NOTABLE REVOLUTIONS; BEING A TRUE RELATION Of what happened in the United
Provinces OF THE NETHERLANDS In the years MDCL and MDCLI.

Somewhat before and after the Death of the late Prince of ORANGE.

According to the Dutch Copy, collected and published at the Haghe 1652.

By LION AITZEMA.

Concordia Res Parvae Crescunt.
Discordia Magnae Dilabuntur.
Tunc Tua Res agitur, Paries cum Proximus ardet.
The Principal matters handled herein, you shall have in a Table at the end of
the Book.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, by the Appointment of the Council of
State, Anno 1653.

THE AUTHOR to his READER.
THe Aim and Drift of publishing this Book, is no other then that which those
of the present Government here of late professed themselves (see page 281.)
namely, to show and manifest before all the World, how regularly and orderly
certain principal Charges were supplied, when as by their Vacancie, happened in
the year 1650, the Lion with his bundle of Arrows, that is to say, the United
power of these Countries, seemed heart-broken. The ensued Recoverie thereof by
an Unanimous Resolution, showing plainly, That Republics die not. The
particulars treated here, relate much to the Everlasting League and
Confederacy made between the Provinces in the year 1^79, commonly called The
Union of Utrecht; which therefore shall be premised to the Work in lieu of a
Preface. There were sundry Explanations made lately in the Grand Assembly,
upon the said Union, and some Extensions also, as will appear in the handling.
But there was no nearer or streighter Union made between the Provinces, as some
abusively held forth in Print, and would have made the world believ.

Farewell.

The Transaction of the UNION, Everlasting League and Agreement between the
Countries, Provinces, Cities and Members thereof, hereafter specified, decreed
at Utrecht, and published from the Town-hous there, Januarie 29, in the year M.
D. LXXIX.
IT being manifest, that since the Pacification made at Ghent whereby all the
Provinces of these Netherlands, stood sufficiently engaged to assist one
another with life and goods, for the expelling of the Spaniards and other
foreign Nations, together with their adherents; The said Spaniards have with
Don John d' Austria and other their Chieftains and Commanders, endeavored since
by all means, and daily seek to subdue the said Provinces; as well in general as
each one apart, under their Tyrannical Government and slaverie, and both by
force of Arms and subtle practices, to divide and disjoint the said Provinces,
and thereby to undo and subvert the Union made between them by the Pacification
aforesaid, to the utter ruin and destruction of the Foresaid Countries and
Provinces: in prosecution of which obstinate persisting in their foresaid
pernicious design, they, lately again solicited some towns and Quarters by
soothing letters, and others, viz. in Gelderland they set upon and surprised by
force of Arms.

Therefore those of the Principality of Ghelders and County of Zutphen, those
of the Earldom's and Countries of Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht and Frizish
Omlands, betwixt the Em. and Lawers, have found it expedient, to enter into a
nearer and streighter Union and alliance among themselves; not with any intent
to separate themselves from the abovementioned general Union made by the
Pacification of Ghent; but rather for the further strenghtning of the same, and
the better securing of themselves against all manner of inconveniences,
whereinto they might be driven by the feveral practices, designs, or forcible
attemts of their Enemies; That the said Provinces might know how and in what
manner to carry themselves, for to be protected and secured against the
prevalencie of their Enemy; as also for the eschewing of further separations,
among the foresaid Provinces and particular members thereof; the foresaid
general Union and Pacification at Ghent remaining otherwise in its full vigor.
In pursuance of the Premises, the Deputies of the foresaid Provinces, fully
instructed and autorized by their respective principals, have agreed and
resolved upon the points and articles here ensuing, without any purpose
nevertheless of withdrawing themselves hereby, from or out of the holy Roman
Empire.

And I. that the foresaid Provinces shall allie confederate and unite themselves
together, as by these they do allie, confederate and unite themselves for ever,
remaining joined together in every regard and manner, as if they were all of
them but one Province, without ever separating, or suffering themselves to be
separated one from another, by any Testament-wills, Codicils, Donation,
Cession, Permutation, Sale, treaty of peace, Marriage, or for any cause
whatsoever; without nevertheless infringing, or impairing any of their
particular Privileges, Freedoms, Exemtions, Rights, Statutes, laudable ancient
customs, and observances, or any other immunities, of any Provinces, particular
Cities, members and inhabitants thereof; wherein they shall not only not
hinder disturb, or prejudice one another, but every one shall by all convenient
and possible means, yea, (if need be) with both life and goods, help to
maintain, support, and strengthen, defend, and protect the other therein,
against all and every one, whoever he be, and however qualified, that shall
go actually about to prejudice or infringe any of them. Provided, that the
Questions and Debates which any of the said Provinces, the Members or Cities,
belonging to this Union, either now has, or for the future may chance to have
amongst themselves, touching their own peculiar privileges, Freedoms, Exemtions,
Rights, Statutes, laudable ancient customs and observances, or any other
Immunities, the same shall be decided and determined by the ordinary Court of
Justice, arbitration or friendly Agreement, without the intermedling of any
other Country or Province, Cities or Members thereof, (as long as both the
interessed disputing parties shall submit to their proper Judges) unless it
were by interceding for a good accord.

2. That the foresaid Provinces shall be bound in conformity and for
performance of the said League and Union, to assist one another with Body,
Goods, and Blood against any Force and violence that shall be attemted against
them by any, in the name of the King of Spain, or in his behalf, or under
pretense of either, whether it be by reason of the treaty of peace made at
Ghent; for taking up arms against Don John of Austria; receiving of Archduke
Matthias for their Governor, or any matter relating thereunto, depending or
ensuing upon it, or like to ensue, though it were under color only of
reestablishing, restoring or introducing of the Roman Catholic Religion by
force of arms; or for any innovations or alterations, happened within any of the
foresaid Provinces, Cities or Members of the same, since the year 1558, or also
because of this present Union and Confederacy, or upon any other such like
ground; and this as well in case the said force and violence shall be used
against any one of the said Provinces, Cities or Members thereof apart, or
against them all in general.

3. That the said Provinces shall be bound likewise, in the self same manner
to assist and help to defend one another, against all foreign and native Lords,
Princes, Countries, Cities and Provinces thereof, which shall attemt any force,
or violence, or wrong against them, or make war upon them, either in general
or particular. Provided that the said assistance be autorized by the
Generality of this Union upon cognizance, and according to the condition of the
matter.

4. And for the better assurance of the said Provinces, Cities and Members of
them, against all violence, That the Frontier-Cities and others* also, where it
shall be found needful, in any one of the Provinces, shall be fortified and
strengthened, by the advice and order of the United Provinces, at the charges of
the Cities and Provinces wherein they are situated, being assisted thereunto
with the one moyetie, from the Generality, Provided, that, if by the said
Provinces it be found expedient, to erect any new forts or strong holds in any
of these Provinces, or to alter or demolish such as are already made the
charges requisite thereunto be born then by all the Provinces in General.

5. And for Provision of such charges as shall be needful (in the cases
abovesaid) for the defense of the said Provinces, it is agreed, that in all the
said United Provinces there be (in an uniform way and manner, for the defense
of the said Provinces, appointed,) disposed and publicly farmed out to the
most offering, from three months to three months, at other convenient terms,
the collecting thoroughout all the said United Provinces, Cities and Members
thereof, certain imposts, upon all sorts of wines, foreign and homebrewed beer,
milled corn and grain, upon Salt, Gold, Silver, Silk and woollen cloth, upon
horncattel and sowed lands, upon the beasts of the butcherie, upon horses and
oxen sold or barterd, upon the goods transported by wagons, and all such other
things as hereafter shall be thought good by common advice and agreement; and
that, in persuance, of the Orders which shall be framed and made in that
behalf, there be likewise employed to the uses aforesaid, the revenues of the
Demains of the King's Majesty, the incumbent charges thereof deducted.

6. Which means shall by common advice be raised and abated, according as the
exigencie and condition of affairs shall require, and only employed, for the
common defense and such things, as the Generality shall be bound to undergo
and care for, without permission to employ the same means to any other end and
purpose.

7. That the foresaid-frontier towns, and others also, when need require's,
shall at all times be bound to take in such Garrisons, as the said United
Provinces shall think meet, and with the advice of the Governor of the Province
where the Garrison is to lie, do appoint and order, without any refusal.
Provided that the said Garrisons shall be paid their wages by the said United
Provinces, and that both Captains, and Soldiers, shall besides the general
Oath, make particular oath also to the Town, or City, and Province, where the
Garrisons is to be laid; and that this same shall be inserted in their
Articles; and that likewise there shall be such order taken, and such
discipline kept among the Soldiers, that the Burghers and inhabitants of both
Town and Country, whether Church or Laymen shall not be burdened beyond
reason, nor suffer any molestation; and the said Garrisons shall be no more
privileged or exemted from paying of Excise or import, then the Burghers and
inhabitants are of the place, where they com to lie. Order being also to be
given, that the Generality shall pay the Burghers and inhabitants for the
lodgings, in the same manner, as has hitherto been practiced in Holland.

8. And to the end, that there may be a continual assistance in readiness of
the Inhabitants of these Countries, the same shall, thoroughout every one of
these United Provinces, within the space of one month from the date hereof, at
the furthest, be mustered and enrolled, such namely, as are between 18 and 60
years of age; that so the heads and number of them being known, there may
afterward, at the first meeting of the Confederates, such course and order be
taken as shall be judged to make most for the protection and security of
these United Countries.

9. Also there shall be no agreement for truce or peace be made, nor war
undertaken, nor any imposts or contributions appointed, touching the Generality
of this Alliance, without the common advice and consent of the foresaid
Provinces: but in other matters that concern the managing of this confederacy,
and things depending or ensuiug thereupon. all shall be regulated, by what
shall be advised and resolved upon, by most voices or votes of the Provinces
comprehended in this alliance, which shall be gathered in the same manner, as
hitherto has been in use in the Generality of the States, and that
provisionally, till by common advice of the confederates it shall be otherwise
ordered. Provided, that, in case the Provinces could not agree among themselves
about matters of truce, peace war or contributions, the difference shall
provisionally be referred and submitted to the Lords Governors or Deputies of
the foresaid Provinces, at this time being, who shall reconcile the difference
between the parties, or determine the same, as they shall judge it fitting in
equity. Provided, that if the said Governors shall not be able to compose the
difference, they shall assume then and choos such impartial Assessors or
adjuncts, as they shall think expedient; and the parties shall be bound to
conform themselves to what shall be determined by the said Governors, in manner
abovesaid.

10. That none of the foresaid Provinces Cities or Members thereof shall enter
into any Confederacy or Alliance with any Neighbor-^ords, or Country without
consent of these United Provinces and Confederates.

11. To this end it is agreed, that in case any Neighbor-Princes, Lords,
Countries, or Cities, desire to join themselves to these United Provinces, and
enter into Coufederacie with them, that they are to be admitted by common
advice and consent of these Provinces.

12. That the foresaid Provinces shall be bound to a conformity in
Mint-matter, viz. about the course and value of coin, suitable to such
ordinances, as shall with the first be made in that behalf, which the one
shall not be able to utter without the other.

13. And as touching matters of Religion, those of Holland and Zealand shall
dispose therein, as they shall hold fitting, and the rest of the Provinces may
regulate themselves according to the Tenor of the peace of Religion, already
framed by the Archduke Matthias, Governor and Captain General of these
Countries and his Council, by advice of the States General; or else take such
course and order in general and particular,, in that behalf, as they shall find
conducing to the quiet and welfare of the Provinces, Cities, and particular
Members thereof, and the conservation of every ones Ecclesiastical or civil
right and possession; without being in any kind molested or hindered therein
by any other Province, every one having freedom in his Religion, and none
being to be troubled or questioned for Religion's sake, according to the
foresaid pacification of Ghent.

14. The Cloister-people and those of the Clergy, shall, according to the
pacification, have their goods yielded them, which they may have lying in any
of these United Provinces reciprocally; and if so be, that any Churchpersons
within the Provinces, shall, during the war between the Countries of Holland
and Zealand against the Spaniard, withdrawing themselves out of their Cloisters
or Colleges, under the jurisdiction of those of Holland or Zealand, the same
shall be afforded due Alimentation and sustenance during their lives from
their said Cloisters or Colleges; as shall likewise be don to those which
shall have retired themselves out of Holland or Zealand into any of the rest of
these United Provinces.

15. That likewise unto such, as shall be, or have been in any Cloister or
Church-College belonging to these United Countries and are willing, either for
Religion's sake, or upon other reasonable causes to forsake the same, or have
forsaken them, there shall be afforded due Alimentation to them, during their
lives, out of the revenues of their said Cloisters or Colleges, according to
the condition of them. Provided that such as shall enter themselves into any of
these Cloisters, after the date hereof, and afterward forsake the same again,
they shall be allowed nothing more, but only have liberty, to take back with
them for their behoof what they brought in there.

That such likewise as at this present are, or hereafter may com into those
Convents or Colleges, shall enjoy freedom and Liberty of Religion, as also of
Garments and Habits. Provided they be subject in all other things unto the
Superiors or Governors of the said Convents.

16. And in case (which God forbid) there should arise any misunderstanding,
debate or difference among the Provinces, that they could not agree among
themselves; that the same (so far forth as it concern's any of the Provinces in
particular:) shall be composed and determined by the other Provinces, or such
of them, as they shall pleas to depute thereunto. And as far forth as it
concern's all the Provinces, in manner as is expressed above in the 9th article,
who shall be bound to do right to the parties, or to make them agree within a
months space, (or speedier, the exigencie of the matter so requiring it,) after
the intercession of, or endeavor with the one or other party adjoined; and
that which by the forecited Provinces or their Deputies or Lords Governors
shall be pronounced thus, the same shall be forward and yielded unto without
any further demurr, or other proviso of right, by way of appeal, relief,
revision, nullitie, or any other exception whatsoever.

17. That the foresaid Provinces, Cities and Members thereof shall take heed of
giving any occasion of war to any foreign Princes, Lords, Countries, or Cities;
and for the better avoiding of all such occasions, the foresaid Provinces,
Cities, and members thereof, shall be bound to administer good right and
justice as well to the foreiners as to the Inhabitants of the said Provinces: and
in case any one fall short therein, the rest of the confederates shall do their
utmost, by all fit ways and means, that right may be don, and that all abuses
whereby the same is stopped, and justice prejudiced, may be amended and
reformed, according to the rights and powers of every ones Privileges, laudable
customs and constant practice.

18. Nor shall any of these United Provinces, Cities, or Members of the same,
set up or introduce any imposts, conduct-monies, or the like burdens, to the
grievance and prejudice of the other, and without common consent, nor tax or
molest any of their confederates, more then they do their own inhabitants.

19. Furthermore, to provide against all emergencies and troubles as much as
may be; the Confederates shall be bound, being summoned by those which shall
be autorized thereunto, to present themselves at Vtrecht by such a day as shall
be appointed in the letters, wherein shall be expressed, as much as may be
don (unless secrecy be required,) the matters and emergencies to be treated
of, that with common advice and consent, or by most voices, in the manner
abovesaid, things may be debated and resolved upon. In case also some should
fail to appear, the rest shall nevertheless have power to proceed to such
Resolutions, as they shall judge expedient for the common good of these United
Countries and Provinces; and that which shall be thus resolved upon, shall be
yielded unto by those that were absent; unless the matters were very weighty,
and could brook some delay, in which case the absent shall be summoned by a
second letter, to appear some other day, upon pain to forfeit their vote for
that time; and whatsoever shall be concluded by the present, the same shall be
held firm and obligatorie, notwithstanding the absence of any of the other
Provinces. Provided, that if any be indisposed to appear, they have liberty
to send their advice to the Assembly in writing, thereupon to proceed in
collecting the Votes, as the circumstances shall require.

20. And to the end aforesaid, all and every one of the said Confederates,
shall be bound, in writing to communicate unto him, that shall be autorized
to summon the rest, all such materials as shall present themselves or happen
unto them, and whatsoever they cenceiv may concern the good or ill of these
United Countries and confederates, that the rest of the Provinces may have
notice given them about it, after the manner aforesaid.

21. And after there shall be found any obscurity or doubtfulness therein,
which might occasion questions and debate, it shall be interpreted and
determined by the Confederates who shall order and dispose therein by common
advice and consent, as they shall judge meet. And in case they could not agree
about it, they shall have recours to the Lords Governors of the Provinces, in
manner as above.

22. So likewise if at any time it shall be found needful, that the Articles
of this Union, League and alliance, be amplified or altered in any points or
articles, the same shall be don by common advice and consent of the foresaid
confederates, and not otherwise*

23. All which points and articles, and every one of them in particular, the
foresaid United Provinces have promised and do promise by these to observe and
follow, and to cause them to be observed and followed, without doing ought or
suffering ought to be don against the same; directly or indirectly, in any way
or kind whatsoever.

And in case any thing be don or attemted to the contrary, they do declare
the same now as then, altogether, null void and unvalid where under they engage
themselves, and the inhabitants of their respective Provinces Cities and Members
thereof, their persons and goods, that the same may and shall, in case of
contravention and not observing this treaty and what depends thereon, be
arrested, sued and prosecuted in any place and before any Magistrates, Courts
renouncing to this end, all exceptions, graces, privileges, reliefs, and
generally all other Benefits or Indults of Courts, which might in any wise ser^
or favor them to the contrary, and especially that Exception in the Laws,
which says, That a general Renunciation has no binding force, unless a
special one be gone before.

24. And for a further confirmation, it is agreed, That the Lords, Lievtenants
or Governors of the foresaid Provinces, both present and to com, together with
all the Magistrates and chief Officers of every Province, City or Member of
the same, shall promiss and engage by Oath to observe and keep, and cause to be
observed and kept, this Union and Confederacy and every Article thereof in
particular.

25. The like Oath for observing the same, shall be made, by all the
train-bands, fraternities and companies, or societies, in any Towns or
Corporations, within this Union.

26. And hereof there shall be drawn up Letters in due form, to be signed and
sealed by the Lords Stadt-holders, and the principal Members and Cities of the
Provinces, as also subscribed by their respective Secretaries; special address
and application having been made to them in this behalf by the rest.

These foresaid Points and Articles are signed, by the Deputies of Gelderland,
and County of Zutphen, viz. by my Lord Count John of Nassaw, Lieutenant of the
said Countries; for himself, and with the other Commissioners in the name of
the common Nobility of the said Principality of Gelders and County of
Zutphen; together with the Deputies of Holland, Zeland, Vtrecht and Omlands
aforesaid, assembled and autorised, as above, formally decreed and concluded;
whereupon the said Deputies of Gelderland and the County of Zutphen, adjourned
to 9. of Febr. ensuing, for the further declaring of the Banner-Lords, the
great and lesser Cities of the foresaid Principality and County; and that to
be made within the City of Vtrecht, to the States Commissioners there
present. Thus don at Vtrecht Januar. 23. 1579. under the hands of my Lords, the
Lord Lieutenant aforesaid and the foresaid Deputies, set down underneath here
for further assurance; and was signed, John Count of Nassaw, Catzenellebogeus
in the behalf of the Nobility of the Principality of Gelders and County of
Zutphen, Alexander van Tellich, Gelis Pick, Joachim van Liere, Alexander
Bentinck; in the behalf of those of Holland, G. Poelgeest, P. Buys, Reynier
Cant; in the behalf of the States of Zeland, Willem Roelsius, Nicolaes Blauex,
Peter de Rycke, Caspar van Vosbergen; in behalf of the States of Vtrecht,
Ansonius van Galama, de mandato Capituli sui, Schore, Jacobus Verhaer,
Vicedecanus, sancti Petri, de mandato capituli, Adrian van Zuphen, Lambertus
van der Buegh, Capitulo jubente; F. de Wen Eng, Raynhard van Azwyne,
Bartholomues van der Wael, Nicolaes van Zuphen, A. D. Leyden, Lubbert van
Cleef; in the behalf of the States of the Omlands, Egbert Clandt; E. Jarges.

This Copy, collation'd with the original signed Union, is found to agree
therewith, by me,

Lam Zwede.

Declaration of the XIIIth. Article.
WHereas some do seem to make some difficulty about the 13th Article of the
Union, concluded on the 23. of last month, between the Deputies of Gelderland
and Zutphen, Holland, Zeland, Vtrecht and the Omlands, Ems and Lawers, as if
the meaning and intention had been, to receiv none into the said Union, but
such as according to the pacification of Religion, framed by the Archduke of
Austria and Council of States, by advice of the States General shall at
leastwise suffer both Religions, viz. the Roman Catholic and the Reformed; The
foresaid Deputies, which were present at and concluded the said Union, for the
taking away all mistakes and diffidence, are pleased to declare, that their
meaning and intention, neither then was, nor now is, to exclude from the
foresaid Union and Alliance, any Towns or Provinces which shall be willing to
keep themselves only to the said Roman Catholic Religion, and where the Number
of their Inhabitants, professing the Reformed Religion is not so great or
considerable, as may enable them to enjoy the exercise of the Reformed
Religion, according to the pacification above said. But that notwithstanding
any former expression, they shall and will be ready, to receiv into this
Union, all such Towns and Provinces as shall be desirous to keep themselves
only to the Romish Religion, provided, they will engage themselves to the
observing of the rest of the Points and Articles of this Union, and carry
themselves as good Patriots; there being no such meaning, that the one Province
or City, shall take cognizance of others, in matter of Religion; and thus for
the clear maintenance of peace and concord among the Provinces, and to avoid
and take away the chiefest occasion of difference and discord.

Don thus, in Vtrecht Febr. 1. 1^79.
Amplification of the 15th Article.
THere being provision made in the 15th Article for the alimentation and
maintenance of Clergie-people, such as had formerly been in any Convents or
Colleges, and withdrawn themselves thence because of Religion, or upon other
reasonable grounds; or may hereafter forsake and leav the same; and it being
found very considerable, that by reason thereof there may arise many suites and
controversies, as is given to understand, that diverse are raised already, when
as such persons, do or shall pretend to have a right of succession in the goods
of their parents; brothers, sisters, and other friends and kindred deceased, or
coming to deceas; and such also, as in their lifetime they may have convay'd
and alienated the same unto, by way of gift, transport or otherwise, or also
made sure to them after their death; therefore the foresaid Confederates, to
prevent such Processes and Troubles, as may arise from hence, have found good,
to suspend all such suites and processes, as either already are, or may be
commenced upon the causes aforesaid, for to rest in statu quo, from any further
prosecution, until such time, as the said Confederates together with such
others, as shall likewise enter into the same Union and Alliance, shall
generally (and if it be needful, by Authority of the Magistrate) have taken
order therein, and published their Declaration.

Don thus, by the foresaid Deputies, Febr. 1. 1579. signed, Lamsweerde.

This day Febr. 4. 1579. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid
Deputies sitting at Vtrecht, the underwritten Deputies of Ghent, and declared,
that, having perused the points and Articles of the foresaid Union, and what by
virtue thereof has further been transacted, They found it good, and thereupon,
by virtue of their Letters of Credence, and special procuration and
instruction, dated Januar. 27. 1579. have solemnly allowed, approved and
ratified the same, promising, like the other Confederates, to keep, observe and
follow the same and every point thereof in particular. In witness whereof the
foresaid Deputies, set their hands to it, the day, month and year, as above;
and was signed, In the behalf of those of Ghent, Aclolf de Grutere, Levin
Tayart, Christoph. de la Becqre, Lucas Mayart.

This day Martii 5. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid Deputies,
at Vtrecht, the Deputies of the common Nobility of the Quarter of Nymeghen,
together with those of the City of Nymeghen; and declared, that having perused
the Points and Articles of the said Union, and what has further been
transacted by virtue thereof, they found it good, and thereupon, by virtue of
their Instruction, sealed with the privy Seal of the City of Nymeghen, and
dated Febr. 12. 1579. have solemnly allowed, approved and ratified, do allow,
by these: promising like to the other Confederates,, to keep observe and follow
the same and every point thereof in particular. In witness whereof, the
foresaid Deputies of the common Nobility and City of the Quarter of Nymeghen,
have set their hands to it, the day, month and year as above, and was signed,
Gelis Pick, Jan Kelfken, Arent van Zeller, Dirck Fleming, Lambert Janssz, Johan
van de Have.

This day March 5. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid Deputies at
Vtrecht, the Deputies of the common Nobility, chief and lesser Cities of the
Quarter of Arnhim, and declared, That having perused the Points and Articles of
the foresaid Union, and what has further been transacted by virtue thereof,
they found it good; and thereupon, by virtue of their Letters of Credence,
dated 18. and a certain Instruction dated Febr. 16. 79. both sealed with the
privy Seal of the City of Arnheim, after long and mature Deliberation, have
solemnly allowed approoved and ratified the same; do allow by these; promising
in quality as before, that like to the other Confederates, they will keep,
observe and follow the same and every point thereof in particular. In witness
whereof the foresaid Deputies of the common Nobility, the chief and lesser
Cities of the Quarter of Arnheim, have set their hands to it, the day, month
and year as above, and was signed, Alexander Bentinck.

This day March 23. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid Deputies
of the United Provinces at Vtrecht, the Deputies of the Cities of Lewarden,
Sneck, Franeker and of certain Bailifs and Baily-ships, with some particular
Gentlemen of Friesland, named in their Procuration, and declared, That having
perused the Points and Articles of the said Union, and what by virtue thereof
has been further transacted, they found it good, and thereupon by virtue of
their foresaid Procuration dated March 12. 1579. have solemnly allowed,
approoved and ratified the same; do allow, approov and ratify the same by
these; promising that like to the other Confederates, they will keep, observe
and follow the same, and every point thereof in particular. In witness whereof
the foresaid Deputies of the foresaid Cities, Lewarden, Sneck, Francker and of
certain Bailifs and Baily-ships, together with some particular Gentlemen of
Friesland, have set their hands to it, the day, month and year as above, and
was signed,

B. Idsaerda, Jelle Sibesz.

This day April 11. 1579. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid
Deputies of the United Provinces, at Vtrecht, the Deputies of the City of
Venlo, viz. Gerard van Lohn, Herman de Laet, Cornelissen of the Council, Jacob
Goris Senator, and John de Groot, as Deputies of the Commonaltie there, and
declared, That having perused the Points and Articles of the foresaid Union,
and what by virtue thereof has further been transacted, they found it good,
and thereupon, by virtue of their Instruction, dated April 3. 1579. have
solemnly allowed, approoved and ratified the same, do allow, approove and
ratify the same, by these; promising, that, like to the other Confederates,
they will keep, observe and follow the same, and every Point thereof in
particular. In witness whereof the foresaid Deputies, of the foresaid City of
Venlo, have set their hands to it, the day, month and year aforesaid, and was
signed,

Gerard van Lohn, Herman de Laet, Cornelissen of the Council, Jacob Grois, John
de Groot.

Forasmuch as his Excellency ever held it expedient and needful for the
Conservation and Maintenance of the common good, the Rights and Liberties of
the Netherlands, to keep and entertain still, good friendship, unity and
concord among the Provinces of the said Countries, the Cities also and
particular Members thereof, whereby the common Enemy may not only more
effectually, by the common power and mutual assistance be resisted and kept
off, but likewise be dispossessed and deprived of the means to sow or cause any
misunderstanding and discord among the said Provinces, Cities and Members
thereof, by reason of discrepancie in Religion and otherwise. Therefore, his
Excellency having seen a certain Union and Alliance, made in Januarie last at
Vtrecht, between the well-born Lord Count John of Nassaw, Lieutenant of the
principality of Gelders and County of Zutphen, and likewise those of Holland,
Zealand, Vtrecht and the Frisish Om-lands betwixt the Ems and Lawers, had
indeed found the said Union good, and allowed of it; although, to the end the
same might so much the better, and with the more conveniencie and opportunity
be presented to the Generality of the Provinces, for to be received with
common consent and concluded into an Universal Peace, Unity and Concord, of
all these Countries, he hitherto deferred and put off the subscribing of the
said Union. And whereas his Highs now together with a great part of the foresaid
Provinces, which hitherto have declared themselves that they found it good and
convenient, such an Union should be framed, concluded and entered into, for the
better administration of the affairs of our common Father-land; his Excellency
is likewise pleased now to declare, as by these he does declare, that he does
accept of and will observe, and hereby does accept and approov of the foresaid
Union, lately made and concluded at Vtrecht, between the foresaid Provinces; as
being assured that the Magistracy and Authority of the Archduke, is nothing
impaired or lessoned thereby; and whereas also the foresaid United
Confederates are to assemble again very shortly, further to settle and conclude
about all the particular points and Articles of the said Union, what may
conduce to the more effectual and steadfast Concord of the same; his
Excellency, therefore further likewise declares, that he will accept of and
conform himself to the same Points and Articles, so as by the foresaid
Provinces of Gelderland, Holland, Zeland, Vtrecht and others associating
themselves, shall be devised, framed, concluded and allowed. In witness whereof
his Excellcie has underwrit his Name, and caused his privy Seal to be
affixed to it, in the Patent of the City of Ant^erp, May 3. 1579. signed,

William de Nassaw. and lower was written, By permission of his Excellcie,
signed, N. Bruninex.

This day Jun. 1. 1579. the Plenipotentiaries of the Cities, being assembled
in the Cloister of the Jacobites, at the Landdaie, within Lewarden, after they
had heard the proposition of the Ambassador from the nearer Union at Vtrecht,
and that some of their Plenipotentiaries had been deputed to the said
Ambassador, more particularly in the name of all the rest, to communicate with
the said Ambassador, and to peruse the several Points and Articles of the said
Union; which being performed, and report made to their fellow-Commissioners;
all the said Plenipotentiaries of the said Cities, which underwrit these, do
declare, that they have allowed, approoved and ratified all the foresaid Points
and Articles of the Union aforesaid; do allow etc. by these: promising, that
like unto the rest of the Confederates, they will keep, observe and follow the
same, and every point thereof in particular, as well what hitherto is don
therein, as what by virtue thereof shall yet further be don and agreed on. In
witness whereof the foresaid Plenipotentiaries of the Cities, have set their
hands to this, the day, month and year abovesaid, and was signed with the
names here ensuing, written by diverse hands, Julius van Botnya Plenipotentiarie
for Francker, Jurien Hendrieksz, Plenipotentiarie for Franiker, Henrick
Jahrichsz Plenipotentiarie for Lewarden; Jan Jansz substituted by Aid
Lammarts, who had procuration, and was from home; Claes Hotthissz for the
Council of the City of Sneeck; Jacob Syverttz, Plenipotentiarie for Bolswert;
Frans Jacob Frerekson, for those of Bolswert; Banne Peter's, Plenipotentiarie
from the Burgomasters of the City of Ylst, Jeltze van Galama likewise* for
Ylst, Reynier Olfertsz for Staveren, Willem Sippessz for Sloten, Joh. Bettegh,
Burgomaster of Worcum, Done Abbesz likewise for Worcum.

Whereas we George van Laling, Count of Rinnenberg, Baron and Banner-Lord at
Ville, Seigneur of Villierve, Imbriechies, Lieutenant and Captain General of
Friesland, Over-Yssel, Groninghen, the Omlands, Drent and Linghen, chief of his
Maties Exchequer, have found it expedient and very needful for the conservation
and maintenance of the Commonweal, Rights and Liberties of the Netherlands,
that there be maintained all good friendship, unity and concord among the
Provinces of these Countries, and those under our Government, as also among the
Cities and particular members of the same; whereby the common Enemy will not
only be the more effectually withstood and kept off, by a joint power and
mutual assistance, but likewise deprived of the means to sow or raise any
misunderstanding or difference betwixt the same Provinces, Cities or Members
thereof, by reason of difference in Religion or otherwise, howsoever.
Therefore, having seen a certain Union and Alliance, as it was projected first
last summer, by our advice at Arnheim, and made in Januarie last at Vtrecht,
and concluded there, between the wel-born Lord Count John of Nassaw, Lieutenant
of the principality of Gelders and County of Zutphen, and them of Holland,
Zeland, Vtrecht, the Friesish Omlands and others; together with several Acts of
approbation and acceptance of the foresaid Union, by my Lord the Prince of
Orange, Lieutenant General of the Archduke Matthias, Governor General of the
foresaid Netherlands, dated May 3. 1579. we do declare, that we have
ratified, approoved and allowed the same; do ratify, approov, allow and accept
of the same by these; being persuaded and sure, that the Magistracy and
Authority of the Arch-Duke's eminency is no ways impaired nor lessened
thereby. Promising, like the other Confederates, to keep, observe and follow the
same, and every point thereof. In witness whereof we have underwriten these
with our hand, and caused our privy Seal in Patent-waie to be affixed
hereunto. Actum at Winse in the Omlands this 11th of Jun. 1579. beneath was
written,

George van Lataines.

This day July 10. 1579. there appeared in the foresaid Assembly of the said
Deputies at Vtrecht, the Deputies of the City of Ypren, viz. Sig. Jan van
Lanquedul Law-keeper, and M. Peter Balde Pensioner to the said City of Ypren,
who had declared, that having perused the points and Articles of the foresaid
Union, and that which by virtue thereof has further been transacted, they
found it good, and thereupon have, by virtue of their Letters of Credence and
Procuration, bearing date June 23. 1579. allowed, approoved and ratified, do
allow etc. the same by these: promising like to the other Confederates, to
keep, observe and follow the same, and every point thereof in particular. In
witness whereof, the foresaid Deputies of the City of Ypren, set their hands
to it underneath, the day, month and year abovesaid, signed, Jan van
Lanquedul, M. Peter Balde.

This day the 29th of July 1579. there appeared in the Assembly of the
foresaid Deputies of the nearer United Provinces, assembled in Vtrecht, the
Commissioners of the City of Antwerp, viz. Sig. Jan van Stralen, utter
Burgomaster, Voncker Philips van Schoonhoven Sig. of Wanroy, of the Council,
Jan van Brecht old Counselor, Adam Verhult Colonel, Valerius van Dale and Jan
Gyssels Dekens, who declared, that having perused the Points and Articles of
the foresaid Union, and that which by virtue thereof has been further
transacted, They found it good, and thereupon by virtue of their Procuration,
bearing date July 22. and Letters of Credence, dated July 23. 1579. have
allowed, approoved and ratified, do allow, approov and ratify the same by
these: promising like to the other Confederates, to keep, observe and follow the
same and every point thereof in particular. In witness whereof the foresaid
Deputies of the said City of Antwerp set their hands to it, the day, month
and year as above, and was underwriten, Jan van Stralen, Philips van
Schoonhoven, Jan van Brecht, Adam Verhult, Valerius van Dale, Jan Gyssels.

This day the 13 of September. 1579. there appeared in the Assembly of the
foresaid Deputies, assembled at Vtrecht, the Deputies of the City of Breda,
viz. Godert van Luchtenberg, Burgomaster of the City, Godefroy Montes, of the
Council and Lieutenant of the Colonel and Captain likewise, and Christian Back*
Master of the Orphants and Ten-man, who declared, that, having perused the
Points and Articles of the foresaid Union, and that which by virtue thereof
has been transacted since, they found it good; and thereupon have, by virtue
of their Procuration dated September. 10* 1579. allowed, approoved and ratified;
do allow etc. the same by these: promising like to the other Confederates, they
will keep, observe and follow the same and every point thereof in particular. In
witness whereof, the foresaid Deputies of the said City of Breda, have set
their hands hereunder, the day, month and year abovesaid, signed, Godert van
Luchtenberg, Godefroy Montes and Christian Back* Frans-son.

This day Febr. 1. 1580. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid
Deputies of the nearer United Provinces, assembled at Vtrecht, Sig. Guido du
Bruecq, of the Council of the City of Brugge, who declared, that they having
perused the Points and Articles of the foresaid Union, and what has further
been transacted since by virtue of the same, they found it good, and thereupon,
over and above the approbation thereof by Sig. Levin Step, of the Council,
and M. Jacob Yman Pensioner of the said City of Brugge, by virtue of their
sealed Procuration of Nov. 7. 1579. made at Antwerp, the 26. of the same month,
by virtue of Letters of Credence and sealed Procuration, both dated Januar. 25.
1580. have allowed, approoved and ratified the same Union, and do allow the
same by these, promising like to the other Confederates, to keep, observe and
follow the same, and every point thereof. In witness whereof the foresaid
Deputy of the City of Brugge has set his hand underneath, the day, month
and year as above,

signed, Guide du Bruecq.

This day Febr. 1. 1580. there appeared in the Assembly of the foresaid
Deputies of the nearer United Provinces assembled in Vtrecht, Yoncker Woulter
van der Hecken of Council to the Land of the Vryen, who declared, that having
perused the Points and Articles of the foresaid Union, and that which by virtue
thereof, has further been transacted; he found it good, and has thereupon,
over the approbation already made at Antwerp, November. 26. 1579. by M.
Ysnebrand Provyn Pensioner of the foresaid land of de Vryn; by virtue of his
sealed procuration dated October. 17. before; now by virtue of his procuration
dated the 23. of Januarie, and Letters of Credence dated the 25. of the same
month of this present year, solemnly allowed, approoved prooved and ratified;
does allow, approov and ratify the same Union by these: promising like the
other Confederates, to keep, observe and follow the same and every point thereof
in particular. In witness whereof the foresaid Deputy of the said Land of de
Vryn, set his hand underneath here, the day, month and year as above,

signed, Woulter van der Hecken.

NOTABLE REVOLUTIONS: OR, A Relation of what happened in the UNITED PROVINCES
of the Netherlands; in the years 1650, and 1651, somewhat before and after the
death of the late Prince of ORANGE.
IMmediately after the promulgation of the Peace (made at Munster) the Lords of
Holland busied themselves earnestly and seriously about reducing of their
public charges and expenses, with intent to extinguish the Generalship of
Horse; (suffering, nevertheless, his Highness to enjoie an equivalence some other
way) to change the Entertainment of Field-Marshal from 700 ^lor. in 32 days,
to a life pension of 3000 ^lor. per an. to continue the Charge of the
Artillery without any particular Entertainment: to alter the Lieutenant
General of Horse his present Entertainment into a Life-pension of 2000 flor.
that of Commiss^rie General for the Horse into a Life-pension of 600 flor. per
an. to the Sergeant Major General 1200 flor. to the Quartermaster-General of
the Camp 500 flor. to the Quartermaster-General of Horse a Life-pension of 500
flor. to the Seven Ge^^nors of Hartoghen Bosch, Mastricht, Breda, Berghen ap
Zoom, Sluys, Hulst, and Willemstadt, the continuance of the Title of Honor, but
no Entertainment. To all the Colonels of the Infantrie, there being thirty of
them in number, to allow a life-pension of 800 flor. per ann. and that their
respective charges should com to be void by their deceas, and all Lieutenant
Colonels, Sergeant-Majors, Quarter Masters, and Marshals of Regiments, should
be cashiered. To discharge all the Muster-masters, 15 in number, and so
likewise diverse other and lesser charges; that so in time the State might be
enabled by the Peace, to discharge the Debts contracted by War. This business,
by reason of its weight, advancing but slowly, was reassumed again in the
Spring of 1650. and especially did Holland press much the disbanding of 105
Foot-Companies, Foreiners, together with half the Cavalrie; besides several
other points projected and debated a good while before.

They writ in behalf of these matters to all the Provinces, and represented to
the Generality, whatsoever might persuade the undertaking of the Work: among
the rest, That their Provincial Debts were so great, that though they should
get their whole project of reducing charges effected, and had all their means
and Revenues continued still in the same state they now were in; nevertheless
they could not but remain every year, a whole Million in arrears, and were much
destitute of expedients, how to get out of debts at length. But the rest of the
Provinces returned unanimously advice, that there ought no more forces yet to
be cashiered, then 55 Foot-Companies, and 20 of Horse; allowing the cashiered
Officers, an honest pension or entertainment during life, and to the Colonels,
each 1000 Rix-dollers per an.

Upon the 21 and 22 of Januarie, those of Holland urged their affairs strongly
at the Assembly, but were by the rest of the Provinces, by the Prince, Count
William, and the Council of State (being present there at every time) mainly
opposed, they mainteining, That whiles France, Spain, Sweden, and Germany were
in arms, it was not fit to disarm here, so as Holland sought it: That so many
gallant Captains and Officers, as had hazarded their lives for the Land, ought
not to be so ill requited: That it was against the Union, for Holland to
persist alone thus, to disband and cashier the common Forces. Some also
upbraided Holland, that they had not managed their Treasure well, and thereby
run into such arrears; Whereupon Holland remonstrated, That for all this
cashiering, there would remain men enough in service still; for, said they, To
what end shall we entertain Garrisons at Delf, Rotterdam, Goude, Dort,
Schoonhoven, Schiedam, and other Inland Towns, as likewise at Utrecht, Campen,
Deventer, Swoll, Arnbeim, Reenen, Nymeghen; in the Triesish Towns, and
Groninghen? That it was against the Union, to charge any Province against their
will, and beyond their ability: That many years ago they had longed to see a
more equal proportion of raising means, and that many sendings had past from
them into the Provinces to that purpose, but all in vain: That they of
Friesland, had already reduced and saved 600000 flor. yearly means; and that
the same Province was now advantaged near upon 200000 flor. yearly besides;
whereby it was evident, that Holland was too highly charged, and much
over-rated.

In March there arrived a very great extraordinary Committee out of Zealand;
principally about the matter of Reduction, who maintained at first, there ought
none to be cashiered at all: Wherein they had their particular Considerations;
namely, that they, with their Province, were placed in the Van or Front; that
the Spanish showed themselves most implacable against them: Some also of the
chiefest there sought at that time to ingratiate themselves with the Prince,
thereby to advance their particular interest and greediness. Nevertheless,
within a short time after, they conformed themselves to the other five Provinces.

About middle March, the French, English, and Scottish Officers, presented
their Requests, remonstrating their old, long and faithful services, and that
they ought not to be cashiered more or sooner then the Natives. The advice of
the Prince thereupon was, that the disbanding ought to be proportioned equally
between the one and the other, as well the Native as the Foreiner. The second
of April the Lords Bronckhorst, Vett, Renswoud, Andee, Mulart (Gronginghen, and
the Omlands being absent) were deputed and sent from the Generality, into the
Assembly of Holland, where by a speech of the Lord Bronckhorst there was
endeavored and propounded* whatsoever might any way conduce, to make the Lords
of Holland conform themselves to the rest of the Provinces. These matters went
so high and avaunt, that the Ministers took the boldness to broach and preach in
their Pulpits, there was but a straw's breadth betwixt them and the breach of
the Union. Which was to flatter the Court. Toward the end of April, the
States General writ a remonstrating Letter to the Commissioned Council of
Holland.

Noble mighty Lords!
WE have hertofore transmitted unto the Noble Mighty Lords, the States of
Holland, and West-Friesland, and to the other six Provinces respectively, the
newliest projected state of War, so as it was fit the same should be observed,
during the present peace, whereunto some of the Provinces showed themselves well
inclined; But in regard that the Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland
pretended and presented unto us several points of saving charges, we have
likewise at the request of the said Lords, transmitted the foresaid points to
the six other Provinces: Who, for continuations sake of mutual unity and
common tranquillity, have so far by the return of their respective Provincial
advices, advanced to meet the foresaid Province of Holland, that they have
respectively yielded up a great part of the foresaid projected state of war,
and consequently given their assent to the disbanding of 55 Foot-Companies of
Foreiners, for the reducing of those Outlandish Regiments, as also twelv
Companies of Horse, and that the rest of the Hors-Companies may be reduced from
60 to 50 a piece, gratifying withal the Officers to be disbanded, with such a
pension, as the joint Provinces shall be disposed to settle upon them. And the
other six Provinces doubted not, but the States of Holland would have conformed
themselves to this expedient* But we are very sorry to understand that their
Noble Mighties should be persisting still in their foresaid points of saving
obarges, with intention and purpose, to pass and act the same apart, without
the General Authority; which we seriously regarding, and weighing the evil
consequences thereof, that in this and like matters one Province alone should
in opposition to all the rest of the confederates, undertake such discrepant
resolutions, and the effectual prosecution of them; the rather, forasmuch as
before the determining and concluding of the Treaty of peace with Spain, it
was solemnly agreed to, with the advice of his Highness, and the Council of
State, That a sufficient number of forces should be retained. Therefore we
judged it necessary, to make this address unto your Honor, that you will be
pleased to give notice hereof unto the Members which are to meet, either by
writing or sending to them, and thereby endeavor to persuade the said Lords
the States, that, for to prevent confusion and disorder, they would beware how
they tread into any separate or particular reduction or disbanding of Forces,
sworn and committed to the Generality; for if this should be attempted, it
would be directly against the Union, the everlasting alliance, and laudable
observance hitherto; besides, that so soon after the peace made, there would
be discovered thereby a very greet feebleness in the Government of these
Countries, and the reputation thereof mightily weakened round about. Whereas on
the contrary, this State in the times of hottest war, has no less by the
mutual unity, then by the prosperous success of arms, been of great esteem and
repute both far and near, it being most plain and assured, that the
entertainment of a competent quantity of Forces, is both formidable to the
covered and close enemy, and as considerable pleasing and grateful to the
friends and confederates. Your Honors may pleas herewithal to consider, that
his Highness and the Council of State, in framing the late new project and
state of war, aimed as on the one side at the conservation of the State of the
Land, the present doubtful constitution and occurrences of things, the
neighbors round about us being in arms still; so on the other side, at the
great charges, that lie upon the respective Provinces, only that the
weightiest part being the preservation of the whole, must needs preponderate
or outweigh the lesser; yet notwithstanding the six other Provinces out-went
the former project, as has been already mentioned, and met those of Holland a
great part of their way; Which affair, being narrowly looked into, it will be
found, that following the advice of the six Provinces, there will be one
hundred Horse, and 270 Foot more entertained now then were kept in service,
during the last Truce; when as since the expiration thereof it has pleased
Almighty God to augment, strengthen, and crown the state of these Countries
with the Reduction of many Cities, and a great number of Forts; which Forts and
Cities must needs be beset and kept with requisite Garrisons, unless we hold
such dear-bought Conquests scarce worth the keeping. And it is farther worth
noting, that the whole Difference betwixt the Provincial Advices of the six
said Provinces, and that of the said Province of Holland, does charge these
Provinces yearly with no more then about 25000 flor. which for such a Province
(which God Almighty has so abundantly blessed with Trade, Wealth, and
Prosperity) in our apprehension ought to be esteemed far less then the
dis-repute and mis*understandings, which are like to arise most unexspectedly
out of the forenamed discrepancie, it being no unusual accident, that a small
spark easily kindles into a great embracement. Over and above all which
considerations, we conceiv likewise that the foresaid Lords the States of
Holland ought to ponder the love, affection, and kind disposition they owe to
those provinces their Confederates, who continually endured the heat and brunt
of war, and whose inhabitants sat daily so sensibly in the flames thereof, to
eas and reliev them now as much as may be in regard of the burden, which not
without cause remain's hanging upon their shoulders, none knowing how soon or
which way the like mischiefs may light upon them again, peradventure, when it
may least be thought on from afar off by such forces, of whose raising there
was or could be had but little notice, or notice being had, the reasons and
grounds thereof may have been disguised and palliated; against which, there is
otherwise no fence, but by providing and keeping sufficient Garrisons in the
utmost Frontiers of this State, wherein consist's the preservation and
maintenance of that, which through God's gracious blessing upon the Armies of
these Countries, has been purchased for us with so much expense of wealth and
blood. For these and other causes we shall rely upon the good Devoirs and
Offices, which your Honors shall be pleased to show and apply toward the
Lords, the Members of the instant States-Assembly of the foresaid Province of
Holland and West-Friesland. Whereunto we pray God Almighty to vouchsafe his
blessing, to whose protection we commend your Honors, etc.

Actum April 16* 1650.

In May, those of Leyden propounded, That the Provincial advices of the rest
should be followed, provisionally for the space of four months, and then to
consider and resolv farther. Hereupon the Members repaired home to their
principals, and returning back again, seemed ready to yield to the
proposition. But the Provinces, the Prince* and the Council urged, that then
there should forthwith be settled a State of war, and no further speech be
made of disbanding, reduction, etc. till after such time, as France, Spain,
Sweden, and Germany, should have laid down arms. This they of Holland would
not be engaged in. Nevertheless, those of Leyden, Rotterdam, Gorcum, Goude,
Shoonhoven, Horn, Enckhuysen, eight in number, were so scrupulous, that
hitherto they could, nor durst not resolv upon a particular disbanding.

On the 28 of May, those of Holland presented the ensuing points, much
approaching those of the Generality; as namely,

That they were content there should be disbanded fifty five Foot-Companies,
Foreiners.

That there should be cashiered likewise twelv Companies of Horse.

That the Curiassiers should be changed into Carabines.

That what formerly was represented, may be don provisionally, and that the
Provinces should be desired, and were desired by these, to conform themselves
to the further points of Charge-saving, formerly by their Provincial advice
exhibited to the Generality, consisting mainly in the following particulars.

That the Military and such like entertainments should be regulated according
to the project formerly presented by them to the Generality.

That the Officers to be cashiered, should enjoie no further entertainment or
pension, being out of the Land-service.

That the payment for lodgings, should be surceased, because of true and exact
pay to be made to the Army.

That the Foot-Forces should be reduced from 70 to 60 men, and that there
should be disbanded 8 Companies more of Horse, which added to the former 12,
produce in all 20 Companies that may be spared.

That the Commissioners of the respective Provinces would undertake or
endeavor to recommend these matters effectually to their Principals, and
within the space of a month or six weeks at farthest, procure their respective
Provincial Advices upon these four last points to be returned to the Assembly
of the Generality.

Next day following being Sunday, the same points having been presented to
their high Mightiness, in the presence of his Highness, his Excellency, and
the Council, after advice taken, it was declared by the six Provinces, that
they adhered to their former advices, desiring and recommending most seriously
and tenderly to the said ordinary and extraordinary Deputies of Holland and
West-Friesland, that as they had already been pleased to declare themselves
conformable to the other six Provinces in some points, so they would yet further
continue such good offices and devoirs toward their Principals (at their
present States-meeting) to the end, that the fame may be pleased to declare
themselves ready to conform their resolutions in like manner about the
remaining different and open points, to the advices of the six other Provinces,
his Highness, his Excellency, together with the Council of State, that so this
important affair, which cannot be protracted, but to the great dis-service of
the common cause, may once be determined and ended, with concord. But this was
fruitless.

For those of Holland seeing or conceiving, as they asserted, that by how much
the more they approached to the rest of the Provinces, so much the more they
recoiled or grew peremptory; they labored hard all this week to com to an
issue, and especially to disburthen themselves, which also they went through
with, on Saturday, being the fourth of June, with great fervencie, causing in
their presence Letters and Notifications to be written and dispatched to twelv
Companies of Horse, and one and thirty Companies of Foot, reckoning up all the
youngest in Commission: as being their rate for number, mentioned in the points
presented May 28. Sending Inhibitions likewise to the Solicitors, to advance
no more moneys to those Captains. And thus thinking they had don their business
well and safe enough, they parted that very Saturdaie, on Whitson-Eve.

The day following being Pentecost or Whitsunday, the Council of State was
gathered half an hour after seven. After the first Sermon, the said Council,
his Highness and Count William were in the Assembly of the States General,
continuing together till three in the afternoon, where his Highness, his
Excellency the Stadtholder, and the Council of State, represented to their
High Mights, that it had grieved them to understand, that the Lords the States
of Holland before their parting, had undertaken to act and execute any
disbanding and reduction of the Lands Forces, and that his Highness, his
Excellency, and the Council of the States, had caused a Letter to be drawn,
directed to the Governors or Commanders, as also Captains of Horse and Foot, or,
in the absence of them, unto their Officers, lying in Garrison within this
State, suitable to their High Mights resolution of April 10. last, the contents
whereof were word for word as he^e ensues.

Noble Gentlemen!
THE high and Mighty Lords the States General were pleased by their Resolution
of April 10 last, to autorize his Highness and this Council, so to order and
direct things, that none of the Forces in service of and sworn to the
Generality, should be disbanded or otherwise disposed upon any particular
Order from one or other Province. And whereas it is reported, that some such
particular Order is issued forth in that behalf, we therefore upon mature
deliberation, with the advice of his said Highness, his Excellency the
Stadtholder, and the Council of State, thought good by this to mind and
advertise you, that you and every one of you received your Commission from the
Generality, and accordingly did swear to the same, and in consideration
thereof, cannot be dispensed to obey or yield to any particular charge of
disbanding or reducing; but that ye ought rather to keep your Companies and
men in good order together, till further Order from their High Mights, or his
Highness and Council of State, which every one of you is to attend and regard,
without fail, etc.


His Highness moreover, his Excellency and the Council of State, referred it
to their High Mights consideration, Whether they found not good likewise to
dispatch a Letter of like tenor to the Governors and Commanders aforesaid, and
then desired their High Mights they would be pleased to bethink themselves of
further means, what may be fit and requisite to be don about this important
affair, for the concord, tranquillity and best service of the Land: Whereupon
deliberation being had, their High Mights in regard of the former point, gave
thanks to his Highness, his Excellency, and the Council, over and for their
provident care, showed in the foresaid business, and consequently found good,
and ordered, that the foresaid Letter, Mutatis mutandis, should be dispatched
from the Generality, to the same intent, unto the said Governors or
Commanders: Whereupon a draught was made ready for to be read in the
afternoon in their High Might^ Assembly, and expedited accordingly. As for the
second point, it was found good and agreed to, that a very solemn Deputation
should be dispatched to all the Cities and Members of the Province of Holland,
for to persuade them by all conceivable motives and arguments, that they would
refrain and desist from all separate or particular disbanding, lessning or
altering of the Forces in service, and sworn to the Generality, and not
intermeddle with any thing that may be undertaken or afoot, to the contrary:
and herewithal it was committed and referred to his Highness, in what manner
and by what persons and number the said Deputation should be expedited. His
Highness being likewise desired and autorised to put all things in requisite
order, and to take care of preserving the common peace and tranquillity,
especially that the Union may be maintained, together with all the
dependencies thereof, and all contrary practices and designs prevented and
withstood. But the Deputies of the Province of Gelderland declared, that they
reserved liberty to themselves to set down what they should think fitting about
the foresaid Resolution, at the next meeting. The Deputies present for the
Province of Holland, declared upon the said pretended Resolution, and caused to
be registered, that they took for repeated, whatsoever their Principals the
States of Holland had from time to time*caused to be remonstrated at the
Assembly of their High Mights touching the point and matter in hand, and that
they, their Deputies, referred themselves herein to what they had caused to be
set down, October. 26. 1649. and April 10 last, respectively; and therefore, as
also for other causes, did not, nor could in no wise consent to the present
Resolution, Dispatches, and Deputation, together with the dependence and sequel
thereof; but in express terms reserved the liberty to themselves to oppose
hereafter therein, what their Superiors shall judge expedient; insisting
especially, that the foresaid Resolution was undertaken against the accustomed
order. And this is that famous Resolution of the fifth of June, so much spoken
of, and attended with such remarkable effects and consequences, in regard
whereof it might well be said then, that our Lion was distempered.

The next day his Highness appearing again in the Assembly, he communicated to
their High Mights, that in consideration of the importance of the Business, he
was intended and resolved to h^lp to suit this sending to the Cities and
Members of the Government of the Province of Holland and West-Friesland,
yesterday agreed upon and determined by their High Mights, with his own person;
and that by virtue of the Authority that same day, by their High Mights
referred and attributed to him, he designed to that purpose out of their own
Assembly, the Lords Van Aertsberghen, Rinsewoude and Clant, (there being but
one Deputy present for the Provinces of Friesland and Over-Yssel respectively)
and that his Highness by virtue and to the purpose aforesaid, did assume out of
the Council of the States, the Lords of Asperen, Lucas and the
Treasurer-General Brasser, desiring that, in case it were to their High Mights
content, that the fitting Letters of Credence to the respective Cities and
Members of the Government of Holland, might forthwith be dispatched. Whereupon
deliberation being had, their High Mights most highly thanked his Highness
about and for the sake, that he was pleased so much to incommodate his
Princely person, and so far to tender the service of the Land, by attending the
foresaid sending in this manner; Desiring him, that by all possible means and
arguments, he would endeavor to convince and persuade the foresaid Cities and
Members of the said Province of Holland, in this sending, that they may desist
from all separate disbanding, every one according to their respective rates,
and consequently join themselves unanimously with the other six consenting
Provinces. Their High Mights were likewise well pleased with the choice and
assumption his Highness had made in virtue aforesaid of the said Lords, both of
the body of their High Mights Assembly, and of the Council of State unto the
accomplishment of the foresaid grand affair. To this end order was given for
the dispatching and delivering of the Credentials in due form and manner,
together with the abovesaid solemn Resolution. Hereupon the Deputies of Holland
caused to be entered, that they found the present deliberation to be a result
of the hesternal Resolution taken in behalf of the foresaid sending, and that
in that regard they referred themselves to what in behalf of their said
Province, they had entered already upon the respective resolution taken that
day. The Deputies for the Province of Gelderland, having yesterday reserved
liberty to themselves, to enter next meeting what they should judge convenient
about the Conclusion taken then, they now declared, that the nature of business
was altered since, through the representation, communication and advertisement
made this day by his Highness in the Assembly of their Hi. Mi. and that they
would make report to their Superiors of the Resolution, such as it was.

The Minister Morus in the French Church, and Sterremont in the Cloister-Church
preached in express terms upon these matters on Whitsunday; saying, That some
(aiming at the Hollanders) had a design to break the Union; that they began to
grow careless, and remembered nor considered not ho^ inveterate and implacable
the Spanish hatred was. That they would reward the Army with unthankfulness.
That they little regarded the great Deserts and Services of his Highness and
Predecessors Father, Uncle, and Grand-sire. The like Discourses and Reports
were plentifully spread among the Vulgar, with additions; That some of the Lords
of Holland entertained private communication with the Spanish Ambassador. That
the said Ambassador had lately co^veied great sums of money into his house by
night, and afterward distributed the same among his creatures. Item, That in
the last Truce some had under the cover of Religion, sought and endeavored to
bring the Land in discord and disturbance, and to reduce it thereby at length
under Spain again. That the same thing was practiced now under color of
regulating the Army. That the Ministers and all zealous Professors of the
Reformed Religion, ought to awaken and bestir themselves, considering, that,
though all others might easily make their peace with Spain, they of the
Ministry sure could never look for any reconciliation with them.

The Invectives and animosities grew daily grea^er and so enormous, that one
might well see some extremities must presently ensue. But Holland could imagine
no such thing. They were deeply indebted, and saw not how to discharge
themselves; and therefore conceiving, that as a Sovereign Province, they could
not by virtue of the Union, be charged against their will and above reason;
they adhered firmly and steadfastly to their former Resolution, being they
could not but remain yearly a whole Million in arrears, though they kept all
their Incoms entire, and obtained their Charge-saving project to the full.

On the seventh of June, the Deputies for the Province of Holland, presented
sundry Propositions in the Assembly of their Hi. Mi. tending to this end, That
their Hi. Mi. might be pleased to suspend or surceas the foresaid sending to
the Cities of the Province of Holland, determined yesterday, being the same
was an Innovation, and besides the accustomed order of the Government, from
which there could be expected no good fruit; the said Deputies of Holland
making offer, to summon another States-meeting of their Province as soon as
could be don; that the same which was intended to be represented by the
foresaid sending to the particular Cities and Members thereof, might be
presented to them: Whereupon offer being made by the Deputies for the Province
of Gelderland (and avowed by the other four, then present Provinces) that in
case the said Deputies of the Province of Holland would call in the Letters of
Notifications touching the separate Disbanding and Reduction, dispatched from
that Province to the respective Officers of horse and foot; and put the case of
the foresaid Disbanding and Reduction wholly into their former condition, that
then his Highness should be desired to appear again in their Hi. Mi. Assembly,
and the affair of that sending reassumed there into further deliberation: The
said Deputies of Holland thereupon giving to understand, and declaring, that
this belonged not to them to do, but to their Superiors the States of the said
Province of Holland, to whom the foresaid motion ought to be addressed for
acceptance; it was found good upon precedent deliberation, to persist in their
Hi. Mi. hesternal and former respective Resolutions in that behalf, and then
their Hi. Mi. desired the said Deputies of Holland, that they would second
their, as also his Highness and the Councils, good meaning and intention in
this business, touching the separate Disbanding and Reduction, with all good
offices and endeavors. Whereupon the said Deputies of the Province of Holland
caused to be entered, that They could not consent to the foresaid Conclusion,
but did expressly declare against the same, conformably and according to their
former entries made upon the same subject: That the foresaid Resolution was an
Innovation, not suiting with the Order of the Government, offering still the
most expedite summoning of the States of the Province, but in vain.

For next morning early, being Wednesday, June 8. the joint Deputies or
Commissioners parted from the Hague to Dort with a great number of chief
Officers. His Highness went first to Honselardyck, to take his leav of the
pretended K. of England, and came to Dort by eleven in the night, being
nevertheless received, by the Train-Bands in arms, with all respect.

The Propositions made there to the Citie-Council was as follows:

Propositions made by his Highness, and the rest of the Commissioners of their
Hi. Mi. the Lords States General, in the respective Cities of Holland.
I.
Worshipful, etc.

THE state of the United Provinces is at present surprised with much Disorder
and Disturbance, by reason of a particular Disbanding of the Lands Forces,
undertaken by the Nob. Mi. Lords the States of Holland at their last meeting,
without precedent communication with their Confederates, against the mind and
will of their residing Deputies at the Assembly of their Hi. Mi. and against
the advice and allowance of his Highness, and the No. Mi. Counselors of State,
to whom only by consent of all the Confederates, the Supreme Command, levying
and disbanding of Forces, is deferred, and of whom alone depend's both the
engaging of the Souldierie by oath, and the releasing or discharging of them
from it.

II.
This Order and Way has ever since the erected Union been kept inviolably to
this time.

III.
The alteration now attempted therein by one Province alone, causes the six
other Provinces, together with his Highness, and his Excellency the
Stadtholder, and the Council of State to be greatly troubled and perplexed,
lest hereby we might fall into a breach and dissolution of the Union, a
confusion of the State, and the ruin of the good Inhabitants of the Land, it
being not unknown to your Worships, that the Enemies both from without and
within, are uncessantly busy to undermine the maintenance of the true Reformed
Religion, and the Unity and Concord among the Provinces and members thereof.
And if at any time they could find an occasion to untie the bond of Religion,
consisting in that Union, they would never rest endeavoring the utter
subversion and destruction of the Reformed Christian worship, and to dispossess
the good Inhabitants of this Land, professing the same, of all their
privileges, goods, and freedom; yea, and to persecute and destroy them by
sword, fire, and murder, even as they have murdered, persecuted, and
tyrannized over our forefathers.

IV.
To prevent which formerly-suffered, and now again new threatened evils, their
Hi. Mi. together with his Highness, his Excellency, the Stadtholder, and the
Council of State, have deliberately thought upon fit remedies, and to that end
resolved upon a very solemn Deputation or sending to the members of the
Province of Holland, as comprehended in the Treaty of the Union, and having
their part and share in the devoirs and consequences thereof, which are caused
or occasioned by the Union.

V.
Whereunto, since it has pleased his Highness to be employed in his Princely
person, out of an upright Love and Zeal to the conservation of the said Union,
which his noble Predecessors out of the same Zeal and Constancy, have
counseled and helped to make and maintein, with the loss and hazard of goods
and blood; whereupon it pleased God at length to bless these United Netherlands
with a glorious peace; their high Mightiness most highly thanked his Highness
for this tender and provident care of his, that with such incommodation to his
person, he would so far condescend to advance the service of the Country; and
have together with him put in Commission about that affair, as well out of
their high Mi. Assembly, as out of the No. Mi. Council of State, the Lords here
present with his Highness, in their name to represent unto your Worships the
beginnings, grounds and intentions of the Union, together with the Devoirs,
whereunto all the Provinces and Members thereof stand engaged.

VI.
As concerning the first rise and beginning of the war, it is well known to
every one, what troubles befell the Professors of the Reformed Christian
Religion, when the rays of the Gospel first began to glimmer through the dark
clouds of Popery.

VII.
But when afterward the Light of the Gospel brake forth with force as it were,
shining as bright as midday, and being entirely separated from the darkness
of Popery, to the dishonor and shame of the child of perdition, and a door
thereby was opened in these Countries, that by reading of the holy Scriptures,
the people could see every hour and moment, what was requisite for their
Deliverance and Salvation;

VIII.
Then did the Pope, the King of Spain, and all their Adherents, arm themselves
mightily with burnings and murderings against the Professors thereof.

IX.
And by reason that so many of them were found in the Netherlands, they fell
upon our forefathers, and used them as the Cities of Zutphen, Leyden, Harlem,
Oudewater, Naerden, and diverse others can testify, insomuch that our
Adversaries themselves do brag in their Histories, to have destroyed no less
then 18000 souls by fire, sword and gallows. One cannot rehears the p^rticulars
without horror and astonishment.

X.
The Illustrious Prince of Orange, Prince William of blessed memory,
compassionating the butchering and murdering of his poor people, found good
together with all the States of the Countries, to arm themselves against this
murdering and burning Tyranny, which that wise Prince and other Governors
judged could not be better don, but by way of a real League and Union among
themselves; in pursuance whereof they framed in the year 1579. a nearer Union
and everlasting League and Confederacy, thereby binding and uniting themselves
to stand and stick for ever faithfully the one to the other, without ever
parting or separating again asunder: by reason whereof the Union and ensued
observance thereof ought to still to be the rule and square for ordering our
preservation.

XI.
The Body of these United Provinces being so well formed and framed by this
Union, grew mighty and famous thereby through their mutual Concord and
stedfastness, and as formidable to all their Enemies, as considerable in all
the world; all the while the same did unanimously keep to, and govern themselves
by the Union.

XII.
These first years of peace do now produce very dangerous commotions from
within the State, disturbing the very Soul thereof; that is to say, the Unity
of the Provinces, and shaking the very foundations; whenas the Orders of
Government, the Pillars so long maintained, are in a manner dissolved by those
strange Disputes and Questions, What and how far each Province or most Members
thereof may and ought to do, contrary to the prejudice of their confederates;
in that manner and condition, that it can produce and train after it nothing
but mischief and ruin, unless it be maturely remedied.

XIII.
For the avoiding and prevention of which enormities, his Highness and the
Council had already a pretty while before (according to the ancient custom,
and best knowing what the preservation of the Land required) drawn up and sent
to the Provinces a State of War, or Forces, to be kept in Garrisons, according
as they judged it necessary at this time, for securing the Land upon the
Frontiers outwardly, and the State within against the inward Enemies both of
Religion and Government.

XIV.
Their high Mi. have endeavored a long time to bring the matters of this State
of War to be debated in a Conference: But the Deputies for the Province of
Holland waving it, propounded afterward a disbanding of half the Cavalrie, and
an hundred and five Companies of the Infantrie, which the six other Provinces
judged very unseasonale and disserviceable; but yet, even against their own
judgment, and for no other aim or regard* but fairly to meet the Province of
Holland, yielded and agreed for the disbanding of fifty five Foot Companies,
and twelv of Horse, together with the Reduction of the horse from 60 to 50 men in
each Company; to the end there might be taken once an effectual Resolution
about the State of War, drawn up by his Highness, his Excellency, the
Stadtholder, and the Council of the States, there being no possibility of
keeping the state of the Country free from confusion, without a State of war.

XV.
Wherein when the No. Mi. Lords the States of Holland refused to join with the
six other Provinces, there were deputed Commissioners sent to their Nob. Mi.
assembled at the Hague in a States meeting, for to persuade them to an uniform
advice with the other consenting Provinces; and to the end that all the members
of this Province might be truly informed of the condition of things, their
high Mi. found good, to write a serious Letter, in April last 16o, whereof we
have cause to doubt, whether indeed it was sent to all the Cities, as was
desired and requisite, the Committee of the Council having represented to their
Hi. Mi. the necessity of it.

XVI.
Over and above all this, when their Hi. Mi. were again and again advertised,
That the States of Holland had, by plurality of Votes, and against the real
protests and contradictions of considerable members, taken Resolution for a
separate Disbanding and Reduction of Forces, they sent again unto them at their
full Assembly, that they would supersede the execution of the past-Resolution,
and beware of opening a door to innovations and breach of the Union, and
likewise by reiterated communication, about the points in difference, presented
occasions to com to a fair issue, by accommodating the differences.

XVII.
Desiring continuance of conference for that end, and having unexspectectedly
to their great grief understood, that by way of over-voting, there had been
very fervently, during the Assembly been drawn and sent dispatches in all
haste, to the Officers of foot and horse, (indeed of that Provinces own
repartition, or allotment, but) sworn and engaged by oath to obeie his Highness
and the Council of State; by reason whereof there were likewise contrary
orders dispatched by their Hi. Mi., his Highness, and the Council of State, to
keep those Companies together; all which tended to the great blemish of this
laudable Government, and the joy of none but the Enemies thereof.

XVIII.
This indeed is the cause which necessitated their high Mi., his Highness and
the Council of State, to apply to new unheard of accidents in this Government,
new and extraordinary remedies by this solemn Deputation to all the Cities of
this Province, that the same being rightly informed, they may help the
advancing of such remedies, whereby mischief may be prevented, and the
Provinces on the one side orderly and unitedly eased in their charges, and on
the other side secured against such Enemies as might rise up against us either
from without or from within; all for the preservation and maintenance of our
Religion and Union, it being an easy matter to conceiv and understand, that
the same cannot be upheld in safety, without arms and sufficient forces; and
that his Highness and the Council of State do best know what is fit and
requisite for the Lands preservation.

XIX.
We know it and believ indeed, that the Treasury of the No. Mi. Lords, the
States of Holland, is heavily charged, and that they are not well able to
undergo all the burdens. Other Provinces do likewise complain of their charge
and disabilitie. The war has been costly and long-lasting; but yet it has
been recompensed with a wonderful blessing all the Land over, and with
inestimable freedom. The purchased peace now requires eas; the rest of the
Provinces are likewise well inclined to it, but they understand, that the
Easing desired, and the disbanding and reduction of the Lands-forces, together
with the removing of the common and incident charges of war must be don with
good order and united consent of all the members interessed, sutably to the
Union, and hitherto maintained order.

XX.
Their No. Mi. the States of Holland, have at other times sitting President in
the Assembly of their high Mi. judged this themselves expedient and necessary,
whenas, together with the other Provinces they helped to resolv, November. 10
1623. That no Province ought of their own authority put off any Companies
without precedent communication with, and resolution of their High Mi. and the
Council of State; and if there was any thing practiced to the contrary, that
it ought to be looked to by authority, which indeed was propounded and urged
thus by the Province of Holland it self.

XXI.
And in the year 1626. they effectually helped, according to the resolution of
Febr. 9. to obviate the like particular reduction of Companies undertaken by
the Lords of Zealand, grounding themselves upon like complaints of disabilitie;
when to the end aforesaid, the Lords Beveren and Schaffer were sent into
Zealand, and Prince Maurice himself of noble memory, desired, in case it
should be requisite, to repair thither likewise in person.

XXII.
And then it was withal expressly declared, That the resolution taken by the
Lords of Zealand in this matter, was directly against the Union, and could not
be taken by any Province apart, being also of dangerous and ruinous
consequence to the State of the Land, and drawing with it nothing but confusion
and such woeful effects, as cannot be tolerated without subversion of all good
Order and Government, according to the very words of the said Resolution.

XXIII.
The very same has likewise been practiced with other Provinces, where
occasion was given, and was never contradicted by any of the Provinces.

XXIV.
And forasmuch as these points do concern the preservation or dissolution of
the Union, the maintenance or destruction of this puissant and redoubted State,
and that protracted deliberations can beget and produce nothing but mischief
and confusion; therefore it is that his Highness and we, as Deputies of their
high Mi. in the name and behalf of all your Confederates, fellow members of the
Union, do most seriously and friendly desire your Worships to abide
undissolubly joined to the Union, to hold fast the ancient Unity and Order, so
long and unanimously maintained between the Confederates, and to that end to
continue the payment of the discharged Companies, as likewise to repair the
contraventions against the Union committed by that separate disbanding and
reduction, ordered by your Deputies, and those of some other Cities of this
Province, lately gathered at their Provincial States-Assemblie. To which
Reparation, this Province and the members thereof stand bound by virtue of the
23d Article of the Union, saying, that in case any thing be don or attempted
to the contrary, they do declare the same now, as then, altogether null, void,
and invalid; whereunder they engage themselves, and all the Inhabitants of their
respective Provinces, Cities, and Members thereof, their persons and goods,
that the same may and shall, in case of contravention, and not observing this
Treaty, and what depend's thereon, be arrested, sued and prosecuted.

Accordingly do we also desire our Worships to join your selves with the six
other Provinces, consenting to the State of war, or else to let the Differences
be decided by the Governors or Lievtenants of the Provinces, according to the
ninth Article of the Union.

Upon all which, your Worships are desired to make known to his Highness, and
Us here present, your good meaning and intention, that care may be taken
without delay, lest the State and the good Inhabitants of the Land should fall
into Divisions, and consequently into a relaps in the same miseries and
desolations, which our forefathers endured, which we rest confident, your
Worships will endeavor to prevent, praying God to inspire you thereunto with
wisdom.

Here follow the Resolutions, alleged in the foregoing Proposition, Artic. 20.
and 21. and first, that of Nov. 10 1623.
His Excellency and the Council of State appearing in the Assembly, it was
related by the Lord President, that some Provinces made difficulty of paying
their Companies, and discharged them from their allotment or repartition, the
same tending to very evil consequence, disreputation of the Land and confusion,
which must unavoidably ensue thereupon. Wherefore after deliberation taken, it
is resolved with advice of his Excellency, and the Council of State, that no
Province shall of their own authority discharge any Companies, without
foregoing communication with, and resolution of their Hi. Mi. and the Council
of State, and if any thing be practiced to the contrary, that course ought to
be taken against it by authority, it being withal resolved, that earnest
endeavors by Deputies and otherwise, shall be made by the Council of State in
those Provinces, which remain backward to furnish their paiments, and that
without remission until effectual payment be performed, it being otherwise
impossible to keep and preserv the Land and State without confusion.

The Resolution of Febr. 9. 1626. was as follows.

Report being made, that the States of Zealand should have resolved to reduce
the Companies in their Repartition, to 100 heads a piece; and his Excellency,
and the Council of State being thereupon sought to and sent for, after
deliberation upon the matter, and their advice, it is agreed and resolved, that
Letters shall be written to the Command^rs of places, where the Zealandish
Companies lie, that they ought not to suffer any such Reduction to be made
within their Garrisons, till further order from their Hi. Mi.* and that
besides, the said States of Zealand shall be sent to by Deputies out of their
high Mi* Assembly, and by his Excellency himself, in case the matter should
prove more difficult then is yet conceived, to represent unto them that such
Resolutions directly impugn the Union, and cannot be undertaken by any one
Province alone, being of dangerous and ruinous consequence to the whole state
of the Land, and training after it nothing but confusion and such mischievous
effects, as cannot be tolerated without subversion of all good order and
government. And that for this end and purpose it be desired, that a
States-Assembly be held there in Zealand, on the 16 of this month, with full
Commission and Authority of the Members there appearing, for to reassume the
matter, and restore it to the form^r condition, with any further proceeding or
endeavor in the foresaid Reduction: and there are Commissioned for this
sending, the Lords Beveren and Schaffer, who shall go before, and if they find
things so conditioned, that the coming of his Excellency be required, give
advertisement of it, that his Excellency may transport himself thither in like
manner; therewithal it was likewise found good, that the Lord of Beaumont also
be desired to repair thither, the more to convince the States of Zealand of
the great wrong they were about to commit by this their enterprise, and that
the Lord Hautain, Governor of Sluys be sent for to the Assembly, and thanks
there be given him for his information, together with a special charge to
suffer no such Reduction in his Government, but to await the further Order of
their Hi. Mi. Hereupon it was found good, that Instructions should be drawn up
by the Council of State for the said Commissioners.

The former Proposition being forthwith printed and published, there came out,
soon after, these ensuing observations.
Some needful Animadversions upon a certain Proposition made in June, 1650.
within the Cities of Holland.
I.
IT was not enough to make a Proposition to the Corporations or Councils of
those places they visited, but the same was likewise printed, and thereby
really insinuated and presented to all the Commons, nay, to all the world. That
which is spoken to every one, may be answered by any one. Take it not amiss
then, I pray, that in the behalf of the honest Commons of Holland, I do say and
maintein, That none indeed is better able to foresee disorder and disturbance
(whereof the first member of the Proposition speaks) then he that makes and
causes the disorder and disturbance himself. All the strangers, Germans,
Brabanders, French, English, coming into this Country, wonder at the good
order and policy that is in Holland; and if that (next to the blessing of God)
had not been, the Land had been lost long ago; and unless there be yet order
settled and maintained, especially in the Treasury, this good Province, and
Millions of Widows, Orphans, and other honest Inhabitants, that have their
moneys out in public stocks, will be undon. This is so well known to all the
Cities and members of Holland, that it need's no proof. Sure in all Kingdoms,
Cities and Countries, Peace is mainly made for that end, to eas and disburthen
the Commons. How shall they be eased, or disburthen'd, if that be not taken
off, which the peace it self take's off, and make's to cea^? The
neighbor-Provinces (especially Friesland, Groninghen, and the Omlands) they
know how to eas their Commons to some purpose. The want hereof must needs draw
along with it a decreas and diversion of Trade and people.

That the Cashiering made by the Lords of Holland, happened not without
foregoing, and for above a twelv-month-continued communication, advice and
debate with his Highness, with the Deputies of other Provinces, with his
Excellency, the Stadtholder, and the Council of State, the manifold
Resolutions, Negotiations, Messages, Letters, and other Acts can testify. That
the power of levying and disbanding, or reducing of Forces, should be given up
to the Council of State; the same is contrary to the first Article of the
Union, where every Province declare's, they will keep and maintein each one's
respective Soveraigntie: and contrary likewise to the 32 Article of the
Instruction of the Council of State, set down hereafter.

II.
And therefore that is untrue, which is said in the second Section.

III.
It is no change then, no breach, nor dissolution, but a punctual observing and
mainteining of the Union, Artic. 5. what the Lords of Holland have don. Under
the very Kings and Monarchs, their Subjects, much more the States and
Parlaments, have, and maintein a propriety still, and a free disposing of of
their purses, goods, and possessions. If the King would have ought of the
Inhabitants, it must be don by way of entreatie, not threats and forcing. The
very word Beden used in Braband, plainly implie's thus much; it happens
frequently, nay, every year in Br^band, Flanders, and other Spanish Countries,
that the King praying in that kind, is paid with a flat and downright denial.
In Braband it is a thing known in the streets: how much more then in these
Provinces, where the States themselves are Sovereigns now, ought it to remain in
their free power, to consent and yield or not, what is prayed in the Councils
Petition, who themselves are in Service, Commission, and swo^^ to them? there is
no year, but the States are prayed and entreated for the continuance of the
State of war, that is to say, of all the Army. And verily in the midst of war
the States had power and freedom to continue or discontinue the same, as
likewise several other incidents of Leaguer-charges, of Subsidies to the
West-Indie-Companie, of casting Ordnance, of lodging-monie, of buying
ammunition, paying for Fortification, etc. In the midst of war, many thousands
have now and then, by greater and lesser parties in Regiments and Companies,
been discontinued. Holland, as more interessed in it alone then all the rest,
has always brought in the weightiest portion, and therefore most concerned in
the good order and managing thereof; as also being here in loco, and best
acquainted with the affairs of the Generality, has always been the readiest
and forwardest to observe and show, what charges were useless and fit to be
forborne. The like Disbandings and Reductions, or Discontinuations have been
practiced in the very height of our wars: as immediately after the loss of
Breda, 1625. and afterward, after the Reduction of the Bosch in 1629. and of
Mastricht; and further in the years 1640. 1642. 1647* though I say, we were in
war still, Holland going before, the rest of the Provinces followed; not as if
Holland thereby sought or arrogated a special Prerogative unto her self above
or over the rest; but only doing that which all the others might have don,
viz* discontinuing their consent: being commonly the first, for that they are
in loco, and can always be the readiest; and this condition of theirs being
wholesome and advantageous for the other Provinces, Holland in all reason should
have hearty thanks rather. However, if the other Provinces are pleased to
continue charged, it was left to their freedoms, although it was never seen,
but the rest of the Provinces would always in this point follow the laudable
pattern of Holland: and hitherto it succeeded well. Being now in peace, what
reason is there, that we should not discharge things useless and unnecessarie.
I see no need we have of continuing entertainments to Governors, Colonels, and
a numberless company of other Camp-Officers. There is no need of it, That
Captains, Commanders, etc. go all bedaubed and besmeared with gold and silver
upon their clothes, whilst the poor Commons are glad to feed on a piece of
dry bread, and must often carry their children supperless to bed. It can be
no good advice to entertain strange Forces, or Troops and Soldiers of Foreign
Nations. When Kings and Princes bring in such, it is a shrewd sign they intend
to tyrannize or to introduce an absolute arbitrarie Government. Do not we see
now at this time, that Scotland (though threatened and in danger by England,
yet) will not suffer their King to bring in there any strange Forces, and so it
is likewise every where else.

Nevertheless, for such Supernumerarie and Foreign Soldier's sake, at Utrecht,
Reenen, Wagoningen, Arnheim, Campen, Deventer, Swoll, Dort, Delft, Rotterdam,
Shiedam, Tolen, Ziricksea, der Goes, Lewarden, Franecker, Harlingeen,
Bolsweert, Sneeck, and many other places: for the great entertainments sake of
Colonels, Lievtenant-Colonels, etc. which were not in use in the hottest times
of all the war (for it is a thing well known, that most Troops were reduced
under Regiments, but within these 10 or 15 years.) For such unprofitable things
I say, so much water must be foul'd now. That which is so Learnedly brought
in, in the third Section about the true Reformed Religion, does fit the matter
as aptly as the fifth wheel a Wagon. The drawer of the Proposition followed
therein your Priests, who, when they studied but little for their Sermon,
commonly supply the defect with falling upon Calvin and Luther: then they have
stuff and matter enough, a large Field to exspatiate and show their parts in;
then they are always sure to beat their adversary, and triumph over them. Some
few indeed of that Coat among us here, sought to make likewise a
Pulpit-business of this matter, but all the faithful Pastors most highly
disapproved it, and it was easily found out, that they were Court hirelings,
set awork under that cloak, to raise mutiny and sedition, to dispoil and bereav
Holland, and the whole State indeed, of their Rights and Privileges, of their
Soveraigntie and freedom, (for the purchasing whereof Holland alone has
contributed more Treasure and Blood, then all the other Provinces together) to
cause the honest Commons to groan under everlasting Burdens, through the
confusion in the Treasury, whereby Millions of Widows and Orphans will be
prostituted to extreme poverty. Thus indeed the great floodgates would be
opened, for our Enemies to overwhelm and to destroy us by murder and fire, and
all manner of destruction at their pleasure, which by a necessary redress in
the Treasury, would with God's help, in a few years sufficiently be
prevented, that such a fear should be needless.

IV.
That which is mentioned in the fourth Section, is an Innovation unheard of,
and of very evil consequence, condemned by all the Cities, and no more to be
admitted or suffered.

V.
Those that exposed his Highness Princely and most honorable person to public
reproach in such conjunctures or confusion rather, they are none of his true
friends; doing all they can, to make his heroic virtues and faithful love to
the Father-Land, as odious and suspect as may be, and endeavoring to loosen
the bonds of Love and Affection, then which, the government can have no firmer.
The beginnings, grounds, and intentions of the Union, are exstant and to be
seen in the Text of the Union; and are very dissonant to this Proposition, as
being made for the maintenance of the pacification of Ghent: read but the
Preface to the Union. The Reformed Religion would gain little by such
allegations: for none but Holland and Zealand were the eagerst for the Reformed
Religion, nevertheless without excluding the Papists. But the rest of the
Provinces regulated themselves according to the peace of Religion. See the 13
Article of the Union.

VI.
How impertinently and hatefully is the business of Religion produced in the
sixth place: Holland has don more alone, and is still disposed to do more for
the Reformed Religion, then all the rest together.

VII.
What relation or affinity, I wonder, has the Treasurieaffair, and Reduction
of the Souldierie, with the reading of the Scripture, as it is here alleged?

VIII.
Holland alone, more then all the other Provinces together, has paid the King
of Spain his Murdering and Burning, home into his Bosom, that in the very
beginings of the first Troubles, the President Vergas said, Ifti Haeretici
patibulant, sicut nos: The Peopelings have small reason to brag of advantage.
If they shall believ our Histories, we ought to believ theirs, affirming, that
for one Preacher of ours, an hundred of theirs were banished, vexed, hanged,
killed, drowned. Are not all the Churches and Cloisters in the Land, purged of
the Popish Religion and Priests together? Are not all the United Provinces,
together with the associated Cities and Countries, freed and rid of the
Spaniards, the Spanish Government, and Spanish adherents? Have not we don ten
times more hurt and damage to the Spaniard, both by Sea and Land, then ever
he did to us?

IX.
That which happened at Haerlem, Leyden, Oudewater, Naerden, was in Holland.
Holland I say again, has suffered and don more in revenge thereof, more alone,
then all the other Provinces together: and Holland for that straining of its
power, now at the end fetching breath, seek's but thereby to be made the more
fit in time to com, to do the like again upon occasions, viz. more alone for
the defense of it self and all their good confederates, then all the other
Provinces.

X.
The Province of Holland has no intention nor thought to separate from the
other Provinces, or to break the Union. But the other Provinces have much
receded from it, since the very first day of making it; therein namely, that
they never would comply to an uniform way of Contribution: which is manifest by
the fifth Article of the Union. So also promise is made by the first Article,
that every Province should be left entire in the enjoiment of their Rights,
Privileges, Liberties, etc. a principal point whereof is, not to be changed
against their consent. Art. 18. This Right Holland does not grudg to any; but
the rest go about to bereav Holland of it. According to their main intent of
the Union, endeavors are promised, to discharge and dismiss all Foreign and
Outlandish Forces. Holland is inclined to it, for the advancing of good and
faithful Native Officers and Soldiers; but some of the other Provinces would
keep in the Foreiners to the destruction of the Natives; some whereof, namely,
the 29 Companies of the fifty raised in the year 1628, received not one penny
of money in five years, but what the Captains were fain to take upon interest
at 8 per cent.

XI.
The Body of these Provinces is grown mighty, next to God's blessing, most by
the Treasure and Blood of Holland. Whole Provinces were partly won, partly
cleared of Spanish Garrisons; partly provided and supported with
Fortifications, new Forts, Ordnance, Ammunition, Lodging-monies, and other
Subsidies, the most part by and from Holland. Gelderland and Over-Issel were
non*continuing Provinces till the late Truce. The Union is like a painted man
upon the wall: how the Generality, and how the rest of the Provinces have at
several times and places observed and kept the same, is known sufficiently.

XII.
The Peace yield's opportunity and means to get out of debts, and into a
fitting condition again of effectual defense against all Domestic and
Outlandish Enemies. This is the end wherefore all Kings and Potentates make
peace. Holland would fain be gathering once this wholesome fruit from the Tree
of Peace; but some ill-affected Hollanders do all they can to hinder them.

XIII.
There is none but know's as well as this Proposition can tell us, what is
requisite toward and for the guarding and securing of the Frontiers. Delft,
Rotterdam, Ter-Goude, Schoonhoven, and fifty such like In-Land-Towns, are they
all become Frontiers now? What Watch and Guard does the Soldier perform there?
unless they had a mind by degrees to commit the Custody and Keys of those
In-Land-Garrisons unto the Captains there; then indeed the Citizens, nay, the
Magistrate, nay, the States themselves, might have reason to say once, as Whilem
the Duke of Gelderland; yea marry, now she sit's cleanly. But prithee tell
me, those great entertainments of the Governors, of the Colonels, and other
Warlike Officers, (things altogether unknown in the hottest times of war, and
which serve for nothing, but to brave it in the Hague, to keep great Horses and
Carroches, to feast it, and bribe and domineer) are they the Guards and
Ramparts of our Frontiers? Do they stand Sentinels? For one indeed of such
Entertainments you might well entertain thirty, forty, nay, fifty better men
to perform that emploiment; and yet we must be told, therein consist's the
State of War, and guarding of the Frontiers; and this forsooth is the only
means to stave off the Spaniard and other open and hidden Enemies within and
without the Land, from annoying or affronting of us.

XIV.
The Province of Holland has been in Conference and Treaty with the Council,
etc. about the Entertainment of a Complete Quantity of Forces, above this
twelv-month; and Holland has made it plainly appear, that following the
project of Reduction, ready pay, exact mustering and order, there would be
more men effectually kept in service, then that way the Council propounded in
their project or state of war. All the Question now is, but about 50 Companies,
of whom all the rest of the Provinces are to provide but for 21.

XV.
Whereas the Lords of Holland in their State's-Assembly, as the Proposition
confesfeth in the 15 Section, declared, that they were extremely necessitated
to discharge themselves of 3^ Foot-Companies, and 12 of Horse (according to that
right of non*consent, or discontinuing of consent, each Province has power and
liberty every year to make use of) which now is the point in Controversy: it
was exceeding strange and unheard of (and might otherwise well be called
Sedition) to go and irritate or set at odds the Members of a Sovereign
Province, one against the other, and against the Provincial Government. Might
not a body as easily meet with male-contented and ill-affected Citizens and
Inhabitants within the Cities of other Provinces, if one should put the like
Questions to the Commons, or their Representative meetings there; Your
Deputie-States, Sirs, have don such and such things, or left undon such and
such: Is this according to your sens or mind? Will you have it to pass thus,
or not rather otherwise? Especially if one should add and interweav all manner
of persuading, soothing, promising and threatening arguments, representing in
what danger Religion stood, how the Gates would be opened to the Spaniard,
and all ready to be exposed to murdering, burning, robbing, plundering, (as
the like was both openly, before, in, and after this Sending broached
everyvvhere, and covertly insinuated in the Proposition it self) might it not
endanger the States there, and shake their Government into Subversion?

XVI.
All the Cities of Holland, none excepted, have allowed of the project or state
of reducing, so as it was laid: though in the point of discharging, there be
no universal consent needful.

XVII.
The Officers and Souldierie are properly sworn and engaged to the United
Provinces or the States thereof, who are their Sovereigns and pay*masters; the
Direction and Captain-ship General indeed they have committed to his Highness
and the Council: Yet so nevertheless, that they, the States never yielded up to
them the sovereign and absolute power of disbanding, raising, augmenting or
diminishing the Army and Forces of the Land, at their own pleasure and
arbitrie. Else might the Companies by virtue of their repartition or allotment,
play the same feats with the Cities they are referred to, which the
Imperialists, Swedish and French were wont to practice by their Quarterings in
Germany.

XVIII.
In the 18 Section the Proposition confesses this Sending to be a new
extraordinary Remedy, that is to say, in plainer terms, a business of
dangerous and evil consequence, such indeed as may make the whole Government
suspect to the Commons, and hazard a total subversion. This unexspected,
undeserved requital, Holland had from their confederates, for having rescued,
assisted and protected them these 80 years; more alone, then all the rest
together. Nevertheless, it is not imputed to the Provinces themselves, but only
to a few ill-affected Hollanders; who being grown rich and great by Jars,
Divisions and Confusions, do seek by the same craft to grow more rich and
greater still.

XIX.
If so be that they know the charges of Holland and the other Provinces, then
is this proceeding of theirs against their own Conscience: if there ought to
be a full agreement in the discharge (which nevertheless is untrue, and
against the known practice) much more certainly ought there be a full
agreement in bearing the charge; and Holland must likewise give its consent to
the laying of it on. As long as Holland dissent's, there is no full agreement.

XX.
The discharging of the Companies made by those of Gel. derland and Over-Yssel,
whereof the Resolution of Nov. 10, 1623 does speak, and the diminishing of
their rates, that has been practiced and continued by the same Provinces until
such time as the East Side of the Rhine was wholly cleared of the Spaniards.

XXI.
Those of Zealand were not sent to in the year 1626. in such a new and unheard
of manner as Holland now is. Letters were written, and Commissioners were sent
to the full Assembly of the States. And Zealand at that time being awed to
continuation of consent by the instant danger from a puissant enemy, they have
not therefore yielded up their right of consenting or non-consenting for all
time to com. The Lords Beveren and Schaffer likewise went not thither with
intent to dispoil those of Zealand of that right; but, according to the
accustomed manner of Sending (to the States) only for to induce and persuade
them. Yet it fallows not, that in case of standing out, they should have gone
up and down the Country, to incens and stir up the Commons against the
Government there.

XXII.
The Reduction mentioned in the 22 Sect. was don precipitantly, without
communication and advice of the Provinces, without showing themselves so greatly
overcharged, and in the hottest time of war, and therefore differs very much
from that of Holland: which was not made till after long and manifold friendly
communications, having showed and proved their excessive charges, and that not
till after the war ended: and all this and the like resolutions were taken, and
are without any prejudice to the Union, and to the Rights and Soveraigntie of
any Province; even as Utrecht in the midst of war discharged themselves of their
rate for Sea-matters, or guarding the Seacoasts; Friesland, of the arming and
expedition against the Portugals; and for all that there was never any attempt
made to stir up the Commons there against their Magistrates.

XXIII.
The contrary practice is well known: there was a new express consent to be
obtained every year, for the continuation of the Army.

XXIV.
Whatsoever therefore is don now to the prejudice of the Soveraigntie, the
Rights and Privileges of Holland, or practiced by any ill-affected Hollanders,
that same Holland justly reputeth null and invalid, according to Art. 23. of
the Union, desiring still, as has been desired for the space almost of two
years now, that the Reduction may be made according to the Union with common
advice; that is to say, the Province of Holland being necessitated to
discharge her self of such unnecessarie Forces and Entertainments, that the
other Provinces would be pleased to do the like, and so with common consent
disband the 55 Companies, wherein all the Provinces are agreed. Thus the Lords
of Holland likewise brought in, and after the like long opposition, effectually
procured their resolved Reduction, April 12, 1642. to the solace and relief as
well of the rest, as their own Province.

XXV.
The Caution brought in at last, that this far-reflecting Commission shall be
without prejudice to the Soveraigntie, Privileges, etc. (which nevertheless was
forgotten in the first Cities) is of that nature, which the Lawyers call
Protestatio actui contraria; others, a catch, and come's just to as much as if
they had given Holland and the Cities a stab into the Bowels, saying, it shall
do you no hurt. The Lords of Holland do not at all take upon them to prescribe
a Law to their Hi. Mi. or the other Provinces: if they pleas to re-entertain
the 31 and 12 Companies, which Holland cashiered, as Gelderland and Over-Yssel
did in the year 1623, Holland will not, cannot hinder it. But there is much
reason to doubt, whether the Deputies of the other Provinces are instructed by
their Principals, to charge them with it. Nay, it is well known, that not one
of the discharged Captains, not one of their Solicitors, will advance one
penny to their Companies upon the Countermand. Nevertheless if the other
Provinces will provisionally take on these cashiered Companies, by somewhat
raising their own rate, and easing that of Holland, which lay so heavy and
insupportable upon their shoulders, it shall be very pleasing and acceptable
to them; and in the mean time they will not withhold their hand effectually to
procure, that the former Souldierie may be faithfully mustered, readily paid,
and kept so complete, that there shall be found more men in number upon the
Frontiers in Garrison, then were before this Reduction. For it is a thing well
known, that the most French, English, and Scots Companies, are not 25 men a
piece. There is no question, but the rest of the Provinces love disorder, and
waste of money (the contributed sweat and blood of the poor Commons) and
unnecessarie charges, as little as they of Holland: and will, in stead of
breaking with their friends, soon apply themselves to put in effect their
resolution of cashiering the 55 Companies, etc. as the like has often
happened, etc. this, and but last Winter yet, about the reduction of some
twenty men in several Companies.

The 32 Article of the Instruction for the Council of State, alleged in the
foregoing Animadversions.
And the meaning of the forenamed States General is, that in regard of the
preservation of the Right of the United Provinces both in the general and
particular, they do not now by this instruction or constitution of the
Government and Council of State, in their behalf abdicate or abrogate the Right
and Power from the States General and the States of the Provinces in
particular, that each of them in particular, as much as concern's themselves,
may in time of need, or when the affairs of the Country shall require it,
dispose of, and order things committed to the said Council themselves, and to
execute by their direction matters of Sea and Land, with all their dependence,
as particularly also the mustering, keeping of Discipline, Military
punishments for all kind of excess and exorbitancie, and any other matter.
Understanding likewise, that all businesses of State-Policie and Justice,
concerning the said Countries, Cities and Members thereof in general and
particular, and not expressly committed to the said Council, shall remain at
the disposition of the States General, of the States of the particular
Provinces, of the Magistrates of the Cities and other lawful Authority, to each
according to the peculiar regard and interest.

There past at Dort some notable reflecting words between the Lord of
Aerts-berghen, and Burgo-master de Wit: whereof there will be made mention
hereafter, in the Deduction of those of Amsterdam, upon his Highness
Proposition, July 30. However the Resolution and Answer there was but general
and by word of mouth. That against the instant next Assembly, they would bring
in their advice, suitable to the Union and Order of the Land, and contribute
their utmost for procuring the peace and welfare of the State. From thence the
progress went to Gorcum, where, as also at Schoonhoven, the Resolution was
suited ansvverably to the Proposition. At Goude they were first resolved to give
no audience in their Hall, but his Highness arriving and sending for one and
the other, he got most voices and prevailed, though he got likewise but a
general declaration from them by word of mouth.

There, there came to his Highness in behalf of Amsterdam the Lords of Waveren,
and Hasselaer. That which past betwixt them, may be seen in the foresaid
Proposition of his Highness at Amsterdam, 30 July, and the Answer of the Lord
there upon it:

In the Briel and at Rotterdam (whither there were sent some beforehand to awe
or draw the chiefest to compliance) they were admitted according to desire, and
were answered accordingly; howbeit, but by word of mouth, and relatively, to
what they intended to bring in at the States-Assembly. But at Schiedam, they
were simply told, their Towns advice should be brought in at the Provincial
meeting. So that his Highness receiving so small satisfaction there, refused
their entertainment, and would not so much as take a meal there. And so
likewise at Delft, where they showed themselves ready to give audience to the
Prince, but to the rest of the Commissioners they would not, nor billet the
Train; which made both his Highness, and the rest presently to pass through,
and return to the Hague.

Saturday the 18, they went to Al^maer, where the Communion being to be
celebrated next day, and his Highness invited, he received it together with
Count Henry; and being admitted afterward to audience, received a good
answer, though likewise but by word of mouth, and in general terms; as also
afterward at Horn, Enck^uyse, and in the smaller Towns, was otherwise
everywhere received by the Train-Bands in arms, and with all respect. But they
of Medenblick came of their own accord to bring their Resolution dilatorie and
general, praying his Highness not to take the pains to com to their City,
because of the bad ways, and that they were but slenderly accommodated, to
entertain his Highness, as was fitting according to his Quality. At Edam there
came two other Commissioners from Amsterdam to salute his Highness the Lords
Geelvinck and Spiegel, as we shall see anon in Amsterdam's answer to his
Highnesses Proposition.

At Amsterdam it self his Highness was every where received with all possible
honor and respect; and what further past there will appear by their foresaid
answer.

The Magistrate had prepared a sumptuous Banquet to entertain his* Highness
withal. But he excused himself, and being pressed but to taste a refreshing
Cup, replied, For to eat and drink together we had need be better friends
first then we are.

Friday the 24, his Highness came to Haerlem, where the Magistrate likewise
refused audience to the Commissioners of their Hi. Mi. so that his Highness
received no content there neither. Saturday they went to Leyden, where they
dined, and received answer according to desire; yet all by word of mouth only;
and both those of Leyden, and all elsewhere constantly protested, that
whatsoever they did, was with reservation of the right and privileges of their
respective Cities. That night they returned all to the Hague again. About the
house Deyl, betwixt Leyden and the Hague, one of the Prince's Pages fell out
with his Wain-man, whom he unhappily ran through and killed, leaving a poor
widow and an house full of small children behind him, which caused much
discourse.

It was observed that those of Schoonhoven had more sumptuously entertained his
Highness and the Commissioners, then any other. Having sent for great quantity
of Comfitures, many Cooks and Pasterers to Utrecht, which seemed so much the
stranger for the smalness of the place, and frequent complaints by their
Commissioners at the Provincial meetings, and continual desires of being eased
and relieved by others, for being so much in arrears, that they had scarce
wherewith to entertain their Deputies at the said Meetings.

June 27. The Lords Commissioners of their Hi. Mi. made the ensuing Report.
High, Mighty Lords!
THere being a very solemn Deputation or Commission decreed by your Hi. Mi. 5
and 6 of this present June, to repair to the Cities and Members of the Province
of Holland and West-Friesland, for the undergoing whereof your Hi. Mi. desired
and appointed his Highness, and the Commissioned Lords Van Aertsberghen,
Marignant, Rensevvoude and Clant, out of your high Mi. own Assembly, and the
Lords Van Asperen, Lucas and Treasurer Brasser, out of the Council of State to
incline and persuade the said Cities, by all conceivable arguments and possible
means for to desist from all separate disbanding, diminishing, and altering of
the Lands Forces, and consequently, to join themselves with the consenting six
other Provinces: His Highness accordingly, together with the other
Commissioners, disposed themselves in performance of your high Mi. Resolution,
to take their Journie the very next day after, being June 7. to Dort, and in
the mean time drew up a Proposition in writing, containing very good Reasons
and Motives; to this intent, That the Cities, as Fellovv-Members of the Union,
would declare their being resolved to cleav indissolubly to the Union, to hold
fast the ancient Unity, so long and unanimously maintained among the
Confederates, and for that end to be assisting, that the payment of the
discharged Companies may be continued, and Reparation made for that which is
committed against the Union, by Separate Disbanding and Reduction. Secondly,
that they would join with the six other Provinces, for consent to the State of
War, and accordingly cause their Deputies (to be appointed for the Provincial
Meeting) to advance requisite Resolutions in that behalf in their
States-Assembly, according to the ancient custom. And if so be that any
differences yet should then remain betwixt the Provinces, touching the State of
War, that the said Cities would help to further the submitting and determining
thereof, according to the Tenor of the Union. And Lastly, that order may be
taken without delay, for provisional payment of the cashiered and reduced
Souldierie, to prevent the danger that might otherwise ensue: all which was
expressed and deduced more at large in the Proposition delivered to them in
writing. The Reasons and Inducements were both by word of mouth and writing,
fitly accommodated and applied, and all managed in such sort, as his Highness
and the Lords Commissioners judged the same suitable to the condition of things
and places, some of the Cities and Members of this Province being thanked for
their good offices and purposes showed in behalf of the conservation of the
Union, and the Unity and Order of the Government, with desire that they would
constantly persevere therein. Others were largely informed of the troubles,
confusion and mischief that was to be feared from this separate Disbanding and
Reduction of Forces, standing engaged by oath, in common to all the
Confederates; and desired thereupon to help to repair what had been committed
against the Union, according to the twenty third Article thereof; whereby that
which is don against the Union, is declared null, and invalid, besides the
forfeiture of all particular trespassing Provinces, Cities, and Members
thereof, their persons and goods for reparation.

And it was not only showed, that the Judgment of the six consenting Provinces
was strengthened with the advice of his Highness, as Captain General of these
United Netherlands, and that of his Excellency, the Stadtholder, and the No.
Mi. Council of State, that viz. this precipitated separate cashiering and
lessning of the Forces of the Land, ordered and concluded by the No. Mi. States
of Holland, fourth of this present month, upon a Resolution taken by plurality
of voices, is a plain Contravention against the Union; but likewise that it is
the Judgment and Opinion of the States of Holland themselves, as the same was
made known and brought into the Generality by them, in the years 1623, 1626,
1642, whereof the proof was read before them out of the Exstracts of the
public Records.

His Highness and the rest of their Hi. Mi. Commissioners proceeded herein with
all the circumspection and diligence attainable, fully to inform and possess
all the Cities of Holland of their Hi. Mi. good intention, to the end their
Deputies might the better be instructed and autorised against the next
Provincial Assembly.

They found indeed that their Hi. Mi. were not every where alike welcome. His
Highness was received in all the Cities (except Medenblick, where he came not)
with all honor, concours of people, and acclamation, both coming and going, so
that there appeared a general great respect and affection every where unto his
Highness. The endeavors of their Hi. Mi. Commissioners were by some Cities well
taken, they expressing their thanks both to his Highness and the Commissioners
for the good care they took in the behalf and service of the Land.

Some of the Cities, as Haerlem, Amsterdam, and Medenblick, refused to give
audience to his Highness and the Commissioners of their Hi. Mi. in the manner
desired. All the rest of the Cities have, upon intimation from his Highness,
gathered their Councils together, gave ear to the Proposition, and returned
answer; some Cities also reading some written Notes, and some few protesting de non
praejudicando, that this act may be no president to their prejudice, whereupon
their Hi. Mi. Commissioners prod^ced both reasons and examples to convince
them, that their jealousy was needless and groundless.

The Answers of the Cities were different. Some declared they were resolved for
ever, holily and indissolubly to cleav to the Union. Some others past by that
point, or touched it but soberly. As to the other points concerning the State
of War with the ingredients thereof, as also the provisional payment of the
discharged and reduced Forces, some Cities made satisfactorie Answers, and had
thanks returned them; others referred these matters to the Charge and
Commission which they should give to their Deputies for the instant Provincial
Assembly; by reason whereof all those Cities were most seriously desired and
exborted carefully to mind these points, thus represented unto them, and
especially that of mainteining the Union and Unity among the Provinces; to the
end that these Differences touching a State of War, might be laid by once; the
good correspondence and old order of Government (as well in times of peace, as
war, revived and upheld) and consequently that the consents of the Provinces
about the State of war, (without which the State of the Land cannot be kept
from confusion and disorder) might be brought in at length to the Generality,
and settled accordingly.

All which being, in the presence of his Highness and Council of State,
reported first by word of mouth, and afterward delivered in writing, it was
founded upon precedent deliberation and advice with the Council of State, and
resolved to return most high and hearty thanks to his Highness for his
exceeding great pains and care, which he was pleased to take upon him and go
through with, in this high and weighty affair, concerning the weal and
tranquillity of this State; as also high and hearty thanks were returned to
the foresaid Lords their Hi. Mi. Commissioners of their own Assembly, and no
less to the Lords Commissioners of the Council of State, for and by reason of
their respective devoirs and good offices contributed in the deputation
aforesaid; their Hi. Mi. trusting in God Almighty, that he would give such a
blessing to these their endeavors, as that thereby the respective Provinces may
wholly be reduced to mutual unity and concord, and evermore maintained in the
same. This Conclusion was framed by the Lord of Rijn-haysin. The extraordinary
and ordinary Deputies of Holland there declared upon the said Report and the
Result thereof, that they took no share in the advice, but would acquaint their
Provincial Superiors with the whole matter. His Highness then communicated to
their Hi. Mi. that during this Commission to the Cities of Holland and
West-Friesland, some things had happened to him in particular, whereof he
intended to inform them at some other opportunity; which communication was
entertained with thanks, and answer returned, their Hi. Mi. would be ready
to receiv the same information, whensoever his Highness should be pleased to
impart it. Upon which the Extrordinarie Deputies of Holland repeated again
their former Exception or Declaration.

In the mean time there were also assembled again the States of Holland, mainly
about the matter of this late Sending, every one presenting and reporting
there, what had passed and happened with them in that behalf: and thereupon
taking pains together for their further mutual consent and constancy, in
maintaining their late (June 4.) determined Disbanding or Discharging of their
Soldiers.

And by them there was likewise among other things a Note drawn of the new
rates among the Provinces, being all the rest showed themselves so rich and
self-seeking, that they would not hear of any Reduction, such as Holland was
constrained unto.

The Old Rate. The New Rate. 5 -- 12 -- 3 Gelderland -- 7 -- 0 -- 0 58 -- 6 --
2 Holland -- 42 -- 0 -- 0 9 -- 3 -- 8 Zealand -- 13 -- 0 -- 0 5 -- 16 -- 7
Utrecht -- 8 -- 0 -- 0 11 -- 13 -- 2 Friesland -- 17 -- 0 -- 0 3 -- 11 -- 5
Over-Issel -- 5 -- 0 -- 0 5 -- 16 -- 7 Groaning and Omlands 8 -- 0 -- 0 100 -- 0
-- 0 100 -- 0 -- 0

June 24. Their Hi. Mi. sent Commissioners again, the Lords Aertsberghen,
Marignant, Renswonde, Grovesteins, Mulart and Clant, to the Provincial Assembly
of Holland, to continue persuading of them, to what was formerly propounded to
the Cities: Whereupon the customarie answer was returned, that it should be
taken into deliberation, and their Resolution returned in convenient time.

In pursuance of what his Highness had said at the Report June 27. about a more
particular Relation, on Thursday following, the 30 day, he himself accompanied
and brought in by the Nobles, did make this ensuing Proposition in the Assembly
of the States Provincial of Holland, it being easily observed by the style,
that the same was penned by Secretary Nusch.

Noble Mighty Lords!
AFter that the respective Provinces had returned to the Generality their
Provincial advices about the matter of the State of War, and dependence
thereof, and when it appeared thereby, that the six other Provinces were
somewhat disagreeing therein with your No. Mi.: We then and his Excellency the
Stadtholder, and the Council of State, would gladly have seen that they the
said Provinces could have understood one another in this behalf, and ways
likewise were showed them. But your No. Mi. were pleased to pass it all by, and
on a sudden, at your last Provincial meeting to resolv upon a separate
Discharge and Reduction of some of the Forces of the Land, both Horse and Foot,
and likewise to put the same in execution; whereby their Hi. Mi. the
States*General were necessitated among other Devoirs and Expedients, to resolv
upon a very solemn Sending or Commission to all the Cities and Members of your
No. Mi. Province, to persuade the same by all conceivable Arguments, to a
re-assuming of the foresaid whole business, and consequently that they would
desist from all Separate Disbanding, diminishing, or altering the foresaid
Forces, as being in service of, and engaged by oath to the Generality, and to
relinquish all contrary purposes and acts of that nature, that so the Concord,
Tranquillity, and necessary Unity between such old and confident
Confederates, might be preserved, and on the contrary all such practices as
should attempt to thwart and cross the same, timely prevented and obviated.

In which good and upright intention, we were content our own person should
be employed together with others in that Deputation; and having undertaken it,
our first Journie and Address was to the City of Dort, from whence we
proceeded to Gorcum, in regard of the Vicinitie. At which place there repaired
unto us the Lords Octgens and Hasselaer, with Letters of Credence from the
Worshipful the Burgo-master and Council of Amsterdam; which Gentlemen told us
again and again most unexspectedly in plain terms, that they should not suffer
us, nor the rest of the Commissioners to com within their said City of
Amsterdam.

A little while after, the Lords Geelvinck and Spiegel, accompanied with a
Secretary, came to meet us at Edam, desiring us, that we would not trouble
the said City of Amsterdam, but pass it by, left the Magistrate of that City
should be compelled to something that might prove distasteful.

Notwithstanding all this, we went on, and came to the said City of
Amsterdam, together with all the Lords of the said Commission. Where the
Burgo-masters indeed, welcomed us for our person, declaring, they received us
as Stadtholder or Governor, and consequently showed some demonstration of
outward honor.

But being desired they should grant us Audience in the full Council of the
said City, they refused it.

Whereupon pressing them that at least wise they would give Audience to our
person in their full Council, in quality of your No. Mi. Stadtholder or
Lieutenant. And that in a matter, whereof for their further satisfaction, we
had given them information beforehand.

This our desire they referred to the deliberation of the full Council.

And next day the Burgo-masters accompanied with some other of the Magistrates
of that City, came to us, and declared, that they could not admit the
audience, in quality of Stadtholder.

Which proceedings were very different from those of the other Cities of your
Nob. Mi. Province, all of them both within and without their districts,
respectively, friendly presenting and affording us audience, as Stadtholder.

By reason whereof we cannot but so much the more most highly resent and
complain of the foresaid denunciations and refusals made unto us in the name of
the City of Amsterdam, as being directly against our Dignity and Respect;
and no less against the State and Eminency of this Province, who qualified us
with the charge of their Lieutenant or Governor; and notoriously tending to the
undervaluing and vilifying of our person; it being also a matter altogether
unheard of, and never used toward any of Our Predecessor's in Charge; in
regard whereof we have judged it necessary, your No. Mi. being gathered now
in a Provincial Assembly, to acquaint you with all these passages, and to
request and desire you to dispose, order, and oblige the foresaid Magistracy
of the City of Amsterdam, to make due Reparation unto us in that behalf,
resting confident your No. Mi. will take it into speedy deliberation, and
resolv accordingly.

Don in the Hague, June 30. 1650. and was signed G. P. d' Orange.


It was observed, that as his Highness named the City of Amsterdam, he did it
with a certain commotion and elevation of the Voice, yet afterward moderated
his speech again. Those of Amsterdam desired the Copy thereof, and brought in
their Answer, which shall follow in due place.

The States of Holland appointed a Committee, one of the Nobility, and the
five foremost Cities of South*Holland, Dort, Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam,
and of the North-Quarter, Alcmaer, Horn, Enckhuyse, for to examine the whole
Business of the foresaid Sending, and dependence thereof; who found the same to
consist in three heads, as, 1. What was fitting to be don in regard of
Formalities about the said Sending; 2. What was to be judged of the Substance
of the foresaid Proposition made in the Cities of Holland. 3. What might be
most expedient for the weal of the Land, to be don about the discontinuance of
paying the Souldierie cashiered by their Nob. great Mo.

Touching the first point, viz. the foresaid Formalities, it was the opinion of
the Committee, That their No: Great Mo. ought by Resolution to disapprove of
the said Sending and dependence thereof, it being past example, and against
the order and form of Government. And that in like manner it be confirmed by
Resolution, that the Cities of this Province shall for time to com, neither
afford nor admit of any such Sending. And*

As for the second point, the Substance, namely, contained in the foresaid
Proposition: That there are found in the same in several respects, diverse
abusive positions: as, 1. In regard that in the beginning thereof it is said,
That the Separate Disbanding and Reduction of the Land's Forces, was undertaken
by their Nob. gr. Mi. without foregoing communication with their Confederates:
whenas it is more then notorious, that not only for a long time, nay, diverse
months one after another, all endeavors have been used, to make known the
intention of their No. gr. Mi. touching this subject, unto the Provinces; but
also all possible means used, to dispose them to consent with their No. gr. Mi.
whereof the Registers of the Generality can render sufficient testimony at
all times, especially in Januarie, March, April, May, and even the third of
June last: Besides the Letters written to all the Provinces in December before,
the particulars of all which, may, if need be, be produced forthwith. As
likewise (said they) it could never be proved, what the Proposition laie's
down for a groundwork, viz. That the^ Supreme command or power of raising,
cashiering, or reducing of Forces, is solely committed to the Council of State;
there being no such thing to be found, neither in the Instruction of the said
Council, nor in the Union, nor in any Resolution of the State; that ever the
like should be transported to the said Council: but that on the contrary, it
does plainly appear by the first Article of the Union, and the 32d Art. of the
said Councils Instruction, that the same is resolved to belong to the
Provinces. As little ground has that which the said Proposition aver's,
saying, That the lessning of the Forces made by their No. gr. Mi. should be a
breach or dissolution of the Union, there being no such Conclusion can be
made from the Articles of the Union: and the allegations out of the said
Articles made use of in the Proposition; they being besides the point, and no
way applicable to this case. Moreover (besides that the business of Religion is
most odiously produced there, which nevertheless their No. gr. Mi. as highly
affect and mind, as ever any of the other Provinces did or does) that it was
ill said there, the lessning of the charges made by their No. gr. Mi. was an
unheard of and new accident. Whenas it is well known to all the State, what the
other Provinces formerly have undertaken and don in that kind, and in
particular, what Utrecht did in the hottest time of war, withdrawing themselves,
and refusing their Contributions for the whole affair of the Sea Coast-Navie,
which in effect is the Leaguer for the State at Sea, and the most principal
pillar of the Citie's welfare; as Friesland and others also likewise have
proved notably defective in that regard from time to time, besides what is
known, Friesland did in regard of the West-Indie-Companie, altogether
abandoning these affairs, even to this day, notwithstanding that the
maintenance thereof, is the cause and firm assurance of our so long exspected,
dear bought peace; and the means, whereby the power of the King of Spain can
best be bridled. As also in particular, the lessning of the Forces, has
heretofore been undertaken by several Provinces.

It was also the foresaid Committee's advice, that the abovementioned
disapproving Resolutions might be intimated to the Generality, and registered
there. And that withal, it was fitting to be there likewise in terms declared
and registered, That, for the time to com, the Cities of this Province should
not admit nor suffer any such Sending or Commission, to be brought or
presented to them: and that therefore it should seriously be urged, That the
Provinces beware of laying a ground for such Sendings, or ever undertaking
again to put the same in execution, for reasons to be further deduced then.
That it should likewise be remonstrated to the Generality, how among the
ingredients of the Proposition made, there was use made of many abusive
Positions in various respects, with the deduction thereof, as was briefly
touched above, andcould easily be particularized further.

Lastly, That it was fitting, serious and well-grounded Letters should be
written and sent to all the Provinces, wherein to acquaint them with the
reasons and motives, why the foresaid Sending was, by their No. gr. Mi.
Resolution disapproved, and for time to com never to be admitted or
entertained again by the Cities of this Province, deducing therewithal, how
manifold Devoirs and offers, friendly and serious applications there have been
made and reiterated to the Generality, even in presence of his Highness, and
his Excellency the Stadholder, and the Council of State, for the disposing of
the Provinces to an agreement with their No* gr. M. good intentions; declaring
that their No. gr. Mi. had never other aim nor design, but to disburthen the
State for a time, according to the present opportunities, and nevertheless to
keep a sufficient proportion of Forces for its security, and therwithal firmly
to maintein, and more and more to cultivate the old confident Confederacy with
all the Provinces.

That in all this, the person and respect of his Highness, was to be held and
maintained by them all, in high esteem, and that this intention of their No.
gr. Mi. should in terms be certified to his Highness himself in their behalf.

Upon the third point the advice was, that his Highness should be saluted from
his No. gr. Mi. by the Councellor Pensionarie, and desired, that according to
his wise Considerations, and the exact knowledge he has of the whole Business,
his Highness would be pleased to make overture of such Propositions, as he
judged would most effectually serve for to reduce the Provinces to a common
consent, about lessning or easing the charges of the State. And besides that
the said Councellor Pensionarie should likewise give his Highness to
understand, that the Members of Holland were disposed to entertain a Conference
about these matters with his Highness, that there being afterward made Report
of the success thereof, such further progress might be made or undertaken, as
should be requisite and fitting.

Hereupon several Conferences were held with his Highness, who desired that in
the first place and above all things, Holland should recall their foresaid
disapproving advice. Nor was there any other or further Proposition or Project
made by his Highness; but he stuck still to what formerly was resolved and
determined by their Hi. Mi. and by the Council, maintaining, that Holland could
nor ought not to do any thing to the contrary. Saying, that for the defense of
the Land there were required at the least 27000 Foot, and 3000 Horse. That the
whole business of charges, ought to be reviewed with the Council of State:
that being don once, he would make report of it to the Provinces, and that in
the interim Holland should continue to pay the cashiered Companies.

Friday, July 8. The Counselor Pensionarie Cats, made report of the Conference
held by the Committee Members with his Highness, relating, that after various
discourses of the one and the other side, the opinion and intention of his
Highness was received to be reported at the Assembly, in manner as follows.

That the third Member of the Advice presented to the Provincial Assemby,
touching the Sending resolved upon by the Generality, to the Cities of this
Province, should be extended as a particular Resolution by it self, and as
having no relation to the other Members of the same Advice.

That his Highness confiding in the Committee-Members, that they will endeavor
to the utmost to dispose their respective Superiors, that the business of
disapproving the foresaid Sending to the Cities of this Province, might be set
apart and laid by, without presenting of it to the Generality, or otherwise
acting in it; he could be content, that a Committee might be appointed by
their No. gr. Mi. for further Conference with him for to frame such an advice
together, as might be most serviceable for the Land, about lessning of the
Souldierie, and matters depending thereon; to be communicated to the Assembly
of their No. gr. Mi., and if accepted there, overture might then be made
thereof at the Generality, as an advice of his Highness, and Conference
thereupon had with the Provinces, that so the said Work might be settled at
last, and effectually dispatched.

That in the mean time the payment should be continued to the discharged
Souldierie, till such time as the Provinces should be reduced to a full
consent.

Furthermore it was related by the Counselor Pensionarie, that his Highness at
pa^ting, desired notice might be taken, that the foresaid Overtures were made
by him, according to his former Declaration, as Stadtholder or Governor of the
Province of Holland and West-Friesland.

All which being taken into Consideration, it was agreed, That the last Member
of the foresaid Advice, should according to his Highness's desire, be
extended, as a Resolution by it self, without reflection to any thing else.

And further, that the Committee-Members should be desired, and were desired
by these, to make a general Report to their respective principals, of the
foresaid matter and dependence, and so endeavor to the uttermost of their
abilities, that their said principals may be disposed to contribute that Zeal
to the Work, whereby the same and things dependant, may commodiously be
directed to most service of the Land, and best consent of the Provinces, for an
happy issue and conclusion of all. And it was further agreed, that in the
interim another Conference should be entertained by the Committee of their No.
gr. Mi. with his Highness, about lessening of the Souldierie and matters
annexed, to procure an other project in that behalf, that the Commissioner's
advice heard thereupon, the project framed by his Highness joined with the
Committee, may further be managed as should be found expedient.

At the Deliberation, what Members should be chosen for the Conference with
his Highness about the said subject of lessening the Souldierie and like
matters, it was found good the Resolution now taken, and resumed, and concluded
that afternoon, should beforehand be communicated to his Highness by the
Counselor Pensionarie, and his mind known, whether it would be acceptable to
him, to enter next day following into the foresaid Conference.

Not long after Report was made by the said Counselor Pensionarie, that his
Highness upon the hearing of the foresaid Resolution read, had declared, he
would be ready to morrow to enter into Conference with the Committee of their
No. gr. Mi. upon the intimated subject, vid. in quality as Stadtholder of this
Province, according to former Declaration. Whereupon deliberation had, there
were desired and appointed ^or that Committee, the Nobles, together with the
Lords of Dort, Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Gruda, Alemaer, Horn,
Enckhuyse and Medenblick, viz, one person for each of those members, and the
Counselle Pensionarie.

But they being not able to bring things to a Consent at that Conferrence, his
Highness in the interim was very busy for some days together with the Council
of State; and having together found out and drawn up a project of further
accommodation, the same was, (July 15. next ensuing,) presented to the Assembly
of their Hi. Mi. in tenor as follows.

High, Mighty Lords!
After what manner his Highness, and his Excellency, Stadtholder, and the
Council of State have, during the War, uncessantly watched and taken care for
the preservation of the State, by timely and seasonable presenting unto your
Hi. Mi. with what power the Land was fit to be protected; so immediately upon
the Conclusion of the Peace, they have held it their Devoir, to continue their
care and watchfullness for the protection of the State, according to the
Constitution of affairs then; and to this end and effect, they have drawn and
presented unto your Hi. Mi. the state of war, containing such a proportion of
Forces and like necessary requisites, as they judged needful for the
preservation of the State, as well without as within. But hitherto your Hi. Mi.
have not yet accepted of the said State of war with full Consent, to the great
grief of his Highness his Excellency and the Council of State, who cannot but
fear thereby, as waste of Treasure on the one hand, so confusion in the State
on the other, the rather for that the discrepancies of opinion have already
produced such evil effects, and been followed with a pretended seperat
Disbanding of Forces, who remaining unpaid, there cannot but ensue and arise
thence many both apprehended and unapprehended troubles.

By reason whereof his Highness his Excellency, Stadholder and the Council of
State have judged it needful, to appear now in your Hi. Mi. Assembly, and to
see whether your Hi. Mi. may be equal Propositious, yet be brought to an
agreement of minds. Nevertheless before they com to that, his Highness his
Excellency, Stadholder and the Council of State, declare herewith, That they
are still of opinion and conceiv, The security of this State, requires as yet
no less Forces, then were comprehended in the formerly delivered State of War;
and they will likewise be held blameless, if through want of entertaining a
sufficient Number of Souldierie, the state of the Land, should be surprised by
any mischief; declaring further, that they are moved to present this new
draught or project, only upon the apprehension, of the imminent dangers; in
case the Provinces continue longer at odds, about the receiving of a State of
War, and especially, if during the Deliberations to be taken thereabout, a
considerable party of the Souldierie remain the whiles unpaid.

Therefore it is, that his Highness his Excellency, Stadholder and the Council
of State, do in the first place desire that the pay may be continued to the
Souldierie separately and pretendedly discharged.

And thereupon, to bring the Provinces to an Unanimous Resolution, as for the
discharging of some Forces, so for the other points of Charges, and the settling
of a State of War, his Highness his Excellency and the Council of State would
present the ensuing propositions, nevertheless under express Declaration, as
before.

In the first place, That 16 Troops of horse should be disbanded, there
remaining then in the service, yet 52, besides 50 Carabins belonging to his
Excellency Stadholder: whereof 10 Troops of Colonels, consisting of 60 some,
and others of 38 bors a piece; those of 60 should be reduced to 50. The 4
first Troops, should remain as now they are, viz. three of his Highs one of 150
and two of 200 horse; and that of Count Maurice, Lieutenant General, 100 horse.
Thus there should be discharged 1340 horse and 3000 remain in service.

That the Cuirassiers should be turned into Carabins, excepted only the
Guards of his Highness, one Troop of 150 and the other of 100 horse, and the 50
of his Excellencies.

That of the Infantrie there should be discharged 55 companies of 50 men
apiece, and of the 201 Companies of 70 men, remaining, five men a piece reduced
besides, so that in all there should be disbanded 3755 foot, and remain in
service 450 companies, consisting of 26350 men.

Which forces are less, then were kept in time of the Truce, besides the 2
troops of horse, 30 Companies of foot, entertained by France, at which time,
there were not so many Frontiers to be Garrisoned, as now there are, there
being a good many more gotten recovered since, besides other Relations
requiring it now, which were not before.

That the lodging-monies, where the same were paid hitherto, should be
lessened by a Moitie, provided the Companies be well and readily paid, and
likewise disburd'ned from all extraordinary Charges.

That the Officers of such Companies, as are to go off by disbanding, they
being reduced to a great deal of inconvenience by this time of peace, many of
them having served the State for many years in several qualities, and not well
knowing on a sudden what course of living to apply themselves unto, it seems
very equal, that a certain pension be allowed them; as namely, to a Captain of
horse 1200 flor. p. an. he entertaining always one horse, to be in readiness
upon occasions, at his Highness's call for service. To a Captain of Foot 800
flor. to a Lieutenant of horse 350 fl. to a Lieutenant of Foot and Cornet of
horse, each 250 fl. to an Ensign 200 fl. p. an^ respectively; so nevertheless,
as that all such participants shall remain engaged for service as Reformado's,
if need be, under the Collonel-Companies of the Regiments, or otherwise as his
Highness shall find meet: and that the said pensions shall be enjoied by
them, either during life, or until they shall be preferred again in the Lands
Service; whereunto they shall stand recommended before others; also that the
pensions of such as shall leav the Land, for to dwell or serve elsewhere, shall
surceas, and return to the equal benefit of all the Provinces.

That being the Governors of some of the chiefest and most important Frontiers,
besides the great trust put in them of such places, must honorably keep house
there, as having great resort to them of passengers, and withal wanting those
advantages of booties and prises, which they enjoyed during the War, besides
their Entertainments. Those therefore of the Bosch, Mastricht, Breda, and
Sluys, should each of them, have an allowance of 250 flor. p. month. Those of
Berg op Zoom, Hulst and Wesel, each 200 flor. p. month. Those of Willemstad,
Clundert etc. continuing still to receiv their 50 fl. p. month apiece.

That the Colonels of horse and foot, in present service, ought to be had in
special consideration, most of them being ancient and well qualified officers,
and men who by long and good services (through a world of pains, toils and
dangers, in Leaguers, Sieges and all occasions, whereof many bear the sad marks
still) came to be advanced to these Charges: and therefore now in time of
peace, ought to be entertained according to their Deserts, some having
heretofore received 500, 400, and the least 300 flor. p. month that the present
incumbents should have allowed them 200 fl. each p. month and their successors
150 fl. But those of horse might expire by death, the whole Cavalrie being to
be reduced to six Colonels only.

That the Majors of horse and the Lieutenant Colonels of foot, in present
service, for the same reasons, of long and good services, may each of them have
allowed him 50 fl p. month and the Majors of Horse expire after the present,
likewise to six.

And that the Majors of the foot-Regiments shall be reduced to an allowance of
42 fl. p month.

His Highness, his Excellency, and the Council of State desiring their Hi. Mi.
would be pleased to accept of this Project, to bring things in a fittness for
the framing of another State of War, and expediting of all other affairs, which
in the interim, ought to remain in statu quo, and the Council shall go on in
the mean while, communicating with his Highness and his Excellency to examine
and perpend the presented Provincial advices, for the spediest settling of that
State of War, it being altogether impossible that the State of the Land and
the Treasury can be kept free from disorder and confusion without one.

Don in the Council of State at the Hagh, this 15 of July 1650. attested by
Hans Wickel, VI. underneath stood, By Order of the Council of State, J.
Eyckbergh.


THe same being read, his Highness his Excellency and the Council of State
were highly thanked for the good and provident care, they had showed
throughout, for the service of the Land, and especially, for to conserv the
Provinces in mutual concord, with desire they would still continue this their
wonted Zeal upon all emergencies. And thereupon the present Deputies of the
Province of Holland were desired, to communicate the foresaid Project to their
Principals, the Provincial States of Holland now assembled, and to second the
same with all good offices, to the end that fruitful Resolution may speedily
be returned from them; the same States of Holland being likewise desired
then, that in the mean time, they would continue to pay the Soulderie of Horse
and Foot, now lately discharged by them. Whereupon the said Deputies of Holland
in the Assembly of the Generality, declared, and caused to be entered in the
Register-Book, that as yet they could not get their consent therein.

During the sesion of this Assembly his Highness got an ague, and coming home,
took his Bed. The Doctors judged, that it came from his washing or bathing
himself the day before in the Viver, at Ryswick, being a cold standing water:
next day he was let blood, and kept his bed for some days after. The opinion
was, he would get the small pocks. A certain principal member of the Assembly
said then, If the Prince chance to die, they of Holland will scarce admit of
another Stadholder.

But toward the week's end he was well again, though afterward that saying is
proved a true prophecy.

The foresaid project of accommodation of July 15. was examined by the States
of Holland in their Assembly for some days together, and to com still nearer
and nearer, to the same and the intentions of the Generality, they drew up
this Conciliatorie Model.

That, not to vary and retract what was once agreed upon, there should be
discharged 55 Companies of Foot.

That the Companies of 70 men a piece, should be reduced to 60 and those of 60
to 50.

That the form or manner of discharging should be left to his Highs and the
Council of State.

That the military entertainment should be regulated, according to the
project and design of December 1648.

That the Fieldmarshal's entertainment should remain as before and as it is
said in the new State of War.

That the disbanded Captains of horse shall be allowed 1000 fl. p. an. apiece.

The Captains of Foot 700 fl. p. an. provided those Captains of horse or Foot,
engage in no other service; and they shall be recommended to his Highs for
employment to com; and getting new employment, or into other service abroad,
their respective entertainments shall surceas.

That the Companies coming to be vacant, shall be given, at the nomination of
his Highness, according to the former accustomed Order.

That the Lievtenants of Horse and Foot, shall exspire by death.

That three Companies shall remain exemt from alteration viz. two of his Highs
and one of his Excellencies Count William Stadtholder of Friesland.

That the Lodging-monies shall be taken off altogether, and good order settled
for the more exact and ready pay of all Soldier's wages.

And all this without derogating to any former Resolutions in case these
aforesaid com to fail of success, the former in that case, remaining in full
force and vigor.

Delivered at the Generality July 26. 1650.

Upon the 27. of July the States of Holland sent to the six other Provinces
this following large Letter, drawn up by Sigr Reuyl Pensionarie of Haerlem.

Noble Mighty Lords, our singular good friends, Neighbors and Confederates!
WIth what zeal the Province of Holland and West-Friesland, has ever from the
beginning of this present Government, and hitherto throughout, taken to heart
the conservation, security, growth and welfare of the Body of the Union in
General, and of the Members thereof in particular, the same may appear from
thence, that notwithstanding it was agreed between the Provinces by the
everlasting Union, made in the year 1579. That in all the said Provinces, there
should an uniform and equal proportion of Imposts be levied in them all upon
certain things, for the supplying of the charges needful for common Defense,
the Province of Holland and West Friesland notwithstanding, has been content
for the common good, in the rate of the said charges, to undergo such a
proportion, as far exceeded the rate of the other six Provinces together, and
that in yearly expenses, not without great trouble, by introducing all possible
means, insupportable at length to the good people, brought in, together with,
yea often before and beyond other Provinces, (who many times remained in
arrears) into the Treasury of the Generality, and not only so, but, in times
of exigencie and necessity, furnished excessive sums to the Generality for
the other Provinces, whereof there is no return made yet; by all which, our
Treasury being so exhausted, that it is altogether impossible, the same and
the State of the Province, which must have its nourishment and sustenance
thence, can subsist any longer, unless the charges be lessened to some purpose;
Hence it is, that since it has pleased Almighty God to bless the State with a
glorious Peace, we have judged it meet and equal to bet^ink our selves, how the
enfeebled body of the Treasury, drawn dry of all its vital moisture almost,
by the chargeableness of the long-lasting War, may, by the benefit of Rest,
recover so much vigor again, that the ill-willers may be disappointed of all
their devices to attemt any thing against the State, and the attemters by
vigorous resistance defeated of all their hopes of success against us; it
being undeniable, that otherwise, by the continuance of the charges, which
cannot be furnished from the Incoms, the State will and must needs be ruined
by Peace, which ought to be the means of its recoverie; which as it were great
unthankfulness to God, who all this while and long hot War not only kept, but
also enlarged it; and unanswerable to posterity, that such a glorious Fabric,
which stood unmovable against all the enemies thereof, should by ill-trusted
friends and careless Gardians be suffered to fall at last to ruin: So we
have, looking on the one hand, to the Eas of charges, and on the other, with no
less heed, upon the security of the State, acquainted thereupon his Highness
his Excellency, and the Council of State, with our advice for the new state of
War, framed with that circumspection, and presented at last to the Generality,
that we have severed matters of Liberality from matters of Necessity, and
nevertheless in the first, used that Discretion, that the modesty of a
discreet desire might well be content therewith; and proceeded in the second
with that carefulness, that we were no way behind hand; but that afterward,
for compliance sake with the other Provinces, and if it had been possible, to
have brought all to one Consent in this affair, We made offer, that disbanding
20 Troops of Horse, and 55 Foot-companies each of 50 men, and the reduction of
the companies a 70 to 60 men, we yielded to continue the remaining forces both
Horse and Foot in service, the Cuirassiers only changed into Carabins; to the
sum of 2700 horse and about 26000 foot: and although we hoped that the upright
discovery, which with singular confidence we made to the Deputies of the
Provinces, showing, that we should keep a less number effective in service, if
we took on more then we are able to pay; whereby the State must needs rest
less secure and considing in the Forces, and grow more ruinous in the
Treasury. The conferences indeed, which have been made about that subject
several times at the Generality it self, and at public Deliberations, and
especially the Communication we imparted thereof by our Letters of December
last to all the Provinces as Confederates, we hoped, should have had the
operation, as to render the said Provinces, and among them your Nob. Mi.
particulars like minded and consenting with us; but as yet the State could
never be so happy, no not so much as that the Deputies of the Provinces would
but have assented, that the same thing wherein they themselves, according to the
advices of their Superiors, agree with us by common consent, might have been
but provisionally executed by the Council of State; and endeavored to recommend
the rest to their principals, that by degrees, at least, things might have com
to a full consent at length; insomuch, that all our manifold endeavors and
reiterated instances for many months together remaining fruitless, We were
necessitated at last to dis-continue the pay of those Forces, for the
entertaining whereof we had declared by our solemn Advice, we could not
consent; Which howbeit, that by some at the Generality it is censured, as if it
lay not in our power to do, they pretending that the joint Confederates have
committed the supreme Command, the raising and dis-banding or reducing of
Forces, unto his Highness and the Council of State, and that the Officers
likewise are engaged by Oath to his Highness and the said Council, for to obey
them only; and that therefore our foresaid discontinuance of pay should be a
Breach of the Union; yea, and that we our selves had understood and sentenced
it so at other times, upon like occasions, against other Confederates;
Nevertheless we dare promiss our selves, from the zeal of your Nob. Mi. and
that of the States of the other Provinces, toward the Conservation of your own
Freedoms, and from your singular Discretion, a far different, nay contrary
judgment to theirs, touching the Sens of the Union, and that which we are said
to have maintained heretofore our selves against other Confederates. For as the
Provinces have by the Union, in matters of public charge, kept unto themselves
the freedom of yielding or withholding their Consent, which therefore was to
be renewed every year, (by reason of alterations that might happen) it having
been a known practice, that the Council of State drew a Petition yearly, which
was sent to the respective Confederates to desire their Consent; so without all
peradventure, the Freedom consisted not in an emtie sound of words, but in such
effectual realities, that we our selves free from paying or contributing to
such charges, for the continuation whereof we, (any of the Provinces) had
declared our selves once, that we could not yield our consent; The Provinces
having no power to over-vote the one the other in matter of consent, much less
upon such Consent's refusal, to force any to Contribution; of which all the
Provinces, especially Utrecht and Friesland may bear witness; the former having
in the hottest time of War with held their Consents for many years together,
for Subsidy to the Coast-Navie, the Sea-Leaguer (as it were) of the State, as
the other did for Subsidy to the West-Indie* Company, the protection of the
Conquests in Brasil, and the withstanding of the perfidious power of the
Portugals; and consequently contributed, respectively, not a penie to either.
Thus much indeed we yield to, That the Council of State, as Exsecutor of the
Resolutions of the Common-Union, may, after that all the Confederates have
certified their consent of raising forces, accordingly levy the same, and
engage them by Oath; and that the Officers so taken on, in matters of military
exploits for the service and conservation of the State, are to yield obedience
to his Highs and the Council of State; but the same are in no wise enabled or
autorised to raise or continue Forces in service against the consent of the
Provinces, much less under pretext of the Oath, taken in the Name of the
Common-Union, to force them to continue the same in service against the
Remonstrance of the Members of the Union. Nor shall it ever be found, that the
Province of Holland and West-Friesland understood it otherwise at any time
against their Confederates; being that the Examples produced for that purpose
are of a clean different nature; and particularly, That some Provinces, either
contrary to their consent given, or without foregoing notification to the
Confederates of their discontinuing consent, may have sought to eas themselves
by clandestine Reduction of the Forces, or some other underhand way of
disburthening charges; the same might not without reason be said to have been
against the Union, as, whereby the security or safety of the State is
empaired, against former (given, or at leastwise not professedly discontinued)
Consent, without any notification to the Confederates. But if so be, that a
Province have made known to the Confederates her disabilitie of undergoing
their Burden any longer, and have showed their reasons why they cannot
continue their consent of entertaining the charges they were not able to bear;
then certainly, it is far enough from the Province of Holland, ever to have
maintained, this to be contrary to the Union; Holland having in this Case,
not only been content to pass by such with-holdings, but (the Lands exigencie
requiring it) has readily put her own shoulders under the burdens, thus
excused or rejected by others; by which zeal and proneness of hers her back
being overburthened and born down ready to break, We cannot be so
mistrustful to our cause, that putting off now what we are not longer able to
bear, and doing but therein, what the Freedom, preserved by the Union, does
enable us, and following in the same the Examples of other Confederates; we
should yet be held bound to your Nob. Mi. to perform impossibilities, and that
you will suffer, that after so long maintenance of our Freedom, against those
that were our Enemies, any Confederate should dare (now we enjoy peace) to
dispute our and your Freedom, never controverted in War, and ever acknowledged
by the Princes of the Land themselves, before the Wars: especially considering
further that our aim tend's to the repute, honor and safety of the State, and
the missing thereof must needs weaken the esteem, abate the credit, and
endanger all again; the Credit and reputation of affairs consisting in this,
that in time of peace, care and heed be taken, how by fit and wise managing
and husbanding, that may recover and get strength again, which by War was
brought low and weakened, and the Honor, that thereby may be recovered the
luster and splendour a^ a well-ordred Treasury, and the Safety, that by exact
and ready pay there may be kept a convenient and well-disciplin'd Army;
whereas on the contrary the neglect of such a managing of peace, will cause our
very friends to slight and vilipend us, and the further decaie of our
Treasury be the Joy and Exsultation of our Enemies, whereon to ground an
assured hope, that (we continuing in this reklessness) it will shortly bring
to pass that, which all the power from without, for so many years (whilst the
good cause was stood for by the upright courage of heroic Generals, and the
prudence and Wisdom of Zealous Governors, both assisted by the blessing of God)
was never able to effect.

As likewise the entertaining of Forces and such like Burdens in greater
proportion then the incoms are able to discharge, must needs draw along an
uncertain doubtful pay, which will soon lessen the number and strength, and
that which is wors, breed thoughts of disobedience, malcontentedness, and the
like, to the apparent danger of the State; which hazard is very needless, in
regard that these Countries are so situated, that if the Treasury be but
furnished with ability to make good pay, there will be no want of men in
time of need; but to entertain more then can be paid, must of necessity cause
want and decaie of Treasure.

And since by what has been deduced here, Your No* Mi. are easily able to
understand, that we have proceeded in all this with all requisite
Communication with our Confederates, and don nothing, but what our Disabilitie,
caused by our indefatigable Zeal for the preservation of the State, has
necessitated us unto, and that which by Right and in Wisdom we might and ought
to do, and other Confederates, in times of greater danger, have don before us;
for the maintenance and preservation of which Right and Freedom, all the
Confederates themselves are bound according to the Union, to aid and assist us,
all tending but to our own Preservation; wherein, how much all the rest of the
Confederates are concerned, they themselves have oft-times tasted during all the
War, and are able at present to discern by their Wisdom, and that the aim of
the Union is none other but the preservation of the State in general, and of
every particular member thereof: Therefore we will not doubt, but our sincere
intention shall sufficiently guard us in your Nob. Mi. apprehension, from all
^inister impression of our being otherwise disposed, then to remain inviolably
faithful to the Union, which we do holily protest, we are resolved and ready,
firmly to keep and maintein with life and goods for ever, with utmost
seriousness, for the Love of our Dear Father-land, and the memory of those
that have sealed the Confirmation of this Union with their heart'sblood; for
the preservation of our selves and all that are near and dear to us, and for the
Honor of God and his Son, whom here we have liberty to profess and worship
according to his Will. Beseeching your Nob. Mi. that by your joint putting off,
together with us, of such insupportable burdens as may be dispensed with,
without evident danger to the State, You will help to further the disburthening
of the overcharged Estate thereof; and weighing well your No. Mi. own
preservation, you will not further importune us with what we are not able to
perform, or, if we should undertake it, would unavoidably hasten our
Destruction, and consequently the ^uine of the whole State: In confidence of
your Nob. Mi. Wisdom and Zeal for remedying the same, We rest, etc.

Written in the Haghe July 27o 1650. Superscription; To the Nobles. To all the
Provinces. The States.

In the mean time they of Amsterdam had likewise got ready and presented unto
the Provincial Assembly of Holland, their Answer to the abovesaid Proposition
of his Highs, made at the same Assembly June 30, in terms and manner as
follows.

Noble Mighty Lords!
THe Burgomasters and 36 in Council, of the City of Amsterdam, having seen a
Copy of the Proposition presented to the Assembly of your No. Gr. Mi. June 30
last past, by his Highs the Prince of Orange; and that therein Complaint is
made, and Reparation desired, of and for certain offenses to have been
committed against his said Highs, by and in behalf of the Government of this
State; They are very sorry to understand, that the good and upright intention
which their WW had in all the passages that Proposition reflect's upon, should
be so mistaken, as to be made the subject of Complaints and Dissatisfaction.
And though they would have been glad, that what happened in that kind might
have been past by in silence, so, as their W. W. endeavored on their parts by
their Deputies to have disposed his Highs, and to give all possible content:
Nevertheless they do now find themselves urged by necessity, in their own
defense and justification, to present and lay before your Noble gr. mi. the
ensuing answer; the rather also, for that the foresaid Proposition has been
spread abroad and divulged in print, to our great prejudice: being confident
it shall plainly be made to appear, their WW had no design in what has past,
but, together with the maintenance of the lawful order of Government, and the
Rights of this Province and their own City, to yield all due respect and honor
to his Highness.

Thus then the matter stands; That the said Burgomasters, and the 36 in
Council, having been a long while waiting for the fruitful issue of the
Deliberation, which held your No. gr. mi. busy so much time, viz. about the
state of War; coming to see at last the Resolution taken by your No. gr. mi.
June 4o last past, and the Orders issued for conformity thereunto* viz* to
leav unpaid, and to hold for discharged and cashiered, some Companies of the
Repartition or Allotment of Holland; Their WW rested confident, the other
Provinces and their Deputies at the Generality, would duly have acknowledged
the lawful power of your No. gr. Mi. in that behalf, together with those
pregnant and pressing motives, which had moved and sufficiently constrained you
to take that Resolution at last; and thereupon would have left you uncontrouled
in the effecting of what you had resolved.

But contrary to all exspectation their WW were advertised, that after the
parting of your No. Gr. Mi. Assembly, the said honorable Deputies of the
Provinces at the Generality, undertook upon Whitsundaie June 5o without any
more ado, to Countermand your No. Gr. Mi. Order by Letters to the respective
Commanders, Captains and Sollicitors, tnd to resolv upon a very Solemn
Deputation to all the Cities and Members of Holland, for to dissuade them by
all conceivable arguments, from conforming to your No. Gr. Mi. Resolution
aforesaid, and that his Highs the Prince of Orange should in person help to
suit and adorn the said Commission, together with some of the Lords of the
Generality and others of the Council of State; with a very prejudicial
autorization of his Highness, in regard of the Province of Holland, the Cities
and members thereof.

Also, that his Highs and the rest of that Commission, were already parted from
the Haghe to the purpose aforesaid, notwithstanding, that the present Deputies
of your No. Gr. Mi. at the Generality, had solemnly desired there beforehand,
June 7o that the said Sending being an Innovation beside all accustomed order
of Government, which could promiss no good issue, might be superseded, or but
suspended, with offer that the Provincial Assembly should be convocated with
all possible expedition, to the end, that the matters intended to be
propounded to the particular Cities and Members of Holland, might be
communicated there unto their Representatives.

The great weight and concernment of all which, has made the Burgomasters judge
it necessary, timely to deliberate hereupon with the Citie-Council; and to
this end at a solemn Meeting appointed June 10 it was unanimously agreed, that
the foresaid Sending of their Hi. Mi* to the Cities and Members of Holland in
particular, especially in a matter concerning a Provincial Deliberation, and
point blank against the Resolution thereof, could not be admitted nor received
to Audience; and thereupon concluded to dispatch forthwith Commissioners to
meet his said Highness, and from the City to acquaint him, that his Highs
Princely person and the other Commissioners with him, being in no other
quality then Deputies from their Hi. Mi. they could not be admitted to
Audience in the Citie's Council, nor so much as to com into the City.

And without judging it needful to deduce here at length the reasons, which
moved their W W* to this, they shall only refer themselves touching the fitness
and unfitness, together with the troublesome Consequences of the foresaid
Sending, to what formerly in the year 1639 upon like occasion (howbeit of less
importance, in regard his Highness was not personally joined in Commission, but
only some Holland-Gentlemen who made themselves liable to answer it to their
Principals) has amply been deduced and presented to your N. G. M. from and in
behalf of the Government of this City, according to the Copy hereunto
annexed, and unto that likewise, which by the Committee*members of your N. G.
M. conformably thereunto, has by way of advice been presented, about the
subject in hand in particular; Consisting in this, That by your N. G. M.
Resolution the said Sending and dependence, is to be disapproved, as being
past Example, and against the order and form of Government; as also, that it
be resolved, The Cities of this Province should henceforward, neither offer
nor admit any such Sending within their Bounds; furthermore, that this
disapprooving Resolution should be made known from your N. G. M. to the
Generality, and registered there, that hereafter no such Sending should be
more admitted by the Cities of this Province; and that therefore it should be
seriously urged to the said Generality, they would take heed of laying a
ground hereafter for any such Sending, or of undertaking and acting the same,
for reasons to be further showed, and lastly to write seriously to all the
Provinces, and to give them a particular account of the reasons and motives,
wherefore the foresaid Sending was disapproved by their N. G. M.

See the foresaid Advice a little before.

And forasmuch as the Burgomasters and Council of Amsterdam were sorry and
wondered much to see, that his Highs suffered himself (by such, to whom it no
ways belong's) to be entangled in the accepting of this Commission, and
perceived, that they could no less disacknowledg his Highs himself then the
rest in Commission with him, Their W W. out of respect to his said Highs, and
to sever him, if it were possible from his received Commission, and to prevent
a Refusal of the Audience, found good to send to his Highs, and to let him know
the foresaid Resolution, with deduction of the pregnant Reasons, which moved
the said Burgomasters and Council, to take the same, and consequently seriously
to desire his Highs, that be would be pleased to break off his intended
journie, in regard that he and the rest in Commission with him, could not be
received into the Council nor City of Amsterdam, in quality of that
Commission. Which message with other offices being performed by the
Burgomasters Waveren and Hasselaer in the City of Gorcum, they had thanks
given them at their return.

Now the same being construed by his Highs, as if the intention of
Burgomasters and Council had been, simply not to admit his Princely person into
their City, no not in consideration of his Dignity of Stadholder of the
Province; their W W solemnly declared for elucidation of their good intention,
that the same was altogether far removed from their least thoughts, as the East
is from the West; but that his Highness as Stadtholder of the Province might
be assured of the greatest honor and respect that could be desired, and that
the sens of the Council was only, That his Highs could not be admitted, in
regard of the foresaid Commission.

And when afterward the said Burgomasters were advertised, that his Highness
continued in his Resolution to repair nevertheless to the said City,
conceiving he might prevail for all that to get admission upon the foresaid
Commission and Lettes Credential from their Hi. Mi* Their W W and the Council
persisted again, it was not in their liberty nor power to grant the foresaid
Audience, and found good to send the second time to his Highs to acquaint him
with their Resolutions, and for the foresaid reasons most seriously again to
desire him, to pass the City by in this Commission, testifying nevertheless
all due readiness to receiv him (this quality laid aside) as Stadtholder, with
all respect and honor. To this end there were sent unto his Highs the Lord
Gelvinck, old Burgomaster, and Sigr Spiegel of the Council, with a Secretary,
who meeting his Highs at Edam, they there in decent manner made known unto him
the foresaid Resolution and desire; intimating therewithal unto him, in the
Name of their Superiors, that if his Highs were pleased to com into the City
as Stadholder, that their W W should longingly take the opportunity of showing
to his Highs all the proofs of their respect and obsequiousness.

And because it pleased his Highs to reply thereupon that he meant to com
together with the rest of the Commissioners in all the Qualities he now was
invested with. The Citie-Commissioners returned, that his Highs coming to the
City, he should be looked upon and received as Stadholder of the Province,
and he was desired then to let them know the time when his Highs was to be
there exspected.

Next day, being 23 of June, his Highs together with the foresaid
Commissioners arrived within the said City, and was received for his person
with the train-bands in arms, and with further exhibition of all due respects
by the Burgomasters.

But when, notwithstanding all the former Devoirs and Deprecations, it pleased
his Highs to declare to the said Burgomasters, that he was com there, together
with other Commissioners from their Hi. Mi. to propound to the Common Council
according to their Letters of credence, such matters as they had in Commission,
desiring Audience for that purpose, the same was, upon the forecited reasons,
answered with an Excuse.

Which they made use of the rather, in consideration of the offense committed
in this Commission against the Dignity and Reputation of your No. Gr. M.
Province, when as the Lord Alexander vande Capelle, Sigr of Aertsberghen,
being the mouth of the Commissioners from their Hi. Mi. did (according to the
report of the Deputies of the City of Dort) in the Common Council there, in
most exasperate bitter and unsufferable language, declare, That they the
Commissioners could take no satisfaction in the dilatorie answer made the day
before unto his Highs, and that they would not depart from Dort, ere and before
the Old Council had roundly declared unto them, whether they would return to
the Union again which they had deserted, and until they had received a clean,
short, positive, Categorical and peremtorie answer to their Proposition in
writing; and that besides this, they looked for to have a ready and effectual
Reparation made by the said Lords of Dort for the Breach of the Union, whereof
they had made themselves guilty together with other members of Holland, and
were liable therefore in body and goods, according to the 23d Article of the
Union, and the Examples alleged, to be arrested and proceeded against before
any Magistrates and Judicatures; the said Lord of Aertsberghen declaring
further, that in case of failing in or delaying the said Reparation, they the
Commissioners must talk with them in another strain, whereof they should hear
more ere long.

Upon the foresaid Excuse, his Highs was pleased to let it rest there, and
began to desire that he might be admitted then himself only in person to
Audience, as Stadtholder of Holland, without nevertheless laying down the
fore^aid Quality of Commissioner, declaring that he intended to speak there
only about that which was propounded to his Highs at Gorcum by the Lord
Waveren, in the name of the Government of this City, without any further
specification.

And when his Highs would not be pleased to recede from* this desire, nor make
any further overture of what he intended to propound, the Burgomasters, for to
give as much content as might be, and to consider, whether it were necessary
and requisite to call the Common Council about it, they received the desire of
his Highs to communicate the same with the Lord Valekenier their Colleague,
President at that time, but not present, because of some bodily indisposition.

And although their WW had Authority enough themselves to dispose of this
Audience, nevertheless for their better Discharge, they had it debated in the
Council, and it being found unfitting by their advice, his Highs being com
into the City in the foresaid Commission, and having matters to propound
depending on that Commission, to grant any Audience to him in full Council; it
was found good therefore that the Burgomasters, together with 5 more of the
Council, should be deputed to him, and fairly excuse the Admission*

Which Lords having made the foresaid Excuse to his Highs, they offered unto
him for further satisfaction, that if his Highs had any thing to propound,
either about that same, or some other matter, he would be pleased to make the
overture to them, assuring him, they would make faithful Report unto the
Council, which no doub^ would be ready thereupon to give him all feasible
satisfaction.

But it being perceived that his Highness was not pleased to make any further
overture but in full Council, and Burgomaster van Waveren offering there upon
the place, that forasmuch as him concerned, he was ready to answer what past
at Gorcum, and to give satisfaction in that behalf therewith, and a repeated
desire and presentation to his Highs unsatisfied, they parted.

Now that this last Excuse of Audience, in manner as said is, should be
interpreted and complained of in the foresaid Propositition, as if thereby
those of Amsterdam had failed in their respect due unto the Stadtholder, the
said Burgom^sters and Council cannot but rejoin for their discharge, That upon
review of the Commission given by your N* G. M* to his Highs as Stadholder, it
dotb plainly indeed appear, that the Stadtholder is bound to stand for,
further, and defend the Dignity, Rights, Privileges and welf^re of the
Country, the Members, Cities and Inhabitants thereof, together with the use
and exercise of the Christian Religion, to preserv and Protect the same from
all molestation and trouble, disorder and discord, detriment and damage;
moreover, to see Right and Justice don and administered to all such as shall
desire the same, and to see all matters of Justice executed by the Advice of
the Lord President and Council of Holland and Wessfries^and; and again, after
advice taken from the same Court, to grant letters of Grace and Remission; and
as touching the affairs of War or Government of this Province, to conform
himself to the mind of the said Lords the States of Holland, or the Advice of
their Commissioned Council, according to their instruction; as also to change
the Burgomasters, the Council and Laws in due manner, according to the
privileges and immunities of the respective Cities and places, etc. But that
the Stadhholder should have power, by virtue of the said Commission, to present
himself in the respective Citie*Councils, there appears not the least tittle:
so that in that particular regard, as* also in regard of the Quality of
Governor and Captain General, every one ought to regulate and govern himself
according to that which hitherto has been in use and practice, as well for the
one as for the other: namely, That if the same have any thing to propound to
the Citie-Council, that then he address himself first to the Burgomasters to
make the overture there, and to procure audience, it being the Burgomasters
part to judge, whether the desired audience i^ to be granted, (for all things
are not subjected ^o the Counci^^ cognizance) and if not, then he ought to
have patience, without any offense of being under valued; forasmuch as it is
the peculiar right of the Burgomasters so to judge and declare.

And besides their WW give your N. G. M. to consider* the most dangerous
consequence, that when they, the States of the Country, of or by their
Sovereign Autorit^e do resolv ought, the Governor or Stadtholder, not pleased
therewith, shall at his own pleasure have the liberty to travel round about
from one Citie-Co^^cil to another, to over-aw and terrify them thus by
piecemeal, in manner as before is related of the Lord of Aertsberghen his
practice and endeavor; and if he seeking audience any where upon that score*
none shall so much as dare to excuse the same.

Against which there can be no contrary Pr^cedents or practices of his Highs
Predecessors be alleged, much less proved and made good during this Government
in this City* and therefore very abusively, under favor, and upon very ill
information, is there mention made in the foresaid Proposition of contrary use
and practice; forasmuch as the Supreme Government is nor committed to the
Stadtholder, but to the Assembly of the States Provincial.

And this N. G. M. Lords is that which the said Burgomasters and 36 of the
Council have been constreined in their necessary Defense to lay before your
Honors, as concerning not only their peculiar Right and Freedom, but likewise
that of your N. G. M. in general; whereupon they persuade themselves that his
Highs, repondering the matters more exactly, and yielding place to reason, he
will easily be able to judge, that the Lords of Amsterdam did nothing in all
these occurrences, but according to the Order of Government, and with respect
to the dignity of this Province: and in stead that Reparation is demanded at
their hands, they have more ground and reason to complain and demand reparation
for the encroaching made and put upon the Government of Holland in general, and
of the City of Amsterdam in particular, by those which advised and set on ^is
Highs to the undertaking and personal undergoing of the foresaid ill-grounded
Commission and the exsecution thereof; and more especially, that in regard of
the Lord of Aertsberghen there ^ee Reparation demanded and had for the
insufferable insolence and injury abovesaid, where such is due and requisite.
Forasmuch as the Resolution of your N. G. M. made and taken after so many
precedent instances at the Generality, was grounded not against the Union, but
upon the proper Right of your N, G. M. constantly in like cases usual; and
besides the exigent necessity, upon Equity it self, That this Province
having, during all the war, laid out it self more then any of the other
Provinces, even beyond ability, for the purchasing of the joint Liberty of
all the Provinces, and having now, through Go^'s blessing, obtein'd the same,
would be loath to suffer the same in peace to com to wrack and ruin by
further waste of the Treasury; but rather, to entertain a well-regulated
Army, exactly definite for Number, fit and proportioned for the Defense of the
Laud; and to see the same duly paid and mustered, that the insufferable fraud,
even hitherto in vogue still, may be hemmed, and by means of all this the
honest habitants be eased and freed by degrees, as much as may be, of those
great burdens and charges of impositions and like molestations, which
hitherto, during the Wars, they have bo^n above measure; and therein be made
as happy, as those of some Provinces already are in that kind, and com to
taste likewise the sweet fruits of their Peace so dearly purchased; Which, by a
longer entertainment of the former un-necessarie and ill*regulated Souldierie,
they cannot possibly obtein or hope for.

In conclusion, their WW add but this more, that they wonder much why the
offense is only taken up against them and their City in particular, and not
against any other; whereas his Highs declared in the written report made to the
Generality in this behalf, that other members likewise of your N. G. M.
Assembly had refused the same Audience or Admittance.

By Order of their WW. Signed, Gerard Hulst.


Matters being com thus avaunt, and each part conceiving they had sufficiently
cleared or declared themselves, and none inclined to yield to the other; his
Highness took a sudden and subtle resolution; viz. to seiz some Members of the
Assembly of Holland, and to reduce the City of Amsterdam by force of Arms;
for which end he had secretly some days before already sent Orders abroad to
several Troops of Horse at Nimmeghen, Arnheim and elsewhere, to be^ on Saturdaie
morning very early, viz. July 30, before such a Gate of Amsterdam. Count
William was gone from the Haghe on Friday the 29 in the afternoon, and at Abkow
after midnight, where the Lord of Sommerdick and the Baron of Dona, arrived
punctually at the set time with four Troops of Horse, but the rest of the
Cavalrie from Nimmeghen and Arnheim had straied in the V^law: the fault whereof
was cast on Captain Mom; though it was the Lord of Sommerdyck that commanded
that whole Brigade. Nor had Mom any other notice of the Enterprise, but to
bring the Horse to Abkow, no^ any charge of stopping passengers; whereupon it
happened that the Hamborough post or messenger, lighting among his Troops, was
not stayed at all, but keeping on his course, arrived early in the morn at
Amsterdam, and brought the first news to the Postmaster by the Exchange, and
after that to the Lord Van Swieten one of the Burgomasters, that he had been
riding the night before among some thousands of Horse, supposing them Lorrainers,
and that they were marching for Amsterdam. The Burgomaster immediately send's
for the Major of the City, causes the Draw-bridges to be taken up, and
strengthen's the guards, and getting himself to the Town-hous, gave order (he
being alone of all the Burgomasters at hand, the rest either from home, or
sick, or dead) for the Ordnance to be put upon the walls of the City in
posture of Arms.

In the mean time the Horse all met, and after a Council of War, Count William
marched, and arrived pretty late about noon, along the Amstel, even close up
to the City. His Design and Charge was, fairly to ride in at Saint Antonie's
gate, it being no custom at Amsterdam to keep any special Guard, much less to
ask or examine any whence he came: supposing there would be as little scruple
or let now made by any, as ever before; especially, if it were early yet, and
few people stirring, which was the time intended. A certain French Captain
Major, by name Jentilot, on Friday evening before, accompanied with 50 choice
men, soldiers, all picked of several Nations, (the Prince would have had him
taken only French, but Jentilot deprecating the Odium to fall all upon his
Nation, he obtained to cull them out of all Nations, amongst whom there were
many Officers, all armed with Swords and Pocket-pistols,) took boat at Utrecht,
with intent to be next morning very early before Amsterdam, and civilly
entering the Gate, suddenly to make himself master of the same. He told me
himself, that he had express charge to commit no act of hostility, nor to
shoot, even though they were shot at themselves. And so the Horse likewise that
were to enter, were charged not to show the least hostile carriage, nor to
shoot again being shot at, (unless the Citizens made it too gross; for then of
right they might defend themselves, and the Prince gave them leav) but to tell
the people, they came only as friends for the good of the City and State, to
preserv peace and unity between the Provinces in general, and among the
Members of Holland in particular; And so riding on fair and softly in good
order, they should have beset and taken possession of the Town house, until his
Highs, who was to follow them, should have com, and have removed some
ill-affected Members of the Magistracy and Council, and reduced the rest to an
happy agreement with the rest of the Provinces about the present Differences.

There was never a Captain of these but had two or three hundred Ducats in
gold about him, to supply their men's necessary occasions, most if not all of
them being ill provided by reason of this sudden, unexspected service; though
some also said, it was for to quiet and allure to their side diverse of the
Common people, that might have stood in opposition to them at the entry.

Jentilot indeed was timely enough at the Randevouz, but missed Count William,
for the reason aforesaid* who coming at last, and finding the Gate shut against
him, and the City all in arms, attempted nothing; sending only a Letter, from
his Highs to the Magistrate, by one of his Gentlemen, in these ensuing terms.

Worshipful, Prudent, very discreet, singular good friends!
Being lately in your City, for the service of the Land, we were so
strangely encountered by you, that for not being subjected any more to the
like, we resolved to send Count William of Nassaw with the Troops under him,
unto your Town, with Order to keep all things there in rest and quiet, to the
end, that we may not be let again by some ill affected, in what we have yet
to propound unto you, concerning the service of the Land; whereunto we desire
your good Cooperation, and relying upon it, commend you to the protection of
the most High, resting Your good friend

G. P. d'Orange.
Dated, Hagh July 29, 1650.

Whereupon the Magistrate having advised, there went forth the City in the
afternoon, in an armed Pinnace the Lords Huydekooper, Marseveen, and Counsel
Verdoos, and being landed, on the Amstel road, right against the Garden-hous
of Sigr Dirck Williers, called Wellna, they found his Excellency Count William
standing accompanied with all his Officers in a Ring under the Skies blew
Canopie, where, after some obeisance, the Lord Hydekooper, spoke in this manner.

Highborn Lord! We are sorry, that we must com to congratulate your Honor,
in such a Disjuncture. The Lords Burgomasters, have well received the Letter of
his Highs of July 29, sent by your Excellency into the City, bnt could have
wished the same had not been accompanied with so great an Attendance, which
caused them to ^udg it needful immediately to call a Council, to communicate
the same with their W W for to resolv together upon an answer, such as the
matters required: whereupon it was beld fittng, to depute of the company, Sigr
Vanderdoos and my self, to let your Excellency know for answer* that their W W
(having understood before, that such ^ number of bo^smen wa^ marching towa^ds
their City) fo^thwith dispatc^t (...) Expr^s^, to their Deputies, and their N.
G. M. the Provincial States, presently assembled at the Hagh, to desire and
know their Advice and Order in this behalf; their W W judging themselves,
without the said weighty Advice, altogether unfit as yet, to ^^ti^n an answer
to his Highs Letter, most friendly and earnestly desiring your Excellency in
the interim to spare their City, and to make no neer^r approach thereunto;
least their W W be constrained to d^fend and protect their City with all such
possible me^^s and Arms* a^ God and Nature has furnished them withal. His
Excellency being somewhat moved at this unexspected Answer, paused a good
while upon it, whereof the Lord Huydekooper thought good to proceed in his
Discourse, saying further.

My Lord, That which we have told your Excellency, is absolutely the Charge
our Principals have laid upon us, and for my particular I make bold friendly
and submissively to advise your Excellency to withdraw your self with all
conveniencie; your Excellency being not without great danger in this place
and juncture; the rather for that our City is full of all kind of Nations,
and strange humors; who coming once to break out, might attempt things, ruinous
to your self, and unpleasing to us. The talk goe's so high already, that it
will not be much longer in our choice, but of necessity and constraint, we
must make use of the means and Arms God and Nature granted to their W W to keep
off harm at further distance. After some paus again, his Excellency answered.

That which is undertaken by me, is nothing, but what his High^ has been
pleased, to order, will and charge me, I shall make report of all unto his
High^. Whereupon, and a civil friendly leav taken of etither side, the said
Deputies returned to their Principals, and his Excellency retired further off
to Oudekerk.

But within the City the Drums beat up and down, and men were taken on in
service at 10 stivers (an English shilling) a day, and some Vessels of War,
laid upon the Ye.

They write to the Cities of Holland, desi^ing them to send their
Commissioners, and to remove the Assembly to A^sterdam.

This being that Saturdaies passage at and before Amsterdam; in the Hagh the
Proceedings were as strange that day. Early in the morning, some Lords were
sent for to his Highness, which otherwise is usual enough; These were the Lords
de Wit of Dort, de Wael and Reuyl of Haerlem, Duyst Van Voorhout, of Del^t,
Keyser, of Horen, and A^llingwerf of Medenblick.

The same being let in one after the other, through the Anti*chamber, into the
Presence, where his Highness usually gave Audience, they found there the
Lieutenant Colonel of the Guard, Meteren, who told them one after the other,
his Highness had charged him, to seis and arrest their persons; and so
committed them each with three Soldiers in a chamber apart, locked upon them.
This feat being dispacht twixt 8 and 9 of the Clock, his Highness sent for the
Counselor Pensionarie Cats, who coming to Court, found the Prince with a sword
at his side, telling him with some distemper, My Lord Cats, You will strange at
what I did, and now am about to tell you. I was not able any longer to endure,
that a few illaffected members, should to the disservice of the Land, nourish
and foment the discord and differences betwixt the Province of Holland and the
rest. I have got here (pointing up toward the Chambers where they were kept)
six of the principal of them; and I have sent Count William with horse and men
to reduce Amsterdam: Go and acquaint here below the Assembly of Holland with
it, and that* I am going now my self for Amsterdam. The Lord Cats was not a
little astonished at all this, and enquired after the names of the persons
seized; and saying, he knew not whether, by reason of his weak memory, he
should be able to remember them; the Prince bad him to write them down, going
himself into the Gallerie for to fetch pen and ink: In which interim the Lord
Cats, making use of a looking-glass there, recovered his color and countenance
somewhat, and after he had written the names, asked, Upon what ground, and with
whose knowledge or communication ^ee had don this: to whom he gave no other
answer, but that he ref^rred himself to the Resolution of 5o Junii, and the
Contents of the Union. The Lord Cats thus withdrawing again, communicated all
the passages to the Assembly of Holland; who immediately thereupon, not
without great fear and amazement, separating themselves, went every one to their
respective Cities, with resolution to return again on mundaie following. Soon
after the Lord Bronckhorst being President at their Hi. Mi. Assembly,
repairing to his Highness according to custom, he desired him to make the like
Communication or report these, thus namely, That his High^, by virtue of their
H. M. Resolution Junii 5o last, upon several and weighty grounds had seized
some few Lords of Holland; and sent his Excellency the Stadholder with a good
number of horse and men toward the City of Amsterdam, whereof his Highness
intended to declare the circumstances and reasons more fully unto them in
Writing; for which end their Hi. Mi. were desired to assemble again to morrow
after sermon at eleven of the clock.

In the mean time, the whole Guard (under pretext of going to shoot in the
downs) met in arms, and beset all the gates of the Court very strongly. Four
Colonel's-Companies of the French, English and Scottish Nation came about noon
from Delft, Schiedam and likewise into the Haghe, together with two Troops of
Horse. This mightily revived the courage of all military Blades, who for a
while had gone drooping, much like an Ox before the Ax; on the contrary, others
mourned and muttered, and most Statesmen, except such as wished Holland ill,
were sorry to see such exorbitancies. Now it appears, said they, to what end
some flatterers ever sought to aggrandize the the Stadtholders so much from time
to time, still adding to theirs, and detracting from the State's Authority. See
how they have possess*d this Prince with Tibi Roma subegerit Orbem (all for
Him, what e're we win). It was not our Freedom and Liberty that we fought
for all this while, but only the Question, Whether the King of Spain, or the
Prince (though he never had nor moov'd the least imaginable pretense or claim
to the State or Sovereigntie thereof) should bear sway and reign over us? That
under the Earls of Holland themselves the States never suffered such
indignities. That all State's Assemblies were now in vain, and as good as
dissolved; being they can neither meet nor Vote freely any more. On the other
side it was said, There was an everlasting Covenant between the seven
provinces. That the Act of separate Disbanding or Cashiering of Forces was
against all ancient custom and order of Government; That it was not all
Holland, but some few Bell-weathers that had caused all this stir and variance:
That those few ones being once removed out of the way, the^ Province, no
question, would soon return into it, and mind their Devoir. That, to
Extremities of Diseases, there must be applied Extremities of Remedies. That
this very State found no harm by the like application of such in like cases in
the year eighteen; but was rather extraordinarily blessed since, in might, in
means and all manner of prosperity; the like issue might now also well be
exspected upon the present application.

Next day the Lord Bronckhurst, President at the Assembly, acquainted the
same in discharge of his yesterdaies promiss from the Prince, that as yet he
had not received that writing of his Highness, of further deducing the
circumstances and reasons of his undertaking, adding, that his Highness
intended that day to go in person toward the Forces, at, or about Amsterdam,
to pu^ all things in order, that there may arise no Troubles nor Disturbance
there; which taken into Deliberation, their Hi. Mi. resolved to accept of this
for a Notification, and to exspect the promised Reasons and Motives upon which
his Highness grounded the arresting of the foresaid Members of the Assembly of
Holland, and the sending of Forces Horse and Foot under the conduct of Count
William the Stadtholder, toward and about the City of Amsterdam, as he the
Lord President had intimated yesterday, upon his Highness desire at the
Assembly. Hereupon the Extraordinary and Ordinary Deputies of Holland,
caused to be Registered, that in lieu of their assent, they constantly adhered
to their formerly entered respective Protestations and obtestations, of October.
26. 1649. 9 and 10 of April. 5, 6, 7 of June last.

His Highs likewise dispatched this ensuing Letter to all the Provinces but
Holland.
Noble, Mighty Lords, singular good Friends!
WHereas the Hi. Mi. Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands have
desired and autorized Us 5o Junii last past, to take all necessary Order and
care for the preserving of every thing in peace and tranquillity, and
especially for the mainteining and establishing of the Union, together with the
dependances and consequences of it, and on the contrary, for the preventing
and withstanding of any contrary endeavors and practices; and that we,
notwithstanding all good and friendly means of inducement used, both by the
General Government, and by our own person respectively, with the Lords States
of the Province of Holland and Westfrie^land, and with the Lords and Members
thereof in particular; have daily more and more clearly seen and observed
before our eyes the apparent disorders, confusions, rents and dissolution of
the foresaid Union, practiced by the slights and continual instillations and
instigations of some Ill*affected Members of the Assembly of the foresaid
province of Holland; and others likewise within the said Province, encouraged
and supported by and from the City of Amsterdam and their Deputies; We
therefore, to stop and quell such evil practices and subtle courses, have held
it most necessary for the said Union, and behoofful for the service of the
Land to seize (as yesterday sornoon we did) the Lords, de Wit, of Dort, de
Wael and Reuyl of Haerlem, Jan Duyst van Vorhout, of Delft, Reyser van Horen
and Stellingwerf of Medenblick; and moreover, to send the wellborn-Lord, Count
William of Nassaw, Stadtholder of Friezlando, Our loving Cosen, with a good
number of Horse and Foot-forces, toward Amsterdam, for the keeping of the same
City firm to the Union, being the only yet remaining means, over and above
all the former friendly ways and essaies to preserv and maintain the Land in
Concord, Peace and Unity: and resting Confident, the Advertisment hereof will
not only be pleasing unto you, but that you will contribute your best
endeavors for the maintenance thereof, and bringing all to a safe and happy
issue; whereby your No. Mi. shall testify the Continuation of their affection
and their unchangeable disposition, for the preservation of the common
Fatherland; We declaring before God and your No. Mi. that in all this we have
no other aim nor intention, but the foresaid preservation, together with the
maintenance of the true Christian reformed Religion, for the which we are and
ever shall be ready to hazard Life and Goods; and consequently with all
faithfulness to serve the State of the Land in General, and your No. Mi. in
particular. This, God Almighty judge off; into whose Holy protection we
commend your No. Mi.

In the Hagh this underneath stood, 15 of July 1650. Your Nob. Might. friend to
serve you, and was signed, G. Prince d'Orange.


In the afternoon his Highness mounted a great black Horse, with a great train
of Gentlemen and Officers, all on horsback, and so went away from the Hagh, and
passing through Leyden and the Vecneu, arrived toward night at Amsterveen.
Those of Amsterdam perceiving the fire laid so near them, left nothing undon of
what was necessary for their defense, although there was nothing attemted in
any hostile way, by either side.

It was propounded in the Citie-Council, there would be no such present
remedy for the raising of the Siege, as the cutting of the Sea-dyke or dam,
and opening of the Sluices. The former mist, but by two voices, and it was found
best to open but some Sluices at the first, and to cut here and there a Polder,
which was in part performed. And forasmuch as his Highness presently sent into
the City, and offered a fair Treaty, those of the City likewise forbore all
further extremities; as whereby a great part of Holland must have been set
under water, to the irreparable damage of the Province; and did send forth
unto the Prince, according to his desire, the Lords de Graef, Vanderdoos, Tulp
and Clouck.

The Prince desired to put a Garrison into the City. They, that his Highness
would withdraw the Forces, promising that at the Provincial Assembly they
would bring in all possible contentment, and dispose the rest of the members to
the like. Neither sides offer being accepted, there were afterward other
Overtures made.

At the Hagh, the whilst some both Extraordinary and Ordinary Deputies of the
Province of Holland at the Generality, representing to the rest of the
Provinces the present Condition of affairs, desired them to propound some
Expedients, whereby these Commotions, might be assuaged; after some
Deliberation, the other Provinces declared, that they were very sorry to see
things grown to such a pass and height, desiring that the said Deputies of
Holland themselves, (as best acquainted with the affairs of their own Province)
would point out and propound, what they thought fittest and most applyable to
the present constitution of things, for the calming of these Troubles; the said
Provinces declaring, that they would be ready to contribute all good offices
thereunto on their side. They of Holland replied, they had hoped the Provinces
would have thought good to propound some ways and means of Expedients in this
Exigencie, but since they did not, They would refer what was past unto their
Principals, whom they were exspecting that Eve in the Hagh.

Next morning, the Provincial States of Holland being met in full Body, it
was represented there by their Counselor Pensionarie Cats, what Troubles and
dangers were like to ensue, by the prosecution of the enterprise about
Amsterdam, if it were not prevented by a speedy application of fit and
effectual Expedients; whereupon, since the other six Provinces and the
Generality had thought good yesterdaie, the Deputies of Holland (as best
acquainted with their own Province) should propound some such Expedients, as
might best serve to be applied in the present Juncture of times and affairs;
their No. Mi. after mature Deliberation found good, most seriously to desire
the said Provinces, that without any further delay, a solemn Commission might
be deputed by them to his Highness, for to dispose him by all the weightiest
arguments, to desist from the Enterprise begun, how sooner, how better,
dismissing the Forces into their respective Garrisons, and returning personally
hither into the Hagh again, there to deliberate and resolv with the Government,
ripely and without force of arms, how all things ought most conveniently and
effectually be reduced and determined, for the good service of the State;
nothing doubting, but if the said Commission or Sending were dispatched
seriously and without delaie, the wished happy effects would soon follow.
Which desire of the province of Holland, being taken into Deliberation, after
resumed debate, it was found good, agreed and resolved, Commissioners should
be sent from their Hi. Mi. unto his Highs, and that of every Province there
should be appointed one member in the said Commission, and that the Commission
it self should be to this effect, To dispose his Highs for to repair into the
Hagh, and there to deliberate and resolv with the Government about and upon
such means and ways, whereby the present distempers may be allayed and that
his Highs besides, be most seriously desired, to avoid all acts of hostility,
and to let the Commerce of the City of Amsterdam have its free Course still
without molestation. And the Lords of Holland likewise took upon them and
declared, that they would also send peculiar Commissioner^ from their Body, to
dispo^e his Highness to the end aforesaid, and most seriously desire the Lords
of Amsterdam, to send their Deputies hither without delaie, to help together
with the rest of the Members of Holland, to deliberate and resolv about the
present perplexities of affairs, so as might make most for the service of the
Country; and that they would forbear all attempts of letting in the water and
^he like; and the Lords of Holland were desired in the mean time so to prepare
and fit matters, that the instant Deliberations might not be frustrated of a
happy issue. From the Generality there were appointed Commissioners, the
Lords van Aertsberghen, Paets, Reinswoude, Ofinga, Mulert. The Ordinary
Deputies of the province of Zealand declared upon the Conclusion, that having
formerly their turn made known, that they were not instructed to advise about
the point of Cashiering and reducing, as neither their Hi. Mi. known Resolution
of Jun. 5. last past, without the Counsel and Assistance of the Extraordinary
Deputies of their said Province, whom they understood to be already
particularly autorized and empowered thereunto by a Provincial Resolution, That
nevertheless, (considering the present perplexities of affairs, and the joint
agreement of the Advice of the other Provinces) they were not minded to hinder
the progress of the foresaid Commission in any kind; desiring only, that in
this case, the present Members of Holland, would be pleased in the interim, so
to dispose matters, that at the arrival of his Highs there may be taken and
settled such a good and wholesome Resolution, as may be to the satisfaction and
content of all the Members of the Union, in this behalf.

The Lord of Beverweert was com expressly from the Leaguer on Monday, to observe
and manage what might be resolved at the Generality; and it appeared, that
this their Hi. Mi. Resolution would be acceptable enough to his Highness, as
whereby, in case the Accord with Amsterdam should not succeed, he might
nevertheless return with Reputation; and therefore, immediately after the
foresaid Resolution, the Lord of Beverweert, returned per post toward
Amsterdam, to make report thereof, unto the Prince. In the mean time the
Treaty, betwixt his Highness and the City advanced; those of Amsterdam
considered, that, for all their former desire, none of the other Cities
appeared: that those of Haerlem, the next and mightiest, left her Gates open
for the Princes men, supplied the Leaguer with all manner of provisions, and
took no party: That those of Leyden furnished the Leaguer with all sorts of
Shovels, Spades, and such like materials; That the cutting of the Dykes and
opening of the ^luces would bring an irreparable damage unto Holland, and that,
by protraction of the Siege, besides the blood that might be spilt, their
Trade and Commerce would be exceedingly disadvantaged, by reason of all which
they held it best, to wink a little. The Prince, to show that he intended no
harm to Amsterdam, but only against some ill-affected ones, excepted only the
two Bickers, Burgomasters; as knowing well, that by reason of their great
authority and respect, they were, as it commonly happen's in popular
Governments, much hated and envied by many. So it stood only at last upon this
point, that these two should be removed from the Government. All the rest
judged, this might prove of very evil consequence, by Hodie mihi, cras tibi; To
day the case is mine, to morrow it may be thine. Notwithstanding, because the
said Bickers themselves, showed themselves willing and ready for it having no
desire that the Body of the City should suffer any thing for their particular
interests sake; that point was likewise yielded unto. And as touching the
consent of accepting the Proposition of July 15. the same was in like manner
for peace sake, condescended unto; and as for admitting his Highness into the
Council, they would show no further refusal.

Thus, August 3. about noon, all things were accommodated, and in the evening,
ratified and signed, as follows.

Agreement, made betwixt his Highness on the one side, and the Lords
Burgomasters and XXXVI of the Council of the City of Amsterdam, by their
respective plenarie Commissioners, according to the Procuration annexed here.
We Burgomasters and XXXVI of the Council of the City of Amsterdam, do
declare, that by these, we have commissionated, authorized and with full power
enabled the Lords Cornelis de Graef, Baron of Zuyd-Pol-brock, old Burgomaster,
Simon vander-Doos and Dr Nicolas Tulp Counselors, and old Scabins, together
with Mr Peter Cloeck Counselor of this City, in Our name and behalf to enter
into Treaty with his Highness the Prince of Orange, touching the Differences
arisen, betwixt his said Highness and this City; to debate that matter with
his Highness, and to agree and conclude so as our said Commissioners shall
find good and expedient; promising to hold for acceptable and to ratify,
whatsoever our foresaid Commissioners shall act, treat and conclude in this
behalf, under all Obligations of Right. In witness whereof, we have here
underneath affixed the Seal of the foresaid City, August 2. 1650. signed,
Gerard Hulst, with the Seal of green Wax.

That the Lords of Amsterdam shall resolv, to conform themselves with the six
other Provinces, touching the State of War; That his Highness will be pleased
to endeavor to procure that the State of War may be adjusted to the platform
and project of his Highness and the Council of State, made for the
accommodation of the United Provinces; and that nevertheless, and in the mean
time, the present State of War shall be followed, jointly by all the
Provinces, until the foresaid State be accomplished and settled by the Consent
of the Provinces; and in case of delaie thereof, so long as the War shall last
betwixt France and Spain, and that, at the longest, for 3 or 4 years, in hope,
that by that time the said War shall be composed; and in case it be not, that
then things shall be disposed according to the constitution of the times, and
to most advantage of the State, following the Order of Government.

And that there shall be likewise Resolution brought in, that the Companies
discharged by the States of Holland may be paid for their arrears; and good
Order taken for good payment of the Souldierie in time to com.

That his Highs, disposed to com into the City, shall be received there like
his Predecessors, Stadtholders of Holland, with all honor, respect and
obsequiousness, and if he think good to appear in the City Council, that his
Highs shall always have Audience granted him in that Quality.

That the Lords of Amsterdam shall moreover emploie all good and possible
Devoirs at the Assembly of the States of Holland, that all Disgusts may wholly
be taken away, and things be reduced to a firm and assured friendship and
confidence, and all what has past be put in oblivion, as if it had never
happened. To which end they shall further debate and communicate with his Highs
about the prosecution.

As soon as this Contract shall be completed and signed on both sides, his
Highs undertake's to dismiss the present Forces into their old Garrisons; and
the City in like manner to cashier their levied men, and to resettle every
thing in their City into the old posture.

Promiss being made on either side, faithfully and without any guile or fraud
to perform and keep this Contract or Treaty in all parts thereof.

Don at Amsterveen this 3d of August, 1650. and hereof there were two several
Acts made, of like tenor, signed by both parties and one delivered to each.

Signed, G. P. d' Orange, and his Highness Signet affixed in red Wax. And
besides, C. de Graef. Simon Vander Doos. Niclaes Tulp. Petrus Cloeck, TsTs.
The Burgomasters and XXXVI of the Council of Amstetredam do approve and
ratify the above-written Contract or Treaty, betwixt his Highness on the one
side, and their specially thereto enabled Commissioners on the other, concluded
at Amsterveen, August 30, 1650. In Witness whereof this is subscribed by one of
the Secretaries, and the Seal of our City affixed underneath, August 3. 1650.
Signed, Gerard Hulst, the said Seal being expressed in green Wax.
A separate Article of the Accommodation Aug. 3. 1650. betwixt his Highness and
the City of Amsterdam.
THat his Highs does judge it expedient for the Service of the Land, according
to the present constitution of Affairs, that the Lord Andrew and Cornelius
Bickers, the one old, the other present Burgomaster, without any prejudice to
the honor and good name of either of them, and without any trouble or
molestation of their persons and goods whereof his Highs does assure them; do
withdraw themselves from all further Government of the City, without being to
be called again unto it. His Highs remaining ready nevertheless to hear them
in person, and having heard them, if his Highns should not alter his former
apprehension and judgment, they shall freely resign their foresaid Government
as before, and from this present, abstein from all public functions. In
witness whereof, this is signed and confirmed on both sides, in pursuance of
the Contract or Transaction made betwixt his Highs and the Commissioners of the
City this day, at Amsterveen, August 3. 1650.

Signed, G. P. d'Orange, with the Seal of his Highs Signet in red Wax; and
further, C. de Graef. Simon van der Doos. Niclaes Tulp. Petrus Cloeck. Ts. Ts.
The Burgomasters, and XXXVI of the Council of the City of Amsterdam, do
approve and ratify the above-written separat Article of Agreement betwixt his
Highs on the one side, and their specially enabled Commissioners on the other
side, concluded at Amsterveen. In witness whereof this is subscribed, etc. as
before.
Amsterdam, being the richest, the mightiest and most considerable Member of
Holland, failing and yielding thus, it became a powerful example and inducement
to all the rest, and many blamed them exceedingly, saying, They should have
timely considered before, whether they had the power or the courage to stand to
what they principally had so long and eagerly professed and pressed. Now it
appeared that they wanted either or both; that they had don very ill, to show
so much aversness to so little purpose; There being now by this Extremity, a
new pattern given to his Highs and the Generality, which will serve them
hereafter for a Rule to proceed by, when Holland shall fall again into a fit of
Reluctancie; that now there will be little cause left to glory of the freedom
of the Land or the States. But they of Amsterdam thought they did best as they
did; and like a ship upon Ancre in a tempest, were glad to strike and give rope
till they might recover a better time and opportunity: for they continued in
affection the very same they were before.

The Commissioners of their Hi. Mi. arriving at Amsterveen on Wednesdaie-Eve
found all transacted, and were all of them, together with those of Amsterdam,
entertained by his Highness at Supper, where among other Discourses, those of
Amsterdam saying, they should have had the Element of water for their
advantage; the Prince replied, And I should have made use of the Element of
fire against it; (they of Delft having, upon order from the Council of State,
furnished store of Ammunition, Ordnance, Grenades, Morter-pieces, etc.) which
past away thus with smiles and laughing, but the earnest surpassed the jest in
the reflection.

Next morning early his Highness parted from thence, and arrived in the Haghe
about noon, and the Forces were all reconducted to their Quarters.

The six apprehended Lords were carried away from the Court, Sunday the 31 of
Julie, in two Coaches, three and three in a Coach, and in each three soldiers,
besides 25 horsemen before, so many in the midst, and as many after, together
with 50 musketeers. They past along by the Veenen, Woerden and Ysselstein, to
avoid the Cities, and next evening were brought unto the House of Loeuvestein.
They, good men, thought to have stood it out stoutly, persuading themselves the
States and Cities would have stuck to their Resolutions. But perceiving they
accommodated themselves all one after another, to the Proposition of Julie 15o,
and abandoned all their own cause; they saw well enough, none of them would take
up the Buckler in their behalf, and that the Case of the Bickers must be their
Rule.

The Lord Duyst van Voorhout, a man of 69, who, according to the Custom in
Delft, was within one year to quit all Emploiment in course, and being of a
crazie constitution, and rich withal, having but one child, he was the first
that sought and offered to get free upon that account.

Above it was said, that his Highness had made promiss to present the points of
the Charge and Reasons of apprehending the six Gentlemen. The same he caused
to be delivered under his hand and Seal to the Assembly Provincial of
Holland; The substance was general; That they had don against the Union, and
therefore were liable to punishment according to the 23d Article. That his
Highs thought good to cull out these few, and to put them out of the
Government, for the perservation of the whole State; as in a case of a great
fire, some houses next the Embrasement are pulled down to save the whole street
or City; and at last he said, he had besides some particular matters of
Charge against every one, which he reserved for another opportunity.

Those that knew the contents of this so general and weak a Charge, did manage
the business so, that it was not read in the Assembly, much less Copies given
of it, but locked up under Seal, which yet came to light at length, as shall
be showed in due place.

After all this August 13, the Lords of Holland came to the Assembly of their
Hi. Mi. in presence of his Highs his Excellency the Stadtholder and the
Council of State, declaring, That in the name and behalf of their Principals,
there had been often times before, motions made, about reducing of the
Souldierie, and matters depending, with arguments taken from the condition of
their exhausted Treasury, caused by the late long and heavy War; but having
since considered, that the rest of the Provinces, showed themselves unsatisfied,
as judging, the State of these Countries would not be safe enough, if the
forces were reduced according to the project and proffer of their Principals;
they had therefore thought good now, to meet their Confederates in this matter,
as far as might be, and to put them out of all doubts and perplexities,
consented and agreed to the Proposition, made by the Council of State July 15
last past, in terminis, as it lie's; fully confiding, and seriously
recommending, that the Provinces, as good Confederates, will on their side, in
recompense, of this their undergoing again so heavy a charge, to pleas and
complie with the other Provinces, undertake now for the good of the State, to
improve their best endeavors. That the means of the State may be well and
duly managed and advantaged. That the Navie-affairs may seriously be taken to
heart. That the Liquidations between the Provinces, may at length be taken in
hand and really performed. That the business of the West-Indie-Companie may
vigorously be relieved. That the Ratification of the Treaty and Contract made
with the King of Denmark, and matters coincident, may be fully concluded and
settled.

Whereupon, after some Deliberation, it was found good, according to the
Proposition and Modification, which his Highs, his Excellency the Stadtholder
and the Council of State had brought in and presented to the Generality, July
15 by reason of the Differences arisen then about the State of War; with joint
consent of all the Provinces, to accept of and confirm the State of War, as the
same was projected by his Highness, his Excellency and the Council of State,
and sent unto the Provinces; and that the Disbanding and Reduction therein
mentioned, should be made by his Highness his Excellency and the Council of
State, according to the Order of the Land, provided, that the 4 troops of horse
and a 1000 foot, shall be entertained and paid, till the Provinces shall be
wholly agreed touching the same; whereunto the Provinces were desired, to
accommodate themselves, and to bring in their Conferences and Advices at
furthest within the space of 5 or 6 weeks; the Provinces undertaking in the
interim to pay all Soldiers wages entertainments and other defrayments of
War, according to the old State of War. Further it was resolved and agreed,
that henceforward there shall no separate Cashiering or Reducing of Forces be
undertaken or practiced by any Province, of their own Authority; and in case
any Province should attempt the like, the same shall forthwith be addressed
and remedied by the General Authority, as a Contravention of the Union, and
Order of Government.

Nevertheless the Provinces were pleased to declare hereupon, that these
matters abovesaid, should as yet be held only as projected Resolutions.

The 15 of August the Lord Reynswoude, then President, propounded and
communicated to their Hi. Mi. that his Highness had put into his hands, shut
and sealed with his Signet, the Reasons and Motives of his seizing the six
Members of the Provincial Assembly of Holland in persuance of their High. Mis.
Act, Jun. 50 last past; which being taken into Deliberation, it was agreed,
that the foresaid shut and sealed Reasons, should as yet be laid by and put
into the Secretarie's Cabinet. The Deputies of Holland caused to be entered
hereupon, that they would make report hereof to their Principals.

The same Lord President, likewise then, by Order from his Highness,
communicated to their Hi. Mi. that the Governors of the City of Delft, as also
the kindred of the Lord Jan Duyst van Voorhout had sought to his Highness, for
his freedom and releas of his Restraint at Laeuvenstein, under condition and
offer, That the said Governors, at the request of the said Jan Duyst van
Voorhout, himself, would discharge him from the Employment, Commission, and
Oath, wherewith he was engaged to the said City, without ever reassuming or
taking him in again, and yet so nevertheless, as that it should be no blot to
his good Name and Fame; and that this might be taken for satisfaction; which
his Highness by Virtue of their Hi. Mi. Act of Authorization of July 5 last
past had granted, and accordingly released him; and their Hi. Mi. upon
deliberation, found good, to accept of this as a Notification. The Holland
Deputies entered hereupon, that they would make report hereof to their
Principals, The like Notification, in the same manner, was afterward presented
for the rest also, till they were all released.

As for the State of War abovesaid, the Resolution and establishment thereof
was by reason of its importance, reassumed August 18. when, after further
Deliberation upon the Contents of the New State of War, as the same was
projected by his Highness his Excellency Stadtholder and the Council of State,
and formerly sent to the respective Provinces; as likewise upon the
modification, in the proposition of accommodation, presented at the Assembly
by his said Highness his Excellency and the Council of State, dated July 15.
It was found good and agreed to with common Consent and advice of all the
Provinces, herewithal to accept of and to establish the foresaid State of War,
as the same was projected and framed by his Highness, his Excellency, and the
Council of State, and sent to the Provinces formerly, under and with the
foresaid modification, in the proposition of July 15, and that the Disbanding
and Reduction of Forces, horse and foot, to be made in pursuance thereof shall
be performed, by his Highness, his Excellency, and the Council of State,
according to the Order of the Land; provided nevertheless, that the 4 Troops of
horse and 1000 foot, about whom there were some Differences yet, should in regard
of the Advices of some Provinces, and the foresaid modification, be entertained
and paid provisionally, until the Provinces shall have brought in their
Provincial Resolutions in that behalf, within the space of 5 or 6 weeks at
furthest, and the same not coming in within that time, that after the
Expiration thereof, the foresaid Disbanding and Reduction shall be put in
effect without further delaie; also the Provinces have undertaken to proportion
all Souldiers-wages, Entertainments, Arrears and other charges comprehended in
the State of War of the year 1621. as also the Forces, horse and foot,
comprehended in the respective more particular Repartitions of the years 1626,
1627, 1628. as many as then were in Service yet; and that till the last of
December. 1648 inclusively; and the beginning of Januarie* 1649. according to the
new State of War, presented here at the Generality December. 8o. 1648. and sent
unto the Provinces, until the time of the Disbanding to com now; and after
that, according to the State of War now settled. Further it was resolved and
established, That henceforward no manner of Separate and particular Disbanding
Reducing or Cashiering of any Forces horse and foot in service and oath of the
Generality shall be undertaken by any Province of their own authority, it
being contrary to the Resolution of Nov. 1o. 1623. and Febr. 9o. 1626. hereby
renewed and confirmed; but that all Disbandings, Reductions, Cashiering, shall
and ought to be made according to the order of the Government: and if so be,
that there arise any Difference hereafter among the Provinces about the
continuance or alteration of this State of War, that the same shall be
composed by friendly conferences; and in case they cannot agree, that the
Difference or Question shall be referred then to the most wise advice and
decision of the ^ords Stadtholders, or Stadtholder of the provinces then
being: and that this their Hi. Mi. Resolution shall issue without further
reassumption.

Nevertheless the Deputies of Gelderland caused to be entered hereupon into
the register Book, That they could not accept of the State of War, but with
condition, that the Services in it should be divided and paid in the same
manner as hitherto was used throughout the United Provinces, according to the
seventh Article of the Union.

The States of Holland, in Body, entered, That their No. Mi. had given their
Consent to the abovesaid Conclusions, safe and without prejudice to their
accustomed Freedom in point of Consent.

The Deputies for the Province of Zealand in the Assembly of their Hi. Mi.
entered, that having heard the wise Advice of his Highness his Excellency
Stadtholder, and the Council of State, and likewise taken notice of the Advices
of the other Provinces, they declared themselves ready to acquiesce to this
Conclusion, upon pleasure of their Principals; and withal, safe and without
prejudice to their wonted freedom in point of Consent.

The Deputies of the Province of Utrecht made entrance about the foresaid
Conclusion, in the same tenor as Zealand.

The Deputies of the Province of Friesland caused to be entered hereupon in
their behalf, That they could no otherwise accept of the new projected state of
War, but under express condition, that the same be reviewed and redrest, so as
the Resolution of the No. Mi. States of Friesland of October. 20, 1649,
punctually held forth. And as for the disbanding of 55 Companies Foot and 12
Troops of Horse, they consented therein so far forth as the same should be made
of the Foreign Nations in service; according to the Provincial advice of their
Principals Febr. 21. 1650, declaring, they were not instructed for any further
or other consent in that behalf, much less to admit of any penal Clauses,
whereby their Principals might be prejudiced in their freedom of advice;
embracing in the mean time provisionally, and upon pleasure of their
Principals, the Modification of Services and Entertainments mentioned in the
Proposition of Julie 15, last past. Safe always and without prejudice of the
freedom of their Principals in point of Consent.

The Deputies of the Province of Over Yssell caused to be entered, that for the
matter of Services they referred the same to the further deliberation and
disposing of their Principals, yielding to the rest, safe, and without
prejudice of their freedom in point of Consent.

The Lord Eysinga entered in behalf of the Province of the City of Groninghen
and Omland, to acquiesce no otherwise with the Conclusion aforesaid but under
these express reservations, 1. That the Disbanding of the 55 Companies of Foot
and 12 Troops of Horse be made of none but Foreign Nations. 2. That the
Lodging-monies for the Souldierie within the respective Provinces and Forts
about them, be still as formerly paid and defraid by the Generality. 3. That
the considerations moved heretofore by his Principals about the new state of
War, and such as ere long shall be added thereunto* may be had in good
regard* 4. That they do disavow by these the penal Claus inserted in the
foresaid Conclusion; and yield to the rest, safe still, and without prejudice
of the States of Groningen and Omland their freedom in point of Consent.

Hereupon at last there followed the Disbanding of the 55 Companies of Foot; of
every French Regiment 4. in all 20. of Cromwell's Regiment 8. of Craven's 8. of
Killgrey 9. of Oxford 7. in all 32. and of each Scot's Regiment one, in all 3.
being all of them the youngest in Commission.

Of the Cavalrie there were Cashiered four ancient Troops, and the rest the
youngest in Commission.

After which his Highness and Count William, Aug. 27, went to Dieren for some
Divertisment, and the Princess Royal, being great with child, to the house of
Teylinghen. Yet before the Prince his departure out of the Haghe, the States of
Zealand arrived there, and solemnly presented their large thanks to his Highs
in these terms:

The Lords the States of Zealand having examined and weighed the means and
proceedings which his Highs was pleased to use, both in regard of the Forces
sent toward and about Amsterdam, and likewise about the seizing and
apprehending of some Members of the Assembly of Holland; judging it to be
conformable to the Resolution of their Hi. Mi. of Jun. 5. last past, they have
avowed and commended, and do avow and commend all aforesaid, giving thanks to
his Highs for the pains and endeavors undertaken in this behalf, and desiring
him to continue his zeal therein Charging our Deputies to make the same known
to the Generality, and to enter it into the Register-book of their Hi. Mi. and
to desire the rest of the Provinces to conform themselves to the same
acknowledgment. Don at the assembly of the States of Zealand, August 16. 1650.

Underneath stood. Agreeing with the Notes.

Signed, Le Brun^.


The Thanks of Friesland came in next month, with this expression:

-- And serious thanks are given to his Highs the Prince of Orange, for the
great pains, care, and providence which it pleased his Highs for to undergo in
behalf of establishing the Provincial advices touching the state of war. But of
the Siege of Amsterdam, or seizing the six Lords, not a word. Nevertheless in
their Letters to Prince and Count William apart, their expression and thanks
were somewhat enlarged in manner as follows.

Illustrious, Highborn Prince!
We have understood at large by the Lord Chevalier Andre, our Deputy at the
Assembly of the Hi. Mi. Lords the States General, and the Lord Wickel, of the
Council of State, the singular pains, labor and care which it has pleased your
Highs to employ for the preservation of the Union, and furthering an
Uniformitie in the State of War; finding our selves obliged to return most high
and serviceable thanks to your Highs, as having been the only means whereby
the Provinces were kept from confusion. We do most heartily beseech, your
Highs will be pleased to continue the same provident care for the good and
service of the Land. Whereunto wishing your Highs the blessing of Almighti^
God, we rest, etc. Attested, F* van Eyssinga v. Und^rneath stood

Your Highs most serviceable The States of Friesland
By Order of the same Dr L. Scheltinga. Lewarden August 18, 1650.

The letter to Count William.
High and Well-born Earl, gracious Lord!
THe Lord Chevalier Andre, and with him the Lord Wickel, have by word of mouth
and in most ample manner made relation of what has past in the Haghe about the
business of the Union, and the state of War, and the Acts and Resolutions
brought in afterward, of Julie 15, and August 13 and 18, whereupon followed
the Resolution coming along with these, whereunto yielding our consent, we
cannot but give your Excellency also our highest thanks for the pains and
troubles undergon in that behalf, with friendly desire, you will be pleased
still to continue the same thus, for the good and service of the Land.
Wherewithal wishing your Excellency a long and happy Gevernment, we remain

Your Excellcie^'s good friends The States of Friesland.
Attested, F. van Eyssinga By Order from them signed, Dr L. Scheltinga
Lewardin, August 18, 1650.

Those of the Court of Gelderland (as Mr Kelfken wrote thence) were likewise
resolved, that at the Princes coming to Dieren, they would present their thanks
to him, either by their Body, or a good number of Commissioners; howbeit but
in general terms, For His great Care for the preservation of the Union; giving
likewise particular thanks to the Lord van Aertsberghen, according to the
report from that Court. Yet in what manner afterward the States of Gelderland
thanked his Highness, appears by this following Letter:

Illustrious, Highborn Prince!
We are sufficiently given to understand how much pains, care and zeal your
Highs has employed this long time, in regard of the great and dangerous
differences arisen in the United Provinces, especially about the Reduction and
Cassation of the Forces, the establishing of the new state of War, the
maintenance of the Right and Freedom thereof, the Conservation of the Union,
once settled and secured by Oath, together with the Resolution of Aug. 18,
confirmed by all the Provinces, of accepting the the said new state of War and
matters coincident under the Modification of Julie 15; as likewise what your
Highs has effectually procured for the service of our Common State, and
conservation of the said Union; in due consideration whereof, we find our
selves obliged friendly to thank your Highs, being confident the same will
always remain disposed to assist maintein and further by all means the Rights
and Privileges of the Land, as also the rest, peace and unity among the
Provinces respectively, as we shall not be wanting neither on our side, to
contribute thereunto all possible care and endeavor. Pra^ing God, prosperously
to preserv your Highs for a long lasting Government.

Dated Zutphen Sept. 26. 1650. Your Highs good friends The States of Gelderland
and County of Zutphen, assembled at Zutphen.


They of Over-Yssell writ this ensuing Letter.
Illustrious and Highborn Prince, gracious Lord!
BY Letters from your Highs of Julie 31 last past, we have understood, how
that your Highness has been necessitated for the preservation of our common
peace and quiet, and for the maintenance of the famous Union between the
Provinces of this State, to seiz certain persons, and to send a considerable
quantity of forces horse and foot for Amsterdam, for to preserv that City to
the Union, and to encounter the practices of some ill-affected ones, tending to
disorder, confusion and dissolution of the said Union; that being the only
remaining means, after all the foregone friendly assaies to keep the Land in
quiet, and maintein a reciprocal Unity. All which considered, and trusting
that your Highs had very pregnant motives thereunto, and proceeded therein no
otherwise then with good and mature Deliberation, for the maintenance only of
the said Union, Rest and necessary Concord betwixt the Provinces: We held it
our Devoir first to congratulate your Highs prosperous atchieving of this
important affair, and then to return you highest thanks for the pains which it
has pleased your Highness to undergo, wishing and praying our good God
graciously to bless your Government with all further prosperity, to the honor
of his holy Name, and the good of this Land, and long to preserv the person of
your Highs in good health; remaining herewithall

Illustrious, Highborn Prince, gracious Lord! Your Highs servants The States
of Over-Yssel.
Swoll. Sept. 25, 1650.

At Utrecht some would fain have had the Thanksgiving run in this strain among
the rest. We therefore find our selves most highly engaged to give your Highs
most serviceable and kindest thanks, as we do by these present, for the
faithful care of your Highs, and therewithal fully so approve of your Highness
applying and improving such further means of withstanding all evil designs and
dangerous courses, and mainteining the Union of these Netherlands; particularly
consisting in the seizing of certain persons, and the sending of a good number
of horse and foot-companies for Amsterdam, to preserv that City in the Union:
further desiring your Highness, in this and like occurrences, to continue your
Princely zeal in such a noble manner, and thereby to remove out of the way all
further Mischief and Discord, and to preserv the state of the United Provinces;
that so the Land may be quietly and peaceably governed, and each Province,
with every Member thereof, maintained in their Rights.

But the City- Council of Utrecht would not descend to such particular thanks,
and altered the same as you shall find in the subsequent Letter; for
notwithstanding all the means and endeavors which the two first Members used to
persuade them to the contrary, those of the City carried it: for all that the
Prince, having settled the Magistrate there much according to the mind of the
City, and contrary to the opinion of those of the two first Memberships, was
com himself to Utrecht (taking it in his way to go to the Land-daie at
Zutphen): so that at last the said two Memberships complied with the City
advice, in manner as follows.

Extract out of the Resolutions-Register of the Nob. Mi. Lords the States of
Utrecht. Veneris October. 11/21 1650.
THeir No. Mi. being put in mind of what was propounded unto them on
Wednesdaie last, accordin to the Notes added thereunto, touching the writing to
his Highs the matter has been further considered and deliberated; and it is
agreed and declared therereupon, That the Delegated Nobility and Gentry had
hoped, the Governors of the City of Utrecht would likewise have approved of
the draught of the two former Memberships; nevertheless upon the review, and
willing that the respective three Members should go unitedly together; they,
the Delegated Nobility and Gentry do hereby accept of the draught of the
Letter made and communicated to their No. Mi. the States here, by the Committee
of the City of Utrecht, Aug. 28 last past; and accordingly conform themselves
to the Contents of the same draught, once more now read before us, and allowed
with one accord by their No. Mi. Lords, the States of the Country of Utrecht,
in manner as follows.

Illustrious, Highborn Prince!
HAving taken into Deliberation, and weighed that which your Highness notified
unto us by Letters of 21/31 Julie last, touching the sending of his Excellency
Stadtholder of Friesland with a good number of Horse and Foot toward and about
Amsterdam, together with the seizing of some Lords of the Provincial Assembly
of Holland, of all which your Highs has caused the Reasons and motives to be
delivered in writing, shut and sealed up at the Assembly of their Hi. Mi.
where the same yet remain's in the Cabinet of the Generalitie's Secretatrie.
We do declare, firmly confiding in your Highs, and the good grounds those
Reasons doubtless were built upon, that we approve of what in pursuance
thereof has been performed by your Highs, for the maintenance and conservation
of the Union; giving thanks to your Highs for all the good offices employed for
the good of the State, with most friendly desire, you will be pleased still to
continue that good affection, for the maintenance of the common Peace and
Unity; and especially also, that singular good zeal of your Highness for the
preservation and maintenance of the true Christian Reformed Religion.


There at Utrecht his Highs received the Letter formerly recited of those of
Gelderland, which they therefore sent thus unto him before he arrived at their
Land-day, for fear that coming thither before receiving of the Letter, he
might have found means and ways there to make the thanks a great deal more
ample and particular then they were.

From Groninghen and the Omland came no thanksgiving, there being no Land-day,
nor any appointed yet, and in the interim happened the Prince's death.

Now though the rest of the Provinces returned one after another such thanks
unto his Highs as you see; they of Holland, and Amsterdam especially, conn'd
him none. Murmuring, Impatience, Obtrectations, Revilings, was up afloat there.
The City continued yet in September, to search the arriving ships and vessels;
The Watches and Guards continued strict and strong: the common people talked
broad and boldly; and the Magistrate's apprehension that the Prince had some
further Design, and sought no less then Sovereigntie and absoluteness,
increased daily. Many, even of his Confidents and friends, wished him, and were
of opinion, he should labor all he could to sweeten and salv up all that was
past, and of his own accord seek to content and satisfy the seized Lords. But
no such disposition appeared in him by what he did at Haerlem: for there
happening in September, the day of their choosing Magistrates, on the 7th he
returned from Dieren to the Haghe, and perceiving there were some stood in
Nomination not sorting to his humor (being especially, that one of his
Confidents Seigr Verkameren was past by, and left out of the Nomination) he
did pass by the worthiest and most respected of all, and chose new mean
persons; among others one a Doorkeeper; and when those of the City had put
the Charge of Orphant's-master, or over-seer of the poor upon Seigr de Wael
(being sometimes given even to a Roman Catholic) he crossed it again, and made
his displeasure known to them about it.

A motion there was made at the Assembly of their Hi. Mi. for a day of prayer
and thanksgiving to be published throughout all the Provinces, in regard of
the present condition of times and affairs. But they of Holland would not give
their consent, least thereby they should tacitly allow, and in public avow all
that had past, and also not to let loos the reins thereby to some seditious (the
good are still excepted) Ministers or Pulpit-men to inveigh and rail against
the Government, and to sooth and flatter the Prince in his Exorbitances. Those
of Amsterdam showed in all their managings, that they were full of Jealousies;
and therefore they caused their Citie-trenches to be fenced with pallisadoes
or planks and trees round about, raised their brest-works, increased their
Train-bands from 24 Companies to 54, got an Engineer from Antwerp (a sign they
trusted, or durst trust none that was in the Land's service) the same that
invented and built the Work at the Scheur by Duynkirck. They raised likewise 2
Companies auxiliaries. The people in general talked very ill and licentiously
of the Prince, and his late acts and practices; and there wanted not pens to
write smart and bitter invectives against them: among the rest of those blew
books, there was one called, The distempered Amsterdammer; wherein the Prince
is set forth to have out-gon and out don the Duke d'Alve, the Duke having but
executed his Master's Command, and seized persons sworn and in service to the
King: the Prince had seized his own Masters, at least some of them; and that
without any Autoritie's command. The Charge of the 5th of June which he
pretend's, being but general, and given by the Deputies of the other
Provinces, who had no such power. That the Prince's aim had been to make
himself Master of the Bank, and all the rich Counting-houses, to have their
ready money at command; partly to assist his Brother in Law the King of
Scotland, and partly for to break with Spain, and set upon Antwerp. These and
such like invectives were daily broached, and came to the ears of the Prince,
whiles he was in the Velaco, a hunting, as to recreate himself, so to have an
eye withal upon the Geldrish Land-day, kept at Zutphen, aiming, (for that he
was now in possession of Dieren,) to be likewise admitted in Gelderland as
premier Noble, the head of the Nobility there. Once he was at Zutphen
himself, and once he was visited and complemented by a Committee thence of
eighteen. The chiefest and principal business of that Land-Day was the
introducing of the Oppignoration, which had been preparing for the space of some
years, with diverse Sentences past upon it in the years 1642, 1643, and 1644.
All this while that the Prince was in the Veluw, the weather was exceeding bad,
windy and rainie, as indeed most of that Summer had been; nevertheless he
kept there and cared neither for wind not weather, making shift in a
Countrie*man's house at Bickberghen, and continuing his violent Exercises of
hunting, unto the very end of October, whenas for a day or two growing somewhat
feverish, he was advised to return by water down the Phine and Leck by
Rotterdam to the Hagh, where he arr^ved Saturday morning by 3 of the Clock,
being the 29 of October. This Sickness is described by his Physicians in
manner as follows; That viz. being at the age of 24 years and near 6 months,
full of blood, after he had hunted there in the Veluw for 3 weeks together,
and kept a disorderly Diet, and October. 27 (being Thursday) after a sweating
domestic Exercise or pastime, called Au billard, had been for seven hours on
hors-back in a very cold aer; whereupon, being wearied, he felt afterward some
pain in his Loins, and next day keeping his bed, and eating nothing, he was
brought down the River to the Hagh the 29. There he complained of Head-ake or
the Meagrims, wherewith he was often troubled, also the pain in the Loins
continued still, he eat but little, toward the evening he sweated of his
own accord, for about an hour and half, and would admit no Clyster yet: had but
little rest that night. On Sunday, about 10 in the forenoon, he was Clystred,
and in the evening about 4 having eaten a little at dinner before, he was let
blood on his left arm; the blood was hot and dry; the fever continuing still
upon him, his urine troubled, his thirst great, with pain in the head,
difficulty of breathing and a cough: at night he eat little, drank some beer
with a toasted crust of bread, decoctum Hordei, and water with some lemmon-juice
and Sugar. Monday the last of October, there appeared in his face some small
Pimples, and so likewise upon his arms, breast and all the body over: which
was that his Doctor Vander straten presaged: therefore to help them forth,
there was given him twice or thrice in 24 hours, Decoctum Cicorei, Card.
Benedict. Endiv. and the like, which kept him in a continual sweat, though
little covered. His eyes were washed with Rose Water and the like, also he had
something given him to gargarize his throat.

Tuesday following Dr de Reeck and Dr de Hays, were called to assist; who
approved, what D. Vanderstraten had prescribed. He took a little broth in the
morning, and about 10 a Decoctum, at noon he eat moderately, drank some while
a Julep, other while some beer with a toasted crust. He swet so excessively and
continually, that his shirt, wastcoat and bed must be changed sundry times,
which nevertheless was don with that care, that upon the change, he sweat
again immedia^ely: in the evening he eat an Hordeatum, and gellie: that night
he had pretty good rest without difficulty of breathing, headache or other
Symptoms. Wednesday Nov. 2. morning, noon and night, he eat some small minced
parcels of Pullets-breast and Patridge: once he took a Decoctum, in the
afternoon at 3 he was Clyster'd, whereupon he had 5 stools, feculent matter,
though without griping in the belly: he had a reasonable night, the pulls and
urine were passing good.

Thursday, he kept the same Diet, eat sometimes of a roasted apple, drank twice
of a Decoctum. He continued sweating still, but not so excessivly. The pulls
and respiration differed not from that of a sound man. The Urine was very good,
the small pocks came out according to wish: all Symptoms, as promising as could
be, the Prince complaining of nothing, but that he was somewhat thirsty, in
the evening his Excremts were hard: the Bed wherein he had lain now for
28hours, was changed, but with great weariness: the night following, he rested
pretty well.

Friday, his thirst increased, sweating continually, though not overmuch; he
kept the former Diet, the pox issued more and more, the face was overlaid with
fresh Lard, made warm a little: he drank Decoctum twice; and now and then a
Julep, and some beer, in the night once or twice almond-milk, he had no
difficulty of respiration, no oppression or obstruction.

Saturday, having rested well, his water was all sediment in a manner, the
pulls beat somvvhat quicker, the breath with some pain and difficulty, the
sweat increased, the pox were raised and round. The Physicians being asked
by him, what they judged of it, they ansvvered, they perceived no bad Symptoms
as yet, but that the fever was somvvhat increased and the short breathing;
which commonly happen's about that time of this Diseas, nevertheless, the ship
was not in the Haven, and that the seventh day it was like to meet with some
cross winds yet. In the evening his short-breathing increased; whereupon, some
tabelle were ordained, the pox showed themselves fairly raised and white.

Sunday, having had no good rest, the breathing was somewhat freer, the thirst
great, the pox something inflamed, the water troubled. He broke his fast, and
dined according to the former Diet. The pulls was heightened and quick, breathing
grew difficult, it being usual in this diseas, that the sixth and seventh
day, when the pox begin to inflame, the pain and fever increases: he being
costive, they applied a suppositorie of honey and salt, with good effect; a
great many pox upon the back, loins, buttocks, thighs (in the evening also some
upon the face) brake and mattered, others were raised, round, white, full of
matter; other Symptoms besides these there appeared none.

About 5 in the Evening, (many pox being bursted) the fever increased
together with the short breathing, for the easing whereof (it arrising from
sharp damps) and to strengthen the heart, there was ordained a Bolus and
Diascord, in the presence of all the three Physicians a quarter of an hour
after supper, having taken a draught of Julep, there was good hope, so that Dr
de Reeck and de Hays went home, with intent to return at ten, and to stay
there all night. But within half an hour after they were gone, the fever and
short breathing increased so mightily and with such a decaie of vigor in all
faculties on a sudden, that every one began to fear the worst* and the Princess
his Mother, was made acquainted with it, and a Minister sent for, an the other
Doctors fetched again. When Sterremont the Minister came, He was already past
speech; and nevertheless the same Sterremont Printed and published afterward,
the Relation of his Deceas, in terms as follows, namely,

That he the Minister, having spoke to him, and with pertinent and pregnant
arguments, tending to the practice of repentance, sorrow, hope of
reconciliation and forgiveness, together with the confident assurance in
Christ's bloody merits, endeavored to prepare his Soul for a blessed waiting
for the coming of Christ, and happy departure out of this miserable World; His
Highness, being asked the Question thereupon by the said Minister, whether
accordingly, upon the ground aforesaid, His Soul was well satisfied, ready
and content, cheerfully to vvait for Death and the ensuing gracious Judgment of
his Savior, his Highness ansvvered with a hollovv voice, Yea, lifting up his
eyes therevvithal to Heaven. Then replied the Minister, well then Illustrious
Prince, let these eyes of your body, be accompanied thither with your heart
also, and with the eyes of your Faith, and I do assure you, That you shall see
the Heavens opened, and the Son of man, standing at the right hand of God, to
give your Body new strength, or favorably to receiv your Soul into his glory.
Whereupon with good liking of his Highness, he and the present company, but
few in Number, fell down upon their knees, pouring out their prayer with sighs
and tears, and heartily seeking to the Divine Majesty, to vouchsafe a gracious
and speedy releas to his Highness from under this heavy agony: during the
prayer there was perceived a great and incredible change in the disposition of
his Highness, which doubled the zeal of prayer, and made them sigh out from the
heart, that God would yet be further gracious to the person of his Highness,
and in him to the whole Land. Rising up from prayer, the Minister asked his
Highness, whether he had undsrstood the words of the prayer, and received
any comfort by it? but he received no answer. Then the Physicians would have
given his Highness some Cordial, but they found his mouth closely shut up,
which made them all conclude, that his last minute was at hand, returning
thereupon to prayer. But they perceived immediately, that this young Prince,
with a gentle hiccough sent forth his Soul to Heaven, into that Happiness,
which notwithstanding the complaints, tears and sighs of his faithful servants,
and others there present, took from him all desire to return. And thus this
Prince, who in Wisdom, Discretion, Prudence and Couragiousness already
surpassed his Heroical and famous Ancestors, and whom the world did wonder at,
was snatched out of it, indeed unworthie of him, even in the beautifullest
bloom, and youthfullest vigor of his years, being old but 24 years and 6
months, after that the untha^kfulness of these times, and the base unworthiness
of many, had for a good while hitherto afflicted and pierced his Soul, now
translated into that place and company, where the Laurel-Garlands of his
glorious atchievments shall never fade nor fail him, upon Sunday November. 6.
about 9 at night, in the year of the prognostic of those Countries downfall,
1650. The News thereof, was at the desire of the Courtiers, presently brought
to her Highs the Mother Dowager, by the foresaid Minister Sterremont, and to
her Royal Highs the young widow, by one of her Chaplains; which two, even to
death afflicted Ladies, met that night yet about 12. at his late Highs Court;
The sighs, sobs, tears, doleful behavior and words, that past reciprocally
between them, no eye was able to look upon, but it melted his heart into tears;
the former grieving for the premature death of her only Son, the Crown of her
Age; and the other for the untimely remooval, of the only hope and support of
her Bleeding House, and of the Illustrious Father of that long longed-for
Infant* which yet she carried swadled in her Bowels, and had hoped speedily
and cheerfully to have surrendered into his Arms with thanks. But woe unto us,
and our dear Father-land, if God be not gracious unto us, in a most singular
and yet undiscernable manner; the only hope remaining yet, is, that God would
be pleased to bless her Royal Highs, by a happy and successful Deliverie,
with a young Son, another William, to shoot forth out of this withered
Orangetree, and that he may grow up prosperously from day to day, and with
his blowing branches, shelter and protect all the subjects of these Countries,
against the Spanish heat and all manner of storms and tempests, according to
the pattern of his Ancestors. God grant in the mean time to my Lords the
States, abundance of wisdom, to remain in Unity, to take care for the
Countrie's and Church's welfare, and to make choice in the interim, of a wise,
pious, sober and fit Deputie-Lievtenant; being that which all honest
inhabitants of this Land, are bound, repentingly, to pray for.

Thus far Sterremont.

Next day the Body being opened, one might still see the small pox without
raised and white (no bad signs) and many broken. The Brains were sound, the
Milt somewhat slap as ordinary, and filled with some black blood, the 2 parts
and the bottom of the Liver, bluish, but the whole Lungs very black, swelled,
inflamed, surrounded with black blood, and thence arose the shortness of breath
or difficulty of respiration, Dispnoea, and the fever of the two last days
(not before) which as it could not be known, (for he had neither cough, nor
loosnings of fleam, nor obstructions) neither from the Fever nor from the
Damps; so it could not have been remedied neither in that state and condition
of the sickness and faculties. Those of the Prince's household notwithstanding
have much complained and given out, as if the Prince had been neglected; That
they suffered him too often to change his linen, and to take too freely
Lemonadoes, and other cooling drinks. But all the three abovementioned Doctors
have signed the foresaid Relation of his sickness with their own hands. The
Report of his Death immediately filled all the Haghe, and amazed it with the
unexspectedness; it having always been held and given out, there was no
danger, and all in good hopes; as indeed such flattering speeches are always
best liked, and therefore most used in Courts. None indeed durst tell the
Prince that he was in danger. The Ministers had once designed among themselves,
to visit him every day by turns; but when any presented himself to his
Bedchamber, they were always told, it would distemper the Prince, and put him
out of heart; that he was pretty well, and visit was needless. Sterremont
only was once admitted in all the time; and yet, least the Prince should be
terrified with a thought of death by the approach of a Minister, they told him
before hand, he came only to present to his Highs some extraordinary good
Oranges which he had received from Rotterdam; and Sterremont was expressly
charged, to forbear speaking of any apprehension of danger; so that the same
visit proved but a mere Civilitie.

The States G^neral assembled that night yet about 10, and found good
immediately to advertise the Provinces of this unexspected Departure by
Letters: Desiring them to prepare themselves for the taking and framing such
Provincial advices thereupon, as their No. Mi. should judge fitting and
convenient in the weighty conjuncture of the present times and affairs, and to
return the same with all possible expedition to the Assembly, making overture
there of such mattters as concern the Generality. Notice also was given hereof
to the Courts of the Admiraltie; as likewise to the Ambassadors and Residents
of this State in foreign parts, for to put themselves in Mourning, allowing
every Ambassador 800 flor. and every Resident 400 for that purpose. Dispatches
also were made to Count William Governor of Friesland; to the Lord Brederode
Field-Marshal, and to all Governors and Commanders of the reduced Cities of
Brabant and Flanders; item, of Orsey, Rynberg, Wesell, Embrik, Rees, Ravestein,
Gennep, Moeurs, to the Commanders at Embden, Lezort, and Coeverdeu, charging
them all to keep a narrow and watchful eye to the respective places committed
to their trust, against any stirs or attemts that might arise by occasion
hereof, whether from without, or from within; carrying and discharging
themselves faithfully, according to the Oath made by them to this State, at the
undertaking of their respective Commissions: of which Oath there were sent
Copies to them, to refresh it in their memories. And then the Council of State
was desired to inform their Hi. Mi. with all speed of the true state and
condition of the Garrisons in all the Frontier-Towns and places of this State,
that accordingly such order might be taken, and provision made as should be
found expedient and requisite for most safety of the State. Advertisement was
likewise given to the reduced Cities of Brabant and Flanders apart. To the
Foreign Ambassadors and Residents residing at the Haghe intimation was given of
this Accident by some Deputies of their Hi. Mi. and by the Agent Verburgh.

The Corpse was not showed in public (as his Fathers, Uncles, and Grandfathers
had been) partly for that the face was much altered and disfigured by the small
Pox, and partly to avoid further disturbance of the Princess Royal by too much
stir and nois there, she being great with child; which was the cause likewise
that she never saw the Prince in all his sickness; as also they would have
kept his departure from her knowledge the first night, but that she perceived
it well enough by the much running out and in, and hearing the whole Court
alarmed with it.

The King of Spain his Ambassador sent immediately to impart unto her his
condoling, and for leav that he might com to perform it in Person; which was
don next morning, as likewise that of the States General, and inferior Courts
or Assemblies, both to her, and to the Princess Dowager, and the Q. of Bohemia.

The Princess Dowager sent that day by Seigr de Willem, and Secretary Busero,
to get the Lord van Wimmenum to represent unto the Assembly, that there was a
certain Treaty agreed upon between the Spanish Ambassador and the late Prince,
about an Equivalence for the not surrendering of the Marquisate; there wanting
nothing to it but the Subscription; and fearing the wind might get in between,
being the Ambassador was upon his departure for Brussels; and therefore her
Highs desired their Hi. Mi. would be pleased to induce the Ambassador to the
accomplishment. They sent and pressed it, but the Ambassador said, He was
charged to get the Treaty signed by the Princes own hand. The same now being
dead, he must and would write for further instruction; and sometime after
returning again to the Haghe, he declared himself ready for to conclude that
Treaty, as soon as the Wardship of the young Prince should be settled.

The Death of the Prince did much perplex and afflict all those, that together
with and by him had agitated the proceedings against Holland. Some Ministers
also, both in the Pulpit and otherwise in companies and meetings, exclaimed and
lamented, that now the State was Headless; that there was no King now in
Israel: that the State must needs fall into Discord, Confusion and Ruin. But
among those of the Government of Holland, and every where among such, whose
hearts stood more for Liberty, then Court dependence, you might have seen
immediately a very great Alteration and Reviving. The news ran nimbly; by 3 in
the morning, it was already at Amsterdam. The Alms box fared well by it; the
people really glad, would be really thankful, and liberal for their liberty.
One among the rest, putting in a good quantity of Gold, in the Deacons purs,
at Sermon, had featly wrapped it up, and added a Note to it with words to this
purpose, in Ryme. The Prince his death, Make's my gift great. No gladder n^ws,
these hundred years.

Upon the Letters from the Holland Deputies at the Generality, the States of
Holland met presently, and after some preparatorie business with their
Commissioned Members, they caused to be presented in writing to the
Generality; That their N. G. M. do judge the Unity of the Provinces, to be
the only Foundation, for to make the State subsist; and that therefore
Declaration was hereby made unto the Provinces, that the sincere intention of
their N. G. M. is, constantly to improve, maintain, and evermore holily and
inviolably to keep and cultivate the Unity, Love, Friendship and good
Correspondence with and among the Provinces, without ever to recede therefrom,
and that they are ready to show forth the same not in words only; but by real
effects also upon all occasions.

Furthermore, that their N. G. M. are firmly resolved to uphold and maintain
Religion, according to to the Synod of Dort, and as the same is taught at this
present in the public Churches of these Countries. That the Union shall be
kept faithfully, so as it was concluded on, in the year 1579, at Utrecht: and
that the Souldierie for the service of the State, shall be entertained,
according to the Resolutions formerly taken upon the preliminar points, for the
Treaty of Peace.

That the Provinces may be desired to appoint a General Assembly of all the
States in the Hagh; and to take care, that they may com every one, duly and
sufficiently instructed, for a work of so great importance and general
concernment.

That they had found good to send unto all the several Provinces, for this end
and purpose.

That the Deputies of the other Provinces are earnestly desired to second the
good intention of Holland, by serious Letters, to their Principals.

That in the mean time all States-affairs may be left and proceeded in,
according to the accustomed Course and fundamental Order of this Government. The
Courts or several Councils, as also the chief Military Officers, remaining in
their respective Commissions and Instructions, until such time, as further
Order shall be taken upon the whole frame of the said affair by the Provinces.

In the first draught, the words of this Claus ^un thus; Until such time, as
her Royal Highs shall be delivered of the Fruit she yet does go with. But
least that might have caused a Construction of some Engagement, it was altered
as above.

Holland studied and endeavored much, how they might draw Zealand in, at least,
to side with them; hoping that thereby they should be able so to shut their
Fence, and to be in that posture, as that they should not need to fear to have
a Captain General or a Stadtholder forced upon them. And yet they ever showed
themselves very Civil, in their expressions of thankfulness to the House of
Orange and Nassaw; declaring, they would gladly forget and lay aside all what
was past, and live and die with the Provinces in all Love, Unity and Concord.

Before their intended sending to the Provinces could be dispatched, the
Princess Royal was delivered of a Son, upon Mundaie November. 14. betwixt 8 and 9
of the clock at night. Whereupon the Assembly presently met, and notice was
given of it to the Provinces, and congratulations made to her Royal Highs, her
Highs the Princess Dowager and the Q. of Bohemia, and the news imparted to the
foreign Ministers, the Bells also were rung, and the common people showed
themselves very joiful; thereby manifesting, that they knew or apprehended not
otherwise, but that the Prince was their Soverain and the true Lord and Heir of
the Country: which the vulgar sort was well content it should be so, for the
several benefits and advantages, they had and made of the Court to themselves,
by the utterance of their commodities and otherwise. But the Lord Cats said
very well to a friend, upon an occasion touching the Princes death; That in a
Church or great Hall, there were both Pillars and Crowns (meaning the great
hanging candlesticks) and so it was in this State; The Pillars were the
Provinces and States thereof, the Prince had been the Crown, or great gilt
Candlestick, and given it much luster and ornament. The Candlestick might
easily be remoov'd, The Pillars remain steadfast, unaltered, and they are such
as only can and must furnish both Candlestick and lights upon them.

And now the States of Holland sent away their Commissioners, viz. to
Gelderland and Over-Yssel, the Lords Opdam and Polsbrouck with Pensionarie
Riccen; to Utrecht, the Lords of Brederode, Strevelshook and Beverning; to
Zealand, the Lords Pensionarie Ruysh, Zyl and Soneveld; to Friesland,
Groninghen and the Omland, the Lords Pensionarie Bernighen, Pensionarie Nyport
and Ripertse; whose respective Propositions were all fitted and framed,
according to the former advice presented to the Generality, in manner as
follows.

Noble Mighty Lords!
THe Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Holland and Westfriesland, met in States
Assembly, upon the unexspected sad departure of his Highs the Prince of
Orange, of immortal memory, for to help resolv upon such a dismal occasion and
in a time of such an intricate constitution of affairs about the Results and
Emergencies thereof, for the common service of the Land, They have, ere and
before they would let their thoughts go further, providently judged, that for
the maintenance of a sure foundation, whereupon to ground common Consultations
with confidence to raise up these Countries, under God's blessing, to the
bighest top of welfare and Greatness, there is nothing more necessary, then
that there be holily and unalterably kept and entertained still a perfect
Unity and good correspondence, among all the Members thereof.

And in that regard, being excited and stirred up, by a cordial Zeal for the
common good, to give your N. M. and the respective States of the other
Provinces the more assurance and the firmer impression, of this their wholesome
and seasonable consideration; Their N. Gr. M. have been pleased to appoint Us
their Commissioners, for to make the same particularly known unto your Honors,
and solemnly to assure you, of their upright settled intention, (grounded upon
an exuberant affection to the good of all,) to employ and contribute with all
care and diligence, whatsoever lies in the utmost of their Abilities, to the
end, that all Jealousies, Differences, and Controversies, the lets and all
obstacles of all wholesome Resolutions, and the pestiferous bain of the State,
may be prevented, eschewed and eradicated; and on the contrary all true and
faithful friendship and such a solid Confidence, begotten, and more and more
enlivened and cheered up amongst all the Members of this State, as that they
may all, and evermore, conspire to a perfect Unity and Concord, in a sweet
harmonious Consort of Hearts and Minds; Which the Lords our Principals do
declare themselves to be resolved to help, encourage and maintain, and to
observe and cultivate sincerely and inviolably for ever, without ever offering
to fail or recede from it in the least; and that they shall always be ready
to show it forth not only in Words, but much rather in deeds and realities.

And like as always, it has been held and esteemed, according to the old and
good maxims and fundamentals of these Countries, That the maintenance of the
Reformed worship of God, The Observance of the Covenant of the Union made in
Anno, 1579. and the Entertainment of needful and sufficient Forces for the
common Safety and Defense, are the three main and principal means, for to
uphold and preserv this most desirable and blessed Unity, together with Rest
and Tranquillity at home, Respect among friends, and Terror to Enemies abroad;

So their N. G. M. our Principals were willing upon this occasion, further to
testify unto your N. M. That their unchangeable Resolution still has been and
ever shall be, to maintain the said Reformed Religion, according to the Synod
of Dort, and in such sort, as the same now is taught in the public Churches
throughout this Country; and therewithal holdy to continue observing the
foresaid Covenant of the Union; and to entertain such an Army or Forces for
the Service of tke State, as is agreeable to the Solemn Declaration made in
that behalf, upon the preliminar points before the peace, agreed upon by common
consent of all the Members of this State and Government.

Moreover, N. M. Lords, it being seriously considered by our said Principals,
that by reason of the premature Departure of the person of his Highness in the
present discomposure of affairs, there will arise and be occasioned abundance
of most weighty and most important Deliberations, most nearly and highly
concerning your N. M. and all the United Netherlands in general, and of that
nature and consequence, which cannot promiss any Resolution effectually
Fruitful for the Lands welfare, but by mutual full and pertinent Communication,
and well-united Consultation. In regard whereof, it being laid down as a
fundamental Law of Government in the foresaid Covenant of the Union, and having
likewise in former several times of emergent troubles and difficulties, been
the wholesome and profitable practice of the Land, in cases even of less
concernment then the present, for the more satisfactorie transaction and
determination of things, to the content of all parties interessed, and to
establish and settle the same with the more efficacy, luster and authority.
That the Lords the States of all the Provinces in general, were sollemnly
summoned and called together, to make one States-assemblie General, gathering
and meeting all in one place; Their N. G. M. have therefore thought good and
necessary, in consideration of the present occasion and for the service of the
common interest, that there might be such a General States Assembly procured
and held now, in these Conjunctures, suitable to the foresaid fundamental rules
and former good examples. And this we are especially charged to represent unto
your N. M. wise Judgment, and most heartily and seriously to desire you, that
it would pleas your N. M. together with the other Provinces, to approov hereof,
and by your accustomed Prudence to help to procure and accelerate, that the
said Assembly General of all the Provincial States may speedily be kept and
solemnized; to the end, that with common and unanimous consent, and with joined
Hearts and Hands, the old friendship between so dear Confederates, may renew
the deeper impression, and such resolutions be taken with one and full
consent, as may serve most effectually to preserv the so dearly purchased
Freedom, Greatness and Welfare of these Countries, and all the Members and
Inhabitants thereof.

And that in the mean time no ground of prejudice may be laid by separate
resolutions in this or that Province, nor any change or alteration projected or
practiced, without communication and deliberation had before with the
jointlie-interessed Confederates, for the better and due providing for and
disposing of all with the more maturitie, knowledge and consent, and the less
disgust and offense of any: Our foresaid Principals have held it as needful and
reasonable, so also void of danger to the Land-service, That all matters
concerning the State, be left to the usual Course and fundamental Orders of
this Government, the several Courts or Councils, as also the chief Military
Officers remaining in their respective Commissions, until the Government
General shall otherwise dispose therein.

And this, Noble, Mighty Lords, is that which their N. Gr. M. the States of
Holland and Westfriesland (not for any particular self respect, but merely out
of the uprightness and abundance of their affection to the Common Weal and
welfare) have thought good, not only to propound in the Assembly of their Hi.
Mi. unto your N. M. and the other Provincial Deputies there; but for their own
and your fu^ther satisfaction, more particularly to represent and most
seriously and effectually to recommend by a commissionated Member of their own,
to all the Provinces apart, and to your N. M. themselves in particular, by Us
whose names are here underwritten* And forasmuch as all this has no other aim
nor respect but the Unity, Friendship and Concord, without which there is no
hope nor possibility to subsist, we dare and do promiss our selves undoubtedly
from the wisdom, prudence and good affection of your N. M. (that which we most
friendly and earnestly request at your hands) a wholesome and desired Resolution,
beseeching Almighty God to speed and bless the same to the constant
Tranquillity, Prosperity and Glory of these United Countries, but especially
to the magnifying of the prais of his most Holy Name.


The Resolutions and Answers returned hereupon by the Provinces, were to this
effect; That they undertook to appoint a good Number of Extraordinary Deputies
for the said General Assembly. The Nobility of the Nimmeghen and Veluw
quarter resolved to com in Body, though at their own charges. They of
Over-Yssell autorized only their Ordinary Commissioners, though afterward
Extraordinary ones were sent from the Towns, and of the Nobility, as many as
would go upon their own expenses. Those of Groninghen and the Omlands,
immediately upon the departure of the Holland-Commissioners, went to choose
themselves a Stadtholder, and that at the desire and motion of Friesland by
their Deputies, contrary to the advice of those of Holland; and unanimously
nominated Count William. Friesland had the like intent of sending and
recommending the same to those of Ov^^-Yssell; but Count William himself
dissuaded it, to give no offense to the Princesses. They of Dreut followed the
City of Groninghen and the Omlands.

The Princess Dowager, Grandmother to the young Prince, had sent by express
Gentlemen to all the Provinces this ensuing Letter, having first caused the
same to be communicated to the States General, with desire of seconding the
Contents; who nevertheless received it but simply for a Notification, and that
they would send Copies to the Provinces.

Noble Mighty Lords!
SInce it has pleased Almighty God somewhat to allay our great grief and
dejectedness for the sudden Departure of Prince William, our dear son of
blessed memory, by the birth of a young Prince, whereof the Princess Royal was
happily delivered on the 14th of this instant: We may not doubt but that your
N. M. particularly participated together with Us, and all the well affected
Inhabitants of this State, in that rejoicing; and that, of their own accord,
thoughts presented themselves to your consideration, of the importance of such a
desired success at that instant, whenas it was sadly appre^ended, that the
whole Maleline of the Illustrious Princes of Orange, those that laid the
grounds and foundations of this Government, and successively assisted the
rising thereof with such high and famous atchievments, should com to fail in
this sorrowful season. Nevertheless, to satisfy our mind, we could not rest
there, but judged it every way fit and behoovful to make this present address
unto your No. M^. together with the rest of the United Provinces, friendly and
seriously showing, recommending, and desiring, that they would be pleased,
according to their accustomed wisdom and foresight to take into mindeful
consideration, now that the supplying of the Captainship general by Sea and
Land, and the Stadtholder or Governor-ship of your Province shall be put into
deliberation, what regard and reflection ought to be made and had then unto the
person of the said young Prince, in relation of what, as said is, his Ancestors
of immortal memory have adventured both in goods and blood, and uncessantly
sought and endeavored in the common cause, even so long, until, by their
successful direction, this State has been raised to this height of prosperity
and reputation, that their most puissant Enemy has been constrein'd to seek
that Peace at their hands, which the jo^nt Provinces so long generally aimed
at, and do enjoy at present. We do therefore once again desire and entreat
your No. Mi. that for the now succeeding times, you will help to frame and fit
the public Resolutions sutably to the good remembrance of those which are
past; and this granted, we are confident it will easily be believed and
prognosticated, that this young sprout of the Orange-tree will bear as good and
comfortable fruit as the Tree and Branches hitherto have brought forth. However
we persuade our selves your No. Mi. will accept of this friendly address and
commendation, as proceeding, on the one side, from the considerations of
natural duty we o^ to this our Infant's son's*son, as grandmother, and on the
other, from the inviolable inclination and affection, which, according to the
Example of his High^ of blessed memory, our whilom most highly honored Lord
and Husband, we even did bear to this State, and ever shall do as long it
shall pleas God to keep us in this life; Beseeching him from the bottom of our
heart to inspire your No. Mi. with what shall most tend to and advance the
Honor of his Holy Name, the Unity and Safety of this State, and the
prosperity and welfare of the good Inhabitants thereof* and to keep your N. M.
in his holy protection.

Given at the Haghe this 20 of November. 1650.

Count William, Count Maurice and the Lord of Brederode did likewise
respectively recommend their persons to the States General, by the Lord
President, though but in geueral terms; and writ also each of them to the
States of every Province apart in that behalf.

The Lord of Brederode, in the superscription of his Letter to the States of
Groninghen and the Omlands, had only put, To the Nob. Mighty Lords the States
of Groninghen, and left out the Omlands; for which default the Letter remained
unopened. How the choosing of Count William for Stadtholder of Groninghen and
the Omlands pleased the Princesses, is not hard to conjecture, being don in a
manner to their face, in regard of the Princess Dowager her abovesaid Letter so
newly addressed unto them; nor could she cover the smart resent thereof. But
those of Groninghen said, that by reason of their Differences among themselves,
they stood in need of a Man, and not of a Babe for their Stadtholder; and were
not used to have a Deputy Stadtholder, or Lievtenants Leivtenant, which would
have been needful, if they had made choice of the young Prince; besides, they
had prospered very well under Count William's Father, Brother and Uncle
respectively, and their last Stadtholder (Prince William) was no better then
forced upon them in the year 1640. Those also that stood well affected to the
Common Liberty judged it better, that at leastwise one man should not be
Stadtholder General over all; for which and such like allegations and
discourses in the foresaid year 1640, some good Patriots run no small hazard.
There happened also another Disgust to the said Princess Dowager, which was,
that the Lord Knuyt was outed of all his functions, for having represented the
Prince's interest before the same was made void by his death; which to recover,
means was made to the Court of Holland, to autorize the late Prince's Counsel,
provisionally to manage the young Prince's pretense or interest: And the said
Council renewed an Act for Knuyt, such as he had before from the Prince, by
virtue whereof he undertook to present himself again at the Board of their Hi.
Mi. but his former Colleagues, the Deputies of Zealand, would not endure him
there; and returning into Zealand, the States there likewise turned him out of
both the State and Commissioned Council and other Assemblies where he meant to
take place, according to the said Relation, the States taking it, that by the
death of the Prince, that Prime Membership of the Nobility among them was
extinguished; and mainteining, that indeed hitherto they had allowed it to the
Princes of Orange for their Deserts, but personally only, and under that
protestation; not at all Really or hereditarily.

Those of Dort, immediately upon the Prince's' death, restored the Lord de Wit
to his former place; and so did they at Delft soon after the Lord Duyst van
Verhout, and they of Haerlem the Lord de Wael and Reuyl, and they of Medenblick
the Lord Stellingswerf, the Lord Keyser was already chosen Fiscal for the
Council of the Admiraltie in the North quarter, the Prince yet living. At
Amsterdam they proceeded a little more slowly with the restitution of the
Bickers, for to show their moderation.

They of Groninghen and the Omlands, sought to have the Company of the Guard,
which the Prince had caused to com from Groninghen in the late stirs last
summer, that now they might be returned, which was granted without
difficulty, but only about the manner, under what Commission they should
march now the Prince was dead. Lastly they were dispatched with Commission from
the States General.

The States of Holland being assembled in the Haghe, they caused to be drawn
up by their Commssioned Members, this ensuing provisional managing of affairs
in their Province, That all such Cities and places as had any Privilege or
fore-right in constituting of their Magistrates, should inviolably enjoie and
keep the same, and according to the tenor thereof continually exercise and
practice it in times and seasons most convenient for themselves. But as touching
the Cities, which having session in the Assembly of their N. Gr. M. but no
such peculiar Privilege or fore-right in this behalf, that in regard thereof it
shall be ordained by a General Resolution, that the same shall have liberty
to constitute their respective Magistrates in such a way and manner as they
themselves shall judge most useful and expedient for their said Cities; provided
that in case any of the foresaid Cities held it expedient or needful for their
Citie's condition to have any thing more, or else granted unto them, then might
be conceived to be understood by the foresaid general Resolution, that they
shall have liberty to make their address to their N. Gr. M. for the obteining
of such further grants in that behalf, as shall be judged best suting with
their condition; and that the granting of such Desires (or passing of such
Grants) shall be determined in the Assembly of their N. Gr. M. by the
plurality of advices; and moreover it is provided, that in case any of the
foresaid Cities should, for reasons best known to themselves, not desire to make
use of the foresaid General Resolution for the choosing of their own respective
Magistrates, the same shall be don upon Nomination or Proposition from them by
their N. Gr. M. State's-Assemblie, or (they peradventure not sitting at such a
time) by the Commissioned Council in both the Quarters respectively. And as for
such Cities and places as have no Session in the Provincial State's-assemblie,
nor any immunitie in point of choosing Magistrates; it is found good, that they
shall make their addresses to the Assembly of their N. G. M. for the choosing
of their Magistrates upon their precedent Nomination; and in case of the
State's-Assemblie not sitting, to the Committee-Council in both Quarters, each
apart, who shall be enabled to dispose thereof respectively.

As for the disposing of all civil Offices and charges, besides the
Magistracy, it was agreed, that henceforward the same shall absolutely be and
remain in the power of the Assembly of their N. Gr. M. such only excepted as
shall be found to belong by peculiar right and known custom unto other Courts
or Assemblies, and there they shall continue.

Concerning the condition and qualification of persons capable of Magistracy,
it was agreed, That all such as should be invested with any place or office of
that nature, ought to be of the Christian Reformed Religion, so as the same
was confirmed by the Synod of Dort, and is taught now in the public Churches
of the Land; at leastwise they should make public profession thereof.

All other affairs, being not Domestic, or, merely Provincial, but having
relation to the Generality, were put of and referred to the arrival of the
Grand-Assemblie of the Provinces, assigned to begin the 13th of December
ensuing.

About this time began the Difference about the Wardship of the young Prince of
Orange. The Prince had left a Codicill, dated December. 21o. 1649. wherein he
had augmented the Dowry of the Princess Royal from 10000 l. sterling. to 15000 l.
per. an. in case she had issue; and failing of issue, 20000 l. sterling. per. an.
together with the use, and all the mooveables of the Houses, at Buren, Breda,
Isselstein and Houselardyck. There was likewise a Testament or Will produced;
but without date of day or place, and unsubcribed; wherein he, dying without
issue, instituted his Sister Albertine to inherit, on condition of marrying an
Earl of Nassaw. The Princess Royal maintained that the right of Guardianship
was her own, being Mother, and the next in Law. The manner of her plea,
appears by the ensuing Paper presented to the States of Holland.

The Princess Royal does remonstrate to your N. G. M. that to her great grief,
she is necessitated in this her sad condition, so often to interrupt your high
and weighty Deliberations, seeking for that at your hands, which the natural
affection to her only Son, and her motherlie tenderness for his welfare,
together with the conservation of the mourning-hous of the Prince of Orange,
her husband of happy memory, constrain's her self unto.

Testifying before your N. G. M. her upright and sincere intention herein, she
having hitherto had no other aim, but that her foresaid Son, whom both nature
and the Laws likewise of these Countries have and do Commend unto her care and
oversight, before all others, may be provided with Guardians-assistant
together with her self, of such Lords, members of the State, as the Court of
Holland, communicating with her Remonstrant, shall find good, under your N. G.
M. approbation, to ordain.

Being moved thereunto, by the full and perfect knowledge she, Remonstrant
has concerning this, of the earnest will and desire of his Highness her
husband: whereof their N. G. M. may be further assured, by the draught of
Disposition, lately sent unto you, in a Copy by the Court of Holland.

Which disposition being circumstantially examined, especially so far forth,
as the same make's mention of constituting of Guardians and the qualifications
of them; together with the plain exclusion of all others, not thus qualified;
The will of his Highs, and the assuredness of the foresaid Disposition, cannot
be drawn into question by any reason; it being constituted in the Laws, that
even imperfect Dispositions, destitute of all solemnities, nay, the very bare
intimation of the last will, is sufficient for the giving or appointing a
Guardian, especially being the Fathers for his child.

The reason why the foresaid Disposition want's the formal Solemnity (however
unnecessarie as for the present purpose of constituting Guardians) proceeded
not from any change of his Highs former will, nor any intention of his, it
should remain without the usual solemnities; but, that the same was hindered
only by some other accidents, the which, she Remonstrant, for certain
considerations, does not think good as yet to discover, and should be
contented to let it pass thus, if she be not constrained to show forth the
Truth thereof in its nakedness.

It being a mere abuse, that the draught of the foresaid Disposition should
be abolished or cancell*d by the Codicill of his Highs, dated December. 21o.
1649. the Laws plainly showing, that Codicillarie Dispositions do not alter
Wills or Testaments; no nor any former Codicils, but in so much as is expressly
derogated unto the former, by the later.

A like abuse is it, That the foresaid Draught should be of no efficacy, for
that his Highs should have testified in his sickness, that he would or
intended to make a Disposition or Testament. Such an intention tending not to
the altering of the foresaid Disposition, but only to pass in due form, what
he long beforehand and premeditately had brought to that perfection, that by
special charge from himself, and by his own hand Clark, it was fairly written
out, and lackt nothing more but the solemn formalities aforesaid, as shall be
fully proved if need be.

She, Remonstrant, will not be tedious now, by showing to your N. G. M. with
what prudence and singular wisdom, that foresaid Disposition has been framed
by his Highs, all the world easily comprehending, that his aim was not only to
take care for that which most concerned the weal and conservation of the
affairs of his house, but also and especially, that his Son, whom he had
destinated for the Service of this State, might be brought up, under the eye
and inspection, of some Lords members of the State it self.

The Right, which She, Remonstrant, has before all other, to the inspection
and Guardian-ship of her Son, does need no justification at all, in the
righteous judgment of your N. G. M. Her own Minorennitie coming not into any
Consideration here, when as the very Laws of the Land pronounce the age
complete by matrimony; so that the Civil Law can take no hold of Us in this
particular; besides especially, that it ought to be considered, in what
Eminency of Condition her person is, which does qualify, the Princes and
Princesses of her Family, even under age, such as she, Remonstrant, now is,
to the Government of the State it self.

She, Remonstrant, is very well contented, that My Lady the Princess Dawager
should take care for the conservation of the Princesses, her Daughters Rights
and Interests, and declar's, she is like Zealously affected for it; it being
very for from her thoughts to commit the least direction of the Government of
her Son and his Goods, to any Foreiner* but absolutely to leav it to such, as
his Highs most circumspectly has ordained, by his foresaid Disposition.

Judging, that whatsoever is practiced and contrived against and contrary to
the wise intention of his Highness, cannot but most highly prejudice the
welfare of his Son and his inheritance.

She, Remonstrant, make's no scruple at all at your N. G. M. being autorised,
to provide her Son with Guardians assistant together with herself, sutably to
the foresaid Dispositi^n of the Prince of Orange of happy Memory; but
contrarily, she desires and entreat's it at your hands.

But if so be, it shall pleas your N. G. M. to make use herein of the service
of the Court-Provincial, unto which is referred and committed the Universal
Jurisdiction of the Countries of Holland, Zealand and West-friesland: She
rests confident, the same would prove no prejudice to the Highness of her house,
and the emiment Quality thereof.

Considering that the foresaid Court, of old, and time out of mind, have still
exercised in this Land the right of Magistracy, over all Noble and Eminent
persons, and consequently also provided their Orpbants, if need was, with
Guardians.

The Princes of the Land themselves, having had the said Court in that esteem
and consideration, that they have committed to them the care and keeping of
their Dignity and Rights; together with all their Sovereign and Princely
prerogatives: and his late Highs himself sufficiently testified, by his
abovesaid Disposition, the great respect he bore to the said Court whenas he
committed or referred to the same, a considerable part of the oversight of his
house mortuaire, and things depending thereon.

All which your N. G. M. are entreated to take into serious Consideration, so
as may make most for the good of her Remonstrant, and her Son, etc.

Unto the States of Holland and West-Friesland.
Noble, Great, Mighty Lords!

THe Tragical Afflictions, wherewith it has pleased the great God to visit her
Royal Highs in the Royal House, and especially in the person of the King her
Father of most blessed memory; as likewise the unexspected, and to her most
sad and grievous departure of the Prince of Orange her Dear Husband; these are
matters known to all the World.

And your N. G. M. have also, in regard of the foresaid calamitous accidents,
showed unto her, Remonstrant, your singular condoling, and more then fatherly
compassion.

She, the Remonstrant, reduced to such a Condition, and being great with
child therewithal, it pleased the good God, graciously to deliver her of the
Fruit, she had born in her womb with so much grief, to the singular solace of
her in these foresaid heavy Visitations.

And therein also she, Remonstrant, having favorably received your N. G. M.
friendly Congratulations, and cordial Demonstrations of mutual rejo^ceing, She
testifies to be and to remain obliged unto your N. G. M. with immortal Devoirs
of gratefulness.

But waiting for opportunities to evidence the same further, she is
necessitated to appear sooner troublesome then thankful unto your N. G. M. and
by request, touching her particular affairs to interrupt your N. G. M. that
they would be pleased to suffer themselves to be informed, that she
Remonstrant, in no wise intend's to do any thing that shall be inconsistent
with the Laws, or but liable to any construction of attempting ought against
Justice, much less against the Authority of your N. Gr. M.

It is without all Controversy, most agreeable to the Laws of this Land, that
She* the Remonstrant, being Mother of the Prince, her Son, her Dear Husband
deceasing, she thereby becom's and is the Governess or Guardian of her said
Son, beyond all dispute, with exclusion of the Grandmother.

Which unremoovable Foundation being laid, it fallows surely, and is clearly
grounded in Right, that She, the Remonstrant, is enabled thereby, not only to
undertake the Guardianship, but likewise to exercise all acts thereon
depending, and that she cannot be hindered therein, by reason that hitherto
there are no Guardianassistants assigned with her.

That which is said here, being clear and plain in Law, she the Remonstrant
stand's evidently free from having attempted the least against it; so that in
Justice there can be no Inhibition made of her foresaid Administration of the
Guardianship.

She the Remonstrant, is not able neither to conceiv or remember, that the
Acts hitherto past and used by her in Quality of Guardian, should or could be
other then most advantageous for the Prince her Son, being the most important
Act thereof is tendering, how upon good Deliberation and advice with his Highs
Counsel, the House mortuarie, may be disburthened of the heavy and
unnecessarie Charges of above six hundred thousand flor. per. an.

The other Acts consist in the Election of some persons into Magistracy, made
by her in the Name of the Prince her Son, upon the Nomination of a double
Number, whereunto it is apparent, that none other is or can be qualified, but
herself, the Remonstrant, in her present Quality of Guardian over the Prince
her Son. The foresaid Council of his Highs of blessed Memory, being
provisionally autorised no further by the Court of Holland, then what
concerns their Ordinary function, and is contained within their Instruction,
among which it is manifest, that the Election of any Magistrate, is not
comprehended.

She, the Remonstrant, does protest, that this Concertation and Difference
about her own indubitable Right, with the Lady Princess her Mother in Law, and
the Prince Elector of Brandenburg, is much against her mind and heart, wishing
for no other occasions, but to meet and occur them with all Offices of
Civilitie and kind Correspondence, and being ready to give them likewise all
reasonable Satisfaction about the Direction in the particular of the
Guardianship.

For the said Guardianship consisting principally in three functions; the
first, touching the Education of the Person of her Son; the second, the
Administration of his goods; the third, the Collation or bestowing some Charges
and Grants or Benefices.

She (Remonstrant) declares herself to be ready in all uprightness, to order
and dispose the said Education, with the approbation and advice of the foresaid
Lady the Princess her Mother in Law, and according to the manner and custom of
these Countries, to as much advantage as may be, without suffering any
Forrainers to divert her from so doing.

The managing and administration of the goods, the Remonstrant conceives,
ought as hitherto, to be disposed by the Council, and conformably to the
desire of his late Highs her husband.

And that therein consequently be considered, the Confidence that before all
things all debts and charges of the House mortuarie be paid and discharged out
of the yearly Revenue.

And for to give the said Prince Elector full assurance thereof, in respect of
the Fidei-Commissio, or Trust mentioned in his Remonstrance, she, the
Remonstrant here, will gladly admit, that the same Prince Elector and her Highs
the Princess Dowager shall themselves, or by their appointed Commissioners,
assist to audit the yearly accounts of the Treasurer General.

And if they at any time shall thereupon conceiv of better ways and managing
of the said estate, she declare's herself willing to embrace the same

Being far from any inclination or design, that the foresaid Goods or Revenues
shall in the least part be diverted to any other uses; besides that according
to the known Laws, the like would not be in her, nor in the
Assistant-Guardians power for to do.

As for the Collation of the places and offices, the same belong's to her the
Remonstrant by contract of marriage, in all such places out of which her Dowry
is to be paid; and the rest in the quality of Mother and Guardian of the
Prince her Son; being ready nevertheless, in the Election of the Magistrate,
not to proceed otherwise but by the advice of the Court of Holland, and therein
punctually to follow the Tenor of the Privileges and Charters of the places
where the Magistrates are to be changed.

And in respect of the Cities lying in Zealand, to take the advice, during the
minority of the young Prince, of the States of that Country, whereby all
apprehended surmises vanishing, how injuriously soever devised. The Remonstrant
desire's to give your N. G. M. to perpend in their righteous judgment, whether
there can be ought more just and behoofful to the honor and luster of the
young Prince, and respect of the Remonstrant as Mother and Guardian of him,
then that the foresaid Collations and Elections be don in manner aforesaid.

She Remonstrant not entertaining so much as a thought to intrude or entrust
any English therewith, or even to suffer any Nundination to be made about
them, but rather to take care, that in all, the Rules of distributive Justice
may exactly be considered and observed.

All which She Remonstrant thought good to attest thus unto your N. Gr. M. in
all sincerity, least by any contrary impressions she might be prejudiced in
her undoubted Right, to the great indignity of her foresaid Qualities and
personal Illustrious extraction; but especially, to the more aggrieving of her
affliction, wherein she ought rather in this desolate estate to be by all
means comforted and cheered up.

And that in regard hereof, you will not suffer the way of Justice to be shut
up to the Remonstrant, which to the glory and reputation of your N. G. M.
Government stand's ever open, even to the meanest and remotest, that com's but
to make his address here unto it.


The Princess Dowager stood upon this, that the Roial was himself in Minority
yet, and could not in Law be Guardian; that she might be drawn to dissipate
the good or revenue and adventure to spend it upon her Brothers, even as the
late Princes both Henry and William had don themselves, and run themselves deep
in debt besides upon the same score. That she the Grandmother, having much
experience and special relations, the Guardianship ought to be committed to
her, she could better administer the same, and the like, as appears more
fully by her own ensuing Remonstrance.

Noble and great Mighty Lords!
HEr Highs the Lady Princess Dowager of Orange, having, in respect of her
quality as mother and Guardian of the young Princesses her daughters, next
interessed in the House Mortuaire of his late Highs her son of happy memory,
been desired soon after his Deceas, jointly with some Deputies of his Electoral
Highs of Brandenburgh, to appoint some Commissioners, who in their Name might
present*themselvs at the opening to be made by the Court of Holland, of a
certain disposition of a Last Will, as was said to have been left behind by
his foresaid Highs, and was by her Roial Highs put into the hands of the said
Court under close Covert, and not long after that she had been informed by the
Commissioners, how that there was opened and read there a certain sealed
Codicillarie Disposition, made and signed by his said Highs, and attested by a
Notarie and other witnesses in due form and manner, in the behalf of her said
Roial Highs. That withal, at the instance of the foresaid Commissioners, there
was read a certain other open Writing, begun some years past to be rough drawn
by his Highs in another hand, but not completed, much less dated, signed,
sealed or past in form accustomed: Nevertheless that the Lecture hereof was not
made but upon precedent Protestation of her Highs Commissioners against the
plain invaliditie of the same, seconded after by the said Court's explicit
Declaration* that the said Lecture should neither benefit nor prejudice any;
howbeit the Deputies of his Electoral Highs having protested against it,
refused to stay the reading, and withdrew themselves out of the Court.

And her Highs consequently, together with all uninteressed people of reason
and discretion, looking upon the condition of this house mortuaire no otherwise
then that his foresaid Highs having of late drawn the Contents of the foresaid
Codicil, out of the roughdraught abovementioned, he has thereby plainly
rejected the same, and therefore at several times testified upon his Deathbed,
he intended to make his Testament, and therefore without any contradiction,
being precipitated by his sickness, came to die intestate; and that therefore
it were requisite above all things, order should be taken both for the
Guardianship of the young*born Prince, together with his Roial Lady Mother,
and the administration of his goods.

She was very confident indeed, and still she does rely upon it, that your
No. Gr. Mi. as Sovereigns of the Province where the House Mortuaire happened,
and in consideration likewise of its Eminency, you would be pleased to settle
such order therein, as in like Cases the Common Laws and Customs of this and
all Countries almost have provided; and has by reason hereof refrained
hitherto to importune your N. Gr. M. in this affair.

But being her Highs has been informed since, that the Lords of the Court of
Holland had, besides their rescription, communicated Copies unto your N. G. M.
not only of the foresaid Codicil, but also the other imperfect Writing, and
does otherwise also understand, that certain persons, whom it least beseem's,
do seek and go about to the undervalue of this Illustrious House, to engage the
principal members thereof into needless Controversy; and dare take upon them,
contrary to all Laws, Customs and sound reason, publicly to assert and
maintein, as if by virtue of the foresaid invalid Writing, the pretenders were
enabled to act in what concern's the foresaid Guardianship and Administration,
even with seclusion of the nearest in Blood and Alliance, that are
ungainsaiably legitimated and qualified thereunto; and that the said persons
likewise endeavored to carry on and dispose of the business, by all kind of
strange under-hand-dealings.

Her Highs has in all respects both of Law and Nature, found herself obliged
and even constrained, hereby most courteously and friendly to desire your N.
Gr. M. They would be pleased to take all what here has been deduced,
according to your accustomed wisdom and discretion, into good and mature
Counsel-deliberation, and to devise and settle such Order about the forenamed
Guardian ship and Administration, That your N. Gr. M. doubtless finding good to
appoint a Committee of some Members of the Government it self for it, there may
be no further prejudice practiced against them, to whom it belong's to be
preferred and empl^ied hereunto, as from the Father's side before all others,
and who consequently likewise cannot be put by or excluded without singular
reason, disgust, and offense.

However your N. Gr. M. are to consider, that her Highs is making this timely
application in discharge of her Devoir, partly out of motherlie affection to
her dear and only Grandchilde, and partly by reason of her foresaid quality
of Mother and Guardian to the said young Princesses her daughters, whose
interests she may not abandon, That Guardianship being solemnly laid upon her
by the last Will and Testament of his Highness of blessed memory, her Lord and
Husband, who likewise desired therein your N. G. M. assistance for the
execution.


By another Memorandum the Princess Dowager showed as follows.
Noble, Great Mighty Lords!
ALthough her Highs the Princess Dowager of Orange, and the next Allies of his
Highs side of blessed memory, were very loath to disturb and interrupt the
high and important deliberations of your N. G. M. with their particular
affairs, and rested confident, that whilst your N. G. M. (to whom as to the
Sovereigns of this Province of Holland belong's the disposing of the
Guardianship of the young-born Prince of Orange,) Resolution was not opened or
declared, all things should remain in State as it was, and nothing be attemted
by the Princess Roial, as on the side of her Highs respect was given in this
behalf to your N. G. M. by sitting still, and the said Princess Roial also
entreated and invited in the name of her Highs to amicable composure of the
differences arisen, and warned not to attemt ought while the matter was
undecided.

Nevertheless her Highs com's to be informed, not without amazement, that the
Princess Roial, even during your N. G. M. Deliberations, has actually
undertaken the Administration of the Guardianship, as well in the point of
changing of Magistrates, as in others, tending to the prejudice of what your N.
G. M. shall find good, according to their accustomed wisdom, justly and
equitably to determine and dispose in the said Guardianship.

Wherefore her Highs and next allies of this side cannot avoid, how much soever
against their will at this time, to importune your N. G. M. and by this duly
and seriously to desire, you would be pleased, for the exigent remedy of
these and all other attemts, and preventing of unnecessarie and prejudicial
irritations, to mature and hasten your Resolution about the Guardianship; and
in case the same could not be soon dispatched, at leastwise to settle such
order, that like as her Highs continues bearing due respect to your N. G. M.
and awaiting your righteous Resolution, so also all attemts may ceas and desist
on the Princess Roial her side, and the affairs of the House, especially such as
can brook no delaie, be duly looked unto; her Highs leaving it to your N. G.
M. consideration, whether it were not fit the same should be referred and
committed to the Counsel of his Highs deceased, the same being specially
obliged to the House by oath, well informed of all things thereto belonging, and
sufficiently autorized in that behalf by the Court Provincial.

And forasmuch as this desire is altogether grounded on Law, Reason and
Equity, and void of all disputing, and that here especially delaie breed's
danger, her Highs and next allies; once again most courteously and friendly
desire, your N. G. M. will be pleased, during this Session, to take and pass
such a Resolution about it as you shall find fitting.

your N. Gr. M. may be pleased herewithal to take notice, that my Lady the
Princess Royal took upon her, to dispose alone of the change of the Magistrate
at ter-Veer in Zealand, about Newyears day last, and also at Gertruydenberg
and Meurs, and in other places, besides other things and matters concerning the
State of the House Mortuaire, being so many attempts in prejudice of your N.
gr. M. determination under Debate yet.


The Prince Elector of Brandenbourg in his wife's, the Electress behalf, as
being the next in blood, and substituted heir by Prince Henry, maintained,
he ought to be Guardian; See his grounds and allegations in the following
Memorandum of his Commissioner to the States of Holland.

Noble and great Mighty Lords!
COmmissioner Copes finds himself necessitated with all respect to make known
unto your N. gr. M. that as yesterdaie he received Letters by the Poast from
his most gracious Lord and Master, the Prince Elector of Brandenburg, dated at
Berlin December. old style 1650. Whereby it pleased his Elect. Highs to signify
unto the said Commissioner in Substance, That he not only com's to understand
with singular regret, what various disgusts and misunderstandings there are
arisen, about the business of Guardian-ship for the new born Prince of Orange
his Nephew; but especially, that his Highs is amazed to hear of practices and
endeavors, whereby in an unheard of manner, contrary to all Law, Reason and
Equity, to put by and exclude her Highs, his Elect. Highs Dear and
most-honored Mother in Law, together with others the next in Blood and
Consanguinitie, out of the said Guardianship and Administration of the Pupils
Estate; whereunto his Elect. Highs in most serious and pregnant terms in
adding, That he should most highly apprehend and resent it, if at all events
her foresaid Highs came to be put by the Administration of the said Estate,
being, That not only in Quality of Grandmother, but especially in the right
of Mother and Guardian of the said Estate for the next and substituted Heirs,
it does so peculiarly belong to her before all other, to care for and look to
the conservation thereof. In which regard also, his Electoral Highs pretend's
in all Reason, as Husband and Guardian of the next of those Heirs, to be
likewise acknowledged in the said Administration, so as That he shall never
connive, that the same be totally left and abandoned to the Discretion of
them, who by pretense of the Mother's side only, seek to prevail against all
the rest; his Elect. Highs having many weighty reasons and considerations
besides against it, which it were better for them to help to cover, then to
urge their coming to public View.

Hereof the foresaid Commissioner thought it fit, thus timely to discharge
himself before your N. gr. M. with respectful Desire your N. gr. M. whom he
understand's to have these matters in present Agitation, would be pleased to
have such a regard to what has been propounded, that by means of their high
wisdom and foresight, both his Elect. Highs and the rest of the Principal
Interessed in the foresaid Guardianship and Administration, may obtain that,
whech even according to the public Laws and Customs of these Countries, does
justly belong unto them: that so there may be eschewed and prevented all
causes of further Difference, in such an Illustrious kindred, and many other
more troublesome inconveniences, which might easily spring thence.

December 23o. 1650. Your N. gr. Mi. humble Servant Joh. Copes.


And when the Princess Royal notwithstanding all this, proceeded to take
possession of the Guardianship, his said Elect. Highs caused again to be
remonstranced, That on the Princess Royal her side, They proceeded not in the
matter of the Guardianship, and Administration of the Estate of the newborn
Prince of Orange, with that respect which was due to their respective
Illustrious Houses; being that by her Royal Highs there were new attempts
practiced, during the time, their N. gr. Might. stood in Deliberation about it;
tending to the notable undervaluing of his Elect. Highs, a Prince of such
Eminency; and of their N. Gr. M. likewise; when as namely on the one side,
their N. gr. M. and the Court Provincial are sought unto by Memorandums of her
Royal Highs, as the Supreme Magistrate, to decide these Differences, her party
nevertheless proceed's to the changing of the Magistrates, as was don at
ter-Veer and elsewhere; and the Counselors and Servants of the House are charged
to bring in all affairs of dispatch, for to be disposed of by her the said
Princess Royal as absolute Guardian, effectually thus occupying the
Administration of those goods and Estates, wherein his Elect. Highs most
rightfully pretend's to be acknowledged, and shall never look with good eyes
upon it, that in such an Illustrious Parentage, there should be practices and
proceedings of such undue and unseemly Conditions; whenas they pretend
notwithstanding to submit the matter to Course of Law. He desired therefore
once again, That this affair might be taken in hand with all expedition, and
the Guardianship and Administration of the goods adjudged to his said Elect.
Highs and her Highs his most honored Mother in Law, in such sort as the same
does appertain to them, according to the Laws and Customs of these Countries,
for to prevent all further irritation.

Don Louis William, as son to Princess Amalia, full sister to Prince Maurice;
item the Prince of Landsbergh maintained likewise as next of kin, to have right
and interest thereto.

The Prince Elector of Brandenburgh, to second the prosecution of his own and
her Highs his Mother's in Law pretense and claim, sent likewise two of his
Clerish Counsel of State to the Haghe. It was now, Ubi Cadaver, ibi
congregantur Aquilae, Where the Carcass is, you may be sure of Eagles. The
intention and affection for the young Prince was good no doubt, nevertheless it
plainly appeared, the pretenders or their Ministers aimed (besides the pains
and care) at their own interest and advancement; especially, the Prince having
the placeing of the Magistrate at ter Veer and Flushing, and by possession
(though but gratis) the whole Membership of the Nobility in Zealand at his
beck, whereby he had absolutely three of the seven voices among the States of
Zealand; besides the stately possessions and Towns also (though without voice)
in Holland, in Braband and elsewhere; the Administration whereof could not but
procure great authority and respect to the Guardians and their Ministers, and
furnish them with notable opportunities and occasions.

The States of Holland, for to be rid of these troublesome solicitations, sent
all the materials presented unto them unto the Court Provincial, not by
Commission, but only as a Cause belonging to a Court of Justice to be decided
there, if it could not amicably be composed between the parties, which should
be endeavored; and within a few days after the States of Holland agreed and
ordered expressly, That no person belonging to the Government should be
capable of being employed in the same Guardianship, to prevent thereby the
raising of one or other particular persons inhabitant, to too great a
domineering condition over others, as by the Princes favors had often happened
heretofore.

According to the Resolution of August 18, there were also at length disbanded
and cashiered sour Troops of Horse more, and a 1000 Foot; and the ensuing List
made of paying the Companies Horse and Foot, according to their strength.

Lists of the Companies, Horse and Foot, and the Rates of their Entertainment
according to the strength hereafter specified, all by the Month at 42 days.
A Troop of Horse, Carabins, of 60 horse.
Horse. flor. 4. The Captain by the Month for Entertainment 250 flor. and 4
horses, each allowed 25 flor. they appearing manned and armed at mustering, in
all 350 2. The Lieutenant for Entertainment 80 flor. and 2 horses as before,
com's to 130 2. The Cornet's Entertainment 70 flor. and 2 horses as before,
com's to 120 1. The Quartermaster with one horse 45 2. 2 Trumpeters, each 35
flor. 70 2. One Clerk, and one Farrier, each 28 flor. 56 47. Carabins, each at
28 flor. with 12 flor. for the Corporal's advantage 1328 60 Horse. Sum -- 2099
flor.

A Troop of Horse, Carabins, of 50 horse.
Men. -- Officers. flor. 4. The Captain, with 4 horses, in manner as before 350
2. The Lieutenant with 2 horses, as before 130 2. The Cornet with 2 horses, as
before 120 1. The Quartermaster with one horse 45 2. 2 Trumpeters, each 35 flor.
in all 70 2. One Farrier, one Clerk, each 28 flor 56 37. Carabins, each at 28
flor. and 12 flor. for the advantage of 3 Corporals 1048 50 Horse. Sum -- 1819.
flor.

A Company of 100 Foot-souldiers.
Men. -- Officers. flor. 1. The Captain, for himself 150 1. The Lieutenant 45
1. The Ensign. 40 2. Sergeants, each 24 flor. 48 3. Corporals, each 16 flor. 48
2. Drummers, each 12 flor. 24 3. One Clerk, one Surgeon, one Marshal, each
12 flor. 36 13. 391 flor.

36 Pikes, thus: flor. 1. at 16 2. at 15 30 2. at 14 28 4. at 13 52 13. at 12
156 14 at 11. 154 436 flor.

48 Musketeers, thus: flor. 2. at 14 28 6 at 13 78 20 at 12 240 20 at 11 220
566 3. Youths, each 8 flor. 24 100. Men. Sum 1417 flor.

A Company of 65 Foot-souldiers.
Men. flor. 12. Officers all as before, except a Clerk 379 1. at 16 16 2. at 14
28 22 Pikes, thus: 3. at 13 39 8. at 12 96 8. at 11 81 267 flor.

28 Musketeers, thus: 1. at 14 14 4. at 13 52 12. at 12 144 11. at 11 121 331
flor. 3. Youths, each 8 flor. 24 flor. 65. Men Sum. 1001 flor.

A Company of 50 Foot-souldiers.
Men. -- Officers. 1. The Captain at 150 1. Lieutenant 45 1. Ensign 40 2.
Sergeants, each at 24 flor. 48 3. Corporals, each at 16 48 2. Drummers, each 12
flor. 24 1. Clerk 12 367 flor. 11.

14 Pikes, thus: 1. at 16 1. at 15 1. at 14 2. at 13 26 4. at 12 48 5. at 11 55
147 flor.

22 Musketeers, thus: 1. at 14 3. at 13 39 9. at 12 108 9, at 11 99 260 flor.
3. Youths, each at 8 flor. 24 flor. 50 Men. Sum. 825 flor.

Don thus and concluded in the the Council of State December. 5. 1650. J. Eeck
vt* By Order of the Council of State. J. Eyckberg.

ABove it was said, that they of Holland so ordered their Provincial
Government, as to be without a Stadtholder or Governor; that the Cities should
enjoy the choosing of their own Magistrates, and that whatsoe^ver hitherto was
don by the Stadt-holder, should be don by the States themselves. The Membership
of the Nobility and the City of Leyden showed themselves somewhat inclined to
the Prince.

Alcmaer, Delft, and Rotterdam, were the first that sought and obtained a
Charter for the free choice of their own Magistrates; for it was declared
already beforehand, that none should be refused that came to desire it. And
having the Grant, each City proceeded according to their own pleasure, as it
best agreed with every one; most of them sorting their Election out of a double
Number; which the Stadt-holder was wont to do before with the advice of the
Council, or Court Provincial, or in his absence that Court alone, by reason
whereof the same Court might well have pretended now, that it belonged to them
alone, and none other. But they never did nor durst open their mouths about it.

The first that arrived in the Hagh of the Provincial States for the
Grand-Assemblie, were they of Zealand, and were streightwaies most kindly
welcomed with some Coaches, by the principal Members of Holland; as likewise
afterward they were fetched again in their Body, with Coaches, to have
Audience in the Assembly of the States of Holland; there passing abundance of
Complements, and shows of much affection and friendship, with readiness of
contributing whatsoe^ver might tend and conduce to the maintenance of the
everlasting Union, and faithful correspondence one with another. Therefore did
they of Holland, in Body, or one of every Member (the Lord van Opdam still
being the chief, for that the Lord Beverweert, first nominated for that
purpose had excused himself) meet with these of Zealand, making an Assembly
together apart at the New Doel, where they had sev^ral Conferences. They of
Zealand, spoke in the beginning of the young Prince, that special regard ought
to be had of him; and at the least he might be nominated Stadt-holder, and
have a Lieutenant joined to him; in which particular the Princesses also, both
Mother and Grandmother took much pains both personally and by their well
affected friends and dependants. But Holland replied, it was too too soon, and
uncertain what he might grow and be brought up to* Possibly indeed he might
prove a good and fit Prince; but he might likewise as ^asily ^iscarrie. As some
of late reported of the present Queen of Sweden, being wished to marry* that
she answered her States, J hold it better to design you a Successor, that is
fit already, and known to be a good Prince, then to marry; for ^ may as
easily bring forth a Nero, as an Augustus; and so might this young Prince of
Orange as easily be bred to follow the exorbitant footsteps of his Father
Prince William, such as he made last Summer against the City of Amsterdam,
and the Assembly of the States of Holland; and Prince Maurice before him in
the year eighteen, as other Qualities and Virtues of his Predecessors.

That likewise the appointing of a Lieutenant, or Deputy Stadt-holder might
prove dangerous, as well for the young Prince himself as for the State: for the
same might, during the Princes Minority, so settle and establish himself, that
neither the Prince full grown, nor the State should be able afterward to make
him resign and give up the place. And the young Prince besides, having now such
an honor conferred upon him, would never con the States any thanks for it; but
rather grow up in an opinion, that he had it by inheritance, and that he
could not be past by. Whereunto came further the secret considerations, of his
near and great Alliances, with France, Spain, England and Denmark, joined with
his great and mighty possessions in the Land it self, making him formidable to
the State; that these were dangerous Entertainments for a Republic, and no
sure means of maintaining Liberty. The Ostracismus and Petalismus were used in
the Grecian Republics, against fellow-Citizens, if they grew once too potent
in authority: the same was much more to take place against a Prince, whose
Father and predeces^or evidently showed, that under the Name of Governor, they
levelled at the Soveraigntie; which yet in effect, as well for Authority and
Direction both of State and Militia they enjoyed already more absolutely and
powerfully then the Souveraigns of the Land had don before.

Those of Geld^rland and Utrecht came likewise in the later end of December,
and were welcomed and complemented in like sort, by them of Holland, as the
Zealanders were before.

Those of Friesland, of Groninghen and the Omlands, arrived in Januarie; and
though they of Over*Yssel had first only autorized their Ordinary Deputies,
yet they sent Extraordinary after, viz. those of Zealand, Twent and
Vollenhove, as many of the Gentry, as would go at their own charges, and from
Deventer, two of the Magistrates there; from Campen came only their Ordinary
Commissioner: from Swoll, no body, by reason of their instant Election.

They of Holland saluted and welcomed them all in particular, and held
particular and preparatorie Conferences with all, respectively: for to impart
to and receiv back from them their particular inclinations and considerations
upon the three main points, that were to be treated of in the Grand Assembly.

The States of Holland, finding the Chamber of the Ordinary Assembly was not
large enough for the Number of this Extraordinary meeting of all the
Provinces, they caused the great Hall of the Court of Holland to be fitted for
their Session, remooving all the Booksellers and other shops quite thence, and
setting up convenient seats and benches on both sides, rising up by degrees one
behind the other, in manner of an Amphitheatre; to place the Provinces in
their Order, and each, according to the number of their Commissioners, apart by
themselves. Between both sides there was a pretty space left, and in the midst
thereof a square long Table placed; at the upper end whereof, was to sit the
President, and right over against him at the other end the Secretary. The
Walls, Benches and Table were all hung with green cloth, to show the State
was not in mourning. And because the talk went, that Holland intended by this
opportunity, (in favor of Spain,) to remove and take away out of the said
great Hall, all the Colors, Cornets, Standarts and Flags, formerly taken from
the Spaniards both by Sea and Land, and hung up there in abundance: they
contrarily caused them all to be well brushed over, and made more
conspicuous, adding many more, that never were there before, but kept elsewhere
hitherto, that it made a very gallant show.

Wednesday, Januarie 18o. the Session began, and the Lords*of Friesland (in
their turn) sitting President, having made the Introduction, with convenient
terms of welcoming this Grand Assembly, and praying God to assist and bless
their Consultations; they desired the Lords of Holland to make Overture of the
chiefest points, for which they had desired this solemn meeting. Whereupon the
Lord Cats, by word of mouth, made this ensuing Proposition, and delivered it
next day unto the Assembly in writing.

High Mighty Lords!
GOd Almighty be ever blessed and praised, that this Grand and Solemn Assembly
may be kept now in the very place, where heretofore the King of Spain was
Abjured, his Yoke cast off, and the Foundations laid of these Countrie's
Liberty, whereof the Trophies and Bliss-tokens of Victory from time to time
most graciously bestowed upon this State, by God, are waving over every one of
our heads here. This same God now let us pray unto, from the bottom of our
hearts, to continue his Governing hand over this State from age to age, and
more and more to multiply his Grace and Mercy upon us.

After that, through the incomprehensible Judgments of Almighty God, Prince
William of Orange, of immortal memory, was suddenly and unexspectedly taken
away from this world, without leaving any issue of his body visible, however
afterward through God's blessing a young Prince was happily born; The State of
these United Netherlands was found to be reduced into such an estate and
condition, the like it never had been in from their Foundation, viz. at that
point, that there is none left of the House of ORANGE, fit and capable to be
what the former Princes of ORANGE have been.

The Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland, those which from the
beginning of the Union so worthily have acquitted themselves, so freely opened
their Coffers, so largely extended their Treasure, and in a word, so spent and
adventured their utmost abilities, both in Defense of, and Conquests for this
State, as is sufficiently known to all the world, and they themselves are yet
smartingly sensible of to their very bowels; they were nevertheless so far from
setting their accustomed zeal faint in this disastrous conjuncture of times and
affairs, that it has made them so much the more careful for the State, and to
procure the present hopes of redress, having upon mature Deliberation held it
very expedient, nay most necessary, that the Higher Powers of all the United
Netherlands might be brought to meet together in a Grand-States-Assemblie, for
jointly and unanimously there (God graciously assisting to bless them) to
perpend and Consult, how the State of these Countries may best of all, be
safely and securely settled.

Their No. gr. Mi. seeing now upon their intimated Desires* this Illustrious
Assembly so happily met; They declare that therein they find a most singular
content and satisfaction: and as among the people of God it was counted once a
remarkable blessing when the same, even from Beersheba to Dan, assembled
themselves like one man, to consider of their common good and welfare, the same
being a most evident and manifest sign of their concord and unanimitie; so do
their* N. Gr. M. no less rejoice and congratulate both themselves and the whole
High Mighty Assembly, in and for this blessed meeting of them all united
thus, doubtless excited and brought to pass by a singular Providence and Grace
of Almighty God, to whom therefore their N. Gr. M. return most hearty prais
and thanks, most officiously and friendly likewise thanking your H. Mi. and
every Member apart, that they were pleased, at the foresaid desire of their N.
Gr. M. to repair and assemble in this place.

Now then for to begin this prais-worthie and most important action, their Nob.
Gr. M. do declare, as speaking by my mouth, their judgment to be this, That
the Unity and Concord of the Provinces* is the only foundation whereupon the
Fabric of this State may be securely grounded and kept always entire: as
indeed our wise Forefathers and Founders of the State have well considered,
leaving unto their posterity an everlasting Memorandum, the Hedged Close with
the Bundle of Arrows, and this Inscription, viz. Concordia res parvae crescunt,
etc. They therefore again now sincerely and uprightly declare before this High
Mighty Assembly, their steadfast intention and utmost design to be no other,
(whatever malice may have spread in the streets to the contrary, to abuse the
people,) but to cherish, maintein, and inviolably to entertain and cultivate
the mutual Love, Friendship, Unity, good Correspondence and Confidence between
the Provinces, without ever receding or withdrawing themselves from the same;
and that this they will do not only in words, but rather in real effects and
deeds at all times.

And for the more effectual prosecution and performance of the Resolution
aforesaid, their N. Gr. M. declare, they judge it very needful, that three
distinct main things be well settled and continually maintained, to wit, The
Union, Religion, and Militia, being the three preliminar points which before
the beginning of the Treaty of Peace were judged necessary by the State to
be looked unto in and above all things. These their N. Gr. M. formerly held
inviolable, and still adhere to the same judgment, That viz. the Union be kept
entirely as it was concluded in the year 1579. at Utrecht; That Religion be
maintained steadfastly, so as the same is taught in all the public Churches
throughout these United Provinces, and was elucidated by the Synod of Dort in
the years 1618, and 1619, and that the Militia be entertained constantly,
according to the Resolution formerly agreed on by the State, upon the said
preliminar points.

Concerning the two first points there is, at the present constitution of
affairs (God be praised) no change yet happened, and their N. Gr. M. are
likewise confident there will be no discrepancie nor difference at all between
the Provinces about them, so that the Deliberations and Consultations to be
entered now into, will properly and only concern the settling and ordering of
the Militia and matters annexed, and how the same ought to be disposed of and
regulated by this present Solemn Assembly.

There are at this present three concurrent things, which never since the
beginning of this Republic were seen in that constitution.

The first is, The Peace, which through the gracious blessing of God the State
of these Countries has gloriously purchased.

The second, The unexspected Case, That there is none at this present of the
House of Orange fit and capable to undergo and manage the highest charge of this
State.

The third, That in the upshot of the War it was found good to choose and
appoint a Field-Marshal, whose Office is, in absence of the General, or other
emergencie, to command the Army.

Hereupon their N. Gr. M. considering that of old, from the beginning of the
War, the managing af all military affairs was referred to the Council of
State, according to their Instruction, especially in conformity to the sixth
and eighteenth Article of the same. Their opinion is, that it will be good and
serviceable for the State, that the foresaid Council of State, as also the
forenamed Field-marshal, together with the Governors, Commanders, and other
chief officers by Sea and by Land, be continued in the full and effectual
function of their respective charges.

And further, that the removing of the Garrisons, and giving of Patents or
Commissions may be disposed of to the content and security of the Provinces,
in the ensuing manner, framed and drawn out of fundamental State-Documents, and
the modern practice and experiment, especially of the Province of Friesland.

That the States of the particular Provinces, or their Commission'd-Council,
each within their own Province, may have liberty to remove the Companies lying
therein, and to give Commissions for it.

That if it shall be needful to take forth any Companies out of any of the
voicing Provinces, in such a case the Council of State should desire of the
said Province, or of their Commissioned Council, so many Companies as the
Council shall yield unto, adding the reasons and motives of their taking forth
and sending the Patents or Commissions with vacant spaces for the Captains
names, to be filled up and given afterward by the States, or the Commissioned
Council of the respective Provinces themselves; and that the Companies thus
desired shall be yielded, unless the said States or Commissioned Council of
the Province had reasons to the contrary, whereof they shall immediately give
notice to the Council of State that they may judge of it; and if the reasons be
not found sufficient, that then at the second desire of the Council of State
the Companies shall be yielded. Provided that the Companies which stand upon
the repartition of the same Province where they lie, they may not be removed
out of it without express consent of the said Province, or their Commissioned
Council; and that the same shall likewise be followed and observed in regard
of Quarter, marches, and Randevouzes.

That as much as shall be seasible, the Companies may be put in Garrisons
within the same Province, or in the Frontiers about them from whence they have
their pay, and that for this end there be by Common Consent of the Members of
the Union certain Frontierplaces assigned for every Province.

That the Council of State shall have power to place and displace the Companies
in the respective assigned Frontiers: and that the same also may be don in
time of need, and the service of the Country requiring it, by the States of
the Province to whom the said Frontiers are assigned, or by their Commissioned
Council; abiding within the bounds of their assigned Frontiers and the
jurisdiction of their Province, and giving immediate advertisement thereof to
the Council of State.

That the Council of State intending to take forth any Companies out of the
assigned Frontiers, shall intimate their desire to the States or Commissioned
Council of the Province to which the said Frontiers are assigned, sending
Commissions for that purpose with vacant spaces for the Names, to be filled up
by the foresaid States or their Commissioned Council, or returning reasons of
their difficulties to the Council of State, to be considered and judged of;
and the reasons not being found sufficient, that then at a second desire of
the Council, the Companies shall be yielded.

That as to the bestowing of the Chief Military Charges of Governments and
Commanderies, together with their appurtenances and condependencies, coming to
be void and vacant, they shall be in the power and gift of the Province* to
whose repartition or allotment and Territory the same belong; and such as
belong to the Territory or repartition of the Generality; in the power and
gift of their Hi. Mi. the States General.

So also, That all the Soulderie, shall be engaged by Oath as to the
Generality, so also to the Provinces in Particular.

At this present to pass to an Election of a New Governor and Captain General
their N. gr. M. judge it too considerable.

Minding rather, or wishing for such a frame of Government in Military
matters, as is exemplified by the oldest Republic, that ever was known in the
World, to wit, that of the Hebrews, God's own people, who from the time they
went forth out of Egypt, until the Kings came in, for the space namely of about
450 years, never had any settled Governor or Captain General, notwithstanding
their continual Wars; but only chose themselves a Head or Chieftain, for every
Expedition respectively: and some of the most learned Writers, judge that
Republic, to agree very much with this our State, for sundry reasons, deduced
by them: as likewise their manner of proceeding, has been much followed in
former times by the wisest Nations, and is at this day; as formerly, by
Romans, the Athenians, and the Lacedaemonians: and in our times, by the
Venetians, Swissers, Genues and others at this very moment.

Besides this, their N. G M. are of opinion, that the choosing of such a General
now, cannot but be prejudicial in sundry respects.

1. In regard of the persons it self, that might be chosen or designed now for
it.

2. In regard of the Lieutenant or provisional keeper of the place of General.

3. In regard of the State it self, as may easily be gathered from the Nature
of the thing it self, and the reasons and consequences of it.

If in the mean time, any Instructions, for the Council of State, the
Fieldmarshal or other Councils or Persons, might be fit to be altered, or new
ones made, the some may be don conveniently now with the advice and consent of
all the Provinces.


They of Friesland propounded, whether it would not be fitting, to adjourn the
Assembly for some days, and to give time to the Provinces in the interim, to
draw up their Considerations and to bring them in. But by reason that some had
already before had preparatorie Conferences with them of Holland, it was held
best, to continue the Assembly in Action.

Januarie 20o, were brought in by those of Gelderland the ensuing
Considerations: notwithstanding, that the Quarter of Zutphen dissented from the
other two, and diverse also of both the Nimeghen and Valaw*Quarters, were but
little inclined to the Maxim of Holland, and therefore pressed hard for the
Election of a Captain General and Stadtholder. But the Cities in both the
Quarters of Nimegh^n and the Valaw, together with some of the Gentry,
prevailed, and out-Voted the rest.

Considerations and Inclinations of the Province of Gelderland.
In the first place; Concerning the Ordering of the Militia, or, Army.
I.
THat the Supreme Authority of the United Provinces remaining entire, the
Direction of the Militia shall be in the disposal of the Assembly of the
States General, by advice of the Council of State; and that in the Name of all
the Confederates, who shall beforehand fit them with exact and uniform
Instructions to be sworn to, and punctually followed.

II.
And if in time of War, or other emergent necessity, a Captain or Lieutenant
General shall be requisite, for the conduct of the State's Forces, then the
respective Provinces shall every one by themselves (an Instruction for that
Charge, being agreed upon before hand) advise and resolv thereupon, as they
shall find most conducing for the service of the Land in General; and cause the
result to be brought in at the Generality, there to be concluded, by one
common consent and no otherwise.

III.
All the great Military Charges, which formerly were in the disposing of the
States General, or his Highs unto the Charge of Colonel, exclusively, shall
henceforward remain in the disposition of the United Provinces, who shall bring
in their advices concerning the same, by their Commissioners at the Assembly
of the States General.

IIII.
All other Military offices of Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels,
Serjeant-Majors, Captains of horse and foot, and lesser Charges; which his Highs
absolutely disposed of without any Nomination, they shall hereafter all of
them, be they of forain or native relations, be given and bestowed by the
United Provinces, and equally shared amongst them.

V.
But as for the Companies of horse and foot, and other Military offices,
whereof his Highs had the choosing heretofore, upon the Nomination of the
respective paymasters, they shall absolutely henceforward remain to the choice
of the respective paymasters, to whom they are assigned.

VI.
As for the Commanders and Majors of the Cities and Forts of the Provinces
having voice in the State, their places being void, and necessary, they shall
absolutely be disposed of by the respective Provinces, by Commission of the
States General or Council of State; provided nevertheless, that the said
Commanders and Majors do not take upon them in the same Cities, the keeping of
the Keys, opening and shutting of the Gates, or the giving of the Watchword:
but that the same shall remain wholly and solely in the power and hand of the
Magistrate of the said respective Cities.

VII.
As likewise the Majors shall no further exercise or extend the Military
Jurisdiction in the said voicing Cities, then to neglects and trespasses of
Marches and Watches, running over to the Enemy, deserting their Company, or
running away from the one to the other without a Pass; besides such other
excesses and delinquencies which the Officers and soldiers may commit among
themselves, one against another, and no further; so that in all other matters
whether criminal or civil, the military persons, or any soldier, shall be
apprehendable, triable, condemnable and executable by the Civil or Criminal
Judge in Ordinary, whose sentence also, in matter of Debts and such like, upon
default of goods moveable or unmovable, shall extend and be executed upon the
wages and pay of the party condemned, according to the course and order of the
Land.

VIII.
And as for the Governors in the Towns and places having no Voice in the State,
as at Sluys, Berghen op Zoom, Hulst, Breda, the Bosh, Willemstadt, Mastricht
and Wesel, the same shall be disposed by the United Provinces, by and
according to the usual Commission.

IX.
The Commandries of such places shall be conferred by the State General.

X.
And the Major-ships by the Council of State; provided they be all fit and
qualified persons, and of the Reformed Religion; who, together with all other
Officers of war, shall regulate themselves according to the Orders of the Land.

XI.
Touching the giving Pattents or Commissions, and the placing of Garrisons,
gathering of Leaguers, or sending forth any considerable parties to places, and
upon occasions where the service of the Country require's it, the same shall
be and remain still in the disposal of the States General, with the advice of
the Council of State.

XII.
Provided, that always where any change of Garrison is to be made, the same
be made known to the Provinces, Cities and places where the Companies are to
be sent to, or taken forth; and there be timely notice given by Letters unto
the Provinces where the same Companies are to march through, or make their
Randevous, that order may be taken accordingly for such marches, or C^ups and
Leaguerings.

XIII.
Provided likewise that the State or Government in the respective Provinces (if
need require) shall have liberty each within their own Province, to transfer
some Companies with Pattents or Commissions from one place for the succor of
another, which the Officers of the same Companies shall likewise be bound to
obey; provided there be immediately given advertisement thereof to the
Generality.

XIV.
Moreover, that the Companies lying at present in Garrisons any where, or
being laid there hereafter, they shall be tied according to the 7th Article
of the Union, to swear to the respective Magistrates of the Cities, in terms
either already used, or to be new framed; and where any Companies shall com to
lie forth the Cities in the open Country, for guarding of the streams or the
like, Oath shall be made by them to the chief Officers of the said open
Country.

XV.
Concerning Secret Correspondencie within and without the Land, the same shall
be continued and managed by the States General and Council of State, by such
persons and in such order, as may make most for the service of the Land, and
be don most secretly and frugally; the needful expenses whereof shall be
furnished from the Treasury by the Receiver General.

XVI.
As for the deciding and determining of incident questions, differences and
mis-understandings, it would be advised, that the same arising at any time
betwixt the Cities and Members of any Province, shall be composed or decided
by the ordinary Court of Justice there, (in case their Jurisdiction be well
grounded) and Commissioners of the Country; and in default of competent
Jurisdiction, by such like Commissioners, with assumtion of impartial members
of some other Court of Justice.

XVII.
If there arise any mis-understandings or Differences betwixt two or more
Provinces; That then the Province pretending to sustein the wrong, shall
address themselves to the Assembly of the States General, who shall forthwith
seek to dispose the Province complained against, to forbearance, or friendly
acommodation; and that not succeeding, to endeavor, that from other disengaged
Provinces in the matter, Commissioners may be appointed and sent to take off
the Dispute, or to pronunce sentence upon it.

XVIII.
And in Case Differences and Questions should arise among all the Provinces, so
that they could com to no agreement among themselves, that then there should be
Judges deputed out of the respective Provinces, to bring the Questions
aforesaid to an amicable Transaction, or else to pass sentence upon and
determine the same.

XIX.
Expressly provided, that in the foresaid Case, the whole business shall be so
compendified, cleared and instructed from all sides; that, if it be possible,
they may be brought to an issue and dispatch within the space of one month;
and that withal the parties shall have liberty to refuse all suspected
persons, on condition that others be presently supplied in their rooms.

XX.
And the foresaid Commissioners or Judges, shall make Oath respectively, that
they will have no regard or reflection to any particular Province or Members,
but impartially judge and pronounce what in equity shall be found to conduce
most to the tranquillity and Unity of the Provinces, which Judgment or
Sentence shall be followed and yielded to without any further Exception or
Appeal, under whatsoever pretext, to be offered, much less allowed of.

XXI.
And if so be that the Commissioners, after 2 or 3 summons, made by their Hi.
Mi. shall fail of having their past sentence effected; their Hi. Mi. shall take
requisite care and course, that the said Sentence be not eluded, but really
executed.

XXII.
And there shall neither before nor after, be used or practiced any
extremities and Acts of hostility or reprisals in or among the Provinces.

XXIII.
Concerning Religion, That the Resolution of their Hi. Mi. agreed November. 6o.
1646. might still be adhered to, viz. That throughout all the United Provinces
and all the Countries and Cities, belonging to, or associated with them, The
true reformed Christian Religion shall continue settled, so as the same is
preached and taught every where at this present in all the public Churches of
these Countries, and as it was elucidated by the National Synod at Dort, in the
year 1619. That the said Religion moreover shall be maintained in the
respective Provinces apart, by the power of the Land; without suffering any to
introduce any alteration in the same Religion. That the Placats or Decrees
against the Papists formerly published, may remain in their Vigor, and both
those and such others as shall be published for the future, in that behalf may
be executed according to the form and tenor thereof; and withal that there be
a Temperament and Order devised, to refrain the over-free coming in, of the
popish Clergy, without nevertheless impairing the Treaty of Peace.

Read and presented thus, in the Grand-Assemblie of the United Provinces, at
the Haghe, on Januarie 10/20 1650. Signed J. Singendonck. H. Verstegen,
Secretary.

That same day Jan. 20o. they of Zealand, made the ensuing Proposition, by the
mouth of their Pensionarie, Adrian Vett, and delivered it in writing, upon the
22.

High Mighty Lords!
AFter the sudden and remarkable Alteration happened in the chiefest parts of
the Government, through the deplorable Death of his Highs of immortal memory,
the Lords the States of Zealand, were very glad to understand, First, the
provisional Order that was taken by the Ordinary Deputies of the Provinces,
for Direction of the Militia or Army; and Secondly, that their Hi. Mi. were
pleased to convocate this Grand and Solemn Assembly, for to consider together,
either of some Person on whom the Eminent Administrations, his Highs whilom was
invested with, might securely and safely be conferred; or of some other way
and order, whereby the affairs of the Common Union, both within and without the
Land, might best be regulated and managed.

And that the rather, for that the same Convocation, was made in such a manner,
as never or seldom was don before, that your Hi. Mi. were pleased to repair
hither with such a numerous presence, and by the respective States-Assemblies.

Whereby the said Ordinary Deputies in the Generality made known, that one
the one side they apprehended as they ought, the present perplexed constitution
of time and affairs, and on the other, wished, that with all possible
acceleration, care and courses might be taken, for settling of the Government,
and timely obviateing of all attempts, that might be practiced against it.

Once more, it is said, your Hi. Mi. were assembled before, and in the same
manner, and in the same place, whenas, (viz. in the year 1582.) the King of
Spain was declared, to have forfeited his Right and Dominion over these
Countries, and all Princely Authority ceasing in him; thereby, was consolidated
into the power of the States, and the whole Souveraigntie devolved to the
States of the respective United Provinces, from whom the said Princely
authority originally was sprung and derived; at which time also the State of
these Countries orderly returned, to that form, wherein it consisted before the
Creation of Hereditarie principals, in the days when the Dutch Nation in
general, and ours also among the rest, were governed in the way of Republics.

And as then, for the reasons aforesaid, the Cause of your Hi. Mi. assembling
was very important, so it is likewise of no less weight at present; whenas the
Government does find it self at an instant and so unexpectedly bereft of its
principal Director born of the Illustrious House of Orange, which had obliged
this State with so many notable services and deserts; and deceased without
leaving any of that Houses posterity, fit and capable in person, to put his
hand to the rudder of the Ship.

Forasmuch then, that your Hi* Mi. are met here upon this occasion, for to
consult and advise together, what may be most requisite for the Common good
and interest, The States of Zealand wish, their H. M. may undertake the same,
with the same Love Unity and Confidence, wherewith their respective
Predecessors made the Union at Utrecht* and proceed likewise with as much Zeal
and Courage, as made our Forefathers (nothing daunted at the King of Spain, so
mighty a Prince) to stand it out against him, and set up the present frame of
Government, to strengthen and maintain the same by all means to this
conjuncture.

Not only, because all good Governments are ever wont heartily to mind and
effect the Government that is in being, but also for that the same which is
set up among us, is grounded upon such laudable and steadfast maxims, that
there can be no better nor safer devised; as that, wherein there is nothing
administered or managed by any Superiority, and which is, even from the bottom
to the top, altogether representative.

As now this Grand Assembly of your Hi. Mi. is composed of Seven Members or
Provinces* who though free and Sovereign, each one within their limits, are
nevertheless, for their common preservation, so straightly allied and
confederated, as if in effect they were but one Province.

Those same Provinces again consist of several Members and Towns, such as were
never subdued to slaverie by any ones arms; but were of old free and privileged
members and Cities, which are governed respectively by such persons, who at the
entrance of their functions, must make Oath, to watch with all
conscionableness, and according to their best knowledge, for the safety and
welfare of the Land.

Out of which advices and deliberations, are framed afterward in each Province
the Resolutions of the States, and the same Resolutions are orderly transmitted
and communicated to the Assembly of the Confederates. Whence it appears and
fallows undisputably, that this Common Government, set up for the affairs of
the Union, beset with so many Provincial Orders and fences, and represented by
such an authoritative Assembly, consisting of the prime, ablest and
faithfullest persons in the Land, is not only in reason to be esteemed by all
men understanding and versed in divine and humane affairs, but really and
experimentally, the most pleasing, most honorable and most safe Government,
that can be imagined here on earth.

As being further also commended by the Example not only of the Common wealth
of the Hebrews instituted according to the prescript of God Almighty himself,
which ought to be of great weight and moment among all Christians; but of many
other civilized Nations l^kewise, under the same forms of Government, both of
old and later times, in neighbor and remoter Countries; especially the great
Assemblies of the Grecians, called Amphyctiones, composed of diverse Cities,
who, though every one apart was free and Sovereign within themselves, were
nevertheless confederated and United together against the power of the Medes
and Persians.

And as the histories inform us, that, as long as they cleaved to this alliance
and remained in this Union, they could not be overcom by all the power of the
Persians: so experience has showed likewise, what this State, through the
Members unity and confiding one in the other, was able to do against the King
of Spain; and how the same by that means has waded and got through all the
obstacles and difficulties of 80 years war, to this prosperity and height we
see it in at present.

Wherefore we have great cause to pray to God Almighty, that he would be
pleased to preserv the Republic in Unity and Concord, that we may be able
to transmit the same as pure and undefiled to our posterity as we received
from our forefathers; settling and governing the same upon those good and
wholesome Laws and Maxims that were the original foundations thereof.

And forasmuch as without all controversy there are necessarily required to
this purpose three inseparable main-points, to wit, the Union, Religion and
Militia; and that the Provinces of Gelderland and Holland, have presented to
your Hi. Mi. some considerations thereupon, and chiefly upon the point of the
Militia; We shall likewise in behalf of the Lords the States of Zealand
summarily deduce a few Considerations which their N. M. had upon the points of
the Union and Religion in particular.

As for the former, your Hi. M. know, that as well this grand and Solemn
Assembly, as the affairs of this Boards are properly grounded upon the Treaty
of the Union made at Utrecht in Anno 1579.

That likewise the same Union is originally contracted between the Provinces,
to the mutual and common protection of all, against all, both foreign and
homebred force and violence.

Which alone is sufficient to make your Hi. Mi. apprehend, of what importance
it is, that the same Union be religiously and uprightly maintained, as known
to be the only Foundation whereupon the glorious structure of this Government
stand's settled, the only mortar and morteises whereby the walls thereof are
cemented and fastened on all sides, the advantageous steps and degrees which
have mounted it to the present Eminency, and the pillars whereon securely
resting, it present's it self with so much luster and pleasantness to the eyes
of all the world.

Now as it is almost impossible, Hi. and Mi. Lords, that the same Unity shall
duly be preserved, if the Members of the Body should clash one against the
other through inward Dissentions and misunderstandings; and that likewise one
cannot well conceiv, that there should never no differences arise in a
Government such as this is, composed of seven several free and Sovereign
Provinces, and each one thereof consisting of sundry Members and Cities, as
said is, and they again represented by persons of various humors and interests,
and also governed by different and peculiar Laws, Constitutions and Customs:
that it is scarce possible likewise, that by reason of the difficulties of the
matters in Deliberation, and difference of apprehensions and understandings all
things should be dispatched with unanimous consent; and that it happen's often
times, that through the discrepancie of opinions, especially about essential
points, there are caused notable Distractions and Contentions, unless the same
are by provident care and discretion timonsly obviated or prevented; so the
Lords the States of Zealand wish* that in this General Convocation some promt
and peremtorie expedient may be thought and resolved upon, whereby the
Differences at any time arising among the Provinces, may either happily be
avoided, or expeditely removed.

Which we say not, Hi. Mi. Lords, as if we feared this Assembly should be
troubled by any such Disputes and misunderstandings; or, that, if any should
happen (which God Almighty be pleased to prevent) we should not be
confident the same might presently be agreed again, by means of persuasion or
otherwise; but only that for time to com* sufficient order may be provided
against the same; and that your Hi. Mi. both in the general and particular
having met together in unity and parted in love, the same unity and loving
friendship may for ever be preserved and continued among you.

In reading over and examining the foresaid Treaty of the Union, we find,
that provision is made in this behalf in distinct manner, according to the
diversity of matters, and first by the IX Article, what course is to be taken
in Deliberations about Truce, Peace and War, namely, that therein the Provinces
are to conclude with one consent; or if that cannot be obtein'd, that then the
Difference shall be referred and submitted to the Lds Stadth* who shall compose
the same between the parties, or decide the matter, rather by themselves alone,
or in case of discrepancie, with ass^^mtion of some impartial Assistants and
Assessors; which Disposing is afterward likewise applied in the 16th Article,
for the voiding and taking away of all other Dissentions, of what nature soever
they may be.

True it is indeed, Hi. Mi. Lords, that the foresaid power and prerogative
seems to be given by the contents of these Articles, only to the Lords
Stadtholders then in being, and therefore not to be extended to the
succeeding Stadtholders. But as these and other such like clauses are
oftentimes put into solemn Contracts and Transactions, so they ceas not,
however but provisionally inserted, to be always obligatorie, as long as they
are not expressly repealed; the meaning of the foresaid clauses being only,
that, if afterward there should some inconvenience or grievance com to be
discovered about the principal Expedient or Disposition of the Article which
they are annexed to; that in such a case the Contracting parties shall have
liberty, passing by or nulling the former expedient, to think and resolv upon
another; as also accordingly the Members of the Union, if heretofore they had
remarked any difficulty, whether about the foresaid submission to the Lords
Stadtholders, or in their decisions, they had power enough to consider and
agree together upon some fitter and safer disposition; whereunto nevertheless
they have not found themselves necessitated, forasmuch as the said Lords
Stadtholders being of themselves not much inclined or disposed to pronounce
Sentence or make Decisions between the principal Members of such a Considerable
Body, and willing to avoid all occasions of giving offense, they have for the
most part endeavored to compose the Differences by way of intercession and
persuasion, which also for the most part has well succeeded, not only by
reason of the great credit and authority the said Lords Stadtholders were
invested with, but also that the party reflecting on each side, which way the
balance might happen to preponderate, were loath to advenuture upon a Decision,
and always eschew'd the same.

But since that same means of respect and intercession, ar also of decision at
last, is com to fail now, through the Deceas of his Highs of immortal memory,
as having been Stadtholder over several Provinces, the Lords States of Zealand
do wish some remedy may be thought upon, whereby the said Defect may most
conveniently be supplied; and that indeed the rather for that by want hereof,
two of the most principal and necessary Articles of the Union would be
useless and in vain.

We are not ignorant, Hi. Mi. Lords, what Expedients there are constituted
against such Difficult Emergencies in other Countries and Commonwealths; but
know as well on the other side, how little they would agree with the humor and
disposition of this Nation, and with the constitution of this Government;
therefore we refer to your Hi. Mi. consideration, whether in the cases alleged
(which God Almighty grant may never happen among us) for the composing and
voiding of Differences betwixt the Provinces, it might not prove expedient to
desire and make use of some Members of the Provincial Courts of Justice, they
being used and versed in all manner of Differences, and being themselves also
without the Government, and therefore unprejudiced, might best be able to judge
of them; or if this should be excepted against, that there might be called
and Commissionated, some of the ablest, most experienced and discreetest States
men, who being well acquainted with Questions daily arising in Government, and
knowing that in matter of State and Policy the way of Accommodation is
usually more safe and expeditious then that of rigor in Law; they might
per-adventure be emploi'd thereabout more fruitfully: or if these persons
also, as having some part or share in the Government, either directly or
indirectly, cannot be held impartial and free of prejudice; that the
Differences be submitted to some of the friends and Allies of the State, such
as are most concerned in the preservation thereof. Desiring that upon all these
proposals they may distinctly understand your Hi. Mi. wise considerations, and
that by this solemn convocation, effectual order may be settled in this behalf.

Touching the third point viz that of Religion, the States of Zealand assure
themselves, your Hi. Mi. will evermore continue holily and sincerely to maintein
that precious pledge, by God Almighty, put into the hands of this State from
Heaven, and by their common Forefathers and Successors hitherto with the
hazard and loss of so much blood and treasure preserved among us.

Nevertheless their N. M. most affectionately desire your Hi. Mi. would be
pleased upon this occasion anew to declare, That they are resolved not only to
maintein the true Christian Reformed Religion, so as the same is taught now in
the public Churches of this Land, and has been elucidated by the Synod held
at Dort; But likewise never to suffer any alteration to be made therein; and
that the said Religion shall be protected and vindicated by the armed powers
of the Lands, as in every Province apart by themselves, so by the Generality in
the Quarters resorting under their Command, against all disorders or offenses
whatsoever.

That likewise for the further preventing of all considerable prejudices, the
Sects and Separate people in Religion, which are secluded from the public
protection, and only connived or wink't at, shall be kept in good order and
quietness, and limited against all exorbitancies, and under express caution and
clauses, that they shall be tolerated no where else but in those places where
now they are at present.

That for refraining of the public Exercise of the Romish Superstition, and
remooving of whatsoever has dependence thereon, the public Ordinances of the
Land shall be executed punctually without any composition or connivence,
forasmuch as experience has made it manifest, that for want of such prompt and
ready Execution, whether it came through remissness of the Officers, or
otherwise, not only the Government it self has suffered much in their Honor
and Reputation, but the diseas also is grown from ill to wors; so that the
liberty of the Papists, which according to the privileges of the Land, cannot
be denied them, in what concern's and regards their Consciences and Opinions
in matters of Religion, that therein they may not be questioned nor any ways
molested, is by little and little degenerated into an open licentiousness and
stoutness, insomuch, that they are not shie, to set up formal Hierarchies, and
actually, by concurs of armed men, to oppose the lawful endeavors of the
officers of Justice, in the very face of Justice and the Higher Powers of the
Land themselves, to the great prejudice of the true Reformed Religion, the sad
grief of all the upright professors thereof, and the joie and exultation of all
disaffected thereunto, which might at last occasion very troublesome effects:
and what advantage may thereby be given in particular to all that are
ill-affected to the State, for attempts upon it, your Hi. Mi. are best able to
judge, the consequences thereof would prove so much the sadder and more
dangerous, in that they would light upon none more heavily, then the best
Patriots, that is to say, those of the Reformed Religion, on whose
faithfulness this State reposeth with most security.

We are not ignorant neither Hi. Mi. Lords, that many Princes and
Commonwealths are allied together for mutual protection, notwithstanding their
manifest difference in Religion: And that likewise the discrepancie therein,
does not hinder their living together in confident Unity; But as there is no
sure arguing, from the Examples or natural constitutions and humors of one
Nation, to the other; so doubtless, though the same may safely be practiced
with other confederates, and is at this present; yet here in this Country it
is not only unprofitable, but prejudicial and ruinous in the highest degree;
being that the most principal Bond of this Government, is the foresaid
Reformed Religion; and the Flower of the Inhabitants thereof, to wit, all the
persons making profession of and being well-affected to the said Religion are
thereby inseparably inclined and engaged to mutual Unity and to the common
interest of the State.

And whereas likewise, Hi. Mi. Lords, it is evident, that the Number and
Boldness of the said Papists does very much encreas, by means of the bad
Instructions and impressions, which the good and plain Inhabitants of this
State are possessed withal, by Popelings, Priests and other pretended
Ecclesiastical persons, which daily in great numbers arrive into these parts
out of the King of Spain his Territories; The States of Zealand are desirous,
that Provision be made against it, as well as may be.

For although it is agreed unto of this side, by the Treaty of peace, that the
Subjects of the said King in General, may convers and negotiate in these
Countries, the same seems nevertheless not applicable to the foresaid
ecclesiastical persons, or Clergymen. First, by reason of the Resolution
taken upon the preliminar points, to be observed, during that peace; wherein
it is plainly set down, that the Ordinances made against the Papists, should
be executed according to their form and contents; in which Ordinances there is
an express penal prohibition of the coming of such Ecclesiastical or
Clergie-persons into this Country. Secondly, because that the said pretended
Ecclesiastics, generally do maintain, as the Plenip^tentiarie Ambassador of
the King of Spain at Munster; themselves alleged, that they are none of the said
Kings Subjects, nor subjected to any secular power; but only to the Pope of
Rome; wherefore also the Provision of the foresaid Treaty, of free resort
however couched in general terms, cannot be extended to their advantage. As
likewise in the third place, the same is evinced, by the interpretation and
practice of several other Princes and Potentates, who notwithstanding their
friendship and alliance with the said King, whereby his Subjects in general are
denied no access nor commerce in their Countries, yet suffer no known Clergy
of his to com and covers there, which interpretation agree's likewise with the
Declaration of the Lords the Ordinary Deputies of the Generality plainly
expressed in a Certain Ordinance of theirs, made for that very purpose, and
observed to this day in the Quarters resorting under their Command. Wherein
nevertheless if your Hi. Mi. should be otherwise minded, and willing to admit
a larger sens and construction in that particular of the Treaty of peace; The
States of Zealand could wish then, that it might be don with such a tolerable
Temper and Moderation, as may bring least prejudice to the service of the Land
and true Religion, and take away all scandal as much as may be.

As likewise their N. M. desire, That the Resolution formerly taken by the
Generality to the same end and for the same good considerations, whereby the
Ambassadors and public Ministers of forain Princes and Potentates, are
prohibited to admit any exercise of religious worship in their Houses, but in
the proper language of their respective Lords and Master's, may be renewed,
seriously revived, and roundly declared to the said public Ministers.

And lastly, That your Hi. Mi. will be pleased to take once some vigorous
resolution for an effectual Introduction of Reformation both Ecclesiastic and
Civil, in the Meyerie of the Bosch, and other known Quarters of like nature.
And to that end duly weigh and review, how dear the Conquest of these Quarters
bath stood this State; what Disputes there have been agitated by the King of
Spain, about the Soveraigntie thereof, and with how much difficulty they were
at last asserted to Us; what troubles and vexations, the beginning of
Ecclesiastical Reformation sustained there; what countermining and opposition
were practiced against it, both from without and from within the Provinces:
with how much enormitie and insolence the Ministers thereof were assaulted; and
what helpless remedies there were applied, not only to the contempt of the
Government, and grief of all the good Inhabitants of the Land, but even to the
dishonor of the Reformed Religion, and provoking of Almighty God. What
courageous and wholesome Resolutions were there not taken by the Generality, for
the introduction of the Civil Reformation there (without which the
Ecclesiastic, doubtless, cannot subsist) and how small an appearance is there
of any Fruits or Effects thereof? nay, how have they been from time to time
crossed, traversed and utterly hindered? Wherefore the Lords the States of Zealand
desire, that courses may be taken, for the surceasing at length of all further
opposition against the foresaid Resolutions, so solemnly taken and reiterated,
and tending so much to the maintenance of the Right and Service of the Land;
and that on the contrary, the same may be executed and observed, so as they
are couched, in all their points and Articles: for the effecting whereof, their
N. M. in particular, do hold themselves obliged not only to your Hi. Mi. as
their Confederates; but even to God himself, to Reason and Equity, and to the
Good and Benefit of the State in general. And nothing doubting of the sincere
intention in your Hi. Mi. we shall pray to God Almighty, so to inspire the
same with the Spirit of Wisdom, that in this great, extraordinary and solemn
Assembly, no other Resolution may be taken, but such, as shall tend to the
honor and magnifying of his holy Name, to the confirmation of the Everlasting
Union, to the establishing of Religion, and to the weal and welfare of the Land
in general, and the joie and comfort of all the Inhabitants in particular.


Upon occasion of this grand Assembly, where Religion was one of the principal
points to be treated of, the Synods of the respective Provinces sent likewise
their Deputies, who desired audience; which was promised them, with this
proviso nevertheless, to make this Proposition short and pertinent. At the
appointed time they were admitted into the Grand Assembly, five of them in
number, where standing before the Table all bare-headed, Lotius one of the
Ministers in the Haghe made an elegant and convenient address suitable to the
present occasion, and serving for an Introduction and further recommendation of
the ensuing Remonstrance which they delivered there in writing subscribed by
themselves.

To the High Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands.
THe Ministers of Jesus Christ, and Overseers of the Church of God under your
Hi. Mi. laudable Government, reverently show, That having been informed of an
appointed solemn and extraordinary Assembly of the United Provinces, among
other things, to consult about settling of Religion; They have judged it a
duty of their Charge to rowz up themselves, and therefore could not forbear, by
virtue of God's Command, constreint of Conscience, love to the Divine Truth,
enlarging of Christ's Kingdom and welfare of our Dear Fatherland, but in all
subjection to present unto your Hi. Mi. these ensuing things in the Name of our
Great God.

We shall not need to demonstrate here, knowing assuredly your Hi. Mi.
themselves do believ, that God Almighty, next unto himself, esteems nothing
more precious and highly then his Church and People, being the beloved of his
Soul; for whose sake God has blessed or punished, preserved or destroyed whole
Nations and Kingdoms; according namely as the Governors thereof protected or
oppressed His Inheritance; and therefore also are all Higher Powers God's
Vicegerents here on earth, bound to follow herein their Lord and Master's
Example, and to exalt Jerusalem above the highest relations in the Land* to let
their first and nearest care be that the Relogion whereof your Hi. Mi. make
profession, and hope to be saved in, may be settled before all other affairs,
so, as the same was confirmed out of God's holy Word by the National Synod
held at Dort, in the year 1619, and by the Sovereign Authority approved, and
hitherto (through God's grace) taught and maintained in all the public
Churches, as the Religion of the Land, and the Foundation of the State, which
therefore ought to be constantly maintained by the power of the Land; without
permitting that any member of the Union, or whosoever else, should dare to
attempt ought directly or indirectly against it; as we do hope your Hi. Mi.
will declare and establish the same by an express Act.

Now for to mantein and settle the foresaid Religion aright, both as to
doctrine and practice, we do hold it needful above all things, that all Popish
Idolatry, Superstition and Hierarchy (whereby they take upon them to bestow
both Civil and Ecclesiastic Offices, declaring all Collations, Prebendships,
and Benefices disposed of by the Governors of the Land for null, and conferring
them upon others; all in hope of some alteration ere long) which the Papists
have set up every where in our Land in a sufficiently open manner, under the
very ^ies of the Governors and Court of Justice, and practice in secret, yea in
some place having their Churches or Chapels trimmed and set with Images and
Altars, may be forbidden and rooted out, as a Doctrine with the dependence
thereof so directly opposite to God's Word, the places of the Land, the safety
of Religion and the State, and the Salvation of souls, who by thousands, as
they boast of it, have, since the peace, been drawn away from the Divine Truth
to their Superstition and Errors, by goodly promises of Inheritances and
other advantages, or threatenings; by increasing or withdrawing means and
opportunities of trade and livelihoods, by railing at and slandering the
Reformed Religion, abusing, nick-naming, affronting, beating, yea and wounding
some, even to death, that are against their Idolatry, daring to put their
consecrated wafers into the mouths of some dying Protestants, to shrive and
anoint them etc. no otherwise then if they lived under the Cross, and
themselves had all the Government in Church and Policy in their own hands.

Whereunto they are mightily set on by an infinite number of Jesuits, Priests,
Monks and Friars, who like grasshoppers out of the bottomless pit, overspread
the Land by thousands, and under the color and pretense of Religious Worship,
do by their falls doctrine withdraw the Inhabitants from the Obedience they owe
to their lawful Magistrate; debauch, infect and poison the younger sort in the
Popish Schools which they have here all the land over, or causing them to be
brought up without the Land in Popish Universities, Schools and Colleges of
Jesuits or other pretended Ecclesiastical persons; and many both young and old
are seduced by Jesuitesses, or she Jesuits, and such like femal pretended
orders (condemned in the Court of Rome it self by Pope John 22, Clements, and
but lately by Urban 8, May 21, 1631, as pernicious Sects, and therefore
prohibited and excommunicated) who nevertheless are reported to dwell amongst
us to the Number of about 20 thousand, doing nothing night and day but entice
and draw away all manner of persons, especially such as are sick and lying on
their deathbed, from the love and profession of the Reformed Religion to the false and comfortless doctrine of Popery.

By all which means they encreas daily in such an extraordinary manner, that
they boast of many thousands like-minded with them both in Cities and Countries
throughout all the Land; and who has not reason then to stand in fear, Hi. Mi.
Lords, that they may once rise and join together, and after the example of
Ireland, first break the necks of all honest Governors, and then fall a
murdering and massacring of all the Reformed Protestants, according as the
manner and genius (well known to every one, and but too abundantly taught by
experience) of all Idolaters (such as your Hi. Mi. hold these to be) is cruel,
and their unfaithfulness great, they not holding themselves bound to keep faith
with Heretics, and therefore not to be obliged by any oath of Fidelity;
being besides daily more and more animated and incensed to all manner of
cruelty against the reformed Protestants, by promises and persuasions of great
merit; as appears by their daily Discourses; and that they live where round
about they have Neighbors that will be readi^ enough to assist them suddenly
upon any occasion. Do not all these enormities then, High M. Lords, hold forth
just and great reason, that the higher Powers should watch against such
Violences, and provide accordingly, for to keep themselves guiltless of the
innocent Blood of such, who may easily and on a sudden be surprised by them,
according to all those foresaid Considerations.

Hence it is, that in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, ^ee do here pray and
beseech your Hi. Mi. that in obedience to God's Command, and following the
Example of all Godly Kings and Governors, you will be pleased, effectually to
remoov whatsoever does promote and strengthen Popery amongst us: according to
the adjoined means set down by us in that behalf, and for the most part
extracted out of the public Acts and Ordinances of the Land. Let once, we
beseech your Hi. Mi. let those manifold complaints and grievances, crying to
heaven, and those many Remonstrances of the Churches, presented in that behalf,
be heard and regarded once by your H. M speedy Resolutions and Executions be
issued forth and set a work against all the remonstranced excesses, and high
banded insolences; which we do likewise particularly entreat in behalf of the
Mayerie, the Baronie, the Marquisat of Berghen, the Countries of Cuyck,
Ravestein* Overmaes, etc. that together with the Ecclesiastic, there may also
a Civil Reformation be instituted; to the end that the Churches of God and the
well affected ones to the Reformed Religion in these Quarters, may thereby be
protected.

As for other Sectaries and ^rroneous spirits, whereof there are but too many
in the Land; we humbly pray your Hi. Mi. that they may be kept within their
bounds, and no where allowed any further or new privilege of public Exercise;
But touching the Jews^, that to them as abominable Blasphemers of our Dear
Savior all public worship be interdicted: And that likewise, all sorts be
restrained from slandering the reformed Religion, and from translating and
putting forth in Print, any kind of old or new heretical Treatises, whereby
many of the simpler sort are seduced, especially the writings of the Socinians
and Arrians, which were always wholesomly suppressed by the Government, till
now of late, since the Peace a great many began to be printed and published
without control.

We could wish likewise from our hearts, Hi. Mi. Lords, that the States of the
respective Provinces here gathered together at present, would encourage one
another for to take like order and co^^ses every one in their Province against
the great ^ins and Lan^destroying abominations, which through course of time,
the witness of Satan, bad examples, contemt of God's Holy Word, Unbelief and
want of censure and punishment are broken in and have taken root among us; such
as are the observing still of the Feast or Holydaies, the horrible cursing and
blaspheming of God's Holi^ Nam^ by old and young, even to the children, the
unspeakable perjuries committed by all sorts of men, there being so little
heed taken both to the administering or keeping of Oat^s; the general
profanation of the holy Sabbath: the many murders and easy procu^ing of
pardons for them; the filthy Resorts and Brothel-houses, Dancingschools,
Gaming*places, Play Houses, Rope*dauncings, the very baits and lures to all
manner of corruption and vanities; the prohibited, scandalous and incestuous
marriages; the excess of pride and haughtiness, and the sumtuositie in Apparel
and Entertainments, to the undoing and r^ine of many Families; and such like
other crying sins more, for which God's Wrath is kindling against our dear
Fatherland; and which are the causes of so many hot diseases, decay and want of
Trade, great inundations, dearth and scarcity, the taking away of the
righteous and precious of the land, wherewith God has begun to visit us the
year past, and his hand is not taken off yet.

Not to detain your Hi. Mi. any longer, we do in conclusion once again in all
humility pray entreat and be^^ech you in the Name of the King of Kings, by
whom Princes reign, that yo^^ H. M. will be pleased, in the beginning of thi^
great and I^^ustrious Assembly, to take a^ e^^ectual steadfast Resolution, for
the settling of the Reformed Religion, abating of Poperi^, etc. before the Land
do spue us out for it, and ^od r^^eng^ i^ upon us.

Thus shall your Hi. Mi. show your selves truly thankful to God, for the great
Mercies and Benefits vouchsafed to your State, (whom God has raised from small
to great, from poor to rich, and even miraculously brought and preserved
hitherto). Then shall your H. M. not have received the Sword in vain, but
acquit your Conscience, do God acceptable service, preserv many souls from
destruction, terrify wicked-doers, cherish the good, and doubtless receiv a
blessing from Heaven upon your further Consultations and Government, and upon
all your persons and Inhabitants, and at last as faithful Servants and Stewards
of God, be made partakers in Heaven, of the gracious reward, ready prepared
there for all good Governors, which God Almighty grant to your Hi. Mi. Amen.

Signed in the Name of all, Bernard Craso, Eleazar Lotius, Maximilian Feeling,
Cornelius Lamanus, Johannes Heystius.


Means exhibited for the hindering of the Popes Hierarchy, and the
Superstitions of the Papists in the United Provinces, for the most part taken
out of the Acts and Ordnances of the Land.
I.
THat all popish Clergie*persons, Jesuits, Priests, Friars etc. be kept out of
the Land, they being no Subjects of any Secular Princes or Magistrates, but
only of the Court of Rome, according to their own Tenants; as likewise the
United Provinces have determined in the preliminar points before the concluding
of the Peace, that the Ordinances against the Papists, formerly published,
should remain in their vigor, and executed according to their plain form and
^ontents.

II.
That all Acts and Liberties granted to popish Clergymen, Priests etc. may
be repealed, and an Order made* that no Governors nor Commanders, nor any
whatsoever, shall for time to com, grant any more such.

III.
That all Assemblies or Cohabitatio^s, in Houses, Cloisters, Nunneries of
unmarried persons, Nuns, Beguins, Jesuitesses, Que^els, Cloppens, may be
dissolved, and in particular all Cloppens and Quesels, may be banished the
Land, or reduced from that pernicious Order.

IV.
That no Papists be admitted to the Government or any public Employment of
the Land; but that all popish Justices, town-Senators, Secretaries, Forresters,
public messengers, be cashired, and able persons, (making open profession of
the Reformed Religion) put in their places.

V.
That all Popish Conventicles may be prohibited, disturbed, their Altars,
Images, Crucifixes, and Ecclesi^stical Ornaments and things belonging
thereunto* broken in pieces and taken away; and strict orders made against all
that frequent such meetings; or let out, yield or grant their Houses,
Court-yards, Ships, etc. to any such purpose.

VI.
That likewise the Inhabitants, running after Popish C^urches, processions,
festivals, may be let and prevented.

VII.
That no Ambassadors or Agents, being of a Contrary Religion be permitted to
exercise their worship in any other, but every one his own language, and none
admitted but their Domestics.

VIII.
That likewise all particular Lords, dwelling in this State, or having any
Lordships, Manors, Houses, in the same, be prohibited to permit any Popish
worship to be celebrated in any of them.

IX.
That all private entries, and close passages (which the Papists make use of,
for the conveighing of themselves from one house to another, in the exercise of
their worship) may be stopped up and forbidden.

X.
That all public pilgrimages, processions, visiting of pretended holy places,
the setting up of Images and Crucifixes in Churchyards, the crossing and
marking of Papists houses, for to be the better known and found out by their
Clergy; and kneeling at the graves, the setting up at or about the dead
bodies, any crosses, candles and other such like Popish superstitions in use
here among them; as the shutting of their shops upon the foresaid festivals or
holy days, may be prevented and hindered.

XI.
That it be expressly forbidden to make directly or indirectly any Collection
or gathering of Moneys, Wares, Commodities etc. in the behalf of any the
foresaid Ecclesiastical Popish persons, Churches, Colleges, Convents, within or
without the Land; or to send away, or remit any such moneys, wares, etc.

XII.
That all Popish parents or families be interdicted to disinherit their
children or lawful heirs, for or by reason of the reformed Religion; and that
the Papists of this Country be forbidden likewise, to make over their goods
to the Jesuits, Priests, Nuns or any other pretended Ecclesiastics, whether
within or without the Land, to the prejudice of their heirs.

XIII.
That no Marriages of the Papists be acknowledged lawful, but such as are made
before the Magistrates or in the public Churches; and that they be prohibited
to marry any other way.

XIV.
That all Popish Schools in this Land, together with the Catechizing or
teaching of children by Nuns in their Nunneries, or by the Cloppens in
particular houses, may be hindered and restrained.

XV.
That the Papists dwelling in these Countries, may be forbidden to let their
children be brought up, forth the Land in any Popish Schools, Universities,
Colleges of Jesuits Cloisters of Frieries.

XVI.
That the children of the Reformed, whether by father or mother, be brought up
by reformed Guardians, in the Reformed Religion, without suffering them to be
put under popish Guardians.

XVII.
That no popish Landlord be suffered more henceforward, but strictly
forbidden, to let out his Lands with stipulation and condition, that the
Tenants shall go to Mass, and let their children be baptized by popish Priests.

XVIII.
That all useless Colleges, and Popish Societies be put down, and the revenue
employed to pious uses; and likewise all superstitious customs, as the running
about with Drums and Burgundian Banners, which are used at the meetings of the
Child's or Companies, may be restrained; and all the old Charters, full of
Idolatries and superstitions renewed.

XIX.
That strict Orders be made against all Officers that are negligent in the
Execution of the Ordinances, and that the same be enjoined not only to them,
but also to the Military Officers.

XX.
For conclusion of these means, besides what other the wisdom of your Hi. Mi.
shall judge fit and ordain, we do wish, some convenient ones could be thought
upon by your Hi. Mi. whereby the Papists in this Land might be brought to the
hearing of Gods holy Word, and by it the true faith in Jesus Christ, and an
upright obedience to their lawful Magistrates. In the Name of all it was
signed, as before.

Bernard Craso. Eleazar M. F. Lotius. Maximilian Feeling. Cornelius Lamanus.
Johannes Hestius.

Some Provinces could have been contented the Ministers had staid at home:
especially for that there was one among these Representers, who in a certain
Dedication of a Book to the late Prince, had highly praised and flattered him
in regard of his proceedings last year against those of Holland and Amsterdam;
misapplying and wresting several Scripture-places to that purpose; which most
Ministers themselves held to savor too too much of profanation.

Those of Holland remembered likewise, what endeavors were used last Summer, to
charge them with defaults in the point of Religion.

And some others not best affected to Holland, pressed, it should be enacted in
ample plain and special manner, That in case one or other member of the State
should happen to go contrary to the Reformed Religion, or, not duly to
maintein the same, the Generality should look to it. This the Hollanders and
such like humors held for an opening of too great a door to all manner of
Violences, and a giving of too much authority to the Preachers. Friesland,
Over-Yssel, Groninghen and the Omlands alone, together with the Quarter of
Zutp^en, were of opinion there ought forthwith to have been settled a way*
whereby Religion might effectually have been maintein*d, against such as should
not maintein the same in due manner; and they were ready likewise to pass and
stand to almost all the points propounded by the Ministers. Holland feared
these would take too much upon them, and what by Discourses, what by their
Sermons, mix themselves in State Affairs, and make strange impressions of the
necessity of a Stadtholder; as indeed two or three of them had attemted
already, mainteining openly, That the Government could not subsist without an
autoritative and permanent Head, as well in Civil as Military respects and
affairs; representing the State more Monarchical then Polyarchical; so as was
showed above some had don immediately after the Prince's death. Nevertheless by
means of better persuasions by some of the Governors in the Haghe it was
forborne. The day of Humiliation was likewise put off for a while by those of
Holland, for to give no occasion to bring the present occurrences of
State's-matters up into the Pulpit, as diverse Ministers were wont to do; but
the most part, except some two or three at the Haghe, carried themselves
discreetly therein without meddling.

The Provinces indeed agreed all of them in this, that good Ordinances and
Regulations were made in the point of Religion; but the complaints of the
Ministry of Zealand and others, were, That the same ought to be better
observed and executed. Wherein they of Holland, especially Amsterdam were
consured most; who for fear of prejudice in their Trade, connived much. But
Holland and others stood upon this, that having taken up arms for Liberty of
Conscience, and in time of war and rigor it self, never proceeded according to
the manner of the Spanish Inquisition, the same ought not now neither be
introduced. What they advised upon this point will follow by and by: and
although the States of Gelderland, Zealand, and Utrecht had been at first more
rigid in their Provincial Advices upon all the three points (as shall likewise
be seen anon by what was presented in behalf of those points) yet they
declared afterward, to wit, Gelderland, That they conformed themselves to the
advice of Holland; provided only, that as concerning the Civil Reformation in
the Mayerie of the Bosch and other parts of like nature, such as could show to
have any right and interest to any Civil Office, might receiv reasonable
satisfaction or compensation; and that such as at present were in any such
charge or office might have liberty to treat with some fit person, being of
the Reformed Religion, under the approbation of their Hi. Mi. Zealand likewise
declared themselves Conform to Holland, urging only a more vigorous execution
of the Ordinances; and so did Utrecht, and that the Civil Reformation in the
foresaid Mayierie, and such like places, might be prosecuted and settled; and
that the Sects which were connivingly tolerated, might not be suffered to
spread further, nor in any other places, then where now they were.

The Advices and inclinations of the other Provinces will be seen in their own
Propositions hereafter, but for connexion's sake of matter, we shall produce
here what Holland advised upon the point of Religion; the same being
afterward converted into a General Declaration of all the Provinces Januarii
27o.

The Advice Provincial of Holland and Westfriesland in point of Religion, and
the mainteinance thereof; converted into the following Resolution and
Declaration, approved and received by all the other Provinces.
I.
THe States of the respective Provinces have declared, as by these they do
declare, that they will, each in theirs, firmly uphold and maintain, the true
Christian Reformed Religion, such as the same is every where at present
preached and taught in the public Churches of these Countries, and was
established by the National Synod, held at Dort, in the year 1619.

II.
That the same Religion, shall in every Province within it self, and by the
Generality in the Quarters resorting under their Command, be maintained by
the Power of the Lind, without suffering that ever any alteration be made
therein by any.

III.
That the Sects and Separates, being secluded from the public protection, and
only connived at, shall be kept in good order and quiet, with boundaries
against all Excesses, and that the same also shall be permitted no where else,
but where they are at present.

IV.
That the Ordinances published heretofore against the Papists, shall remain in
their vigor, and be strictly executed, according to their forms and contents.

V.
That withal, there shall be such a Temper and Order framed against the
licentious coming in of the popish Clergy, as may best stand, without
prejudice or impairing the Treaty of peace.

VI.
That the Ambassadors and public Ministers of foreign Prince's and Potentates
shall be obliged, not to suffer any Sermons or other religious service to be
don in their houses in Dutch, but order it so, that the same may be performed
in the language of their respective Lords and Masters, and that there be no
other admitted neither, to officiate with them in this kind, but such as do
properly belong to the train and family of the said Lords Ambassadors and
Ministers.

VII.
That the wholesome Resolutions and Decrees made at the Generality, for the
introduction of the civil Reformation in the Mayerie of the Bosch, and other
Quarters of like Nature, shall effectually once be executed in all their
points and Articles; and consequently, that there shall be no other Baylies,
Justices, Secretaries, Forresters, and other such like Officers, but of the
Reformed Religion; provided nevertheless; that the particular Lords, having
right and title to place Officers, be warned and minded to follow the required
alteration in regard of their Popish Officers, within a prefixed time, or that
upon default, at the time expired, the same shall be supplied by their H. M.

And thus now the first point of the Assembly, viz. that of Religion was held
to be determined; and however many things were past by in this Declaration,
held forth in the abovesaid Remonstrance of the Ministers, they nevertheless
acquiesced, and returned their express thanks to their H. M. for it, and every
one went his way home again. They of Friesland, Groninghen and the Omlands,
had rather seen, the Ministers would not have so easily been contented, and
continued pressing a further satisfaction of their Desires. But when the
Ministers saw, Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Utrecht and Over-Yssel agreed
thus; they held it bootless to insist further. Their thanksgiving was in these
terms following.

High and Mighty Lords!
THe Deputies of the Synods, thank your H. M. from the Bowels of their hearts,
That you were pleased unanimously to take such prais-worthie Resolutions, for
the maintenance of the true Religion and the propagation thereof, and do assure
themselves likewise, that your H. M. will give it that life, by a vigorous
execution, that we shall have cause, besides what is given us already, to make
known and publish your H. M. noble Act, in all our respective Congregations,
whereby not only the respective Members will be moved to bless God, but all
of us shall be stirred up more and more, to make continual intercession to Him
for further blessing of your H. M. great and weighty affairs, and to crown
your Government with his gracious Regard, and long to preserv your H. M.
persons and posterities, for the honor of his Name, the good and comfort of our
Fatherland and his Church therein, and their everlasting welfare.


They of Friesland, Groninghen and the Omlands, presented their considerations
likewise Januarii 27o. in manner as follows.

Considerations and Inclinations of the Province of Friesland, touching
Religion, the Union and the Militia.
High and Mighty Lords!
THe Lords Commissioners for the Province of Friesland, were much satisfied to
understand the Declaration, which their N. M. my Lords the States of Holland
were pleased to make in their Proposition, that their N. M. are resolved
entirely to preserv the Union in the manner as the same was framed at Utrecht
in the year 1679, and to maintein Religion, so as the same was agreed upon and
established in the year 1619, by the Synod of Dort.

Being that thence will follow, that all means then shall be taken in hand
which may conduce to the preservation thereof, and all such removed, as may any
way threaten it with labefaction; and therefore their Lordships, the
Commissioners of the Province of Friesland declare, as also formerly they have
declared, that Religion ought to be taken in the first and prime
consideration, and special care had, that the Popish Superstitions, increasing
daily more and more, may be prevented from spreading any further.

And upon this ground they refer it to their H. M. consideration, whether it
were not necessary for compassing hereof, that the joint United Provinces
should resolv upon a like harmonious uniform Course, not only of proclaiming
and publishing the Ordinances after the usual manner, but especially that the
substance and contents thereof may be put alike in practice throughout all the
Provinces, to take away at once that prejudicial diversity; when one Province
or member thereof does so much affect the repute of clemency above the other,
in sundry ways, as has been practiced much hitherto this long while.

In regard whereof the Province of Friesland should not think amiss of the 1,
2, 3, 5, and 6 Articles of the Provincial Advice brought in by their Lordships
the States of Holland, on the point of Religion.

But as concerning the 4. Article, and that which the Province of Friesland
moved besides the Execution of the Ordinances, the Pro^ince of Friesland is of
opinion, that the matter is not remedied as it ought, unless the Officers
appointed for the performance, were further engaged by a new Oath or
considerable penalty, and that every where in like manner throughout all the
United Provinces, and other parts resorting under them.

And concerning the Union, my Lords the Commissioners, recommend it to your H.
M. Deliberation, whether it were not expedient, nay necessary, that, for the
avoiding of diverse prejudicial inconveniences, as between the United Provinces
in general, so among the particular members thereof, every Province should
resolv to choose themselves a Stadtholder, as those of Friesland ever did,
although the place came to be vacant thrice within the space of a few years;
and the Province of Groninghen and the Omlands followed the like, yet lately,
since the deceas of the Prince of Orange, of blessed memory, doubtless not
without great reasons.

High Mighty Lords! The necessity of having Stadholders seems to have been
so necessary a Requisite at the framing of the Union, that they could discern
almost no issue at all, out of incident troubles and difficulties without it as
may be seen by the perusal of the 9, 16, and 21 Articles of the foresaid
Union; and though in the 9 Article these words are found [by Provision, or
Provisionally] and [now in beeing] as if the Stadtholder's deceasing, this or
that Member of the Union had liberty to choose another or not, at their own
good liking and pleasure; nevertheless it cannot be denied, by what is
contained in the first Article, but that the intent and aim has been to
establish an Alliance for ever to endure, and that therefore the means also of
its conservation, and the Persons, to support and underprop the work in
doubtful cases, should remain in like condition; and consequently, that in
humane affairs, naturally subject to manifold alterations, whence variety of
difficulties and differences may arise, there might be always as ready and
fit Physicians at hand to redress and cure the same.

And besides this the words [now in beeing] may very fitly be applied to the
words [United Provinces] and not be mean once of the Stadeholders; there
having been great hopes the^ that by reason of the Exervation of the
Pacification of Ghent, more Provinces would in time have com in; nor does the
Province of Friesland take the ^ords, [by Provision, or Provisionally] in that
sens that the appointing of Stadtholders should be by provision, as by way of
trial and assaie; but that their Sentence and Determination should
provisionally be executed, as the last words of the s^id Article do make it
appear sufficiently: and that this is the meaning also of their H. M. is
abundantly evident by the Resolution taken by them August 18, 1650, where the
very words [now in beeing] are explained by the words [in time] showing a
successive space of time, Tractum temporis successivum.

It is very true, the Provinces have with one Consent inserted this Precaution,
that, every one shall remain undisturbed in their Soveregintie. But as there
can be no Society erected, but the Contracters lose some liberty which they
had before the Contract, so neither can our Union lay hold on any effect
without each ones yielding so much of his Liberty to the Common Interest, as
is once held and determined necessary for the upholding thereof, and the
choosing of such persons, although some Province by the Deceas of theirs may for
a time be freed: it being always more advantageous to maintein that which
is safe and present, then what is new and dangerous; least by too much
liberty, even Liberty it self do perish.

To speak much of the point of Militia, the Province of Friesland hold's it
unseasonable as yet: nevertheless not to pass it by altogether, because the
Lords States of Holland were pleased to assert in their Proposition, that since
the constitution of the Peace it was needless to trouble our selves with the
choosing of a new Captain General, especially there being none left at present
of the House of Orange actually fit for it; The Province Friesland declare's,
that they are of opinion, that in time of Peace, War must be thought upon; and
that the nature of War require's it, if it shall be safely managed, to be
committed to one, both in regard of secret intelligences, without which none
can stand upon his guard, nor any thing be kept private enough for the
executing or preventing of Stratagems, whereof we have had many experiments;
and to be always in readiness upon any incident occasion; we especially at
this time, by reason of our doubtful peace with the King of Spain, who
continue's in arms still, hovering continually about our frontiers, and shall
never want for pretenses, if he can find an opportunity to break with us to
his advantage: for to begin a Deliberation about a General when the Enemy
shall be upon us will prove too late indeeds and the histories of our own age
can sufficienly show, what damage the Common wealth has formerly suffered on
such occasions, according to the old saying, Dum Romae deliberatur, perit
Saguntum; Whiles they consult at Rome, the enemies take Saguntum.

And put case there was none to be found of the House of Orange at present, fit
or capable to be General, yet there are those of the Stock and Stem-hous of
the Princes of Orange, whose Fathers, Brothers, Uncles, Kindred and Allies have
shed their blood for the welfare of these Countries, and themselves also at the
end of the War, have by exploits personally made it appear, what they were
ready and willing to live and die for.

And therefore to let those merits pass by unrewarded, or to die out and
exspire by process of time, and by little and little to translate the
acknowledgment due to them unto another family; this the Province of Friesland
cannot look upon, but as a matter of evil consequence, and what doubtless will
be strangely reflected on by many good Patriots and well-affected foreign
Lords and Potentates.

Wherefore they refer to your Hi. Mi. serious consideration, whether the
Dignity of Captain General might not conveniently be conferred upon the
present young*born Prince, quoad Titulum and honorem, fully to be invested
with it at his maturitie, with such instructions, as to your Hi. Mi shall seem
good to frame besides, and in the mean time settle such order for the
Lieutenant General, that the Difficulties which their Hi. Mi. mentioned
concerning this matter, may be avoided and always obviated; thereby to make
known to all the world, to the immortal glory of the House of Orange, that the
United Provinces had so much confidence in it, as to trust a well*ordered
Militia, requisite for the welfare both of Church and State, even to the shadow
of the same. The Province of Friesland, my Lords, is of opinion, that if your
Hi. Mi. will be pleased to weigh these their foresaid Considerations, the
following points of removing the Garrisons, and passing of Patents or
Commissions will much the sooner be agreed on.

Points of Consideration propounded in the General Assembly of the joint
United Provinces, by the City of Groninghen and the Omlands at the Haghe, Ao
1651.
High and Mighty Lords!
FOrasmuch, as upon the serious Desire and further instance, as of the Lords
the Ordinary Deputies here of the Provinces, so also in particular, of the
Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland, the joint Confederates of this
United State, being through God's gracious blessing met here together in such
a solemn manner, as never happened before, seem all of them to aim at and agree
in this, That the true Christian Reformed Religion, as the same is publicly
taught in the Churches of this State, and was confirmed and 'elucidated out of
the Word of God, in the National Synod of Dort, in the years 1618, and 1619.
and the Union and everlasting Alliance made at Utrecht, Anno 1579. and a
well-ordered Militia; these three things, unitedly together, are the
fundamentals of this State, and so conditioned, that any one of these being
less zealously taken to heart then the other, The Concord and consequently the
welfare of this State, must needs immediately exspect an irreparable flaw and
detriment.

The Lords of the City and Land therefore, viewing and well weighing, that the
present constitution of the times and the important affairs which sutably to
the undoubted presupposition of the foresaid 3 main points, are to be altered
or otherwise disposed in this your H. M. most solemn Assembly, do referr unto
your H. M. Consideration,

Whether these high Matters and Consultations, ought not to begin from the most
excellent and highest point of all, that is to say, from the true reformed
Christian Religion, and the uncorrupted public worship of God.

To make many words of the truth and efficacious operation thereof, will be
needless here. Only the Lords of City and Lands, would reminde your H. M* of
this ever undoubted Maxim, That all good gifts, blessings and prosperity of
these Countries and the Inhabitants thereof, must com from the great and
merciful God, who therefore ought to be worshipped and heartily prayed unto.

Whence we conceiv it very necessary, if in these high and important affairs
we would partake of God's gracious blessing, (without which all our
consultations will be abortive) to mind and take in hand the things
immediately concerning the sincere and true worship of Him, above and before
all other Worldly concernments.

And that not only by such words as these, Religion shall be maintained, even
if need require, with the mighty hand; that being formerly agreed upon by the
Members of the Union, but by a real maintenance thereof, in which behalf the
Lords of Groninghen and Omlands, refer to their H. M. consideration,

Whether there ought not Vigorous means be provided by the joint Provinces, to
the end, that throughout them all, though in each, by themselves, and in all the
associated Countries and Towns, effectual courses may be taken, as well as
unanimous Resolutions past and Ordinances published, for the restraining,
suppressing and punishing of Popish Conventicles, which do daily so encreas in
Number and insolency, that without rigorous and present proceedings against
them, this State cannot but incurr great danger.

Consequently also, that the Seminaries of this Popery, that is to say, the
places or Schools, where the Youth from their infancy are nourisht up and
embibed, like a new earthen pot, with those abominable superstitions, may de
facto, be put down and abolished; they having hitherto been suffered and
continued in this State, not by connivance only* but openly and daringly, to
the great grief of many faithful Patriots.

That withal there be to this end, upon all events a ready moderation and
means devised against the unlimited coming in of the Popish Clergy, who do not
only most freely and frequently resort and convers in the countries, but
likewise by their subtilties and envenomed insinuations seduce the younger sort
from the true worship to follow them: nevertheless, that the same be don in
such manner, as the treaty of peace will permit; and besides this, that the
other sects or separates, however they be called, be indulged no more liberty
of exercise, then the very same, they had from the beginning, and no other;
though none shall be troubled in his Conscience about private opinions.

That the Ambassadors and public Ministers of Foreign Princes and Potentates
shall suffer likewise no sermons or other Church Service in their houses, but
in the language of their own Lords, and Masters, and admit none to them but
those of their own train and family.

And that the civil reformation in the Mayerie of the Bosch, and such like
other places, be most seriously taken to heart.

Now concerning the second Point, being the Union and everlasting Alliance of
this State; because your H. M. do with one consent and upright zeal accord, that
the same shall be kept and cultivated bolily and inviolably, so as it was
concluded on and published at Utrecht Jan. 29. in the year 1579.

Therefore the Lords of the City and Lands would desire your Hi. Mi. seriously
to ponder, whether all the consultations in these high and weighty affairs, as
well Civil as Military, ought not to be regulated, according to the sens and
contents of the Union aforesaid, it being an everlasting alliance, and a
confederacy which cannot be receded from.

Wherewithal their N. M. should take it for granted, that the least, yea no
alteration thereof at all is doubtless the best; if so be your Hi. Mi. shall
judge that the present constitusion of this state can permit it, which their N.
M. conside, they may in this behalf.

Hereupon, passing by the Civil administration of every Province apart, who are
to be left respectively to their own Sovereinty, with restriction,
nevertheless of the said sovereigns in behalf of the United Bond as joint
interest, The Lords of the City and Land, should conciev, under correction of
your Hi. Mi. further advice and consideration.

That all and the whole Civil Administration of this State, is most exactly and
curiously settled therein, according to that time.

For the 1. and 16. Article thereof, does say in plain terms, how and in what
manner the differences and questions arising amongst the Provinces, the Cities
and Members thereof, about their privileges, rights etc. (as the text run's)
shall be determined or taken away.

Insomuch, that for to shun and prevent most pernicious innovations in our
State, all unexspectedly arising questions and differences in matters, there
specified, ought to be left there, where, and according as the same Article
dictate's.

But in case there arise Discrepancie and jarring among the Provinces about the
conduct and managing of this United State and matters depending and
consectarie, the 9th Article says, In that case all is to be regulated by the
conclusion of the most-voting Provinces.

And whereas, the making of Peace or Truce, waging of War, and raising of
contributions in the behalf of the Generality and the State united, are
matters of very great weight and consequence; Our forefathers agreed, that
therein the plurality of Votes, should have no place, but things should be
don, by the common and unanimous Consent of all the Confederacy.

Our Forefathers considered well enough, that the diversity of persons,
whereof the Government of this State consisted, and yet does, would bring with
it diversity of humors, and consequently cause at last discrepancie of opinion,
even in weightiest matters.

And herein also they have thought upon wholesome means, against the evil thence
to be feared, agreeing, that the difference risen in that behalf, should be
referred to the Lords Stadtholders of the United Provinces, in the last named
Article.

It is true indeed, that the said Article add's these terms, by provision or,
provisionally, and now are at this time being.

But the Lords of the City and Lands desire your H. M. seriously to consider,
whether notwithstanding such clauses, all differences arising from the grounds
aforesaid, ought not still be left at the submission there set down.

First, because the same provision was never cancelled or altered yet by any
other order of the joint Consederates.

In the second place, because the 24 Article of the said everlasting League and
Union says in plain and downright terms, that the Lords Stadtholders which
now are, or shall com hereafter, etc. shall make promiss by Oath, to follow and
observe all and every Article in particular.

To which end, besides this, there ought to be likewise applied the unanimous
Resolution, taken after mature Deliberation, August 8/18 1650, together with
the Instruction of the Council of State.

Furthermore the Lords of the City and Land are desirous to propound to your
H. M. herewithal, being the Articles of the Union ordinarily speak of ordering
or settling things by the Generality, and the United Provinces; and more then
manifest, that the said Confederated State, that is to say, the United
Provinces, cannot always be assembled in Body;

Whether it be not therefore very necessary, that exact and pertinent Orders
may be framed and established for the Government of the Generality, in
absence of the respective voting Provinces.

And that the Deputies or Commissioners to be appointed thereunto, be
autorized not by Provincial, but by a General and unanimous Instruction of all
the Provinces together.

That the same shall have an eye to whatsoever the joint Provinces have
referred unto them, that is to say, to the Generality, and dispose therein as
according to the extent of their instruction shall be fit and requisite for
the Common welfare.

Coming now in order to the third point, viz. that of the Militia; That the
foresaid Deputies or Commissioners of the respective Provinces, shall, with the
advice of the Lords Stadholders or Council of State, have the direction of the
Militia, and matters depending, such as are the removing or sending forth of
Garrisons in great or small bodies, out of one Province into another, for the
securing of Fortifications and Frontiers, etc. as the Union hold's forth
throughout.

Safe notwithstanding the Lords the States and the Stadtholders of the
respective Provinces, each their own peculiar power, dignity and authority
within themselves, in matters of Militia and dependant thereon, and the
disposing of the forces within their respective Provinces, placed there for the
securing thereof.

They having the liberty in cases of necessity and conveniencie to place and
displace, encreas or diminish them by their own Commissioners for the service
of the Province.

And to take and frame such orders and courses about the Military Discipline
and Jurisdiction, as either they have already, or shall find good and suitable
to the constitution of their Provinces.

That the respective Provinces shall likewise retein to themselves the absolute
bestowing of all higher and lower Offices of War, in such Regiments and
Companies of either Foot or Horse, as shall by repartition be charged upon the
Provinces, and do receiv their Commissions from them, provided only they take
the Oath of Fidelity, to be true to the Generality.

As likewise that the disposing of the Comm^nderies, Major ships, and the like
c^arges coming to be vacant in the Towns and apperteining Forts of the
respective Provinces, shall remain to the respective States where they happen
to be vacant, to do therewith as shall seem good unto them.

Moreover, that the Deputies or Commissioners of the respective Provinces to
be appointed as is aforesaid, shall have the chief authority over, and
managing of the Sea*affairs, with the advice of the respective Councils of the
Admiraltie; and in a word, power to do whatsoever otherwise, a General of this
State by Sea and land, upon incident occasion and emergencies of trouble and
danger is warranted and commanded to do, until such time as the joint Provinces
shall be agreed about a General for the service of this State.

By which occasion the Lords of the City and land do present to your H. M.
whether it is not highly necessary, and mightily important for the service of
this State, especially in regard of the great exigencie of secret
Correspondence or Intelligence, that the same (Generalship) be taken into
consideration with the first opportunity, and that for this end there be
first and foremost drawn up and settled a pertinent and rational instruction for
that Charge and Dignity.

And in case your Hi. Mi. inclination herein should light upon the person of
^the new born Prince of Orange, that this State may be provided with a
Lieutenant General, whereunto God has preserved (as their N. M. are confident)
very Capable Persons, of Illustrious Family* and such as have very well
deserved of this State.

Your Hi. Mi. know very well, that in times of Peace one must be mindful of
War, and that sudden cases and accidents suffer no long deliberations of
several Counsels, and may bring irreparable damage to the State.

And forasmuch as it is to be feared, that during these difficult and most
important Deliberations, this State will suffer in their Commerce at Sea (the
principal sinews of the Land) inestimable prejudice in their reputation and
credit, and an irrecoverable flaw in their Authority, unless there be in the
interim some vigorous means taken in hand against it; Your Hi. Mi. are desired
to consider and weigh well, whether the affairs of the Admiralties, so much out
of order, together with that of the West-Indie-Companie, near utterly decayed,
ought not to be most seriously looked unto, and the said Company, even during
these Deliberations, instantly and extraordinarily relieved as to the
principal, and put in state and condition again, of useful subsistence.

Those of Utrecht put in likewise at last their following Declaration to show
what Considerations they had; who, together with Zealand and Gelderland, made
it appear, they held it needless to have a Stadtholder and Captain General;
passing by the matter, or leaving it untouched.

Inclinations and Considerations of Utrecht.
High and Mighty Lords!
AS the cause of this Great Assembly and Solemn meeting was sad, by occasion of
the unexspected Deceas of his Highs the Prince of Orange, of immortal memory;
so it is comfortable again and very prais-worthie, that the United Provinces
agreed all so unanimonsly to assemble so strongly here, for to consider with
mature Deliberation of Counsels and mutual Communication, how the fourscore
years structure of this Republic so wisely and excellently devised and founded
by our Forefathers, may be kept standing and strengthened more and mores
wherein the pious zeal of the Confederates is very remarkable and laudable,
every one showing himself so ready and forward to put his helping hand to the
underpropping and upholding of the said ancient structure. Now as we seldom
see Bodies attein to any great age without some sickness and diseases, and those
though recovered, yet commonly leav some weakness behind; so very great and
good care must be had, least the Body of our Government fall into any relaps
or new diseas, and that fit preservatives and remedies may timely be applied
against them.

And whereas that which is necessary for the Conservation of this Body, may
fitly be referred to three main points, viz. the Religion, the Union, and the
Militia; the Lords the States of the Land of Utrecht have thought good to lay
open their inclinations upon each of them in particular, and accordingly to
present unto the aforesaid Grand Assembly of the United Provinces these
ensuing Considerations.

Upon the point of RELIGION.
I.
Their N. M. should hold it needful and expedient that the respective Provinces
should declare each of them, that they will keep and maintein steadfastly, no
other but the true Christian Reformed Religion, so as the same is taught at
present in the public Churches throughout these Countries, and was elucidated
and confirmed by the National Synod at Dort, Ao 1619.

II.
That the said Reformed Religion shall in each Province apart, and in the
Generalitie's behalf throughout the respective Quarters, resorting under the
Command of their Hi. Mi. be maintained by the power of the State of the United
Provinces, without suffering the least alteration to be ever made or allowed
in the same Religion, in any sort or manner, by any whosoever.

III.
Item, that the Sects and Separatists, being secluded and shut out of the
public protection, and only connived at, may be kept in a regulated order
and quiet, branding them against all exorbitancies; and likewise that such
Sects and Separates, shall be permitted and suffered no where else, but where
they are winked at and tolerated at present.

IV.
And that in like manner, the Ordinances published heretofore against the Roman
Papists, shall be and remain firm and steadfast, and be observed in their full
virtue and vigor, causing them to be punctually executed, according to their
tenor, without any connivencie or dissimulation, and strictly obliging the
Officers to the performance.

V.
Framing withal such orders and expedients against the licentious coming into
these Countries, of Roman Clergymen and persons in Orders, as can be made
without the least impairing or prejudice to the Treaty of peace.

VI.
That the Ambassadors likewise, and public Ministers of Foreign Kings, Princes
and Potentates, be held to this, not to suffer or permit, that within their
Houses or habitations, there be made any Sermons, preachings or other
administrations of religious worship, in ihe Netherlandish tongue; but to take
order, that the same be don in the respective languages of their Lords and
Masters; and besides, That neither to the exercising nor the assisting of the
foresaid Services there be employed or admitted any other person or people,
but those and such as particularly and properly belong to the family and train
of the said Ambassadors and public Ministers.

VII.
And lastly, That the wholesome Resolutions and Decrees taken and past at the
Generality, for the introduction of the Civil Reformation in the Mayerie of
the Bosch, and other Quarters of like nature, be once effectually and with all
possible speed and expedition, put in execution, in all the points and Articles
thereof; so that accordingly, there shall be no Baylifs, Justices,
Secretaries, Forresters, and other such like officers there any more
henceforward, but such as truly are, and show themselves indeed to be of the
said true Reformed Religion; provided nevertheless, that the particular Lords,
having any right and power to put in Officers within the said Mayerie, have
warning given them, and be seriously admonished, that within a certain
peremtorie time, to be perfixed, they themselves perform the same necessary
and required change and alteration of their present Popish Officers; or else,
that in default thereof at the perfixed time elapsed, the supply shall be made
by their Hi. Mi.

Touching the UNION.
I.
THat the Union shall religiously be maintained, in manner as the same has
been established at Utrecht, in the year 1579*

II.
As touching the Decision of incident Differences, it would be advised, That
in case the same should happen to arise among the respective Provinces in
General, for to decide and determine the same, there should be appointed three
of the Members in Government, and three Judges or Civil Lawyers; and they all
bound by oath, to pronounce what is right, without respect to their own
Province, and that in such a manner, that the said questions and differences,
shall be voyded and dispatched (if possible) within the space of six Weeks;
and then no further appeal, nor other exception (under what pretext soever) to
be admitted: and if the party condemned, after 2 or 3 summons made in the
name and behalf of the States General, shall not submit, or refuse to obey and
observe the sentence past, that then there shall be courses requisite taken
against the refusing; to the end, that the said sentence may prove effectual,
and not illusorie; provided only, that neither before nor after, there be auy
reprisals, or other actual attemts made by, in, or among the Provinces.

III.
If so be, that there happen any misunderstanding or difference betwixt two or
more Provinces, That the same shall be composed and determined by the other
Provinces not interested in the Questions; who shall be bound to do Right to
the parties or to make them agree, within a month, or shorter time, if need
require, upon the one or the other parties address or desire. And that which
the foresaid other Provinces or their Deputies do pronounce and doom, the same
shall be obeyed and yielded to, without any further plea or exception of Law,
Appeal, Relief, Revision, pretense of Nullitie, or any other evasion
whatsoever, to be propounded or admitted.

IV.
And if there should arise any difference or question among the respective
Members in the United Provinces, that therein that course shall be held and
followed, which is provided by the Union in that behalf.

Concerning the MILITIA.
I.
THeir N. M. should hold fitting, That the Disposing of the point of the
Militia, should be recommended to the Assembly of the States General; and
that with such Instructions, as shall be agreed on by the joint Consent of the
Confederates; or to the Council of State, with like Instructions, voted by
Provinces, and not heads.

II.
Well considering and weighing, whether it were not expedient for the State,
forthwith to frame an Instruction by joint consent of the Confederates,
whereupon in time of sudden need (to be judged of by the consenting Votes, of
at least five agreeing Provinces) a well qualified General may be made choice
of, best suiting with the service and prosperity of the State of the United
Provinces, to be over the Militia.

III.
That the respective Provinces, according to the Charge to be given to their
Deputies at the Assembly of the said Lords the States General, shall have* the
disposing of all the high and low Military Charges and Offices, which
respectively heretofore were disposed by their H* M. or his Highs to the
Charges of Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeant Majors, Captains of horse
and foot, and lesser offices, which his Highs absolutely bestowed and
conferred, without nomination of the Provinces.

IV.
As for the Companies of foot and horse, and such other Military offices and
emploiments, whereof his Highs had the choice, upon nomination of the pay
masters, That the same shall absolutely be disposed, by the respective
pay*masters or Provinces, to whom they are allotted.

V.
The places of Commanders and Majors in the Cities and Forts of the respective
Provinces, having Voice in the State and Generality, coming to be vacant, and
being necessary, shall be disposed and conferred, by the Provinces
themselves, according to the Charge, which those Provinces shall find good to
give unto their Deputies at the Assembly of the States General.

VI.
As also the Commanders in the Cities of the voicing Provinces aforesaid, shall
not use nor extend their Military Jurisdiction any further, then to matters of
neglecting or trespassing marches and Watches, going over to the Enemy,
deserting of Companies, or running away from the one to the other without
passport, together with such other excesses and delinquencies, as may happen
between the officers and Soldiers among themselves, and not further; insomuch,
that for all other matters and causes, whether Criminal or Civil, the Military
men or Soldiers whatsoever, shall be apprehendable, prosecutable and
executable, only, by the Civil or Criminal Judge in Ordinary, whose sentence,
if it be in matter of Debts or the like, for want or default of other goods
and means of satisfaction, shall be executed upon the wages of the party
condemned, according to the Order of the Land.

VII.
That the Governors places in Cities and Forts, having no Voice in the State,
such as are, Sluys, Berghen op Zoom, Hulst, Breda, the Bosch, Willemstadt,
Mastricht and Wesel; being void, or otherwise, shall be disposed of and
conferred by the respective Provinces, according to the Charge to be given by
them to their Deputies at the Generality.

VIII.
And that in like manner and order, the Commanderies also in the same as well
as in other Cities and places, not voicing in the State, shall be conferred
and disposed of by them.

IX.
Leaving, so far forth as hitherto may have been observed and practiced, the
disposing of the Majors offices, unto the Council of State.

X.
Provided always, that all the foresaid Charges vacant, be conferred upon fit
and qualified persons, making Profession of the true Reformed Religion, who
coming to be officers of War, shall together with all other persons govern
themselves, according to the order of the Land.

XI.
The giving of Patents or Commissions and remooving of Garrisons from one place
to another, Randevouzing of Leaguers, or sending forth of considerable Troops,
to places and upon occasions, such as the service of the Land may require, to
abide and continue in the disposing of the Lords the States General, according
to such Instructions, as their H. M. shall be pleased to frame by the joint
Consent of the Confederates; or, of the Council of State, upon the like
Instruction, to be voted by Provinces, not heads.

XII.
So that whatsoever and as often as any Change of Garrison is to be made, the
same shall be made known by Letters unto the Provinces, Cities and places
respectively, where the said Companies are to march through, or to assemble: to
the end, that the same Provinces and Cities respectively, may take good order
accordingly for these marches and campings.

XIII.
Provided withal, that the particular Government in the respective Provinces
shall have liberty (when need require's) to transferr Companies within their
Province from one place to another, by Patents or Commissions of their own,
saving the Frontier-places hereafter to be expressed; And the Officers of the
said Companies shall likewise be bound to obey them; and present advertisement
shall duly be given thereof, unto their Hi. Mi.

XIV.
As further also the Companies presently lying in the respective Garrisons, and
hereafter to be laid there, shall be obliged to make oath to the Lords the
States and Magistrates of the Provinces respectively, according to the seventh
Article of the Union, in conformity to the form already made, and yet to be
made; that which shall likewise be performed in the Country unto the Chief
Officer thereof, if need should require at any time, to lay any Companies
there, whether for the securing of the streams and Rivers, or for other causes.

XV.
The secret Correspondencies or Intelligencies, both within and without the
Land, to continue with the Lord*s the States General, or Council of State, with
instructions to be given them, such as shall be agreed on by the joint
Confederates; and to be managed by such persons, as they shall find
requisite, in most secret manner, to the best advantage of the service of the
Country, and with as much frugalitie as may be. Nevertheless if the Council
of State shall be thought fit to be authorized with the foresaid
Intelligence, that their Instruction, in that behalf, shall not be Voted by
the heads, but by the order and Session of the United Provinces.

XVI.
Giving their H. M. further to consider, whether they shall not find it
necessary and useful for this State, to charge all Military Officers of horse
and foot, out of hand, to repair to their respectively appointed Garrisons,
there to wait upon and exercise their respective charges and offices, according
to their several Commissions; as also to frame convenient Orders against the
foresaid Officers absenting themselves from their respective* Garrisons, for
time to com.

XVII.
Conceiving, that the Garrisons of the Frontier-Towns and Forts, ought to be
furnished with Companies of different Repartitions or Provinces; and that they
are to be changed from time to time, so as the same shall be found requisite
to be most serviceable and advantageous for the Land, according to the several
occasions and occurrences of affairs.

XVIII.
That there ought likewise Orders to be made, that the Captains keep their
Companies complete, and give the Soldiers their full pay; care being had,
that the Captains also themselves be precisely paid, and freed from
unnecessarie charges.

XIX.
Giving moreover unto their H M. to consider, whether in these occurrences it
were not fit to renew the Oath formerly taken by those of the Militia or
Souldieris.

XX.
Lastly their N. M. should also incline, and hold it very necessary, that by
occasion of this Assembly of the Confederates, good Orders were settled, for
the maintenance, subsistence and redress of the West-Indie Company, judged to
be one of the principallest Pillars of this State.

XXI.
All which foresaid proposals here presented, being the Considerations and
Inclinations of the Lords the States of the Land of Utrecht, and made without
prejudice to any other; their N. M. do reserv to themselves the power and
freedom of adding hereunto, or taking from, or altering in it, what they shall
hold needful and expedient.

XXII.
Judging likewise, that the Conclusions of this present General Assembly,
ought, according to the 24 Article of the Union, to be solemnly sworn by the
respective Confederates, for the more engaging of them to observe and keep the
same.

Those of Holland seeing their Proposition traversed in several points by the
Considerations of the other Provinces, especially by those of Friesland and
Groninghen, with the Omlands; they held themselves obliged to justify their
Aslertions; the which they endeavored to make the more savorie by particular
Conferences and Addresses here and there.

In the Great Assembly they caused a certain* long Deduction to be produced
and read, and the same to be elucidated at intervalls by word of mouth;
chiefly concerning the Militia; showing, what power was given from the
beginning to the Council of State; then to the Captain General of all the
Provinces, and also of every Province apart; alleging to this end sundry
Instructions, as of the Captains-General, so also of the Council of State and
the Commissioned Counselors of the respective Provinces.

Holland's intent was to prove thereby, that the State in general, and the
Provinces in particular, especially Friesland, and the City and Lands had
still been very wary and careful from the beginning to preserv their Freedom,
and not absolutely to part with the sword out of their fist for to give it to
another.

They might easily have said in plain and downright terms, We are Sovereign
in our Province, and over our purs: if heretofore we yielded something to our
Stadtholder, or Captain General, that is past and gone; we reassume it now to
our selves* it is escheated back again unto us by Death, which paie's all. God
Almightic has returned it into our own hands. And if the Danish High-Steward
Ulefield, being at the Haghe in the year 1649, had reason to say, When our
King is dead, we have not only power to choose whom we will, but likewise to
choose none at all, and to remain Musters our selves; Holland had far better
ground to say so; Nevertheless, they made use of no such argument, contenting
themselves with allegations of the old and former ways and manner of
Government, kept and used in these Countries since the Change.

Here fallows the Deduction of Holland, presented Januarie 30.
A Deduction presented in the name and behalf of the States of Holland, at the
General Assembly of the States of the United Provinces extraordinarily met at
the Haghe, serving for to justify their N. Gr. M. Assertion in the point of
the Militia, and matters depending thereon, formerly made known to the foresaid
Assembly.
Their Assertion being comprehended in these following Articles.
FIrst, That their N. G. M. considering that of old, and from the beginning of
the Wars, the governing or managing of all Military affairs, concerning the
Generality, was referred and committed to the Council of State; they are of
opinion, the same Government and the disposing of the Souldierie ought to be
left unto them, they following their Instruction as the same lie's before them,
or with such alterations and amendments, as sutably to times and affairs, shall
be thought good by the common Confederates to be made therein.

IIly That the States of the particular Provinces, or their Commissioned
Council, have right and power to transplace the Companies lying in their
particular Provinces, without any further address, as often as they shall find
it expedient; provided they abide within the resort of their respective
Provinces.

IIIly That if it shall be requisite to remove any Companies out of a Voicing
Province, the Council of State shall be obliged in that Case to desire the
same of the States of that Province or their Commissioned Council, that the
said States or Commissioned Council would be pleased to yield so many
Companies as the Council judges needful, adding thereunto the motive and
reasons thereof, and sending Patents withal or Commissions, with Blanks for the
Captain's Names, to be supplied and filled up by the States or Commissioned
Council of that Province; and that therewithal their own patent also be
joined; and that thereupon the desired Companies shall be yielded, unless the
said States or Commissioned Counsel of the Province had reasons to the
contrary, whereof they shall give present advertisement to the Council of
State, to judge of those reasons; and in case they be found insufficient there,
That upon the second Desire of the Council, the Companies lying in the
Province, and not being of their repartition, they shall be yielded; and
those of the repartition, no otherwise, then with consent and Patents of their
pay masters.

IVly That no Companies shall be laid into a voicing Province without express
Consent and Commission of the States of that Province, or their Commissioned
Counsel, and that the same course is to be followed also in the case of
Quarterings, Marches or Randevouzes.

Vly That as much as may be don, the Garrison Companies ought to be laid in
the same Provinces and Frontiers thereabout, from which Provinces the same
Companies receiv their pay, and that to this end, by joint advice of the
Members of the Union, certain Frontier-places be assigned to each Province, in
which respective Frontier places the foresaid Council of State, shall have
power with the knowledge of the Provincial Government to change or transplace
the Companies; and that the States of the Province, to whom the foresaid
Frontier places shall be assigned, or their Commissioned Council, shall have
power to do the same; as also to remove the Companies out of the said Frontiers
into their Province, and vice versa, out of their Province into the said
Frontiers, giving immediate notice thereof unto the foresaid Council.

VIly That the Council of State intending to take forth some Companies out of
the assigned Frontiers, they shall move their desire to the States or
Commissioned Council of the Province to which those Frontiers are assigned,
sending Patents along for that purpose, with blanks for Names, to be filled up
by the foresaid States or their Commissioned Council, or else to return their
reasons to the Council of State, of making difficulty for to be judged of by
them; and that upon the second desire (the reasons of making difficulty being
judged insufficient) the Companies shall be yielded. Provided nevertheless,
that for the more reciprocal content and quietness, there shall be made two
Lists, the one for besetting, the other for emploie; and that in case of
Invasion or sudden breaking in of the enemy, the Council shall have power to
take forth the Companies, standing in the List of employ, giving only
advertisement thereof to the States of the Province, in whose assigned
Frontiers they are situated, and causing the same to return to their former
Garrison when the danger is over.

VIIly That the bestowing or conferring of all Military Offices without
distinction, is in the disposing of the States or Commissioned Council of every
Province, to which their repartition does belong. As likewise the Conferring of
the Governments and Commanderies of all Cities, Forts and places in the
disposing of the Provincial Government in whose Territories they lie, together
with all things relating thereto, or condep^nding thereon. In like manner, the
giving away of the Military Charges, paid by the Generality, or where the
Generality had the disposing formerly; and the Commanderies of the places
resorting under the Generality, does absolutely belong to the Disposition of
the joint members of the Union.

VIIIly That the Militia or Souldierie shall be bound, besides the General
Oath to the Generality, to swear likewise in particular to the Province
wherein they shall be laid, and that of their Repartition; as also to the
respective Cities of the voicing Provinces where the Garrisons are to be laid,
and that according to the form already framed, or yet to be framed by the
Provincial Government.

IXly That at present to proceed to the Election of a Captain General over the
Souldierie, is judged by their N. G. M. to be useless and not to be
counseled.

All which points their N. G. M. thought good by this summarie deduction, to
elucidate a little, to the end that your H. M. ponderating the same in their
upright truth, they may discern and find, that here is nothing produced from
the particular interest of the Province of Holland and Westfriesland, but that
all this is framed and deduced out of old and new Resolutions, Acts and
Monuments taken and settled, as by the Members of the Union in general, so by
the State's-assemblies of every Province in particular, pertinently agreeing
with the ground and fundamentals of this Government, without any varying of or
receding from it.

And in the first place concerning the Assertion of their N. Gr. M. That the
governing or managing of all Military affairs, touching the Generality or
Union, of old times ever was, and consequently still ought to remain with the
Council of State; their N. Gr. M. cannot judge that the same can admit any
fundamental contradiction.

For besides that the Instruction of the said Council, framed by the joint
Confederates in the year 1588 speak's clearly in that point; there are many
which remember the practice thereof very well yet.

The Head or Title of the foresaid Instruction being plain in express terms,
That those of the said Council ought to govern and direct the affairs touching
the common state, the defense, conservation and union of the United Netherlands.

And if it should be judged that the matter is not sufficiently determined
there yet; their N. G. M. are confident, all the remaining scruple will be
taken away by the plainer expression in the 6th Article, saying, [And the same
Council shall dispose in the affair of War, and over the men of War, or
Souldierie, being in the Land's Service, causing their Commands to be
performed by the Governor General, the Governors of the Provinces, the Admiral
and other Officers every one in their places].

Insomuch that the foresaid Governors of the Provinces and Generals themselves,
must (following the contents of the 18 Article of the foresaid Instruction)
promiss to obey the Council of State, settled, or hereafter to be settled by
the States General.

So that the foresaid Instruction it self does speak about this very business
in more express and plainer terms then those are wherewith their N. G. M. have
formerly expressed their assertion.

As likewise the same Authority of the Council, does manifestly appear out of
the whole frame and tenor of the said Instruction, besides many other public
Acts and Resolutions, held needless to be rehearsed here.

And verily the matter it self of directing and ordering of War, and things
apperteining thereunto, is of that nature, that the same connot fruitfully, nor
so as the service of the Common safety and protection requires, be managed
elsewhere; no not by name in the Assembly of the States General; being that
there are sitting such, who being engaged by Oath to the particular Provinces
from which they are sent; and not to the Generality, may easily be so possessed
with the interest of their particular Provinces, that thereby the necessary
protection of the General Body of the State may com to be neglected and
prejudiced; for which reason Prince William, of blessed memory, great
Grandfather to the present Prince of Orange, seriously urged it in his time,
and brought it so far to pass also, that with the approbation of the joint
Confederates, the foresaid Direction was referred to such a College (to wit,
the Council of State) wherein the Deputies for the respective Provinces,
Members of the said Council, though not alike for number from each, in regard
of the different contribution and interest in the conservation of the General
State; yet are all of them engaged by Oath, to renounce all particular
Correspondence with either Province, Cities or private and particular persons,
in any matter or manner as might be prejudicial to the common good; and that
without any respect to the Province, or Cities where they were born or chosen;
or their own or any others particular profit; they being to have nothing
before their eyes but the glory of God, and the welfare and conservation of
the foresaid Land and general affairs of the Common*wealth, etc.

And that the said Council of State successively used and exercised the
foresaid power and authority, much more absolutely then the actual possession
for some years hitherto held forth, appears not only by their Register*books
and known Histories; but there are many likewise yet among us which remember
full well, that the said Council, the more commodiously to exercise the
foresaid authority, were wont to go forth themselves with the Leaguers, together
with the Generals, or at least to quarter in some places near hand them, to cause
them to execute their Commands for the servi^^ of the Land with the greater
promtitude.

For which end it is plainly set down in the 25 Article of the foresaid
Instruction, That the Residence of the Council shall be kept in a commodious
and secure place of the United Provinces, without being tied to any place
precisely; but they may gather and assemble where the service and common good
of the Land, especially the Direction of the affairs of War (note) does require
it.

So that it being now abundantly proved, that the Direction of Military
affairs, is by the States referred to the Council of State; and their N. Gr. M.
finding no reason, why a business firmly settled with mature Deliberation by
the Confederates, should be receded from; they are firmly confident, there
will be no further proof desired for the verification of their first point.

For the Justification of the Second, namely, That to the States of the
particular Provinces, or their Comission'd Counselors, does appertain the
right of transplacing, or causing to be transplaced, such Companies as lie
within their respective Provinces, without any further address, there shall be
laid down for a fundamental rule, that true Declaration of the States of
Holland and Zealand, made long ago in the year 1587, by their Resolution of
Febr. 6. That of all ancient times, and particularly under the Emperor Charles,
it has been in the Charge and disposition of the Governor and Captain General
of Holland, Zealand and Westfriesland, to take care that all the Cities and
strong holds of the said Countries might be kept in good security and
defense; and that by Articles and Instructions made with the Roial Majesty of
England, about the undertaking of the Sovereigntie of these Countries, it was
expressly resolved, that the besetting of Cities and holds with faithful
Garrisons, should remain in the Disposition of the Governors of the respective
Provinces, together with the States thereof or their Comissioners.

For application of which true fundamental Rule, their N. Gr. M. desire to
premise that which is evident and clear in it self, viz. That all that has
been don in former times in these United Provinces, and is don to this day in
Friesland, Groninghen and the Omlands, by particular Governors, or Captains
General of the respective Provinces, the same is purely and absolutely
Provincial and in effect the proper and peculiar fact of the respective States
or Countries, that gave those Governors or Captains General their Commission.

Thus then, it being clear and manifest, not only out of the forementioned
Declaration of the States of Holland and Zealand, but also out of many other
public Acts, that the besetting or garrisoning of the Cities and Holds, or
Forts in the Land, was ever left to the disposing of the particular Governors
of the respective Provinces, together with the States thereof or their
Commissioned Council, it must follow that the besetting of the Cities and Forts
in the respective Provinces has ever purely and absolutely, been and remained
in effect, the proper and peculiar right and fact of the States of the
respective Provinces, or their Commissioned Council.

Which is so much the more confirmed by the same Resolution of Feb. 6, 158^.
forasmuch as that it is not only said there. That his Excellc^e of Nassaw,
Prince Maurice of immortal mimorie, who was only particular Stadtholder or
Governor of Holland and Zealand, without having the Commission then of the
Generality, should have the disposing and managing of the affairs of War by
Land, in Holland and Zealand, and particularly the besetting of all Cities and
Forts of those Countries, by the Advice of the States thereof or their
Commissioners; But also that the removing or transplacing, the increasing,
deminishing or altering of the Garrisons of the Cities and Forts of Holland
Zealand and West-Friesland, should be don by the Orders of his foresaid
Excellcie of Nassaw, with the advice of the States forenamed, or their
Commissioners.

It being very considerable, that at the very same time the Earl of Leicester
had absolute Commission from the States General, as Governor and Captain
General, not simply of the leaguers or over the Souldierie only, without the
Voicing Provinces, so as the successive Princes* of Orange had their
Commissions of Captain General limited and circumscribed; but absolutely over
all the United Provinces themselves, which power and authority was never
conferred upon any one after his time.

Where observe an indubitable Argument arising hence, That all the removing or
transplacing of the Souldierie or Garrisons within the Respective Provinces,
made by the successive Princes of Orange, was performed by them, not in the
Quality of Captains General of the Souldierie of the United Provinces in
General, but only in quality of Stadtholders, Governors or Captains General
of the respective Provinces in particular.

For, if even in these times, when there was a Governor and Captain General of
the United Provinces in general; the changing of Garrisons within the Provinces
of Holland and Zealand was made by the Governor or Captain General of the said
Provinces in particular, (as the same appears by what was showed before to
have been don in Leiecester's time by his Excellcie Prince Maurice) how much
more then must needs the changing of the Garrisons, in times when the
Commissions of Captain General extend's only to the Souldierie or Camps and
Leaguers of the Generality, be don or made, by the Governors or Captains
General of the respective Provinces in particular, that is to say, though by
such persons, who together were Captains General over the Souldierie in
general, and Captains General of several Provinces in particular, yet no
otherwise then in the foresaid latter Quality, and not in the former.

As also (another evident and palpable token) the Princes of Orange, having
been Captains General, for the Generality over the Souldierie, that was in the
Lands service, would otherwise have had power likewise, to remove or transplace
the So^ldierie in those Provinces, where they were not Stadt holders or
Governors particular, which how far it was from being so, the public
generally and known practice of Friesland, sufficiently shows, serving also
for a singular and manifest token, that it belong's and appertain's to the
particular Provinces, every one to be careful how to beset or Garrison their
Cities and Forts, and to have power of removing the Souldierie within their
Province from one place to another, for the same end; and that the respective
States thereof, might always appoint, and effectually also have appointed
their particular Captains General, who being appointed thus, had necessarily
therewithal, full pawer and and authority over the Souldierie (as the very word
Captain does imply) acknowledging no Superior therein, as the signification of
the word General make's plain and easy to be understood.

All this being confirmed, as by the former instance of Leicester and Prince
Maurice, together with the Example of Friesland, so especially by the ninth
Article for the Instruction of the Stadt-holder of Groninghen and the Omlands,
containing these formal words, That the Stadt-holder shall withal be Captain
General and Upper-Head (Note) of our Souldierie of horse and foot, which at
present is in this Province, or hereafter may com into it.

And this foresaid Right, having hitherto inviolably been practiced by all the
United Provinces, or every one of them; and the forementioned Distinction,
betwixt Captains General over the Souldierie of the Generality, and Governors
or Captains-General of the Provinces in particular, exactly and curiously
observed in all public Acts and Monuments, every one of the United Provinces
having always transplaced the Souldierie within their Province, either by
order of the States themselves, and their Commissioned Council, or by the
particular Governors or Captains General of their own Province, or by order of
the one, with the advice of the other, without ever giving or yielding any
Authority to the Generality or the Captain General thereof, in that behalf.

Which for to prove orderly, and to establish it past all contradiction, Their
N. Gr. M. desire in the first place it would be considered, That whatsoever is
committed or given in charge to the respective Stadt-holders, Commissioned
Counsel or deputed States, by Commission or Instruction from the States,
Countries, or Plenipotentiaries of the particular Provinces; The same cannot
be any other, but the private and peculiar Right of the same respective
Provinces, whose States have framed the said Instructions, or given such
Commissions. As likewise the respective Provincial States or Plenipotentiaries,
can neither by Instructions, Commissions or any otherwise dispose of things
belonging to the Generality, or such as do not absolutely stand under the
arbitrarie power of the particular Provinces.

Whence it must needs follow, That, forasmuch as the particular States of every
Province have by Instruction or Commission, given in charge to their
Stadt-holders, Governors or Captains General, or also to their Commissioned
Council, the removeing or transplacing of the Garrisons, within their Province;
the same removing or transplacing of Garrisons can be none other but the
private and peculiar right of the same Province.

Now that this transplacing of Garrisons and things depending thereon, is and
has been given in charge by Instruction or Commission of the States of every
one of the United Provinces, unto their Stadt-holders, or Commissioned Council,
or also to the one, with the advice of the other, Their N. gr. M. shall briefly
show the same by the summarie allegation of some Articles and passages taken out
of the foresaid Instructions and Commissions.

And first, to begin with the Province of Gelderland, the 5th Article of the
Instruction for their Countrie's Deputies, is very pertinent, where, it being
premised, that all Dispatches or Expeditions shall be issued in the Name and
Title of the Deputie-States of the Principality of Ghelders, and County of
Zutphen, there follow these express words, [excepting the commands to the
Souldierie, which shall be issued in the Name of his Excellency as
Stadt-holder (Note) with the advice or reference to the Deputies aforesaid.

Where it is worth observing, not only that it is ordained, the Commands or
Patents for the Souldierie are to be dispatched or expedited by the
Deputie-States of the foresaid Province; but also, that the same issuing forth
in the Name of his Excellency, his said Excellency is thereby considered
only as Stadt-holder of the Province, and not as Captain General for the
Generality.

And that which is more yet, the foresaid Deputie-States, are charged, by
Artic. 31. of the same Instruction, That they shall keep off all necessary
inquartering and through-marching without due Patents; such namely as are
mentioned in the foresaid 5 Artic. the same being yet further confirmed by the
Instruction for the late Prince William, in the year 1642. being received
Stadt-holder by the foresaid Province of Gelderland; the said Instruction,
Artic. 60. holding forth, That his Highs shall not give nor receiv given by
others, any Patents for through-marches, Randevouzes, or inquarterings, no not
in extreme necessity (note) but with precedent deliberation of the Court of
Gelderland, or with the Land's Deputies their cooperation and permission.

So that hereby it does most evidently appear, not only that it appertain's to
the Provincial Government of Gelderland to transplace their Souldierie within
their Province; but also that the same belong's to the said Provincial
Government, privative, absolutely and so far forth, that the Country has
enjoined their Deputies, not only to exercise and maintain the same right, but
also, in case any Soldiers came marching into the same Province, upon any
other Order, to keep off and hinder them de facto.

To this same end serve also the 5. 11. and 17. Articles of the Instruction;
whereupon Prince Maurice of immortal memory in the year 1590. item the 11. and
17 Artic. whereupon Prince Henry, in the year 1625. were received
Stadt-holders of the foresaid Province, wherein there are especially
observable, the said 11th Articleimporting, That the Stadt-holder be not
permitted to put any Garrison into the Cities without the fore-knowledg and
consent of the respective Magistrates; and the said 17th Article, ordaining,
that if his Excellency shall not be within the Country, the Government shall
be exercised by the Landship or Land Deputies, to whom the Souldierie shall
be bound to yield as perfect obedience as to his Excellency himself.

As for the Provinces of Holland and Zealand, over and above that which has
been amply deduced in this behalf out of their forecited Resolution of Feb. 6.
1587. there is a very pertinent passage in the instruction for the Commissioned
Counsel of their N. Gr. M. made in the year 1590 and contained in the 38th
Article thereof, where it being first ordained in general, that the said
Commissioners should issue forth all their Dispatches or Orders, under the
Title of the Commissioners of Holland and West-friesland, there are afterward
by way of Exception subjoined these following words, safe notwithstanding the
Dispatches and Commands to the Souldierie, which they shall issue forth in the
Name of his Excellency, with advice of the Commissioned Counsel aforesaid.

As likewise in the later Instruction of the foresaid Commissioned Counsel of
the year 1623. Artic. 35. the same is ordained more straightly yet, even with
Exclusion of the Governor of the Province, That namely the Dispatches and
Commands to the Souldierie shall be issued in the name of the Lds the States,
with reference to the Commissioned Counsel.

It being also given in charge to the respective Stadt-holders of Holland and
Zealand, by the States of the said Provinces, in their Instruction Artic. 6.
together with the Deputy Counsel, to look to all the needful Garrisons,
security and protection of the foresaid Countries Cities, Forts, Ports, Waters
and Rivers thereof.

All which is yet further confirmed by the contents of the 5. 31. and 35.
Artic. of the former-cited Instruction of the Commissioned Counsel, and those
of the 5. 28. and 32. Artic. of their later and last cited Instruction.

In conformity whereof also the Patents within the Province of Holland, were
given and dispatched, in the former times by the foresaid Commissioned Counsel,
and confirmed with their Seal and Secretaries Signature, in the Name of the
Stadt-holders and Governors, with these express words inserted, with advice of
the Commissioned Council: whereof for example, there shall be a copy set down
here of a Patent, given and dispatched by the said Commissioned Council April,
170. 1595. word for word as follows.

Maurice, born Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassaw etc. Marquis of Vere, Flushing,
Governor and Captain General over Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, West-Friesland,
Zutphen, Utrecht, Over-Yssell etc. Admiral and General, By the advice of the
Commissioned Council of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, charge and
ordains by these Captain Strackman, to transport himself to the City of
Goude, and there to abide for a certain short time, till further order from his
Excellency. Don at the Haghe, under the Seal of the forementioned
Commission'd-Council. underneath stood, By his Excellency, according to the
ordinance of the Commissioned Council of the States of Holland and
West-friesland: and was signed, C. de Rechtere.

And although for some years hitherto, the last Stadt-holders may have past and
given some Patents of themselves, without the knowledge of the Commissioned
Council, it is considerable nevertheless, that the same being don by them, as
Stadt-holders and Governors particular of the said Province, and consequently
in the Name of the same Province in particular, and not in the Name of the
Generality, the Right of the Province is no whit impaired thereby.

Coming now to the City, Towns and Lands of Utrecht, there are diverse
pertinent passages in the Instruction for their Stadt-holders or Governors, to
prove what has been said before: and particularly the passage of the 11th
Article thereof, importing, that if it be found needful, any Garrison should
be put into the foresaid City or Towns, the same shall not be don, but by
the Patent of the Governor with consent of the States or their Deputies, under
a certain restriction, about the same Governor's absence, set down there more
at large.

As the same is yet further elucidated in the 13. and 14. Articles of the
foresaid Instruction.

The States of the Province of Friesland speak very clearly in the Instruction
framed for their Deputie-States, and especially in the 33. Article of the same,
in these words; Whereas the Plenipotentiaries are assured, that the Garrisons
have generally been transplaced and changed, by the sole command of his
Lordship (the Governor) and never with the advice of the Lords Deputies; and
the Plenipotentiaries judging, that the said transplacing of the Garrisons is a
principal point of the Government of this Country; (Note, that here the
transplacing of the Garrisons is said to to be a principal point of the
particular or Provincial Government of Friesland,) therefore they the
Plenipotentiaries do ordain their Deputies, to suffer no more henceforward, any
transplacing of Garrisons to be made otherwise, then with express consent and
advice of the said Deputies, etc.

It being very pertinent withal to this purpose, what is said in the end of
the 31. Article of the foresaid Instruction, namely, That the Captains and
Commanders having Companies under them, shall stand engaged to be ready for
the service and protection of the Country in all places and quarters, where
the same shall be appointed them by the Governor and Deputie-States; to pass
by diverse other places of the same Instruction, applicable to this purpose,
which their N. Gr. M. judge needless notwithstanding here to enumerate.

Only for further Confirmation thereof, let the 8th Article speak, of the
Instruction whereupon his Lp Count Henry of Nassaw whilom in the year 1632,
and afterward his Excellcie Count William, received the Government of the
foresaid Province, it being therein ordained, That the Stadt-holder shall
govern himself, according to the foresaid Instruction of the Deputie-States,
for so much as the same concern's his Person, especially about placing of
Garrisons, in which regard they must precisely observe the foresaid 33 Article
of the Instruction for the Deputies; provided always, that in the absence of
the Ld Stadt-holder, the Government of the foresaid Country shall remain in
the sole disposition or administration of the said Deputies.

Concerning the Province of Over-Yssell, it is plain, that the Respective
Stadt-holders of the said Province were by the States thereof entrusted with
power to transplace the Souldierie garrisoned within their Province, with
precedent deliberation of the States or Deputies, and to give due patents
accordingly; the said Stadtholders being moreover (to prevent their abusing of
that power) charged in the 11 Article of their Instruction, to bring no
garrison into any of the Cities, without the foreknowledg and good liking of
their respective Citie-Council and sworn Commons.

As also the same Stadtholder has given it him in charge in the same
Instruction, Artic. 7, To give no Patents for throughmarchings, randevouzes or
quartering, no not in extreme necessity, nor to receiv any patents given by
others, but with precedent deliberation of the States or their Deputies
autorized ^hereunto.

Which could be deduced with many more instances, as from the same
Instruction, so out of several other public Acts of the said States; but that
their N. Gr. M. do hold it needless.

For Conclusion only they will add here, touching the Province of Groninghen
and the Omlands, the contents of the 12 Article of the Instruction for the
Stadtholder and Captain General of that Province, prescribed by the States
thereof, importing, That the said Stadtholder, together with the Deputie-states
of that Province, shall change the Garrisons in such sort as shall be found
requisite for the protection of the said Province and the Commonwealth;
provided that the foresaid Deputies, in the absence of the Lord Stadtholder,
shall have power to transplace the Garrisons within the Province and the
Frontiers thereof themselves.

And this their N. G. M. are persuaded will suffice, and that nothing more can
be desired for the justification of what was said before and asserted, to wit,
That every one of the United Provinces in particular have always had and
practiced the transplacing of the Souldierie within their Circuit, either by
their Deputy States, or by their Stadtholders with the advice of them, without
address to the Generality, even to this day.

And forasmuch as the foresaid transplacing of the Garrisons is a principal,
yea the most principal point of the Sovereigntie and Rights of every Province,
as the Lords of Friesland also do avow in express terms, in the before alleged
33d Article of the Instruction for their Deputy States, And that every member,
together with every particular person of this Assembly, is bound by solemn
Oath to stand up for, defend and maintein the sovereigntie and rights of every
one of these United Provinces, and of his own respectively;

Their N.* Gr. M. are very confident, that your Hi. Mi. weighing the reasons
deduced above, will not only yield that each Province in their precinct, shall
maintein this peculiar right of theirs, of transplacing the Souldierie within
their Province, but also in case of necessity, help to uphold and maintein the
rest of the Provinces in the same right.

All which premised thus, there result's from it the Justification of what
before Artic. 3. was asserted: for this being sure, that the care of the
common defense and union, together with the managing and ordering of the
Military affairs of these Countries in general, does belong to the Council of
State, it is without all contradiction, that the said Council, for the same
end, must take care, that all places which may happen to be in danger of
being invaded or overrun by any foreign forces, for preventing and
withstanding the same, may have sufficient forces sent into them; and it being
proved above, that the Supreme Authority and Command over the Souldierie within
each Province does appertein to the particular States thereof, or to them whom
the States absolutely have autorized thereunto; there remains nothing, but
that the said Council standing in need of taking forth any forces out of a
Voicing Province, and being destitute of power to cause the same to march
within the Territory thereof, do address themselves by way of Desire to the
Provincial Government there, that they would be pleased to yield the forces
desired to march. And for that their N. Gr. M. are of opinion, that the
foresaid Provincial Government is to join their Patent or Commission, they
conceiv the reason deduced before, convincing enough, That, namely within the
Soveraigntie of every or any Province, no souldierie or military forces may
march, without order or patents and Commissions from the States thereof, or,
such, as by the same State shall thereunto be qualified. And that therewithal
there ought to be provided also a patent from the Council, for as much as the
forces being past the bounds of the Province whence they com, and forth their
jurisdiction, the power of the foresaid Provincial patent come's to ceas then,
and the patent of the Council, must supply the warrant for the forces coming
upon the ground of the Generality.

And although, according to the foresaid known Right, the States of that
Province, whence the forces are desired to be taken forth, are not bound,
stricto jure, to yield the same; nevertheless, partly by reason of the solemn
promises made at the Treaty of the Union, to help to protect one another with
body, goods and blood against all violence, and partly for conveniences and
expedition's sake; Their N. G. M. thought good to proceed herein with such an
expedient and temper, as is set down in the 3. Article aforesaid.

And it is worth singular observation about that third Article, That all that
is laid down there, and especially the transmitting of the Patents with blanks
for the names, is in every point agreeing, with the manner of proceeding,
observed and practiced in those Provinces, which had their particular
Governors, and such as were not withal, Captains General of the Armies or
Leaguers; and particularly in the Province of Friesland, out of which when the
Council of State had a mind to take forth any forces, they were always wont
to address their desire for that end, to the Stadt*holders or Governors
particular of that Province, transmitting their patents with blanks for names,
which the Stadt-holders or Governors particular, by advice of the States, or
their deputies, filled up, and added thereunto their own Provincial patent.

Now* concerning the Justification of the Fourth point, set down above; That
namely no Forces may enter, or march through any Province, without express
consent and patent of the Provincial Government thereof; besides that the same
sufficiently and naturally fallows from the Grounds already laid; it is a
thing expressly settled and ordained in every one of the United Provinces, by
their respective States-autoritie in each.

Wherein the States of Gelderland went so far, That in the before-cited 31.
Article of the instruction for their Deputies, They charge them, De facto, or
actually to forbear all necessary inquarterings and thorow-Marchings without
due patents, to wit, without patents given by the said Deputies in the name of
the Stadt-holder, and by advice or in relation to the Deputies aforesaid; so as
the dispatches and expeditions of patents and Commissions were orderd and
regulated in the 5. article of the said Instructions.

As for the States of Holland and Zealand; they declare very formally in this
behalf in the beforementioned Resolution of Feb. 6. 1587. in plain words, That
in the open country of Holland, Zeland, and West-Friesland, no forces of foot
or horse, may attempt any inquartering, or thorough-marchings, without patents
from his Excellcie given by adviceof the foresaid States, or their Committees.
(Note) not in the open country: Ergo much less, in fenced Cities sorts or
strong holds of the Provinces.

The like is easily to be showed to have been settled by the Provinces of
Utrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssel, Groninghen, and the Omlands; as in the
Instructions given to their Deputie-States and Stadtholders, so also by several
other public Acts of the States; which their N. G. M. (confident the former
deduction will be sufficient) judge needless here to repeat, or to make further
instances of more particulars. There is applicable unto this the 7 Article of
the Union, in the beginning whereof it is established, That the Frontier-Cities
and others also, necessity requiring it, shall be bound at all times to receiv
such Garrisons as the United Provinces shall find good, and ordain by the
advice of the Governor of the Provinces, where the Garrison is to be laid
(where note by the way, that it presupposed the garrison as coming from
another Province).

But it is specially observable, how this is bounded with the words, necessity
requiring it; for there being no express and urgent necessity, this same
might not be don simply by the Governor's advice alone, without the express
Patent from the Provincial Government, as has been proved before at large; so
that only extreme necessity requiring Expedition, seems to dispense therein.

Besides that the foresaid Article of the Union has received a nearer and
clearer interpretation since, by the general practice observed and more
elucidated in all the United Provinces their respective forementioned
Instructions, set down and established by the States.

Proceeding then to justify the foresaid fifth and sixth point, touching the
assignation of Frontier-places, and the transplacing of the Forces in the same;
thus it is, that however the Souldierie, according to the eighteenth Article of
the Instruction of the Council of State about the form of swearing the
Souldierie, and likewise according to the foresaid Resolution of Holland and
Zealand of February 6, 1587, is bound among other things to be true and
faithful to the States of the Province, to whose Repartition they belong for
payment, and faithfully to serve and to obey them, and that consequently it
might justly be asserted, that the Souldierie cannot be transplaced without
Patent or Commission of their Paie-masters; Their N. Gr. M. nevertheless have
thought good, for accommodation's sake, not to stand upon their utmost Right;
but only to motion, that certain places, belonging to the jurisdiction of the
Generality, may ac^ording to the good liking of the members of the Union, be
assigned to the respective Provinces for Frontiers, and that according to the
known practice observed in diverse Provinces, the Souldierie may be disposed of
and laid, as much as may be don, in garrisons within those Provinces and the
Frontiers respectively assigned them in the repartition or allotment of which
Province they are respectively divided for their pay.

Which motion of their N. Gr. M. pertinently agree's with the eleventh Article
of the Instruction for the* Stadtholders of Groninghen and the Omlands,
importing, That the Stadt*holder of the said Province, shall endeavor by all
possible means, that all the Souldierie, standing on their Repartition and
Pay, may be laid in garrison within the foresaid City and Sconces of that
Province, or belonging to the protection thereof.

It appearing likewise by several Acts and Monuments, that other Provinces, and
particularly the Province of Zealand and Friesland had their out-Frontiers and
out Forts assigned them, where the same Provinces had right and authority over
the forces therein; and notably, by Article 34 of the Instruction for the
Deputies of Friesland, saying, That his Lordship and the said Deputies,
forasmuch as concern's the Policy or Civil Government, besetting and keeping
of the Sconces in the O^lands, Belingerwolderland, and other as well out-land
as inland Sconces, and that which depend's thereon, are to regulate themselves
according to the Resolutions of the Plenipotentiaries taken in that behalf
November 12, 1593* And again the fourth Article of the Instruction for the
Stadholders of Friesland, importing* That the said Stadt-holder with the
Deputies, are to take good care and heed to the Out-land forts and holds,
standing under their authority and provision; and more pertinently yet by the
15 Article of the Instruction for the Stadt*holder of Groninghen and the
Omlands, showing, That the said Stadt-holder shall likewise be engaged, to
endeavor to his utmost, that the said Provinces be defended and maintained in
the authority and right belonging to them, over the Sconces Bellingerwolde,
Bourtanye, and Couvorde, or such others as may hereafter be raised in the said
Province for its protection.

And though it be evident again that the States of the respective Provinces,
their Deputies or Stadtholders, have the right, that they may absolutely
transplace the Garrisons lying in their out-Frontiers; whereof the pertinent
Decision is to be seen in the 12 Article of the foresaid Instruction for the
Stadtholder of City and Land, in these terms, Provided, that in the absence of
the Lord Stadtholder, the forenamed Deputies may transplace the Garrisons
within this Province and the Frontiers thereof; (note thereof) yea so far, that
the respective Provinces are wont to exercise the accustomed Military
Discipline in their foresaid out-Frontiers over the Souldierie there in
Garrison, as appears by Article 31 of the Instruction for the Deputies of
Friesland, saying, That the said Deputies ought to exercise good Discipline
together with the Governor, or in his absence, themselves alone, in all the
Sconces lying as well without as within the said Country.

All which is further confirmed yet by the 33 Article of the same Instruction,
and diverse other public Acts, Monuments and Resolutions, for brevities sake
past by here.

Therefore their N. G. M. judged it expedient, that the proceeding therein
might be moderated, as is set down above in the 5 and 6 Article; partly for
the better accommodation and conveniencie of things, and partly in respect that
their N. G. M. held it more serviceable for the good of the Land.

And thus their N. Gr. M. persuaded, that the manner and right of transplacing
the forces, before asserted, is abundantly justified; they com now to the
Seventh Point, to wit, That the giving or bestowing of all Military Charges
indifferently stands in the disposing of the States of that Province, to
whose Repartition they belong, and the conferring of the Governments and
Commanderies of all Cities, Forts and places in the disposing of the Provincial
Government, in whose Territories they are situated.

And though this same do necessarily follow from the Maxims formerly laid
down; for it being true that the particular Provinces ever kept and retained
the supreme authority over their Souldierie, and the Sovereign jurisdiction
within their Territory; it fallows naturally and of it self, that theirs also
is the right of disposing of the Military Charges and Commands in such manner
as is ass^rted before; nevertheless their N* G. M. are willing, for more
abundant satisfaction, to add and show here, That every one of the United
Provinces thus understood and settled it by State's authority.

The Province of Gelderland in the Instruction for their Stadt-holder, Artic. 4.

Holland and Zealand in the forementioned Resolution of Febr. 6, 1587; and
because the words thereof are so considerable, it will not be amiss to set them
down: That all the great Commanders, Colonels, Superintendents and Captains
already put in Garrisons, or which may be put in hereafter, in the Cities of
Holland, Zealand, and Westfriesland, shall receiv Commission from his
Excellency (namely, as Stadtholder and Governor of the same Provinces) and be
engaged by Oath to the States of Holland and Zealand, together with his
Excellcie, for their fidelity and obedience; and such as shall be unwilling
to do it, to be cashiered.

The Province of Utrecht in the 13 Artic. for their Stadt-holders.

And so likewise Friesland in the Instruction for their Stadt-holders, Artic.
5, 6, and 7, together with the Instruction for their Deputie-States Artic. 31,
35, and 37. And forasmuch as the words of the foresaid 5 Article of the
Instruction for their Stadt-holders are very pertinent and remarkable, they are
following here in their own terms: All Militant Offices standing in our
Repartition and Pay, shall indifferently every one of them, be disposed of by
the Stadt-holders and our Deputies, by most voices, and in the absence of the
Stadtholder, by our Deputies alone.

Over-Yssell confirm the same in the Instruction for their Stadt-holder, Artic.
15.

Groninghen and the Omlands in theirs, Artic. 13. and 16.

And howbeit the Election of some Officers of the Foreign Nations were
absolutely, and without any precedent Nomination, disposed of by the late
Prince of Orange and his Predecessor or Predecessors; yet it cannot be
contradicted, but that the same was don, not by virtue of any right those
Princes had in quality of Captains General over the Souldierie for the
Generality, but only as allowed them by the States of those particular
Provinces, whereof they were likewise Stadtholders in particular; as also their
Highnesses in that regard never meddled with disposing of any such Foreign
Officers as stood in the Repartition of those Provinces which had their
particular Governors.

The substance of the foresaid eight Article, or the eight point formerly
propounded, is pertinently confirmed by the seventh Article of the Union; the
18 Article of the Instruction for the Council of State; the oft-mentioned
Resolution of Holland and Zealand of Febr. 6, 1587, the form of the Oath agreed
upon by the States of Holland and Zealand upon the 20 day of the same month
(wherein the swearing Souldierie, among other, make's this solemn promiss, To
be obedient to the States aforesaid, or their Commissioners, in what they
shall command them for the furtherance of the service and defense of the
foresaid Countries) together with the practice ensued and continued thereupon.

For the elucidation of the Ninth point above mentioned, viz. That their N. Gr.
M. are of opinion, that for the present it is needless and unadvisable to
proceed to the Election of a Captain General; They seriously desire and
earnestly pray your Hi. Mi. attentively to consider the distinction or
difference that is betwixt the Office of a Governor General on the one side,
and the charge of a Captain General on the other; both the one and the other
being twofold, namely either for the Generality, or for the Particular
Provinces each apart, as it was invested in former times, and in regard of
those particular Provinces of Friesland and Groninghen, where yet it is
invested.

And first, touching the Office of Governor General having been invested from
the Generality, his Authority extended over all the United Provinces, there
being yielded up unto him, powerfully and absolutely, (to make use of the
words of the Acts of Authorization, given by the States General, unto the Earl
of Leicester Januar. 10. 1586.) to command in the matter and point of War, and
that which depend's thereon, by Sea and Land, over all the foresaid Provinces,
Cities and Members thereof etc.

That on the contrary the Charge of Captain General, likewise invested from
the Generality, extended no further, then over the Souldierie Horse and Foot,
in service of the Provinces, appears by the Commissions given to the
respective Princes of Orange in that quality, by the States General.

Insomuch that betwixt these foresaid offices or charges there are to be
observed these ensuing remarkable differences.

First, that the power and Authority of the Governor General extended and
spread it self over all the United Provinces themselves, together with the
Cities and Members thereof, and the power and authority of the Captain General,
only over the Souldierie, Army or Leaguers thereof.

Secondly, that the Governor General of the United Provinces had the full and
absolute command over the particular Governors thereof, when as on the
contrary, the Captain General, had not any command in the world over the
particular Governors of the Provinces, within their respective Jurisdiction;
but those particular Governors, notwithstanding the Captain General appointed
over the Souldierie, for the Generality, having been themselves also Captains
General over the Souldierie lying within their respective Provinces, as the
same has sufficiently been showed before, out of their respective Instructions
and the constant practice of the Provinces, whose particular Governors were not
the same persons, that were appointed Captains General over the Souldierie, for
the Generality.

Thirdly, that the Government General of the Generality did not in effect
include the Admiralship of the United Provinces, there being given likewise to
those Governors General by their Commission the power fully and absolutely to
command the Admirals and Vice-Admirals; whereas on the contrary, the
Captain-ship General, and the Admiral-ship of the Generality, are two equal
charges, the one not being above the other, but of equal authority over the
Souldierie by Land and Water, respectively; wherefore also the Commissions of
the Captains general do not import (that which the Commissions of the Governors
General aforesaid, in that regard expressly comprehended) that the said
Captains General should have any command over the Admirals, howbeit, that
generally the Admiral-ship has been conferred upon the Captains General, as a
Charge apart, sometimes by one and the same, and otherwhiles also by separate
and distinct Commissions.

By all which it being abundantly manifest, what a palpable difference there
is betwixt the Government and the Captain-ship General, being both conferred
and exercised by authority from the Generality of those Countries; their N.
gr. M. will likewise briefly show, the distinct offices of the Captain General
over the Forces for the Generality, and of the Captains General appointed over
the Souldierie, for the particular Provinces; holding it needless to say any
more of the foresaid Government General of the United Provinces, the same
coming now into no consideration at all, being altogether extinct and
mortified in the times of the Earl of Leicester; or to show here the
distinction that is betwixt the Government and Captain-ship General of the
particular Provinces, forasmuch as those Charges were never combined together
in one and the same person.

Now then, it being heretofore fully proved, that the supreme authority over
the Souldierie, within the respective Provinces, has always appertained and
yet does at present, unto the Provincial Government thereof, or to the Captains
General of the particular Provinces, appointed by the same Provinces in the
manner abovesaid; it must needs follow, that the power and authority of the
Captains General of the United Provinces, appointed by the States General, in
quality as such, has extended no farther, nor indeed could extend any
further, then over the Souldierie Army or Leaguers, being without the
Voiceing-Provinces and in the Field, so as their own Commission shows likewise
plainly enough, insomuch, that the difference of the Charges of the
Captains-General of the Generality, and of the Captains General of the
particular Provinces consisted therein, that the former had the command, as the
true and proper Chieftain or Field-leader of the Leaguers or Forces without the
Provinces, and the Armies being in the Field, and the other had the chief
power and authority in the Militia and the conduct of War within the respective
Voicing-Provinces, by the advice of the States or their Commissioned
Counselors, for so much as concerned the security of each of these Provinces
apart.

The States General of the united Provinces, having discovered in what manner
the Earl of Leicester exceeded and abused the power of the Government General,
conferred upon him by themselves, they found good after, for the preventing of
the like inconveniences in time to com, to extinguish and mortify the said
charge, as also it has remained absolutely extinct and mortified to this day;
(so that, as was said before, the same ought not to be taken into any
deliberation at all) nevertheless the Provinces being engaged in so great a
War with the King of Spain, and standing in need therefore of a Field-leader,
or Chieftain of the Union, they agreed by advice, to choose his Excellence
Prince Maurice, of immortal memory, for Captain General over the Landforces,
and Admiral-General likewise over the Sea Forces; and after his Deceas the War
still continuing, they supplied the vacant place successively, by the employ of
their Highs Henry and William, both Princes of Orange: and now the War,
through God's gracious blessing being com to an end, and changed into a
glorious peace, their N. gr. M. are of opinion, that thereby those moveing
causes being com to ceas, and yet ceasing, it is consequently not only
needless, but likewise for sundry pregnant reasons, formerly deduced by their
N. gr. M. both by word of mouth and in the foresaid written proposition, both
disserviceable and unadvisable, to procced again to the Election of a
Captain General.

The rather, for that their N. Gr. M. besides that, cannot judge otherwise, but
that the direction of the Militia is at this present so well settled yet in
these Countries, notwithstanding the Captain General his Deceas, that even in
case of a sudden chance of War (which God Almighty in mercy keep off from
these Countries) there would be no necessity of proceeding to the Election of
a Captain General. The Militia or forces of these United Provinces being
provided yet with a fit Chieftain or Director for the Generality, the
Field-marshal namely, appointed by Commission, dated Julie 31, 1642, to be
over all the Forces Horse and Foot, in present service of the State, or such as
may be entered therein afterward.

The said Field-marshal having full power, authority and special command given
him in that quality of his, to command the said forces; and to bring and keep
them in all good order, rule and military discipline, and to use and emploie
them for the defense of the United Netherlands; the quarters, forts and places
thereof, according to the orders of the United Provinces in general and in
particular; to set upon the enemy, to annoie and disadvantage him: item, To
defend and protect the foresaid United Countries in general, and the Provinces,
Quarters, Cities, places and inhabitants thereof in particular against all
manner of force and violence, etc.

By which Commission their N. G. M. conceiv the Militia to be sufficiently
provided with a Chieftain, and the same Chieftain as well with all requisite
power and authority.

Nevertheless if your Hi. Mi. shall judge it to fall yet short of something,
their N. G. M. shall make no difficulty, that the same default may be
supplied, and the foresaid Commission amplified by common advice of the
Confederates, so as the state of affairs shall require.

All which deduced reasons and allegations hitherto their N. G. M. friendly
desire, may seriously be weighed by your Hi. Mi. being confident, your Hi.
Mi. will clearly thereby discover and discern, that the foresaid points and
deduction are not framed according to the particular interest of the Province
of Holland, but upon the fundamental grounds of Government, or absolute
Concord; and that therefore your Hi. Mi. will not only not accept against, but
much rather, for the rest, peace, welfare and common good of these Countries,
conform thereto in all the particulars.

Next day, Januarie 31, there were presented the provisional Considerations of
Zealand, upon the three main points; whereof, as of all the former in their
turns, copies were given to the Provinces, to see what they might have to say
or reply to it.

Provincial Considerations of the Province of Zealand, upon the points of
giving Patents or Commissions; of transplacing of the Garrisons and things
depending thereon, and of bestowing or conferring Military Offices.
THat the Conduct and Disposition over the Forces be left to the Council of
State, in conformity to their Instruction; only that the same be first
amended and amplified in some points according to the present constitution of
times and affairs.

That the States of the particular Provinces, or their Commissioned Council,
shall make use of their right and power in transplacing of the Companies lying
within their respective Provinces, without address to any about it, as often as
they shall think good and fitting themselves* provided the same be don only
within the limits of their respective Provinces.

That if it it shall be needful to draw forth any Companies out of a voicing
Province, in that case the Council of State shall write to the States of that
Province, or their Commissioned Council, that they would be pleased to yield
so many Companies as the Council shall judge needful; adding the motives and
reasons of their desire, and transmitting of Patents for that purpose, wherein
Blanks shall be left for the names of the Captains, to be filled by the
States or Commissioned Council of that Province, and accompanied by their own
Patent, and that thereupon the desired Companies shall be yielded, unless the
said States or Commissioned Council of the Province had reasons to the
contrary, whereof they are to give present advertisement to the Council of
State, that they may judge of them, and if they be not sound weighty, that
upon a second desire of the Council, the Companies lying in the Province, and
not being of their own Repartition, they may be drawn forth; yet not without
express consent and patent of their Paie-masters.

Provided nevertheless, that for the better mutual content and quietness, there
shall be made two several lists, the one of beletting, the other of emploie;
and that in case of invasion or sudden surprisal from the Enemy, the Council
shall have power to draw forth the Companies standing upon the list of emploie,
giving advertisement thereof to the States of the Province, where and in whose
assigned Frontiers they are lying, and the danger being over, that they be
returned to their former garrisons.

That no companies may be laid into any Voicing Province, without express
consent and patent of the States of the said Province, or their Commissioned
Council; and that the same is likewise to be observed in regard of
Quarterings, Marches, Randevouzes.

That as much as may be, those Companies ought to be garrisoned within the
respective Provinces and in the Frontiers thereabout, which have their pay
from that Province where they are put; and that by common advice of the
Provinces, there be assigned certain Frontier-places to each of them, in which
frontierplaces the foresaid Council of State shall have power to transplace the
Companies, acquainting only that Provincial Government with it, to whom the
said Frontiers are assigned; and that the States of the Province, or their
Commissioned Council, shall have power to do the like, as also to transplace
the Companies out of the said frontiers into their Province, and vice versa,
out of their Province into the frontiers; provided only they give present
advertisement thereof unto the foresaid Council.

That if the Council of State have a mind to draw forth any Companies out of
the assigned Frontiers, they ought to address their Desire to the States or
Commissioned Conncil of the Province to which the said Frontiers are assigned,
sending Patents for that purpose with open Names, to be filled by the foresaid
States or their Commissioned Council, or their reasons of difficulty to be
returned and judged of by the Council; and upon the second desire (the foresaid
returned reasons not being held sufficient) the Companies shall be yielded.

That the bestowing of all Military Charges and Offices indifferently shall
be in the disposal of the States or Commissioned Council of every Province, to
whose repartition they belong; and so likewise the conferring of the
Governments and Commanderies of all Cities, Forts and places, to the Provincial
Government in whose Territory or assigned Quarters, the same are situated; as
also the disposing of the Military Charges, standing under the pay of the
Generality, or where the Generality formerly had the disposing, and of the
Commanderies of the places resorting under the Generality, the same does
absolutely belong to the Members of the Union in general.

That the Souldierie shall be engaged, besides the general Oath to the
Generality, to swear likewise in particular to the Province where they shall
be laid, and to whose Repartition also they belong; as also to the respective
Cities of the voicing Provinces wherein the Garrison is put, and that according
to the form already past, or by the Provincial Government to be past yet.

Upon the 1 of February Counselor Pensionarie Vett made a notable Proposition
in the name and behalf of Zealand, against the giving and taking of Bribes and
Presents; offering withal a Draught of Instruction for the Council of State;
for which good zeal and intention they of Zealand had thanks returned them by
the Lord President. And Copies being imparted, they of Holland next day
declared, that they likewise avowed and conformed themselves in all to the
considerations offered the day before by the Lords the States of Zealand, both
touching the ampliation of the Instruction for the Council of State, and
against the receiving of gifts and presents by the Deputies in the said Council
and elsewhere; as also in regard of all other Courts or Assemblies of the
Generality. The other Provinces likewise undertook, they would declare in
behalf of these matters.

Counselor de Vett his speech in the Grand Assembly against Bribes and
Presents.
High and Mighty Lords!
THe whilst that your H. M. are busied with considerations how the Government
may be settled and every where secured with good and wholesome Laws and
Constitutions; the Deputies of the Lords the States of Zealand cast their eyes
and thoughts in the mean time upon the most principal causes, whereby the same
Government might formerly have been brought to some Convulsion-fits; and for
ought they can judge, one of the chief and principal thereof should be that
base custom of giving and taking Bribes and pensions; which if credit may be
given to the public and constant reports, are used and practiced here among
us, even to public shame and confusion.

We shall not, H. M. Lords, take upon us to particularize any, but, for some
reasons, represent them only in the Thesis, or thing, and without any
personalitie.

We know very well and easily grant, That every one, who carrie's the Name of
an honest man, is presumed in Law, what matters soever be brought before him,
that he will advise therein, attentively, uprightly and ingenuously; so as
according to his best knowledge, and in Conscience, he apprehend's it to make
most for the honor of God Almighty, and the common welfare; as likewise, That
all such as are chosen to any office or place of Government, ought to be
called thereunto, with such a particular reflection; that all Instructions and
Commissions in the Provinces and others, do precisely aim at and imply as much;
That all Governors themselves do either implicitly oblige themselves thereunto,
or are engaged by Oath in that behalf. But yet we sadly know as well, how
easily many, whether by weakness of Spirit, not being able to resist the
insinuating Temptations, which set upon them; or by some sudden surprise, before
they are aware of the danger; or by domestic Necessity; or also, by the
Example of others; or lastly, which is worst of all, of set purpose and private
design, enticed and excited thereunto, by their own ambition and greediness,
are diverted and drawn aside from their engaged Duty and public Fidelity;
Who, if they be not presently stayed or stopped in their carier, either by their
own Christian and generous Resolution and Repentance, or by public
Animadversion and Punishment; it cannot be any otherwise exspected, but that
their diseas, through custom of sinning and impunitie, will degenerate by
degrees from evil to wors, and, through the infectious Contagion thereof at
last, precipitate and ingulph the State in Ruin, past all redress and remedy.

Your H. M. know and remember, that, at what Time the Arms were first taken up
against the King of Spain, and when afterward he was solemnly declared to
have forfeited all his Right and Dominion over these Countries, the same was
don, for no other reason, but to protect and vindicate the Liberties, Rights
and Privileges of these Countries, against their strange and unheard of
Domination.

Now, it is not possible, that those Laws and Privileges, however Vindicated
thus, should be heard to speak of themselves; but they stand in need of
Advocates and Defenders, who if they prove not faithful and sincere, the
foresaid Privileges not only miss their needful plea, but, even contrary to
nature, they are prejudiced thereby; as also, one can scarce possibly conceiv,
how those their Advocates or Counselors shall be kept in their integrity and
faithfulness, when they lie open and exposed to the countermining of Corruption
and Baseness: they being, without all contradiction, utterly unable then, to
enter upon any Deliberation and Affair, without prejudice of a sinister
intention, by means of the contract and bond, whereby the Receiver stand's
plainly engaged to the Giver, for the working out of his Design, whether it be
with or against his own min^e and better knowledge.

We intend not H. M. Lords, to extend our selves at large in showing the
pernicious effects of th^s Evil, when once it com's to get the prevalencie in
all the parts of this Republic; the same would be to v^st an enterprise; we
only desire leav, to touch and produce some of the most remarkable and
essential concernment.

And first of all, to show, how extremely prejudicial and dangerous that diseas
is, when once it has infected the chief Cou^ts of Justice; there is none of
any understanding, but can apprehend the same, if he do but consider, That the
said Courts do sit to judge and pronounce sentence, not only in Civil, but also
in Criminal affairs; not only in the behalf of goods and possessions, but of
the credit also, of the honor and reputation, yea and the lives too of all the
Commonaltie or Inhabitants of this Country: and, that therefore it is
impossible that the said Inhabitants, whether of high or low Degree, can
neither have any due ass^rance of this or that without Law; or rest confident
of a sincere and inviolable Administration of Justice, by Law; if so be, that
those which are appointed to be of the Judicature, shall not proceed in the
managing, with such clean and unp^lluted hands and hearts, as by all Divine and
humane Laws is required of them.

Which also make's the wises^ Statesmen to conceiv, that the most principal
cause of the manifold inconveniences and troubles, which have so often shaken
the Kingdom of France, or this, That the Offices and functions there of
Judicature, are sought and got for money; whence they cannot but infer, that
virtue and knowledge must needs be despised, where the Emploiments are exposed
to sale; and where Covetousness get's on the Bench, there can be no place for
integrity.

For which respects also, it has been ord^ined both by written Laws, and the
constitutions of diverse Nations, That all such as are advanced to any of these
funct^ons, must before their admittance, clear themselves by Oath, that they
never presented, promised or gave ought to any, directly or indirectly, for
their preferment.

How pernicious yea and ruinous this same exorbitancie is likewise to good
Policy, and the Administration of Government, may thence appear, that it does
especially show forth it self, and is mainly busy and occupied about the
conferring of Public Charges and Offices: the most noble and sensible point of
Government.

From whence immediately and unavoidably there arise 3 sorts of dangerous
incongruities.

First, that thereby, there com to be employed in the managing of Government,
and direction of the public affairs of the Land, the most ill-condition'd,
mean and unfittest persons; the most worthy, able and sufficient both in parts
and Estates being past by; who nevertheless, as well by God's command, and
natural reason, as according to the written Laws, Rights and Privileges of the
Land, are before all others capable of and qualified for it; besides the
palpable infraction of Distributive Justice, which ought to take as much, if
not more place in the foresaid subject, (upon whose integrity the public
tranquillity is founded,) than in the Justice communicative in matters and
cases between different parties, before any high Courts, subaltern Judicatures.

Secondly, That the same unfit, unserviceable and mean persons, being once
advanced to the foresaid Charges, and standing in fear, either of being turned
out by those of better qualities and conditions; or that the virtue and
sufficiency of such, will be a continual check and censure of their actions
and comportments, and consequently not daring to impart or communicate unto
such, any of their sinister practices and devices; will evermore, for their own
security get and keep the Courts supplied and packt still with persons of like
stuff and condition.

And thirdly, That such Governors as crept into Magistracy, not by any virtue
or worthiness of their own, but by mere baseness, will ever be found to hold
forth all their actions; as well those which concern their functions, as
others, saleable and mercenarie; considering, that they do not only bring with
them into the Government a most corrupt and base mind; but also, to attain to
it, have been constrained often to undergo great difficulties; and therefore
now to get the Co^n they laid out r^imbursed* do find themselves necesst^ated
to follow the course of their Patrons; at first, it may be with a more subt^e
and streighter hand but afterward with such loos raines, that they never stop
again, and commonly run on thus to their dying day; as indeed you never see men
falling fram a precipi^^ to remain lying half way, but to come tumbling down
from the top to the b^ttom without intermission.

It being likewise worth consideration, that the writers of good Polic^e teach
us, that from 3. foresaid incongruities there spring and result naturally as
from a fountain diverse others, or as pernicious effects from one and the same
pernicious ca^s.

As they do prove and deduce, that by the foresaid Corruptions there are caused
innumerable and inevitable Contentions and estrangings or divisions amongst the
persons and members of one and the same Court or assembly; forasmuch as
Viciousness* though very fruitful otherwise, nevertheless cannot work alike,
with her infections upon all minds, but is often (...) generously resisted, and
consequently by the different and contrary aims and endeav^^s of the honester
sort, and the disho^^st, there m^st needs fall out between them, discrepancie
of opinion, and from that mat^al fractions and divisions, to the apparent
prejudice of the public interest; as the same is not only found by
experience, but observed likewise th^^owout (...) Hist^^ies, to be one of the
principal causes whereby diverse Countries and Republics were brought to R^^ne;
(...) among others Taci^^s allegeth the same as the main ^^ason of the loss of
the Roman ^ibertie; putting in the first place, avatiti^m Magistratuum the
^retc^ed Covetousness of (...) ^over^ors; and after that, Certamina Potentium,
the ^^rrs and contentions of the Grandees; with this remarkable claus upon it,
Invalido Legum auxilio, quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbantur. When
bootless is the help of Laws, which by might, by seeking of preferments, and
lastly by Money, are disturbed and perverted.

Besides, that it is likewise impossible, that where things are thus carried,
there should arise no Seditions or Commotions among the people; who finding,
that instead of being by their Superiors and Magistrates governed as they
ought with all Justice and integrity, they are but plagued, exacted upon and
undon by them; whence at first there arise's just reasons of discontent, and
consequently no address appearing by any means or order from public authority,
they seek to right and vindicate themselves by ways of Insurrection; which many
times grow's up unto that height on a sudden, that all the armed power of the
Land is not able to quell it.

Wherefore also it was wisely ordained by the Romans* That all such as had the
Government of any of their Provinces, when the time of their administration was
exspired, should stay and remain for some time after in the said Province, and
show themselves in public, ready to undergo the trial of the Laws, upon any
ones information or charge of mis-government against them.

Wherewith agree's as pertinently, what is related in the Scriptures of solemn
protestations of MOSES, JOSHUA, SAMUEL, and other pious Governors made at the
resigning of their Administrations, before God and all the people over whom he
had constituted them as watchmen: declaring openly, That they took no man's Ox
nor Ass, had wronged or oppressed none, nor received any gifts of any, to hide
their eyes from him, (that is, to dissemble their iniquities) and further
offering there, if they were guilty in the least, to make due restitution; and
if not, desired and likewise obtained of the people a public testimony of
their innocence and integrity.

And for this same purpose serve likewise no less the Resolutions and
Commissions in these Countries, and particularly in the Province which has the
honor of this present Grand Assembly, taken and decreed, Super Censura
bonorum, that is, To take information, or make inquiry of all new Riches
gotten, and all apparently sinister purchases; to take provisional cognizance
of them; and also to sequester them, for to be further proceeded and disposed
therein according to the Laws; which are the very words of the same
Resolutions, and are exstant in the known Registers; and this was thought good
to be introduced and practiced in the times of their greatest perplexities, in
the beginning of the Troubles, when there seemed to be noreason for any such
courses; what then ought there not now to be don in these times, when partly
by the success of our Arms, and partly by our Flourishing Commerce, both
Richess and Luxury have so mightily overspread this State? Should not a man
with much more reason think and ask now? Ubi Lex nunc Julia dormis? Where lie's
this Law now dormant?

It is true indeed, H. M. Lords, that by the written Laws it was permitted to
such as were entrusted with the Administration of any Province, that they might
receiv some such eat*and drinkwaves from the Provincials, as might be spent
within a few days (whereupon some very imprudently do seek to ground a liberty
for corruptions) but this was allowed for no other reason, then that those
persons were Commissioned and sent to the said emploiments from Rome, into
parts very remote from their own Families and accommodations, and not without
sensible prejudice to their Household affairs^; whereas now on the contrary,
especially in these Countries, according to their own customs and privileges
none may be chosen to the public Offices of any place but where he is born,
and bath his babitation; and who, besides the Entertainment which they receiv
by way of Salarie, are not hindered by their Emploiments, to look to and order
their own particular affairs*

Moreover, how considerable is it among the chiefest concernments of this
kind, that by reason of the foresaid Corruptions and baseness, where they are
impunely winked at and suffered, it is impossible any public Deliberations,
Advices and Resolutions can be^ kept so secret as is requisite; which Secrecy
notwithstanding is the very soul of the noblest part of State*affairs.

And though the same evil be found in vogue likewise under other Forms of
Government; yet this is sure, none have been so much pestered and pressed with
it as great Republics at all times.

For which reason in some of them, the Governors are justly forbidden and
debarred all speaking and communicating with any public Ministers of Foreign
Princes and Potentates residing with them; and that because those Ministers make
it their special business narrowly to pry and enquire into the whole frame and
all the parts of Government, to fish out and observe the Arcana Imperii, to
sound the humors and feel the pulses of the Governors, and accurately to survey
all their Actions and Comportments, for to make their profit and advantage of
all afterward, when time and opportunity serves; and meeting happily with
some unstaied or unfaithful greedy Grandees, do lure and engage them by all
means possible for the advancement of their Master's interest.

We do not speak here H. M. Lords, of Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Commissioners, whose emploiment continue's but for a little while, but of those
called Ordinary now, or Residentiarie, and Leigers, of which sort former
histories, even of the wisest and civillest Nations, and consequently the Right
of Nations, were wholly ignorant, being introduced but of later times, and
begun first by Ferdinand the first of that name King of Casteel, and F^nce made
use of by other Princes also; but in very truth to the great damage and
prejudice of Common Society, as by all understanding Politicians is asserted;
for which cause likewise, diverse Christian Princes, to avoid the alleged
inconveniences, admit of none such in their Countries.

And although, on this occasion it would not be difficult to represent here
some troublesome passages even thereby caused and brought upon the State of these
Countries, yet for certain good respects, we shall dispense with it, in this
Grand Assembly, as being met, not to occasion trouble, but to settle Unity,
not to censure what is past, but to order and regulate what is to com.

Wherefore also the Lords the States of Zealand, judge, under Correction, that
your H. M. taking this subject of Corruptions and some redress thereof into
their serious thoughts and considerations, it will be one of, not only the
honorablest, justest and most acceptable, but also the most advantageous and
necessary actions, that can here be treated of, and is worthy the
Deliberation of this Assembly.

As whereby the whole Commonaltie shall be freed from all manner of exactions,
oppressions and outrages, Justice, every where and always, administered fairly
and uprightly, the Government esteemed according to its worth and merit, the
Governors kept in their bounds and duties, according to their Oaths and
Instructions* and every one in obedience to the Laws, without contradiction,
and generally the State of the United Provinces maintained in its Authority and
Reputation, both at home and abroad.

And theref^re also we read, that the Emperor Justinian in his time, having
after serious Deliberation, settled Orders and Directions for the suppressing
of the foresaid Corruptions, which had mightily infected and overspread his
Dominions, did not only in most solemn manner and pregnant terms, give thanks
for it to Almighty God, but straightly likewise charged all his subjects, to
do the like together with him, as having thereby precured for them, as ^ee
judged three special things, First, That thereby every one henceforward could
rest secure and quiet in his own Country; Secondly, safely enjoy the
possession of their means and goods, and lastly be assured of faithful and
upright administration of Justice.

And in the histories it is observed, That diverse other wise and pious Kings
and Potentates having effectually considered the same they were persuaded they
had thereby don acceptable service to God, and procured for themselves, first,
the Testimony of a cheerful Conscience, and after that, the recompense of a
better and unfading State of Glory; the foresaid evil, being indeed a
Concatenation, or linking together of a world of scandalous abuses and
enormities, which suppressed once, does lay a solid foundation of a happy
Government.

Nor can we see, H. M. Lords, how in default of necessary Remedies against
this Evil, any Courts or Course, either of Justice and Government, or Treasury
and Militia can subsist.

For if Unrighteousness and Iniquity bear swaie in the High Courts of Justice,
who can look for any Justice from the subordinate ones, or from particular
persons? If those that sit at the helm or stern of the Supreme Authority be
not shie, nor scruple to defile and contaminate themselves with such baseness of
taking bribes and presents, who shall wonder at it, in inferior Magistrates and
Governors? How I pray, shall They make Orders and take Courses against
Oppressions and Exactions of officers, Civil or Military, which are guilty of
the same crimes? how shall they look to the fair managing and good improoving
of the public Treasury, which are the only cause of wasting and exhausting
it, putting it into confusion and thereby seeking and raising their own profit?
how, I say, shall those be able to take a right care of the common stock, the
Means and Revenues of the Land, who make no Conscience thereby to enrich
themselves? And lastly, how is it possible that such as are every way base and
catching and griping, should be fit or able to tax, rebuke and curb the
malversation of others; and then what place can be secured, what Bullwark can
be imagined strong enough against such corruptions, when we see how they
invade and break through the Highest Courts, from whence they cannot but distill
downward, and penetrate and spread through all, even the least and meanest
parts and members of the whole Body.?

Now if ever it was useful and expedient, H. M. Lords, to take a vigorous course
against this scandalous Evil; it must needs be of special use and advantage,
in this Conjuncture of time, and in the present constitution of Government,
which being for the greater part Aristocratick, and Popular in some part, the
said diseas is of more dangerous Consequence under it, then under a Monarchy,
for many reasons, which might be deduced by Politicians; unless it were more
experimentally discernable and known to them, what sure and wholesome Orders for
preventing thereof, the Senate and Republic of Venice have settled of old among
themselves, whereby they had the happiness to subsist a Commonwealth for these
twelve-hundred years, in a constantly flourishing and puissant Condition.

Which blessing we longing for, together with your H. M. to see imparted
likewise to this our dear Father-land and famous Republic; We do most humbly
desire, that this Point may speedily and vigorously be look*d too.

The rather, for that otherwise it will be impossible to turn away from these
Countries the just wrath and indignation of God, which we have cause to fear,
may be kindled already against it, by reason of the foresaid too too common
base and* foul practices; and will undoubtedly burst out once into a fearful
embrazement, if it be not atoned by a ready meeting and resolute redress of
those, whom he has entrusted with the power to remedy the same, and of whom
he will likewise demand a strict account; that having either well acquitted
themselves of their endeavors, they may inherit bliss and glory, or being
found faulty, suffer not only the lash of their own conscience and the
opprobrious prejudice of all men against them here, but hereafter also the
terrible doom of the Just Judge of all the World to their everlasting confusion
and destruction.

Let us but, my Lords, the better to consider of it, View our selves in other
Republics, which, whiles their Governors continued Virtuous and uncorruptible,
remained flourishing for many ages, but afterward, corruption seizing on them,
weere soon brought to decaie and ruin; and among them especially, That of the
Romans, which in this point degenerated so far from their former integrity,
that their own Historie-writers balked not to say, All was exposed to sale,
there wanted but a Chapman; Venalem fuisse, si reperisset emtorem.

And if your H. M. would make use of our Considerations upon this point, and
were desirous to know what remedies we conceived most fit to be applied
against this Evil; we should, b^ your permission, apply nothing of what has
been decreed against it in other Countries and Republics, but only, that,
which according to the written Laws, in use and course here among our selves, and
upon like occasions in these Countries has been enacted against it.

And in the first place, we should under Correction hold it needful, that all
such persons, as shall be called to any Office or Employ in any of the Courts
of the Generality, shall before their admittance, be bound, besides the
requisite and accustomed Oath, to swear likewise, that for the getting and
obtaining of the said office, they never offered, promised, or gave, nor ever
would promise or give any thing directly or indirectly.

Secondly, That they shall neither directly nor indirectly, themselves, their
wives, children, family, or any having relation to them, receiv enjoy or
improve any gifts, offers or presents of any thing what or how small soever, no
not so much as any meat or drink from any, be they Cities, Courts, public or
private persons whatsoever, whom they know to have any business in the Courts,
or like to have ere long, and that as well before as after the said business
shall be dispatched in the said Court; and if so be that any one should have
received any such gift of any one, who might happen afterward to get some
business in that Court, the said receivor shall be bound then to acquaint the
Court with it, and to convert the received gifts or the value thereof, to the
use of the poor, in manner as they shall be directed to do, and besides this
they shall not be allowed to be present at the hearing or debate of his cause
and affairs, from whom they shall have received the said gifts, without special
leav, from the Court. All this under pain, that such as shall be found to have
don contrary to the order aforesaid, or any point thereof, shall forthwith be
turned out of their places, and declared infamous and incapable ever to bear
any charge or office more within the United Provinces, the associated
countries, the Cities and Memberships thereof; and stand moreover obliged, to
restore and bring in the foursould of what in regard of the received gifts and
presents they shall have enjoied ard prosited, besides their liableness to such
other reparations and arbitrarie punishments, as, according to the Exigencie of
things and circumstances shall be found requisite. And the Members of the
Court shall on a certain day appointed, and the others absent, at their first
appearance and sitting again in the Court, be obliged before the acting of any
other thing, to clear themselves by solemn Oath in the said Court one to
another, that, in and about the foresaid matter, they have honestly acquitted
themselves, and that they know not at all, whether their Wives, Children,
Household, or any, having relation to them, have don ought contrary to the
foresaid Order, promising, that for the time to com they will continue this
their uprightness constantly. And suffering none to be admitted to the affairs
of the Court, before and till such time, as he shall solemnly have made the
foresaid promiss and protestation.

And furthermore they shall be bound at any other time upon the least occasion
thus to clear themselves the one to the other by Oath as before; as also to make
such as shall have business at the Court, and may be somewhat suspected, to
declare by Oath, that they neither did nor would give or promiss ought to any
of the foresaid persons directly or indirectly.

And that such as shall be found to have given or promised or caused to be
given, or promised any bribes, gifts or presents to any of the foresaid
persons, their Wives, Children, Household or to any others in their behalf,
directly or indirectly, either before or after the business shall be
despatched, for expedition's sake of the business, or otherwise, under what
pretext soever, shall be sentenced and condemned to 'a fine proportioned or
countervailing the worth of the business transacted or otherwise, according to
the condition and exigencie of the matter. And that all the foresaid Fines or
Amercements shall be disposed one third part to the informer's use, and the
two other thirds to the benefit of the poor; although the same excess or
corruption should not com to be discovered, till some years after they were
committed.

And to the end that the foresaid grounds may the more effectually be
practiced and prosecuted, and none of those which have any business at the
Courts, plead ignorance, there should be hung up a Patent or Brief, in a
certain conspicuous place at or about the said Court, in the Netherlandish,
French, English, and Scottish language, whereby every one should be warned
from offering, giving or promising, or causing to be offered, given or
promised, any gifts or presents to any of the foresaid persons, their wives,
children, household, or to any other in their behalf or regard, directly or
indirectly, under the pains and amercements expressed in the foregoing article:
As also the Proctors Solicitors and others, which are ordinarily attending to
be employed, at the said Courts shall at the day aforesaid, or being absent
then, as soon as they shall return to the Court, make promiss under Oath, not
to serve any in the Corrupted way aforesaid, nor to their Council, their Clients
or cause them to be counsel d to give or promiss, or procure to be given and
promised any gifts or presents, to any of the foresaid persons their Wives etc.
But if so be their Clients should discover unto them any disposition of giving
or promising in that kind as aforesaid, that they shall dissuade them from it,
or, understanding, that already they may have given or promised the like, They
shall immediately make it known to the Court; as they shall be obliged
likewise from the very beginning of their emploiment, to give faithful warning
to their Clients not to give or promiss ought to the foresaid persons in manner
abovesaid, directly or indirectly and all under pain, if they be found guilty
of the contrary, to be punished according to the nature and exigencie of the
offense.

And both the Courts of Justice here in the Hague shall be desired, and
formally deputed and Commissioned jointly and together as one Court, to take
cognizance of such Excesses as are mentioned formerly, and shall do right
therein, according to the disposition of the foresaid articles, and as they
shall find requisite in conscience.

And the Fiscal of the Generality, and the Fiscal and Attorney General of the
Court of Holland Zealand and West-Friesland, jointly together, or the Fiscal
and Attorney General of the said Court alone, in case the Fiscal of the
Generality himself should happen to be charged, shall according to the
instruction to be given them in that behalf, by order of the foresaid Courts
of Justice, exactly inform themselves of the foresaid exorbitancies and
accordingly proceed against such of the foresaid persons as shall be held
guilty in this kind, and charge and prosecute the matter to a Definitive
sentence; which sentence shall punctually be executed forthwith without any
appeal to be made from it to Us, or any other Court sovereign in these
Provinces.

Or if so be the rest of the Provinces should scruple the foresaid Commission,
and conceiv, that the Members of both the Courts aforesaid being daily over
busied with weighty affairs, so as that they would not be able with that
commodiousness and that exactness to expedite the Differences and Processes
which may arise in this kind, as the nature of it requires; in that case the
Lords of Zealand should not think it amiss or useless, that some understanding,
learned and discreet persons might be chosen a Committee for that purpose out
of the respective Provinces; to whom likewise might be referred the cognizance
and reports of such judicial matters as by Appeal devolv to the Court or
Assembly of the States General; and all this by and under such a Commission,
Instruction and Entertainment, as by common advice of the Provinces shall be
agreed on.

And as we are confident, Hi. Mi. Lords, that you will take these our
considerations seriously to heart, so we will not doubt neither, but that
according to your eminent wisdom and ancient zeal for the common good, you will
take a speedy and courageous resolution and course, for the refreining and
suppression of the fores^id v^le enormities and corruptions, to the end, that
Justice may be administered with all integrity, the Government duly served,
the Subjects protected against all violence, and a free passage opened for
Virtue, Knowledge, Honesty and Piety, discountenancing and suppressing all
oppre^sion and profaness: Whereupon we shall be able to rest secure, That God
Almighty the Author and Protector of this flourishing Republic, will bless and
prosper all your H. M. Deliberation and Resolution in this great and solem^
Assembly, to the continual preservation and maintenance of the same.

Here follows the Old Instructions for the Council of State.
Instructions for the Council of State of the United Netherlands, according to
which the Lords, lawfully commissioned, and to be commissioned, are
provisionally, and till it shall be otherwise ordered by the States General,
to manage and direct the affairs concerning the common state, the defense,
conservation and Union of the foresaid Countries.

I.
IN the foresaid Council there shall be comprehended, and at all times appear,
have place and voice therein, the Governors of the respective Provinces where
they are; and matters shall be handled, deliberated and treated in the said
Council with all due reverence, respect and modesty, for most service of the
foresaid Countries, and the good unity and friendship among them, and and the
Cities and members thereof, together with the mutual concord of the Lords
assembling in that Council. And the Governors of the respective Provinces, and
the President of the foresaid Council for the time being, are desired to take
good provident care, that all particular affections, jangling and impertinent
motions (not concerning the matters and affairs under Deliberation) may be
prevented and hindered.

II.
In the foresaid Council there shall not be together such as are allied by
consanguinitie in the fourth degree, and by affinity in the second, according
as the same are accounted by the Civil Laws.

III.
And for the better direction and managing of all emergent businesses, The same
Council shall ordinarily assemble at 9 of the clock in the forenoon, and at 3
in the afternoon, and none of the Counselors shall be allowed to depart (or
go forth) without acquainting the Lord President therewith. And the said
Counselors shall be obliged, to repair and appear constantly at the place,
where the said Council shall negociate; and to be ready to to meet at any
time, when they shall be desired, except they have lawful excuses.

IV.
The foresaid Council shall have a special regard that the Countries and United
Provinces, Cities and Members thereof, may conformably to the confederacies
made and established betwixt them, be settled and kept in Unity and Concord
both amongst themselves* and with the Governors and military Commanders, as
also the Governors and the Commanders amongst themselves.

V.
And the said Council shall have and exercise the Authority, to dispose in
matters of War, and over all the Souldierie, being in the Lands service,
causing their Commands to be performed by the foresaid Governors of the
Provinces for the time being, the Admiral or other off^cers, every one in his
place.

VI.
Conditioned, they the said Council do nor attempt nothing, which might tend to
the prejudice of the Privileges, Rights, Liberties, Treaties, Contracts,
Ordinances, Statutes, Decrees and Customs of the said Countries in general, or
of any Provinces, Cities or Members thereof in particular.

VII.
The said Council shall endeavor, that the general means agreed, or to be
agreed on, and committed or to be committed to their disposing, by the consent
of the Provinces for the Lands Defens, may uniformly and generally be raised
throughout all the United Provinces, the Associated Countries, Cities and
Members thereof, together with the Quarters resorting under the Generality in
particular; and that the Farmers and Collectors thereof be maintained for the
getting of it in, and executing of what shall be farmed out to them, or
commanded to be collected; and that the trespassing of the Ordinances made in
that behalf, or to be made, be punished without any connivance, The Council
of Brabant or Flanders, being exempted from meddling at all with any of the
foresaid Means or Questions and Differences arising thence.

VIII.
And for the raising of the said general means, they shall follow and execute
such Instructions and Ordinances as are made or to be made in that behalf by
the States General.

IX.
And for the getting in and executing the said Common means, together with the
agreements or Subsidies of of the Provinces, and in manner as they shall be
appointed, the foresaid Council shall proceed against the Debitors, Farmers and
Collectors, as also against the Inhabitants of the Provinces and Cities, being
in default, and their goods, as in former times the custom was to proceed in
these Countries, about the actions and moneys of the Prince, and according to
the Executorials to be granted in that behalf; provided, that none shall be
summoned forth the Province where he inhabit's, without the consent of the
States of the same Province.

X.
They shall take care, and narrowly look to, that all such as are accountable
for the Generalities means, duly bring in their accounts, at the Generalities
Chequer or Chamber accountant.

XI.
The moneys proceeding of the foresaid assented means and other consents, shall
be used and employed for the paiement of the Souldierie, and other requisites
of War, according to the agreements of the respective Provinces, or so, as the
Provinces in general shall ordein for most profit of the Land; and especially
shall there be good order settled for the mustering and military discipline,
and that the Souldierie may be paid by the head or pole.

XII.
They shall take care, and straightly oblige the Captains in the Land-service,
under pain of cashiering, that they pay, and cause to be delivered to their
Soldiers the full pay according to the order of the Land, without also
abating to the said soldiers the eight day; and those, by whose information
any trespassing of the order aforesaid, shall be discovered, they shall take
special notice of, to further and advance them according as opportunity shall
be given.

XIII.
All Patents or Commissions and Command, to be addressed to the Souldierie,
shall be signed by three of the Council, being of distinct Provinces, and by
the Secretary.

XIV.
As likewise all Orders for Paiments shall be signed by the Treasurer and
three of the Council, being of several Provinces, and by the Secretary of the
said Council; and no Orders of payment shall be held authentic, but such as
shall be signed in manner aforesaid, with a Note Registered, folio tali, upon
it.

XV.
They shall likewise endeavor and further as far as shall be needful, that the
Convoys, according to the Agreements and Lists made, or to be made yet by the
States General in that behalf; and so likewise the free passages, according to
the Lists appointed and to be appointed, be uniformly raised and executed;
and that neither the States, nor the Governors of the particular Provinces, nor
the Magistrates or Commons of any Cities or places, nor any other whosoever, do
hinder or impede the passages and transport of the goods which are duly
provided with their Convoys and Passes according to the Lists aforesaid; nor
that any whosoever, require or take ought above the aforesaid lists of those
goods; and that the contrary thereof, whether directly or indirectly
committed, may receiv exemplarie punishment.

XVI.
They shall let the Cities enjoie their Custom, in time of exigencie, and when
matters can suffer no delaie, to arm themselves by Sea, and to set out Ships of
War at the charge of the Land; that they may be paid out of the foresaid
means; and that against all Pirates, and other such like enemies of the
Commonweal, to resist the same, and to reduce them under their power; on
condition nevertheless, that the cognizance both of persons, ships and goods
shall lie in the Decision of the Courts of Admiraltie, settled or yet to be
settled in the respective Quarters of those Provinces which negotiate and
traffic by Sea.

XVII.
The Council of State shall be obliged to deliver up to the States General,
and to the States of the particular Provinces, an exact state from three months
to three months, of the List of War, and the Incoms of the means to be agreed
on, and the emploiment or expending of the same.

XVIII.
They shall keep an exact List of the besetting (or garrisoning) of all Cities*
Forts and places, so as the same shall be conditioned from time to time, and
shall be obliged to yield at all times copies thereof to the Provinces
desiring the same.

XIX.
They shall take care to their utmost, that the Pales and Limits of the
foresaid Provinces respectively be not lessened, and that all Cities and
places resorting under the Generality be brought and reduced under equal
Contribution for the common defense of the Land, as much as may be possibly;
and that the like be used in regard of the Cities and places which shall be
recovered hereafter.

XX.
They shall take care, that all Governors, Admirals, Generals, Colonels,
Ritmasters, Captains and all men belonging to the Wars, by Sea and Land, shall
promiss and swear unto the United Countries, jointly abiding in the Union and
maintenance of the Reformed Religion; to the States of the Provinces and
Magistrates of the Cities where they are employed, and at whose charge and
repartition they are paid, to be true and faithful to them, faithfully to serve
them, and readily to obey the aforesaid States General, and also the States of
the particular Provinces each in their respective concernments; and that the
Governors likewise of the Provinces and their Generals, shall promiss to obey
the Council of State, instituted, or to be hereafter instituted by the States
General: and that the Colonels, Ritmasters, Captains and all the rest of the
Souldierie shall likewise further promiss and swear, duly to obey the commands
of the Governors of the Provinces where they are, and the soldiers at Sea, the
Commands of the Admiral, and all such other Officers and Commanders as shall
be set over them.

XXI.
They shall entertain all Treaties and Alliances made by the United Countries,
the Provinces, Cities and Members thereof, with the Neighbor-Kingdoms,
Countries and Republics, and for that end, and the advancement of the Trade
and Traffic of these Countries, they shall entertain good Correspondencie,
Friendship and Neighborhood with foreign States and Princes, the Kingdoms,
Republics, Countries and Cities round about, by all the best means they can
devise.

XXII.
They of the Council aforesaid and each of them, coming to Vote, they shall
openly and plainly declare, what in honor, duty and conscience they shall
think good, whether it be by conforming themselves with the opinion of others
which they approve, for to avoid repetitions, or as they shall think best by
other arguments and considerations. And all matters shall be determined in the
said Council by most voices of the Lords present, having voted thereupon; and
if so be the matters concern directly or indirectly, any of the said Council,
either in regard of their own persons, or their Kindred and Allies unto the
fourth degree; the same shall not be allowed to give his advice therein, nor
be present at the Deliberation and Conclusion thereof, but shall withdraw and
remain without the Council Chamger, during the said Deliberation.

XXIII.
Nothing shall be finally determined or decreed in the foresaid Council, but
in the presence of all the Lords of the Council, which shall be present or
resident in the place, where the Council shall be kept; or at least the
greater part of them.

XXIV.
The Council shall not assemble about, nor resolv upon any Extraordinary
Business, but with precedent intimation thereof to all the Counselors resident
at the place.

XXV.
They shall dispose of no grants, to give any, nor continue such as the States
General shall have granted for a certain space of years, after the exspiration
thereof; nor allow any pensions or Annuities at the Charge of the Land, nor any
resignation of Offices.

XXVI.
They shall grant no Remissions to Farmers or other Debtors of the common Land,
otherwise then in the presence of all the Council, and at the least, with two
thirds of the voices.

XXVII.
They shall put out all works publicly and allow of no continuation of works
undertaken, upon pain to make satisfaction themselves in particular, of the
damage, which the Commonwealth may chance to incurr thereby.

XXVIII.
The foresaid Council shall not be allowed to have any part or share, directly
or indirectly in any Works, already put out, or to be put out hereafter, for
the service of the Commonwealth; nor in any Convoyes, Imposts, or other common
means, nor in any Powder, Shot, Artillery, Arms, Corn, Rye, Oats, Butter,
Chees, or any other victuals, ammunition and such like military requisites,
whatever they may be, which are to be employed for the profit and service of
the public affairs; nor shall they buy, or under any other Title undertake or
grant any Ordinances, which at the charge of the Land are granted in common or
of any Province in particular, neither by themselves, their wives, children,
families, nor by any any other whosoever; nor participate in the buying,
undertaking and disposing thereof by others, directly or indirectly; nor yet
themselves, their wives, children, families, or any other in that behalf,
receiv, enjoy or make use of any gifts, presents or gratuities of any thing,
how small soever, even to eating and drinking wares, from or by whomsoever it
be, whether Cities, Courts, public or private persons, whom they know to have
any business before the Council, or that they are like to have any; and that as
well before as after that the business shall be dispatched in the Council; and
in case that any such shall have received gifts by any, whom afterward they
perceived to have somewhat to do with the said Council, which at the time of
receiving the gifts they knew not; or that such may get some business afterward
at the Council, They shall be bound to acquaint the Council with it, and to
convert the received gifts, or the value thereof for the use of the poor, in
manner as the Council shall ordain them; and besides that, they shall not be
allowed to vote or sentence at the deliberation about the business touching him
or them, from whom they shall have received any such gifts without the Councils
special leav: all under pain, That whosoever shall be found to have don
contrary to these orders or any point thereof, he shall forthwith be put out
of his place, and held infamous, and incapable of bearing any charge or office
within the United Provinces, the Associated Countries, Cities and members
thereof, and be bound besides to make restitution and lay down the fourfold
proportion of whatsoever he received or enjoied by any participation of the
foresaid public Works, Provision, Ammunition and other requisites; buying,
undertaking, granting of ordinances, or from the participation thereof; as also
by the gifts and presents received; and made liable above all this to such
further pennances and arbitrarie correction, as shall be held fit and
requisite, according to the condition and exigence of the offense: and the
foresaid Council shall every year* upon the first Tuesday in the month of May,
and such as may be absent then, on the first Tuesday they shall appear in the
Council, before they fall upon any business belonging to the Council, clear
themselves the one to the other by solemn oath, and make likewise the
Treasurer-General, Receivor-General, Fiscal, Secretary and Clarks to purge
themselves by oath, that in the foresaid matters they have acquitted themselves
uprightly* and that they are not privy, that their wives, children, families
or any others of relation to them, have either directly or indirectly don ought
contrary to what is aforesaid; with promise for the future also to continue
upright in this behalf. And none at all shall be admitted to any business or
affairs of the Council, before and until he shall have solemnly cleared and
engaged himself as is said before.

XXIX.
Also the foresaid Council shall over and above all this be always bound upon
the least suspicion to clear themselves thereof one toward another by oath as
before, and to cause the Treasurer-General, Receivor-General and Fiscal, the
Secretary and Clarks of the Generality, to clear themselves of the same; as
those likewise, which have any business with the Council, and are under
suspicion, shall declare by oath, that neither directly nor indirectly they
have promised or given any thing to any of the persons aforesaid, nor will do.

XXX.
And such as shall be found to have given or promised, or caused to be given
or promised any gifts or presents to any of the foresaid persons, their wives,
children, families, or any other in their behalf, directly or indirectly,
whether before or after the business shall be dispatched, either for
expeditions sake or otherwise under what pretext soever, they shall be
sentenced and condemned by the foresaid Council to a Fine proportioned or equal
to the value of the business transacted or otherwise, as the matter shall be
conditioned and require. And all the foresaid Fines or Amercements shall be
disposed, one third part to the informer, and the two remaining thirds for the
use of the poor; although the committed exorbitancie should not be found out
till within some years after the fact.

XXXI.
And to the end, That the foresaid things may the better be observed, and none
pretend or plead ignorance thereof, having any thing to do with the Council,
there shall be hung up a Patent or Table, in Netherlandish, French, English
and Scottish, to warn every one, of offering giving or promising directly or
indirectly any gifts or presents to any of the persons aforesaid, their wives
and children, families or any other in their behalf, upon pain and fine
expressed in the next ensuing Article, as also the Proctors, Sollicitors and
others; which ordinarily present themselves to be employed before the foresaid
Council, shall upon the abovesaid Tuesday, or in case of absence then, as soon
as they shall be returned to the Haghe again, make promise by oath unto the
Council, that they will serve none, nor give counsel to any Client, or cause
them to be counseled, to give or promise, or cause to be given or promised any
gifts or presents, directly or indirectly to any of the foresaid persons, their
wives, children, families or any other in their behalf; but if so be, that
they find their Clients disposed or inclined, to give or promise any thing to
any of the persons aforesaid, that they shall dissuade them: or, coming to
know, that they may have given or promised something already in that kind,
that they shall make it known to the Council forthwith: as also they shall be
bound from the beginning of their employ, faithfully to warn their Clients of
all such giving or promising ought directly or indirectly to the persons
aforesaid, and that they must acquaint the Council with what they know or shall
discover of that nature: all this under pain, that the trespasser herein shall
be punished by the Council, according to the quality and exigence of the
matter.

XXXII.
And that the Council may the better be able to attend the affairs, concerning
the common weal and protection of the Land, and not be hindered therein, by the
examinations of the processes; which may arise against the exorbitances
mentioned in the foresaid Articles, and which might be laid to the charge of
any one of the Council, the Treasurer-General, Receiver-General, Fiscal,
Secretary, or any of the Courts; and for the preventing of all distaste,
contention and discord, which might arise thereby among the Counselors
themselves, to the prejudice of the common good; therefore the Lords of the
Courts of Justice here in the Haghe shall be desired, and commissioned in form
of Delegation, to take, jointly together as one Court, cognizance of such like
exorbitancies, as are mentioned above, and wherewith any of the foresaid
Counselors, the Treasurer-General, Receiver-General, Secretary or Clarks may
com to be charged; and therein they shall do right, according to the tenor of
the foresaid Articles, so as in their Consciences they shall find just and
fitting.

XXXIII.
And the Fiscal of the Generality, and the Fiscal and Proctor-General of the
Court of Holland, Zealand and Friesland, together, or the Fiscal and
Proctor-General of the foresaid Court alone, in case the Fiscal of the
Generality himself, should stand impeached, shall, according to the
Instructions given him in that regard by Order of the Courts of Justice
aforesaid, take exact informations of the foresaid Exorbitances, and proceed
against the foresaid Persons being culpable, even to definitive Sentence,
which shall stand and be made effectual without any further appeal thence to
our selves or any Court whatsoever.

XXXIV.
All Commissions, Orders, Instructions, Letters and Dispatches shall be under
written by the name at length of the Council's President, and being thus
underwritten, shall further be signed by one of the Provincial Governors, or
by some other member of the Council, (and that, in case the same shall be
judged needful by the Council, for the importance of the marter) and by the
Secretary of the Council, without letting the same com into any other hands,
or communicating it with any besides those of the Council: and the Secretary
shall keep good and exact Registers, or Record-books of all the Resolutions and
Determinations of matters and affairs treated and concluded at the the said
Council, at leastwise of all such as shall be of any importance and notable
consideration: and the businesses and matters being concluded and agreed on by
common or most voices, all the members of the said Council indifferently;
whether they were present or absent; of the same, or a contrary opinion, shall
jointly, without any further contradiction, contribute all endeavors toward
the well-managing, effecting and maintaining the foresaid Conclusions and
Resolutions.

XXXV.
The Council of State shall have power to summon the States General of the
United Provinces, necessity requiring the same, to certain commodious and safe
places of the United Provinces; who shall make their appearance there, without
prejudice nevertheless of their Privileges, not to be called or summoned forth
the Provinces.

XXXVI.
The Residence of the foresaid Council shall be kept in a commodious and safe
place of the United Provinces; without being tied to remain precisely in one
place, but they may assemble at any place, where the service and common good of
the land, and especially the Direction of the affairs of War, shall require it.

XXXVII.
The Entertainment of the Counselors shall be 1500 pounds Flemish a piece by
the year, to be paid them by the Province by whom they are appointed, from
three months to three months: whereupon they shall maintein themselves
honorably, befitting their state, without nevertheless bringing any
extraordinary charge upon the Land, other then Convoys and transportation, and
what shall further be ordered in that behalf: and if any of the Council com to
deceas, or resign his place, the Province by whom he was appointed shall
nominate another fit person acceptable to the States General, to be admitted
by them.

XXXVIII.
Besides this Council there shall be entertained a Treasurer and
Receiver-general, for to accommodate them with their Salaries.

XXXIX.
The Secretaries Entertainment shall be of 800 pounds Flemish a year, and that
upon such instructions, as the States General, with advice of the Council of
State, have made already, or shall make hereafter.

XL.
The Dispatches of such businesses, as according to this Instruction are at the
foresaid Council's disposal, being of that importance and consideration, that
touching matters of War, they issued forth in former times in the Name of the
Princes of these Countries; they shall go forth now in the Name and under the
Seal and Counter-seal and Signet of the States General of the United
Netherlands, by advice of the Council, with this subscription, In relation of
their Council of State.

XLI.
And such Dispatches as are not of that great consideration and importance,
they shall issue forth in the Name of the Council of State of the United
Provinces, howbeit under the Seal, Counter-seal and Signet of the States
General af^resaid.

XLII.
The Seal shall be kept by one of the Counselors to be appointed thereunto,
who shall be answerable for it, and not suffer in no wise to let it com into
any other hand; and shall keep a good Register and Counterroul of all
Dispatches past the Seal, and be paid according to the Tax set by the States
General, or to be set yet; and the profits thence arising shall be disposed
for the paying of the Officers of the foresaid Council, and other necessary
Expenses at the Council's Disposal.

XLIII.
The foresaid States General understanding all this, so that for the
conservation of the Right of the United Countries in general and particular,
they do not at all by this Instruction or appointment of a Government and
Council of State, abdicate or resign the Power and Right of the States General,
or the States of the Provinces in particular, each one as much as appertain's
to him in times of necessity, or when the affairs of the Country shall
require the same, themselves to appoint and exercise orders and directions of
military affairs by Sea and Land for the service of the Country, otherwise by
them committed to the disposal of the foresaid Council, together with all such
things as have relation thereunto, especially also the musterings, keeping of
military discipline, and punishing of all exorbitancies. And as for all other
matters concerning the state, policy and justice of the foresaid Countries,
Cities and members thereof in general, and in particular, not expressly
committed to the disposal of the Council, they shall remain at the disposal of
the States General, the States of the particular Provinces, the Magistrates of
the Cities, and other lawful Superiors respectively; and the States of the
respective Provinces do reserv unto themselves, the right of giving of Patents
to the Train-bands, if at any time of need it shall be requisite for the
service of the Land, to lead and employ them forth their own Cities, without
any intermedling of the Council in giving of any such Patents.

XLIV.
The Members of the Council of State aforesaid shall, at the beginning of their
service, purge themselves and declare by Oath, that for the obteining of the
said Emploiment they neither gave nor promised any money or monie-worth, nor
any thing whatsoever, nor shall give or promiss ought in that kind directly or
indirectly; and moreover promiss and swear into the hands of the States
General, or their Deputies, to be true and faithful to the said States General
of the Provinces which shall remain in the Union and maintenance of the true
Christian Religion; and renounce by Oath, all particular Correspondencie with
either Provinces, Cities, or private and particular persons, so far forth
namely as the same shall be prejudicial to the common interest; and that
without any by*regard to the Provinces or Cities where they are born or chosen,
or to any particular profit from thence, or any other; having nothing before
their eyes but the Honor of God, and the welfare and preservation of the
foresaid Countries and the Common Interest; and that they will reveal nothing
of the Communications, Deliberations or Resolutions which ought to remain
secret, and and that forth the Council they shall commune with no body about
the same, and especially with no Ministers of Foreign Kings, Princes, States
and Commonwealths, in what company, and with whomsoever, unless it were with
some of the said Council of State apart and separated from all other. Item, that
they shall be in service to no body else, nor receiv or enjoie any pensions
from any; That they shall have nor take no part nor share at all directly nor
indirectly, in any public works now, or hereafter to be put out for the
common Wealth; nor in any Convoys, Imposts, or other common means, nor in any
furnishing of powder, shot, artillery, arms, corn, rye, butter, chees, oats,
or other provision, ammunition and requisites for the Wars, whatsoever, being
to be employed for the use and service of the Commonwealth: That they shall
neither buy, nor under any other title undertake or let out any ordinances,
which are granted at the charge of the Land in general, or of any Province in
particular; neither by themselves, nor by their wives, children, families, or
any other whosoever in their behalf; nor participate of any others sale or
undertaking or letting directly or indirectly; neither themselves, nor their
wives, children, families, or any other in their behalf, receiv, enjoy, make
profit of any offers, gifts or presents, in any kind, how small soever they
may be, even to eating and drinking wares, from any body whosoever, whether
they be Cities, Courts, Persons, public or private, whom they know to have
any thing to do with the Council; or in likelihood of it, and that as well
before, as after the matter shall be transacted: and if so be they should
chance to receiv any such gifts from any, whom they shall afterward perceiv,
to have some business in the Council, whereof they were ignorant at the time of
the receiving such presents, or that the givers shall afterward get any thing
to to do at the Council, the receiver shall acquaint the Council with it; and
that they shall in all things regulate themselves precisely according to the
tenor of this Instruction, and every Article thereof, and do further whatsoever
good and faithful Counselors of State are bound to do, and all this
provisionally.

XLV.
In case this Instruction shall be found to have any obscurity in it, or to
require any alteration, contracting or amplification, it shall be taken into
consideration accordingly, at the first Assembly of the States General, with
the knowledge and advice of the Council.

Don thus in the Assembly of the foresaid Lords the States General, and
decreed, this 12th. of April, in the year 1588.
(The Table or Patent, mentioned Article XXXI. was to this effect.)
WHereas it appears, that some Dangerous and Pernicious men, to the no small
disreputation of the Council of State and grief of the Lords in Commission
therein, and their ministers, do so embolden themselves, that having any thing
to do at the said Council of State, they dare presume to present and offer
gifts or bribes to the said Lords of the Council, the Tresurer-General,
Receiver-General, the Fiscal and Secretary, and the Clarks, or their
respective Wives, Children, Families, or others having relation to them:
showing thereby that they have not that opinion of the faithfulness, sincerity
and uprightness of the said Lords of the Council and the foresaid Ministers,
which the worthiness of their charge and office, and the honor of their Persons
should cause them to entertain of them; and this being a matter of very evil
consequences, and not to be endured by men of honor, nor by the State; Hence
it is, That thereby, the Counselors of State, do straightly forbid and
prohibit all and every one of what Quality and Condition soever they are or
may be, that neither for Expedition's sake, nor under any pretext whatsoever,
they presume to present, give, or promiss, or cause by others to be presented,
given, or promised to any of the Lords of the Council, the Treasurer-Ceneral,
the Receiver-General, the Secretary or Clark, their Wives, Children, Families,
or any one having relation to them, any gifts or presents of any thing how
small soever, even of meat and drink-wares; upon pain that those which shall
be found to have presented, given or promised any such gifts to any of the
said Lords and Ministers, their wives, children, families, or any other
relating to them, shall by the Council, be condemned to a fine proportioned
to, or equallizing the worth or value of the Cause they have or had in agitation
before the Council: or otherwise, according to the condition and exigence of
the fact.

Those of Holland presented further this following Declaration touching certain
points of the Union.
Considerations presented by the Lords of Holland and West-Friesland about
certain points of the Union.
THe Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland, considering, that this
great Assembly is called together for reasons and causes of weighty
concernment, and that in a season of the year very incommodious; and perceiving
plainly by the frequent meeting of your Hi. Mi. that their zeal and affection
for the common good, does lay aside their particular inconveniences; they
judged it expedient, and are still of the same mind, that the affairs of this
Assembly ought to be so ordered and disposed, that with Unity and Concord
they may be brought to a wholesome and speedy conclusion, for the transaction
whereof indeed your Hi. Mi. peculiarly met here, that so the particular Members
of the Provinces may be eased in their grievances; the Commonwealth secured
within it self by an orderly supply of the defect, happened in a principal
part of the Government, and the stabilitie of the State made known to all the
world, by good and ready Resolutions, the true effects of Wisdom and Unity,
the most assured grounds wherein a Common*wealth of a hopeful State and
condition, can subsist; and therefore the Lords of Holland so framed their
Proposition, that though they showed the Concours of the 3 points of Religion,
Union and Militia, yet they enlarged themselves but little upon the two former
in their said proposition; not as holding the same to be of less importance
then the last; but only because that therein there happened no alteration in
the present conjuncture and condition of affairs, presupposing that in the
first point, concerning the Honor of God, the Provinces would ever out-strive
one another in a holy and fervent Zeal, and in the second, wherein consist's
the preservation of the State, they would be as ready to continue their
upright mutual affection each to other.

Nevertheless, since some of the Provinces were pleased to insist, that the
States of Holland would declare themselves in special manner about the ninth and
other Articles of the Union, and about the Expedients, whereby the Differences
arising among the Provinces, in matters expressed in the said Article, might
be removed; others some, as the Lords of Friesland, and the City of
Groninghen, and the Omlands, were pleased to infer out of the said Articles
and from a pretended Necessity, as if the Provinces were bound each one in
particular, to proceed to the choosing of a Stadtholder; The Lords of Holland
are necessitated to declare, with all due respect to your Hi. Mi. that They are
not able to comprehend, how either by the Text of the Union, or any Arguments
thence deduced, or by any other pretended necessities, it is or ever can be
proved, That the Provinces should be bound to choos Stadtholders, or the
interest and service of the Common League should require the same: for it is a
thing past all dispute, and asserted by the presented Considerations of the
Provinces themselves, That the States of the respective United Provinces every
one apart are Sovereign States; That the Union made between them, expressly
conditioned it, that every Province notwithstanding the same, should not only
remain unprejudiced in their freedoms and prerogatives, so as that none should
trouble or molest the other about it, but on the contrary, by all means due
and possible, yea with body and goods, to help, assist, maintain, strengthen
and protect one another therein to the utmost against any whomsoever; and
whereas among all the foresaid privileges the greatest and most considerable
point, is the Free and Sovereign Government, therefore the Provinces had no
intent nor desire, to bound and overruled one another therein in their
Respective Jurisdictions; but have left one another, as to that, in their
perfect freedom, for to administer all the parts of Soveraigntie, in policy,
Justice and otherwise, by themselves, or some of them in their name by others.
And verily the Confederates could have no such particular intent at the time of
making the Union, as to oblige or engage one another to the appointing of
Stadtholders, forasmuch as at that time they had not yet renounced the Dominion
of the King of Spain, and consequently were not qualified to appoint any
Stadtholders; and therefore it will follow so much the less, that by the 10
Article of the Union the States should have obliged themselves to the
continuance of appointing Stadtholders, they having then made no beginning yet,
and the Stadtholders which then were having the King's Commission; besides that
by the foresaid Article, such questions as might arise about the matters there
mentioned, are not absolutely referred to the Stadholders, but only
provisionally; neither at all to the office of Stadtholdership, but only to
the persons in office and place then; insomuch that the foresaid provisional
Order, not being discontinued or altered in the life time of the Stadt-holders
then in being, the foresaid submission must needs be ended with the deceas of
the said Stadt-holders, as being fastened by the said Confederates to the
Elected persons of those Stadt-holders. And by adding of the words, now being,
clearly showed, that they meant not their Successors should pretend to the same
right, unless it were that the same by a later Resolution should be referred
unto them, which the Lords of Holland do not find was ever don since; being
the words of the foresaid Article cannot possibly bear any such interpretation
as the Lords of Friesland do hold forth; namely, That the submission should not
be provisional, but that the sentence or doom of the Stadt-holders should have
provisional Execution; so much the less, being this is directly opposite to
the 16 Article of the Union, expressly importing, That the sentence of the
Stadt-holders ought to be followed and yielded unto without any further demur,
or other proviso of right, by way of appeal, relief, review, nullitie, or any
other exception whatsoever: which does not agree with a provisional Execution,
presupposing a further demur or appeal, whereby the sentence may com to be
altered: as also the words now being cannot be referred to the United
Provinces, because that thereby the Stadtholders of the Provinces which
thereafter might have joined themselves to the Union, would have remained
excluded from the foresaid Umpirage, or arbitrarie Decision; and those
Provinces should have been fain to submit themselves to the judgment and
decision of the Stadtholders of the other Provinces, which would have made an
inequality amongst the Members of the Union, and in no wise advantaged the
Union, or encouraged other Provinces to enter into such an one; Much less yet
can it be inferred from Artic. 24 of the said Union, That the Provinces should
be bound to the appointing of Stadtholders, for that it is said there, That
the Stadholders then in being, or afterward coming in should be sworn to the
observance of the Union, and the Articles thereof: for although these words
show what the Stadtholders, which may happen to be chosen, are bound to do;
they do in no wise prove, that the Provinces shall ever be bound to choose
Stadtholders; and the Lords of Holland do not think neither, that the office of
Stadtholdership should be absolutely necessary, for the voiding of
differences; and that the same should serve as the uttermost remedy of removing
controversies; for besides that on the one hand it would be unreasonable, that
the Provinces, only for deciding of Differences, should be necessitated to
choose Stadtholders, though otherwise full sore against their wills, who
afterward, besides the foresaid Decision, should do whatsoever otherwise
ordinarily belong*d to the conduct of Stadtholders; and on the other side it
would be as ill-beseeming, that the Stadt-holder's Commission should be
altogether impaled with the foresaid Decision. And the ninth Article it self
shows that our forefathers foresaw, the Stadholders might not prove such of
whom the said Decisions could be exspected, forasmuch as they, being engaged
every one to stand for his own Province, and thereby bound to the interests
thereof, will hardly be perfectly neuter and impartial; wherefore it is said,
that when they shall not be able to agree among themselves, they shall assume
to themselves some unpartial assessors or adjuncts, which make's the Lords of
Holland to think and conceiv, that the Union remaining* together with the
Obligation of the Provinces thereby one to another, in terms and manner as it
is laid down, if some difference should happen, which might and must be
determined by decision, some such expedients might then be taken and followed as
are propounded by the Lords of Zealand, Gelderland and Utrecht respectively;
those of them which shall be judged the best and most convenient, according to
the condition and exigence of times and affairs: hoping nevertheless, that God
Almighty shall bless the State with so much prudence, wisdom and Unitis, that
it shall be needless, to have ever recours to any Decision of Differences,
whereunto the Lords of Holland and West-Friesland shall evermore be ready to
contribute not only, all good will and readiness, but likewise the real and
upright effects; desiring that this their Declaration, as proceeding from
upright hearts, may be received accordingly* my Lords of Holland and
West-Friesland reserving to themselves the Liberty, to make such further
Declaration upon the said and other Articles of the Union, as it shall pleas
them to agree upon.

At last there came in likewise the inclinations of Over-Yssell, touching the 3
important points of the great Assembly.
High and Mighty Lords!
AS on the one side the State has great reason of being greived at the last
departure of his Highs the Prince of Orange of immortal memory; so it is on
the other no small ground of joy among the confederat^^, mutually to see and
observe the extraordinary Zeal of seeking and finding out extraordinary and
wholesome Remedie's, upon this unexpected accident whereby our dear Fatherland
may be kept secure, and safe as well within it self as from without.

The present Lords of the Province of Over-Yssell, have judged it their duty,
as Members of the common laboring Country, to contribute their part also, in
serving this Illustrious Assembly with their inclinations and considerations,
for to further the consummation of the foresaid holy work, with all mutual
concord and freindship, to the uttermost.

And forasmuch as in this regard there are three inseparable main things
without all controversy most requisite and necessary to wit, Religion, the
Union, and the Militia, it will be very needful likewise, to consider in what
manner and condition, the one as well as the other may be upheld and
maintained.

As for Religion; your, H* M. has lately January 27. in this present Assembly
framed such order that there is no more to be desired in that behalf: only
we referr to your H. M. consideration, whether there could not be some
expedient settled, in case the one or other Province should happen, beyond
expectation, to refuse or neglect the executing of Orders formerly published in
this behalf, and the other points contained in the foresaid resolution, and to
wink manifestly at the transgressions thereof; what means there might be used
then, for to keep the failing party to better performance; being the said
resolution does make no mention of any; and the second point thereof speak's
only of the maintenance of Religion it self, without expression any penalty
otherwise then in regard thereof; They therefore would advise, pondering the
sad experience of former times which taught us, how much the licentiousness of
the Papisls and of other sects and separates in these Countries, is able to
disturb the desired Union thereof; That the Provinces ought mutually to engage
themselves, not only to the observance of all the Articles of the forementioned
resolutions, but also to use and apply the foresaid penalty uuto that Member
or Province, which shall go about to infringe any of the foresaid points, or
connive at the doing thereof.

Concerning the Union, Their opinion is, That the same ought to be kept holily
and unviolahly as it was concluded at Utrecht in the year 1579. But if it
should fall out, which God prevent, that some Questions, or mis-understandings
should arise betwixt the members in any one Province, which formerly, by virtue
of the Union, were decided and taken away, and in part yet are, by the
Stadholders, if so be the Provinces, destitute now of Stadholders, have no
mind to choose new ones; it will be very requisite in this Case, That means
be thought upon and propounded, whereby the said defect may most conveniently
be supplied, and in this regard we hold the Propositions made by the Province
of Gelder-Land to be especially serviceable, and could rest well satisfied
with them. Nevertheless, under Correction, judging it a no less convenient
remedy, That the parties should be bound within a certain peremtorie time, to
choos, and submit their questions to a certain number of impartial Arbitrators,
who not being able to agree among themselves, for want of a casting voice, they
should likewise be obliged to choose within a prefixed time a Super-arbitrator,
for to compose the questions if it be possible within the term of one month at
furthest, and sooner, in case of urgent and pressing necesitie, or, in case of
deficiencie, to decide them upon Instruction. And if so be that the one party
shall not have named their Arbitrators, within the term aforesaid, then the
other which is ready, if they be members of one Province, may desire and have
granted them others. But if they be members, those that should cause the voices
to fail; or Province against Province, then both to be don by the States
General within time limited; and if the same should happen among the Provinces
together, then such Arbitrators to be chosen out of the one or the other Court
of Justice in these United Provinces.

It would likewise be very expedient, to bethink our selves, how to make these
and the like Orders, when settled once, to be readily and really obeyed.

The execution, of what by sentence should be determined in manner aforesaid,
we should think fit to be remitted to the Generality, after the third
summons gone before.

The tranquillity of the confederates requires likewise, that neither before
nor after, there should be any extremities, reprisals or acts of hostility
used, by, in, or among the Provinces.

Touching the point of the Militia, we should conceiv, that the disposition
thereof ought to be recommended to the Assembly of the States General, with
advice of the Council of State, upon such Instructions, as by common consent of
the Confederates, shall be agreed on.

Holding it needful likewise to frame an instruction for a Chieftain over the
Militia, nor to be concluded but with common consent of all the Provinces, and
the time of election to be ripely weighed, and nothing determined therein but
at the least, with the consent of five Provinces.

The persons We judge should be elected then by plurality of voices.

That all Chief Offices in the Army, which heretofore were at the disposal of
the States General or his Highs, unto the charge of Colonels exclusively,
should hence forward be left to the disposition of the Provinces, who should
send in their advices about it, to the Assembly of the States General.

All other Military offices of Colonels Lievtent Collonls Sergeant Majors,
Rit-Masters, Captains and inferior charges, formerly disposed of by the
absolute pleasure of his Highs without any nomination to him presented, shall
hereafter, without difference of In or Outlandish ones, be disposed of by the
United Provinces, and equally distributed among them.

The Commanders and Majors in the Cities and Forts of the Provinces, having
voice in the Stae, where the same are vacant and requisite, their places to be
disposed absolutely by the same Provinces, upon Commission of the States
General or Council of State; with that proviso nevertheless, that the same
Commanders or Majors shall in no wise pretend to the keeping of the keys,
opening or shutting of the Gates, but that the same shall wholly and soly remain
in the disposing of the Magistrates of the said Cities and places.

Among the foresaid Major-ships, there are not to be comprehended here, any
such as hitherto have been by the appointing of the Cities themselves, which
ought to be left to what hitherto they enjoied.

The Commanders aforesaid in the voicing Cities, shall no otherwise exercise or
extend the Military discipline, then for neglects and trespasses in marches
and watches, running over to the Enemy, deserting their Companies, or shifting
from one Company to another, without pass; together with such other
Exorbitancies and delinquencies; which Officers and Soldiers, in military
matters may commit among themselves; and no further; so that all other matters,
whether Criminal or Civil, shall make the Souldierie or Military persons
liable to be aprehended, indicted sentenced and executed by the Civil or
Criminal Judges, whose sentences, be they about matters of debts or otherwise,
shall in default of other satisfaction, be put in execution, according to the
order of the Land.

The Governors in the Cities and places, having no voices in the State, as at
Sluys, Berghen of Zoom, Hulst, Breda, the Bosch, Willemstadt, Mastricht and
Wessel, shall be appointed by the Provinces; and that with the usual
Commissions: the Commanderies of other such like places, by the States General.

The Majorships, by the Council of State.

The Military Officers to be admitted hereafter, ought all of them to profess
the Reformed Religion.

As for the giving of Patents or Commissions, and transplacing of Garrisons,
gathering of Camps and Leaguers, or sending forth considerable troops or
squadrons, to places and upon occasions, where the service of the Land
requires it, the same shall be and remain in the disposition of the States
General with advice of the Council of State.

And their Hi. M. are to conclude and determine therein by the plurality of
voices: provided, that if any alteration com to be made, the same be made
known to the Provinces, Cities and places, where the Companies are to be sent
to or taken forth.

As likewise timely notice is to be given by Letters to the Provinces where
the said Companies are to pass or randevouz, that orders and courses may be
taken about their marchings and quarters: provided that the Governments of the
Respective Provinces, shall have liberty also to send Companies from one place
to another for the security thereof; and the Officers of the said Companies
be bound to obey them, they giving immediate advertisement thereof to their
Hi. Mi.

And that furthermore all such Companies as are any where in Garrison now, or
may be put in hereafter, shall be obliged to swear to the respective Cities,
according to the 17th Article of the Union, and the form already made, or to
be made; or to the chief Officers in the open Country, in case Necessity
should require, to put any Companies there, for the keeping of Rivers or
otherwise.

The Cities anciently exempted and privileged, of being molested with any
Garrison against their will, they shall remain in their old right and
possession thereof, and not be prejudiced therein at all.

As for Secret Correspondencie both within and without the Land, the same shall
be kept and continued with their Hi. Mi. and the Council of State, by such
persons and in such order as their Hi. Mi. and the Council of State shall think
fitting and requisite for most service of the Land, and most secret managing
thereof, with the least chargeableness that may be; the moneys for it being
to be furnished from the Treasury by the Receiver-General.

Besides all these foresaid Inclinations and Considerations, the present Lords
of the Province of Over-Yssell reser^ to themselves the liberty of taking off
or adding, what they shall judge fit and requisite, for most service of the
Country.

Upon Februarii 13o there being com in now the Inclinations and Considerations
of all the Provinces, upon the Overture and Proposition made by and in behalf
of Holland, Januar. 18o. The Lords of Holland propounded by word of mouth and
delivered in writing their further considerations, for contracting the affairs
of the Great Assembly, in manner as follows.

The Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland, have brought into the
Assembly, and made overture of their further Considerations; for dispatching
the affairs of this great Assembly, by distinguishing things purely provincial
(concerning which they have likewise declared themselves in manner as will be
showed by and by) and things properly to be deliberated by this Assembly;
containing in effect, That the said Lords the States of Holland and
West-Friesland having perused and examined the respective Considerations served
in by the Provinces at the said great Assembly, they judged thereupon, that
the matters contained in the said Considerations, are some of them purely
Provincial, and do not belong to the Deliberation and Ordering of the said
Assembly, but wholly and solely to the managing of the Respective Provinces;
and others some belong purely to the managing of the Common Union, and
consequently to the Deliberation of the foresaid great Assembly.

That the things which their No. Mi. judged to be provincial, and wholly and
solely to belong to the managing of the States of the Respective Provinces, are
these following.

I. The appointing of Stad-holders, or forbearing it, at the States pleasure in
every Province.

II. The disposing of the Commanderies and Major-ships in the Cities and Forts
within the respective United Provinces, together with their Condependencies.

III. The keeping of the keys by such Cities as have voices in the State, and
the giving of the watchword by the Magistrates of the said Cities.

IV. The jurisdiction over the Militia, in all things which are not purely
Military.

V. The disposing of the Collonel-ships, Captain-ships and lesser charges, of
their own Repartition.

VI. The transplacing of the Garrisons within the respective Provinces, with
the condependencies.

VII. The swearing of the Souldierie by the States of the Province and
Magistrates of the Cities, where any Souldierie is put in Garrison, besides the
oath which the said Souldierie is bound to make to the Provinces, upon whose
Repartition they stand.

That their No. Mi. conceiv, the foresaid matters ought wholly and solely to
remain in the Disposing of the States of the Respective Provinces, every one
apart; declaring withal that their N. M. intending to make use of this Right
within their own Government, they shall be well content, that the Provinces
and members of them, shall as they think good, make use of, and improve the
same Right, and therefore they hold it expedient, That the Officers Military
may be written unto, from this Board, in that behalf, for to submit themselves
in what is said before to the States of the respective Provinces and Members
thereof, and to obey the same therein.

That the matters, which their N. M. judged to belong properly to the managing
of the Common Union, and consequently ought to be deliberated in this
Assembly, are,

I. Whether in the General Direction and Disposition of Military affairs and
the Army or Souldierie, by common advice of the Confederates formerly referred
unto the Council of State, it will be thought good to make any alteration
therein.

II. By whom and in what manner the Patents or Commissions shall be given to
such of the Army, as are without the limits of the United Provinces.

III. In what manner the voicing Provinces and the Cities thereof, shall receiv
Garrisons and give way to Marches and Randevouzes.

IV. In what manner any Souldierie shall be drawn forth out of voicing
Provinces and the Cities thereof.

V. To whom it shall be referred or left to dispose of the Governments and
Commanderies in the Cities and Forts without the limits of the voicing
Provinces.

VI. To whom, the disposing of the Major-ships in the said Cities and Forts.

VII. Who shall have the disposing of the great Military Charges, formerly
disposed by the States General, or his Highss unto Colonels, exclusively.

VIII. Whether the foresaid Charges, together with Governments, Commanderies,
and Majorships, may henceforward be bestowed upon persons not being of the
Reformed Religion.

IX. Whether and when and in what manner the Provinces ought to proceed to an
Election of a Captain General over the Army.

X. How the Differences, arising amongst the Provinces in General, shall be
determined.

XI. How and by whom the the secret Correspondencies ought to be managed.

That in regard of this later sort of matters their No. Mi. could not otherwise
conceiv, but that the Provinces do well agree about the 5, 6, 7, and 8th point,
namely,

That the Governments and Commanderies in the Cities and Forts, lying without
the voicing Provinces, shall be disposed of by the States General.

That the Majorships of those places be disposed by the Council of State.

That the great military charges to Colonels exclusively, formerly at the
disposal of the States General, or of his Highs, shall be disposed by the
States General.

And that the foresaid great charges, together with the Governments,
Commanderies and Majorships, be given henceforward to none but such as are of
the Reformed Religion.

In regard whereof the Ass^mblie shall not need to trouble themselves any
further with deliberating upon the points aforesaid; but may readily proceed to
conclude them according to the foresaid common consent and agreement.

And that therefore nothing does remain to deliberate upon, but the matters
contained in the foresaid 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10 and 11 Articles, namely,

I. Whether it shall be thought good to make any alteration in the direction
of Military affairs.

II. The giving of Patents to the Souldierie without the United Provinces.

III. and IV. The putting in and drawing forth of forces in and out of the
Voicing Provinces.

V. Whether, when and how there should be proceeded to the Election of a
Captain General.

VI. How the Differences arising among all the Provinces, shall be determined.

VII. How and by whom the Secret Intelligences shall be managed.

In the Deliberation of which points, their N. M. declare, they rest confident,
that the Provinces, yielding to the weight of Reasons and fixing their eyes
only upon the rest, unity and preservation of the State, they will meet one
another with so much affection and confidence, that therein also things may
soon be brought to a happy conclusion.

After which there were these two ensuing points of Deliberation propounded by
the Lord President, to be advised upon by the respective Provinces against the
next morning, according to the order of the present Assembly.

First, whether it shall be thought meet to make any alteration in the general
direction and disposition of military affairs, and the Army or Souldierie
which formerly by common advice of the Confederates, was referred to the
Council of State.

And Secondly, by whom and in what manner Patents shall be given to the
Souldierie, lying without the limits of the United Provinces.

Next morning the Provinces were summoned and minded accordingly to make their
Declarations touching the two points aforesaid, the Direction of the Militia,
and giving of Patents.

At this time the Princess Dowager, Grandmother to the young Prince of Orange,
presented by the Lord President the ensuing paper; being a fair and civil
memento to the States of the Provinces, not to put the said young Prince out of
their Remembrance altogether; and yet plainly declaring, it was not at all
pretended, that the State was bound to any such thing, or that the Charges born
by his Predecessors should be hereditarie; but that both he and she should
take it as tokens of pure affection and thankfulness.

High Mighty Lords!
THe Princess Dowager of Orange does here by these address her self with all
respect to your Hi. Mi. Illustrious Assembly, wishing from the bottom of her
heart, that God would be pleased to continue his wonted Grace and Favor over
their famous Government, and especially to bless your Hi. Mi. present most
important Assembly with such an happy success of wholesome Res^lutions, as may
be most effectual for the service and safety of the common interest in these
troublesome conjunctures.

And forasmuch as her Highs is informed, That your Hi. M. are busied now, in
that part of your important affairs, which relate's to the chiefest Civil and
Military Charges, made vacant at late by the sudden departure of the Prince
her Son; her Highs does find her self engaged and obliged, as well in respect
of her upright affection to the service of this State as especially, by the
natural tenderness of a Grandmother, withal friendly respect to put your Hi.
Mi. in mind and remembrance, h^w that at this present, through God's mercy,
and to her singular Comfort, in her manifold heavy afflictions, there is lying
in the cradle now the only remaining male-heir and offspring of those
Illustrious Princes of Orange, of whom her Highs is confident it is still some
sweet content and satisfaction to your Highs to have it remembered, how they not
only helped to lay the foundation of this Commonwealth, but likewise by their
most indefatigable and hereick faithfulness, yea with their own goods and
blood, now above these fourscore years, assisted and maintained the rearing and
building up thereof, That the same under God's grace and your H. M. wise
directions, is thereby risen to that blessed height and eminence, that not
only the good inhabitants of these Countries do find themselves seated in
perfect prosperity, liberty, and quietness of Conscience under their own Vine
and Fig Tree, but that even all Foreign Nations, and though sore against their
will, the most ill affected to this State do com to see and take notice with
terror and amazement, that the Honorable body of this Union is now assembled
together in full peace and concord, under the shadows of the glorious Trophies
and Laurels which from year to year were brought home to your H. M. by their
foresaid famous Generals.

It is true H. M. Lords, that her Highs never scrupled, but your H. M. would,
upon this occasion, according to their wanted wisdom and discretion, have
minded those high and long continued services, to your State, without any
remembrances* and she finde's herself likewise much strengthened in that
confidence of hers by the kind and friendly answers she received from most
Provinces, upon her former communicating and commending to them, soon after the
deceas of the Prince her Son, the happy birth of the present young Prince.

Nevertheless her Highs conceived herself not discharged yet, in the utmost of
her Grand-motherly devoirs, for the good of her Infant Grand*child, without
renewing this Office of address in his behalf, most serviceably and friendly
desiring your H. M. since it pleased you by the honor of your witnessing for
him at his Christian Baptism* to assure him of your special favor and
protection in the face of the Church, to take such further regard in his
behalf, as in your great wisdom and prudence, you shall find fitting upon the
premises.

Her Highs shall confidently await your H. M. favorable resolution, without any
further importunity; concluding this only with her most express declaration
and protestation that she does not intend in the least manner to pretend and
claim ought of your H. M. as if those high charges, the Princess of Orange have
been invested with, for so many years, should thereby be acquired to their
houses and posterity; but on the contrary, her Highs intent is, whatsoever
Your H. M. shall be pleased, at her request, to grant and conferr, to look
upon and accept of it, as purely and originally proceeding from the good and
friendly disposition, which You are pleased thankfully and prais-worthily to
show unto that house, in regard of their said long and manifold services and
merits. Which favor her Highs is confident, this young Sprout will duly
acknowledge in due time, with the same care and faithfulness toward yaur H. M.
and the State of the Land, as the Lords his Forefathers have showed; Whereof
your H. M. may rest very confident not only in regard of the house from which
this Prince is sprung, hut also by reason of the great and considerable
possessions, which by lawful successions are fallen to him, under your H. M.
jurisdiction, beyond all other inhabitants, insomuch that in his person there
will always be a concurrence of the consideration of his own interest joined
with his own, and Fore-father's honor and glory, together with the inbred
love and affection to the constant welfare of the State; which God Almighty
second with his holy Blessing.

(Signed) Amelia, Princess of Orange.


This Memorandum being taken into deliberation, there was nothing don upon it,
but that it was received as a Notification; and copies made of it for the
Provinces; both Holland and most of the other Provinces continuing disposed
still, not to enter into thoughts of entrusting any one person, and ^uch less a
Child, with such a power as the former Stadholders and Governors General had
here. Friesland and Groninghen, with the Omlands, having a Stad-holder already,
were much less able to say any thing in behalf of the young Prince in point of
Stadholdership. They showed indeed a great deal of zeal for conferring the
Charge of Capt^in General upon the young Prince, so as that Count William their
Stadholder might in the mean time, and during his Minority, be his
Lieutenant. But this was not relisht by the rest.

The Lords Deputies of the Province of Holland and West-Friesland, advising
upon the two points lately appointed for Deliberation, by the Lord President,
they declared themselves,
FOr the First, That in the General Direction and Disposition of the Military
affairs and the Souldierie, formerly by common advice of the Confederates
referred to the Council of State, there should be made no alteration, but that
the same Direction should be left to the Council of State, and that the
Instruction of the said Council should be framed for the security of the
Provinces, sutably to the considerations brought in, in this behalf, by the
Lords of Zealand the first of this month, whereunto their N. Gr. M. herewithal
conformed themselves.

And for the Second, That as much as is feasible, the Companies be laid in
Garrison within such Provinces and adjacent Frontiers, from which Provinces
they do receiv their pay; and that to this end there be by common advice of
the Members of the Union certain Frontier-places assigned to every Province, in
which respective Frontier-places the foresaid Council of State shall have
liberty of transplacing the Companies, acquainting the Provincial Government
with it; and that the States of the Province, to which the said Frontier-places
shall be assigned, or their Commissioned Council shall have power to do the
like, as also to bring the Companies out of the said frontier-places into their
own Province, and vice ver^a out of their Province into the same Frontiers,
provided only that they give present advertisement thereof to the Council of
State.

That the Council of State intending to draw forth any Companies out of any of
the assigned Frontiers, shall address themselves to the States, or Commissioned
Council of the Province to which the said Frontiers are assigned, transmitting
Patents for that purpose, with open Names to be filled up by the said States,
or their Commissioned Council; or elf their reasons to be returned to the
Council, why they make difficulty, and the same to be judged of by the
Council; and upon the second address of the Council (the foresaid transmitted
reasons being not found weighty enough) the Companies shall be yielded; with
this proviso nevertheless, That by the common advice of the Confederates, and
for the more mutual content and quiet, there should be made two Lists, the one
for Besetting, the other for Emploie; and that in case of Invasion or sudden
Surprisals by the Enemy, the Council should have power to draw forth so many
Companies as are upon the List of Emploie, giving but advertisement and notice
thereof to the Provinces where and in whose assigned Frontiers they lay, and
causing them to return as soon as the danger shall be over into their former
Garrisons.

They of Zealand declared in manner as follows.
The Lords Deputies of the Province of Zealand, advising in the behalf of their
Principals, upon the two points propounded for Deliberation at the Assembly,
by the Lord President on the 13 of this instant, they declare,
AS to the First, that they yield their consent, that in present constitution
of time and affairs, the General Direction and Disposition of matters of War
and over the soldiers, shall be referred to the Council of State, under such
an exact and pertinent Instruction, as according to the draught was some few
days ago, in their N. M. behalf, presented to this Assembly; or shall with
joint-advice of the common Confederates, be thought best, by which determining
of the Instruction their N. M. likewise understand, that the decreeing of the
foresaid Delegation shall be comprehended pari passu, and not otherwise; as
without which they declare their foresaid consent no consent.

For the second point, their N. M. conceived, that in it there came explicit
into consideration the business of Repartition, and Assignation of the
Frontiers to be made to the respective Provinces, and the transplacing of the
Garrisons therein.

Declaring, their N. M. advice to be, that the Militia and the Souldierie,
standing upon the Repartition, and at the charge of the repsective Provinces,
should be laid as much as possibly might, within the same Province, together
with the Frontiers and places assigned for their security and protection; as
not being liable then, for their faithfulness and obedience to their
Paiemaster, to take any other Oath, or in any other manner then has been usual
heretofose according to the old form.

That therewithal, sutably to former practice and examples, there should be
assigned to the respective Provinces for their particular defense, provision
and authority, all such strong holds and forts as lay next them, and in whose
conservation and preservation they were most interessed: in which affair their
N. M. desire, that a serious conference and debate may be appointed by a
Committee of this solemn assembly, and the same favorably disposed.

As to the point of disposing or bestowing of Patents, transplacing of
Garrisons in the said assigned places, they declared that their Principals
adhered to their former advice and considerations, presented by way of
Inclination, in all the points and Articles thereof without any variation,
desiring only, that a speedy course may be taken for the framing of the lists
both of Besetting and Emploie therein mentioned.

And they do expressly also declare herewith, that they do not mean in any
wise, by this their advice and declaration, to prejudice the Deliberations and
Dispositions which may happen hereafter upon the point of the Captainship
General.

Hereupon other Provinces likewise being called upon, Gelderland brought in
their advice upon the foresaid points, after they had succinctly said, that
finding the advices of the Provinces discrepant in the weightiest points, they
held it needful, some few Members of all the Provinces should be appointed as a
Committee, not only to confer about the said Discrepancie; but likewise to
find out some Expedient, for the consolidation of the upper Quarter of
Gelderland by an equivalent.

Hereupon follows
The Application of the Geldrish Instruction, touching the Direction of the
Militia; that the same ought to remain with the States General, and not with
the Council of State.
FOrasmuch as in the Assembly of the States General, every Province has an
equal vote or voicing, but not so in the Council; and that every Province ought
to have as much to say as the other about the Direction of the Militia; it
having not com into Consideration at the first disposing of the common Defense,
what every ones Quota or R^te was, nor how the Militia was shared into
Repartitions afterward; the seven Soveraig^s contributing each one according
to their abilities for the general interest, about which every one ought
therefore to have equal Authority of advising therein.

The same agree's likewise with the eldest and best Governments of Republics,
and with the modern Cantons.

It is conform also to the old Government of the Netherlands in general, when
the same met together for common Defense, and in regard thereof had alike much
to faie, and equal authority of devising.

And as agreeable to the Union Artic. 3. 4. 6. 7. and 9. and the resolution
ensued, both that same year 1579. and the years 1582. and 1584.

Nor can the said Direction be brought to the Council of State, because there
is not only an inequality there of voicing for the Provinces; but a further
inequality also therein now, that some Provinces have the voice of Stad-holder
in it; to balance which, though Gelderland should obtain the bringing in of
one member more, yet they consider still, the prevalent vote of great persons
and men in Authority, with other such like inconveniences.

That heretofore indeed the Direction of the Militia was by Instruction
referred, for a season only, to the Council, the same was don in regard that
England then by reason of their Subsidy, had likewise somewhat to say therein,
according to agreement. The Direction over the Militia by the said Instruction,
being likewise only constituted in part and consisting most in terms
prohibitorie, or negative: and not longer then about three months after the
agreement upon the Instruction for the Council of State, the States General
being reassembled, they reassumed the general direction to themselves,
according to the Union Artic. 9. And there it ought likewise to remain,
regulating only the Assembly with an Instruction and by a general oath,
according to that, agreed upon May 14o. 1580. and renewed October. 22o. 1586.
which will be more easy to be don then to frame the Council so, as shall be
to the content of all the Provinces in this behalf.

If it should be in the disposal of the Council, it is well known, that the
States of Holland always assembling in the Haghe, and being most of them
together, there would be nothing don in the Council, but with the advice of
the Lords the States of Holland, as is to be seen by the Report made to the
States General by the Council December. 10o. 1588. Therefore it were best, that
the other Provinces also, were something strong in the Council, and kept the
managing of the General concernment together with those of Holland.

Applications, about the giving of Patents or Commissions and transplacing of
Garrisons.
IN case it be not thought good as yet to choose a Captain General or Stad
holder, whiles there is no difference about the giving of Patents in the
voicing Provinces, though it be considerable; but only about the transplacing
of the G^rrisons without the Provinces; the Province of Gelderland maintain's,
that the same ought to be don by the States General with the advice of the
Council of State.

That being conform to the foregoing reasons produced about the general
Direction of the Militia; Conform likewise to the Union Arti^* 9. and to the
ensued Resolution of 1582. where it is to be n^ted, that the Garrisons without
the Provinces should be ordered with advice of the Council of State, by that
of 1584 in these words, That the Garrisons with the Towns and Forrs taken by
force of Arms, shall be ordered with the approbation of the States General.

If the particular Provinces should have the giving of Patents for the
Frontier-places, every one would look to his own and the General would be
neglected, and the Division would first be practiced among the Provinces, and
afterward among the members of the Provinces; They that give least, would be
least secured, although there were most need of it. Examples we have in the
Admiralties; the Names of Licenses and Convoy's by direction of Ao. 1579.
divided, is the cause, why the Commerce out of the Maces and other places cannot
so well and requisitly be conducted as from Amsterdam; and let it be observed
withal, how little the Admiralties obey the States General.

It is needless to relate all the inconveniences, arisen from this, that the
giving of Patents has been in the hands, and usurped by particular Provinces;
although in case of necessity now and then it has been useful, and in
necessity it may be allowed still.

That in the Disposing or bestowing of the Military Charges, each Province
has alike interest.
I. FOr that is conform to the old Governments, and the best, applied to this
State.

II. That the same is likewise conform to the old Government of the Netherlands
in general.

III. That it is conform to the Union, wherein the means of expenses and common
charge, are to be applied and managed in common, Artic. 6. and that conform to
the 9th Article by plurality of voices, as the manner is in the Generality,
set down more clearer yet, in tbe ensued Resolutions of the year 1584.

IV. The disposing of offices, has likewise been general at first in the power
of the States General, and was by Resolution of 21. Jun. 1581. committed to the
Captain General, with these words inserted in the Commission: upon precedent
Resolution of the States General.

V. If it shall be made particular, then first it will be soamong the
Provinces; next among the members in the Provinces, and after that among the
very families: if Amsterdam stood for this in Holland, Utrecht in the Diocese
the Nimmeghen Quarter in Gelderland, Middleburg in Zealand? what could it prove
at last, but a general withdrawing from the Union.

VI. If it should be don according to every ones Rate or Quota, then note,
that Gelderland would be in no better condition, then, by example, the Cities
of Emmerick, Rhees, Wesel, Rhinberg? where their H. M. send officers, though
with this difference, Those give nothing and are protected, Gelderland should
be guarded and kept in awe with officers from Holland, and give never the
less; only they might appoint a Governor, and furnish 5 Companies, in hundred.
This must be laid down for a ground, That the Repartition give's no Right, but
that the Defense is Common, and, by the death of his Highs, the disposing of
the Military charges are devolved again to the Provinces in general.

VII. Or if it shall not be liked in Common, which nevertheless ought to be
so according to the Union in all the three foresaid points, let the proceeding
be as in the Admiralties, suitable to the interests, opportunities, and natural
conditions of the Confederates: Gelderland, Utrecht and Over-Yssell help all
offices of War to be entertained for Holland, out of the common means of
Licenses and Convoys; and why should not the same discretion out of the common
means of Consumtion by Land, be appointed for the Provinces most interested by
Land, most suitable and according to their natural condition, the practice
being observable, that when the Generality has any offices to bestow by Sea
or Land in Holland, it is referred to Holland; if by Land in other Provinces,
they referr it to the Province.

VIII. Only it behoov's us to say yet something to what is alleged of the
practice of Friesland and Groninghen with the Omlands, joined with the
inclination of Zealand upon all the 3 foresaid points: that same practice is
therefore t^lerable, and yet not applicable in general, forasmuch as*
Friesland, Gronin ghen and the Omlands in proportion of what they have to guard
by Sea and Land, and what they give toward the common defense, they hardly yet
do take and use a seventh part of authority in the common Defens, in giving of
Patents and disposing of Charges; so that the same cannot bring the general
concernment to any disproportion* and peradventure those Provinces would be as
well content to reduce it to the Generality, for to have a full seventh part
of authority: but to apply all the same to Holland, and their Quota against
Gelderland, Utrecht and Over-Yssell, would be too wide beside the Union. Et
tum Getri essent sub Tutela Hollandorum: and introduced once into practice, one
might then justly apply the Government of the Roman Republic to those four
Provinces, and say, Socii Romanorum tacit redigebantur in Servitutem. By
little and little the Romans Allies became their Bondmen.

On the 18. of Febr. those of Friesland likewise presented their advice upon
the points brought in by Holland, 130. in manner as follows.

The Deputies of the Province of Friesland, having examined the 2 points
propounded by my Lords of Holland and West-Friesland, and extracted out of
their N. M. further Considerations of Feb. 13. finding the Disposition of the
further Considerations so qualified, that among the same some points were found
severed, which might more fruitfully have been joined; and some put in the rear,
which, if they were dispatched in the first place, would have given a great
deal of eas and advantage for the rest that were propounded. The main points to
be discussed in this Illustrious Assembly, being agreed to be these three,
to wit Religion, the Union, and Militia, and granting, according to the sens of
most of the Proviuces, that of Religion to be sufficiently provided for; sure
then there ought to follow that of the Union, together with that which is so
considerable in it, viz, the Stadholder's Remedy against accidental
Differences, before we proceed to couferences about matters having relation to
the Militia. Nay even therein, my Lords of Holland and West-friesland, went so
far as to judge, there was no discrepancie among the Provinces, about a certdin
partition propounded by them, when as many of the Provinces had not so much as
seen their N. M. Provincial Project, much less consented thereunto. Now
forasmuch as the Deputies of the Province of Friesland, having made several
addresses to the Lord President in regard of that which my Lords of Holland and
West-Friesland were pleased to propound in this behalf to be discussed in this
Assembly, that Copies might be communicated to the Provinces, the same could
not be obtained hitherto; Therefore the said Deputies of the Province of
Friesland do advise, that it ought first to be deliberated in this Assembly,
whether the joint Provinces are pleased and content with the Disposition and
Method inserted by their N. M. the Lords of Holland in their said project of
13. of this instant; before it can be allowed, that deductions or extracts
should be made thereof, and propounded for solemn Debate; and in this regard
the said Deputies of Friesland would friendly desire the joint Provinces to be
pleased first of all to declare their minds on this subject, to the end that
every thing may be discussed and transacted orderly, without confounding the
Union with the Militia, or the Militia with the Union; and besides that this
Declaration of the Province of Friesland may be inserted and registered among
the public Acts, to serve upon occasions, to what is fitting.

Upon the 21th. the Provinces were summoned again, about the point of the
Militia, the distinction and assignation of the Frontiers and Companies;
whereupon, those of Over-Yssell presented this following advice.

High and Mighty Lords!
FOr to be able to ground a good advice upon that which is propounded by the
Lords of Holland, and now again put to the Question by the Lord President, the
present Lords of the Province of Over-Yssell, conceiv, under Correction, it
were fit to be known and declared before hand, how many persons are to
constitute the Council of State, and withal what is understood by a general
Direction and Disposition of Military affairs, and how much they would have
comprehended under it, saving that entire which seems to be presupposed, that
such a general Disposition, which might be excluded even to the Supreme
Authority, should be referred to the Council of State by the Confederates; we
do find indeed, that the States General, at that time, when the College of
this Council was erected, not being able to meet always, recommended the
direction of the Military affairs to the Council, by way of provision,
together with some others, such as were the paying of the Souldierie, and other
Military requisites, Musterings, Discipline, Swearing the Souldierie, together
with discharging of them, upon precedent order of the Confederates, and some
such other particular matters, but not the general; and all nevertheless with
that restriction, that they could not make to surceas, what they the States
General, or the Provincial States in particular, were pleased to order
themselves.

Neither do we know that this Delegation or Commission was don by common
advice, so as all the members of the Union should have unanimously consented
about it in their voicing, though we will not gainsay, but that the
Consederates found good unanimously and with common advice to erect the said
Council, and to frame instructions for it; but they are not able to see, how it
fallows thence, that all the Articles and points of order therein
comprehended, were all and every one of them determined with an unanimous
consent of the Confederates, being that in the managing of Confederacies and
the dependence thereof, that is to obtain and to be followed, which shall be
concluded by most voices, which must be gathered for that purpose; so as the
custom was to proceed at that time in the Generality, according to the 9th
Article of the Union, there being never no alteration made therein, as none
also can be without joint advice.

And supposed, that the foresaid Direction was referred to the Council with
common advice, (which nevertheless we were not able to discover) it is
manifest, that the same College is very much altered already, as in regard of
the mooving causes, wherefore it was chosen, and through the alteration of the
States General, and the misting of those excellent Military Persons, then
constituting the same, so likewise in respect of the matters themselves to be
transacted there, partly by tacit and partly by express consent of the
Provinces abridged, or referred to others, or returned back ad primum fontem
(to the first source) so that the present Council is of an other condition; and
thence it is, that the present Lords of Over-Yssell can find no sufficient
reason, wherefore there ought more Authority to be given now to the foresaid
College, then is constituted at present; and judge, that the Supreme Authority
remaining with the Sovereign, that is to say, the Provinces themselves, the
general Direction and Disposition of Military affairs ought to be left under
Instruction, to such a governing Power, where there is found no iniquity, and
the Provinces may enjoy still those prerogatives, which the Union allowed them
in voicing; which Right, is no where found to be abdicated by them, there
being never constituted a certain number of Persons in the Council.

And this we advise without restraint of the Lords our Principals to add or
deminish, what their N. M. shall find fitting for the service of the Country.

As for the Second point, we shall referr our selves to our formerly delivered
Inclinations and Considerations, ready to justify the same, together with the
matter foregoing with the first.

Those of Friesland seeing, that most Provinces wholly disposing themselves to
remain without Stadholder and Captain General, made not only no more mention
of that point, but seemed to have buried it in oblivion; they thought good, to
draw up a writting, which they delivered and caused to be read in the Great
Assembly, Febr. 21. endeavoring as by experience, and the nature of these
Republics, so also from the Union it self to demonstrate, how necessary it
was, that this State being Polyarchical, should be tempered with a show and
shadow of Monarchical Government.

A Deduction of Friesland, in justification of their N. M. formerly delivered
Considerations.
High Mighty Lords!
THe Commissioners of the Province of Friesland having seen the Debate which
the N. M. the Lords States of Holland presented to the Generality the ninth of
this instant, upon the Considerations and Inclinations delivered Januarie 27,
in behalf of the foresaid Province, they cannot but in satisfaction of their
minds, and discharge of their duty declare, that under favor they cannot judge
the foresaid Considerations of that weight, thereby their scruples should be
removed, or all other deduced motives and considerations enervated.

For it is too well known among Politicians, that in the Polyarchical State
there is nothing so much to be feared still, as discord and division among the
Governors, proceeding from Dissentings, Emulations and Factions, as also from
different interests, aims and designs, which ever follow such a State, as a
shadow does the body, which is testified by the continual disputes and
distempers of the Demagogues, People-leaders at Athens, the manifold
alterations and commotions in the City of Rome, post ejectos Reges, and other
innumerable examples, which besides that do teach us, Quod quo plures imperant,
eo gravius ^it Discordiarum periculum, quodque multae Reipublicae in tanto
dissentionum aeftu, ipsae a seipsis subversae sint. That the more the Governors
are, the greater is their danger from Discord, and that many Commonwealths
were through that heat of dissentions, subverted by themselves.

Which our very prudent Forefathers, the Autors of the nearer Union, well
perceiving by means of the representation made thereof by the old Prince
William, of blessed memory (being absolutely the best Politician and Adviser
in those times) judged it behoofful and necessary, by advice of the said
Prince, that the function, authority and direction of the Stadtholders would
be the best temper and qualification of the Polyarchical Government, for the
banishing and preventing of all such dissentions and discords; yea the very
bond and chain of the everlasting League they were a making then among
themselves; and in case notwithstanding this preservative, there might creep in
any differences and misunderstanding among the Provinces, and find
entertainment there, they made choice, appointed and established the foresaid
Stadtholders, to be as it were the Panacaea or sacra Anchora, and the only
remedy of removing and determining the said Disputes and Discrepancies;
insomuch, that the questions touching Peace, Truce, War and Contributions are
provisionally left to their Decisions by the 9. Article of the Union; and all
other arising Disputes between the Provinces in general, principally and
absolutely remitted and yielded up to the said Stadtholders without any further
exception, appeal, revision, or any other evasion to be used or admitted; in
conformity to the 16. Artic. of the said Union.

Upon which foundation is likewise built the interpretation of dubious or
doubtful cases which may arise from the Union, referred to the Stadholders by
the 21 Article; as also the Oath of the Stadholders for observing and keeping
the Articles of the Confederacy, and causing them to be observed and kept.
Article 24, together with the mainteining of the Train-bands in Cities and
Towns, and sealing of the Writs in that behalf, expressed more at large Article
25, and 26 of the foresaid Union.

All which precautions, foundations and remedies were devised, established, and
by way of Contract, admitted and yielded unto, in behalf of all the
Confederated Provinces in general, and consequently by the whole State for the
conservation thereof; whence it does necessarily follow, that not any, nor most
Members of the Union, may vary or alter the disposition thereof in opposition
to one, two or three Provinces, but are bound, according to the examples of the
Provinces conforming herein to the Union, to choose likewise Stadholders for
themselves, to make all Provinces by that means partakers of the enjoiment of
the effects and benefits abovesaid: Nam quemadmodum qui ad finem obligatus est,
obligatus quoque est ad media: Sic in hoc casu Provinciae, quae obligatae sunt
ad Unionem conservandam, and Discordias tum praecavendas, tum sopiendas,
obligatae sunt ad Media ad istum finem ducentia, maxim quia illa semel,
communi Foederatoum placito, specifice and formaliter recepta ac approbata
sunt; which cannot be altered but by common advice and consent of all the
Confederates; as is notably set down in terms concerning the Stadholders in the
11, 21 Articles of the foresaid Union, and reiterated Artic. 22 in general,
from the nature, property and efficacy of all contracts, that there may be
no alterations made of any points or articles, but by common advice and consent
of the Confederates, additis verbis taxativis, and not otherwise.

Beyond all this there ought to be considered, the great Diversity of
opinions and enormous lingering of Resolutions in Polyarchical Government, as a
most peculiar property of it, which in Plutarch are aptly represented,
speaking of the Samnites, in these words, Consilia vestra longa sunt, effectus
lenti, ac saepe nulli; which slackness and remissness is notably corrected by
the vigilancie, credit, authority and dexterity of a Stadholder, and reduced
to expedition, consent and unity; whereby it com's to pass, Ut Consiliorum
fiat and Conclusio and Executio, which is that whereof Politicians speak,
Polyarchicum Statum eatenus esse laudabilem, quatenus in se habet fimilitudinem
and representationem Monarchiae, atque adeo, quatenus illi plures qui imperant
reducuntur ad unitatem: it being very remarkable what Bodine says in a
certain place, Si plurium Imperia memoria recolamus, inveniemus eos, aut cum
civibus internum, aut cum hostibus externum bellum perpetuo gessisse; and
quanquam faverent Polyarchiae, non plurium, sed sapientissimi cujusdam Civis
Imperio, nutu ac Consiliis, quasi Regia quadam potestate gubernatos ac
moderatos fuisse. And daily experience shows, what hinderance, inconvenience
and prejudice is brought upon the rest of the Provinces, yea to the whole
Union, by the irresolution of but one Member; insomuch that the Confederates
are highly concerned and interessed the one in the other's expedite
Deliberation, Resolution and Execution, and have great reason very seriously to
press and desire, that in this regard likewise the No* Mighty States of all
the Provinces would be pleased, with unamous resolution to accommodate
themselves to the choosing of a Stadholder, or Stadholders; for that we see how
it has pleased God Almighty to bless and prosper the said form of Government
hitherto, to the admiration of all the world, and it being much to be feared,
(which God in mercy prevent) Ne mutatione Reipublicae, fortuna Belgici Nominis
mutetur. Tacitus hunc metum instillat, dum inquit; Scito super omnibus negociis
melius atque rectius olim provisam, and quae convertuntur, in deterius mutari:
Vulgus hoc non ignorant, qui saepe experitur, quod dum vitia quaedam vitare
studet, in contraria, mul^oque majora, deteriora, ac periculosiora incurrat.
Quare*sanctissimum est Alcibiadis apud Thucydidem judicium, dicentis* Eos
tutissime agere, qui Rempublicam administrantes in regimine and leg^bus minimum
variant. To pass by, Quod autoritas Regiminis (quam Lipsius definit, impressam
subditis exteris opinionem reverentem de Reip. Sta^u) a constanti Reip* forma
pendeat, and per innvoationem ac mu^a^ionem valde accidatur, ac ubique vilesca^.

Lastly, there is so often made mention in the Instruction of the Council of
State, as Artic. 1, ^, 6, 20, 34, and others, made in the year 1588, of the
Stadholders or Governors, as de partibus integrantibus Statnum, that thereby
also it does sufficiently appear, that our Forefathers held the Office of
Stadholders very necessaire in all the respective Provinces.

Against which it is to no purpose what is alleged for the Sovereigntie of each
Province, the Majesty whereof is nothing impaired, restreined or lessened by
Contracts or Covenants; for else all Kings and States should com to lose their
supreme authority as often as they do bind themselves to make no peace nor
truce with the Common Enemy the one without the other, which being absurd,
the foresaid assertion of like nature must needs be as impertinent. Quid
multis? Why should the Sovereigntie be more prejudiced by the necessity of
choosing Stadholders, then by the Obligation of making no Truce or Peace,
beginning no War, imposing no Taxes, entering into no Confederacies with any
neighbor-States or Princes, making no alteration in the course of Coins, which
nevertheless are the most principal marks of Supreme Authority. Qu^madmodum
igitur libertatem non afficit nec alterat, siquis lege prohibeatur quid facere;
sic Majestatem non afficit yel imminu^t, si conventione vel foedere impediatur
ho^ vel illud agere, vel cogatur ad aliquid faciendum vel p^aestandum.

Besides, it is of strange consequence, that it is so positively affirmed, it
should not have been lawful or allowable, at the time of making the Union, to
have appointed Stadholders, the King of spain his Dominion being then not
abjured yet, and the Stadholders then in being, having had their commissions
from the King etc. For by this argument you may as well condemn all the Acts of
this State against the King of Spain or his Ministers before the abjuring of
Holland and Zealand in the year 1580. and of Friesland 1581. nay the very Union
it self to have been unlawful, and to be of no validity. Besides, that it is
true de facto, that Count John of Nassaw, of famous memory, was called by the
States General to be Stadholder, of Gelderland, at the desire of the said
Province; and had no commission from the King at all: and that all the
Provinces being provided with Stadholders at the time of making the Union,
they could have no thoughts then of framing a Government at any time, without
Stadholders.

And that which is urged out of the word, provisionally, or by provision,
inserted in the IX Article, is in truth to small purpose; first for speaking
but of particular cases; secondly, for that in those very cases, the difference
is to be referred, to the Lords Stadholders, by provision, till it shall be
otherwise ordered by common advice of the confederates. U^ Articulus IX
express habet, cujus prior explicatio etiam ad hunc posteriorem casum
pertinet, quia nulla diversitatis ratio potest dari, vel alia commodior
explicatio adduci. So that however no Province can be deprived of this
provisional Remedy, nor the course altered, but by common advice; forasmuch as
the Stadholders are to do, or administer Right in the rest of the Cases,
besides the forenamed, in a principal manner and at last cast.

As for the distinction betwixt the Office of the Stad-holders and the Persons
thereof, taken from these words of the IX Article [now being,] to pass by the
contradictorie terms of debate) the same savoreth more of acuteness then of
probability, and is partly literal, and contrary to the meaning, intent, and
design of the Confederates, which without all question was no other, but that
the questions happening to arise from the foresaid causes might as well be
accommodated and decided by the subsequent Stad-holders, as by those that were
being at the time of making the Union, there being the same ground and
necessity for either, namely, by provision, till it should be otherwise
ordered by common consent and advice, which was never don to this day. And
besides, it is plain* that the foresaid IX Article treat's only of the
foresaid particular cases; and that the XVI and XXI. together with others
formerly alleged, speak generally and indistinctly of all the Stad-holders,
as well to com as present; as likewise in a special case, mentioned without the
foresaid occasion, it was but lately understood by your H. M. by the Resolution
of August 18. 1650 which referr^th the particulars therein mentioned to the
decision of the Stadholders or Stad*holholder of the Provinces at that time,
with reflection to the Union and all the parts thereof.

The rest of the foresaid debate consist's in too too large an assumtion of the
alleged interpretations, impertinent consequences, refutations of imaginary
objections, conceited limitations of the office of Stadholders and the like;
which are sufficiently defeated by the foregoing arguments and explication so
that the Deputies shall not need to repent any, for to apply them to each
point in particular. Their N. M. the Commissioners of Friesland declaring
herewith, that they have no other aim in all this deduction, but in the
uprightness of their hearts, zealously to maintain the common cause, and to
contribute their utmost for the conservation and settling of the State, being
not able to think on change and alterations without fear and trembling. The
admitting of one, drawing along with it a great many others, and very seldom
any good success; considering withal that this State has found so much benefit
by the former way of Government; in regard whereof the United Provinces have
good reason to mind^, what was said of Rome, Moribus antiquis res stat Romana,
virisque.

In prosecution and remembrance of what those of Zealand had propounded against
Corruptions and receiving of presents, the Lord Jacob Vett presiding for
Zealand at the Assembly Febr. 22, he moved to their Hi. Mi* whether, for
those reasons and motives largely then deduced and insisted on by him, they did
not ^inde good forthwith to order by express Resolution that such of their Hi.
Mi. Deputies, or Commissioners, as should henceforward be employed to enter
into and make any Treaty in the behalf of this State, with Ambassador or other
public Ministers of foreign Princes, Potentates and Republics, should be
obliged before they enter upon any business of that kind, to take such an oath
mutatis mutandis, as the Lords their Hi. Mi. Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, for the General Treaty of Peace at Munster, had solemnly
taken before their going thither; according to the 9, and 91 Article of their
Instruction.

Hereupon it was next day expressly resolved, That all such as should for time
to com be employed in the behalf of this State, for to make any Treaty with
Ambassadors and other Ministers of foreign Kings, Republics, Princes and
Lords, shall be bound by solemn Oath to promise and swear, that before the
beginning of the respective Treaty they had neither taken no^ enjoied, and
that during, and also after the conclusion of the Treaty, they would not take
nor enjoie any Gifts or Presents, directly or indirectly, in any manner
conceivable or unconceivable: but that on the contrary, if any gifts were
presented them before the beginning of the foresaid Treaty, or should be
presented them during or after the conclusion of the said Treaty, they would
with all uprightness and faithfulness, and as soon as possibly might be,
without any delaie give notice thereof to their Hi. Mi. under pain of infamy
and such other punishment as the condition of affairs should require. And that
they shall likewise be bound to swear, That they will ^eprightly and
faithfully follow their Instruction, and the Resolution relating thereunto* and
contribute whatsoever shall tend most to the furthering thereof, and
contrarily, to decline and oppose themselves to whatsoever shall be practiced
to retard or prejudice the same.

This same day it was likewise found good, Letters should be written in
friendly terms unto the Province of Groninghen and the Omlands, that they
would be pleased to send their Deputies hitherwards, to help together with the
rest of the Provinces to resolv upon the important deliberations: none being
absent of the Principal Members but they.

Since that, there past some days, wherein nothing was don in matters relating
to the great Assembly; there being presented before them (howbeit contrary
to the former intent and appointment of the Assembly:) the business of the
West Indies, the Ratification of the Danish Treaty; The Complaints and
Counter-complaints of Spain and France. Whereupon the Ambassador of Spain, the
Resident Brasset, and the Roial Swedish Commissioner Appelboom had successively
and respectively Audience in the Assembly. All which not relating to our
present purpose, we pass over here.

Holland it self grew cool in pressing the business of the Militia; whether it
were that they would stay for the arrival of the English Ambassador; to cause
jealousy in the other Provinces, that Holland and Zealand alone, if need were,
could so settle their affairs with England, that the rest of the Provinces
should be fain to accommodate themselves with Holland's desires of their own
accord; or that Holland and Zealand, having now declared their mind and
purpose, they would give ^acitly so much to understand, that they intended not
to communicate the authority over the Militia in their pay any further with
the rest, then according to the project of assigning the limits and
distinctions of the Companies, and to leav it to the Council of State;
whereunto if the rest complied not of themselves, Holland and Zealand would
stand to it by themselves.

Those of Drent sought and solicited lately again by their Deputies Schickard
and Str^ick, respective Recorder and secretary of the land of Drent, in all
the assemblies of the particular Provinces, their former pretense, pressed
these many years, of being a Member of the State, as having signed together
with the rest from the beginning of the Union, and having their peculiar
Stadholder and Government.

And after they had sufficiently prepared the same in particular, they craved
Audience in the great Assembly, and had it Martii 2o, upon the Letters of
Credence from the Drost and Deputy of the foresaid Country; whereupon having
wished their Hi. Mi. God's gracious and blessed assistance for their present
important Deliberations, They desired, that, according to their Summons of
November. 6, last, they would be pleased to receiv them into their Assembly,
and to show and appoint the places where they the Commissioners should in the
name and behalf of the said Land of Drent, have their Ordinary Session at and
together with the rest of the Provimces; as also, That the Deputies of the said
Country should be allowed Session likewise in all the Courts of the
Generality. Hereupon it was found good, that the Retro-acta of and in regard
to such matters and propositions formerly past in the Assembly of their Hi.
Mi. touching the said Country, should be searched into.

It was strange to see that there was a Summons past, as from their Hi. Mi.
dated November. 6, signed by the then Lord President, and addressed by the
Secretary to those of Drent; whereby they were as well invited to com to the
Great Assembly, and to bring in their advices as the seven other Provinces.
And thereupon was it, that the Deputies thence desired the Session, as was said
before. The then Lord President being desired to show how that abuse came, he
was able to say nothing else to it, but that such kind of dispatches depend
upon the direction, notice-taking and fidelity of the secretary, having all
the Registers and Original Acts in his keeping; and it being impossible for a
President to collation every thing that is brought him for to sign, with the
Registers, or to look after it whether all be well don, there being sometimes
twenty, thirty and more things sent in together at one time, to be signed in
have. However this abuse, profited those of Drent nothing, but they were
silently kept without the Assembly for all that.

That which the Deputies of the Country of Drent produced and presented in
writting to the Lords of the great Assembly, in grounding and justifying their
Demands, is to be seen by that which follows, formerly exhibited by them.

High Mighty Lords!
THe Gentry and Freeholders of the Country of Drent, having understood, that
your Hi. Mi. were pleased of late, to issue Writ's to the Lords the States of
the respective Provinces, that by occasion of the instant Treaty of Peace or
Truce at Munster and Osnabrug, they would deliberate and resolv upon the
necessary means, such as should be found fitting and requisite, for the
maintenance of the State of their Countries, and in particular for a renewed
confirmation of the common Union of Utrecht, in such sort, as the same was made
and kept in former times; and yet not any Notice or Writ being issued or sent
from your Hi. Mi. unto the Country of Drent in that behalf, notwithstanding
that the same is known to be a fellowmember of the said Union.

They have therefore in their latest Land-day and States-Assemblie found good
and necessary, to present their just complaints or grievance in that behalf
unto your Hi. Mi. and in that regard appointed and charged me, that, after
presentation of their humble service, and wishing your Hi. Mi. a long and
prosperous Government, I should with all due respect and reverence, summarily
again propound unto you, that which heretofore has been so often represented
here, and clearly verified by sufficient demonstrations; viz.

That the said Country of Drent, has been of old, and still continues, an
entire, formed Province, by it self and separated from others, having ever had
and still having, their own peculiar perfect Members, Governments,
Prerogatives, Rights, Immunities, high and low Jurisdictions, Magistrates,
Name, Arms, Seal, Treasury, Laws and Customs, altogether distinct and apart
from other Provinces.

That the said Country likewise, even under the Sovereigns of these Countries
as well by the Government of the Bishops of Utrecht, as that of the House of
Burgundy, was never held otherwise but as one of their Neighboring Provinces.
Not only in the point of a peculiar homage, and reciprocal promises and
confirmations of their Rights and Privileges; And in the Contributions for the
common Charges, whereunto the said Country was always prayed and entreated
apart, and had thanks returned them accordingly, for their voluntary consents,
although the same did many times com far short of the summons petitioned or
pra^'d for.

But likewise in the Case of summoning the Lords the States General together,
when any weighty and difficult matters, touching the commonweal of the
Provinces, required their assembling, whereunto the States of the Country of
Drent, were constantly no less called and invited by Writs, then the States of
any other Country.

As the same appeared notably among other instances, at the time of the solemn
Transport of these Netherlands by the Emperor Charles to his Son King Philip in
the year 1555. at Brussels.

Unto which Act the States of the Country of Drent were summoned and invited
by the said Emperor Charles and King Philip apart, and accordingly made their
apperances; and likewise upon the desire of the Emperor, they yielded their
consent to the said Transportation, and being thereupon peculiarly discharged
of the Oath, formerly made to the Emperor, and anew engaged to King Philip,
they received likewise on the contrary peculiarly for themselves from the said
King, the Oath and confirmation again of their Rights, Freedoms and Possessions.

The same Country likewise afterward, when these Netherlands came to be
engaged in War, with the King of Spain, and by the Union of Utrecht into an
nearer alliance one with another, being no less acknowledged, but always
invited and summoned by Writ, for to assist all affairs of the Countries, and
to advise and deliberate together with the rest, even before such time as they
were received into the said Union, it being a matter so known and manifest,
that the said Country was of it self qualified and privileged to repair to and
appear in the Assembly of the States General, and that by virtue of the 3d
Article of the Pacification of Ghendt, The Convocation of the States General
was to be don in the same form and manner, as it was used, when the Emperor
Charles transported these Countries to his Son King Philip, where the States of
the Country of Drent were likewise summoned apart and appeared as well as the
rest.

In regard whereof the said Country was held for so essential a Member of the
Assembly; That the same was not only summoned by Writ in the year 1579. for
the sending of their Deputies together with the other Provinces, to contribute
their advices and resolutions as well toward the Pacification intended at
Cullen, as about the good directions of the War.

Nay even the Lords the States General themselves, and the Archduke Matthias,
Governor of these Countries have roundly declared it again and again by their
Letters, that they might nor could not bring things to a Resolution, without
the advice of the Country of Drent, and that therefore in default of sending
their Deputies, or their Advice at least, they should be necessitated, to leav
the fo^esaid affairs undon.

In pursuance of this, the Gentry and Freeholders, representing the State of
the Country, or County of Drent, were solemnly and aequo Jure, as
Confederates, taken and received into the Union of Utrecht, April 11o. 1580.

And thereupon they likewise had and enjoied Session and Voice at the Assembly
of the States General, negotiating in the several Courts or Colleges of the
Generality, and continued thus, until the Country, to their great grief, and
without any fault of theirs was rent from the Union for some time, through the
loss of Groninghen, Cororden and Steenwick, and subdued by the Enemy.

The like case happened also to other their neighboring Provinces, either
totally or in part, who notwithstanding the same, being afterward reduced
again, recovered all their former places and privileges, Jure postliminil.

So that in every regard, it is more then fitting and reasonable, that the
Country of Drent, after their Deliverance and Reduction, be likewise wholly
restored unto and repossessed of their former state and condition.

Which your Hi. Mi. themselves also have understood thus, and clearly
manifested, in the year 1584. whenas your Hi. Mi. stood in Treaty with the
King of France, after the death of the Duke of Alencon, where not only in the
3d Article, all the Countrie's privileges in general and in particular were
reserved, but likewise, by Article 22. the condition made, That all the rest of
the United Provinces, as OverYssell, Omlands and Drent (which at that time were
for the most part oppressed under the power of the Enemy) should enjoy the
same conditions with the rest; as Reidanus does rehears the same in the fourth
book of the Netherlandish histories.

Which foresaid restitution or restoration ought to have so much the more place
here, in regard of the offers and promises, which your Hi. Mi. were pleased to
make in the years 1602. and 1632. by public Ordinances, in most ample terms,
even unto such Provinces, as are yet under the Spanish Dominion, and some
whereof had abandoned the Union formerly of their own voluntary accord.

Whereas on the Contrary the Country of Drent, entered into the said Union of
their own free accord, and always carried themselves like faithful
Confederates, and contributed to the common charges, according to, nay,
sufficiently beyond their abilities, and has not deserved in the least, to be
frustrated or deprived of their Right.

Nor can or ought the smalness of the said Country or their mean abilities,
prejudice them ought, being that notwithstanding the said Considerations, they
were received into the Union and into the general Assembly aequo jure, so long
ago, by reason whereof they cannot now in that regard be rejected.

It being moreover well known, that it does happen but seldom, that all
Confederated members are always alike able and powerful, enjoying nevertheless
alike Right of Session and suffrages; as we find it practiced of old in the
confederacy between the mighty King of Persia and those of Thebes, and by
that of the Athaeans, and at this very day in the Covenant and Cantons of
Switzerland; yea, not to go far, in these very United Provinces of the
Netherlands, and their Members and Cities in particular.

Besides that the said Country of Drent is not so small neither, or of so
little consideration, but that in regard of the situation she is the Keie of 2
or 3 of her neighboring allied Provinces, in which the Countries in general are
not a little concerned.

No more can it prejudice the said Country, that diverse and some particular
Cities also were admitted into the Union, which nevertheless had no Session nor
Voice in the general Assembly; There being a vast difference betwixt one or
more particular Cities of a Province, which which were merely received into the
Union, without allowing them Session among the States of the Provinces, and
betwixt an entire formed Country or Province, such as the Country of Drent
is, which, as it was abovementioned, had both Session and Voice in the said
Assembly, suo jure, even before the constituting of the said Union, and was
afterward by the rest of the Provinces and Confederates solemnly called and
admitted, not only to the Union simply, but likewise to the Session and Right
of voicing; nay, and held and acknowledged too, for so necessary a member of
the said Assembly, That without them and their Resolutions, no final
Resolution could be taken in any point concerning Peace or War, or other
weighty affairs of the Land, by the States General, according to their own
Declaration.

Nor are there any considerable Reasons of State, which can prejudice the just
Right they have, what ever was pretended formerly; it being plain, That no
better Maxims or Foundations of State, can possibly be found or laid, then
that which God the only Author and Founder of all well constituted
Governments, has laid himself, saying, In Justitia stabilietur Thronus Regis.

And that there is nothing more just, nor more conformable to the Divine,
Natural and National Right throughout the Univers, then that solemnly
contracted Covenants and sworn Confederacies be Religiously observed and kept.

And on the contrary, that it is repugnant against all Jura Societatis and
Foederum, that the one shall go about to usur pover the other.

Even as your Hi. Mi. themselves do understand it, declaring in one of your
Resolutions (that of Sept. 1. 1592.) most worthily, That the welfare of the
Land in general, and of every Province in particular is especially concerned
and conversant therein. That every one be maintained in his proper Rights and
Privileges, the Arms having been taken up and continued hitherto for that very
purpose; and that so doing according to the General Union sworn unto by all the
Provinces, without the least attemt of usurping over, or supplanting the one
the other, God Almighty would doubtless bless the Common Cause, and grant it an
happy issue; and doing contrary, it would certainly multiply mischiefs and
hale on Judgments for the future upon them.

And least some should pretend and say, that the Country of Drent has been
careless and negligent about their Right in this behalf, and if not expressly,
at least tacitly given up the same; it is manifest enough, that for the
recovering of their former state and condition, they have presently after their
reduction and deliverance out of the hands of the Enemy, and afterward from
time to time made their reiterated address of Grievances, Remonstrances and
solicitations to your Hi. Mi.

And among the rest, in the year 1618, by a well-grounded Remonstrance, with
annexed Evidences; whereof Copies are presented herewithal, in which their
foresaid Right is most clearly deduced and demonstrated.

Insomuch also, that your Hi. Mi. having heard the report of the
Committee-Lords, appointed for the Examination of all the Papers and the
Testimonies, the business has appeared of that soliditie, that having taken it
into your Consideration, and communicated with his Excellency Prince Maurice
of Orange, of immortal memory, and with his Honor Count William of Nassaw of
happpie remembrance, as Stadtholder for to take their advice therein; The same
was, that Copies ought to be taken of the said Remonstrance and annexed Papers
to be sent to all the United Provinces, and to recommend the desires grounded
thereupon unto them: and notwithstanding that, allow the said Country Session
in the Council of State, without henceforward putting them any more or
otherwise to Consents about Subsidie-matters then by way of Proposition.
Whereupon your Hi. Mi. were pleased to transmit the Copies of the said
Remonstrance and annexed papers to all the Provinces, and seriously to
recommend the same business, that at convenient opportunities, and and at their
Land-daies, they might ripely examine the whole matter, and having considered
thereof, charge and and autorize their respective Commissioners at the
Assembly General, that with common advice of all the Provinces, the foresaid
desires of the Country of Drent might be resolved upon as was fitting; all
which appears by the Resolutions of October. 27, 1618, and by your Hi. Mi.
serious Letters of Recommendation of the same date.

Which produced this effect, that some Provinces declared thereupon, that they
would charge and autorize their Deputies at the Assembly, to advance such a
Resolution, as should give content to the Country of Drent, and that none
should thereby be prejudiced in his just cause and right. Some also effectually
did charge their Deputies by express resolution in that behalf; and some plainly
to consent to the desire of the said Country, being the same was found to be
grounded on reason; as appears by the respective Resolutions annexed.

However, the success failing for that time, there were new applications made
in this behalf in the year 1632. And though then likewise there were anew some
Lords of the Assembly appointed, viz. one of every Province, to re-examine all
the Papers; which Lords made a very ample report to the Assembly, to clear the
matter and justify the desire.

Nevertheless the justly exspected and longed for fruits could hitherto not be
obtained; but we must see and suffer, that the States of the Country of
Drent, in lieu of having in the Bishop's times of Utrecht, and those of the
King of Spain, been sought unto by way of Petition or Prayer, to contribute to
the Common Charges, and received courteous thanks for their Consents, They are
awed now by their own Confederates, and dealt with little better then
Tributaries.

That instead of being as formerly they were, both under the Souvereigns, and
at the beginning of the present Government solemnly summoned, and called as
well as the States of other Provinces, to the Assembly of the States General,
for to assist the Deliberations and Resolutions of all affairs of importance,
touching the common interest, as also they did appear accordingly, and had
their Deputies in all the Courts or Colleges of the Generality; They are shut
out now from them all, and from all Common Consultations, and contemtibly past
by, even now at this solemn occasion of deliberating what Resolutions to pass,
not only in regard of the affairs of the instant Treaty at Munster and
Osnabrug, but also about the reconfirming of the Union of Utrecht; in which
matters nevertheless, there may not be any progress made according to the 9
and 22 Article of the said Union, without the common advice and consent of the
United Provinces; no otherwise, then as if the Country of Drent had never
been, or was no more a Member of the Union.

All this to their palpable despect, great prejudice, grievance and no less
sensibleness and just discontent.

Wherefore they are necessitated once again, submissively to pray and entreat,
that in regard of the reasons alleged, and former large deductions made in this
behalf, together with a reflection to their faithful services and endeavors,
which according to their slender ability, they have always willingly
contributed for the common safety and support of these Countries, Your Hi. Mi.
would be pleased at length to let them freely use and enjoy the Right which of
all old times did belong unto, and was never disputed nor denied them by any
Government.

That so they may not only assist the present Deliberations about the affairs
touching the foresaid Munster and Osnabruge. Treaty, and the further
confirmation of the Common Union; But also henceforward have liberty to com
together with other Provinces their Neighbors and Confederates into your Hi.
Mi. Assembly, to have Session and Voice there, and to enjoie all such other
dignities as formerly they had, and to participate such other advantages as the
Jura Societatis aequo Jure coitae (the Rights of such Societies) import.

And that in point of Contribution or Consent, our said Country be no further
troubled with impositions as hitherto, or any otherwise then the rest of the
Provinces are dealt with in that particular.

Which besides, that is a thing agreeable to all Right, Reason and Equity,
shall give so much the more cause to the States of the said Country, to
continue their wonted zeal for the service of the Land and common interest, as
good and faithful Confederates.

(Another Deduction was presented to the States General in the year 1618,
consisting of the same materials, which therefore was held needless to insert;
as well as their manifold Evidences and Testimonies hinted above; the perusal
whereof would be too tedious, and is besides the scope of this Treatise).

SAturday Martii 10o. there being but little *treated of the 3 main points in
the great Assembly, as was said before, those of Friesland, presiding, they
propounded, whether it were not good, to adjourn the Assembly for a time;
being that in several Provinces, there were Land-daies to be kept about that
time; whereupon five Provinces, 14o. advised for the Continuation of the
Assembly, those of Holland having Remonstrated, that it would be a great
Disreputation for the State, to part without some Notable Resolution, the world
being in great exspectation, what this great meeting would effect, toward
the settling of their Unity: and would be ready to interpret the parting a
rupture of the Union, or at least a great disorder.

Next day after those of Friesland were desired, to declare themselves touching
the two points heretofore propounded by those of Holland, viz. the Direction
and Disposition in military affairs, together with the giving of Patents or
Commissions.

Upon the 18th the said 2 points being taken into further Debate, and a
further proposition likewise presented by the Lords of Gelderland and some other
Provinces, that there might be a Committee appointed, of some few members of
this Assembly, for to examine the several Advices and Considerations of the
respective Provinces, brought in by them upon the case of his Highs departure;
and to see wherein they were agreeing or differing, and thereupon to frame a
Reconciliatorie Model: the foresaid matter was put by yet, and the Provinces,
which had not yet declared themselves about the foresaid 2 points, and others
concerning the direction and employ of the Militia, were most friendly and
seriously desired, to do the same with the first, and without further delaie.

The 22th, at length there were some Commissioners named for every Province for
to examine and review all the Considerations and Advices successively from time
to time, brought in, by the respective Provinces upon the business touching the
Direction and Disposition over the Militia, and the giving of Patents, and
presented to the Assembli^; and to observe how and in what points they were
agreeing together, and wherein disagreeing yet, thence to frame in writing an
Advice Conciliatorie, and to make report of all to their Hi. Mi. provided, that
every Province should have liberty to augment or diminish the Number of their
said Deputies, at their own pleasure.

Next day it was found good, that there should not be above 3 from each
Province, at the Committee for the business Conciliatorie.

On the 24th the Lords of Gelderland gave in this ensuing motion.

The Province of Gelderland desires the great Assembly, That their H. M.
would be pleased,

That Letters be written to the Commanders of the Garrisons in the Cities
having voice in the State, to this end, that the said Commanders or their
Majors shall henceforward not assume to themselves the keeping of the Keys,
opening and shutting of the Gates, or the giving of the word, but that the same
shall wholly and solely remain in the power of the Magistrates of the foresaid
Cities, having voice in the State.

Secondly, That the foresaid Commanders with the Council of War in the foresaid
Cities, shall no further use or extend Military Jurisdiction, but for neglects
and trespassings in in marches and watches, going over to the Enemy, deserting
the Companies, or running from one Company to the other, without Passport,
together with such other exorbitances and delinquencies, as may happen to be
committed, between officers and Soldiers or among themselves and no further;
insomuch that for other offenses, whether Criminal or Civil, the Military
persons shall be subject and liable to be apprehended and executed by the
Civil or Political Judge* whose sentence is to be executed according to the
order of the Land, even with extent, in case of Debts and the like, and default
of others means, upon the Wages of the party condemned.

Lastly, that the Companies both horse and foot in Garrison at present, or for
time to com, within the foresaid City, shall according to the 7th Article of
the Union, make Oath to the Magistrates of the said Cities, without prejudicing
the common Oath made or yet to be made to the United Provinces together, or
the particular and respective ones; as likewise to the chief officers in the
open Country where the said Militia shall be disposed of.

By this occasion it was likewise propounded, whether it were not expedient to
nominate a Committee, for to draw the forms of the Oath to be made by the
Militia respectively. 1. To the Confederates in general. 2. To the Provinces
their paymasters. 3. To the Provinces where they shall be employed. 4. To the
Magistrates of the Cities, and the Officers of the open Country, where they
shall be put in Garrison, all to this end, that the foresaid Oaths may not
chance to thwart and contrary one the other.

Which being taken into Deliberation, The Provinces desired and took Copies
thereof, and next day it was found good, That in conformity thereof, Letters
should be written to the Commanders of the Garrisons in the Cities of
Gelderland, having voice in the State, to the end, that the foresaid Commanders
or their Majors, shall henceforward not assume to themselves the keeping of the
keys, opening and shutting of the Gates, or the giving of the Word, but leav
the same wholly and solely to the Magistrates of the foresaid Cities, having
voice in the State.

Secondly, That the foresaid Commanders with the Council of War in the foresaid
Cities shall not have power to use or extend the Military Jurisdiction any
further, then over neglects and trespassings in marches and watches, going over
to the Enemy, deserting of the Companies, or running from one Company to
another without passport, together with such Exorbitances and Delinquencies,
which officers and Soldiers may chance to commit among themselves, or one
against the other, and no further: insomuch that for all other offenses,
whether Criminal or Civil, the military persons shall be subject and liable
to be apprehended, proceeded against, sentenced and executed by the Judges
Civil or Political, whose sentence shall be put in Execution, according to the
order of the Land, and extend in matter of debts and the like, and default of
other means, to the very wages of the party condemned.

Furthermore, their Hi. M. declared upon the proposition aforesaid, that the
companies both horse and foot, lying in Garrison at present, or to be laid
hereafter within the said Cities, shall conformably to the VIIth Article of the
Union, make Oath to the Magistrate of the said Cities, without prejudicing the
Oath already made or yet to be made to the United Provinces together, or the
particular and respective ones, as also to the officers of the open Country
where the foresaid Militia may be disposed of*

Which occasion it was likewise found good, that by certain Commissioners to
be nominated, there should be drawn up the forms of the Oath to be made to
the Confederates in general, the Provinces having besides undertaken
reciprocally by their Deputies to communicate one to another in this behalf,
the respective forms of Oath to be made by the said Militia to the Provinces
their Paymasters, as also to the Provinces, where they shall be employed, and
to the Magistrates of the Cities, and Officers of other places in the open
Country, where the same may happen to be put in Garrison, all to this end,
that the foresaid Oaths may not thwart and contrary one another.

On the 28 it was found good, that in the Conciliatorie Conference about the
points touching the Direction and Disposition of the Military Affairs, the
Advices or Votes should be gathered not by the Heads, but by the Provinces:
That the said Conference should be begun that same afternoon, precisely at 4
of the clock, in the place of the Ordinarle Assembly of their Hi. Mi. and the
Provinces were desired to take notice of the said precise time for the
Conferences by their Deputies, that thereby the business might be expedited
with all promtitude, and report made to their Hi. Mi. as soon as could be; it
being found good likewise, that the Secretary of their Hi. Mi. should be
added to the said Deputies at the conference; and this their Hi. Mi. Resolution
past without any further Resumtion.

Touching the Oath to be made, and things annexed with it, those of Holland
made a Draught, and brought in this ensuing Report.

Noble, Great Mighty Lords!
THe Members of Dort, Amsterdam and Alcmar having in pursuit of the Commission
given them by your N. Gr. M. Febr. 25 last, advised upon and brought to paper
two forms of Oaths to be made by the Souldierie, keeping Garrison within this
Province, into the hands of your N. G. M. and the Magistrates of the Cities
respectively; together with the report made by them in that behalf, they moved
and presented to your Hi. Mi. these ensuing Considerations.

First, touching the Oath to be made to your No. Gr. Mi.

1. By what persons the said Oath is to be made or taken.

2. Where and into whose hands the said Oath is to be plighted.

3. Whether the form formerly agreed upon to be put in practice, shall be
communicated to the other Provinces, yea or no.

4. Whether the Souldierie once sworn, and after having been employed forth the
Province, shall be bound upon their return to be new sworn, yea or no.

And as for plighting the Oath to the Magistrates of the Cities.

1. Likewise to whom the same shall be made.

2. Whether the same shall be taken in all the Cities, or not, and what
distinction there is to be made therein.

3. Whether the Oath being once taken by the Souldierie, if the same march
forth to other parts, and com again afterward, they shall be put anew to
their Oath, or not.

4. Whether those Cities which were wont heretofore to cause some Articles to be
sworn to* or after subscription promise to be made for the observing thereof,
shall notwithstanding the foresaid Oath, continue that said custom of theirs:
and withal, whether other Cities also may frame such like Articles, and in
what manner.

And the foresaid Committee having desired to understand the intentions of your
N. Gr. M. upon these considerations, your N. Gr. M* were pleased by a further
Resolution of Febr. 27, to desire their further advice also in that behalf.

In conformity whereunto, the foresaid Committee, after several debates about
the said subjects, have found good (under Correction of your N. Gr. M.) to
advise upon the foresaid Articles in manner as follows.

Upon the first Article touching the Oath to be plighted to your N. Gr. Mi.
THat the said Oath is to be taken by all the Colonels and Commanders being
within this Province, and exercising any Command over any forces in Garrison
therein; and that by all and every Colonel, Lievtenant-Colonel, Sergeants,
Major, Ritmasters, Captains, and all other inferior Officers indifferently,
whether the Troops or Companies under them lie all together within the said
Province, or but a part of them be there in Garrison.

That the same be likewise don by all common or private soldiers none
excepted.

Upon the second Article.
THat all the forenamed Officers unto Ritmasters and Captains inclusively,
ought to be summoned to make their appearance here in the Hague with the
soonest, and being com to take their Oath in your N. G. M. Assembly, or in
case of your absence and not-sitting, before your Commissioned Counsel, with
erected fingers in the wonted solemnity.

That Commissioners be appointed from among your N. G. M. Assembly, to make a
progress through all the parts and places of this Province, where any
Souldierie is lying in Garrison, and there in the presence of the foresaid
officers, to take the oath of all the inferior officers and private or common
Soldiers, as said is.

And that in regard of the Souldierie which for the future may com forth of
other Provinces to be put in Garrison here, or may be newly raised for the
service of the Country, such a course may be taken, That the officers thereof
unto Ritmasters and Captains inclusively, shall by Patent or Commission from
your N. G. M. and Letters to that purpose be summoned to repair hither, to
have the Oath administered to them as before; as also those officers might be
dealt with, who not being of your N. G. Ms. Repartition, may be remitted
hither from some other Provinces; and that for as much as concern's the
Souldierie of your N. G. M. own Repartition, the Oath might likewise be taken
here from the Lievtenants and Ensigns; being the same are to receiv their
Commissions here in loco. That besides all the rest of the Souldierie, or the
comers in from without the Province, or the new raised men, within such Cities
and places, where there are Governors or Commanders settled by your N. Gr. M.
should be sworn by the said Governors or Commanders; and in the rest of the
Cities and places, by the Magistrates there, or otherwise by their Captains,
and in their absence, by such other officers, as shall then be present there,
commanding the Soldiers: and that for that end the foresaid Commanders,
Magistrates, Captains and other officers, shall be Commissioned by special
Missives or Acts to take the foresaid Oath from such, and the same be read
aforehand publicly and plainly before them, which are to take the oath.

Upon the third Article.
THat the form of the Oath, before spoken of, is fit to be communicated with
the Lords of Zealand; and that being don, it might be deliberated afterward,
whether it should be needful to make any further Communication thereof to
other Provinces.

Upon the fourth Article.
THat the Souldierie, notwithstanding they may have taken the oath once or
oftener, yet as often as they shall have been forth the Province, and be
returned again, they shall be bound to take it anew, in manner aforesaid.

Touching the Oath to be made by the Souldierie, to the Magistrates of the
Cities.
Upon the first Article.
THat the same ought to be taken not only by all such as shall have any
command over the Souldierie there in Garrison, whether their Troops or
Companies be there complete or but in part, (comprehending herewith likewise
the Commanderies in the Cities, having Voice in the Assembly,) but also by all
the common Soldiers indifferently.

Upon the second Article.
THat in the other Cities, where Governors and Commanders are appointed,
underofficers and common Soldiers, shall take the foresaid oath without any
let or contradiction of the Governor.

Upon the third Article.
THat the Souldierie being gone forth the City upon other employments, and
returning afterward again, shall be bound to take the oath anew.

Upon the fourth Article.
THat besides the foresaid oath there ought no other Articles to be sworn to;
nevertheless where it has been the custom formerly, it shall be in the choice
of those Cities, to make the Captains promise and subscribe likewise, if they
think good: and that the rest of the Cities may also make or receiv such of the
like Articles at their pleasure.

Herewith the foresaid Committee trust to have satisfied your N. G. M.
intention, referring all to their further order and Disposition.

Don and advised thus, by the foresaid Committee-Members of your N. G. M. the
last day of March 1651.
Draught of The Form of Oath, to be taken by the Souldierie, keeping Garrison
within the Province of Holland and West-Friesland, in relation to, and before
the States thereof or their Committees.
We do promiss and swear unto the States General of the United Netherlands,
such as shall continue to maintain the Union and maintenance of the true
Christian Religion, and by Name to the States of Holland and West-Friesland, to
be true and faithful to them, to serve them uprightly and faithfully, for the
defens of the foresaid United Netherlands, and by name, the Countries of
Holland and West-Friesland, the Quarters, Cities or Members thereof, against
all their Enemies; to be obedient to the said Lords the States of Holland and
West-Friesland or their Commissioned Counsel, whiles we are in the said
Province, in such things as they shall command us, for the furthering of the
service and defens of the foresaid Countries, to help protect the foresaid
Provinces from inquarterings and throughfairs of other forces* as also not to
march within this same Province, but by and upon Patent or Commission of the
foresaid Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland, or their Commissioned
Council, and consequently in every thing to submit and follow all the Orders
and Articles of War. So truly God Almighty help us.

Draught of The form of Oath to be taken by the Captains and Officers, before
the Magistrates of the Cities where they are lying in Garrison with their
Companies respectively.
I Do promiss and swear to be true and faithful with the Company under me,
unto this City and the Magistrates thereof, and faithfully to serve and obey
them in what they shall command me for the maintenance, service and
tranquillity of their City, and in particular against all uproars and
sedition, the commands which the Lords the States of this Province or their
Commissioned Council shall give me. So truly etc.

Upon the 22 of March, the Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Braband, resorting
under the State, did likewise address themselves unto the Great Assembly; and
as in the year 1648. before and at the conclusion of the Peace they had
presented a certain long Deduction or Remonstrance; so they did now also that
which here ensues, and desired to have Audience; carrying themselves in the
Superscription of their Address and in the Text it self, not as Petitioners, by
way of humble or submissive request, but as fellow Confederates, and that
which is more, as the first Member of the Union. They had sent diverse of their
own into the particular Provinces before, to recommend their affair; where they
received courteous indeed, but only general and no concluding Answers and
Resolutions from them.

The Deduction of the Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Braband, United and
associated with the rest of the United Netherlandish Provinces, showing how
well they are grounded in their desire presented to the Generality.
PHILIP, surnamed the Good, Duke of Burgundy, Earl of Flanders, Arthois, etc.
being by right of Collateral succession become Duke of Braband and Limburg, and
of the lands of Over-Mase, Earl of Hainoult, Holland, Zealand and
West-friesland; and by purchase, Duke of Lutsenberg, Earl of Namen, and Lord of
Mechelen; He first joined all these Countries (being formerly under several
Lords) into One Body.

Emperor Charles the V. afterward having gotten likewise the Over-Rhenish
Provinces of Friesland, Utrecht and Over-Yssel, Groning^en and the Omlands,
Gelderland and Zu^phen, for himself and his Heirs and posterity, as Dukes of
Br^band, and Earls of Holland; and having reduced and reannexod to that Body
certain considerable parcels, which for a long time had been alienated and
distracted; He, in the year 1549, with consent and at the desire of the State^
of those Countries made a fundamental Law or Sancti^^ to that end and purpose,
That all the foresaid Netherlands should thenceforward for ever remain united
in one Body, under one Prince only.

And when after in the year 1555, the foresaid Emperor resigned the
Sovereigntie over these Netherlands unto his Son King Philip the second, taking
his leav of all the Provinces, he exhorted them that notwithstanding the
Countries were diverse and separated in themselves, yet all of them making but
one Body, the Members of that body ought still to help, assist, and succor
one another; considering, that without such a Concord and Conjunction among
them, the Enemies would easily get great advantage upon, and means to surprise
and invade them; when as on the contrary, they remaining united together, and
assisting one another, experience had showed what they were able to perform in
resisting those that durst attemt to hurt or molest them.

After the Peace concluded at Camerick in the year 1559, all the States
together unanimously resolved to keep out all Spanish and foreign forces, and
promised each other ever to continue so doing.

After which, the troubles and bloody Wars ensuing in the Netherlands, the
most principal of the said Countries allied themselves together from the very
beginning for their Common Liberty, and opposed themselves jointly with common
advice and aid, goods and blood, against the Inquisition and Spanish Tyranny.

The Confederated Nobility, who in the year 1566, presented their Petition to
the Duchess of Parma at Brussels, as to the Governess of these Countries, were
indeed some out of all Provinces, but most of them of Braband and Flanders.

And the men of Brussels were those which principally opposed themselves against
the execution of the Tenth penie, notwithstanding that the Duke d'Alva was
present then within their City, and had a strong Garrison of Spaniards about
him.

Whereupon there following that unexspected beginning of the Deliverance by the
taking in of the Briel, most of the Cities of Holland and Zealand joined
themselves together for Liberty; at which time those of Braband and other
adjacent and Inland-Countries, being oppressed and opposed by the Tyranny of
Duke d'Alva with Castles and strong Garrisons, had not yet found or met with
the conveniencie and opportunity which they of Holland and Zealand had of
casting off the Spanish Yoke; but the City of Anwerp was plundered first twice
over by the Spaniards.

At the Treaty of Peace at Breda in the year 1575, the Deputies of the Prince
of Orange, the States and Cities of Holland and Zealand, Bommel and Buren with
their associates, and some particular Noblemen out of other Provinces treated
there with the King's Commissioners.

In the time of greatest straight, when as North Holland and South-Holland
through the loss of Haerlem; and the Province of Zealand through that of
Ziriksea and the land of Sc^owen were rent and divided within themselves, and
one from another; Then was made the Pacification of Ghendt, viz. in the year
1576 (whereof the States of Braband were the first and principal Autors) on the
one side, not only by the Deputies of the Prelates, Nobility, Cities and
Members of Braband, Flanders, Arthois and Henioult, but also by particular
Cities and Countries of their own accord, as by the Cities of Valencien and
Dormick, the land of Turnetis, those of the Cities of Ryssell, Douny and
Orchies, and those of the City of Mechelen representing the States of those
Provinces, Cities and Countries; and on the other side, by the Deputies
autorized by the Prince of Orange, the States of Holland and, Zealand and their
Associates. And there was concluded by the parties and Countries aforesaid an
Everlasting Firm Peace, Confederacy and Union, to the end that the Inhabitants
of all the Netherlands being united together by indissoluble Friendship and
Agreement, should at all times, and upon all occasions assist each other with
Counsel, Aid, Goods and blood, and especially for to expel out of these
Countries, and to keep out of them all Spanish and other foreign soldiers and
their adherents, and to restore unto them the use of their own Rights,
Privileges, Customs and Liberties.

According to which the said States compelled the Germane forces to abandon the
Cities of Ziericksea, Berg op Zome, Steenberghen, Stolen, the Bosch, Breda,
Grave, Campen, Deventer, and made themselves masters of and demolished the
Castles of Utrecht, Antwerp and Groninghen.

But whereas it was found, that since the foresaid Pacification, the Spaniards
with Don John sought all means whereby to reduce the Countries under their
slaverie, and both by force of arms and practices to divide and dismember the
Provinces, and to nullify the Union made by the foresaid Pacification;
therefore the Nobility of the Principality of Gelders and County of Zutphen,
the States of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht and Friezish Omlands betwixt the Ems
and Lawers, did, for the eschewing of further separation among the foresaid
Provinces and particular Members thereof, enter in a streighter and more
particular League, Union, and Confederacy, for ever to remain in all manner
and condition, as if they were all of them but one Province; without ever
separating or suffering themselves to be separated for any cause whatsoever,
engaging themselves one to another to maintein and protect each other's special
and particular privileges with body and goods, against all and every one that
should make or attemt any actual breach therein, and against all foreign powers
which should go about to offer them any wrong or violence, or make war upon
them, either in general or particular. Which foresaid nearer Union being made
at Utrecht, and published there from the Town-hous Januarie 29, 1579, was
likewise approved and signed by diverse of the Nobility, Gentry and Cities,
which were not qualified for to represent the States of their Provinces; as
among many others, by the Prince of Orange, and the City of Breda, who had
their Deputies there at the Assembly of the States General of the United
Netherlands; as may be evidenced by many and diverse Writs of Summons and
Commissions.

But within a little while after the said Union was likewise accepted of and
entered into in the name and behalf of the States and Provinces of Braband, and
the same being published in a special manner with the City of Bosch; the said
States, according to the ancient custom, sent their Deputies to the Assembly
of the forementioned States General; and thereby the foresaid particular
Deputation began to surceas.

But admit, the Province of Braband had not accepted of the Union afterward;
the Prince of Orange and City of Breda, etc. would undoubtedly have remained
particular Members of the said Union, and kept their place and voices in the
same.

The Condition of affairs being changed, truly, since the foresaid Prince and
his Illustrious Successors, have, together with the Cities of Berg op Zome and
Willemstadt, hitherto assisted the said Union with all means possible, and
constantly adhered thereunto; and ^ince the Cities of the Bosch, Breda, Grave,
Steenberghen, being forcibly withdrawn from the Union, and reduced under it
again by the arms of their Confederates; the said Cities ought not therefore,
contrary to the express sens of the common Union, be excluded from the same.

The rather, for that the said Cities stand, as to this, in the same degree
with diverse others, which at present have part and share in the General
Government.

The Illustrious House of Nassaw is, next God Almighty, a principal means of
the preservation and recovered Liberty of the United Countries.

Nor has any of the foresaid Braband-Cities ever purposely separated from the
common Body of the United Provinces, contrary to the contract made with them,
and solemnly confirmed; but they were all of them rent away from the same by
the Power of the Enemy, or the Treachery of others, without any fault of
their own, nay to their great grief and sorrow; and therefore they have no
ways merited to be proscribed or outlawed by the States of the United
Provinces, so as those of Brug or Bruges, and the land Van Vrye were in the
year 1584, and those of Venlo in the year 1586.

Unto whom nevertheless, as well as to the other revolted Provinces and Cities,
it was offered by the Treaty made not long ago with France, That in case any
Provinces, Cities, Princes or Lords came to join themselves for the establishing
of a Peace and their Freedoms, the said King and States would take them into
protection and Confederacy, and make a League with them Offensive and
Desensive; and in case three or four Cities surrendered themselves together, the
same should have power to make a free body of State apart.

The State of Braband were they, which together with those of Gelders and
Zutphen, Holland, Zealand, Mechelin and Utrecht, for the protection and
safeguard of their mutual and common Rights, Privileges and Customs, and the
freedom of their Native Countries, made that solemn Decree of Julie 26, 1581,
whereby the King of Spain was declared to have forfeited the Sovereigntie of
the foresaid Netherlands; and ordained in conformity to the Union of Utrecht,
that instead of the King's Seals there should henceforward be used the Great
Seal, counter-seal and signet of the States General of the United Provinces in
matters touching the Politic administration of justice and other particular
affairs in each Province apart, there should be used by the Provincial and
other Counsels, the Name Title and Seat of the Countries, respectively; where
the matter happen's to be don, and no other; all upon pain of all such
Letters, Judgments or Dispatches Nullitie, which shall be expedited or sealed
contrary to the way prescribed.

As the Treaty of the States of Braband, Gelderland, Flanders, Holland and
West-Friesland, Zealand, Zutphen, Utrecht, Friesland and Mechelin, with the
king, touching the Transportation or surrender of the Soveraigntie, the States
propounded to the King in the Articles, agreed upon among themselves, That the
King ought to reduce under his obedience the Cities and open Country, taken by
the Enemies and join them to the Provinces again, to which they belonged, not
suffering in any wise that the contracting Provinces should be rent or torn
asunder at any time, the one from the other.

It is confessed indeed, that after the loss of Antwerp in the year 1585.
Richard of Merode Lord of Oirschot, the Lord van Poderlo, van der Werck and van
der Menlen, Deputies of Braband in the Generality, taking their leav or
farewell from the Ordinary Assembly of the States General, made this request,
That the Lords the States would be pleased to take that care of the remaining
Cities of Braband, that they might be dealt with conformably to the Privilege
of the said Country.

But those foresaid Deputies (being swai'd by their particular interest,) were
charged with no such thing by their Principals, and therefore could not draw
any prejudice thereby, upon the Rights of the rest of the Nobility Gentry and
Cities of Braband, which continued in the Union, and afterward were again
reduced under it.

Whereupon followed, that Counselor Bruyninex, being appointed by Prince
Maurice, and the Lords of Lockeren, Sonsveld and Tameren, did in the years
1586. 1587. 1588. both in their own behalf and that of the other Nobility and
Gentry, together with the Deputies of the City of Berg op Zome, seek and
solicit as well by writing as word of mouth, That without impediment they
might govern, and administer their State in particular, and that in matters
touching the Generality, such as are, the consent of Subsidies for war, the
framing out and collecting of Imposts, the appointing of Licenses or free
passages, augmentation of services, and the like, they may have such a part and
cognizance, as those of Braband which are under the Generality, ought to have
by virtue of the Common Union.

Upon which Motions and Desires, after several Communications, both before
Commissioners of the States General, and at the Assembly it self, their Hi.
Mi. were pleased at last to declare, That in this posture and condition of
Braband, They could not acknowledge or hold them otherwise, then their
Associates, and not as States of Braband.

And by an Act of that year 1588. Prince Maurice of happy memory was
appointed Captain General over the Cities, Forts and Forces in Braband.

And the Council of State Autorised, provisionally, to govern and direct all
matters regarding the Government of Braband, in the Name of the States General,
in respect of the State of Braband for that time, without prejudice to the
States of Braband, being of this side, and to the City likewise of Berg op
Zome; with this promiss annexed* That in case hereafter there should be any
Treaty set on foot, about a General Peace, or transportation of the
Soveraigntie of the Lands in general, then the foresaid Nobility and Gentry
of Braband and the Governors of Berg op Zome, should be summoned.

Which being promised them, in regard but of one City; what consideration
ought there to have been of the present State of Braband; whenas not only one
Capital City or Metropolis, but other Considerable ones likewise are reunited
to the Union, which formerly had Writs sent them to com to the Assembly of the
States, and accepted of the Union.

During the above said solicitation, Prince Maurice had in the year 1587. put
and autorised some to be Counselors of Braband, in matters of justice, who
were to administer the same in several parts and relations; till in the year
1591. the States General of the United Provinces, instead of a Chancerie and
Fief-Court, appointed a Council of Braband; under this Declaration, That having
taken into their special Consideration, how the Country, the Nobility,
Gentry, Cities, Liberties, Villages and other Inhabitants of Braband, which
remained in the Union of the Netherlands, and those which were afterward
reduced, or yet might be, through the blessing of God, might be governed in
good order, policy and Justice; They ordained etc. without impairing or
prejudicing the Privileges and Rights of the Land of Braband, and of the
Nobility, Gentry, Cities, Liberties, Villages and the Inhabitants thereof.

Afterward in the year 1600, when by the States General there was introduced
at Berg op Zome and Breda a higher raising of the general means, and complaint
presented thereupon in these Cities behalf, showing, That the said Cities, for
matter of means, contributions and the like burdens, were not dealt withal,
according to their old Rights and Privileges of Braband; the said States
General declared thereupon, That they judged, the Remonstrants ought, as
members of the Common Union, bear the burden together with their Neighbors;
and if thereafter there should be occasion of any high or new raising of
means, they should have Writs sent them first, to com to the Assembly of the
States General, with the same authority, as they should have in those matters
among the States-Assemblie of Braband, if the same could be formed in due
manner.

In this foresaid State and Government did the affairs of Braband remain,
notwithstanding, That their state and condition was much strengthened and
enlarged from time to time, through the Reduction of the Cities of Breda,
Steenbergen, Grave, the Bosch, Mastricht etc. insomuch, That the State of
Braband, holding it with the United Netherlands, consist's at present, in six
strong and walled Cities, besides Mastricht, and diverse others belonging
thereunto, and therewithal an exceeding great District of open Country, full
of liberties, villages and Habitations resorting under it extending it self to
30 leagues in length and 10 more in breadth, and making up the greater half in
ground of the whole Dukedom of Braband.

Before the troubles those of Flanders, in the (Beden) petitionings, and
contributions, were commonly taxed with a third part of the general sum; which
was asked and granted throroughout all the Netherlands: Braband with a fourth
part; Holland with a fourth part of the rate of Flanders.

But Braband being impoverished by the war, and Holland with the other United
Provinces, enriched; shall the hard fortune, that those of Braband were
expelled and banished for the common cause, their Cities forced, taken and
plundered by the Enemies etc. Be the ground and reason of forfeiting their
Liberty?

From all which resulteth and appears sufficiently, that the Netherlands
though divided and separated the one Province from the other, do constitute or
make up but one body, being allied together equally, atque aequo foedere and
so that none of them has any right of Superiority or Dominion over the other;
for confirmation whereof, may be alleged, that which Prince William of Orange,
of happy memory, and the State of Holland and Zealand, writing in the year
1573 to the King of Spain do expressly say that the Netherlanders, having
formerly been under several Lords, were afterward reduced together under one
head of the house of Burgundy, allied thereafter with the house of Austria and
at last with the King of Spain; nevertheless always with this express
reservation and limitation that the same land and each Province apart, should
remain and be maintained in their own peculiar Policy, Rights and liberties,
wherein they had continued from all antiquities so that the one Country or
Dominion should pretend no Right or Seigniorie over the other, to disposess the
same in any kind of it is Rights and liberties, but they should be obliged and
engaged each to other in concord and equal Degree.

By the Union of Utrecht the Countries engaged themselves together, as if they
were but one Province; namely, in that they might not be separated, but were
bound to help and assist one another, without in^ringing or impairing
nevertheless the special and particular Privileges, Liberties, Exemtions,
Rights, Statutes, laudable and well-maintained Customs, U^ances, and any other
peculiar advantages of any one of the Provinces or particular Cities Members
and Inhabitants thereof.

Now where there is such an Union, it may well be questioned, whether the one
Member ought to exalt it self over the other, by reason of his prosperity and
power. They make up all but one Body, to the preservation whereof each Member
has cheerfully contributed its part; for if one has afforded more means, the
other has protected and defended the Rivers and passages, the third has
hazarded his Country and lost his Cities with standing it out to the utmost
against the Common Enemy. The Illu^trious Princes of Orange of happy
Memories, they have contri^uted thereunto their wise and courageous direction
and Conduct, and hazarded their persons, lives and estates thereby; and thus
every one has brought and contributed something of that which was requisi^e and
necessary for the forming and framing of the Common State.

The War never b^gan betwixt the Netherlanders, but was undertaken by the
Netherlanders against the Spaniards. This is that, the Letter of the Nobility,
Gentry and Cities of Holland, written to the States General of the Provinces
assembled at Brussels, under Date of Sept. 12, 1573, drive's at, saying, We do
hope that you shall never be able to forget the cheerful and friendly
faithfulness which in former times we always did and still do bear one to the
other; i^ being our duty before both God and Men, and we for our parts
being still resolved and ready for it: Do but remember (it being the very
truth) that we do not wage War the one against the other; for we never
offended one another, neither in great nor small concernments, but all our
strife and War is only and m^erly against the Government of foreign Nations.

The Confederacy of the Union of the Netherlands is Offensive and Defensive
for ever and always, against al and every one, who or how qualified soever
they may be, that shall attemt actually to infringe the special and particular
Privileges of the Countries; insomuch, that the chiefest condition of the Union
among the rest, to maintein the Countries in their Rights, one of which,
without all peradventure, must be the Government; for the Union was made for
their advantage, and not for their damage.

The King of Spain^ caused offers to be made at the Treaties at Breda, of
Cullen, and at all others since, That he would keep and maintein the Countries
both in general and in particular, in all their Privileges, Rights, Laws and
Customs; so as the same had been before the Troubles, and if any thing were
changed and impaired, the same should be restored, being made known.

In prosecution of which ground, the States of the United Netherlands have
often and at several times summoned the States of the Countries subject to the
Spanish Government, and among the rest, in a certain Letter of theirs dated
June 7. 1602, ^used these words, Only we do still most friendly desire,
exhort and entreat you, seriously to reflect upon the prais-w^rthie reputation
which you and your forefathers have gotten to themselves for some hundred of
years, and left the same to us upon record for a rule, that still we should
be upright Defenders and Protectors of the Rights and Freedoms of the
Netherlands in general, and of the Countries or Provinces, the Members, Cities
and Inhabitants thereof in particular.

By way of distinguishing the Provinces and Cities on this side, joined
together by a Common Union; the Provinces and Cities of the Netherlands, being
under Spain, are by this State called, the Invaded Countries.

In the reduction of the Cities of Braband to the Union, it was especially
conditioned and promised, that the Cities and Inhabitants thereof should be
maintained in their Rights, Privileges and immunities.

The States General of the United Netherlands declared but lately by their
Letter of March 14 last year, to all the Cities of the Union, That they had
appointed his Highs Prince William of Orange Captain and Admiral General over
the people of War in service, of this State, for the maintenance of the Union,
the Right and Privileges of the Land, the members and Cities thereof.

The States of Holland declared Febr. 19 of the same year, concerning the
Union, That the Provinces are bound to assist one the other with life and
goods, and to abide together, not suffering themselves to be divided: and if
this be to be understood of such which desired to be under the Union, and
continue to desire the same; The Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Braband have
always desired the same, and declare hereby, that they are constantly and
extremely desirous of it.

By deputation of the States in the year 1586, Febr. 1. the Earl of Leicester
was appointed Governor and Captain General of the United Provinces, to wit, of
Gelderland, Zutphen, Flanders, Holland and Westfriesland, Zealand, Utrecht,
Friesland, together with their Associates, And by the Act of that day, there
were put into the hands of the said Earl, the General Means of Consumtion or
Revenues of Gelderland, Flanders, and associated Cities of Braband. And in
pursuance of the foresaid Commission, the Earl made Oath to the States of the
United Provinces, and their Associates; and the States reciprocally to the
Earl, in the name both of their own respective Provinces, and the said
Associates.

The States General of the United Provinces, do address the Inscription of
their Letters for public Bid and Fasting days, and other things concerning
the common affairs and and interest, to the Cities of Braband, on this side,
under the name of Associates. And diverse Cities of the United Provinces in
their particular Letters to the Cities of Braband, do design themselves their
Confederates.

Nay, The Treaty between France, England and the States General, concluded
ult. October. 1596. import's expressly; That the Ambassadors do in the name and
behalf of the King of France and Queen of England and their Successors, receiv
and associate with the States General of the United Netherlandish Provinces; to
wit, Gelderland and Zutphen, Holland and West-Friesland, Zealand, Utrecht,
Friesland, Over-Yssell, Groninghen, and Omlands, together with the Gentry,
Cities and Forts of Braba^d, those that were United then with the States
General.

And however hitherto, the Government of Braband, since the loss of Antwerp
has been exercised in the Name of the States General; nevertheless the same is
don only by way of provision for that time, without impairing, and under
protestation of not prejudicing the Right and privileges belonging to the
Nobility Gentry and Cities of Braband, as was formerly demonstrated.

And whereas the Wars, through God's blessing are brought to an end now, and
the King of Spain, does by the Treaty of Peace concluded at Munster, declare
and acknowledge, That the States General of the United Netherlands and
respective Countries, Cities and appertaining Lands, are free and Sovereign
Cities Provinces and Countries, whom, and their Associated Countries, Cities
and Lands, the foresaid King, shall neither now nor ever pretend the least
unto, neither for himself, nor his Successors and Posterity; Therefore, the
Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Braband, do confidently persuade themselves,
being in the Union and Associates, That according to the forementioned
Concordates, Confederacies, Unions, Treaties, Promises, and Acknowledgments of
Kings, yea of the King of Spain himself, They shall be held by the United
Provinces, Confederates, Sworn Allies, Associates and Free States, and not
conquered, invaded and subdued ones, in wors condition, then the Spanish
Netherlands.

To their Hi. Mi. Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands.
THe Nobility, Gentry and Cites of Braband holding the side of the Union,
show and desire, That, forasmuch as the war through God's blessing is com to an
end now, They, Exhibitors, may as Associates and Confederates of the common
Union, have Session and Voice in the Generality, like other Provinces, and
that for the reasons alleged in the annexed Deduction.

Or in case, That your Hi. Mi. could not as yet, yield thereunto, we being
persuaded they may, That at leastwise the Exhibitors may without prejudice of
the Rights of Braband, govern their Province particularly; contributing for the
common welfare and Defens together with other Provinces, such a Rate, as by
mutual agreement and equity shall be found fitting; which doing, etc.

High Mighty Lords!
THe Commissioners of the Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Braband, holding the
side of the Union, presented in April 1646, unto the high mighty Lords the
Deputies at the Generality, a certain Remonstrance and Deduction hereunto
annexed, and thereby attentively concluded, either to obtain Session and Voice
in the General Government, like other Provinces, or at leastwise, that without
prejudice to the Rights of Braband, they might Govern their Province
particularly, contributing to the common welfare and Defens such a Rate or Tax,
as according to the condition of the Countries should by mutual accord be held
fitting in equity.

Whereupon there having been no Resolution taken by your Hi. Mi. the Exhibitors
addressed themselves to the No. Gr. Mi. Lords the States of the respective
Provinces, and propounded the same alternative conclusion to them; who, most of
them, after inquiry and mature Deliberation, sufficiently agreed, that the
second member of the foresaid conclusion, could not be denied unto the
Exhitors, autorizing thereupon, their Deputies at the Generality, that they
might treat with the Deputies there from the other Provinces about it.

And foresmuch as the United Provinces ate now extraordinarily met in a grand
States-assemblie, to deliberate about the most important Points for the
establishing of this State; and especially about the maintenance and full
settlement of the Union.

The Exhibitors present themselves with all due respect unto this most honorable
Assembly, to reiterate the foresaid Conclusion, grounded upon the Union, and
represent thereupon unto your Hi. Mi.

That the Exhibitors have been, and were every where without contradiction
acknowledged, Associates and Confederates of this State, and members of the
common Union, as well by virtue of the Pacification of Ghendt, de Anno 1576.
whereof they of Braband had been the first Autors; as especially of the nearer
Union of Utrecht, de Anno 1579. signed by them of Breda at Utrecht, published in
the Boso^, and by the rest of the Cities embraced and followed in States-manner.

That likewise None of the Exhibitors ever abandoned the Union, but that the
Cities of the Bosch, Breda, Grave and Steenberghen, were by force of arms, or
domestic oppression and treachery, rent from the same, with the good parties
loss of goods and blood: Berg op Zome and Willemstadt having always remained
in the Union, as is more largely deduced in the annexed information.

That the forementioned Four withdrawn Cities have been delivered and reduced
again to the Union by the help of the Confederates, in conformity to the
Pacification and Union aforesaid.

And whereas the Foundations of the whole State does mainly consist in the
foresaid mutually made and firmly concluded Union and everlasting Confederacy.

And that consequently the same being aequo jure entered into, the Members are
bound not only to assist one another with goods and blood, but also (if need
be) to restore them in their ancient Rights, Liberties and Privileges,
whereunto it would be e diametro repugnant, that one Member should take upon
him to exercise Superiority and Domination over the other.

Therefore the Exhibitors, negociating at present for such a considerable
number of Cities and great district of Country, containing in ground more then
the Moitie of all Braband, offering to contribute according to their abilities
to the common welfare, ought not to be excluded in any wise, but fully to
enjoie the effect of the Confederacy, like unto the other United Members
thereof.

The Exhibitors undertaking beside, that by their direction the Means of
Braband shall undoubtedly be brought in, to the best advantage and behoof of
the Generality.

All this nevertheless notwithstanding, being the Exhibitors are held and
treated no better then invaded and conquered places, suffering sufficient
prejudice generally in all their Rights and Privileges, as well in regard of
administering Justice without their Country, as the direction of their Civil
Government and incoms; They are confident your Hi. Mi. will, for the reasons
succinctly here alleged, and more largely deduced in the Papers adjoined,
restore the said Exhibiters highly-wronged Right, in best sort and manner, or
at leastwise let them enjoie the effect of the second Member of their
conclusion.

Further Deductions and Informations of the Right of the Nobility, Gentry and
Cities holding the side of the Union.
IT is universally known, that the supreme power of the Serenissime Republic
of the Netherlands consists in the States General of the United Provinces, so
called after the General Uniting of Ghendt, and nearer Union of Utrecht,
whereon the same is founded.

For the preservation of good Unity in the State upon the old and laudable
principles and foundations of the first Government, the Great Mighty States of
all the Provinces, caused to be en^egistred November. 16, 1646, for an
everlasting Remembrance, That they were resolved to keep and maintein the
foresaid Union among the Provinces, as also the associated Countries, Cities
and Members thereof; and now lately again at the sending of Holland to the Six
other Provinces they unanimously testified, they had no other resolution and
intention, then to observe and maintein the foresaid Union holily and
indissolubly.

The States of Braband were the first and chiefest Autors of the Union of
Ghendt.

The nearer Union of Utrecht was signed originally by the City of Breda,
published within the Bosch, and embraced by the other Cities of Braband in
State's-manner.

Hereupon is principally grounded, the desire of the Lords, Gent^ie and Cities
of Braband, who being Members of the foresaid Common Union, ought to enjoie
the eff^cts thereof, and not to be treated contrary to promises and
subscriptions by their own Confederates.

By the Tenor of the Union it appears, that between the Netherlands there was
concluded an everlasting firm Peace, Covenant and Unity for the expelling of
the Spaniards and their Adherents, and to restore the Inhabitants again to
their ancient Rights, Privileges, Customs and Liberties, so that the aim of the
Common Union, was the delivering of the Countries, and the restoring every one
into his Privileges and Rights.

In all public Writings those of Braband are termed no otherwise then
Associates, but by many in their discourses they are against all right and
reason termed Conquered.

Whereas the word of Conquest and conquering can have no place among
Confederates and Associates, who are reciprocally engaged one to another
according to the Unions.

Therefore the States did rightly term the Deliverances and Restitutions of the
Cities forced from the Union, in their* Capitulations and otherwise,
Reductions* and not Conquests.

There must be a distinction made betwixt Cities and Countries of the Enemies
own, won from him by War, in which case the Laws allow, that he that wageth
the war, does get the propriety of the goods taken; and such Cities and
Countries as formerly belonged to our Fri^nds and Associates, and were
delivered and recovered out of the Enemie's hands, they in that case ought to
be^ restored to the first owners.

Thus in former times were Arras, Dornick and other Cities of Arthois, Flanders
and Luxenb^rg recovered from the French, and reduced to the State of the
Netherlands.

And thus has the King of Spain, during these Civil Wars, restored the
Provinces and Cities ma^tered by him, i^to their former state and Government.

In conformity hereof were likewise the Cities of Zutphen, Haerlem,
Ziericksea, Amer^ort, Devente^, Campen and diverse others, being retaken from
the Spaniards and their Adherents, restored by their Confederates, to the us^
and exercise of their former Rights and Freedoms.

Nay diverse Cities which were forced and compelled to forsake the Spanish
party as Nimmighen, Amsterdam, Schonhoven, Middleburg, Goes, Tolen, Utrecht,
Groninghen, were not therefore held as conquered places; in regard, that in the
foresaid Cities there was a good party still; wellaffected to the State, who
were so long kept under by an ill-affected party, until they were delivered by
the Confederates, and reduced to the Union.

Now to show what the present Braband-Cities of the Union have don for the
common good, during the Netherlandish troubles and wars, both in acting and
suffering, it will appear by this short ensuing survay.

First of all, the Cities of Berg op Zome and Willemstadt, which remained still
united to the State of the Union, it is sufficiently known to every one, how
worthily they have ever acquitted themselves upon all occasions and by all means
defensive and offensive against the Common Enemies.

Those of the Bosch, were the first, which in the beginning of the troubles,
showing their Zeal to the true Reformed Religion by open preaching, vigorously
opposed themselves against the Spanish Council, and arrested the Chancellor of
Braband and Lord of Petersheim, coming from the Governess to hinder the same,
and covertly to bring in some Companies of Soldiers; for which cause also they
were proscribed by the King by open Proclamation March 18, 1567. and blocked
up, until the Prince of Orange his departure, when as the good party were fain
to abandon the City, and depart the Land; as likewise happened generally then
throughout all the Netherlands.

After which time the City being overmastered, the same was continually kept
under by force of arms, and pitifully handled by the Spaniards Italians and
other foreign Nations, till in the year 1577. their Confederates rescued the
City from the High Dutch.

In the year 1576. the foresaid City signed and sealed the Pacification of
Ghendt.

In the year 1578. she swore to the peace of Religion and in the year 1579.
embraced and published the Union made at Utrecht.

For the maintenance whereof, the good party within that City adventured life
and goods, laboring continually, how they might be supported by the
Confederates with men and ammunition, according as they had offered and promised
them by the Deputies, within a little while after the foresaid publication, and
the whole Government of that City, had thankfully accepeted of it, with
protestation, they were resolved never to separate from the Generality,
whereunto they were engaged and confederated by solemn Vow and Oath.

But when the Confederates afterward, contrary to the foresaid presentation
foreslowed the sending of succor, and the Prince of Parma, after the subduing
of Mastricht drawing near to the said City of the Bosch, caused the same to
be summoned to surrender, then the good party, unable to make resistance,
both to the ill-affected within, with whom they had struggling enough before, to
bring them to some community; and to the puissant Leaguer of the foresaid
Prince of Parma without, was constrained to abandon the City with all their
families, some thousands of them, and to leav all their welfare behind.

Which City being afterward reduced again to the Union, by the arms of the
Confederates in the year 1629. it ought likewise to be restored to their
ancient Rights and Privileges.

As for the faithful services of the City of Breda, for the Common Liberty,
there is much of it upon public Record, in the Netherlandish Histories.

For a taste whereof we shall only touch here; That the Company of the
withdrawing party from Breda, did many notable services against the Spaniards,
before Berghen in Heinout, Harlem, within Zirick-Sen and elsewhere.

The inland wars lighted more heavy and smart upon this City then any of the
Netherlands besides. For being taken into Confiscation by Duke D' Alva in the
year 1568. it was thereafter most extremely overburthened with heavy Garrisons
both horse and foot; until the City was beleaguered and delivered again by the
Earl of Hohenloe in the year 1577.

Afterward, Jun. 28. 1581. the City, being bare of Garrison, was surprised
again by the Spaniards, through the Castle, by force of arms, and barbarously
plundered notwithstanding the manful resistance made by the Citizens, and
especially by the young men of the City, who were most of them slain in the
Defens thereof.

In the year 1590. the 4th of March, the Castle was surprised again by Prince
Maurice, with a Turfboat.

During the Spanish Siege before it, from August 27. 1624. to June 5. 1625.
there perished above 5000 Inhabitants within the City, by the war, plague and
famine; and the City was deserted after the surrender by more then three fourth
parts of the Citizens, till the reduction of the City followed in the year
1637.

Those of the City of Grave, have likewise showed themselves very zealous and
resolute in the late wars against the Enemies of the Common Fatherland; for not
long after the Pacification of Gbendt they took their Spanish Governor
prisoner, and what with money, what by force and the loss of many Citizens in
the Enterprise, got and drove out the Spanish and High Dutch Garrisons,
altogether.

Afterward May 4th of the year 1586. all the Inhabitants thereof engaged
themselves by Oath; to make utmost resistance against the common Enemy of the
Land, the King of Spain and his Adherents; and that they would in no wise
listen to any offer of agreement or reconciliation with the foresaid Enemies.

Within a short time after, This same City being forced from the Union and
subdued by the Enemy, they remained in a sad condition, till the City was
reduced again to the United State, in the year 1602. by Prince Maurice.

Steenberghen, a very ancient City of Braband, being freed of the High Dutch
Garrison in the year 1577. it was subdued again by the Spaniards, both in Anno
1582. and 1622. and twice also reduced by the Arms of the Confederates, viz.
in the years 1591. and the said 1622.

It is remarkable, that vvhilest the Spanish held this City in possession, the
same was so deserted of Citizens and made so desolate that there was not left
nor kept any Judgment Seat or administration of Justice there.

By all which it plainly appears, That none of the foresaid Cities of Braband,
ever endeavored to join or agree with the Spaniard or their Associates against
the Union and Oath taken, without extreme necessity; and consequently never
sought of their own accord or wilfully to disjoint themselves from the United
State; but they were all of them, forced and rent away from the same, by the
force and power of the Enemy, destitute of succor, or betrayed by others,
without any fault of their own, nay, to their own great grief and undoing.

The Cities of Bruggen with the Land Van Vrye and Venlo, they are the only
places, which for the said Crime of Desertion were publicly declared
Enemies, and consequently had forfeited their Rights and pretentions, which by
virtue of the Union they might have claimed otherwise.

In all public Acts, Those of Braband are by the States of the United
Provinces called indeed their Associates, but in Truth they are dealt with as
a people purely conquered.

For proof whereof we shall produce among many, but these 3 points.

First, for matter of Administration of Justice, the Court or Council of
Braband does sit without the Province, contrary to the known Privileges and
Charters of the Land, sworn to by all the Dukes; besides that the said
infringement draw's the good inhabitants into excessive troubles, charges and
inconveniences.

Secondly, in regard of Government, There is introducing a new way of
naturalizing strangers in Braband, for the suppressing and excluding of the
Natives as well from being employed in their own Province, as they are
sufficiently excluded from offices and Emploiments in others, contrary to
their express privilege, quod competit universo populo Brabantiae, (which is
the peculiar privilege of the people of Braband,) conditioned for with the
Prince, and sworn to by the Prince.

This Privilege was never violated in Braband before the Troubles, and
remains pure and incorrupt even under the Spanish Government to this very
day.

Thirdly, touching the Revenues and Contributions, there have been new burdens
imposed all along upon those of Braband, and they are threatened with more
heavy ones to be imposed at pleasure, without any of their consent, nay,
without so much as hearing them.

Which is repugnant, not only against the Privileges of the Country, but
likewise particularly against the promises of the States General of the year
1600, alleged in the former Deduction.

We shall not insist here on the opposition of the States of Holland against
Emperor Charles for the Congie-monie, nor of the City of Brussels against
Archduke Albert, for a small impost upon pears; but touch in a word only, that
in Spain, England and Germany, it has ever been and is the observance in
course, as likewise is showed by Philip Comines in the States of France under
Charles the eight, assembled at Tours, That no Prince has power to la^e
Impositions upon his Subjects, nor Right to give the^ Laws without their
Consent.

The Society which the Cities and Countries of Braband have in that kind with
the other Confederates, may well be miserable and deplorable, even as in the
benefit of cessio bonorum among the Lawyers: whereof we may take up the old
complaint, Sub umbra foederis servitutem nos pati; neque ^nim Societatem, ut
olim, sed t^nquam mancipia haberi; That under the color of Covenant we are
reduced to slaverie, we being not entreated like Associates, but like Bondmen.

Love indeed is the only firm foundation of Government, and according as a
Wiseman said once, That kind of Republic fare's best and last's longest,
which all the parts are in love with, and wish it lasting.

By the fore^aid Common Union the Netherlands engaged themselves together for
ever, without impairing the special privileges of the particular Provinces,
Cities, Members and Inhabitants thereof; wherein they not only may do one
another no prejudice or hindrance, but are bound likewise to help and protect
one another therein by all means possible, with advice and aid, goods and
blood, against any one that shall attemt or go about to wrong them therein; so
that among the conditions of the Union this appears to be the principal, To
maintein the Countries, Cities, Members and Inhabitants thereof in their
particular Privileges, amongst which without all controversy Government is one
too.

Wherein of old not only the chief Cities, but even the smaller ones in
Braband did share and participate. For information whereof may serve, That among
the Cities of Braband there was no certain order kept heretofore, as appears
by the engagements of the Cities in the years 1354, 1370, 1426, the Charters of
Corteberg of 1312, and of the Lady Johanna of 1385, and the privileges of Duke
John the IVth of the year 1422.

And that the foresaid Cities of Braband were anciently summoned to and sat in
the Assembly of the States of Braband, is a thing too well known to be
doubted of.

Where it is observable yet, that to the Pacification of Ghendt and Union of
Utrecht, there were not only invited and called in the great or chief Cities
of the Provinces, but indifferently all the Cities and Members thereof; and who
know's not the practice since thereupon throughout all the United Provinces.

By the foresaid Common Union the Countries and Cities are equally engaged in
one and the same degree, so that none can pretend any right of Superiority
over the other.

Whence it is evident, that there is no ground which can take away or hinder
the Right of the Lords, Gentry and Cities of Braband, of governing their own
State particularly without the Generality.

The Government of the Switsers Republic may serve us for an Example.

The same consists in three parts.

First, in XIII Cantons, whereof every one is Sovereign in his own district,
and yet they are all engaged one to another for common Defense.

Secondly, in the Confederated Allies, such as are the Abbot and City of St
Gal, the Grisons, the Bishop and Country of Valaye, Rotwiel, Mulhausen and
diverse others; every one of these being likewise Sovereign within his Sphere,
and yet bound together with the Cantons for the Common Safety.

Thirdly, in the Governments or Praesecturae, places conquered from the
Enemies, and subject to the Cantons, and governed by them in several manners,
among whom there are no Countries nor Cities, which formerly were Members of
the Cantons or Associates.

And whereas in default of a Prince and Sovereign, the Sovereigntie of the Land
remains and returns into the hand of the Gentry and Cities, as the States
of Holland rightly asserted in several of their Declarations and Remonstrances
to Leicester.

And that the Government of Braband, since the loss of Antwerp, has hitherto,
during the Wars, been governed in the name of the Hi. Mi. States General, only
provisionally for that time, without impairing, and under protestation of not
prejudicing the Rights and Privileges belonging to the Lords, Gentry and
Cities of Braband, as has been declared by diverse Acts of the States General
themselves, which make's it apparent, that their desire is grounded upon order
and reason, and ought therefore according to the Union, to be determined by
most voices: This is that which make's the Lords, Gentry and Cities of Braband
aforesaid to be very confident, That as Confederates and Associates of this
Serenissime Republic, they shall yet at length enjoie the fruits of ^eace,
together with the rest of the Provinces, according to the Common Union, and
their own unq^^stionable Rights and Privileges.

THe Princess Roial had in the beginning of Januarie discharged the Tables of
her household, allowing them Bord-wages, to continue till after the Enterrment,
whiles the dispute betwixt her and the young Prince his Grandmother about the
Gardianship did still continue, and that not without some eagerness and
estranging; none would yield. And it was observable, that the late Prince
having but last Summer charged those of Holland with Discord (though they
maintein'd the contrary, and prosecuted the managing of their affairs very
unanimously) and handled them so roughly upon that pretense, his own House
should be visited now with so much Discord and Contention, and that those of
his House must take their Refuge and seek unto those very States for Right and
Redress, whom he, but a little before, had subdued in a manner.

The Court of Holland, propounded several ways of Accommodation. But the Grand
mother clayming part in the Guardianship, and the Mother all entire to her
self: all expedients, and conciliatorie means were frustrated; insomuch, that
about the end of February Sigt Matsvelt and Commissarie Copes were sent in
behalf of the said Princess Grandmother and the Prince Elector of Brandenburg
to the Prince's Council, insinuating, and declaring there, by a missive from
the said Grandmother, all Acts possessorie, made by the Princess Royal, to be
null and of no validity, with charge and countermand to surceas the like for
the future, or that They should know how to resent it against their persons,
and this was likewise more especially intimated by a Letter to Secretary
Bucero; the Princess Grandmother grounding her self upon this, That according
to all Rights and Laws, nothing ought to be innovated or attempted by the
Princess Roial; deliberante Principe and Judice (the States and Court of
Holland)*

The Princess Roial stood upon this, She would have her mother in law, first
of all to acknowledge her Guardian; and then she would hear her speaking of
Co-Guardianship. The Mother in law on the contrary, would have the Princess
Royal first of all to acknowledge her Guardian, and hearken then what she could
say for partnership.

The Baptism of the young Princess was at last resolved to be solemnized, on
Sundaie, the 15. of Januarie; the Ceremonies whereof were performed in the
great Church, that afternoon, in manner as follows.

The Deputies of the States General, those of Holland, those of Zealand, as
also those of the Cities of Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, assembled themselves
presently after high noon, each party in their usual places of assembling.

Those of the States General rode first to Church in a Caroach and took their
places appointed for them, all which, together with the passage all a long from
the entry of the Church and Churchyard, the way they came, covered over with
black Baies.

The Steward Dorp, together with the Prince's Gentlemen and Halbardiers, came
to meet the Deputies of the States General first, and afterward the rest of
the Deputies successively unto their Caroaches, and led them to their Seats.

Tegneius the minister was to make the Sermon, and Lindanus, to administer the
Sacrament. The Church was so thronged and filled with people greedy after
Noveltie, that it caused very much disorder and disturbance both in singing and
preaching, the one was confounded, the other could scarce be heard by any, for
all the authority and command for silence* insomuch, that the minister was fain
to give over abruptly, soon after the infant and the rest of the train were got
in once.

There had been some Disorder likewise at Court, which caused them to com later
then was exspected, and that by reason of the dispute about the Duke of York
his going along with them. The first order was, that the Princess Albertina,
should carry the Infant, and be led by the Duke of York and Prince Edward.
But the Duke desired to be excused, saying, he had not been wellcom'd by the
State, and if on this occasion, he should meet with some of the Government, he
knew not how to comport himself, toward, or salute them; nevertheless he said
he would go along and lead the Queen of Bohemia; but afterward, considering
that likewise, he repeated his former Excuse, and went not at all. But he
himself having made no address at all before unto the State of his coming, that
he might be wellcom'd by them, his Excuse was none: and it was thought, he
refused it only of greatness, or by reason of the contesting of the Princesses
Royal and Dowager about the Guardian-ship.

But hereupon the Princess Albertina likewise refusing to carry the Infant, it
was moved my Lady Stanhope Governess of the Princess Roial should carry it,
and the young Ladies of Brederode and of Dhona should bear up the Train, being
a long piece of cloth with white fur and black spots. This was opposed by my
Lady Brederode, saying, She did not desire her daughters should go training
it after Madam Stanhop.

At last it was agreed that the Lady of Dhona, daughter of the Lord Brederode,
should carry the Child to Church, as she did, led on the right hand by Count
Maurice, and on the left by my Lord Goring, alias, Earl of Norwich: the Train
was born by two Ladies of Dhona, and two of Brederode.

After them followed the Queen of Bohemia led by -- and then Princess Dowager,
Grandmother, led by Prince Edward; after her the Princess Louyse, the young
Princesses of Orange, of Hozenzollen and others, most of them confusedly.

Being Coach'd and brought to Church and seated there; the nois and stir of
the people was so great, that the Minister was glad to dispatch and hasten to
the Administration of the Sacrament, by reading the usual institution (during
which the whole company stood up:) and then the Child was presented by the
Queen, and baptized by Lindanus, naming it William-Henrie.

The speech went, that the Princess Roial would gladly have named it
Charls-William, but that the Grandmother opposed it with that eagerness, that
she said, If they will call him CHARLES, I will not go along to see him
Christened.

The Church-Cerimonies being performed, the Deputies rose up one after another
in their order, and passing by the Ladies, took Coach again, each party
repairing to their usual Randevouz, and the rest back to the Court.

Where having reposed themselves a little, there came the Deputies of their Hi.
Mi. the States General, finding the Princess Roial standing before her bed
side, and right over against her the Queen and Princess Dowager. And after my
Lord Van Soelen had complemented her, according to the occasion, he presented
a gilt-box for the Infant, wherein there was an Obligation of an yearly pension
for him of 8000 Gilders. The Princess Roial answered with a like complement,
yet did not reach forth her hand to receiv the Box from him, but he being
beckned toward a Chair standing by, there he set it down; and thus taking
their leaves again they withdrew, having caused a thousand Gilders in fair gold
to be bestowed upon the Nurserie. A little after those of Holland came, whose
present was a gilt box with a pension of 5000 flor. per ann. giving 800 flor.
to the Nurserie. Delft gave a pension of 200 flor. per ann. Those of Amsterdam
one of a 1000 flor. per ann. Those of Zealand 20000 flor. once for all.

The two Ministers, the one for preaching, the other for Administering the
Sacrament, had each 300 flor. given them in the young Prince his behalf.

From the Prince Elector of Brandenburg there assisted none at all at the Font;
nor from any other foreign friend, neither in person, nor by Deputation.

The Deputies from the States General were the Lords Van Soelen, Wimmenum,
Vett, Renswoud, Donia, Mulart and Essinga.

Feast or Collation there was none.

Some did not take it well that the Halbardiers went by the Coach sides of the
young Prince; nor that the child was covered with Ermyn-fur, black on white,
that being Roial.

The Lord Donia, one of the Deputies from the States General sickned next day,
and died on Fridaie following.

The Enterrement was resolved to be performed Tuesday Mar. 7, but the weather
proving foul and tempestuous, it was put off till Wednesday the 8, the Company
was summoned against 9 in the forenoon, but it was full noon before they began
to march, and that in order as follows.

First of all the Guard of his Highs consisting of 400 men, in their best
array, trailing their Colors and Pikes, the Muskets under the arms, with the
bores downward. All the Military Officers which were present at the Hague. Two
Comtrollers with staves to conduct the Mourning. All the Household, both Gentry
and others. Two Kettle-drums. Twelv Trumpets with velvet Jackets, the Trumpets
hung with great Tassels and the Arms of his Highs. A Herald of Arms. Le Cornet
des Couleurs. Le Guidon des Couleurs, being a field-Banner with Colors. The
Helmet of Turney, or Tilting, with feathers, born upon a short Staff. The
Target, being a shield with Colors, likewise born upon a short staff* The
Turney, or Tilting Horse, hung down to the ground with Colors and Devises. The
great Standart with colors of Arms. An Herald of Arms.
Hereafter followed the Horses and Bannerets.

The Horse with the Arms of Warneton, and the Banneret thereof. Herstall.
Grimbergen. Cranendoncq. Gertruydenberg. Die. Grave and land of Kuyck.
Ysselstein. Breda and Polanen. Veer and Vlissinghen. Leerdam. Buyren. Meeurs.
Linghen. Chalon. Diets. Vyanden. Cazenelleboghen. Nassaw.
The Horse with the Arms of Orange and the Banneret thereof. The Herald of Arms*
Le Penon des arms, or field-Banner of Arms. Le Guidon des Arms, or the
field-Banner of War. The Horse of the Battle, embroidered down to knees with the
Arms of his Highs. The great Standart with the complete Arms of his Highs. The
Horse of Honor, embroidered with the complete Arms of his Highness down to the
ground. The great Banner. The IV Headquarters. 1. Wittgenstein. 2. Colligny.
3. Solms. 4. Nassaw, all born orderly.
The Helmet with the Crown born on a short staff. The shield with the plain
Arms, being the complete Arms of his Highness, together with the Crown a top,
and order of the Garter about, born on a short staff. The sword sheathed,
being the sword of Arms. The Coat of Arms born upon a staff. The Horse of
Mourning. The Color and Garter of England, born upon a Cushion. The Sword of
Sovereigntie, born naked, the point upward. The Princely Crown. The principal
Herald. Hereupon followed the Princely Hears, covered with black velvet, upon a
Chariot under a Canopie, very leisurely drawn along with 8 horses, all decked
with black velvet down to the ground, attended round about with abundance of
Gentlemen, Noblemen and others of great quality, and on both sides guarded
with the Halbardiers of his Highness. After this there followed the Dukes,
Princes and Earls of next kindred and alliance to the famous house of Nassaw,
one after the other, all in long trailing Cloaks. As first the Duke of York,
accompanied with Don Emanuel, and Don Ferdinand, sons of Don William Louys
Prince of Portugal. Count John Wolfart of Brederode. The Count of Solms. Count
Christian of Donaw Count Frederick of Nassaw Prince Edward Palsgrave. Count
John Maurice of Nassaw. Count Henry of Nassaw. Count William Frederick of
Nassaw, Stadholder in Friesland. The Rhingrave, Governor of Mastricht. The
Count of Limborgh and Stirum.
Then followed the Deputies of the Assembly of the States General in body,
and a Herald before every Province, with the Arms thereof. Then the Nob. Mi.
the Lords of the Council of State. The Commissioned Council of the No. Gr.
Mighty Lords, the States of Holland and Westfriesland. The Nob. Mi. Lords the
President and Council of the High Court of Holland, Zealand and Westfriesland.
The No. Mi. Lords of the Provincial Court of Holland, Zealand and
Westfriesland. The No. Mi. Lords of the Checker Chamber of the County of
Holland. The Magistrates of the Hague and of Delft. The Ministers of Delft. The
Ministers of the Hague.
All these Companies in very Stately mourning.

After all this, there followed the 6 Companies, or Train-bands of the Hague,
likewise with trailing Colors and pikes, the muskets under their arms with the
bores downwarde, the Officers all in mourning, following the grand Train forth
the Hague, as far as the Leaper's-hous, where attended an exceeding great
number of Coaches, Wagons and horses, all with black liveries, for the
Noblemen and Great-ones, following one another all along in great State unto
Delft; where the Trainbands of the City, conducted the Hears to the new Church
etc.

But though the Prince was buried, the heavy contention between the Princesses
about the Guardian-ship was not. There were several motions and proffers made
for accommodation: among others one, in behalf of the Princess Dowager and Pr.
Elector of Brandenburg, which the Princess Royal absolutely refused, upon
suggested hopes, that she ought of right to be the sole Guardian.

She caused hers likewise to take great pains in Zealand at the Land-daie
there in April, to get the young Prince received there again as Premier Noble,
upon several grounds, which the Province notwithstanding would in no wise yield
unto. There were likewise great endeavors made to dispose those of Zealand, for
the choosing of a Stad-holder.

Those of Holland, to have an eye upon it, dispatched thitherwards the Lords
van Opdam, de Wit, Nyport and Rypen, as it were to invite those of Zealand to
the sending back their Deputies to the great Assembly, and to erect the
Chamber Mi-partie, according to the Treaty of Peace with Spain: but really,
for the diverting of that blow, of choosing again a Stadholder and Premier
Noble there. And so much they effected, That there was nothing don at that
meeting, but a Resolution taken, of sending to the Hague again. And the
Countie-Cities took upon them the Right of choosing their own Council, after
the example of Holland.

All propositions and essaies hitherto of accommodating the difference of the
Princesses about the Guardianship, having prooved fruitless, there was at last
pronounced a Sentence by the Court of Holland; from which the Prince Elector of
Brandenburg (or his Counselors) and the Princess Dowager, immediately appealed
to the High Court, addressing themselves to the same, for inhibition, which,
though many were of opinion, it could not be don, was nevertheless granted.

During these Contests, his Highs the Pr. Elect. of Brandenbourg arrived at the
Hague in person, together with the Electress: and was lodged at the Court of
the Princess Dowager. Understanding there, that it was conceived, the great
animositie and partiality in the Princess Royal proceeded more from evil
Counsel, then her own inclination, suspecting most the Lords of Beverweert and
Henvlict, the said Pr. Elector caused a certain Proposition to be presented
Jun. 24. 1651.
to the Princess Royal by his Counselor Sweryn; which did rather more
exasperate, then mitigate or reconcile the minds; she the Princess Royal
giving to understand in her Answer, that instead of a friendly enterview and
debate, which had become such Allies, she was laden with reproaches etc.

But the said Elector, stayed not there; for having intimated in the foresaid
Proposition, that her bad Counsel swaied too much, and principally aiming at
the above mentioned Lords Beverweert and Henvliet: he caused in solemn manner
by two of his Counselors in the presence Jun. 27.
of a public Notarie, protests to be made in the Haghe, first to the Lord
Beverweert, to this effect; That his Elect^l. Highs took it very strange, the
said Lord had meddled with the Questions in debate, betwixt his said El. Highs
the Princess Dowager, and Princess Royal, concerning the Guardian-ship of his
Highs the young Prince of Orange, and caused the same by his advice and counsel
to be so carried, that hitherto no good could be don in it for the young
Prince, his Highs did thereby warn the said Lord, not to trouble himself
henceforward with giving of any counsel in this affair, but for peace, and the
best advantage of his Highs the young Prince of Orange; and that be the Lord
Beverweert should do well to remember, in what Obligations he stood to the
House of Orange, and have a care therefore to meet the Princess Dowager with as
much respect, as if his Highs of blessed memory, were yet alive. Or else, his
Electl Highs should not forbear, to require another account of him, the said
Lord Beverweert, in this behalf. Whereupon the said Lord Beverweert made
answer; He was confident his Electl Highs was evil informed, concerning the
foresaid matters, desiring his said Counselors they would undeceiv him
therein; forasmuch as he was not in any service now with the Princess Royal,
nor sworn, nor of Counsel to her, and had no wages nor entertainment from her
Highs yet nevertheless he held both his late Highs of happy memory and the
Princess Royal in that esteem, that if the Princess Royal did require his
Advice, he was and would still be ready to serve her, not only with his
Counsel, but also with his person, and whatsoever depended on it; and yet never
advise any thing, but what may be most advantageous to the House and Person of
his Highs the young Prince of Orange, as being the only remaining hopes of
the House of Orange. Moreover, said the Lord Beverweert, that he bore all due
respect to his Electl Highs, as became a Prince of so high Quality; but, that
he was none of his Subjects, but the Lords the States of Holland, to whom and
none other, he was bound here to give account of his Actions. And touching the
memento made of yielding respect to my Lady the Princess Dowager, he said,
he had no obligation to her person, but only to her high Quality, and knew
well enough, what he owed to such.

To the Lord Henvliet, his said Electl. Highs of Brandenbourg caused the like
protest to be made by and before the same persons, That his Electl Highs took
it very strange, he the Lord Henvliet had meddled with the Difference betwixt
his said Highs, the Princess Dowager and the Princess Royal, and by his counsel
and direction, brought things to that pass, that hitherto no good could be don
for the young Prince; That his Highs esteemed him too mean, to be emploi'd in
affairs, concerning his Highs the Prince of Orange, though he was not against
it, but that he might be used in private concernments and businesses of the
Princess Royal, as one of her Hous-hold. That his Electl Highs gave him warning
hereby, to have a care, and meddle no further with the affairs, concerning the
Prince of Orange, or else he should find, the hands of his Electl Highs not to
be too short to require a personal account thereof, of the Lord Henvlict.

Whereupon the Lord Henvlict made answer; That he had received Charge and
Commission from his late Roial Matie of great Britain, renewed by his present
Matie since, to assist the Princess Royal in all her affairs and occasions with
his Advice and Counsel, and that what he had don hitherto, was don by virtue
thereof; and as his Electl Highs did maintain his Servants and Ministers, so
he was confident he should be likewise be maintained, in following his
Commission: and said moreover, That he had declared in full Council, that he
never intended to trouble himself with the business of his Highs, but only
with the affairs of the Princess Royal, wherewith he was charged; adding
thereunto, That he should never suffer himself to be hindered by his Electl
Highs or any body in the World, to give his advice in the affairs of the
Princess Royal; and if they would give him, what they had against him in
writing, he would return his answer in writing accordingly.

On the 29th of June the Princess Dowager caused the foresaid two reports or
protests to be delivered to the Counselor Pensionarie Cats, with desire that
they might be read at the Assembly of their Nob. Gr. Mi. to the end, that
they might truly understand, what had past between his Electl Highs of
Brandenburg, or his Ministers, and the Lord Beverweert and Henvlict, which her
Highs declared, was otherwise reported of to their No. Gr. Mi. then Truth held
forth. Together with that there was read likewise another paper, dated Junii
28o. which had been delivered to the said Counselor Pensionarie by the
Secretary of the Princess Royal, the sum whereof was, That her Royal Highs
found herself very much wronged, in that his foresaid Electl Highs had of his
own humor caused two persons of quality, viz not only the Lord Henvlict her
superintendant, but likewise one of her friends, to be most uncivilly,
disorderly and unreasonably affronted, and threatened withal, if they should
undertake any further to meddle with the business concerning the Guardian-ship
of the Young Prince her Son. Desiring, their N. Gr. M. would be pleased to
provide and order against such proceedings, what they should find requisite in
reason and Justice, to further her Cause; which things being taken into
Deliberation, it was found good* That the persons as well of the Lord
Beverweert, as of the Lord Henvlict, should be taken and were taken into the
protection of their N. G. M. And that this Result should be made known to the
Counselors and Ministers of his said Electl Highs from the States and in their
Name, expressly declaring unto them, that their N. G. M. could not allow of
such kind of proceedings here, as unsufferable to the Constitution of this
State. That the same Resolution aforesaid should likewise be intimated to my
Lady the Princess Dowager of Orange, and she most seriously desired, to
dispose his Electl Highs, that he would forbear such proceedings, and leav
matters referred to justice, to the Decision thereof, without using any further
threats or any such like unbefittiug means as those foresaid papers held forth,
against any one, especially against persons that have Relation to her Royal
Highs or assist her with their Counsel. And the performance of this Resolution
was committed to the Lords of Dort, Harlem, Amsterdam, Alcmar, together with
the Counselor Pensionarie.

And by this occasion it was found good likewise, to advise how and in what
manner it should be provided, That no great Ones should be suffered to com
into the Cities and Forts of this State, without precedent intimation from
them, and good liking of the State.

Besides all this, there happened yet a further occasion of exasperating and
heightning the Contention, news being brought about this time, that the
Governor of Orange, the Earl of Donaw, had caused to be apprehended and
secured an Orange Gentleman, by name Rafaelis, heretofore French Minister at
the Haghe, and afterward one of the Princes Counsel, being secretly dispatched
by the Princess Roial, to get a certain Act declared in the Principality of
Orange, pretended to have been made by Prince William, and addressed to the said
Earl of Donaw, in manner as follows.

Le Prince d' Orange,
ORdain's by this, that the Earl of Donaw, Governor of Orange, shall not yield
up the said place to any one after his Deceas, but follow the Orders which the
Princess Roial his Spous shall give him: And the said Earl shall maintein the
said place in her behalf against any other whatsoever pretending to it.

Don at the Haghe this 24 of Febr. 1649. Signed, G. P. Prince of Orange; and
lower, Busero.

When the said Rafaelis took his leav of the Princess Dowager, she presently
told him, Sir! You are going upon an errand for the Princess Roial; but he
declared again and again, he went about his own affairs. When he arrived at
Orange, it was so late (which it seems he did of purpose) that the Castle
gates were shut already, that so he might have the better excuse, why he was
not com to speak with the Governor before any other; and so to lose no time,
he presently addressed himself to the Parliament and Magistrate there, to
recommend the Princess Royal her intention unto them, but the Governor getting
notice here he caused hold to be laid on him that night, and lodged him safe
in the Castle.

The High Court having heard out the full plea of the Difference between the
Princely parties, there were all means tried, to bring it to an amicable
transaction and composure; but the same not taking, Sentence was pronounced,
and therein also, how the Cabinet should be disposed, which the Court
Provincial in their precedent Sentence, had not so much as mentioned once.

By this Sentence the Princess Royal conceived herself much prejudiced, and
declared, that she would desire Review thereof to be made; yet because all the
Creditors remained still unpai'd, and clamored much, the Princess Roial
declared, That though she could not yield to the foresaid Sentence, there
being Errors in it, and was resolved to desire a Review thereof, and to
prosecute it accordingly; nevertheless for the Creditor's sake, that they might
receiv due satisfaction once, she was content, reserving her Right and
exception against the foresaid Sentence, that Order may be taken jointly for
their payment etc. Which Declaration being presented from the Princess Roial
to the Princess Dowager, July 31. her answer was, That as for the alleged
Sentence, her Highs and the Pr. Elect of Brandenburg, had more reason to except
against and desire a review of it, being that therein the Princess Royal was
joined in the Guardiansh p, contrary to the Law, she being yet in her
Minority. And as for payments, her Highs wished that the moneys had not been
otherwise diverted, but employed for their proper use and appointment. It was
none of her Highs fault, that the Creditors were not paid, she having desired
the High Court formerly, to autorize the Princes Counsel for satisfying of
them. Her Highs commended it to the care of the Princess Royal to find the
moneys for satisfying of the Creditors, and would be very glad those honest
people might receiv content once.

But there being no End of those Deputies, and the prejudice and damage on
all hands thereby but increasing: there were very great endeavors made to bring
the parties to an Accommodation. One of the special Difficulties was, That the
Prince of Landsberg was likewise declared Partner in the Guardian-ship.
Nevertheless August 13. an Agreement was procured, wherein the Prince was
silently past by, it being presupposed, that it would be but troublesome to
him, to attend the administration here at his own Charges, though it had been
offered. The said Agreement being signed, the Princess Dowager went that
evening yet, being Sunday, forth the High toward Aken, for her health's
sake, without seeing the Princess Royal. After her Departure there arose new
disputes, like to undo all afresh, which yet was alla^'d again, so that the
Agreement stood, the sum whereof was,

That the Princess Roial and the Pr. Elect. of Brandenburg, together with the
Princess Dowager of Orange, had friendly agreed about the Guardian-ship of the
Person and Goods of his Highs the young Prince of Orange, on condition,

1. That the Princess Royal as Mother, should have as much Authority alone, as
the other two partner-Guardians together.

2. That all shall be administered with common advice, jointly, for the
conservation of all his Rights, Goods, Domeyns.

3. That employing all his Revenues to his advantage, they shall agree together
how much to allow for yearly expenses.

4. That the Questions about the Principality of Orange shall be left to
Decision of both the Courts of Justice jointly; together with some other
codicillarie dispositions; and things to remain in the interim in statu as they
are, and nothing altered but with common advice and consent.

5. That neither party shall refuse or act contrary to the Determinations of
the foresaid Courts of Justice, in no wise, nor by no pretense whatsoever.

6. That the Election of Magistrates, Collation of Offices and Benefices
belonging to his said Highs shall be divided in two parts, and by lot adjudged
to the parties.

7. Except that the Election of the Magistracy, and Collation of Offices and
Benefices at Flushing, and resort thereof, shall be left wholly to the
disposing of the Princess Roial; and that of ter Vere to the Elector and
Dowager.

8. That the former five Counselors shall be continued by new Commissions,
and two new ones added, one by the Princess Roial, and the other by the two
other Guardians.

9. That the Counselors, and other Council-Officers, shall be supplied and
chosen by turns, the Princess Roial beginning for the Office of Secretary and
Treasure, and the two other Guardians beginning for the rest of the Offices of
the said Council.

10. That all Collations of Charges, Offices and Benefices, shall be
dispatched and issued in the name of the young Prince, and by Commission of the
joint-Guardians.

11. That all Offices Magistracies and places, shall be on all sides bestowed
upon honest and qualified persons, according to the Rights, Privileges and
Customs of the Countries; and without any Nundination, whereof the said persons
are to purge themselves by Oath.

12. All emergent Differences to be referred to 4 persons, to be chosen by
the Princess Royal, and two by the two other Guardians; and those 4 to choos a
fist if need be for the casting Voice.

13. That all former Questions and Differences shall hereby be void, dead and
null.

14. That all these points and Articles shall be subscribed by the parties
interessed, passing their princely word for the inviolable keeping and
performing thereof.

Hereof there were drawn two authentic Copies (at large) and the one signed,
Maria; the other Amidia, Princess of Orange.

However, there being no mention made in this Agreement of the Cabinet, the
same gave occasion of a new dispute. The Princess Roial pretended, that
according to this Agreement she was not bound to produce the Cabinet; that in
it there were likewise some Secrets which it was not fit for her to reveal or
divulge. The others said, that by the Agreement there could not be taken away
that whereof the Agreement made no mention at all: and that according to the
Laws, all Guardians are necessarily bound to produce and deliver up the
Inventaries. At length the Princess Roial was persuaded to restore the Cabinet,
as she did, upon their princely word.

And thus the business of the Guardianship being once concluded and adjusted, a
farther address was made thereupon to the Spanish Ambassador le Brun, for the
completing of the draught of the Treaty made with the late Prince of Orange.
And although the said Draught was made at that time more advantageous for the
Prince, the Spanish being somewhat jealous still the Prince might otherwise
incline too much to the French; and now he was dead, they might have taken the
opportunity of protracting the work, or at leastwise, new-molding it; yet the
Spanish showed themselves generous, in keeping the former draught unaltered, and
bringing it to perfection; the same consisting in these three points.

1. That the Prince of Orange shall be put and remain in full possession and
propriety of all his Goods, Domains and Lordships, situated under the
Sovereigntie of his Majesty of Spain, and specified in the Treaties made at
Munster; howbeit and notwithstanding that they were destinated, as appears by
the said Treaties, to serve and take place for the Exchange and permutation of
the Marquisate of the Bergh op Zome, with the dependances thereof (in regard of
the difficulties and contestation about the same).

2. For the further satisfying of the surplusage of the value, and making
amends for the importance of the said Marquisate, there shall be furnished to
the said Prince's profit and really delivered by Ambassador Le Brun in the
behalf of the King his Master, the sum of five hundred thousand florens at 20
fouls each flor. to be paiable either here at the Hague or at Amsterdam, at
the choice of the said Ambassador in two paiments, viz. the 200000 flor.
immediately after the signature of the present agreement by the parties
contracting; and the other 300000 flor. within five months after.

3. That besides the payment of the said 500000 flor. there shall be assigned
to the profit of the said Prince a yearly Rent of fourscore thousand flor.
likewise at 20 souls each flor. paiable every year either here at the Hague, or
at Amsterdam, at the choice of his Majesty, and according to the common course
of the Coin then at the said places, when successively year by year the said
paiments shall be made. The interests of which rent for the profit of the said
Prince being to begin their course from the same time of signing or dating the
present Agreement and contract; the Capital and Principal thereof may be
redeemed at 20 years purchase within the space of twelv years, to be paid at
several terms, and by several parcels, provided no parcel to be paid be less
then three hundred thousand florins each time.

And all this under the pledges contained in the foresaid Treaties, and the
special obligation of all the Goods, Domains, Subsidies and other Revenues of
his said Majesty in the Dukedom of Braband and Earldom of Flanders.

This advantage only the Spaniard got by the death of the Prince and the
dispute about the Guardianship, That in lieu of paying the Rents and Interests
of the Equivalent agreed upon for the Marquisate of Bergues, from the time of
Signing intended by the Prince, the payment began but now; so that they got or
saved all the rest; viz. not only from the time of signing the Peace; but also
from the death of the Prince hitherto, which was one of the fruits of those
Domestic jars and misunderstandings among friends.

The Gardians pressed likewise for a new Act of Caution or performance of the
Prelates in manner as the former* Transactions Jan. 8, and December. 27, 1647,
were signed and confirmed thereby. But the Ambassador advised, it were safer
they should let that alone; for that the Prelates might easily chance to refuse
it, and because of their authority one might be loath, and could not easily
neither compel them: and by reason of their interstice they might pretend their
former Agreement was held invalid, and could not therefore bind them, and so
it was waved. The Treaty being Signed, the Spanish Ambassador feasted and
Regalized the Commissioners, together with his Excellency the Lord Stadholder
Count William in place of the Princesses.

Having thus far treated of the Defect and Detriment sustained by the death of
the late Prince, we shall now go on to prosecute that which was taken in
hand for the orderly supply and redress or resettling of the Government.

About the latter end of March and beginning of April, as also before and
after, the great Assembly was more busied with the affairs of France, Spain,
Portugal and others, then with domestic, and such, as properly were the cause
of their meeting; and therefore, we shall but barely point at the foreign
affairs, as not conducing to the scope and matter in hand.

The French King's Ambassador Bellievee was arrived in the beginning of March;
and because they could not agree together about the Ceremonies, there was no
conference at all held with him, insomuch that He* seeing he could do nothing
here, went his way home again in the beginning of May.

The Ambassadors S^ John and Strickland, both Counselors of State, to the
Republic of England, arriving here about the latter end of March, with a Train
of near 300 persons, had Audience upon the 30th. in the great Assembly, but
withal so many affronts put upon them from the Courts and Courtiers there,
(however the Lords of Holland labored to suppress them) that toward the end of
April, they were charged by the Parliament to return, declaring they could
tarry there no longer with safety to themselves, and Reputation of the
Republic. The State sought indeed to give them all possible satisfaction,
propounding the Treaty of the year 1495. Those of Holland caused the same to
be insinuated to the Parliament, by their Commissioner Schaep, desiring some
longer stay of the Ambassadors, which was granted for a certain space longer,
but that being elapsed, they were again summoned back, toward the end of
June; and though there were all possible endeavors used to protract their
Departure a little longer* they could not be prevailed with; and so the
Treaty remaining uneffected, it was resolved, that by an Extraordinary
Ambassie from hence into England, the same should be consummated. They took
their leaves Junii 30th. and parted from the Hagh the first of July.

The long and ever since the year 1649. delaied Ratification, of the Treaty
made that year with Denmarck by the High Steward Ulefeld, was at last
completed and settled in the great Assembly March 21. 1651. notwithstanding
the Swedish Ministers Canterestein and Appleboom their respective and
reiterated offices and endeavors against it.

The King of Portugal his Ambassador Sousa de Macedo, having after long Delaie,
obtained Audience at last, Martii 6o. and made his proposition in Latin in the
great Assembly, gave more hopes then effects; so that it was resolved Martii
25o. to cut off all further conference with him, and thenceforward not to
acknowledge him any longer in the quality of Ambassador, notwithstanding that
the Queen of Sweden offered by her Commissarie Appleboom, to mediate between
the State and the said Ambassador; who thereupon within a little time after,
departed thence for Hamborow.

Between the Spanish Ambassador le Brun and the French Resident Brasset, there
happened, both before and during the ^taie of the Ambassador Bellievre, several
bickerings presented in the great Assembly, both by public audiences, and by
transmitted papers; which were divulged still in print (as is conceived by
their own consent) but the State did entertain it with nothing but the hearing
and seeing thereof.

Now then to return again to our domestic affairs; There was much pains taken
since March 28. for to conciliate the discrepant inclinations, that were com in
and presented by the several Provinces, which at length produced a full Report,
made in the Assembly April 26. and afterward Jun. 16o. completely past and
determined, as shall be seen in due place.

At this time, Things stood not in Zealand according to the mind of the Lords
of Holland, understanding what endeavors there were on foot, to proceed to a
new choice of a Stadtholder, Captain General, etc. And though the same did not
necessitate the Lords of Holland, to do the like, yet they feared, it might
occasion some alteration in the Provinces of Gelderland, Utrecht, Over-Yssell,
and in diverse Cities of Holland it self. Therefore to keep the Province of
Zealand in a good intelligence with Holland, they sent (as was said likewise
before) the Lords van Opdam, de Wit, Newport and Picca, in Commission thither;
who made there this ensuing Proposition.

Noble Mighty Lords!
We hold our selves obliged in discharge of our Commission, and according to
the intent of our Principals, successively to communicate and represent unto
you the considerations and sollicitous Trutinations of their N. Gr. M. touching
the Captainship General. All the other points of Religion, the Union and
Militia, are by mutual conferences betwixt the ^wo Provinces, God be praised,
unanimously agreed on; so that we were not able to observe any discrepancie
concerning any other subject.

Your N. M. well know, that the Supreme Authority over the Militia or Army,
together with the Direction of military affairs, does appertain to every one
of the United Provinces within their own Sovereign Provincial Sphere; and that
accordingly there was ever given by them, even to the particular Stadholders,
the quality of Captain General within their respective Provinces, and
especially in those Provinces, whose Stadholders were not invested with the
quality of Captain General over the whole Union; wherefore also the Province
of Groninghen and the Omlands were not content, as all the rest of the
Provinces, in making their Stadholders Captains General by Commission; but
expressed besides in plain terms in the IX Article of their Instruction, That
the Stadholder shall likewise be Captain General and the Chief-head (note) of
the forces of Horse and Foot, which at present are, or hereafter may com into
the said Province.

As also by your N. M. themselves and the Lords of Holland and Westfriesland, it
has been several times solemnly declared; especially by the resolution of
Febr. 6, 1587, That his Excellency Prince Maurice of immortal memory (who was
then particular Governor and Captain General over Holland and Zealand, and had
no Commission yet from the Generality) should have the direction and managing
of the Military affairs by land in Holland and Zealand, and particularly of
besetting or garrisoning all the Cities and Forts of the said Countries, with
the advice of the States thereof, or their Comissioned Council; whence it
fallows, that since the Voicing Provinces have neither by the Commissions to
the Captains General of the Union, granted, nor by any other Act resigned or
given up the foresaid Authority over the Militia, and the direction of
Military affairs; That the successive Captains General of the Union could
claim in that quality no power or authority in the world within the territory
of the Voicing Provinces.

Insomuch, that the function of the Captainship General could be exercised no
where but in the Field or general Expeditions, and without the resort or
jurisdiction of the Voicing Provinces.

It is true indeed, that our Forefathers in the beginning of the War found
good, following the example of the King of Spain, and former Lords of the
Country, to appoint a Governor General over these Countries, whose Authority
withal extended within the limits of the Voicing Provinces, even in matters of
policy and justice it self in the highest Degree. But having perceived
afterward by the sensible example of the Excesses committed by the Earl of
Leice^ter, how easily so great a power may com to be abused, to the great
prejudice of the Country, and with extreme danger of the liberty and freedom
of the people: therefore our Forefathers bethought themselves, and resolved to
mortify the said charge of Governor General; as also from that time ever since
to this day the same remained thus mortified, they having chosen into his place
not a Governor General again, but only a Captain General; whose power having
in no kind of way (as is proved before) extended within the limits of the
Voicing Provinces (as that of the Governor General had don) and consequently
only over the Army or Leaguers without the respective resorts or jurisdiction
of the Voicing Provinces, and being drawn forth into the Field. All which
appears more fully by conferring the Contents of the Commission given by the
Joint Provinces to the Earl of Leicester as Governor General, with that which
was given by them to the Princes of Orange, as Captains General; and you may
be sure, that our prudent Forefathers would never have resolved for the
choosing of a Captain General, if their grievous War had not required an Army
in the field, and the same being abroad, compelled them by evident necessity
to provide a Chieftain for it.

However things being brought now thus far through God's gracious Assistance,
that the bloody Wars are changed into a long-desired peace, and consequently
the forementioned moving cause is com to ceas thereby; we cannot otherwise
judge, but that the Charge which was grounded upon that cause, is in effect by
the cessation thereof to be held exspired and mortified of it self, we being
not able to see how, where no leaguers are gathered, a Captain General could
be made there over the Leaguers which are not, or a Chief field-Commander,
where there is no field-Expedition.

Nor have we ever heard of, or met with any example, that ever any Republic
in the world retained, much less chose a Captain General in time of peace. But
on the contrary it is well known, that many well-governed Countries are wont
to give Commission to their Captains General or Chief field-Commander, only
for such a March or Expedition; the same General in that case no sooner
returning with the forces into their Garrisons, or Winter Quarters, but laying
down again that Quality of his, notwithstanding that the same Wars continue
still in those parts, and the Army being to take the field again soon after,
must be provided with another Chieftain.

The Duke of Alva was the first of all whom the King of Spain did constitute
specifical Captain General over these Netherlands, under the Government of the
Duchess of Parma, in the year 1567, in whose Commission bearing date ultimo
Januarii of the said year, the King of Spain expressly allegeth the motives and
reasons thereof to be the troubles and disturbances arisen in the Netherlands,
together with the necessity of using the way of Arms (as he pretended) whence
it appears, and he sufficiently showed it thereby himself, that in quieter
times, or peace, the same should never have happened.

Upon all which arguments we grow very confident, that your N. M.
apprehending, together with us, in these present conjunctures, That a Captain
General can be of no use nor benefit at all to the United Provinces; assuredly
you will not now, contrary to the example of all other Republics, and even of
the Netherlands themselves, and contrary to the practice of all well-governed
Nations, press and urge the choosing of a Captain General, to the
dissatisfaction of your Confederates, and those especially who in all times of
trouble have been one Republic, as one Body, yea as one City together with
your N. M.

As after we cheerfully took it for a pledge and token thereof, that your N. M.
Deputies at the particular conferences with a Committee of our Lords lately met
at the Haghe, declared then, That during the minority of the young Prince of
Orange the choosing of a Captain General could well be waved without any
prejudice to the Country. Nevertheless we find our selves necessitated to
declare that we cannot find it agreeing with reason, nor consistent with the
service of the Country, that your N. M. Deputies seem to infer and urge
withal, viz. That a resolution should be settled out of hand for the not
choosing of any Captain General during the minoranitie of the said young Prince
of Orange. Nor, that it should be decreed, the same Prince being com to age,
and judged fit by the most Voicing Provinces, he should then be preferred to
the Captainship general before all others.

Considering on the one hand that it could so fall out at one time or other, by
Wars or otherwise (which God in mercy avert and protect these Countries from)
as that the condition of the Land should require it to proceed to the choice of
a Captain General during this said Minority; when it would prove very
prejudicial to the public interest, that the Provinces in that case should be
manacled by such an Engagement from doing their Country service.

And on the other hand, it might so happen likewise (as we hope to God it
shall) that the young Prince of Orange being com to age, these Netherlands may
yet enjoie the blessing of a settled Peace, so that all the reasons and motives
formerly alleged, whereupon we ground it at present unserviceable and
unadvisable to make a Captain General, shall remain the same, and firm and good
still; yea, and that at that very time also the Election of a Captain General
may be found and held directly to be against the service of the Land, and
repugnant to its welfare. And that it would prove the highest prejudice, to
have in any sort obliged our posterity by such Engagements.

However, and in all cases whatsoever, we are fully persuaded, that the
welfare and service of the Country, or the public or common good and
interest, is that which ought to be the only aim of all good Governors, and
the only square whereby they are to rule and order all their Actions and
Deliberations; and that above all things the same Freedom is to be left unto
posterity, to dispose themselves in their own time of such weighty
concernments, so as then they shall judge requisite and expedient for the good
and service of the Country: it being likewise to be feared, upon very
probable ground, that the Governor to com shall protest, that in matters of
such weight and moment, the Resolutions or promises of their predecessors,
could not bind them, nor prejudice their own Deliberations. Whereby it would
com to pass then, that the Prince of Orange and his Adherents* grounding
themselves upon these promises, and conceiving that by virtue thereof they have
a just claim and title; there must needs arise Factions and Fractions in the
State; which we are confident your N. M. will ever help and endeavor to avoid
and prevent, according to their wonted providence.

Besides that, in all the Provinces express resolutions have been taken, and
prohibitorie Laws enacted against seeking of Reversions or Survivances, or
promising of any Offices or Charges for time to com, and in some Provinces
against the very nomination of a Captain General within themselves, doubtless,
because that such survivances and promises are usually procured and practiced by
corruptions or favor of some great ones, without regard had to the common good
and service of the Land. Which reasons, together with sundry others, we dare
promiss our selves your N. M. will find sufficient to persuade you not to
proceed in this weighty affair without the orderly course, and against the
accustomed order; but by the common advice of both Provinces.

Now, although this Proposition, made April 25. was not otherwise answered but
in complemental and general Terms, That the Lords of Zealand would so instruct
and charge their Commissioners, now ready to return to the great Assembly,
about the matter proposed, that the common interest should suffer no detriment
by it; but all endeavors used, for tranquillity and settledness, Yet, there
happened soon after a very remarkable change and alteration of things in
Zealand, as will be seen toward the latter end of this book, in prosecuting
the affairs of the House of Orange.

At present we shall return to the most observable Result and Issue of the
great Assembly; where the Lord van Andref, presiding in the latter end of
April, propounded, That their Hi. Mi. would be pleased to take into their
consideration, how to elucidate their Resolution of Jan. 27, last, touching the
point of Religion, together with the consectaries and dependencies thereof; and
especially for the finding out of such a Temperament about the repairing of the
Romish Clergy into these Countries, as might best and most commodiously be
introduced without derogating to the Treaty of Peace, as also, about the
framing of an uniform course of executing the Laws of these Countries made
against the Papists. Whereupon next day the Lord President moved, that there
might be some Lords commissioned of the Provinces, for to inform themselves of
the way and course which was kept in this behalf, during the twelv-years Truce
here, and accordingly to prepare a Draught of a fit and requisite Temperament,
to be presented to the Assembly, that Deliberation had upon the same, some
Resolution may be taken about it. This same was afterward referred to the
Ordinary Assembly of the States General, and tacitly left, as it was resolved
Jan. 28. last, and reassumed Julii 17o.

In the beginning of May the Lords of Holland propounded and desired that the
Lord Field-marshal might be admitted into the Council of State, to assist the
Consultations about military affairs; but the rest, especially those of
Friesland, Groninghen, and the Omlands had no mind to it.

This same month there were great pains taken about the business of giving
Patents or Commissions, and enlarging the Instruction for the Council of State
and stopping Corruptions.

May 12o. a Form was agreed upon and determined of giving Commission to the
Governors and Commanders of the Cities and places immediately resorting under
the Generality; according as the same was presented to and read before the
Assembly two days before, and in persuance thereof all the said Governors and
Commanders, who formerly were only autorized by his Highs the Pr. of Orange,
were summoned hither by their Hi. Mi. where they received all their respective
Commissions and took their oath upon it.

Here follows the form of the Commission.
THe States General of the United Netherlands, greeting all those which shall
see or hear the reading of these present, do publish and make known hereby,
That we reposing Trust in the valor, manfulness, and good Experience in
handling Military affairs, of (Title and Name of the Governor (or Commander)
we have with advice of the Council of State of the United Netherlands,
continued, appointed, commissioned and autorised him, as by these we do
continue, appoint, commission and autorise him to be Governor, (or Commander)
over the City, or Fort, etc. (Name of the place) giving him full power,
authority, and special Charge, to commaad all the Souldierie and Forces lying
in the said City, or Fort, or according to future occurrences and accasions to
be put in Garrison there, and to use and employ them, against all and every
one, that shall attempt or practice any hostility to the prejudice of the said
City etc. and the State in General, the Provinces in particular and the
members thereof; and that in such sort and manner, as he shall be ordered and
commanded by Us and the Council of State of these United Netherlands, or by
others entrusted by Us; keeping the Garrison in good order, military guard and
Discipline, by day and by night; without suffering them to endammage or molest
the Citizens and inhabitants of either City or Country, where they lie in the
United Provinces, nor any Neighbor Neutral Countries; also, as much as in him
lies, to discover, resist, keep off and prevent, whatsoever may any ways tend
to the disservice and prejudice of the foresaid Countries, Members and Cities
thereof, giving forthwith advertisment to the Council of State of all
emergencies, according as necessity or occasions shall require; and
especially, not to deliver or yield up the foresaid City, etc. to any, nor to
let any Souldierie or Forces to march in or out there, but with our (such as
shall be autorised for it there) resolution, approbation and due Patent or
Commission; looking very narrowly and carefully to it, that the Companies there
in Garrison be kept in their complete Number and Arms, according to the orders
and appointments made in that behalf; and if there appear any default, to give
notice thereof to Us, or to the Council of State, that it may be remedied. In
conformity whereunto, A. B. (the Name of the Governor or Commander) shall be
bound to pledge his Oath hereupon into our hands; which being don, we make
known and command to all and every Ritmasters, Captains, Officers, Soldiers
and people of War, in the said City of -- being there in Garrison, or coming
to be, to acknowledge, respect, submit and obey A. B. as our appointed Governor
(or Commander) there, desiring and requiring likewise all others respectively,
whom it may concern, to yield him all manner of furtherance and assistance in
the Exercise of his said Charge and Commission.

Don at the Haghe, under our Counter-Seal, Paraphure, and Signature of our
Secretary etc.

There was likewise upon the said 12th. of May, brought in a Draught of
enlarging or amending the Instruction for the Council of State, by those of
Gelderland; and the rest of the Provinces were desired, to bring in likewise
their respective Declarations about that Subject. How the same was completed
and ratified at length Julii 18o. we shall see in due place; it being
needless to insert the said Draught.

May 13o. there appeared before the Great Assembly, Adrian van der Mile,
Governor of Willemstadt. John van Merode, Lord of Rumen, Commander at
Ravesteyn. Francis de Ram, Lord of Haghedorn, Commander at Steenberghen.
William Reynier van Cloet at Leverfelt, Commander of Meurs. Martin van Inchem,
Commander of Wesell. Govert de Lion, Commander of Yssendyck. Philip de Vahsy,
Commander of the Fort St Anne in the Polder of Namen. Simon Schotte, Commander
at the Philippine. and Frederick van Inthima, Commander of Aerdenburgh. and by
virtue of the abovesaid Resolution of their Hi. Mi of May 12 their Commissions
being read before them, they took their Oath, in their respective Qualities,
in the hand of the Lord Schagen then President in the Assembly.

On the 17th. there was read the advice of the Council of State of the 13th.
showing, that the Patents or Commission of the Companies both horse and foot,
had been addressed in former times to the Rittmaster or Captain of the respective
Company, so as the same is likewise continued to those that lie in the
Inland-Garrisons: but that for a good while hitherto the Patents for the
Companies, in the Frontiers, where there is a Governor or Commander, were wont
to be addressed to the said Governors or Commanders, for the more orderly
sending forth, or marching of the foresaid Companies, which course their N. M.
conceiv ought to be followed still.

Whereas the Lord of Ghent and other their Hi. Mi. Commissioners had held
several Conciliatorie conferences for a good while, they presented at length a
report May 20o. and caused their Advice Conciliatorie about the Direction and
Disposition of military men and affairs to be read before the Assembly,
together with the forms of the Oath for the Souldierie, which were somewhat
amplified upon further conference, and past afterward; and so likewise there
was brought into the Assembly and read there, a Draught of Instructions for
the Lords Commissioners at the Assembly of their Hi. Mi. in ordinary; how
namely, they ought to govern themselves in the giving of Patents or Commissions
to the said Souldierie, and providing the Frontiers of the State, in manner as
the same were past, Junii 16o. and shall be communicated anon; the said
Council had thanks returned them for their pains, and in all the foresaid
businesses, the Provinces of Gelderland, Holland and Zealand, conformed
themselves wholly, during that Session yet of the Assembly, to the advice
brought in, and the delaying Provinces were earnestly desired, to do the like
as soon as conveniently they could. It was found good likewise, that the Lords
the States of Friesland and Groninghen with the Omlands, should once again most
seriously be written to and desired, conformably to the 19th Article of the
Union, That without any further procrastination, they would return to the
Assembly, (being that since February last, they had been absent, by reason
of a Land-day, they were to keep in their own Country, leaving none behind
them but one or two Deputies, without any charge to act) for to assist the rest
of the Provinces in the important Deliberations of this Assembly, and to help
to bring the same to a speedy and wished issue.

This same day there was likewise a course settled upon the Advice of the
Council of State, of May 13o, That the Patents for the Companies of horse and
foot, in the frontiers of the Generality, where there is a Governor or
Commander, should be addressed to the said Governor or Commander; and that in
the Voicing Cities of the United Provinces, the same should be don, by the
States of the Province or their autorised Commissioners unto the Burgomasters
and Governors of the same Cities for the better ordering of the marches or
remoovings of the foresaid Company.

Maii 23o. Deliberation being had upon the Advice Conciliatorie, touching the
Disposition and Direction of Military affairs and the Souldierie, together
with the form of the Oath for the Souldierie, and the Instruction for the Lords
Commissioners at the Generality, how to govern themselves in giving of Patents
to the Souldierie, and providing for the Frontiers of the State, the Lords of
Utrecht declared, That they received Order from their Principal, to conform
themselves wholly and in all things to the foresaid Advice, and form of Oath, as
they were brought in by the Lord of Ghent and other their Hi. Mi. Commissioners
for the conference Conciliatorie, April 26o last; but whereas after the 9th.
Article of the foresaid advice, as likewise in the said form of Oath, some
amendments had been made since, upon a further conference, for conciliating of
the advices of the respective Provinces, whereof report was made on the 19th of
this month, before the Assembly; the said Lords of Utrecht further declared,
That they dispatched likewise the said Amendments, to their said Principals,
for to receiv their further Order therein, as speedily as might be. And the
rest of the Provinces, which had not yet declared upon the points aforesaid,
were again most friendly desired, to hasten and speed likewise their conforming.

Those of Utrecht propounded at the same time, that they were charged by their
Principals to represent their Right, at the Assembly, which by virtue of the
Union did belong unto them, of deputing the like Number of persons into the
Council of State, which any other Province had there; and accordingly desired,
that the rest of the Provinces, would be pleased not to scruple the deputing
of the like Number by the said Province of Utrecht, especially in this present
conjunctures, when as more direction and authority in military affairs is
committed to the said Council of State, then in former times.

Next day, the Lords of Over-Yssell, propounded the like for themselves also,
as the Lords of Utrecht had don before.

May 27o. the Lords of Utrecht acquainted the Assembly, that they were charged
now by their Principals, wholly and fully to conform themselves to the Advice
Conciliatorie, touching the direction and disposition of the affairs and forces
military; and that they likewise approoved and accepted of the Form of the
Oath for the Souldierie of this State; together with the Instruction for the
Lords Commissioners at the Ordinary Assembly of their Hi. Mi. about the
giving of Patents and things belonging thereunto, so as the same was framed
upon further conference, and presented to the Generality on the 20th. of this
instant, by the Lord of Ghent and other their H. M. Commissioners, at the
Assembly; the said Lords of Utrecht resting confident in the mean time, that
their H. M. will speed and facilitate their satisfaction about the increasing
of their Deputies in the Council of State; which being taken into
Deliberation; Those of Friesland, Over-Yssell, Groninghen and Omlands, were
desired thereupon, that withal possible speed, and without any longer delaie,
they would likewise be pleased to conform themselves to the foresaid Advice
Conciliatorie, Form of Oath and Instruction for the Commissioners of the
Generality, with the agreeing Provinces of Gelderland, Holland, Zealand and
Utrecht.

Upon the 18. it was Whitsunday, during which feast, and for some days
following most of the Lords (without dissolving of the Assembly) took some
respit, or went home once, till Saturday the 10th. of June, the Lord Tiassens
of Groninghen being President, they met again the first time in the great
Hall; where the foresaid Advice Conciliatorie being taken again into
Deliberation, the Lords of Over-Yssell declared their conformity in the whole
and all the particulars thereof, with the four first agreeing Provinces of
Gelderland, Holland, Zealand and Utrecht, and had thanks returned them from
their Hi. Mi. and upon this occasion those of Friesland and Groninghen, with
the Omlands, were again desired to conform herein with the said five consenting
Provinces, and to bring in their Declaration with the first, which they
likewise undertook to perform about the beginning of the week following.

On the 12, 13, and 14 of June the Lords of Friesland and Groninghen were
reiteratedly and seriously desired and exhorted to conform with the five
Provinces, till upon Jun. 16 the Lord of Ghent presiding the points of the
Direction and Disposition of Military affairs and the Souldierie; and
especially by whom, on what grounds and in what manner the Patents were to be
given to the said Souldierie by land, etc. being reassumed; their Hi. Mi. were
pleased to approve and ratify all according to the advice Conciliatorie
brought in May 20 by the Lord van Ghent and others their Hi. Mi. Commissioners
into the Assembly, in manner as follows.

I.
THat provisionally and till further order of the joint Confederates, the
disposing and granting of Patents should belong to the Ordinary Assembly of
the Lords Commissioners at the Generality, with precedent Advice of the
Council of State, who being demanded it, shall be obliged promtly to impart
the same, that their Hi. Mi. may further and finally dispose, and the Patents
dispatched there accordingly under the Paraphure of the Lord President at the
Generality; signed by two Deputies of the next succeeding Provinces,
subscribed by the Secretary, and sealed with the Seal of their H. M. shall be
sent thence to the Council of State, there likewise to be Paraphured by the
President, signed by the Secretary, and sealed with the Seal of the said
Council, and by them to be speeded away thus without any dela^e.

II.
Provided, that the said Council of State shall be bound likewise to advertise
the Ordinary Assembly of the Generalit^e, from time to time, of the true
condition of the Frontiers and Forts of this State, and the necessity of some
enterchange of the Companies, as often as their N. shall judge it requisite,
that upon the advice received as before there may be courses taken by their H.
M. about the transplacing of the Companies, and exchange of Garrisons.

III.
For which end their H. M. have likewise conformed themselves, agreed upon and
decreed in this very behalf, a peculiar Instruction, containing the manner and
order which the said Commissioners at the Generality are precisely to follow,
which said Instruction does ensue immediately after these Resolutions of their
Hi. Mi.

IV.
Which Instructions the said Commissioners shall swear to, for to observe the
same without any regard of the particular Interests of the Provinces, Cities or
Places from which they are sent, or where they are born, they being dispensed,
for as much as concern's this particular, of the particular Oath which lie's
upon them by virtue of their respective Commissions, or which otherwise they
may have made, or ^om to make yet unto their Principals.

V.
And consequently the said Commissioners at the Generality should, as above,
first and above all things take care with the advice of the Council of State,
that the Frontiers of this State in general may be provided with sufficient
garrison of several Nations, and furnished with necessary ammunition by the
Council of State, and that the rest of the Souldierie, as much as may be, and
occasions do permit, be distributed and placed in the nearest and most
commodious places about the said Frontiers, for to be ready at hand at all
times, in case of any sudden need, whether from within, or from without.

VI.
And in case it should be found requisite to take forth any Companies out of a
Voicing Province, that then the States of that Province, or such as are
autorized by them shall be desired to part with so many Companies as shall be
held necessary, transmitting withal the occasion and reasons thereof,
together with Patents or Commissions, with open names to be filled up by the
said States, or those autorized by them, who are to join thereunto their
particular Patents, and that thereupon the said Companies shall follow;
provided, that it shall be determined by common advice among the Confederates,
how many Companies there are to be left in every one of the United Provinces,
for the garrisoning of the Cities and Forts thereof, and for the asserting of
the Magistrates in the Execution of their Civil Commands, which number shall
not be lessened, but in time of necessity, and with express consent of the
States of that Province or their autorized Commissioners, so as that the
necessity being past, the said Companies be returned again to their former
Garrisons, or others instead of them.

VII.
That no Companies be laid into any Voicing Province, but with the
foreknowledg, advice and consent, and Patent likewise of the States of that
Province, or their autorized Commissioners.

VIII.
That no Forces shall pass through any Voicing Province, before timely
advertisement given thereof to the States of that Province, or their autorized
Commissioners, to the end that Orders may be taken for their passage; and that
no Companies or Soldiers at Sea or Land, shall march through any walled towns
of the said Provinces, without leav of the respective Magistrates thereof; but
that the same shall tarry without the foresaid Cities, and give notice of
their arrival to the said Magistrates, who shall thereupon, as soon as may be,
give order that the said forces may pass either through or about the said
Cities, so as they shall find good to appoint, which order the Souldierie
shall be bound to follow precisely.

IX.
That the States in the respective Provinces, or such as shall be especially
autorized by them shall have liberty to transplace the Companies within their
Province by Patents from one place to another; and that the Officers of the
said Companies shall be bound likewise to obey the same; provided there be
forthwith notice given thereof unto their Hi. Mi. and to the Council of State:
As also the States of the Respective Provinces, or their autorized
Commissioners, shall be enabled in case of sudden need, and when the Patents
from the Generality cannot be staid for to send forth Companies lying in
their own Province, upon their particular Patents, into their Province, into
the endangered Cities and Forts resorting immediately under the Generality:
provided always, that thereof there be present advertisement given to the
Lords the States General and the Council of State, with addition of the reasons
thereof; which said Companies sent forth as said is, the States of the said
Provinces, or their autorized Commissioners, shall have power to command back
again upon their own Patents into their said Province when need shall require
it, giving advertisement thereof as before: provided, that the same shall have
no place in regard of the Companies above the ordinary Number of the
determined Garrison, when, and if so be that the same shall have received
contrary Order from the Generality before the foresaid Revocation.

X.
That the Souldierie shall be bound, besides the general Oath to the
Generality, to make Oath likewise in particular to the Province wherein they
shall be laid, together with that under whose Repartition (or pay) they
stand; as also to the Magistrates in the Cities of the Voicing Provinces where
they are put in Garrison; according to the Form agreed upon and established
together with this, as it fallows annexed word for word at the and of these
their H. M. Resolutions. Which Oath shall likewise be made to the Chief
Officers of the open Country, or the Representer thereof; if so be that
necessity require, the putting of any Company there, either for the keeping
of the Streams and Rivers, or otherwise.

XI.
That the Garrisons of the Fontier-Towns and Forts shall likewise be changed
from time to time, so as it shall be found requisite for the most service and
welfare of the Land, according to occasions and emergencies of affairs.

XII.
And that therewithal there shall be kept an exact List of the garrisoning of
all the Cities, Forts and places, so as the same shall be conditioned from
time to time; and that copies thereof shall be communicated to the respective
Provinces at their desire at all times, to be there preserved and Registered.
And of this their H. M. Resolution an Extract shall be sent to the Council of
State, to serve for information and direction to them to steer by, as much as
may concern them.

Here fallows the Instructions, mentioned above Artic. 3. of the foresaid
established Resolution.
Instruction for the Lords Commissioners at the Assembly of their Hi. Mi. the
States General of the United Netherlands, by which they are to regulate
themselves, in giving of Patents or Commissions to the Souldierie, and in
providing for the Frontiers of this State.
I.
THe foresaid Commissioners, shall take ^are with the advice of the Council of
State, that the Frontiers of the State in general be beset with sufficient
garrison of several Nations, and provided with necessary Ammunition and
Provision by the Council of State; and that the rest of the Souldierie, be as
much as may, and occasions permit distributed and disposed of in the nearest
and most convenient places about the said Frontiers, for to be ready at hand
at all times in case of Sudden need, whether from within or from without.

II.
They shall give no Patents or Commissions to the Souldierie, but after advice
had from the Council of State, and the said advice being heard and approoved
of; The Patents to be issued, shall be attested by the Lord President for the
time being in the said Assembly of their H. M. and signed moreover by two
Deputies of the next succeding Provinces, being present, together with the
subscription of the Secretary and sealed with the Seal of their H. M. and the
Patents thus attested, signed and sealed as before, shall be sent to the
Council of State, for to be there likewise attested by their President, signed
by their Secretary and sealed with the Seal of the said Council, and thus with
all speed to be dispatched.

III.
And if it shall be found requisite, to take forth any Companies out of a
Voicing Province, in that Case they shall desire the States of that Province or
their autorised Commissioners, to give way for the taking forth of so many
Companies as shall be thought necessary, adding therewithal the reasons
thereof, and sending the Patents a long to the said States or their autorised
Commissioners, with vacant spaces of the Names to be inserted by either of
them, with the addition of their Provincial Patents

IV.
Nevertheless they shall not have power to take forth so many Companies out of
the said Provinces, as might lessen the Number, which was found good or may be
found good hereafter to be left within each Province, for the besetting of the
Cities and Forts of the same, and for assisting of the Magistrates in executing
of their civil Commands; unless case of great necessity should require the
same, and the States of the said Province or their autorised Commissioners, do
give their express consent unto it: and in that case, the danger being past,
the foresaid Companies, (or some others in their stead) shall be returned to
their former Garrisons.

V.
They shall not have power to lay any Companies in any Voicing Province, but
with the foreknowledg, advice and consent, yea and Patent too, of the States of
that Province or their autorised Commissioners.

VI.
They shall cause no forces to pass through any Voicing Province, without giving
timely notice thereof to the States of that Province or their autorised
Commissioners, That order may be taken for those marchings.

VII.
They shall alter and change the Garrisons of the Frontier. Towns and Forts
from time to time, with the advice of the Council of State and with Patents in
manner before, so as it shall be found to make most for the service and
welfare of the Land, according to the occasions and occurences of affairs.

VIII.
They shall likewise cause an exact list to be kept of the Garrisoning of all
Cities, Forts and places, so as the same shall be conditioned from time to
time, and cause coppies thereof to be imparted to the Provinces desiring the
^ame.

IX.
The foresaid Commissioners at present being, or succeeding afterward, in the
foresaid Assembly of the States General, shall promise by Oath and swear, they
will precisely regulate themselves according to the contents of this Instruction
and every Article thereof, without transgressing or contrarieing the same in
any Article, directly or indirectly, nor ^uffer ought to be don to the
contrary; and in this behalf they shall by Oath renounce all particular
correspondence, with either Province, Cities or Members thereof, or any private
and particular persons, in any matter or way, that might prove prejudicial to
the public interest; and that without any regard of the Provinces or Cities,
where they were born or chosen, or of the particular profit of themselves or any
others, and promiss to have nothing before their eyes, but the welfare and
conservation of those Countries and the public interest, and doing besides in
this behalf, what good and faithful Commissioners are bound and ought to do.

Upon which Instruction, the present Lords Deputies at the Ordinary Assembly
of the Generality are obliged forthwith to take their oath before the present
Great Assembly; as likewise the rest (now absent) are to do from time to time
as they shall present themselves, or such as may be further deputed by the
respective Provinces, during the Session of this present Assembly; or, the
same being ended, before the foresaid Ordinary Assembly of their H. M.
insomuch that none of the Extraordinary Deputies of the respective Provinces
at the said Assembly shall be permitted to participate of the Deliberation
about the giving of the said Patents, but having first taken the oath in behalf
of the foresaid Instruction.

Now fallows the form of the Oath for the Souldierie mentioned and established
by the tenth Article of the above standing Resolution.
The Oath to be made by Souldierie to the States General.
I A. B. do promiss and swear, to be true and faithful to the States General of
the United Netherlands, abiding constant in the Union and maintenance of the
Reformed Religion; and especially, to the N. M. Lords the States of N. my
pay-masters, together with the States of the other Provinces, where I shall be
employed; as also to the Governors or Magistrates of the Cities, as well within
the said Provinces, as without them; where I shall be put in Garrison; to serve
them resolutely and faithfully under the conduct of the Chieftains and
Commanders set, or to be set over me; to honor, respect and obey the foresaid
Lords the States General, and the particular, my pay masters, together with the
States of the other United Provinces, wherein I shall be employed and put in
Garrison, and the Governors thereof at present being, or succeeding
afterward, and such as have or may have in time, authority there given them
over the Souldierie, and the fores^id Chieftains and Commanders set or to be
set over me, in their respective commands, for such time as I shall continue
to be employed in the respective Provinces and Cities; and and moreover to
govern and regulate my self in all things, according to the Articles and Orders
made for the service, and especially to obey and respect no Patents but such as
shall be conditioned, in manner as follows.

To wit, Under the Attestation of the Lord President, besides the signing of
two other Lords of the Deputies at the Generality; the subscribing of the
Secretary, the Seal of their H^. Mi. the attesting of the President at the
Council of State, the signing of the Secretary and the Seal of the Court of
the Council of State, being accompa^ied likewise with the Patents of the
States* out of or into whose Province I shall be commanded to march, provided
with^l, that, lying within any of the United Provinces, I shall upon the
special Patent of the States of the Province or their autorised Commissioners,
transport my self into any City or place of the said Province, and likewise
into the Cities and Forts immediately resorting under the Generality, and back
again out of the said Cities and Forts into the Province; whence I was sent
forth at any time, and as often as their N. M. shall find it requisite for
either their own, or the Generalities service, and that in marches also or
thorow-faires through any Voiceing Province, I shall practice no manner of
hostility or disorder n^r any other trouble or moles^ation whatsoever upon the
Inhabitants of the foresaid Provinces; nor suffer any trespass of this kind in
the Soldiers under my command; nor attempt any thing my self, nor suffer those
under me to attempt the least to prejudice, distress or endammage the same
Provinces, Members or Cities thereof: and if so be, that any shall be sent to
meet me lawfully empowered by the States of such a Provin^e, or their
autorised Commissioners, for to conduct me in the said march, that I shall
punctually follow the orders made in that behalf. So also coming toward any
walled Towns of the foresaid voicing Provinces, that I shall not enter into the
same, without first giving notice of it to the Magistrates thereof; but that I
shall remain without, waiting for their order and pleasure, whether it be to
let me pass through their City, or along the same without it; So help me God.

The Lords of Friesland, of Groninghen and the Omlands, declared that they were
ready to conform to all aforesaid, with the 5 other Provinces, and accordingly
to consent to the foregoing Resolution, under their respective Declaration, to
wit,

The Lords Commissioners of Friesland, That they approved the Articles of the
Conference Conciliatorie, of Maii 20o. 1651. since Jun. 16o. established, under
this express restriction and reservation, That this Provisionally determined
Order, touching the Direction and disposition of Military affairs should not
be prejudicial to the method form and order already concluded on, for the
conservation and mutual entertainment of the Union, or to be concluded
hereafter, in case the one or the other Province would not accommodate
themselves to reason and the observation of the Union in some point or other. As
also their N. M. understood it so, That the Right of a Stadtholder or
Stadholders should not be prejudiced thereby, that the name only of the
Council of State is expressed in these Articles, without adding that of
Stadtholder or Stadtholders. Their N. M. conceived the words of Stadtholder or
Stadtholders ought to be inserted: and likewise that these Articles should not
in the least prejudice the Right of the Province of Friesland or their
Governor, in disposing over the Neighbor Forts and Commanders, according to the
old custom, together with the Resolution and agreements of their H. M. in
several years past.

The Lords of Groninghen, having examined the foresaid Advice Conciliatorie;
they declared likewise, that they could easily conform thereunto, provided
there were but some ^all alteration made therein, which they conceived did
^ncern the interest of their Province in particular, the (...) part of the
foresaid Advice and Resolution (...) remaining otherwise entire; thus namely,

^at in the I. Article and all the rest, where it is said, With (...) advice of
the Council of State, the words may be read the With advice of the Lords
Stadholders (or Stadholder) and the Council of State. Instancing further, that
the Stadholder of ^e Province of Groninghen and Omlands had the undoubtedright
to sit in the foresaid Council, and especially in m^er of securing the
Frontiers and the like, whereof the seco^ Article treated, for to serve their
Hi. Mi. with advice, what might be requisite in cases concerning them; for the
Text remaining as it is in the foresaid Resolution* might otherwise at first
somewhat obscure and at length que obliterate this clear Right of their
Province, so well kn^wn yet to their Hi. M. themselves. All which (said they)
might easily be prevented by the foresaid insertion, with^t nevertheless
altering any thing essential in the establish^ Resolution: it being (said
they) far from the meaning^d intent of this solemn Assembly, to prejudice any
Mem^ thereof in their due Right and Authority.

Touching the V. Artic. th said Deputies of Groninghen represented to their H.
M. That b^th in the Province of Friesland and theirs, the Direction and
Disp^stion of the garrisoning and keeping the forts of C^^vorden and ohers,
lying about the Provinces had ever since the Reduction of Groninghen, been and
remained at the Disposal of their Stadholders; and that consequently the
besetting and guarding of those For^s and Sconces were from time to time in
especial manner recommended to the respective Lords Stadholders of the said
Provinces in their Instruction; And accordingly the Commanders thereof were
always put in by, and received their Commissions from the said Lords
Stadholders. And all that in the same method and manner which their H M. had
been pleased to appoint themselves in regard of t^ said Sconces and
circumstances in the year 1596 and at^^ times. Should the Text of the fifth
Artic. remain in tens as now it is couched, the foresaid right and autori^ of
the Lord Stadholder of the said Provinces would (...) notably impaired, to the
no small prejudice of the (...) Provinces in their remoteness. And therefore
the ords of Groninghen and Omlands conceiv, that the foresaid fifth Article
ought to be altered or claused thus, to (...) Saving the right and interest of
the Provinces. And furt^r their N. M. conceived, That the Order or Direction
affairs Military now advanced by the Advice Conciliorie, being but
provisional, it ought to be expressed (...) it should stand and be of force
only until it sha^ be otherwise disposed of, as the constitution of the Land
shall require it.

The present Lords Deputies of the ^rovince of Over-Yssell, having seen what
the Province of Friesland and Groninghen pretended yesterday Jun. 16, at he
Assembly in their Exceptions delivered in, about the oints of Direction of
Military affairs and giving of Pants; namely, that the Direction and Disposing
of ga^isoning and keeping the Fort of Coevorden belonged of ^ght to them; They
the Lords of Over-Yssell could not p^s it thus without contradicting it, in
behalf and for the conservation of the Right of their Province in that
particul^^, against the pretenses of the said Provinces of Friesland and
Groninghen.

However, within a few days after, viz. Jun. 21, it was agreed, That touching
the Exceptions of the said three Provinces, there should be satisfaction given
them in manner as follows.

That upon the motion of some Provinces at their H. M. Assembly, it was found
good upon precedent deliberation expressly to declare, That by the Resolution
taken June 16, about the Direction of Military affairs, and the giving of
patents, their H. M. meant not to enervate, alter, or prejudice in any kind or
part the Articles of the Union and everlasting Confederacy made at Utrecht
betwixt the United Provinces Januarie 29, 1579, nor the Articles of Instruction
for the Council of State, in as much as may concern the the Stadholders; nor
that the Provinces, or any one of them, shall be prejudiced in the least by
the abovesaid Resolution; nor their Stadholder or Governor, in the Disposing
over some neighbor Forts and Commanders, when ever they shall make it appear by
Resolutions or Agreements of their Hi. Mi. or by any other lawful Title, that
they have gotten an absolute Right of disposing therein.

In the foregoing Resolution of Jan. 16, the Oath is set down to be made to
the Generality. But how and in what manner there were framed three other
Forms, touching the Provinces and Cities in particular, whereof so^ mention is
made in the former Oath to the Generality; the same is to be seen by the
Copies following, the first whereof is,

The Form of Oath to be made by all Chief Commanders, Colonels, Ritmasters,
Captains, Lievtenants, Underofficers, and all the Souldierie, standing upon
the Repartition of Holland and Westfriesland, into the hand of the States of
the said Province, or their Autorized Commissioners.
We do promiss and swear to be true and faithful to the States General of the
United Netherlands, remaining constant to the Union, and in the maintenance of
the true Christian Religion, and especially to the States of Holland and
Westfriesland, to serve them resolutely and faithfully in the Defense of the
foresaid United Netherlands, and especially the Country of Holland and
Westfriesland, the Quarters, Cities, and Members thereof against all their
enemies; to be obedient to the said Lords the States of Holland and
Westfriesland, or their Autorized Commissioners, in what they shall command us
for the furtherance of the service and defense of the said Countries; and
particularly to help to protect and defend the open Country of the foresaid
Province from all inquartering and disorder of military forces: Note, The
words as also, etc. to Autorized Commissioners, inclusively, to be left out at
the swearing of the Common Soldier.
as also that being within the said Province we shall not march forth, or
being without we shall not enter into it for to be employed, quartered, or
garrisoned there, but upon the Patents of the said Lords the States of Holland
and Westfriesland, or their Autorized Commissioners. And besides in all things
to conform our selves to the Articles of War; So truly help us God Almighty.

The Form of Oath to be made by all Chief Commanders, Colonels, Ritmasters,
Captains, Lievtenants, Underofficers, and all the Souldierie in Garrison
within the Province of Holland and Westfriesland, not being of their
Repartition, into the hands of the States of that Province or their Autorized
Commissioners.
We do promiss and swear to be true and faithful to the States General of the
United Netherlands, remaining constant to the Union, and in the maintenance of
the true Christian Religion; and especially to the States of Holland and
Westfriesland, the Quarters, Cities and Members thereof, against all their
Enemies; and for the time we shall remain in the said Province, to be
obedient to the said Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland, or their
Autorized Commissioners, in what they shall command us, for the furtherance of
the service and defense of the foresaid Countries, and particularly to help to
protect and defend the open Country of the said Province from all inqua^tering
and disorder of military forces; Note the words; as also, unto, autorised
Commissioners, inclusively, to be left out at the swearing of the common
Soldier.
as also not to march within this Province but upon the Patent of the said
Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland, or their Autorized
Commissioners. And beside in all things to conform my self to the Articles of
War; So truly God Almighty help us.

The Form of Oath to be made by the Captains, Underofficers and Soldiers,
into the hands of the Citie-Magistrates, where, with their Companies, they lie
in Garrison, or are to be laid respectively.
I Do promiss and swear, Note, The words with the Company under me, to be
left out at the swearing of the Lieutenant, Underofficers and Soldiers.
with the Company under me, to be true and faithful to this City and
Magistrate, faithfully to serve and obey them, in what they shall command me
for the conservation, service, and tranquillity of their City, and
particularly against all manner of uproar and sedition of the people; saving
always the Command which the Lords the States of this Province, or their
Commissioned Council shall lay upon me. So truly God help me.

On the 19th of June it was found good, to desire the Lord Roesveld and other
their High M. Deputies, that they would effectually once, take in hand the
business about Corruption formerly treated of, and make report of it with all
speed possible.

Jun. 21o. it was agreed that the Military Officers should be sworn by the
Commissioners appointed for the mustering of the Forces under this State. The
Lords of Friesland caused to be entered in their behalf, that they consented
no further to the conclusion, then that their Militia and Military persons
should be sworn upon the form here agreed on, by the Lords the Deputed states
of their Province, from whom they had likewise ever received their Commissions,
according to the old custom, observed there ever since the beginning of this
Republic, wherein there had hapened no alteration at all by the death of the
Prince of Orange.

Jun. 22o. the Lords van Ghent, Dort, Roesveld, Wimenum, Loo, Paets, Sonck,
Aylva, van der Beeck, Cates, Jacob Veet, v^n der Hoolk, Tiassens, and Cla^t,
took their oath, before the the great Assembly, upon the Instruction of Jun.
16o. for the Lords Deputies in the Ordinary Assembly of the Generality,
whereby they are to govern themselves in giving of Patents to the Souldierie,
and taking care for the Frontiers of this State; the same was likewise
performed afterward by the rest of the Ordinary Deputies.

About the later end of June, all the chief and subordinate Officers military
to Captains, Lievtenants and Ensigns inclusively, being summoned and com to
the Haghe, they presented themselves in the Ordinary Assembly, and there took
the oath, according to the form established in the great Assembly Jun. 16o.
all of them standing, and barehead; except only his Excellency Count William
of Nassaw as being Stadtholder of Provinces, for whom a chair was set:
nevertheless taking the oath he stood and was uncovered. The like was don by
them all in the Assembly of Holland.

For the stopping of the course of Corruptions, there was a Report made June
27o. importing, that a ^olemn Act or Proclamation ought to be published
against the same, and an order settled by Resolution; That no members of the
Government, sitting in any Assembly, Court, Magistracy or Judicature,
depending on the Generality, should suffer himself to be corrupted or drawn
about with receiving or enjoying any gifts, bribes and presents from any
persons, that may have any thing to seek or sue for, in any of the foresaid
Governments, Courts or Judicatures.

June the 30th. those of Holland, Zealand and Utrecht, conformed themselves unto
it, and the rest of the Provinces were desired, to declare themselves in like
manner.

Whereupon July 1. the Lord Jacob de Vett, being President at the Great
Assembly, it was disposed of and unanimously resolved, agreed and consented
to, That None of the Lords Commissioners at the Assembly of the States
General, no^ Council of State, nor Treasur^e or Exchequer, nor Courts of the
respective Admiralties, nor the Lords Justices of Braband and Flanders, nor
their chief Ministers or Officers respectively, nor any other resorting under
the Generality, none at all excepted, nor their wives, children, or any in
relation to them, shall either themselves, or by any other, take, receiv or
enjoy any thing, not so much as by transaction, sale, exchange or otherwise,
either directly or indirectly, being a gift or present, whatever, yea and how
small soever the gift or gifts may be, even to eating and drinking wares, and
that from no person whatsoever, whom they know to have any thing to do at the
forementioned Assembly, Courts, Judicatures, whereof they are members, or may
be like to get any business there, by reason that either for themselves or
other they may pretend, sue or have obtained any Charges, Offices, Benefices or
Emoluments, Grants, Judgments, Decrees, Resolution, about any matter, there
depending, or for expedition's sake, under what pretext soever, either before
or after the Business shall be transacted or dispatched: and if so be they
should have received or enjoyed any such gift or present from any one whom
afterward they came to understand, that they had business in the Assembly or
any of the foresaid Courts or places of Judicature, where they are Members,
chief Ministers or Officers, which at the time of receiving of those gifts or
presents, they were ignorant of; that then they ought to give notice thereof to
the Assembly or Courts before named respectively, and refrain, either
directly, or indirectly to recommend the business of such to the Assembly or
Courts, or any members thereof, in person or by others. But if it should
plainly and manifestly appear, that They have wittingly and purposely received
or enjoyed any gifts, bribes or presents, in m^nner aforesaid, either in person
or by others, That then they shall forfeit their Charges and Offices wherewith
they are invested, and be withal declared incapable of being employed again
in any other, besides other arbitrarie punishment to be inflicted upon them.
And all the members at their first admittance in the respective Courts, shall
be bound to swear into the hands of the chief Assessor or President, a certain
oath to be framed and fitted for each Court, according to its condition. And
to the end, that their Hi. Mi. good intention may take the better effect, every
one that shall be able to inform their Hi. Mi. that one or other of the
foresaid Government shall have received any such bribes or presents, he shall
be rewarded at least with 600. flor. or more, according to the circumstance of
the thing. And of this their H. M. Resolution there were copies sent to all the
foresaid Courts, to govern themselves precisely according to the tenor thereof.
Moreover, it was found good by their H. M. to publish the ensuing Proclamation,
which was forthwith printed, and according to the custom of the Country
published and affixed in all such places where things concerning public
observance were used to be published.

The Proclamation, so as the same was printed, published and affixed, fallows.
THe States General of the United Netherlands, to all such as shall see or hear
the reading of this, greeting. Be it known, That whereas it has been
discovered, that some dangerous and pernicious people, do so far presume, to the
great dishonor and v^lifying of the chief Government and other Courts of the
Generality, and to the no less grief of the members thereof, that having any
cause or business at or before the said chief Government or Courts, they dare
adventure to present or cause to be presented to the members thereof, any
gifts, bribes or presents, w^enas on the contrary, they ought to have that
opinion of their faithfulness, sincerity, integrity and uprightness, as the
worthiness of their place and function is requiring; We therefore, for due
redress hereof, do hereby most expressly interdict and straightly prohibit
every one, of what quality or condition soever, at any time to present, give
or promiss, directly or indirectly, whether by bargain, sale, exchange, or any
otherwise, to any of the chief Government, or other Courts of the Generality,
the Courts of Justice of Braband and Flanders, or to their prime Ministers or
Officers respectively, as also to the Magistrates and places of Judicature,
resorting under the Generality, none excepted, or to their wives, children, or
to any of their Household, or to any other having relation to them, any gifts or
presents of any thing how small soever, even of meat and drink-wares, for the
obtaining, or having obtained, for either themselves, or some body else, directly
or indirectly, any Charges, Offices, Benefices, Grants, Judgments, Results or
Decrees, in any kind of business, or for the expedition thereof, under what
pretext soever, upon pain that the Transgressor shall be condemned to pay a
Fine, proportioned to, or equalizing the value of the matter which he has
depending, either in his own, or any others behalf, before the said Chief
Government, or other Courts of the Generality, the Courts of Justice of
Braband and Flanders, their prime Ministers or Officers respectively, or any
Magistrates or place* of Judicature, resorting under the Generality; besides
other arbitrarie punishment, infamy and uncapableness of ever being
readmitted to any public charge, office or benefice whatsoever; and that the
same persons shall ip^o facto, forthwith be and stand deprived of all such
charges, offices and benefices, as he may have, bear and enjoie; and all this
without any connivance, mitigation or moderation to be used to himwards: the
foresaid Fine to be employed and bestowed among the Officers, the Informers
and the poor, for each a third part thereof; and the Informers person and name
shall be kept secret besides, and if he were guilty himself in this kind,
he shall have indemnitie. And to the end, that all this may well and in all
parts effectually be performed and practiced, the Lords the States of the
respective Provinces have promised and assured one another, promptly and fully
to execute and cause to be executed, within their several Jurisdictions, all
the Resolutions, Sentences and Judgments, which by the respective Courts upon
address made by Us, the Council of State, or other Courts of the Generality,
or of the Court also of Braband and Flanders, and other Magistrates and
Jurisdictions under the Generality, shall have been pronounced against the
Transgressors of this our Act and Proclamation, or otherwise to proceed against
them, upon address as before, according to the tenor of the said Act, and that
without any connivance, refusal or delaie; for thus we find it requisite for
the service of the Land: and therefore we do signify unto and desire the
Lords the States, the Commissioned Councils, and deputed States of the
Respective Provinces of Gelderland and the County of Zutphen, Holland and
West-Friesland, Zealand, Utrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssell, Groninghen and the
Omlands, the Courts of Justice and Governors in Cities and the open Country,
to cause this our Act and Proclamation to be published and affixed every where
in the usual places. Don at the Assembly of the said States General, at the
Haghe, in the great Hall of the Court of Holland, this first day of July.
1651. Attested, Jacob Vett, vt. underneath stood. By Order from the same.
signed N. Ruysch, and sealed with the Seal of the said Lords the States General
in red Wax.

The Form of the Patents was agreed on in manner as follows.
THe States General of the United Netherlands, after advice taken with the
Council of State, do hereby charge and command Captain -- to transport himself
readily with his Companies* Colors and complete Arms, upon sight hereof into
garrison at -- within -- there to keep garrison for a short time, and till
further order. And by the wai^ he shall take care, that the Country people
be no ways molested or damnified; Their H. M. enjoining the -- and Magistrate
of the said City to furnish the said Companies with lodgings.

Don at the Hague the --. By Order of the said Lords the States General. Don
thus after advice taken with the Council of State. By Order of the said Council
of State.
THeir H. M. had desired the Council of State to advise upon the setting down
of the Number of Companies, which, according to their H. M. Resolution of June
last 16, Artic. 6, were to be left in the respective Voicing Province, as well
for the garrisoning and garding thereof, as for the executing of their civil
Orders and Commands; having first conferred about it with the Lord
Field-Marshal and other Military chief Commanders. In conformity whereunto,
having conferred with his Excellency the Field-Marshal, and likewise heard the
Lord of Beverweert Sergeant Major General of the Army, and his Excellcie the
Stadholder, etc. and well debated and weighed every thing in the Council, their
opinion and advice was, That the Frontiers lying without the Voicing Provinces
should not (according to the present condition of the Forces now in Service)
be left less provided and beset then is showed forth by the List of Companies
herewithal presented; and that the rest of the Companies could be left within
the Voicing Provinces, for the besetting of the Frontiers thereof, and
executing of their civil Orders and Commands, as may be seen by the other List
made in that behalf and likewise presented here, without drawing any forth
thence but in case of necessity, and with consent of the Lords the States or
the Commissioners of the Province; and for the rest, that the 6 and 9th Article
of the foresaid Resolution of June 16 ought to be observed. Nevertheless they
represented also, since daily there could happen occasions whereby the State
might suffer prejudice from abroad or from within, unless it were timely and
readily looked to and prevented, that it would be expedient the Horse should
be exemted from having any more but the Generalities Patent, being to be
drawn forth out of any Province; for the same being to be employed on a
sudden to prevent any evil design against the common good, if they should be
put to stay for the approbation and consent of the Provinces like unto the
Foot Companies, with putting in of names and adding their Provincial Patents,
they might easily com too late, and the Land by that foreslowing to a great
deal of inconveniencie; therefore they were of opinion, that the Patents for
Horse ought only to be given by the Generality, in the same manner as the
Patents are given to the Companies for garrisoning of the Frontiers, that so
they may be ready at hand upon any emergencie and troublesome accident, and
march away forthwith, thus to obviate and prevent all disaster and mischief;
provided, that the danger being past, they be returned again to their former
Garrisons.

The List of such Garrisons as are fit to be left within the Voicing Provinces.
Foot-Companies. Hors-Companies. NImmeghen 10 4 Bommel 2 0 Thiel 2 0 Fort
Nassaw on the Voorn 3 0 S. Andrews 1 0 Zutphen 5 3 Doesburgh 3 1 Groll 3 0
Foot-Companies. Hors-Companies. Breev^rt 3 0 Arnheim 1 2 Briel 10 0 The Hague 1
0 Amsterdam 2 0 Vianen 1 1 viz. Catabins of the Guard.
Gornichem 3 1 viz. The Cuirassiers of the Guard.
Worcum 2 0 Loevestein 1 0 Heusden with Hemert 12 2 Crevecoeur 1 0 Engelen 1 0
Ghertruydenbergh 6 1 Clundert with Nordam 3 0 Flushing 7 0 Vere 2 0 Ter Tolen 1
0 Axel 2 0 Ter Neuse 1 0 Biervlict 1 0 Lillo 2 0 Liefkens hoek 2 0 Utrecht 4 0
Amersfort 1 1 Rhenen 1 0 Lewarden 3 0 Franicker 1 0 Dockum 1 0 Harlinghen 2 0
Deventer 1 3 Zutoll 4 1 Hasselt 4 0 Steenwyck 1 0 Oldenseed 1 0 Enschede 1 0
Otnersum 1 0 Groninghen 10 2 Delf-Ziel 4 0 In all 131 Companies of Foot. 21
Companies of Horse.

The List of the Garrisons or Companies fit to be left without the Voicing
Provinces in the Frontiers.
Foot-Companies. Hors-Companies. EMbden 5 0 Leerort 4 0 Bourtang 3 0 Bellinwold
2 0 Langackersconce 2 0 Coevorden 6 1 Meurs 3 0 Cracau to be Garrisoned by a
Commanded party out of Meurs. ^rsoy 8 1 Rhinberck 9 2 Wesell 15 4 Buderick 4 0
^ees 7 1 The Fort 2 0 Emerick with the Fort 7 0 Schenckensconce 4 0 Gennep 3 0
R^vestein 3 1 Maestricht 40 7 Grave 8 1 Hertoghen-bosch and Forts 23 5 Breda 23
5 Two Forts 2 0 Willemstadt 2 0 Steenberghen 3 0 The Fort^ 1 0 Berghen op Zome
and Forts 21 2 Frederick-fort 1 0 Gross-sconce 1 0 S. Anna 1 0 Hulst and Forts
18 2 Sass van Gant and Forts 12 0 The Fort Morspuy and St Mark 3 0 Philippine 3
0 Ysendyck 3 0 Opburgh and Forts 2 0 Sluys with the passes 19 0 Cassandria 4 0
Fort St Katharine by Opburgh 1 0 Ardenburgh 6 0 In all 284 Companies of Foot.
31 Companies of Horse.

IT was a great while and went hard, beforethey could com to an agreement: each
Province conceiving themselves prejudiced, and to have too few allowed them for
the executing of their Civil Orders and commands; in the mean time every one
grew weary and tired with the slow progress of this great Assembly; for the
compendisying whereof it was propounded by Counselor Andre, that nothing
should be handled and resolved at the great Assembly, but the points
following; (all the rest being remitted to the Assembly in Ordinary) viz.
how and in what manner, the Differences arising between the Provinces, may be
decided and determined for the future; the keep ng of secret intelligence and
correspondence: the business of Mustering: the framing of an Instruction for
the Lords Commissioners at the Assembly of the Generality: the passing of the
reformed Instruction for the Council of State; the redressing of the respective
Instructions for the Generalities Exchequer; the Courts of Admiraltie, the
Treasurer General, the Receiver General, the Secretary of the Council of
State, the Secretaries of the Exchequer of the Generality, the Advocate Fiscal
of the Generality, and consequently the respective requisites of the said
Courts of the Generality, and lastly the Lists of Garrisons as well within as
without the Voicing Provinces. Next day it was resolved, That the following
points only should be taken into deliberation here. viz. How and in what
manner the Differences arising betwixt the Provinces should be composed and
determined; the keeping of Secret intelligence. As for the Mustering, the
Council of State presented this following advice.

That they had, for redress thereof, examined the former Acts of Febr. 4o.
1599* and of Jun. 7o. 1623. and found both in the one and the other several
good points, from all which together there might be framed a good Project,
accommodated for the present time and conjuncture, leaving out such things, as
are not practicable, or cannot be introduced without offense. So as it was
seen in the year 1623, that immediately after the publishing of that Act, there
arose great alteration and distemper among the Souldierie, whereby some places
might easily have run great hazard, had it not been prevented instantly; at
what time his Highs Prince Henry, with some of the Lords of the Generality
were fain to repair in person to Breda, to settle the disorder by exemplarie
punishment; nevertheless it stuck there, insomuch that they durst not urge the
further strict observing of the said Act, and indeed it could never yet be
brought or kept in practice. This they thought themselves obliged to represent
unto their H. M. before the drawing up of another Act for redress in the point
of Mustering; which might easily cause new distemper, or would hardly be
observed as was fitting, and the executions of the punishments prove as
difficult and dangerous; not that they sought any way to protract or delaie
the redress of having and keeping a good and well ordered Militia, they
counting nothing more needful, and had therefore been continually pressing for
the same, and recommended it from time to time most seriously as the greatest
service of the Land; and so they did still. But to obtain that by a reformation
of the mustering, and making of strict Acts and Orders about that, they
conceived it would be fruitless, if there went not before, a redress of that
pretext, which is so commonly taken up in this kind, viz. in the first place,
a more precise and ready pay, without letting the Companie's arrears run on
for a long time, even many months together, so as they said, they were informed
of late, when they went about to take a course with a certain Ritmaster, for the
better paying of his complaining Troopers; the said Ritmaster alleging, That
his pay-masters were in arrears to him for 24 months together. The like they
had understood also by other Ritmasters and Captains; and that others, though
better paid, were put to monthly extraordinary charges, for Clarks and
Sollicitors, whom they must entertain at 60. 70. and more Florins per month,
besides other encumbrances, as defalcating of the 100. penny and the like,
over and above all other expenses; which they being not able to supply out of
their own entertainments, (being allowed but a single pay for a Clark in the
list) they must either abate and deduct the interests of so many months arrears
from their Soldiers and Troopers, whence those complaints of them arise, that
they can never get their full pay: or else they must seek and find out other
ways, whereby to repair their damages, to the Land's great disservice. Which
ground of their pretext, if it were once remooved, and that the Companies were
duly and orderly paid their wages, the redress in the mustering would easily
find admittance, that the transgressors might be punished according to the
tenor of the Acts made or to be made in that behalf. Furthermore They said,
that it had been observed in the matter of mustering, things were not every
where managed for the best, whiles some Provinces sent their Commissaries to a
Garrison where there lay many Companies of several Repartitions, mustering
there only such Companies as belonged to theirs; where it is easy to conceiv
for any one, that it was no hard matter for such Companies to make complete
musters, when the rest knew it concerned not them, though all the Companies
appeared in arms, and some kind of mustering past upon them all, as long as
their pay was not at hand. But (said they) if this Council should muster the
whole Garrison together, then none would be at liberty, to lend his Soldiers
to another; which would be so much the more effectual yet, if the Provincial
paiments were made by no other rolls but those of the Council, where the
public interest would be better heeded. And if one or other Province were
desirous at any time, to have those of their Repartition mustered, the Council,
having notice thereof, should presently give order for it. The said Council
protesting, that in making these motions, they had no design or desire to
prejudice the Provinces Right of mustering themselves, in the least; but that
according to their bounden duty, they were constrained to make this
representation, it being evident, that in the courses hitherto used, the
public service was not considered as it ought, and the whole Land and the
Provinces abused. They therefore desired their H. M. that they would be
pleased, to take all these things into due consideration, that the affairs
concerning the militia may be brought once to a good settlement at length.

In this month of July, there presented themselves likewise once more, a pretty
number of Ministers, out of all the Provinces; who had Audience on the 14th. at
the great Assembly, and delivered there this following Remonstrance.

To the Hi. Mi. Lords the States General of the United Netherlands.
High Mighty Lords!
IN the beginning of this great and Illustrious Assembly, the Churches of our
Father-land cast themselves by their Deputies into the arms of your H. M. for to
recommend unto them, with all humility and the zealous yearning of their
Souls, the welfare of the true Christian Reformed Religion, as the only keie,
the true Pillar and Foundation of this flourishng State; together with the
protecting it against, and delivering it from, that which might be dangerous
and ruinous to the establishment and propagation of it, in regard especially
both of the Popish Idolatry and daily increasing sins and scandals, lying
heavy upon this Land, and calling alowd to heaven for the provoking of God's
wrath and plagues against Us; Upon which Remonstrance, your H. M. were pleased
Jan. 27o. to grant and pass a most favorable and wholesome Resolution, for the
conservation of the foresaid Religion, and supporting it against that which
might prove prejudicial to the growth and prosperity of it; which doubtless
was well pleasing to the Lord, and caused all honest hearts and all the
reformed Churches, to return thanks to your H. M. from the bottom of their
hearts, as by these they express it, the rather for that they have begun to see
and enjoy good effects of it already, especially in the both Ecclesiastcal and
Political Reforming of the Mayorie of the Bosch and Marquisat of Berghen, where
the presumptions and insolences of the Papists were grown so high, That the
Churches of our dear Father-land, which had so heartily rejoiced at the zeal of
your H. M. showed forth by the introducing of Reformed Teachers into these
parts and Quarters; seeing the slow advancement there of the Reformed interest,
and on the contrary the great disobedience, stubborness and bitterness of the
Inhabitants there, it could not but afflict their hearts most sensibly, that
the holy worship of God, and those which administered the same in those parts,
were entertained there in such an hostile and barbarous manner, that it could
hardly happen wors to them among the Turkies and Muscovites, as it has been
sufficiently deduced in former Remonstrances. The Deputies of the Synods Hi.
Mi. Lords, do gladly indeed confess, That since the Political Reformation of
the Officers there has ensued a remarkable amendment in diverse places upon it;
though it was no where so good as they had hoped it would have prooved; and
therefore they cannot but make known and complain to your H. M. how that even
in some such places of the Mayerie, where Reformed Officers were brought in,
nevertheless things go not as they ought; for where some former Popish Officers
had before, only in policy, put in some Reformed Underofficers; others
succeeding them put out again, and substituted most bitter Papists in their
places, besides the untimely ejecting of such as were not much avers from the
Reformed Religion, and taking in bi^terest Papists to supply their places,
when as a certain Quarter-Justice or Sheriff tore an Ordinance of your H. M. in
pieces: nay the Papists are and continue so bold and daring, that in violent
and hostile manner they fell upon, beat, and wounded the Lieutenant of the Land
Drost Ravesway when he was com to dissipate the assembling of them by hundreds
in the Chapel of Aerler in Peeland, and would doubtless have endangered his
life, if he had not been rescued by some Troopers coming to assist him. The
idolatrous Crosses and Saints-Shrines by the high ways sides, which the
Papists so much resort to in their blind devotion, they remain standing in
many places still for all the Ordinances made against it: and in the City of
the Bosch the Priests and Jesuits do dwell and convers so openly, that they
have divided the whole Town into quarters and parishes amongst them, and your
ghostly sisters run the streets up and down by hundreds; and their idolatrous
worship is so freely and frequently exercised there, that the Country people
of the Mayerie com flocking thither; and of the Baronie of Breda and Marquisate
of Berghen, and County of Linghen and Land of Cuyck the report goe's, that the
Papist's insolences are nothing abated, but encreas rather daily in many
places; and that particularly in Breda there are ordinarily six or seven Popish
Priests residing; whose habitation is publicly known, and such a Concour^
there to their superstitious worship, as if they had public license and
authority from the Magistrate; that in the open Country the Priests remain
still and in many places where heretofore there was but one, there are oft-t^me
two or three now: that here and there they keep possession of the
Parsonage-houses by force, and there instruct the people; and have nothing
undon and unattemted to hinder the free cour^ of the Gospel; besides that the
Political reformation is but slenderly advancing any where in those parts, but
the Papists Officers continue in their places, and dare presume, under color of
Country charges, to collect and gather moneys for the entertainment of their
Priests: that in the County of Linghen all the chief Officers but four are
Papists, oppressing the Reformed Churches, and opposing the exercises and
functions of the Ministers, besides their laying taxes upon the inhabitants for
their Mass-priests, and punish them which refuse to pay the same; insomuch
that there is scarce any left which dare show himself well affected to the
Reformed Religion for fear of trouble. Of all which and diverse other
exorbitancies the Deputies having good information, it is much to be feared,
if there be not some speedy course taken, that the hope of Reformation will
shortly vanish altogether; and therefore they the said Deputies of the Synods
do with all due respect address themselves to their H. M. beseeching them with
most sollicitous hearts, that orders may be taken and settled in this great
Assembly of their H. M. for the effectual execution of their foresaid laudable
Resolution upon the point of Religion and matters coincident, taken and decreed
in your H. M. great Assembly Januarie last 17, and consequently that not only
by every Province within their own jurisdiction, but also by your H. M. in the
Mayerie of the Bosch, the Marquisate of Berghen, Land of Cuyck, Ravestein and
Over-mase, and other quarters immediately resorting under your H. M. the
Papist's insolences may effectually be refrained, Religion maintained, and
the Reformation both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as far forth as the same is
defective yet, without further delaie, brought to perfection, and in
particular, that the place Ghement having been provided with a Reformed
Preacher for these three years, may be maintained by this State; that likewise
some quick and vigorous means may, by your H. M. wisdom, be found out,
established and published, whereby all Sectaries may be kept in aw and order,
without reviling the Reformed Religion, or the Ministers thereof by words or
writings; not suffering them to spread into any other places but where they are
at present, according to your H. M. Resolution. Item, that all Popish protended
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual persons, Jesuits, Priests, Clergiemen, Friars, may
be kept out of the land, as being no subjects to any secular Princes or
Magistrates, but only to the Court of Rome, according to their own Tenants.
And besides all this, that all crying and God-provoking sins, such as are the
public violations of Sabbaths, Cursing, Swearing and diverse others showed
forth by the former Remonstrance presented to your H. M. Januarie last 20,
might be made to ceas once among us; and all your H. M. Officers charged upon
forfeiture of their places and other heavy censures, punctually to execute and
perform your H. M. good intention in this behalf. And not to detein your H. M.
any longer, They the Deputies do once again, in the Name of the Churches in
general, yea in the Name of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ, pray and
beseech your H. M. that ye would be pleased to entertein this their
Remonstrance with hearty tenderness, and let it prevail so far, that it may
be seconded with a fruitful execution; that as your H. M. famous Assembly
began with the LORD, his Word and Honor, so it may likewise end there, to the
joie and comfort of all the Churches of our Father-land, which at present with
great longings do exspect and look up for the great Work of securing and
settling of Religion, happily begun by your H. M. great and illustrious
Assembly, that it may not be left half don, but carried on to perfection.

Your High Might. most humble servants in the LORD, the Deputies of the
respective Synods of these United Netherlands. Signed, Petrus Cableau,
Deputatorum Praeses. Virgilius Co^nely, Doct. Deputatorum Assessor. Albertus
Thomae, Deputatorum Scriba. Abrahamus Tilenus. Cornelius Lamanus. Nathanael
Voghelsang. Volckerus ab Osterwyck. Regnerus Berckel. A. Pereyn. Jacobus
Clerquius. Maximilian Teling. Matthias Waelsweer. Joannes James-Huysen. John
Knyphuysen.



The 15 of June there was brought in the following appointment for Vacations
and traveling expenses, both for the Lords Commissioners of the Generality,
and those of the Council of State, whereof mention will be made hereafter
about the resolving and settling of the Instruction for the Council of State.

As, that one of the said Lords, traveling in Commission with one or more
servants, shall be allowed for vacancie and entertainment in the journey
(repast and baiting comprehended therein) eight gilders per diem.

Taking a Messenger along, besides his man or men aforesaid, he shall be
allowed two gilders more per diem, over and above the foresaid sum; in all ten
gilders, besides the said Messenger his Vacancie, as also the said Lord his
Boat, Ship, Wagon, Freight, Convoy or such like charges, which ought to be
put upon account apart.

One of the Lords traveling with a greater Train or Company then his
fellow-Commissioners, the said his fellow-Commissioners ought not to be put to
charges by it.

The said respective Comissioners shall accept and partake of no defraiments by
the Magistrates of the Cities and other places resorting under the Generality,
nor by such persons as are in service of the Generality.

Upon these foresaid respective Declarations, to turn them into a due form of
Ordinances, it was ordered, That the respective original Resolutions of the
Commissions should be annexed to the said Declarations, and thus delivered
into the Council of State, by them to be first viewed and examined, from
thence to be transmitted to the Generalities Checquer-chamber, to be there
likewise viewed, examined and cleared, and especially to see, whether the Land
was liable to be charged or not with the accounts brought in; and then to be
returned back to the foresaid Council, by them to be past into Ordinances,
which Ordinances, should be signed by the Lord President, besides two others
Lords of the same Council, being all of several Provinces, together with the
Treasurer and Secretary of the said Assembly, the same being first registered
folio tali. And this being don, those ordinances with the foresaid annexions,
should be brought again into the foresaid Exchequer, to see and examine,
whether the same was don according to the Order of the Land; and after the
examination past, the said Ordinance should there likewise be registered, folio
tali* and all the Ordinances to be past hereafter upon the respective
Declarations, should be thus conditioned, or else no moneys paid upon them by
the Receiver General.

As touching the precedent Remonstrance of the Synodical Ministers, the
Provinces declared unanimously Julie 17o. that the Resolutions taken in point
of Religion Januarie last 27o. should by every one of them, as much as
concerned them, effectually be, and caused to be prosecuted and put in
execution; and as touching the Countries and Cities resorting under the
Generality, the Lords Commissioners at the Generality in Ordinary, were
charged, to take especial care and inspection, that the public Reformation
both ecclesiastical and civil, may be accomplished with due zeal and
seriousness, the Acts and Ordinances strictly executed according to the tenor
and content of them, the boldness and insolence of the Sectaries duly
restrained, and every thing effected and executed, conformably to the
before*mentioned Resolution. As likewise the foresaid Lords, Ordinary Deputies
had charge given them, to make and publish due Acts and decrees against all
gross sins, Profanations of the Sabbath of the Lord, Fighting of Duels,
publishing of Contentious writings betwixt Ministers and Divines, printing of
scandalous books, Socinians writings and the like. And of all these their H. M.
Resolutions, there were Extracts made, and imparted to the foresaid
Church-Deputies, wherewith they were dismissed, having thanks given them for
their good endeavors, zeal, and pains showed and undertaken in this behalf.

There was great endeavor made this week, the Lord Scheel presiding for
Over-Yssell, to make an end of all, and upon the proposition of Holland of the
15th. the same in a manner agreed on. Yea so confident they were thereof, that
already a project was made of coining a certain Medail, of Gold and Silver,
for a memorial of this famous Assembly: and to this end the Lords Cats and de
Brun, respective Counselors and Pensioners of Holland and Zealand, had made
the ensuing Device; That namely on the one side, there should stand a*Rock with
seven hillocks, as representing the seven Provinces, and on the other, the
Assembly, with this respective inscription,

Dum totus miratur Orbis, and anceps exspectat, quo res Foederati Belgii a
morte Arausionensium Principis evasurae sint, aliis alia pro moribus and genio
cujusque augurantibus, Jani foribus pridem clausis and magna Batavorum Aula
ingenti Procerum Consilio aperta, Tandem, annuente Deo, Religione, Foedere,
Militia, sortiter assertis, Sociis in Orbem datis acceptisque manibus, and
aliis aliorum colla amplectentibus, a se invicem dimissi, Malorum spem ac vota
egregie fefellerunt, Bonorum superarunt.

(Whiles all the world stood amazed, and doubtfully longed what issue the
affairs of the United Netherlands would take, upon the Death of the Prince of
Orange, with various conjectures, according to the variety of each partie's
Conditions and Dispositions; it pleased God, (Janus Temple being shut before)
that the Grand Court of the Batavian States was opened, where at last, through
God's assistance, after a courageous settlement of Religion, Union and Militia:
the Confederates plighted their hands and troth each to the other, and mutually
embraced one another before they parted; they notably thus disappointed the
hopes and wishes of Malignants, and surpassed those of the well-affected).

And about the Rock with the seven hillocks there should have stood these words;

-- Stant foedere juncti,
Ut rupes immota, Dei sub Numine tuti.
(By Covenant joined they stand Rock like unshaken and safe under God's own
hand.)

But however, The Ship of affairs, instead of getting straight into the harbor,
as most had conceived, was driven about again for a while by new cross winds,
arising out of the Debate touching the Amnestie or Act of Oblivion: and withal
it was advised by some, that since the last years troubles proceeded mainly,
from and by reason of the excessive public charges, all courses of lavishing
the same might be eschewed, to prevent clamoring among the people;
notwithstanding that those of the other Provinces, being com hither upon the
invitation of Holland, and having spent much, conceived it was the least this
Province could do in civilitie, to present each Deputy with such a gold
Medail. But there it stuck, and never came further.

The Business of Religion, being dispatched, as was said the first day of
this Presidencie; there was taken in hand the point of Secret Correspondence;
concerning which, it was found good and decreed, according to the report of the
Conciliatorie Conferences, That it was very necessary and expedient for this
State, to send and still to entertain public Ministers abroad (whether they
be Ambassadors, Residents, Agents or Commissioners) at the respective Courts
of the Emperor, the Kings, Spain, Sweden, etc. at Brussells and elsewhere, where
it should be found requisite: so much the better and more conveniently to
consider and observe what might be best for this State's Interest, as also that
from time to time, advertisement may be had, what is practicing or passing
there, for either the advantage or prejudice of this State.

That likewise all particular secret Correspondences, from the Respective
Governors and Commanders of the Frontiers of this State, shall be continued in
the same way as before, according to their Commissions.

The present Commissioners at the Assembly, being of opinion, That, during
the peace, this course would be provisionally sufficient for this State.

That the moneys likewise appointed for secret Correspondences, may
provisionally be converted to the entertainment and support of the foresaid
respective Ministers.

That likewise all foreign Ministers of this State shall address their Letters
immediately to the Ordinary Assembly of the States General, and writing of
things which ought to be held secret, that the same shall be enclosed under
Seal apart, and transmitted within the Ordinary Letters, provided there be
every such line, mention made in the ordinary Letters, of the said enclosed
secret one. Which Secret Letters shall not be opened, but by a certain select
number of the Commissioners, (successively to be nominated and chosen
thereunto, out of every Province present) together with the Secretary; and
that the said Secret shall forthwith be made known to the Ordinary Assembly,
unless it were judged requisite by the said Committee, it should be kept close
yet for a little while, and the Committee, shall afterward, revealing the
Secret, declare their reason withal, of the former concealment.

The foresaid Governors and Commanders of the respective Frontier*places, as
also all other secret Correspondents, shall in like form and manner address
their Letters to the Ordinary Assembly of the States General, whether they
send them mediately under covert by a third hand, or immediately, and all such
Letters shall be opened and managed, as was said before.

And to the end that the service of the Country may be so much the better
regarded, and the foresaid public Ministers the more fitted for it, the
Assembly judged it requisite, that the Committee (to whom the opening of the
foresaid secret Letters shall be referred) should likewise be desired and
autorized to transmit unto the said public Ministers from time to time all the
Resolutions and other necessary points and informations as may stand them
instead, for the performance of their charge to best advantage of the State.

The Lords of Gelderland moved again this day, that some Resolution might be
taken about the consolidation of the upper Quarter of Gelderland, and that the
conferring of the Companies which formerly had been in the Prince's
Disposition, might henceforward be disposed by the Generality, but they
obtained neither. The first was referred to the Chamber my-partie, agreed upon
at Munster between Spain and the United Provinces; the other business remained
in the Disposition of the respective Paiemasters.

As for the Instruction for the Council of State, the same was found good and
resolved upon Julie 18 to be decreed in manner as the same was drawn up by
their H. M. Deputies in the Conferences Concil^^torie, and reported in the
Assembly on the 6th and was likewise entered in their H. M. public Registers,
save only the 21 Article of the said Instruction, speaking of the grant of
orders upon some Declarations, to be dressed according to the last Article of
the report made by the Lord Ommereun and other their Hi. Mi. Deputies, for the
Conference Conciliatorie Julie 25, touching the appointments or allowances for
vacations and traveling charges of any of the Deputies at the Generality, or
Counselors of State going in Commission from the Generality. Those of
Gelderland entered hereupon, that they were not instructed yet in that behalf.

Those of Friesland and Groninghen, with the Omlands, declared, they had given
their consent upon ratification of the Lords their Respective Principals.

Instructions for the Council of STATE of the United Netherlands, whereby the
Counselors thereof lawfully Commissioned and to be Commissioned, shall
provisionally, and till the States General do otherwise ordein, guide and
govern the affairs touching the State in general, the defense, conservation and
Union of the Countries aforesaid.
I.
IN the foresaid Council there shall be comprehended and at all times appear,
have place and voice, the Governors of the respective Provinces, where now they
are, or may be hereafter; and matters shall be handled, deliberated and
transacted in the said Council with all due reverence, respect and modesty, to
the best advantage of the service of the said Countries, the good unity and
friendship among the same, their Cities and Members, together with the mutual
good understanding of the Lords of the Council among themselves: And the
Governors of the respective Provinces, and the President of the Council
aforesaid for the time being, are desired to take good care, that all
particular affections, jarrings and impertinencies (nothing concerning the
matters and affairs there to be deliberated) may be prevented and forborne.

II.
Into this Council there shall be chosen and admitted men, qualified, fit and
versed in matters of State, and being of the true Christian Reformed Religion,
such as the same is taught and preached at present throughout the public
Churches of these Countries; and not being engaged by Oath, pension or
emploiment to any King, Prince or Lords, at home or abroad; nor allied to each
other, unto the fourth degree of blood, or second of affinity, according to
the computation of the civil Laws; and that without any dispensation; also the
said Counselors ought to be firmly resident in the place of their Assembly.

III.
And for the better direction and managing of all emergent affairs, the same
Council shall ordinarily assemble at Nine of the clock in the forenoon, and at
Three in the afternoon; and the Counselor shall not part or go forth without
leav or knowledge of the Counsellor-President; and they shall be bound
constantly to repair to the place where* the Council shall be employed; and
appear at any time when they shall be desired to meet, except only upon
lawful excuses.

IV.
The foresaid Council shall, together with the Assembly of the Commissioners
in the Generality, take good care, that the Countries and United Provinces,
Cities and Members thereof may be put and kept in mutual good concord,
according to the Union made and settled amongst them; and likewise that all
good correspondence be enterteined between them and their Governors and
Military Commanders; as also between the said Governors and Commanders among
themselves.

V.
And the said Council shall, together with the Assembly of the Ordinary
Deputies, as before, have and exercise the authority of disposing in Military
affairs, and over the Souldierie being in the State's service, taking,
according to the exigencies of things, the considerations thereupon of the
Field-marshal and other chief Commanders of War, and causing their Commands to
be executed by the foresaid Governors of the Provinces for the time being,
the Admiral or other Officers and Commanders each within their sphere.

VI.
Provided that the said Council do or attemt nothing that may tend to the
prejudice of the Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Treaties, Contracts, Ordinances,
Statutes, Decrees and Customs of the said Countries in general, or any Province
City or Member thereof in particular.

VII.
And the said Council shall, together with the Assembly of the foresaid
Ordinary Deputies at the Generality, take care that the Frontiers of the
State in general may be beset or provided with sufficient garrison of several
Nations, and that the rest of the Souldierie be divided and quartered, as near
as is feasible and occasions suffer, into the next and most commodious places
about the said Frontiers, to the end that in time and case of sudden need, as
well within as without, they may be at hand.

VIII.
For which end the foresaid Council shall be obliged, the foresaid Assembly
of the Ordinary Deputies at the Generality desiring their advice, about
transplacing or sending forth of any Companies, and giving of Patent to the
same, to supply the desired advice to the said Assembly with all expedition.

IX.
And besides that likewise to inform and advertise the said Assembly of the
Ordinary Deputies at the Generality, from time to time, of the true State and
condition of the foresaid Frontiers, and necessity of changing some of the
Companies, as often as the same shall judge, that the service of the Land
requires it.

X.
And to the end, that the beforementioned Patents may be duly expedited
according to the mind of the joint-Confederates, and as much as may be don,
care had, that no Company shall march into any Voicing Provinces, to be put
in Garrison there, but with permission and particular Patent of the States of
that Province, or their autorized Commissioners; as likewise, that no Companies
shall be removed or drawn forth out of the Voicing Provinces, whereby the
prescribed Number agreed upon, or hereafter to be agreed upon with common
advice of the respective Provinces, to be left in each Province respectively
for garrison in the Cities and Forts thereof, and for assisting the Magistrates
in the executing of their civil command, may com to be lessened; the foresaid
Council shall review and carefully observe the Patents, after their advice
transmitted unto them by the Assembly of the Ordinary Deputies at the
Generality, whether the same Patents be attested by the President at the
Generality, and signed by two Deputies of the two succeeding Provinces
present, subsigned by the Secretary, and sealed with the Seal of their Hi. Mi.

XI.
And if at any time any Patents shall serve to make any Companies to march into
a Voicing Province, then the said Council shall observe further, whether the
Claus be inserted therein, whereby the Officers are warned and charged by
their Oath, that they will not march with their Companies into any such
Province ere and before they shall have got permission and particular Patent
from the States of that Province, or their autorized Commissioners: And if so
be the Patents shall serve thereby to draw forth any Companies out of a Voicing
Province, the foresaid Council shall take care that in the same Patents there
be blanks left, or open spaces for the names of the Officers which are to lead
the said Companies to be filled up by the States of the Provinces out of which
the said Companies are desired, or by their autorized Commissioners, according
to occasions and the Orders agreed upon between the Confederates in that behalf.

XII.
And finding that the said Patents are attested, signed, subsigned and sealed
in manner abovesaid, and contein the foresaid claus of any Companies designed
for marching into any Voicing Province for Garrison; and having blanks for
names of Officers to lead the Companies upon certain occasions, and to draw
them forth out of a Voicing Province; then and not otherwise shall the foresaid
Council likewise attest the said Patents by the President in the Council, and
sign them by the Secretary, and seal them with the Seal of the Council, thus
without any further delaie to be forthwith dispatched and sent away.

XIII.
Moreover the foresaid Council, wherever the States of a Voicing Province or
their autorized Commissioners shall be desired in time of need by the
Generality*, to yield to the drawing forth of some companies out of their
Provinces, whereby the number to remain within the Province, according to the
forecited agreement, to the ends aforesaid, com's to be lessened; shall to
their uttmost take care and endeavor, that the Need or Necessity, which caused
the drawing forth of the said Companies, being past over, the foresaid
Companies be readily returned to their former Garrisons, or others in their
stead.

XIV.
The said Council shall likewise take care from time to time, that the
Frontiers of the State in general, be duly provided with needful ammunition,
provision and other requisits of War.

XV.
The said Council shall endeavor, That the General means for the common defens
of the Land, throughout all the United Provinces, the associated Countries, the
Cities and Members thereof, together with the Quarters resorting under the
Generality, particularly agreed, or yet to be agreed upon, and referred or
yet to be referred to their Disposition, by the consent of the Provinces, may
every where be well and equally levied, and that the Farmers and Collectors
thereof, be maintained in the inning and executing of what is let out or given
in charge to collect: and that the transgressions of the Ordinances made or yet
to be made in that behalf, be punished without any connivance; And in these
matters concerning the foresaid means or the Questions and Differences thence
arising, the Council of Braband and Flanders shall not meddle at all.

XVI.
And in the levying of the said General means, they shall follow, and cause to
be followed such Instructions, as are or shall be made by the States General.

XVII.
And in the inning and executing of ihe said common means, and other consents
or subsidies of the Provinces, and in that manner as they shall be born, The
foresaid Council shall proceed against the Debtors, Farmers and Collectors, as
also against the Subjects or Inhabitants of the Provinces, Cities and places
defective or failing therein, in the same manner, as was used in these
Countries about Princes suits or moneys; and, according to the Warrants
exsecutorie to be issued in that behalf. Provided, that none shall be called
forth out of the Province where he inhabits, without the consent of the States
of the said Province.

XVIII.
They shall take care, and seriously endeavor, that all accomptable Persons of
the Generalities means, the farmings both in Cities and Country, the redemtion
of means, Contribution, Mulcts, Ecclesiastical goods, the Seal of Domaines,
pourvaying of Provision and Ammunition for the Army, and all other incoms and
revenues, none excepted, shall at the years end bring into the Generalities
Exchequer, a threefold acount, viz. one for the Council, a second for the
Exchequer and a third for the Receiver or Surrenderer, adjoining all the
Original Documents and requisites thereof, for to be audited in the foresaid
chequer-chamber, whereof coppies shall be returned, as formerly; and that for
to prevent abuses.

XIX.
The moneys proceeding of the foresaid consented means and subsidies shall be
converted and emploi'd to the payment of the Souldierie and other Necessaries
of War, in conformity to the agreements of the respective Provinces; or, so as
in general shall be ordained by the Provinces, for most profit of the Land;
and above all there shall be settle dorder for Mustering, and Military
Discipline over the Souldierie; and that they may be paid by the head, as near
as possibly may be.

XX.
They shall take care, that the respective Provinces do pay the Companies
their full wages without any abatement, or charge of Sollicitors, Clarks,
cash-monies, New*years money, or any other, whatever it may be called,
directly or indirectly; that they may receiv their pay monthly; there being
good heed taken, that the Ritmasters and Captains be engaged and kept to it
upon pain of casheiring, to pay likewise their horse and foot Soldiers their
full pay according to the Lands order; to wit, the horse men every month, and
the foot soldiers every seven days; and those by whom any transgressions in
this kind shall be discovered, they shall be rewarded according to the Acts
made and to be made in that behalf, and notice taken of besides for being
promoted and advanced, according to the condition of the matter revealed.

XXI.
All Orders for payment shall be signed by the Treasurer and three of the
Council, being of several Provinces, and by the Secretary of the said
Council, and no orders for payment shall be held valid, but these signed as
said is, together with a Note of, Registered, folio tali, upon it; to the said
Orders there shall likewise be joined all the requisites and conditions
belonging to the orders, and in particular what things the orders were granted
for; and the same thus signed and conditioned, shall be sent to the
Generalities Chequer-chamber, there to be viewed examined and registered in
like manner, in case they be granted according to the Lands Order. Without
which the Receiver General is to make no payment, upon pain to have it
disallowed.

XXII.
They shall also take care, and further as far forth as need shall require,
that the Convoys and Licenses may equally be given and performed, according to
the respective Consents and Lists made or to be made in their behalf, by the
States General; and that there be no hindrance or impediment given by the
States of particular Provinces, the Governors and Magistrates, or commonalties
of any Cities or places, or by any other, to the free passing and forthgoing of
the goods, which have performed their Convoys and Licence-Duties according to
the Lists aforesaid; nor, that any whosoever shall demand or take ought for the
said goods beyond the foresaid Lists; and that the contraventions directly or
indirectly practiced in this kind, be exemplarily punished.

XXIII.
They shall suffer the Cities according to their ancient customs, in time of
need, and when matters can brook no delaie, to arm by Sea, and to set out men
of War, at the charge of the Country; provided they give present information
thereof to the Generality, that they may be paid out of the foresaid general
means, and that against all Pirates and other such like Enemies of the common
Weal, to resist and subdue them, save only, that the cognizance and
punishment, extending to the persons, shops and goods, shall appertain to the
Decision of the Courts of the Admiralties set up or to be yet further set up
in the Respective Quarters.

XXIV.
The foresaid Council shall be obliged to deliver up, every third month, to
the States General and the States of each Province, an exact State of the
charge of War, and of the incom of the means to be agreed upon, and of the
employment thereof.

XXV.
They shall keep an exact list of the Garrisons of all Cities, Forts and
places, so as the same shall be conditioned from time to time, and shall let
the Provinces have copies thereof, whenever it shall be desired.

XXVI.
They shall have a special care that the pales and limits of the foresaid
Provinces respectively be not lessened; and that all the Cities and places
resorting under the Generality, be reduced and kept under an equal
contribution, for the common defense of the Land, as near as possibly may be;
and that the same course be taken and practiced, in regard of such Cities and
places as may yet be subdued under this State.

XXVII.
They shall take care, that all Generals, Admirals, Colonels, Ritmasters,
Captains and all the Souldierie by Sea and Land, shall promiss and swear, to
be true and faithful to the States General of the United Netherlands,
continuing in the Union and maintenance of the Reformed Religion; and so
likewise, to the States of the Provinces and the Magistrates of the Cities,
where they shall be employed, and on whose charge and repartition they shall
stand for pay, and faithfully to serve the same, and that they will obey the
foresaid States General, and the States of the particular Provinces, each in
their Sphere, according to the form of the oath for the Militia, established
Jun. 16o. 1651. in the great Hall: and that the Governors of the Provinces and
Generals shall promiss to obey the Council of State instituted, or hereafter to
be instituted by the States General, and that the Colonels, Ritmasters,
Captains, and all the rest of the Souldierie, shall besides that likewise,
promiss and swear duly to obey the Commands of the Governors of the Provinces
where they are emploi'd; and the Sea-Souldiers, the commands of the Admiral,
and all such other Heads or Cheiftains, as shall be set over them.

XXVI II.
They shall keep and entertain all Treaties and Alliances made between the
United Countries, the Provinces, Cities and Members thereof, with the
neighbor-Kingdoms, Countries and Commonwealths; and for that end, and the
advancement of the Trade and Traffic of these Countries, they shall entertain
all good Correspondence, Friendship and Neighborhood with foreign Princes, and
States, especially the neighbor-Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Countries and Cities,
by the^ best means they shall ordain in this behalf.

XXIX.
Those of the Council aforesaid, and every one of them, being to vote: they
shall openly, freely, and advisedly declare what in Honor, Duty and Conscience
they shall think best, whether it be by conforming themselves with the opinion
of others, being satisfied with them, to avoid repetitions, or otherwise, as
they shall think good themselves, by other arguments and considerations; and all
matters shall be determined in the said Council, by most voices of the present
Counselors, having voted; and if any matters shall com to be propounded
concerning any of the said Counselors themselves, directly or indirectly,
either in regard of their own persons, or their kindred and allies, to the
fourth degree, therein they shall not be allowed to give any advice, nor to
be present at the Deliberation and Determination of the business, but shall
retire and remain forth the Council Chamger, during the said Deliberation and
Resolution.

XXX.
In the foresaid Council, nothing shall be decided and determined finally, but
in the presence of all the Lords of the Council, being at hand in the place,
where the Council is kept, or at least the major part of them.

XXXI.
The Council shall not assemble nor resolv upon any extraordinary affairs, but
by precedent insinuation made thereof to all the Counselors at hand in the
place.

XXXII.
They shall henceforward give no grants, nor continue any formerly given by the
States General, for a certain time, after the exspiration thereof; as neither
they are to allow, grant or continue any Pensions or Emoluments to the charge
of the Land, nor resignation of offices, exspectancies, survivances nor
adjunctions.

XXXIII.
They shall grant no Remission to the Farmers or others indebted to the Land in
general, without the cognizance and assent of the Assembly of the Ordinary
Deputies at the Generality; and then no otherwise neither, but in the presence
of all the Council, and at least by 2 third parts of the voices.

XXXIV.
They shall after timely affixion of Bills, let out all works in public, and
join the same bills to the orders, and allow no continuation of works formerly
undertaken, upon pain to undergo themselves in particular, the damage thereby
redounding to the public, and there shall no orders, of what name soever, be
otherwise dispatched, but upon the Receiver General, who shall accommodate the
owners of the said orders, at their desire, with assignations, upon the
subordinate Receivers at the place of their Residence, or where it most
concern's them.

XXXV.
The foresaid Council, Treasurer-General, Receiver-General, Fiscal,
Secretaries, Substitutes, Clarks, Controllers of Fortifications, and all other
attendents of the Council, shall have no share nor part in any Ecclesiastical
goods, Lands, demesnes etc. which are farmed out for the Generality, or
otherwise let forth, nor in any works already put out, or to be put out upon
the common stock of the Land; nor in any convoyes, imposts, or other public
means; nor in any furnishing of gunpowder, bullets, artillery, arms, corn,
rye, oats, butter, chees, or any other provision of victuals or military
ammunition and necessaries, of what sort and condition soever, being to be
employed for the public service: nor shall they be allowed to buy, or under
any other title or color to undertake or let forth, any Orders which are to be
let out, at the charge of the Land in general, or of any Province in
particular, neither by themselves, their wives, children, household, nor by any
others whatsoever; nor so much as participate in any such buying, undertaking
or letting forth by others, directly or indirectly: neither shall they
themselves, their wives, children, household, or any other in their behalf, as
before, accept of, enjoy or profit by any gifts, bribes or presents, of any
thing, be it never so small, though but eating and drinking wares; and that
from no body at all, whether they be Cities, Courts, public or particular
persons, whom they know to have any thing to do at the Council, or like to get
any thing to do there; and and that as well before as after the business shall
be expedited in the Council; and if so be that they should have received any
such gifts from any one, whom afterward they came to understand to have
business before the said Council, which at the time of receiving them they had
not known, or that they shall in aftertime, get any thing to do with the
Council, then they shall be obliged to acquaint the Council with it, and
convert the gifts received or the value thereof to the use of the poor, in such
manner as the Council shall appoint; and besides that, they shall not be
allowed to assist or to be present at the debate of the matters concerning
him, of whom they shall have received any such gift, without special permission
by the Council; all this, upon pain, that those which shall be found to have
don contrary to the orders aforesaid, shall forfeit their state and place, and
be infamous and incapable of ever bearing any office or charge, within the
United Provinces, the associated Countries, Cities and Members thereof; and
besides that, be bound to return and make good fourfold, what they have
participated of the foresaid Ecclesiastical goods, lands, demesnes, etc. farmed
out or otherwise let forth, for the Generalities behoof, or of the abovesaid
public works, furnishing of provisions, ammunition and other necessaries; in
buying, undertaking, letting forth of Orders; or by participation of the same;
together with the received gifts and presents what they enjoyed of or profited
by them; and shall be further liable to such amercements and arbitrarie
punishment, as according to the exigencie of the matter shall be found fitting
and requesite; and the foresaid Counselors, the Treasurer-General,
Receiver-General, Fiscal, Secretary, Substitutes, Clarks, Controller of the
fortifications, and all other attendents of the Council, present or to com,
shall at their first admittance to their functions take their oath, that in and
about the matters aforesaid, they will honestly acquit themselves; as likewise
the foresaid Counselors shall yearly upon the first Teusday in the month of
May, and such as be absent then, upon the first day of their appearance
again in Council, before any other thing be agitated in the said Council,
clear themselves one to another by oath, and so likewise shall the^
Treasurer-General, the Receiver-General, the Fiscal, the Secretary, the
Substitutes, Clarks, Controllers of fortifications and all other attendents of
the Council clear themselves, that in and about the matters aforesaid, they have
acquitted themselves honestly, and that they have no knowledge that their wives,
children, household or any other, having relation to themselves, have don
contrary in any of the foresaid things directly or indirectly promissing for
time to com to continue thus in all uprightness; and that none at all shall be
admitted to the businesses of the Council, ere and before he have solemnly
cleared himself and made promiss in the manner aforesaid.

XXXVI.
And the said Counselors shall moreover, upon the least susspicion arising,
be likewise bound at all times to clear themselves by Oath one toward another
in this behalf, as aforesaid, and to make the Treasurer General, Receiver
General, Fiscal, Secretary Substitutes, Clerks, Comtrollers of Fortifications
and all other attendants of the Council to purge themselves thereof; and to make
him on whom any suspicion falls in particular to declare by Oath, that they
neither promissed, nor gave nor would promiss or give ought to any of the
persons aforesaid, directly or indirectly.

XXXVII.
And those which shall be found to have given, or promissed, or caused to be
promissed or given, directly or indirectly, any gifts or presents to any of the
foresaid persons, their wives, children, household, or to any other for their
sakes and behalf, whether it be before or after the business don for
expedition's sake, or otherwise, under what pretext soever; they shall by
sentence of the foresaid Council be condemned to a fine proportionable or
equal to the value of the cause there depending, or otherwise, according to the
occasion and condition of things; and all the foresaid fines and amercements
shall be dispensed, one third part thereof to the informer or discoverer, and
the two remaining parts to the behoof of the poor; yea though the exorbitancie
or corruption committed should not com to be detected, till within some years
after their commission.

XXXVIII.
And to the end, that what has hitherto been said, may the better be
effected, and followed, and none of all that have or shall have any thing to do
at the Council, may plead or pretend ignorance, there shall be hung up in the
out-room or antichamber of the council an open Patent, in the Netherlandish,
French, English, and Scot's language, whereby every one shall be warned, to
beware of presenting, giving or promising, directly or indirectly, any gifts or
presents, to any of the foresaid persons, their Wives, Children, Families, or
any one in their behalf; on pain of the fines and punishments expressed in the
foregoing article; as likewise the proctors, (attorneys) sollicitors, and
others usually employed, before the foresaid Council, shall upon the tuesday
abovesaid, or then absent, at their first return to the Haghe, make promiss to
the Council by oath, that they will not suffer themselves to be employed nor
give nor cause to be given advice to their Clients of presenting or promising
ought in the manner abovesaid to any of the foresaid persons their Wives,
Children, Families, or any other in their behalf, directly or indirectly; but
in case they should perceiv their Clients disposed to make or promiss any such
presents to any of the said persons; that they will dissuade them from it; or
in case they came to know they had already given or promissed the like, that
they will forthwith acquaint the Council with it; as also they shall be bound
at the beginning of their emploiment by any, faithfully to warn them that they
give nor promiss nothing in that kind to none of the persons aforesaid,
directly or indirectly; and in case they had don it already, to acquaint the
Council with it themselves, on pain of incurring the censure and correction of
the Council, if they shall be found to have don contrary to the Orders
aforesaid.

XXXIX.
And that the foresaid exorbitancies may duly be found out, and the guilty
punished according to desert, the Fiscal of the Generality shall narrowly
observe the action of the foresaid persons, and if so be that he suspect any
of the Substitutes, Clerks, Controllers of fortifications, or inferior
attendants of the Council, he shall by order of the Council inform himself
against them, summon them before the Council, proceed against them, and
prosecute the business to definitive sentence, and further afterward to the
execution thereof.

XL.
And if so be that suspicion falls upon any of the Council, the Treasurer
General, Receiver General, or Secretary of the Council, then the Fiscal of the
Generality, and the Fiscal and Proctor General of the Province where the
Council shall reside, both together; or suspicion falling upon the Fiscal of
the Generality himself, the Fiscal of the foresaid Province alone, shall, by
Order of the highest Court of Justice there, inform him or themselves against
the same, summon them before the said Court of Justice, make them Process,
state and order the same; and if it concern the Treasurer General, or Receiver
General, or Fiscal, or Secretary of the Council, prosecute them before the
said highest Court of Justice to the Definitive sentence; and if the matter
concern any of the Counselors themselves, the Process being rightly stated and
formed shall be sent to the States of the Province to which he belong's, they
having taken upon them, themselves there by ordinary course of Justice to
determine the business, according to the tenor of the foresaid Articles, within
six weeks after the receipt, and the sentences pronounced in the foresaid cases,
shall have their full course and effect, without allowance of appeal thence to
our selves.

XLI.
All Commissions, Orders, Discharges, Instructions, Letters and Dispatches
shall be attested with the full name of the Counselor President, and being
attested thus, shall be signed by one of the Provinces, or some other of the
Council, and all this on condition the said expeditions be found of necessary
importance by the Council; and afterward subsigned likewise by the Secretary
of the Council, without suffering the same to com into other hands, or
communicating them to others then those of the said Council: and the Secretary
shall keep good and exact Registers or books of Remembrance of all Resolutions
and Conclusions about matters and causes agitated and concluded in the said
Council, at least such as are of any importance and notable consideration; with
setting down the names of the Lords present; and the matters and causes being
once determined and resolved upon by common consent or most voices, all those
of the said Council indifferently, whether they were present or absent, of the
same or a contrary opinion, they shall without any gainsaying apply themselves
to the well-managing, effecting, and mainteining of the foresaid conclusions
and resolutions.

XLII.
The foresaid Council finding it needful at any time to summon or call the
respective Confederates, they shall communicate the same to the Assembly of
the Ordinary Deputies at the Generality, and desire such a call or summons to
be made, inserting the points serving to that end; and in case the said
Deputies should happen to make difficulty thereof, the said Council is
autorized hereby to present their justification to the respective Provinces
themselves, with the like insertion of the reasons and motives of their desire;
and in case of appearance, it shall not extend to any prejudice of their
privileges, not to be called or summoned forth of their Provinces.

XLIII.
The Residence of the foresaid Council, shall with the good liking of the
Ordinary Assembly of the States General be kept in a convenient and secure
place of the United Provinces, without being obliged to remain in a certain
place precisely but still assemble there, where the service and common interest
of the Land, and the special direction of the Military affairs require it; and
of the foresaid Council there shall at all times, whiles diverse may be absent
in Commission or otherwise, remain in the place at the least five Counselors
of several respective Provinces, that so the service of the Land may still be
duly attended.

XLIV.
The Entertainment of the Counselors is left to the disposition of the
respective Provinces whence they are sent, wherewith they are to content
themselves, without bringing any extraordinary charge upon the Country,
besides Freights and Convoyes, and such appointments as shall be made and
ordained in that behalf. And if any of the Council com to die or leav his
place, another able person and acceptable to the States General shall be named
by the Province whence he was sent, and taken in by Commission from the States
General.

XLV.
Besides the Council there shall likewise be enterteined a Treasurer and a
Receiver General, with certain wages for them.

XLVI.
And a Secretary at 800 pounds Flem. per an. and with such instructions as the
States General by advice of the Council of State already made, or shall make
hereafter.

XLVII.
The Dispatches of matters belonging to the Disposition of the foresaid Council
of State, being of that importance and consideration, that before the wars,
they were usually expedited in the Name of the former Princes of these
Countries, they shall be made and issued in the Name, under the Seal,
counter-Seal and signet of the States General of the United Netherlands, by
advice of the Council of State, with this subscription, By Order of my Lords
the States General of the United Netherlands, with relation to the Council of
State thereof.

XLVIII.
And the Dispatches being not of so great importance and consideration, they
shall be issued in the Name of the Council of State of the United Netherlands,
but yet under the Seal, Counter-Seal and Signet of the States General aforesaid.

XLIX.
The Seal shall be kept by one of the Counselors to be appointed thereunto,
who shall be responsable for it, not suffering the same to com into any other
hands in any wise; and shall keep an exact Register, and counter-rowl of all
Dispatches and rights of the Seal, and be paid for it, according to the tax
ordained or to be ordained by the States General: and the profits coming in
thereby, shall be converted and employed, to the paying of the Officers of the
foresaid Council, and other necessary occasions in matters of the said
Councils Disposition.

L.
And the joint foresaid Confederates declare herewithal, for the Conservation
of the Right of the United Lands in the general and in particular; That by this
Instruction, they do not abdicate or renounce the Right and Power, either the
States General themselves, or the States of the Provinces in particular, should
not in time of need and when the affairs of the Land shall so require it, each
in as much concern's them, themselves to order, appoint and execute, what shall
be fitting for the service of the Land, even in those very things, which are
by them referred to the disposition of the foresaid Council, such as is the
Direction of military affairs by Sea and Land, with all things appertaining
thereunto, and in particular the keeping of Musters, exercising of military
discipline and punishments of all exorbitances, and in all other causes. They
declare likewise, That all things concerning the Civil State and Justice of the
foresaid Countries, Cities and Members thereof both in general and in
particular, not expressly referred to the disposition of the Council of State
aforesaid, shall remain in the disposition of the States General; the States of
the particular Provinces, the lawful Magistrates of the Cities and other
places, each in their sphere: and the giving of Patents to the train bands, in
case of necessity, and when the service of the Country shall require their
marching forth out of their own Cities, shall remain within the Provinces to
the respective parts thereof, without any of the Councils meddling therein.

LI.
Those of the Council of State aforesaid, shall at their entering or admittance
to their charge clear themselves by oath, that for the getting of that place,
they neither gave nor promised any money or mony-worth, nor any thing else
whatsoever, nor shall give or promiss ought, directly or indirectly, or in any
wise conceivable or unconceivable; and shall further promiss and swear in the
hands of the States General or their Deputies, to be True and Faithful to the
said States General of the Provinces, abiding in the Union and maintaining the
true Christian Reformed Religion; and shall renounce by oath to all particular
Correspondencies, with either Provinces, Cities or private and particular
persons, so far forth as the same may prove prejudicial to the common good;
and that without regard had to the Provinces or Cities, where they were born or
chosen; or to the particular profit and advantage of the same or of any other,
and have nothing at all before their eyes, but the Honor of God, and the
welfare and the conservation of the foresaid Countries, and the public
affairs; That they shall not reveal the Communications, Deliberations or
Resolutions, which ought to remain secret, and speak with no body about them,
besides those of the said Council, and especially not with any Ministers of any
foreign Kings, Republics and States; in whose or with what company soever,
unless it be with those of the said Council separated, as apart from all
other. Item, They may not be engaged in any ones service, nor receiv or enjoy
any pensions, neither may nor shall they partake or share, directly or
indirectly, in any works put out, or to be put out upon the public account,
nor in any Ecclesiastical goods, lands, domains, etc. which are or may be
farmed out for the public, nor in any Convoys, Imposts, or other common means,
nor in the furnishing of any powder, shot, artillery, arms, corn, rye, butter,
chees, beer, oats, or other provision or ammunition, and necessaries of War
whatsoever, being to be used for the benefit and service of the public; nor
buy, nor under any other title take upon them or let forth, any orders granted
at the charge of the Land in general, or of any Provinces in particular,
neither by themselves, nor their wives, children, families, nor by any other
whosoever; nor participate in the sale, undertaking or letting out made by
other, directly or indirectly; neither shall they by themselves, their wives,
children, families, nor by any other as before; receiv or enjoy any gifts
gratuities or presents, nor take benefit by any thing, how small soever, even
to meat and drink, from any, either Cities or Courts, public or private
persons, whom they know to have any thing to do at the Council, or likely to
get any thing to do there, and that as well before as after the business shall
be transacted; and if so be they should receiv any such gifts of any one, not
knowing the giver had any thing to do at the Council, at the time of receiving
the same, or if afterward the same should get any business with the Council,
that they shall give notice thereof unto the Council; and that moreover, they
shall precisely regulate themselves according to the contents of this
Instruction, and every Article thereof, and do besides, whatsoever good and
faithful Counselors of State are bound to do, and all this provisionally.

LII.
If so be that this Instruction shall be found to have any obscurity, or
need of any alteration, contracting or enlarging, the States General shall upon
occasions, with advice of the Council take notice thereof and provide
accordingly, as shall be requisite.

Don thus, and decreed in the Assembly of the States General, July 180. 1651.
Note here, That the one and twentieth Article, beginning, All Orders for
payment, was set down after as follows.
FOr to reduce the Order for payment into a due Form, the respective Requests
to that end presented to the Council, shall be accompanied with all the
requisites, bills and particulars, belonging to the business, wherefore the
said respective Order shall be desired; and being viewed and examined by the
said Council, they shall be transmitted to the Generalities Checquer*chamber,
to be there also viewed, examined and cleared; where special heed is to be
taken, whether the Land is bound or not to the particulars therein specified;
and thence they are to be returned to the Council again, that by them there
may be past and granted Orders, which Orders being registered folio tali, are
to be signed by the Lord President for the time, besides two other Lords of
the Council, all of several Provinces, together with the Treasurer of the said
Council. And this don, the said Orders shall with their annexed pieces be
brought back again into the foresaid checquer*chamber, for to examine, whether
they be given according to the Order of the Land* or no; And after examination
these be likewise there registered folio tali. And thus all the Orders for
payment shall be conditioned, or no payment made thereupon by the Receiver
General, on pain of disallowance.

This same day there was likewise settled the appointment for Vacations and
travelling-charges, for both the Deputies of their Hi. Mi. and the Counselors
of State, being abroad in Commission within this State.

A Lord of the general Assembly or Council of State traveling in Commission,
within this State, with one or more servants, shall be allowed a day for
vacation, entertainment for meals and baiting, ten gilders; having a Messenger
along with him, besides his own man or men, he shall be allowed for the same,
two gilders more, a day; that is to said, 12 gilders in all; the same
Messengers vacation remaining free, as likewise the said Lord his Boat, Ship,
Wagon, Freight, Convoy and other such like charges, all which are to be
brought into a particular account by it self.

One Lord traveling with more retinue or company then his
fellow-Commissioners, they ought not to be overcharged thereby.

The foresaid respective Commissioners ought not to accept nor participate of
any defrayment, from the Magistrates of the Cities or other places refor^ing
under the Generality, nor from any other persons in service of the Generality.

And for to get Orders in due form, upon the foresaid respective Declarations,
the respective Original Resolutions of these Commissions, ought to be annexed
to the said Declarations, and thus delivered into the Council of State, there
to be viewed and examined first, and thence transmitted into the Generalities
checquer-chamber, there to be likewise viewed, examined and cleared, especial
regard being had, whether the Land be bound or not to the particulars therein
contained, and so returned back again to the said Council for the passing of
the Order with the Subscription (after the entrance thereof folio tali) of the
Lord President, besides two other Lords of the Council, all of several
Provinces, together with the Treasurer and Secretary of the said Council;
which don, the said Orders, with the foresaid annexed pieces, shall be brought
back again to the foresaid Chequer chamber there to be examined, whether they
be given according to the order of the Land; and after examination the said
orders shall there likewise be registered folio tali: and thus shall all the
Orders granted upon the respective Declarations be conditioned, or else no
paiement made thereupon by the Receiver general.

At this time it was likewise moved, their Hi. Mi. would take into
consideration, whether for conclusion of this present Assembly, it were not
fit it should be declared by a general resolution, That all their H. Mi.
resolutions taken and past here in the great Hall, during this session,
touching Religion, the Union and the Militia, shall be held and be of the
same virtue and vigor to all intents, as if word for word they were inserted in
the Union made and concluded at Utrecht in the year 1579. But nothing was
resolved upon this.

On the 19 it was agreed, that the States of the respective Provinces which
having Patents sent them according to the 6 Article of their Hi. Mi. resolution
of June last 16, with open names, shall have filled up the same with other
Companies then such as were desired by the Letters from their Hi. Mi. should
forthwith give notice thereof to their Hi. Mi. and the Council of State.

That same day there was likewise order taken, that on Saturday being the 22
of Julie the Assembly should be ended with a Sermon of Thanksgiving, and that
the Consistory of the Hague should appoint a Minister for the performance.

On the 20 there was read the further advice of the Council of State, reformed
the day before, touching the point of Mustering, together with a draught of an
Act in that behalf. Their advice was, that above all things it was needful to
compass a promt and exact way of paying the Army; and that the Ritmasters and
Captains might be eased and disburthened of unnecessarie charges, without
which provisoes, this intended Act would prove not only unseasonable, but
unpracticable altogether.

This Act about Mustering was drawn in manner following.
THe States General of the United Netherlands, to all that shall see or hear
the reading of this, Greeting. Forasmuch as it appears daily more and more,
that the Order and punctual provision made in former times about the point of
Mustering, is either by slighting or negligence so little heeded and followed,
as if there had never been made or published any; that thereby the common Cause
and protection thereof lie's open to extreme danger, it being found upon all
occasions and exigencies, that the Companies, both Horse and foot, do extremely
differ in the number of men from the number enrolled at their Mustering and
paid by the State; and that we hold it more then seasonable to provide once
vigorously and rigorously against the abuses herein; Therefore it is, that we
have reassumed the former Orders and Acts, and after several Communications and
with the advice of his Excellency Count of Nassaw Stadholder of Friesland,
Groninghen and Omlands, and Drent, and the Council of State, we have anew
ordained and established, and do ordain and establish by these expressly all
the points and Articles here ensuing, for to be observed and followed without
any remissness, upon the pains and punishments mentioned in the said Articles,
which we will have executed presently without any connivance, dissimulation,
respect of persons, or sparing of any.

I.
And first of all we ordein most expressly, that no Commissioners for
Mustering (or Muster-masters) presume to receiv or partake any gifts, presents
or gratuities, directly or indirectly, in the least kind, from any Colonels,
Ritmasters, Captains or other Officers of War, nor to be enterteined by them
with Wine, Meals, or Defraiments, upon pain of immediate cashiering both giver
and taker, as well before as after the Mustering, whether the things be given
to the Muster-masters themselves, or to any of theirs.

II.
That henceforward no Ritmasters or Captains shall be allowed to absent
himself out of his Garrison for the dispatch of his particular affairs within
the Country but having leav from his Governor or Commander; and no Lieutenant,
Coronet, Ensign or other Officer, but having the consent of his Ritmaster or
Captain; charging the Governor and Commander to grant leav to the one or the
other no longer at the utmost then for the space of a fortnight; and if they
had need of a further consent, that the same shall not be granted but by Our
selves, the Council of State, or the Stadholder, or the Commissioned Council of
the Province their Pay-masters; all upon pain for the trespassers, that staying
out longer the first time, they shall be past by in the Mustering, and lose a
month's wages; and the second, be liable to arbitrarie punishment.

III.
Further we ordain that henceforward no Colonel, Ritmaster, Captain, Officer,
and Soldier, whether Native or Forreiner, let him be of what quality or
condition soever, shall get leav to travel forth these Countries about their
particular affairs, neither by us nor the Council of State for any longer time
then three months in ordinary course; for which end they shall likewise be
bound to seek and obtein* the consent of the No. Mi. the Lords the States or
Commissioned Counsel of his Pay-masters, as also, if he lie's in another
Voicing Province, that of the Lords the States, or Commissioned Council
thereof; giving withal notice of his obtained Leav unto his Governor or
Commander, and unto the Magistrate also of the City, if it be within a
Voicing Province. And upon his request and cognizance of the matter, he may
have granted him a month two or three more for the continuation of the said
Leav. But if so be he shall stay abroad two months beyond his Leav, then
shall his Place, Company and charge be open and impetrable, and conferred
upon another.

IV.
That moreover all Colonels, Captains, Officers and Soldiers every where,
shall yield due respect to the Commissioners for Mustering, and others to be
appointed by Us the Council of State, the respective Provinces, or their
Commissioned Council, to attend the said Mustering in the execution of their
charge and office, and being summoned by them to make Muster or reviews, shall
immediately be ready for it without any tergiversation; although the
Ritmaster, Captain Lieutenant, Ensign were absent themselves; upon pain of
cashiering and further arbitrarie punishment.

V.
Moreover We ordein, that the Ritmasters and Captains henceforward shall
present at the Musterings none but upright true and real Soldiers, being able
and sufficient men for the arms they bear, fit and worthy the wages they
receiv, duly and completely armed, (according to the Orders made and to be
made in that behalf* and upon the pains therein contained,) and such as are
bound by their Oath and perfect entertainment constantly to follow the
companies, to march and watch in their courses, without ever presenting there
among their companies any domestics, or retainers of Governors, Commanders,
Ritmasters, or Captains, or any Burghers, inhabitants, countrymen, victuallers,
free-booters, soldiers of other companies, Passevolants, (wanderers or
vagabonds) or others not having full pay, nor being enjoined by Oath and
subjection to their companies, to follow the same every where, to march and
watch their turns upon pain of cashiering, and arbitrarie corporal punishment,
yea death it self, according to the exigencie of things, to pass as well upon
the Captains and Officers which shall be found to have presented or advanced
any suborned persons or passevolants at the Musters; as upon the foresaid
persons or passevolants themselves appearing at the Musters, and their
assistants; the defrauders being to be committed into the hands of the
Provost, and present advertisement given to the Council of State to proceed
further as shall be found requisite.

VI.
And the better to provide against all fraud and abuse in this kind, we do
ordein, that all the sick persons of the companies, if possible, shall be
presented at the place of the Mustering together with them; and if any be so
sick that they cannot be brought there without danger of life, that then the
Commissioners shall visit them, or cause them to be visited by such as he may
confide in, and be answerable for, and of such as may lie sick in any
Hospital, to get billets or certificates for, from the Masters of the Hospital,
annexing the same to the Muster-rolls, otherwise not to be allowed.

VII.
And to the end all fraud may yet further and better be prevented, we have
and do ordein by these, that informations may be made and presented within a
year's time by any one, even such as being no Commissioners, Ritmasters, or
Captains, may have trespast in this kind, or participated therein; and that
the informer proving the same, shall, besides the pardon for his own
delinquencie being culpable, receiv for recompense the sum of 200 gilders; and
if he be a soldier, shall be considered over and above this retrard with
enlargement of his wages, or advancement to such charge and office as he may
be fit for, and others likewise with advancing to other places.

VIII.
Charging and commanding further most expessly all and every one of the said
Commissioners of Mustering, and others to be appointed for asserting of the
same by their oath, and least they incur perjurie, and the pain of being
deprived of their places, and further arbitrarie punishment, even death it self
upon exigencies, not to allow of, or let pass any one person in the said
Mustering, but such as are uprightly and actually in service, under the
respective Troops and Companies, being fit for service, marching and watching
their turns, and being bound to follow the colors every where, and whom they
shall find present at every Mustering, without suffering any More-paies to
pass for Majors or others, under what pretext soever.

IX.
And that the mustering it self may be performed the more successfully
henceforward, the Council of State shall ordain the same to be made as often
in the year as may be feasible; and the Muster-rolls afterward transmitted by
the Council, under Seal, to the Lords the States, or Commissioned Council of
the Provinces, the Pay-masters, to proportion the pay accordingly; it
remaining nevertheless in the choice and power of their No. Mi. respectively,
finding it expedient to cause themselves mustering to be made, as well without
as within their own Provinces, giving only advertisement thereof to the
Council of State, to prevent confusion; whose Commission and autorisation from
the said Council of State, shall extend it self to the mustering, if they
pleas, the whole Garrison, of whatsoever Repartition the same consist, whereof
the Roll shall be sent to the Council of State, and in case the same be found
less then the former Mustering, the payment shall be fitted accordingly.

X.
Forbidding moreover all Ritmasters and Captains, that they receiv no Burghers
or Inhabitants of Cities and Forts, nor any countrie-people or pesants into
their Companies, otherwise then upon the ordinary oath and service, to be
obliged, to perform all marches and watches and to follow their Colors every
where, without abiding elsewhere, and without any promiss to be made them, that
upon the marching of the cornet or colors they shall be discharged, upon pain,
that the same shall not be allowed at the muster*ing, but forthwith casheired,
and further liable to Arbitrarie punishment, allowing the Informer hereof a
months wages.

XI.
We ordain likewise, That henceforward, there be allowed but one Victualler,
being a Soldier, to a Troop or Company, having a Warrant for it by the
Ritmaster or Captain, upon pain, That such goods as shall be exposed to sale
by other Soldiers or their wives, shall be forfeited.

XII.
Item, That the Ritmasters and Captains shall not be allowed, either to take
on, or dismiss any Trooper or Soldier, but with the knowledge of the
Muster-master in loco, where there is any. And if any Soldier came to die, or
run away Skellum, betwixt the musters, the new ones taken on in their places,
shall not be allowed till the next muster day, where he shall pass present.

XIII.
Commanding moreover all Ritmasters and Captains, to keep their Companies
complete still, and musters being kept, timely to deliver up unto the
Muster-masters, exact Rolls, conformable to the former, containing a perfect
setting down first, of all the Officers of the Companies, and afterward of all
the Troopers or Soldiers serving under each division or Corporalship, and then
withal expressing after that Roll, what new Troopers or Soldiers there are
taken on from month to month, and from one mustering to another; and that by no
means they put any more names into the said Roll, but such as are actually in
service, upon pain of forfeiting a months entertainment, the said Ritmasters or
Captains thus trespassing; neither shall the said Muster-Commissaries accept of
any other Rolls upon pain of casheiring the Commissarie or Clark, that shall
have accepted or produced any other Rolls.

XIV.
And not only the Ritmasters, Captains, Lievtenants, Cornets and Ensigns, but
the Quartermasters and Sergeants likewise of the Companies, shall be bound to
sign the said Rolls, and to declare by oath, that the Troopers and Soldiers
listed in the Roll, do uprightly and really serve in the same Troop or Company,
upon pain of casheiring, and other arbitrarie punishment.

XV.
And the Ritmasters and Captains shall deliver up to the Commissarie three
several Rolls, whereof he the Commissarie shall send two to the Council of
State and keep one for himself.

XVI.
None shall presume in the listing or mustering, to call himself by any
fictitious or other name or surname, then his own proper Christen-name, and
usually best known surname, together with the place of his birth, upon pain of
immediate arbitrarie punishment upon the fact; and no Ritmasters nor Captains
shall permit any to be otherwise listed in the Roll, upon pain, of being
disallowed the same, and arbitrarie punishment.

XVII.
All the Commissioners shall have power likewise to visit both the night and
daie-watches, for which end the Serjeant-Majors, shall be bound to give the
word to the said Commissaries; and the Commander also shall be bound once a
week at least, by night, in company of the Serjeant-Major, to take an exact
note of the just number of the Soldiers, and of what companies each Corpse du
guard is beset with them, and send up the said Notes every second month to the
Council of State, upon pain of loosing their places.

XVIII.
All Ritmasters and Captains shall without any refusal give way to the paying
of the Souldierie by the Pole, if the Government shall find good so to appoint
it; and if for a certain time it be not don thus, then they shall give an
exact and just account of their Soldiers wages in course, at least every fourth
month, without longer delaie, and that in the presence of the Commissarie of
the musters in loco, or others specially to be deputed thereunto; and to that
end shall the Ritmasters and Captains, at each time, precisely acquaint the
Commissarie, with the time of the last account made, upon forfeiture of a
months wages for their persons; and the said Commissaries shall be bound,
within a sennight after, to give advertisement thereof unto the Provinces, to
whose Repartitions the Companies belong, upon pain likewise of forfeiting a
months entertainment for themselves.

XIX.
The Ritmasters and Captains shall henceforward not give consent, or leav to
more then 3 together of their Companies at the utmost, and at furthest no
longer then for 14 days, and not otherwise, but upon necessary occasions, for
which they shall get leav of the Governor or Commander in writing, signed
likewise by the Commissarie in loco, in which the place shall be expressed
whither they are to go; and the parties having leav obtained thus, shall be
allowed, under condition nevertheless, that they be personally present at the
next ensuing muster, and not otherwise, unless it were, that some Soldiers were
commanded forth by the Governor of the Province, upon some exploit; who are not
to march forth, but in manner as follows.

XX.
Namely, That none other, horse or foot-Souldier, be sent forth upon any
Exploit, but such as are upright Soldiers in actual service, and no
Free*booters, nor under the number of 25 together, except for convoyes or spies
for intelligence; whereof the Governor or Commander of the place shall be
accountable; which five and twenty horse or foot-Souldiers, shall be conducted
by a Corporal, Gentleman or Sergeant; from that number upwards to 50 or under,
by a Lieutenant or Ensign; above 50 upwards to 100, by a Ritmaster or Captain,
and above 100, by two Ritmasters or Captains; though the foresaid numbers
should be made up of several Companies.

XXI.
Besides these thus conditioned, no Soldiers of horse or foot, shall go forth
without having the Governors or Commanders pass, of the place, there being
any, with the proper names and usual well known surnames of all that go forth.
And the foresaid Ritmasters, Captains, Officers or Gentlemen, shall be
answerable for all the exorbitancies committed by the Soldiers under their
conduct.

XXII.
We ordain further, that among the English, French, Scots and and
Switser-Companies of foot, the vacant places shall be supplied as much as may
be, by their own respective Nation; and no Soldier of what Nation soever
shall forsake the service of the Captain or Company where they serve, but
having gotten his lawful passport, upon pain of the halter for the deserter.

XXIII.
And further we ordain, that all Officers, horse and foot-Souldiers, being
forth with leav, out of their own Garrison, in any place, where mustering is
made, they shall be bound to appear likewise at the mustering place, to be
duly noted down by the Commissarie, with expression, of what Garrison they
are, and under what Company they serve, which notification duly verified, the
said Commissarie shall transmit to the Council of State, to serve as occasions
may require; so that such absents shall not be allowed upon any lawful
certificat of their Alibi, unless it appear that they elsewhere presented
themselves as above.

XXIV.
All which Points and Articles, we Will and Ordain, shall precisely and
strictly be kept, observed and executed, upon the pains expressed in every one
of them, without any favor, connivance or remission; according to which also
all Governors, Commanders Colonels, Cammissaries, Ritmasters, Officers and
Soldiers and every one besides are to regulate themsel^s, upon the foresaid
pains; ordaining, That the cognizance and execution of all these shall
app^rtain to Our selves, or the foresaid Council of State, the Governors of the
respective Provinces and Councils of War, together with them; as likewise to
the Deputie-Councils of the States of the respective Provinces; all by way of
prevention.

And that none may pretend ignorance of this our present Act, we do hereby
intima e unto and desire the Lords the States or their Commissioned Councils,
and Stadtholders of the Provinces, where they are, respectively, and enjoin all
other Judges, Officers and public Ministers, they being required it, That
they cause this Act and Ordinance to be every where declared, proclaimed and
published, where publication and proclamation is usually made; and besides the
Governors of the Provinces, Governors and Commanders of Cities and Forts, to
cause the publication hereof to be frequently renewed in the Frontier-Towns and
places of strength, before the Souldierie horse and foot, by Drum and Trumpet;
providing nevertheless, that all the foresaid points shall be kept inviolable,
and the transgression punished according to the respective penalties above
mentioned, though the same publication were not renewed for a whole year; and
that without any favor, connivance or dissimulation to the contrary. For thus
we have found it requisite for the advancement of the service of the Land.

Given at the Haghe.
This same day the Lords of Friesland gave in the ensuing Proposition or
Advice.
High Mighty Lords!
THe Lords Commissioners of Friesland having taken into further Consideration
the conclusion made yesterday touching the Thanksgiving to be returned to
Almighty God on Saturday next, they find the same prais-worthie. But since
there is nothing more worthy the name of God, and nothing more necessary by
reason of his incomprehensible Power of searching the hearts of those that call
upon him, then, that they which draw near unto him see they do the same with
pure hearts, and present their desires in terms of truth and uprightness;
Therefore it is, that the Commissioners of Friesland calling to mind that the
points of Secret Correspondence, and Determining of arising Differences among
the Provinces, being some of the most principal Bonds and Foundations of the
Union are not perfectly transacted yet, to the content and satisfaction of the
joint Provinces; Their desire in behalf of Friesland is, that the same may
first be perfectly adjusted with love and unity of all the Confederates. And
whereas likewise this Illustrious Assembly was held good and commended to the
respective Provinces by the States of Holland for no other end, according to
the propositions made by their Deputies in the several Provinces, but to
establish and maintein Concord, Peace, Love and Friendship among the joint
Provinces, and to remove and extinguish all diffidence, jealousies and
suspicious; The Deputies of the Province of Friesland held it needful to
recommend unto your H. M. serious consideration, whether it were not very fit
and requisite, that these weighty and long-deliberated affairs should be
concluded with a Solemn Resolution of Amnestie, forgiving and forgetting
whatsoever by the one or the other Province, or any Particular persons and
members thereof, may have been don or transacted in the year 1650, touching the
Questions, Differences and Dependencies thereof which were arisen then among
them.

The Province of Friesland for their part conceived it most necessary, to the
end that the blessing of God over this State and the resolutions taken by them,
may so much the more abundantly and confidently be exspected; and nothing
attemted in the one or other Province, after the ending of this Assembly, by
either fact or writing, in derogation or prejudice to his late Highness the
Prince of Orange of praised memory, or any other; whereby the minds of the
Inhabitants might be disturbed, and the pretext of peace become as Oil in the
fire, and set the whole State into an unquenchable combustion of discord and
contention; desiring that all the Provinces would be pleased particularly to
advise and resolv upon this Proposition: as without which Resolution the Lords
of Friesland are firmly persuaded, that the foresaid Thanksgiving to Almighty
God cannot be sincerely performed here, nor any good effect thence be brought
to perfection in the respective Provinces.

The Cause and Occasion of this Motion must be repreesnted with some reflection
to things past. The Lord Cats, Counselor and and Pensionarie of Holland had
some months ago made known to his Lords principals his great age of 74 years;
humbly desiring thereupon that he might be released, and end the rest of his
days in quiet and enjoiment of himself. This having been reiterated by him
several times, and yet not hearkened unto, he did at last (to show he was in
good earnest) declare, he must of necessity discharge himself of several
papers and secret resolutions wherewith he had been entrusted; and to this end
he likewise delivered up a certain writing, entitled, The Reasons and Motives
which induced his Highs to undertake both the arresting of the Lords, and the
enterprise upon, at and about the City of Amsterdam. Which Prince William of
high memory had given in last year, and which then for peace sake was found
good not to open. This Writing being exhibited to the Assembly, it was put to
the question, whether it should be opened or burnt. Most voices, especially
those that held themselves offended, were of opinion, that it ought to be read;
to make it appear, how little ground the Prince had of proceeding as he did.
It being opened acordingly and read, there were copies taken, the Tenor
whereof follows.

THe High Mighty Lords the States General of the United Netherlands, taking to
heart the long-continued, tedious and dangerous disturbances and irritations
which daily are increasing more in the States of these Countries, by reason of
the Discrepancie arisen betwixt the hx Provinces on the one side, and the
Province of Holland and Westfriesland on the other, about the Reducing and
cashiering of a part of the Militia, and the establishing of a state of War;
and according to their great wisdom and knowledge of affairs, foreseeing the
inconveniences like to ensue thereupon; the rather for that by the Province of
Holland and Westfriesland there was already a separate Cashiering resolved upon
by plurality of voices, and orders issued by them for the effecting thereof;
they found good and necessary to decree a solemn Sending or Commission
(whereunto we joined our self) to all the Cities and Members of the foresaid
Province of Holland and Westfriesland, for to persuade the same by all
conceivable motives, that they would refrain from all separate cashiering,
diminishing or altering of the forces, engaged in service by oath to the
Generality; and to withdraw themselves from what might have been undertaken to
the contrary; conforming themselves with the six other Provinces, or submitting
the points in difference according to the provision of the Union in that
behalf: *And the said Lords the States General desired and autorized Us, to see
all requisite order taken, and to provide that all might be kept in peace and
quiet, and specially the Union preserved and maintained, together with all the
consequences and references of the same, and that on the contrary all things
may be obviated and resisted, what is or may be attemted against it.

The foresaid sending or Commission being performed and finished, and nothing
effected by it, by reason of the counter-working of some ill-affected, We,
together with his Excellency the Stadholder of Friezland, and the Council of
State, after many meetings and conferences (under protestation to meet the
Province of Holland as far as might be) framed a solid draught touching the
affairs of the Militia, and things consectarie and connexed, so as it might be
pleasing and acceptable to the joint Provinces; and tend moreover to the
maintenance and conservation of the Uuion, and consequently to the greatest
service, quiet, unity and security of the State of these Countries.

Whereupon conceiving hope, and having likewise used both in public, and
underhand all friendly means of inducement and persuasion, we found at last,
to our highest grief, that all these well-meant endeavors and labors of ours
were made but so much the more fruitless through the insolent demeanor of some,
who chose rather to put the safety of the Land from without, and the welfare
of the good Inhabitants within into an hazardous balance, then yield but one
hair's-bredth from their ill-conceived opinions, wherewith they had abused, and
abusively informed their respective Commons, and indeavored afterward by wiles
and subtilties to draw aside likewise diverse good Members of the Assembly of
Holland it self.

Nay of mere presumtion and wantonness, durst urge and go about to maintein the
foresaid business of Separate Cashiering, saying besides, They were not
destitute of counsel and means to make the other six Provinces yield and
complie, peremptorily alleging, that the Union was dissolved and wholly
disanulled, by whose decaie and fall there was unavoidably to be exspected a
notable Change and alteration, not only in the General Civil Government, but
also in the point of the true Reformed Religion, as the same is now by public
authority professed and exercised in the Provinces, Associated Countries and
Cities of this State.

So that there being no appearance left of prevailing by any kiude of
persuasion or accommodation, and in the mean time all kind of bold, seditious
and dangerous discourses of those ill-affected persons coming to our ears;
besides diverse others well-grounded warnings of most unheard of, pernicious and
ruinous designs and machinations against the State of these Countries, which
were projected by them, and in part promised to be undertaken, whilst under a
fair show and specious pretexts, they only sought to gain time for the
accomplishing of the foresaid pernicious designs, and to bring the State of
these Countries by that means into a notable rupture and confusion, to the
singular advantage of those which are big with jealousies against this State.

We have by virtue of our Commission and special resolution and autorization
in that behalf from the foresaid Lords the States General, judged and
considered it highly necessary, that the forenamed evil and pernicious
designs, undertaken with so much prejudice and danger of the Common Cause,
contrary to the Union, ought to be prevented and resisted before it should
be too late.

And thereupon (though unwillingly, as may appear by all our former peaceable
offices and friendly endeavors) resolved to prevent the foresaid persons in
their attemts, and to take and keep some of the most principal Bell-weathers
from among them in custody, least they should further mislead and abuse the
other good and well-minded Members of the foresaid Assembly of Holland and
Westfriesland.

We were constreined at the same time, and upon the same grounds, to resolv
with the assistance of some Forces to represent unto the City of Amsterdam, how
that a very few persons among them, and chief leaders and instigators of the
foresaid designs, having hindered the Audience we sought in the Citie-hall
there in quality as Stadholder of the said Province of Holland, for the
service and advancement of the public, they ought of necessity to rid their
Government of such Instruments; Whereupon, and what further was taken into
consideration thereabouts, all was amicably transacted and agreed on both parts.

Where it is observable, that the evil being broke out in its worst condition,
the same was so conditioned, as it would have rent and torn the whole State and
Bond of those Provinces, and thereby involved them into inevitable ruin, the
remedies, all fair ways failing, were of necessity now more strictly and
sharply to be applied and practiced.

For even as when there happen's a dangerous fire to arise, we make use of and
employ any thing to quench the same, which otherwise would not be thought on,
as sometimes such and such particular houses are one a sudden pulled down to
the ground, to save a whole street and thereby a whole City, from being laid
all in ashes; So we, being engaged by Oath and Commission to maintain the
Union and Religion, and over and above that anew autorised by special
Resolution of the foresaid States General, for the maintenance of the foresaid
Union* seeing a Flame arising among the Provinces, which by progress and
con^^nuance might have laid them all into coals and ashes, and having the means
in the hand, to prevent the same, it might justly be conceived, we had had no
regard to acquit our Commission, Honor, Oath and Conscience, nor duly
respected or valued such a special and express autorisation, from the highest
Government, if we had not with all possible speed and fervor adventured our
selves against that rising embrazement, and endeavored to resist and damp it, in
manner as was don Us.

As for the particular points of the charge against the arrested persons, which
do respectively more concern the one then the other of them, the same could not
be brought in above, in the general charge; but is reserved to a proper time
of proceeding therein as shall be fitting.

This wrought so much in the minds of the said Assembly of Holland; that they
put both it, and the Proposition, which the Prince had made immediately after
his progress through the Cities of Holland, upon the refusal of admitting him
into the Town Hall at Amsterdam, Jun. 30. the last year* into the hands of some
Members, who thereupon framed this ensuing advice.

First, That by a Deduction in writing, to be drawn up by select
Commissioners, the Proceedings of their Nob. great Might. last year about the
business of reducing charges, and the difficulties made in bearing of the
petitioned Consents of this Province, for the maintenance and payment of a part
of the Militia, having been in service, during the War; should after a summarie
rehearsal of things past, be justified, and the contrary refuted in the
contents of the foresaid two Acts or papers, especially the latter, entitled,
Reasons and Motives, which induced his High^ to undertake both the arresting of
the Lords, and the enterprise upon, at and about the City of Amsterdam.

And that the said Deduction being made ready, the same should be read at
the Generality, after the opening of the like writing, there containing
Reasons and Motives as before, presented to their Hi. Mi. Assembly, August 15.
1650. by the Lord President for the time being, and by Resolution then taken,
laid by them in the Box of the Secretary. And in case the foresaid opening
should, beyond exspectation be disputed by the Provinces, They the
Commissioned Members, do hold, that the foresaid justification ought then to
be presented to the Generality notwithstanding, and entered into the Register
there.

In the second place, That the Sending or Commission in June the last year
1650. performed by his Highs the Prince of Orange with the assumed Lords, to
all the Cities of Holland and West-Friesland, having Voice in this Assembly,
together with all the consequences and effects thereof ought to be disapproved
by a positive Resolution, As contrary to the Order and Form of the Government,
infringing the Eminency and Prerogative of this your N. gr. Might. Assembly,
and especially prejudicial to the Freedom of Deliberation of the respective
Members thereof; and that it be decreed, That the Cities of this Province
shall for the future, neither offer, nor admit or suffer any such Sending or
Commission in their respective jurisdiction. That the same disapproving
Resolution ought together with the abovesaid written Deduction and
Justifications, to be presented to the Generality, and entered into the
Register there; and likewise transmitted by Missives unto the respective
Provinces* desiring each of them, that for the reasons to be alleged in the
said Missives and justifying Deduction, they would be pleased to conform
themselves to the like; however, in no case to lay any ground for such Sendings
hereafter, nor ever to take upon them to decree the same.

Thirdly; That the respective Provinces, as well in the Assembly of their
High. Mi. appearing there by their Deputies, as also by pregnant Letters, to
their respective States-Assemblies, shall be desired, to disapproov the
Resolutions of Jun. 5. and 6. 1650. taken by a few Members at the Generality,
and having past, (it is confidently believed,) without the foreknowledg and
notice, much less the command and autorisation of the respective States of the
Provinces their Lords Principals, and doubtless forced upon or from the said
Deputies, at least the greater part, by the over-awing and swaie of his Highs
the Prince of Orange; and especially that autorisation of the person of his
said Highs, inserted in the foresaid Resolution of June 5. 1650. together with
all the consequences and circumstances thereof; as likewise to declare unlawful
and invalid, and consequently to repeal known extorted thanksgivings made unto
his foresaid Highs, and to declare, that they hold the same, as such, for no
lawful Resolutions, and to geth the same to be entered in the Generalitie's
Register.

Fourthly, That their N. gr. M. ought to declare by positive Resolutions as
before, the enterprise against the City of Amsterdam last year July 30.
together with the seizing of the six Lords, Members of this Sovereign
States-Assemblie, committed the same day, and the consequences thereof to have
been an attempt upon the Freedom, Eminency and Soveraigntie of this Province,
directly contrary to all the Laws Rights and Prorogatives of the same.

That moreover the Common Halls or Councils of the Cities, for which the
foresaid six Lords, had appeared in this Assembly, there and so far forth as
it was not performed already; as also all other common Halls or Councils
sending their Deputies to the said Assembly, ought to be desired to send in
their Declaration in writing, whether their respective Deputies had in the
matter of Reducements, and in regard of the Deliberations happened about the
State of War in the year 1649. for the withholding of the Consents of paying
some forces, as was petitioned by the Council of State in the foresaid State of
War, and in the Execution thereof and things depending thereon, carried
themselves conformable to the charge and intent of their Principals yea or no;
that the same Declarations being perused, the Assembly might then proceed in
regard of the six Members aforesaid, by further Declarations, according as the
condition and exigencie of the matter should be found to require.

Hereupon there was taken several examinations and informations; as first that
of the respective late Secretaries and Clarks of his said Highs Heylersich,
Hulst and Cunes; Which was don the 15, and 16. of June, by a Committee of the
States of Holland. Secretary Heylersich was demanded.

I. Whether he had not delivered to the Clarks of his Highs Secretary, two
several papers; the one, containing, Complaints against those of Amsterdam,
with desire of Repartition and Satisfaction, in the points therein deduced; and
the other being entitled, Reasons and Motives, which induced his Highs, to
seiz on some of their N. Gr. M. Assembly, and to lay Seige to the City of
Amsterdam.

He answered, Yea, and that he had received the said papers from his Highs
own hands; but knew not the hand whereby the same was written.

II. Whether he knew not otherwise, who had written or endited the same.

He answered, no.

III. Whether he had never surmised with himself, who might have penned it.

He said, That now and then he received writings of that nature at his Highs
hands, within some hours or a little while after, that the late Secretary Mush
had been with his Highs in private, and that thence he took occasion sometimes,
to conceiv, that the said Secretary Mush might have drawn them.

IV. Whether all the forementioned writings had been written by one and the same
hand, or no.

He said; he conceived, That the letter written by his Highs to the Provinces
and Cities, touching the matter of the foresaid seizing and siege, and the
first-named paper above, was written by one and the same hand; but that he was
not able to say, whether the other paper entitled, Reasons and Motives etc.
was written by the same, or no.

V. Being demanded a second time, whether he could say nothing of the hand,
whereby both the papers, mentioned in the first Article, were written;

He said, he thought, that one of the Clarks of his Highs Secretary, by name
N. Hulst, had told him, whilst the same writings were copying, that it was the
hand of Cunes, chief Clark of the foresaid Secretary Musch.

VI. Whether he knew the hand of the said Secretary, and whether he could
not say for certain, that the foresaid writing was written by the Secretary
himself.

He said, he knew well enough, that it was not the hand of the said
Secretary himself, and that the writings withal were written fair without any
blots.

VII. Why He, examined, being summoned by their N. gr. M. went home first.

He said, it was to tell his wife, that he was summoned* and withal to make
water.

VIII. Whether he had spoken with no body else concerning this, before he
made his appearance in the Assembly of their N. gr. M.

He answered, No: but only that coming along, he had spoken with his brother
in Law Burgomaster van der Maiden.

This examined being withdrawn, and after that the foresaid Hulst was likewise
heard and had declared as will be showed presently, called in again, he was
asked, whether he knew not the hand of Cunes, and whether when van der Hulst
aforesaid had formerly told him, that it was Cunes his hand, he could observe
by the writing it self, whether it was his hand indeed.

He said, that when the Clark van der Hulst put him in mind, that the same
was Cunes his hand, he could observe well enough, and knew it now, that it was
so indeed, both by reason that he knew Cunes his hand before, and that having
since seen more of his writing, he observed it more particularly.

The Questions demanded of the Clark van der Hulst, were,

I. Whether he had not by Order of Secretary Heylersich, copied two certain
distinct writings, the one containing Complaints against those of Amsterdam,
with desire of Repartition and Satisfaction in the points therein rehearsed; and
the other entitled, Reasons and Motives which induced his Highs to seiz some of
the Lords of their N. Gr. M. Assembly, and to lay siege to the City of
Amsterdam.

He answered, Yea,

II. By whose hand the original was penned from which he took the said Copies.

He said, he could not tell.

III. Demanded further, and pressed, whether himself told not Heylersich then,
that it was the hand of Cunes, Clark to the late Secretary Musch?

He said, that now indeed he did remember, and that indeed it was Cunes his
hand.

IV. Whether both the Writings were written by one and the same hand, yea or no?

He said he knew not.

V. Which of the two then he was sure to have been the hand of Cunes?

He said, that entitled, Reasons and Motives, etc.

VI. Whether he knew Cunes his hand well?

He said, yea; and that he had seen his writings often.

VII. Whether he had no discourse with the said Cunes about the said Writings?

He said, yea; and that Cunes had told him, it was Secretary Musch that
indicted the same, but had charged him (Cunes) very earnestly to keep it secret.

VIII. Where and when they had this discourse together?

He said, it was after the Prince his death, but he could not remember the
place.

IX. Being further demanded, whether he was sure that the writing written by
Cunes was the same which is entitled, Reasons and Motives, etc. and no other?

He said, he knew it very well, and that it was don after the siege of
Amsterdam; and that he remembered well yet, that the Clerks were discoursing
then about that very title, why Reasons and Motives were both used, and whether
Reasons alone might not have been sufficient.

Next day the Clerk Cunes was examined by the said Committee.

I. Whether he had not been Clark to the late Seig^ Musch, late Secretary to
the Lords the States General?

He answered, yea.

II. Whether he had not copied several things concerning his Highs, and in
particular touching the Siege of the City of Amsterdam, and the seizing of some
Lords of the Assembly of Holland, penned by Secretary Musch.

He said, he had copied several writings of that nature in the said
Secretaries Dining room, very early in a morning.

III. Whether he copied the same from a draught, or b^eing dictated to him?

He said, that for the most part he copied the same from a draught, and that
Secretary Musch being busy with making of himself ready, had dictated the
rest.

IV. By whose hand the foresaid Draught was written?

He said, the foresaid Secretaries,

V. Whether the said Draught contained the foresaid Reasons and Motives, or
whether the Secretary dictated of his own head what was defective.

He said the Draught was not perfect, and that the said Secretary had
dictated of his own head what was defective.

VI. Whether he, Examinat, had copied any thing else of that nature?

He declared, No: but if any other like matter were written, the same was like
to be don by one William Goversz, deceased, late Clerk likewise to the said
Secretatarie.

VII. Whether there was any body else present then besides the Secretary?

He said, No.

VIII. What became of the foresaid Writing, and what order was given to him the
Examinat about it.

Heesaid, that by order of the said Secretary he had brought the said
Writing, sealed with his Seal, without Superscription to his Highs Chamber, and
delivered it there to one of his Highs Grooms of the Chamber, by name Youngman.

IX. Whether he Examinat did not conceiv, that some other Clerks might be
alive yet, that were employed about writing of things of like nature by order
of the said Secretary?

He said, it was very like, and especially one Peter Spyck, Jan Dornick and W.
van Zyl.

X. Whether he Examinat could not tell of some particulars that were contained
in the said Writing?

He said, he was confident if he heard it read, he should remember it well
enough.

XI. Whereupon there being read unto him the writing, entitled, Reasons and
Motives, which induced his Highs the Prince of Orange to, etc. as also the
Proposition of his Highs made in the Assembly of Holland, Jun. 30, 1650,
containing, Complaints against those of Amsterdam, with desire of Reparation:
He was asked again, whether one of these two was the Writing beforementioned,
and which of the two it was?

He* said it was the latter, which he had in manner aforesaid partly copied,
and partly written at Dictate.

XII. Whether he Examinat knew very well, not to have copied the other Writing?

He said, he could not affirm it; yet he knew well enough that he had
copied the former in the manner abovesaid.

By and through occasions of these informations and enquiries others also were
muttered of, and especially the Lord of Sommersdyck, who for some time hitherto
had kept himself at his house at Spyck, and this rumor coming to his ear, he
found good of his own accord to repair to the Hague, and to make his appearance
in the Assembly; which also he did, declaring, he had understood of
Discourses to his prejudice, and that therefore he was com to answer to what
might be alleged against him.

Whereupon the abovementioned Committee could not but hear him also, Julie 13,
when he declared, that in the month of Julie last year, some few days before
his departing to Sharp Zyl he was summoned to the Chamber of his Highs the
Prince of Orange, and that his said Highs had then acquainted him, he was
resolved to send Count William Stadholder of Friesland with some Cavalerie into
Amsterdam, for the recovering of the refused audience there as Stadholder, and
intended likewise to make use of his (Sommerdyck's) person, with the Garrison
of Nimmeghen, for the conducting of the Troops designed for the Expedition a
part of the way: That he Examinat, having thereupon showed some difficulties,
by reason of the great distance, the heat of the season, the weakness of the
horse, after some debates about them, his Highness took it into further
consideration; and that next day he appeared there again with Count William;
whenas his Highness declared, he continued still in his Resolution,
notwithstanding both of them instanced again about the foresaid difficulties;
his Highness saying, It must be tried, let the horse go as far as they are
able: and that in case the said could not timely and in sufficient number be
at hand, he himself would com thitherwards with more strength, for to recover
reparation and satisfaction. That nevertheless the matter remained at a stand,
his Highs speaking no further of it for the two ensuing days together, neither
with him Examinat and Count William jointly, nor with him Examinat alone, so
that he began to think his Highness had waved it; but that on the third day
his Highness having sent for both again, he declared unto them, that how he
had ordained and settled the day, the wa^e, the Troops, and every thing
requisite; desiring, that without further delaie the work should be taken in
hand, and that he Examinat, should go before, and receiv the Troops upon the
Heath van Harten, and lead them through several Villages, delivered to him in
writing, as far as Abconde, for to surrender them there to Count William. That
he Examinat, considering the way, to favor his person, represented the great
distance thereof to his Highs, and disposed him, that the Troops; which were to
be lead by him Examinat, should instead of the Heath van Harten, be advanced
to Sharp Zeel, where he would attend them; whereupon his Highs dismissed him,
with order to be ready to depart the second day after, only that before his
going he should attend once again for further order; adding, that he would
order the Count of Dona, to receiv the Troops at Harten* and to conduct them to
Sharp-Zeel. That accordingly* he Examinat, in his traveling suit repaired
again the appointed day at 11 of the clock to his Highs, for to learn, what
his Highs would further be pleased to charge him with; and that his Highs
persisting in the orders formerly given, wherewithal he charged him especially
to take his journey by Amsterdam, and riding through all the Villages
abovementioned, to observe well the distances of the same, for the better
regulating of himself afterward in the conducting of the Troops aforesaid;
giving him this memento at last, That he had charged Count William, to take
such Order with the Troops brought once into the City of Amsterdam, that no
manner of violence should be exercised against the inhabitants or Soldiers
there: and though it came to pass, that some opposition were made against the
Cavaliers, a small matter should not provoke them, no not the firing at them:
giving him moreover especial charge, to help to refrain Count William, as
being to fiery, courageous and hasty, that no disorder may be committed:
Saying that this was that which past before the beginning of his the Examinat's
journey to Sharp-Zeel. That in pursuance thereof, he Examinat, taking his
journey on Wedensday July 27. from the Haghe by Leyden, and being com as far
as Kondekerck, having none with him, but his chamber-Groom, he was met there
by the Marquis de Vieuville, who told him he was charged by his Highs, to
accompany him the Examinat, and to follow the Cavallerie, and to make report
of all that past; and forasmuch as his Highs had never before made any mention
of the said Marquis to him Examinat about that matter, it seemed very strange
to him, that such a one should have had communication with and received orders
from his Highs, and that therefore, he Examinat made no further discovery to
the said Marquis, but in general terms: That he was to conduct the Troops to
Abconde, and that thus they rid together to the Overtoom, and being arrived
there late, about half an hour past 9* it being very dark, they lodged there
at the great* Inn, and next morning half an hour past four, went on for
Amsterdam: where, about the Leyden*gate, meeting diverse horse, and some mares
among them, there happened some disorder, and he Examinat setting spur to his
horse, rid somewhat before, leaving the Marquis a little behind for to
accommodate his stirrup by the help of the Examinat's chamber-Groom, the same
being broke in the foresaid disorder, whiles he Examinat riding on still,
through the City of Amsterdam, the next way toward the Utrecht-gate, called
the Reguliers-gate, as he thought, he had met in the midst of Broad street,
and was saluted and spoken to by the Justice or Secretary of Bueren, but
immediately left him again: and that the foresaid Marquis, overtook him not
till he was gotten some 60 or 70 paces forth the foresaid gate, where the Clock
striking five, he Examinat set his watch, to make the better guess what time
there would be requisite to pass from Abconde through the Villages of
Bambrugge, Loonen, Vreelant, Cortenbove, Hilversum, Soest and Luesden to
Sharp-Zeel, and that in the return he might be able to steer accordingly; and
that he Examinat, being past all the said Villages, arrived at Sharp-Zeel, at
5 in the evening, the foresaid Marquis, being parted from him at Hilversum, to
make a step to Amersfort, whence he returned to the Examinat about midnight.
That next day they stayed there, and after dinner, put themselves in readiness
to attend the Troops, till about five of the clock, he Examinat having notice
of the Troops being arrived without the Village, he forthwith joined and
marched along with them from place to place, before expressed, till they came
to the Heath without Hilversum, where by a storm or sudden tempest the Troops
were much incommodated, which caused some halt in the Village, till they were
all met again, refreshing themselves withal a little; and, that, in marching
thence, the thunder and tempest more increasing, one part took the right way,
and ten companies an other, which was not perceived till the former were com to
Vreelant. That notwithstanding this, he Examinat, marched on with the Troops
about him to Abconde, where as he could guess, he arrived half an hour past
four in the morning, and met Count William with two or three Officers, asking
straight, whether all the Troops were arrived, and perceiving that some remained
behind, he showed himself ill-satisfied, saying, he had cause now to scruple,
whether, in regard of this neglect, he might go on with his Commission or not;
however he would not do it of his own head, but advise first with the rest of
the Officers about it; That, after deliberation had, the Officers being heard,
and sufficiently agreed about advancing the march, He Examinat stepped in
between and advised, That it ought not to be attempted, it being expressly
against the intention of his Highs, who would not have the business undertaken
but with a great number to prevent disorder, and least the Inhabitants and
Soldiers of Amsterdam might be encouraged by so small an appearance of
forces, to adventure upon a resistance and engagement, which his Highs desired
should be avoided by all means. And that these reasons did prevail with Count
William and the rest of the Officers to stay for the rest of the Troops, who
having straied as far as Naerden, arrived not till within 3 hours after. And
that Count William resolved notwithstanding to advance toward Amsterdam, and
to cause his Highs Letter to be delivered there; being com before the City
and having staid there, till by some of the Lords of the City, (one whereof was
the Lord Huydecooper) an answer was returned to him upon the foresaid Letter;
whereupon he was resolved to take up his Quarter at Oudekerck, where next day
order ca^e from his Highs to divide the Troops, the Lord of Stylestein being
commanded to Muyden, and he Examinat to the house ter Heart: and that he
Examinat had understood, that his Highs intended to be that night at
Oudekerck, though he got no further then Amsterveen. That he Examinat
marching toward his assigned place, he came to understand that about Overtoom
they had been cutting of a Dyke, and that there was a Guard placed there, which
caused him Examinat, to dispatch a matter of 25 horse and 30 musketeers thither,
at whose arrival the Guard lying there, presently forsook their standing, and
he Examinat having caused a bridge to be laid got over there, and continued
his march directly to the House ter Heart, where immediately the Lords of Haerl^m
came to him much perplexed and astonished, fearing an enterprise against their
City; but, that he Examinat, assured them by order from his Highs, that there
was nothing intended against the City, or Inhabitants of Haerlem; nor at the
Inhabitants of Amsterdam neither. And when as the Lord van der Camer asked
whether the Swedish Troops, about six or 7000 strong, arrived in the Land of
Gulich, were sent for by his Highs, he Examinat, answered, he knew nothing of
the least Communication between his Highs and the said Troops, but that the
said Troops were com there, for to demand the arrears of the contributions due
to them, adding, it would be well if there were no more correspondence and
communication between the City of Amsterdam and the Parliament of England; and
that there happening some discourses about that subject, he Examinat said at
last, That his Highs had told him 6 days before, of a Letter showed him
written from London to an English Officer, affirming that the said Parliament
had promised to send the City of Amsterdam an assistance of ten thousand men,
and that his Highs had likewise seen a List, wherein the names of the Colonels
and other chief Commanders of those Forces were expressly set down; adding,
that if those of Haerlem might have been drawn to any thing, he held them to
be men of that honesty, as being but minded of it, they would easily be
brought to agree with the rest in their Declaration. That moreover, he
Examinat, having left a Troop of Horse to guard the House ter Heart, and gotten
notice of his Highs arrival at Amsterveen, he repaired thither next morning by
order; acquainting him with the apprehensions of the Lords of Haerlem, and
having received answer for their assuring, he returned that evening back again
to his Quarter, understanding from his High^ at parting, that the same had
given order for the changing of the commanded parties under him into entire
Companies; and that he Examinat in pursuance of the Orders given him in that
behalf, had with some Companies under his brother in Law the Lord of Steelandt,
secured the passage of Sparendam, and remained the day after in his Quarter.
And upon the second, being Wednesday, coming to Court, he understood, that
there was a Treaty of accommodation between his Highs and those of Amsterdam,
and the night after he got order from Count William, to remoov the Troops
again from Sparendam to Oudekerck, where other Patents should attend them; for
every one to march homewards again to their respective Garrisons^; Concluding,
that as in all this he had been employed only as Colonel, in regard of most
of his own Regiment; as Governor in regard of all the Horse of his Garrisons,
and as Ritmaster, in regard of his own Company, employed in the foresaid
Expedition, so conceiving, he was bound to obey both the Captain General as
also the Stadtholder of this Province, who was entrusted with the Militia; he
trusted, That all such as knew what belonged to the Duty of an Officer to his
General, would pass a favorable judgment upon his innocence in this matter; he
protesting that this his Deposition was according to Truth, of which he ever
made Profession. And desired, that all circumstances in this Accident might be
weighed and all prejudice laid aside, whereby it would soon appear, that he
was guiltless in the 3 following points, which he understood would be laid to
his charge; namely, in the first place; That in this matter, he should have
committed ought against his civil Oath. Secondly, That as a Spy he should
have discovered the Walls of Amsterdam, and thirdly, That he should be the
Author of the foresaid Rumor, of a Contract entered into by those of Amsterdam,
with the Parliament of England: beseeching the Committee to make a favorable
Report of all to their N. Gr. M. the States of Holland.

This confusion of his coming forth thus of his own accord, and containing
things which were not demanded, it caused more matter of discourse and charge
against him; which to prevent, he comprehended them all in the said three
points, and undertook to justify them in manner as follows.

As first, concerning the Charge, That by reason of his Civil Oath he ought
not to have accepted of nor concealed his Highs Command: to this he said, That
to judge aright of this matter, there must be considered the whole condition of
the interest of his Highs, and of the affairs as they stood then, and
consequently good heed be taken to these ensuing Reasons, whereby (said he)
all causes of suspecting him would be removed.

As that it was his Captain General and Stadholder who then commanded and
employed him, not as a borrowed Officer, but as a Colonel, Governor and
Ritmaster, and that only for to bring the Troops of the Land, with whom he
was absolutely entrusted, into a City of the Land, and that to no other end
but to obtein the Audience, by the refusal whereof, he had already made
complaint in the Assembly of their N. Gr. M. that he was prejudiced in his
function of Stadholder; and said, he desired it only by way of Reparation,
and (as he likewise had put in the Letter to the Lords of Amsterdam) there to
propound such matters as concerned the service of the Country. But
notwithstanding all this, put the case they should make as bad a construction
of it as now is made by many; he desired their N. Gr. M. would but consider;
first, that though he had refused and concealed his Highs Command, the design
would have gone on for all that, and himself would thereupon have been charged
of having failed in his Military Oath by his disobedience; for which the
heaviest punishment, according to custom of War, would undoubtedly have been
inflicted upon him. And if he had attemted further to reveal, namely to their
N. G. M. what his Highs had given him in charge, and to do the same without
witness (as indeed he had none to produce, being it was told him but by word
of mouth) his Highs might easily have fallen upon him as a Liar and Slanderer,
and their N. G. M. themselves looked upon him as a man out of his wits. And
besides all this, he prayed their N. Gr. M. would but remember, when his Highs
was pleased in person to denounce his intent and purpose in the full Assembly
by the Counselor Pensionarie, there was none then of all that heard the same,
offered to speak one word against it; but they seemed by their silence as much
to approve of that business as he Examinat, by the obligation of his Military
Offices, was bound to be employed therein.

Now as touching his having played the Spy upon the City of Amsterdam, he
represented the occasion, the time and the cause of his journie to Sharp-Zeel by
Amsterdam: being gone from the Haghe upon Wednesdaie in the afternoon, about
one a clock on hors-back, attended but with a Chamber-groom, and overtaken
about Koudekerck by the Marquis de la Vieuville, who presently told him, he
had order from his Highs to overtake him, and to make report of the March which
he was to make with the Cavallerie. And thus they were in Company arrived at
Overtoom half an hour after nine at night; where alighting, they went into the
greatest Inn, and lodged there that night; and being got on hors-back again
next morning a little after half an hour past four, and riding up toward the
Leyden-gate, and there meeting a number of Horse driven out to be put to grass,
it chanced that one of the Marquis his stirrups brake; and whilst his man (the
Marquis having none with him of his own) did reaccommodate the same, he rid on
like a Travellour directly the readiest way toward the Utrecht-gate without
the least stay any where, but that about the middle of the street which lead's
to the Utrecht-gate, riding on still he saluted and spoke to the Scout or
Justice of Bueren (newly arrived from Utrecht with the night-boat), which
nevertheless was so little, that the Marquis overtook him not again till he
was gotten a pretty way forth the gate; and to show what haste he had made,
the clock struck five at that very instant, so that all that way from their
Inn at Overtoom, till without the Utrecht-gate, they had not spent half an
hour; which make's it evident enough (said he) that he was altogether as
guiltless and free from the act of discovering or spying the walls of
Amsterdam, as he protested he had neither charge nor thoughts of any such
enterprise, and had taken his way by Amsterdam for no other end, but that he
might know the exact distance of the march, and to pass through the villages,
which had been given him in writing, he having never gone that way before, and
being expressly ordered to march through them.

Concerning the Deposition of the Lords of Haerlem, although (said he) the
reports be very much differing, nevertheless he held the Depositors to be so
honest, that he doubted not if he should mind the^ of the occasion and the
discourse it self, they would well enough agree with him. And however it was but
a relation of news, yet by good hap being fresh in his mind yet, he could
assure them the substance and circumstances thereof were briefly thus; That
after he had with much ado put the Lords of Haerlem out of fear and
perplexity, they being even ready to depart again, the Lord van der Camer
addressed himself to him Examinat, and asked, whether the 6 or 7000 Swedish Horse
which were said to be com into the ^and of Gulich, were sent for by his Highs?
Whereupon he assured, that for as much as was known to him, his Highs had
nothing to do with them at all; but that they were only com there for to get
in their Contribution-arrears in those parts, and that it were happy if those
of Amsterdam had no more to do with the Parliament of England; and being
demanded, How so? he answered, That there were strange rumors ab^oad:
whereupon they replying, b^t no ground for it at all, ^ee rejoined, be hoped
so too, but he could assure them, that but six days ago his Highness told
him, he had a Letter in his hand written from London to an English officer of
this State, wherein he had seen, that the Parliament should have decreed an
Assistance of ten thousand men for those of Amsterdam, and that therewithal
the very names of the Colonels had been expressed. That this was all,
according to his best remembrance, that had past in discourse with them being
only a communication of rumors and news, for proof whereof he could produce
the Officer whom his Highs had named, being at the Haghe now, and ready to
avouch, not only that he had showed such a letter to his Highs, but likewise
seen diverse others of like tenor.

This he said was all, succinctly and truly, what he had to lay before their
N. Gr. M. for their better information and his Justification about these three
points charged upon him, resting confident, that it would give them
satisfaction, and offering more fully to clear all remaining scruples their N.
Gr. M. should propound.

Now forasmuch as in this Examination there was mention made of Count William
Stadtholder of Friesland and Groninghen, etc. and that the Design of the last
Summer was subject to be further dived into: therefore it was, that the Lords
of that Province brought in that project of the Amnestia, or general oblivion,
the 20 of Julie last.

The Lord van Sommersdyck, to facilitate the same the more, was advised by
express desire to recommend himself to the said Amnestia, which accordingly he
did in manner following.

As that being given to understand, to his great grief and amazement, that all
he had said or propounded in their N. Gr. M. Assembly, had been so ill taken
and construed, as if thereby he had intended to justify his Cause by process
or course of Law, whereas he declares hereby sclemnly, that he had no other
aim, but with all respect personally to inform their N. Gr. M. whom he had
understood to be upon enquiries by their Commissioners about his Actions in
regard of the Expedition for Amsterdam, of the true condition thereof, fully
persuaded, that thereby he might have given all satisfaction to their N. Gr.
M. He therefore found good anew hereby to declare, that his intention was no
other then he professed before; and does herewithall humbly desire and beseech
their N. Gr. M. not to construe his actings and sayings any otherwise, and that
accordingly they will be pleased to comprehend him together with all other
Military Officers and inhabitants of this Land which were employed in that
Expedition, in the General Amnestia or Act of Oblivion, which he understood
was in agitation among the Provinces. And afterward he presented the ensuing
Petition.

To the Noble Great Mighty Lords, the States of Holland and West-Friesland
THe Lord van Sommersdyck shows with all reverence his being so unhappie,
that notwithstanding his uttmost endeavor of giving satisfaction to their N.
gr. M. by an upright and respectful Information, touching his Employ in the
Amsterdam Expedition, he understands their N. gr. M. do still remain
unsatisfied in that behalf: He does therefore once again most humbly beseech
your N. gr. M. seriously to consider the strict obligation and forcible tie of
his Military Employment; most submissively praying, that in regard thereof
they will be pleased to comprehend him in the Amnestia, now in agitation,
promising, that in acknowledgment thereof he shall evermore be and remain,

Their No. gr. M. most humble and most obedient Servant and Subject signed:
(van Aerssen van Sommersdyck.

Whiles thus on the one side, inquisition was made, about such as had lent
their helping hand to the Princes Designs last year; it was found good on the
other side to justify the Actions and Resolutions of the Lords of Holland: and
accordingly there came in from the respective Cities of Dort, Haerlem, Del^t,
Amsterdam, Horen, and Medenblick, as also by the N. gr. M. Lords the States of
Holland themselves these ensuing Acts of Justification.

Act of Justification of the City of Dort.
We Burgomasters, Senators, Counselors, old-council and commons of the City
of Dort, make known by these our open Letters, to all and every one to whom
they shall be presented, That the Lord Jacob de Wit, old Burgomaster of this
City, at present Commissioned Counselor and Deputy from this City at the
Assembly of Holland, has advised nothing touching the new State of War, and
the Cashiering and reducing of the Militia, but that which our Deputies there
were charged to do; and this being anew examined in our full Assembly, and
all the Acts and Resolutions concerning that matter renewed Junii 10. last, the
same is found in truth to be so, and that for all this, thanks were, and yet
are returned to him, by these; wherewithal is comprehended the report of a
certain Letter from their Hi. M. to the Commissioned Counselors, bearing date,
April 16. last past, That the same Lord old Burgomaster de Wit, has been of
the same advice together with the other Lords, concerning what last time was
conferred of here with his Highs in particular, and yielded to and promised by
word of mouth with our Consent, to the content of his High^, according to the
written advice presented in our behalf to the foresaid Assembly of Holland:
That besides the Lord de Wit has endeavored to the utmost, together with
other Deputies, that the conciliatorie advice of 16. July last, might first
among the Deputie-Members of their great Might. and afterward here in our
Assembly by their Nob. gr. M. be settled; and for that and other continued
services had together with his fellow-Commissioners thanks given him by us, and
we thank him to this day, by these; and whereas all the foresaid affairs and
advices were don and performed by his Honor with our full knowledge, order and
autorisation; therefore we declare by these, that we do commend, approve and
ratify the same, together with the advices grounded thereupon, promising to
his Honor, and to his Children also, that whatsoever in regard and by reason
hereof shall further com, or is already com upon or don to him, to hold the
same, as if it were com upon or don to Us in general, and to every one of Us in
particular and personally, and to help the same to be repaired with all vigor,
aad to keep his Honor harmless and indamnified, under the obligation of our
City and all the goods thereof, recoverable by any Lords, Courts, Laws, Judges
and Judicatures. Actum August 2. 1651. and the foresaid Act, being read over
again in our Assembly Aug. 5. next ensuing, the extent thereof has been
approved, and we Burgomasters, Senators, Counselors, Old-Council and Commons
abovesaid, do cause this to be sealed with the City Seal in behalf thereof.
Underneath stood; In absence of the Secretary signed by H. Roosboom, where
under stood the Seal expressed in green Wax, covered over with white paper.

Register-Notes taken by occasion of his Highs the Prince of Orange his arrival
at Dort, together with Lords van de Capelle, van Aersberghen, Marignault,
Rhynswoude, Claut of the Assembly of the Lords the States General, and the
Lords van Asperen, Lucas, and Treasurer General Brasser, of the Council of
State, all in quality of Deputies from the Generality, about the point of
Reducing and Casheiring of the Militia by the Lords the States of Holland and
West-Friesland, resolved in June 1650.
Thursday June 9. 1650.
ADvertisement being given the day before by the Commissioned Counselors, of
the arriving of his Highs and the foresaid Deputies of the Generality, after
that the Lords Burgomasters of this City accompanied with diverse Lords of the
Government, had waited till ten a clock at night for the said arrival of his
Highs; for to receiv the same according to the accustomed order, by causing a
considerable number of Citizens to attend in arms, and that the said
Burgomaster, seeing it grow so late, and doubting of his Highs arrival that
night, had dismissed the foresaid Lords of the Government, together with the
Citizens; this morning early the said Burgomasters were desired in his Highs
behalf, who was com to town yet last night about eleven, that the Assembly of
the Senators, Counselors, Old-Council and Commons might be gathered that
forenoon yet, for to have Audience there, together with the foresaid deputed
Lords from the Generality; whereupon the foresaid Burgomasters accompanied as
before, being gone to his Highs lodging for to bid him welcome, and desired by
him to assemble the Old-Council apart, returned answer to his Highs, that they,
the said Burgomasters, would at the desire and for the respect to his Highs
only, gather the foresaid Old-Council, and admit of the said Audience; under
protestation nevertheless, this being an innovation, and beside the Order of
Government, to lay no ground of prejudice thereby to the Eminence, Prerogative
and Soveraigntie of the Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland, nor to
the freedom of their Deliberations in their State-Assemblie about it.

Where after his Highs being conducted to the foresaid Audience, attended by
the forenamed Deputies of the Generality, there were read by the Lord vand der
Cappelle, some Propositions and papers in writing, being neither signed, nor
bearing any date of time or place, nor adressed or directed to any, and after
the reading thereof delivered into the hands of the said Burgomasters.

His Highs, after some compliments being conducted back to his Lodging, it was
found good by the Old-Council aforesaid, that the said Propositions and papers
should according to the order of this Government be examined, and thereupon
such Resolutions presented to the next instant Assembly of the Lords the
States of Holland and West-Friesland, as should be found to serve and make most
for the good of the Land, the conservation of the Eminence, Freedom, Rights and
privileges of the said Province of Holland and West-Friesland, the Cities and
Members thereof, as likewise for the best concord and conservation of the
Union. Where it was found good likewise, That the substance of all this, should
by a Committee of the foresaid Old-Council be communicated to his Highs, by
way of answer to the forementioned Propositions.

June 10. 1650. There being examined in the full Assembly of the Old-Council,
some few only absent, the Points and Articles of the Writ of their N. gr. M.
the Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland, touching the Reducement of
the charges of the Land, and casheiring of some forces horse and foot, and the
Resolutions and Orders past in that behalf from time to time, and given to the
Deputies of the City of Dort, assisting then at the said Assembly; upon
further examination of the affairs and resolutions made and taken from time to
time in that behalf, and especially, in the affair and resolution of their N.
gr. M. about a separate and peculiar Casheiring and reducing of the foresaid
Militia, whenas the rest of the Provinces refused to condescend thereunto, it
was found, contrary to the abusive report, as if the foresaid Deputies for the
City of Dort, at the said States-Assemblie, had given their consent to the
reducing of the said Militia and separate casheiring of them, contrary to
their order and the resolution of the Old-Council; that the foresaid Lords
Deputies, have truly followed their Order which was given them, remaining yet
rather too much within, then any whit exceeding their Compass, as having had
Warrant enough to go further, and therefore all they did was approved, and
they, the said Deputies had thanks given them, and express notes were registered
thereof to the securing of them against the foresaid wrongful imputation.

His Highs being next day, upon his desire, admitted again in the Assembly
of the Old-Council, together with the foresaid Deputies of the Generality,
under benefit of the protestation made the day before to his Highs, that
should be no prejudice to them: their Declaration was made by the mouth of the
Lord van Capelle van Aersberghen in most sharp bitter and unsufferable terms,
and the foresaid Assembly given to understand, that the Lords Deputies, could
take no satisfaction at all in the diliatorie answer, presented yesterday unto
his Highs, and that he would not stir hence before the Lords of the
Old-Council aforesaid had made a round Categorical Declaration to the Lords
Deputies, whether they would return into the Union, which they had deserted,
and until they the said Deputies had gotten from them a clear, short and
positive, pertinent and peremptory answer in writing to their exhibited
Proposition; and the Lords of Dort made prompt and effectual reparation, for
their breaking of the Union, whereby together with such other Members of
Holland, as had likewise broken the Union, they had made themselves guilty and
punishable in body and goods; in as much as by the 23. Article of the said
Union, and according to former Examples, (whereof some had been alleged to them
already) by reason of the transgression of the same, both their persons and
goods might be arrested and prosecuted in all places, before any Lords Judges
and Judicatories, wherever the same may be met with in case of delaie;
concerning which Reparation, he (the Lord van der Capelle) declared, they the
Lord's Deputies, shall be constrained to talk with them in an other strain
yet, whereof they should hear more ere long. All which being taken into
Deliberation, it was unanimously found good and resolved, that all further
answering of the said Deputies, either in writing or by word of mouth, should
be refused, and the former Resolution persisted in; That moreover it should
be declared to the said Deputies in downright and significant terms, that the
foresaid Old-Council, found themselves by reason of the foresaid harsh and
threatening language, uttered by van der Capelle aforesaid, abused and
scandalized in the highest degree, and that upon all occasions they would
testify their utmost resent; and forasmuch as the said language was injurious
and opprobious against the Eminence, Prerogative, Freedom, Reputation and good
Intention of this Province, the Cities and Members thereof, that they the said
Council, could not avoid to make the same known to the next instant Assembly
of the Lords the States of Holland and West-Friesland; to the end that due and
effectual reparation may be required in that behalf; all which accordingly
was, in the name of the said Council, remonstrated unto the said Lords
Deputies, and especially to the forenamed Capelle, with singular seriousness,
cou^age and resentment. And although upon further desire of his Highs, the
matter was taken once again into further Deliberation, nevertheless the Council
persisted unanimously in their former Resolution, as before; after which the
foresaid Lords Deputies went away next day without any further answer
obtained, toward Gornichem. underneath stood, Extracted out of the Notes of
the Resolutions of the City of Dort, agreeing therewith, July 17. 1651.

signed, M. Berek.

Act of Justification of the City of Haerlem.
We Burgomasters, Counselors and Commons of the City of Haerlem, having
heard the reading of a certain writing, entitled, Reasons and Motives, which
induced his Highs the Prince of Orange to the undertaking both of the seizure
of the Lords, and that which was undertaken, at, by and about the City of
Amsterdam, together with the Declaration of the L. Counselor Pensionarie Cats
dated Jun. last 16. subjoined, and ripely considered the Contents thereof, and
seriously pondered every point, and finding, that therein are set down several
imputations, to charge the said Lords withal, among whom were also the Lord
John de Waet, presiding Burgomaster at that time, and Mr Albert Ruyl Pensioner
of this City, both of them at the time of the foresaid Arrest, our Deputies at
the Assembly of their N. Gr. M. the Lords the States of Holland and
Westfri^sland, do declare, contra^ie to what is pretended in the writings
aforesaid, that the same each of them have ever, in their respective
emploiments, showed and given full proof, that they are upright Patriots and
lovers of their native Country, and of the dear-purchased freedom thereof, and
zealous defenders of the true Christian Reformed Religion; That their actions
have always been far from enterprising, projecting or plotting, much less
^ffecting any thing that mig^t have rended to the dissolution of the Union,
changing of the Civil Government, and of the true Reformed Religion, and
consequently to the prejudice and ruin of the State; but on the contrary,
that in all their doings they have showed upon all occasions, to have had no
other aim before their eyes, but the furtherance of the honor of God, and the
freedom, quiet and security of their Native Country; That the same men each
of them have with all sincerity and faithfulness followed and performed
whatsoever we had given chem in charge, as Deputies for us at the Assembly
and elsewhere, and a^quitted themselves so well therein that he had cause to
commend them for it, and to give them thanks for their zeal and endeavors, and
especially that touching the new state of War projected by his Highs, his
Excellency the Stadholder and the Council of State, after the Peace concluded,
and the Deliberations ventilated thereupon, both in particular conferences of
the deputed Members, and in full Assembly of their N. Gr. M. they have served
and supplied us from time to time with pertinent and faithful reports, and with
good and true informations for our full and needful instructions: that in all
these affairs they never showed to be acted by passion, or possessed with any
malignancie, but always sought every one of them to direct and steer things
according to the quality of their Functions, to the preservation and good of
the State; That in the point of the foresaid State of War, cashiering and
reducing of the Militia and other unnecessarie charges of the public
Treasury, they have propounded and urged nothing at the Assembly of their N.
Gr. M. but what being found good by Us, they had given them in charge: That
the Counter-acting to the Execution decreed by the rest of the Provinces at the
Generality of sending Deputies to all the Cities and members of the Province
of Holland and Westfriesland, has been a work of our own, grounded upon
weighty and pregnant reasons, and determined by a formal resolution taken in
our Assembly, and that the said Lords, so far forth as each of them has been
employed in the executive part thereof have demeaned themselves with prudent
circumspection, and discreet direction of all to our full contentment and
singular satisfaction; wherefore also by the very Act of August 15, 1650,
whereby we were necessitated to our great grief to discharge them from their
respective emploiment, we commended and approved whatsoever respectively to
that very time they had most carefully and faithfully don and transacted in the
the Government; as also still we approve and prais both that and whatsoever
else has since been don by them in our behalf, and give them hearty thanks for
their good endeavors therein, and especially in the business of reducing the
Militia and unnecessarie charges; as also opposing the foresaid Sending, and
other affairs touching the state of this Land wherein they are employed;
promising to them and their posterities, to keep them always free and harmless
from any thing that might molest or trouble them, by reason of any of the
services aforesaid, and to defend and protect them against any upon that
account, under the obligation of our City and all the goods thereof, to be
impleaded by any Court or Judges.

Don thus in the Assembly of the Noble Lords the Counselors and Companies of
the City of Harlem, this third day of Julie, Anno 1651; there being present
four Burgomasters, six Senators* six old Lawkeepers, and eleven Counselors and
Companiemembers of the foresaid City. In witness whereof is the Citie-Seal
hereunder affixed.

Signed, J. Benningh.

Act of Justification of the City of Delft.
Noble, Great, Mighty Lords!
THere being exhibited and read in our last Assembly a certain Missive from
your N. Gr. M. addrests to the Lords Burgomasters and Governors of this City,
dated Julie 6, 1651, together with a certain Paper entitled, Reasons and
Motives, etc. (as before) accompanied with the Declaration of the Lord
Counselor Pensionarie Cats, bearing dat 16o Jun. last. We have after the
reassumtion of our former Resolution, and with mature deliberation found good
and resolved, by way of answer, to make known unto your N. Gr. M. that our
Deputies in the Point of Reducement, and in regard of the Deliberations
happened upon the State of War, projected for the year 1649, about the
with-hoding of their consents for paying certain forces petitioned for by the
Council of State, in and toward the foresaid state of War, and about the
Execution thereof, and what depended thereon, have not carried themselves
otherwise then conformable to our intention and orders which we, not abused by
our foresaid Deputies, and abusively informed, (as the forementioned Paper very
ill and wrongfully hold's forth) but according to the true and full report made
to Us of all things, and upon full knowledge of the matter as it was tending and
making most for the service of the Land. For which cause also we have commended
and approved, and yet further do commend and approve whatsoever our said
Deputies did or transacted in this kind, as our own work, returning thanks to
their N. for the great care and faithfulness which they have testified in the
managing and executing of our Resolutions, and in particular to the Lord John
Duyst van Voorhout, at the time our Commissioned Counselors of Holland, who in
all his emploiment has always given full proof of an upright Patriot, and
true lover of his Native Country and the dear-bought freedom thereof, and
whose actions therefore were ever far from attemting, much less executing any
thing that might have tended to the Dissolution of the Union, the change and
alteration in Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, and consequently to the
prejudice and ruin of these Countries: but on the contrary, that with great
industry, faithfulness, providence, sincerity and uprightness he has still
considered the main end and aim of his emploiment. Wherefore also we do hereby
declare, that the Contents of the foresaid Paper, in regard of the said Lord
Duyst van Voorhout, together with the rest of our Deputies, is contrary to the
known Truth, and that consequently the said Lord Duyst van Voorhout has
without any grounds, and against the Laws of the the Land been detained first
at the Haghe in the Court of his Highs, together with five other Lords, and
carried prisoners afterward to the House of Loevestein: That indeed at the same
time we held our peace, and upon the said Lord Duyst van Voorhout his own
desire, though to our great grief, discharged him from the exercise of his
Functions, because the times were evil, but being delivered thereof by God's
wonderful Providence, we restored him soon after his Highs deceas into his
former state and place, returned him into the Court of the Commissioned Council
of Holland, and his Ordinary time of serving there being exspired, have
deputed him for the Assembly of their No. Gr. Mi. in public testimony, that
inded and truth we ever held, and yet do hold, the foresaid Lord John Duyst
van Voorhunt qualified as is before expressed. -- Herewith, etc.

Noble, etc. and -- Written at Delft, Julie 26, 1651. Your N. Gr. M. subjects
the 40 Council and Commons of the City of Delft. By Order of the same Signed
S. Groenewegen van der Made.

Act of Justification of the City of Amsterdam.
We Burgomasters and Commons of the City of Amsterdam, having heard the
reading of a certain Writing entitled, Reasons and Motives, etc. and finding
that therein are made notable Charges against diverse Members of the Assembly
of the No. Gr. Mi. Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland, about the
passages last year, touching the new state of War and consequences thereof, and
especially in regard of the separate cashiering of forces, found good and set
on foot by the N. Gr. M. Lords the States aforesaid, together with the
counteractings to that solemn Commission or Sending therein mentioned; and
having seen withal a certain Letter from the said Lords the States of Holland
and Westfriesland, of the 6th of this month; whereby, etc. and having maturely
weighed all, we found our selves obliged in defense of truth and the innocence
of us all, and of the Lords in particular employed by and for Us in the affairs
aforesaid, and aimed at in the foresaid Charge; as also to satisfy the desire
and Order of their N. Gr. M. do testify and declare the contrary of what is
asserted in the foresaid Writing; That namely the said Lords our
fellow-Governors, and especially the Lords Andrew and Cornelius Bicker,
Old-Burgomasters at present of this Cirie, both in the foresaid, and other
occasions, have always showed themselves true and honest Governors, and upright
and faithful Patriots and lovers of their Native Country, whose actions and
counsels were far from enterprising, much less effecting any thing that could
have stretched to the dissolution of the Union, change or alteration in the
Civil Government, or true Reformed Christian Religion, and consequently to the
prejudice, ruin and distraction of the State; but on the contrary, have
always tended to the conservation and assurance thereof, and that in that
regard we are abundantly satisfied with their sincere affection, as to the
good of the common cause in general, so especially in their industriousness
about, and faithful prudent managing of the Execution of our Orders touching
the business of the New state of War, and the reducing of part of the Militia,
with the things annexed; in all which we declare, that they have don nothing
else but what we our selves found good in that behalf for the service of the
Land, and gave them in charge by i^erated Resolutions; insomuch that then we
gave them thanks, and heartily thank them still for what they did: and do
declare, that the foresaid Lords have served and supplied Us from time to time
with sincere and faithful reports of the foresaid affairs, to our full and
necessary instruction, without ever showing any ill-affectedness, much less
endeavoring to abuse us thereby; and that in like sort the Counter-acting and
opposing by this City of the sending decreed by a few Lords of the other
Provinces, to be made to all the Members and Cities of Holland and
Westfriesland has been our own work, grounded upon very pregnant and weighty
reasons, and decreed by reiterated Resolutions, taken in our Assembly, and
directed to no other end then to the common good, the conservation of the order
of Government, the eminence of this Province, and the privilege of our City,
and by no means at all thereby to cause any Distraction in the State. According
as about that very time; we have by our Deputies to your N. gr. M. fully
justified the same, and drawn it up in wr^ting, whe^^^ his Highs was pleased to
make particular complaint to your N. gr. M. of our Cities and their Deputies
encountering of him, and to demand reparation and satisfaction in that behalf,
to which Justification of ours we here refer our selves; and have cause to think
our selves happy for the good direction, which has been afforded to us by the
Lords whom we employed in all this, renewing our hearty thanks unto them, and
promising to all the foresaid Lords our fellow-Governors, that whatever shall
be^ide them or their posterities hereafter by reason of the things aforesaid,
to hold and save them harmless. In Witness whereof we have caused Our City
Seal to be hereunder annexed. July 19. 1651. underneath stood, By Order of the
Burgomasters, and the 36. Council.

signed, Gr. Hulst. and sealed with Green Wax.

Act of Justification of the City of Horen.
We Burgomasters, Council and Commons of the City of Horen in West-Friesland,
make known to every one to whom it appertains, That, by our present Deputies
at the Assembly we are advertised 27* Junii, of the reading of certain
Motives and Reasons etc. whereof a Copy was sent us by their N. gr. M. having
heard likewise the personal plea and answer of the Lord Nanning Keyser of our
Citie-Council and late Pensionarie in our Assembly, having been a
fellow-member at that time, made upon our the said Burgomasters precedent
permission, instantly, and since again upon this day, by reason that on the
day aforesaid, there had been three absent, with all due modesty, unto all
and every point thereof, comprehended by him in seven, with reference to the
written Resolutions, taken from time to time in our Assembly, and besides to
the proper knowledge of our selves respectively, which both in this our City,
and at the Haghe have seen and heard his advices and directions, about the
Execution of our Resolutions; whereupon, when the foresaid Lord Keyser of his
own accord withdrew himself out of our Assembly; we took in his absence such
an unanimous Resolution, of Thanks to, Contentment in, and Justification of
him, as might give sufficient satisfaction to any.

Nevertheless since it has pleased the N. gr. M. Lords, the States of Holland
and West Friesland, to address their Letters unto Us and other Members of their
N. gr. M. Assembly, enquiring, whether our Deputies and especially the said
Lord Keyser, (having been one of the six arrested Lords) in the known points of
Reducements, the State of War for the year 1649* with holding of Consents and
the Execution thereof, has carried himself according to our Orders and
Intention; We do hereby unanimously declare, Yea, adding moreover, That both
in these and other affairs of the Land, he has made unto Us, sincere,
faithful and pertinent reports, as well in writing, as by word of mouth,
opening the points in Question and the Considerations of the respective
Members, laying the matters naked before our eyes without any malignancie,
ill-affectedness or passion, and fitting his advice accordingly, to his best
knowledge, as an honest fellow-member would or could do; That likewise he
showed much sorrow by reason of the discord or misunderstanding arisen among
the Members of the Government, and endeavored all he could in our behalf to
prevent with wholesome advices, all those troubles, exasperations and
inconveniences, which threatened the State thence: That moreover he has not
opposed the Sending in Question of June, 1650. but yielded to it together with
us, under due protestation, for the Right of Government, and that only in
respect of his Highs of immortal memory and his high Charges. That both we
and he together are commended in his Highs written Proposition, faithfully
enregistred in our Book of Resolutions, for our Love to the conservation of our
Native Country and readiness to abide constant to the Union with the six other
Provinces, and to maintain the old orders and observances of the Land; and had
thanks given Us for our good will and endeavors, which both we and he had
contributed for a long time to the Unity among the Provinces. That since also
he has notably cleared the points in difference unto us, and showed himself
together with us much inclined to accommodation; nay, he together with his
fellow-Deputies, have even gone somewhat beyond our order toward the embracing
of the Conciliatorie advice of June 16. 1650. which nevertheless, after report
made unto us by our Deputies, we have given them thanks, on the 24th. Nor have
we ever found in him any humorousness, ill-affectedness, malignant design,
presumption or self-will, much less ever heard any seditious or dangerous
Discourses com from him, tending to the Dissolution of the Union or Compulsion
of the other Provinces; neither do we know or can believ, that ever he had
any ill designs, plots or contrivances, or kept ill Counsel apart; we having
contrariewise always known him, and by these we declare him, an upright
Patriot, and Lover of his Native Country, and the paternal freedom thereof,
fought for these four-score years, and withal a good defender of the true
Christian Reformed Religion, and whom we never could suspect to have had any
thing before his eyes, but the advancement of the glory of God, and the
foresaid Religion, the Freedom, Quiet, Security, and Unity of our dear
Father-land, and that in the same form of Government, according to the Union
and other fundemental Maxims of the State, wherein he was born, and which he
^ath appeared and stood for many a time, according to his place and talent. And
further yet we do declare, that he together with his fellow-Deputies, has
served and supplied Us from time to time, especially touching these matters of
saving charges and reducement of forces and the State of War, with very
accurate faithful and since^e reports, touching that which had past as well in
the particular conferrences, as in the full Assembly, and likewise well
discharged his respective Orders, and contributed all he could, for the good
and service as well of the public as of our City in particular; for the which
we have oftimes thanked him, and yet have cause to do, in regard of his
Vigilancie, Faithfulness and Zeal, which appeared sufficiently to every one, in
the discharge of his Employments, as our Secretary first, and afterward
Pensionarie: for all which, as was don before July 31. 1650. so we do still
hold good, firm and valid, whatsoever the foresaid Lord Keyser and other our
Deputies have don at the Assembly, in the affair of Cashiering and Reducing of
the Militia and things depending thereon, giving him hearty and reiterate
thanks for his good endeavors in that and other discharges of his Trust, and
withal promising to him and his posterity, to keep them free and harmless at
all times from whatsoever might betide them by reason hereof, and to defend and
protect them therein against every one, under the obligation of our City and
all the goods thereof, to be impleaded by all Laws, Judges and Judicatures.
Don thus in our Assembly July 10. 1651. present the N. Lords Will. Claesz de
Jager, M. Albert de Groot, Claesz Janssen Pot, Burgomasters. Marten Jansz
Groot, Jan Alberts Lamberschagen, Pieter Dercks Ben, Claes Cornel. Hogwoude, M.
Cornelis Riperse, Jan Fredericksz Abbekerck, Doct. Gerard Hoo^us, Lambert
Powelsz, Cornel. Claes Veen, Thiis Adriaensz Fons, Elbert Dircksz Langewagen,
M. Corn. Olferse and Geroit Pietersz Twis of the Council; the Lords Raet Sonck
and de Vry, attending their function in the Haghe; and the foresaid Lord
Keyser, du^^ng our deliberation, gone out of Town. In witness whereof we have
caused our Citie-Seal to be annexed here under, this 12. of July 1651.
underneath stood, By Order of the Noble my Lords aforenamed,

signed by me Secretary Wormbout Jadsz.
We M. Nicoles Raet Burgomaster, and Geroit Jansz de Vry, Old-Counsellor, both
fellow-Counsellors of the City of Horen, not having been present at the time
of taking Resolution upon the foresaid Act of Justification and Approbation at
Horen in the Assembly of the Commons there, but being deputed here at the
States Assembly, in the said Cities behalf, we do declare by these, that we
do approve the ^oresaid Act and every part thereof, and fully conform our selves
thereunto, as if we had been personally present at the framing and decreeing
of the fore^aid Act and Resolution, in our Common Assembly. Actum at the Haghe
July 14. 1651.

signed; Cl^es Raet and Gerrit Jansz de Vry.



Act of Justification of the City of Medenblyck.
Extract out of the book of Resolutions, of the Burgomasters and Commons of the
City of Medenblyck.
Assembly being held by the Burgomasters and Commons July 3. 1651. present M.
Everk Jacobsz, Jan Jansz de Zee, and M. Volckart Cornelis Burgomasters,
together with Simon Maertse Lieos, Henbrick Verwer, Adrian Roecker,
Bartholomeus Maertse, Jacob Nels, Adam Cornen, Jan van Hauwert, Jacob Acker,
Adrian Albertsz and Cornelis Hogeland, Common Council.
THere being exhibited to and read before the Lords, Burgomasters and Common
Council of the City of Medenblyck a certain paper countersigned by the Lord
Pensionarie Cats, entitled Reasons and Motives etc. whereby the said six Lords
are charged and aspersed with very enormous and insolent crimes and
delinquencies, especially in matters concerning their function and employment,
and by occasion thereof, enquierie being made, what was fit to be don in
specie, in the behalf, defens and protection of the said Lord Stellingwerf,
Counselor and Pensionarie of this City, having been one of the said arrested
six Lords, his innocence; after mature deliberation it was found by the
unanimous Vote of the Burgomasters and Common Council, first and foremost to
declare* as their N. by these do declare, That the said Lord Stellingwerf in
the executing of his office, being Counselor and Pensionarie, and Ordinary
Deputy from this City at the Assembly of the N. gr. M. Lords the States of
Holland and West-Friesland, for many years together, and especially in the
affairs last year 1650. principally agitated, touching the new State of War and
separate Casheiring and Reducing of the Militia, the opposing of the
inhibitorie Resolutions taken at the Generality Jun. 5 and 6. 1650. and of the
Commission afterward of his Highs to all the Cities of this Province; and
lastly of the approbation of the conciliatorie project of July 16. 1650. and
other businesses ensued thereupon, has carried himself so honorably, honestly,
sincerely and uprightly according to the orders given him by Us; made Us such
faithful and true reports from time to time of the advices and considerations
of all the Members at the Assembly of the Province of Holland and West
Friesland, as also at the Generality, touching the foresaid subjects, both pro
and contra, according to his ordinary, curious and laborious custom, as well
by writing as word of mouth, as ever could be don by any, wherefore also both
himself and his respective fellow-Deputies, after reports made of their
vigilancie, zeal and good endeavors, had every time most hearty thanks given
them, which is now reiterated by these in special manner, approving the Zeal
and Courage, which they have showed in these matters for the service of the
Land; declaring withal the contents of the foresaid papers in this regard, for
untrue, injurious and calumnious; and that the rest can be reputed no better,
promising also therefore to him and his descent and posterity, not only to
hold them guilt-and harm-less of whatsoever might at any time betide them by
reason hereof, but likewise, to repute of any such accident, as happening unto
our selves in General, and to every one of us in particular, and to see the same
repaired with all vigor to our utmost, and to save and keep him and his free of
all charge, charges and damages in that behalf, under the obligation of our
City and goods thereof, impetrable by any Court or Judicatories, Laws and
Judges.

Underneath stood; Extracted out of the foresaid Register of the Resolution
book, and found to agree therewith word for word, the day and year as before.

Signed by me M. Ryckaert, Secretary at Medenblyck.

Declaration of the No. Gr. Mi. Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland,
touching the Charge against the six arrested Lords, and the Government of
Amsterdam.
THe Knighthood, Nobles and Cities of Holland and Westfriesland, representing
the States of the said Country; To all those that shall see or hear the
reading of these, greeting.

Be it known, That whereas last year 1650, a Deliberation being on foot about
the receiving a new state of War, a Retrenchment of the Land-Charges and other
dependences thereof, some of the Lords Members of our Assembly of State; by
name Jacob de Wit, Old-Burgomaster of the City of Dort; Jan de Wael
Burgomaster, and Aelbert Ruyl Counselor Pensionarie of the City Haerlem: John
Duyst van Voorhout old Burgomaster of the City of Delft: Nunning Keysar
Counselor and Pensionarie of the City of Horem; and Nicolas Stellingwerf
Counselor and Pensionarie of the City of Medenblyck were seized, and for a
time detained prisoners in our house of Loevestein; and that all the foresaid
Lords, as also together with them the Lords Andreas Bicker, Lord of
Engelenburg, and Cornelius Bicker, Lord of Swieten, the former Old* and the
latter governing Burgomaster of the City of Amsterdam, were fain, through the
practice used then about the foresaid matters, to resign and be discharged of
their respective Citie's emploiments. That likewise our good City of Amsterdam
has for some days been kept shut up and besieged by forces of the State; all
which might cause such as have not a right and full knowledge of the true
condition and circumstances of affairs happened and transacted then, to take it
for granted and current, as if the said respective Lords had been brought to
this seizure and resignation of their emploiments through, or by reason of any
misdeed or misdemeanour of theirs, in either their respective Cities, or the
State's affairs, and consequently through their own fault; as also, that by the
Governors of the City of Amsterdam there had been any just cause given of the
trouble they sustained by the Siege aforesaid: And that nevertheless on the
contrary it has plainly been evidenced unto Us by the lawful and solemn
Declarations of the Unanimous Commons of the abovenamed Cities, that the
foresaid Lords respectively have, with all sincerity and faithfulness,
followed and performed what they had given them in charge by their respective
Principals, and in particular about those points of retrenching the charges of
the State, and in regard of the State of War, and things dependent thereon;
together with all the results of the Deliberations held in behalf thereof: as
well touching the withholding of the consents of paying of a part of the
Militia, petitioned for by the Council of State in the forementioned State of
War, as about the Execution of the Resolutions taken by us in those matters,
and other consectaries thereof, have discharged their trust, and followed the
intentions and orders of the foresaid respective Commons their Principals; and
likewise served and supplied the same from time to time with pertinent, true
and faithful reports of all the advices and considerations, both of the other
members in our own State's-Assemblie, and those of the Deputies of the rest of
the Provinces at the Assembly of the Lords the States General; deduced pro and
con to those Commons their Principals perfect instruction, good content and
ab^olute satisfaction. Moreover, that in the managing of the foresaid matters
and deliberations in the re^pective Commonalties, the said Lords, or any of
them, never showed themselves to be acted by passions, or possessed with
prejudice or ill-affectedness, but on the contrary, ever directed the affairs
uprightly, sincerely and unpassionately; however, as much as in them lay, they
labo^ed by all good and suitable means to direct all to the ^ecuring of the
dear-bought Liberty of the United Provinces in General, and of our Country of
Holland and Westfri^sl^nd in particular; and all that for the quiet welfare and
common good of our dear Father land; Therefore we our selves having likewise
good and perfect knowledge of all the proceedings about the foresaid affairs
transacted in our Assembly; being fully satisfied with, and giving perfect
credit to the respective Testimonies in that rega^d of the foresaid
Commonalties of the Cities of Dort, Haerlem, Delf, Amsterdam, Horem and
Medenblick: finding al^o our selves fully satisfied in the innocence and
uprightness of the proceedings, which by the Government of the foresaid City
of Amsterdam was used about that business, and judging not otherwise thereof
but the same were directed to the good of the State in general, and of our
Province in particular; We have declared and do declare by these, for the
taking off all mis-interpretions, abusive informations, evil and groundless
opinions, that all and every one of the abovenamed Lords, and those of the
Government of the said City of Amsterdam, have don or managed nothing about
all the foresaid matters, deliberations, resolutions and executions thereof,
but what good and just Governors, faithful Patriots and lovers of the freedom
and welfare of these Countries and the good inhabitants thereof were bound to
do, and ought to have don, and that therefore they all and every one of them,
can nor ought not in the least to be prejudiced, impaired or wronged, in their
honor, good name and fame by either their foresaid seizure, detention and
resignation of their respective Emploiments, or in regard of that siege of the
foresaid City.

Don thus and decreed in our State's-Assemblie, under Our Great Seal August 23,
of the year of our Lord and Savior 1651.
After this there was drawn up by a Committee of Members the ensuing
Information; whereof some few Copies were printed under Title of

A True and Necessary Information of that which the Lords the States of
Holland and Westfriesland have, in the year 1650, from time to time advised,
resolved and acted about the matter of Retrenchment of Charges, and the
difficulties made by the said Province of yielding to the desired Consents for
the entertaining and payment of a part of the Army, in service during the War:
Together with A Refutation of a certain Paper entitled, Reasons and Motives
which induced his Highs the Prince of Orange to undertake both the seizing of
the Lords, and that which was begun upon, at and about the City of Amsterdam.
THe States of Holland and Westfri^sland, having seen a certain Paper
entitled, Reasons and Motives which induced his High^ the Prince of Orange to
undertake both the seizing of the Lords, and that which was undertaken upon, at
and about the City of Amsterdam; Consigned by his Highs of immortal memory,
into the hands of our Counselor Pensionarie, August 9, 1650, and afterward
brought into our Assembly, and upon precedent Deliberation opened on June 15
last (1651) and having maturely pondered the same, and made use also of the
advice of our Deputies, into whose hands we, for that end, committed the said
Writing, with sundry other Acts and Resolutions relating to that matter; We
do find our selves necessitated for the better information of our Confederates,
and all others to whose hands the foresaid Papers may have com, and this also
may be presented, as also in special manner for the discharge of Our selves and
posterity, to make known the true state and condition of affairs mentioned in
the Paper aforesaid, together with the proceedings taken in hand by Us from
time to time in and about the same. Declaring and protesting, that in all this
we have no other aim nor design, but to justify, defend and maintein our
Actions, so odiously represented in the foresaid Paper, together with the Honor
and Reputation of our Country of Holland and Westfriesland; and assuring our
upright and faithful Confederates, that our love and affection is nothing
lessened nor cooled toward them, nor shall, for all that diverse unlawful
actions and proceedings, to our great grief and sorrow, have been procured and
practiced against us by some few ones from among them, set on and favored
therein, even (we are fully persuaded) to the dislike and discontent of their
own Principals. Yea, and that all our intent is only tending to the Quiet,
Peace, Unity and Common Good, the which we have during the great and weighty
Deliberations happened since the Deceas of his Highs the Prince of Orange, and
by reason and occasion thereof, and now, through God's gracious assistance,
unanimously and to the full content of all the United Provinces happily ended,
really testified from time to time; most earnestly therefore desiring the said
^our dear Confederates, and all others, to pass as peaceable and impartial a
judgment hereupon, as we have showed and carried our selves peaceable and
impartial all along, and really complying in the matter it ^elf; The same
being thus conditioned, That, immediately after the conclusion of the peace,
obtained through the help and blessing of God Almighty, and especially
purchased, by the free and voluntary contributions of the goods and blood of
our faithful Subjects and Inhabitants, All our Actions and Endeavors were
directed and employed, That the same our Inhabitants and good Commons might
taste now once again the Fruits of Peace, that dear purchase of theirs, and
that by degrees they might in some measure, if it were possible, be eased and
relieved in their manifold Impositions and Contributions, laid upon them for
the maintenance of the Army and other Charges of the Land. And whereas our
Treasury, through the excessive Charge of that long War, and the continual
taking up of Moneys upon Interest, which from time to time we were driven to,
for the Expedition of so many chargeable designs of War, in behalf of the
common Union; and no less, through the manifold supplies and disbursments in
time of need, to the rest of the Provinces our Confederates, for the
preservation of the State, far beyond our own rate, whereof to this hour we
could never recover any liquidation, much less repayment, had run it self in
that extremity of behindhandedness, That even after the discharge of the
ordinary Leaguer-charges, and after a notable redress in the Treasury by the
retrenchment of some other charges both of the Generalities and Provincial
regard, nevertheless the Ordinary Revenue of our Treasuries, could no ways
reach to the paying of the Army, Rents, Interests and other unavoidable yearly
charges: and it being not avoidable in any kind* to supply the yearly
arrears caused thereby, by any further ruinous and cankering means of running
in debt, being in so deep before, by reason of former frequent refuges to it;
much less could we resolv upon an encreas of Taxes, and higher raising and
aggravating of Impositions; that being most unreasonable, and a sign of a most
corrupt policy, to lie more heavy upon the good people and commons of the
Land in time of peace, then we had don in all these heavy wars; but equity
it self requiring, that the Treasure and Blood so frequently adventured and
spent by them and their zealous progenitors, for the safety of the State, with
so much hardship, should now by occasion of the peace, (were it possible) be
recompensed at least with lessening of the charges, and all deviseable
allevations; We saw our selves reduced to that point of necessity, that either
we must undertake to redress the foresaid yearly excess and arrears by means
of a well-regulated saving, and the retrenchment of sundry not highly
necessary charges; or else suffer and see the State of the Land to precipitate
it self into utter disorder and confusion. And accordingly we have caused as
well a Committee of our own Assembly, and our Commissioned Council, seriously
to examine and devise, by what means and in what things the foresaid saving
design might most conveniently be found and practiced without aggrieving of
the Land; as likewise in the year 1648. two distinct businesses of this nature
were projected, and by deduced advices determined, as also Resolutions taken by
us, tending in great part, to the discharging of diverse unnecessarie Officers,
whose functions were of themselves absolutely com to ceas by the peace or
otherwise, and to the retrenching of part of the Entertainments of those, whose
emploiment, by the foresaid alteration was eased of much pains, charge and
expenses.

Now forasmuch as the said Officers, being for the most part Military and
relating to the Generality, were by the Council of State brought in again with
their full Entertainments, at leastwise higher then we judged fitting, in the
State of War for the year 1649. drawn up the whilst, and according to the
ancient custom sent to the Provinces, with desire to yield their consents to
the particulars therein contained: We for our part not able to consent in this
manner, did bring in at the Generality, in writing, our foresaid Resolution of
saving charges, of October. 19. 1649. as the Provisional advice of our Province
upon the said projected State of war, and urged therewithal, that the
Equivalent of certain 50 Companies taken on A. 1628. for the space of 6 months
only, then to com, and from time to time since by continuation surcharged upon
us, might now be found, by the discharge of 50. like Companies of forain
Nations, reserving to our selves the remonstrating of such particulars and
charges in the said projected State of War, as we should judge could well be
discharged, and left out there without any special disservice of the Land; and
whereupon we should not be able, by reason of the great decaie of our
Treasury, to pass our Consents; as to that very end we had already before
July 13. by express Resolution desired and charged our Commissioned Council
(being entrusted with the surintendance and care of our Treasury) upon their
reiterated Remonstrances that though the foresaid projects of saving and
retrenchments might actually be brought to Execution, nevertheless the yearly
Balance came evidently far short of adjusting the charges of the State with
the Revenues thereof; besides the great arrears yet of running debts, which
ought to be satisfied before all other; That they should draw up their
Considerations, how and which way any further means might be found of
disburthening our Treasury; and they likewise had accordingly made a
proposition already to that purpose, the same consisting especially herein.

1. That the pay for lodging Soldiers, hitherto furnished by the State, may
be retrenched, under condition of prompt and ready pay of their wages.

2. That the Companies of Cuirassiers be changed into Carabins.

3. That the Regiments of foreign Nations in service of this State, consisting,
some in 23, 18, 17, 14, and some but in 10 Companies, be all reduced to an
equality of the least proportion, and 55 Companies of them disbanded.

4. That of the Horse, a considerable part be disbanded; in regard that in time
of peace, and by reason of the condition of these Provinces, more
foot-Souldiers are required for the besetting of the Frontiers, then horse, (who
nevertheless upon occasions may readily be had in these Countries at all
times) they being less useful and exceeding chargeable and cumbersom to the
State.

And however we were mightily inclined, for the easing of our burdened
Treasury, forthwith to embrace the said Proposition, and accordingly without
more ado to resolv upon the disbanding of 105 Companies of foot and half the
Cavalrie, reducing the same to 32 Companies, at 60 horse a piece; nevertheless
we found good before we would proceed to a final Resolution, to communicate
all the foresaid affairs with his Highs the Prince of Orange of immortal
memory, for to understand his Considerations and Advice thereupon. And his
said Highs, was pleased after reiterated Remonstrances and further Discoveries
of the state of our Treasury, both by our Deputies, and especially our
Commissioned Council, made unto him, at last on the 8. of December. in the
foresaid year 1649. to make and transmit unto Us in writing this following
Proposition.

That for the finding of an Equivalent of the abovesaid 50. Companies taken on
the year 1618. there should be discharged one Company of every small
Regiment, and 2 of all the great ones.

That in lieu of reducing and equalizing the foreign Regiments to the least
proportion, the Inland Companies should be reduced to 60 heads, and the foreign
to 45.

That instead of disbanding the one half of the horse, twelv Companies only
should be disbanded in all, and the rest reduced to 45.

That the alteration of Cuirassiers into Carabines should be performed.

That the Services should be lessened to a third part.

Now although, according to this his Highs Proposition it self, there would
have been discharged 175 foot-Souldiers more, then by the foresaid 105
Companies, which according to our meaning and the proposition of our
Commissioned Council should have been dismissed; and notwithstanding that both
the foresaid projects touching the disbanding of the Horse* differed in number
but 420 horse; and that consequently both according to the one and the other,
there was within a small matter in all (comprizing horse and foot together) a
like number of Militia to have continued in the States service; and that for
the rest there was but very little discrepance in both side's proposals, or but
of small moment and importance; Nevertheless, for two very Considerable
Reasons, we were not able to condescend to that of his Highs.

First, because that according to the Discharging to be made after his way,
the same would have lighted more* nay in double proportion upon the Natives and
Inhabitants of these Countries, then upon the Forrainers. And secondly, thereby
there would have been don most by Reducing and but little by Disbanding.

And although on the one side, we might easily calculate, that his Highs was
drawn both to the one and other, by some Considerations of his personal repute;
Yet we on the other side took into our Consideration; first, that the States
Security consistech especially, that the Souldierie perform their duties, not
only for the receipt of their wages, but also out of love, affection and
natural proness to the State it self, which without all question, is always
more to be exspected from the Natives then the Forreiners; besides that it
could not be taken but for a singular ingratitude and unnaturalness of the
Governors, That the same passing by their Inhabitants, and as it were, their
own native and legitimate children, should prefer the Forreiners, as adopted
ones before them, a thing never practiced yet by any Kings, Princes or States,
in their disbandings to this da^e. And then secondly, that the foresaid
proposals of reduction, however as many or more forces then by our way, were
thereby to be subtracted from the States Service, yet there appeared no
proportion at all therein with ours, for the easing and sublevating our
overburthened Treasury; when you observe that the said Reduction touches not
the Captains and Officers, but only the private Soldiers, whereas that which
one Captain alone is wont to receiv by the State, would find and entertain a
good number of common Soldiers. And forasmuch as both sides proposals being
counterballanced, it is apparent, that as well the security of the State on
the one hand, as the disburdening of the feeble Treasury on the other, is much
better to be obtained by our way of Casheiring, then by the effect of that of
his Highs; we therefore held it best seriously to remonstrate all this to his
said Highs, and caused our Deputies to perform the same with many pregnant
reasons, and especially by a most exact Balance of our Treasury, exhibited
unto him, whereby we showed, That according to our way, the Rate of this
Province would yearly be eased more, then by his way, by two hundred eighteen
thousand, nine hundred and forty Gilders, 14 Stivers, 2d. Desiring in that
regard, that he would be pleased so to direct the business and recommend it
to the rest of the Provinces, that the Cashiering propounded by Us, may be
expedited and accomplished with all speed.

At last, after many serious instances applied to this end in vain, we found
our selves necessitated to make known unto the Generality, that by reason of
the weakness of our Treasury, we were not able to grant or bear that which
the Council of State desired of us, and by the abovenamed project of the state
of War, was assigned and charged upon upon us, and that consequently we were
absolutely enforced in part to excuse our selves of that desire, declaring, that
as to the continuing and paying of the before*mentioned 105 Foot-companies, and
32 of Horse, together with other particulars expressed in the above cited Advice
of our Commissioned Council, we could grant no Consent.

And howbeit that by virtue of the Freedom, which the respective Provinces ever
had in matters of charging them, even under the Dominion of their Dukes, Earls
and Lords themselves in the strictest sense, we were not bound to give any
particular reasons thereof, or to use any persuasive means, but might, by the
vigor of the said Freedom, sufficiently have acquitted our selves with a simple
notification of discontinuing our Consent: yet for to satisfy all, we forbore
not to* discover and lay before the Deputies of the States of other Provinces
our Confederates, at the Generality, the whole State of our Treasury, and to
deduce there all the pregnant motives of the foresaid Discontinuance at large
and several times, with solid demonstration, That a less number of forces
effectively would be retained in service then we had declared our Consent
for, if so be that the State will entertain more then they are able to pay.
Nothing doubting but all this might and would have wrought a fair
correspondence of the said Deputies with us, and caused theirs by a faithful
report of our foresaid Reasons and Motives, especially of our great necessity
unto their Principals, easily to dispose the same, That the foresaid
dis-banding of forces and lessening of charges, might, according to the ancient
order and old way, have speedily been set a work and effected. Nevertheless
we not only saw our selves disappointed of any such effects, but on the
contrary, found to our great grief, that the payment of those charges which
we had consented to as before, began to be required at our hands; insomuch
that at last we were constreined to declare unto the Generality, as also in
Januarie 1650 we had formally declared, that the Treasury of this Province
was not able any longer to bear the heavy charges imposed upon them during the
Wars, now the Peace had already continued so long. And whereas every Province
has liberty each year to consent or not to consent to the Petition addressed
unto them by the Council of State; and likewise to accept of, or to excuse the
charges therein proposed, according to every one's constitution and condition:
and that the said state of War was knownly nothing else, but a Petition of the
Council of State, and so was transcribed and sent to the respective Provinces.
That we finding the charges therein mentioned to be insufferable for us, had
found good therefore to make difficulty, and to yield no further then our
Provincial Advice formerly returned, and often renewed there did import, and
that consequently we were resolved, in case the other Provinces could not be
disposed to the like, to proceed to the execution of the said Provincial
Advice, according to the contents thereof, within our selves; it being sure
that the beforementioned Freedom of consenting cannot possibly consist in a
bare and emtie sound of words, but in such effectual realities, whereby one may
hold himself free from paying such charges, to the continuation whereof he
has expressly declared he cannot consent. But then the Deputies putting us in
some hope they would speedily bring in their Provincial Advices upon our
foresaid proposals of saving charges; we again, for further satisfaction's
sake to all, superseded the foresaid execution for some further time, and at the
request of the foresaid Deputies continued to dela^e it from time to time,
until at last in the latter end of March and beginning of April next following,
their respective Advices were produced. And notwithstanding our hopes, that his
foresaid Highs the Prince of Orange of immortal memory, would have used some
endeavors upon our serious and reiterated desires, with the said Deputies of
the Provinces of their Principals, that the same might have conformed themselves
with our foresaid Resolution; or however that his Highs would so have directed
the matter, as that at leastwise they might have accepted of his Highs former
own proposals made unto us December. 8, 1649. We saw contrariwise to our grief
the matter so carried, that the Provinces remained far beneath them yet.

Allowing only 55 Foot-Companies and 12 of Horse to be disbanded, and the rest
of the Horse to be reduced to 60 or 50 riders, and the altering of the
Cuirassiers into Carabins; urging besides all this, that the cashiered
Ritmasters and Captains should still enjoie a pension of 1500 and 1000 gilders
respectively; the Lievtenants, Cornets and Ensigns therein proportionably. And
whereas thereby we should nothing near have been able to save the Moitie of
that whereunto we had forborne our Consent; we again most seriously
represented to his Highs the Prince of Orange the real Considerations whereupon
our former Provincial Advice was grounded, with earnest desire to approve, and
yet to recommend and second the same in dealing with the other Provinces; which
being denied by his Highs, and the Deputies of the Provinces insisting and
pressing, that the same Forces, for whose continuance we had not consented,
should be entertained and paid by us, for the most part beyond our abilities;
We thereupon, according to the Right belonging to us, andin conformity of our
abovementioned Declaration presented to the Generality in Januarie 1650,
began to consider, how and by what means we might best and most conveniently
eschew the payment charged upon us against all right and equity in prejudice
of our Freedom, and to the intolerable burden of our good Commons, and
consequently to put in effect our former Resolution of saving charges; and yet
before the effecting thereof, the project being drawn, we once more
communicated with his Highs the Prince of Orange, and the second time desired
him he would be pleased to conform thereunto, and help likewise to dispose
the rest of the Provinces to the like; and thereupon some likelihood appearing,
and some hope also being given, that his foresaid Highs was about to make a
further Proposition about the said matter, which would be of better relish yet
unto us, then that of December. 8 abovesaid, we again superseded the foresaid
intended Execution for a pretty while longer, and patiently waited for that
same further Proposition, until at last May 11, 1650, the same was produced
and transmitted unto us in Writing; Concerning which we must declare here,
that we could not hear the reading thereof without excessive amazement, that
whiles we had waited for a Proposition more suitable to our account, and more
contenting our minds then was that of December. 8 beforementioned, in lieu
thereof and clean contrarily, we saw how his Highs leapt back there near the
full half of his former condescension, besides the adding of very grievous
Conditions, and notably impairing or making wors the former. Pro*pounding
namely therein,

First, the Disbanding of only 55 Companies of Foot, without any Reduction;
whereby (Note) there would 2675 men, or the one half less have been discharged
then was projected by his own proposal December. 8, 1649.

Secondly, that the Cavalrie should be lessened by 20 Companies, the rest
being reduced to 60 Horse a Troop; whereby (Note) 300 Horse more would have been
retained, beyond the former project; and that besides, the disbanded Officers
should have pensions allowed them, according to the foresaid advice and
proffers of the Provinces; and yet beyond that, going about to engage us to
that which is directly against the Freedom of Consents, and cannot be yielded
unto in any wise, That, viz. no other or further Reduction or Disbanding of
forces should be made before such time as the Crowns of France and Spain were
agreed, and peace made between them, and before the peace in Germany should
be settled.

That moreover the Cuirassiers should be turned into Carabins, and the moytie
of the service-monie taken off, on condition the forementioned projected state
of War be received in manner as the same is framed by the Council of State;
whereby anew, all our affairs hitherto, and the Resolutions of saving charges
formerly taken and mentioned, would have been rejected at once. By all which
we plainly perceiving all our hopes of agreeing in this matter with his Highs
to be cut off, and being ready therefore and resolved to pass on to the
final Execution of the Resolution taken by Us from time to time in this behalf:
We nevertheles stayed our hands again, by reason of a new Proposition
presented at our Assembly by the Deputies of Leyden, May 13, which differed
from that of his Highs of May 11, only in this,

That besides the offered Cashiering of 55 Foot-Companies, the rest, which by
the Government were stinted to 70 heads a piece, should be reduced to 60.

And in like manner, that besides the foresaid offer of Cashiering 20 Companies
of Horse, the rest, which by the Government were stinted to 60 Horse, should be
reduced to 50.

But forasmuch as we began to perceiv, during the Deliberation upon this
Proposition, that matters were taken up and prosecuted against us with a
strange zeal, and singular eagerness, insomuch that we stood in fear it might
burst out into Extremities; to avoid all confusions which threatened us, passing
by all former projects, and that of the Deputies of the City of Leyden also in
particular; we determined to conform our selves provisionally with the advices
of the six other Provinces, and thus (Note) to agree with all that which their
Deputies, at several times, and especially April 2 1650, had desired of Us in
our full Assembly, totidem verbis, by the Lord Bronckhorst, to wit,

That in the first place no further Disbanding of Forces should be made, then
what the Deputies of all the Provinces shall jointly agree upon by the
Resolutions of their Principals; and that as to the further points of saving
Charges propounded by Us, the said Deputies would attend the further Commands
of the Lords their respective Principals, hoping that by process of time some
change of humors, and more facility would be met with.

Nevertheless, after reiterated instances thereupon made at the Generality
May 28, and 29, respectively, the foresaid Provisional Execution of the
Provincial Advices of all the Provinces could not be obtained by Us; the
Deputies of the said Provinces urging us, wholly and once for all, to renounce
all further pursuing or seeking of Disbanding, Reduction and other designed
points of saving charges, and declaring therewithal, that in case of failing,
they should not give way to our being disburdened so far yet, as the
respective Provinces had unanimously consented to, by Resolutions of their own
State-Assemblies for themselves; whereby we perceiving through their
non-accepting of the foresaid most reasonable offer of ours, that all hope of
accommodation was taken away, and we absolutely necessitated at length once,
after so much and long patience, to take a final course for the discontinuance
of paying the Militia, for whose further entertainment We had not given our
Consent; and to resolv upon it, as also accordingly we did on the 1 of June
next ensuing thereupon; (to leav unpaid, and withal to hold for cashiered
certain Companies Horse and Foot standing upon our own Repartition) without
nevertheless going further therein then the Deputies of Leyden had propounded
last, assuring our selves, that thereby the business would have been transacted
in that manner, that none in the world would have contradicted it, or could
have don it with any ground or show of reason.

Especially none of the Deputies of the Provinces, in regard we were gone so
far to meet them, that even the second time, we had offered and desired, by
provision, to do the very thing, which was set down by their own advices, nay
and formerly desired at our hands, in that kind, by their own Deputies.
Neither by his Highs, whose project of December. 8. 1649. would have discharged
665 foot-Souldiers more, and but 140 troopers less, and consequently in all,
horse and foot comprised together, 525 men more. Nor by any Members of our own
Assembly, for that by way of accommodation, we had conformed our selves to
the project or opinion of some few, which always had showed themselves most
difficult in the foresaid business: and there being great Necessity, our said
Resolution should be made known to the Militia or the Officers thereof, least
continuing in service, and afterward missing their pay, there might be
caused mutiny or confusion thereby; therefore we found good to give timely
advertisement thereof, where and so as the same was requisite; communicating
nevertheless again with his Highs about it, and desiring to understand his
intention, to what sort of Officers the foresaid advertisement might best be
directed. And finding, that his Highs excused himself, we proceeded therein
with that circumspection, and without consideration of any persons, That we
caused Writs to be made to XXXI Captains, being our proportion in the 55
Companies, all Forreiners, and last or newliest entertained in the Lands
service, together with 12 Ritmasters, likewise our proportion in the 20, and
those also of the newest or last com, signifying unto them, That after the
expiring of the present month, they should exspect no further Orders from Our
Commissioned Council, nor any further payment from Us, for their respective
Companies and, the rest of the offices, (as far forth as our share in the
foresaid Reduction extended) according to the rate of the men whom we avouch
to be reduced, and left unpaid for the future. To the end that those
respective Ritmasters and Captains might have disposed of themselves as was
fitting; Only, before the dispatching of the said Writs, we would try once
more Jun. 3. 1650. to reiterate our former offers, to the Deputies of the other
Provinces at the Generality, with desire they would be pleased to allow, That
the State might be disburdened by provision of that wherein all the Provinces
were agreed, and that the rest might be taken into further consideration at
leisure; but all our endeavors were applied in vain there. For notwithstanding
all this, we were given to understand, that contrary to all exspectation,
immediately after the dispatching of our foresaid Writs, his said Highs, his
Excellcie the Stadtholder of Friesland and the Council of State, by a Missive
of theirs, of Jun. 5. 1650. (being Whitsunday) to all the Governors or
Commanders, as also to the Ritmasters and Captains, or in their absence to
their Officers, lying in Garrison within this State, interdicted and forbad
them all and every one of them, to obey any particular Writs or Command of
disbanding or reducing their Companies, but to keep them and their men in good
order together, till further order from the States General, or his Highs and
the Council of State, charging every one, to govern himself accordingly in this
behalf; as also that self same day, upon the remonstrance made at the
Generality, by his said Highs, his Excellcie the Stadtholder and the Council
of State, some few there of the Deputies, in their presence, presently
determined;

That a Letter of like tenor, mutatis mutandis, should be expedited in the
Name of their High Migh* to the end as before, and withal a solemn Deputation
or Commission to all the Cities and Members of our Province, to persuade them
(as was pretended) by all conceivable Reasons and arguments, that they would
refrain from all separate or apart-disbanding, diminishing or altering of the
Forces in service of and sworn to the Generality, and to abandon that which
may have been undertaken to the contrary, referring and committing to his
Highs, in what manner and by what persons, and in what number the said Sending
should be performed; as also in the mean time desiring and autorising his
Highs to take all requisite order and to provide, that all may be conserved in
good peace and quiet, and especially the Union maintained and secured, together
with all things thereunto relating; and on the contrary, to resist and oppose
whatsoever might be attempted against it. Whereupon ensued, that his said
Highs next day after communicated and gave notice to the Deputies aforesaid at
the Generality, That in consideration of the importance of the business, his
Highs intended personally to go along in the same deputation, and by virtue of
the beforementioned autorisation and commission, named and assumed to himself
certain Lords, both from among their Hi. Mi. Assembly it self, as of the
Council of State, to be deputed as aforesaid. And notwithstanding that (by
reason of the adjournment of our Assembly in regard of the Whitsun-holy-daies)
the Lords our Commissioned Council, together with our Ordinary Deputies at the
Generality, did remonstrate by many reasons, as well to his Highs the Prince
of Orange, as to the foresaid Deputies of the rest of the Provinces, on the one
hand the groundlessness of the foresaid Countermand, and the troubles which
were like to ensue thereupon, and on the other, the unwarrantableness of the
foresaid Deputation, and that thence, as from an Innovation, directly against
the order and form of Government no good fruit could be exspected; desiring
that the said Sending might be waved and deferred, at leastwise but for a
little time yet; offering therewithal to that end, to call our Assembly
together again, as soon as possibly could be don, that the matters which
seemed to be intended for to be propounded to the particular Cities and
Members of this Province, might be represented to them; yet all this wrought
nothing of that, which our Commissioned Council and Deputies at the Generality
had hoped for: his Highs notwithstanding any thing that was or could be
alleged, departing from the Haghe with the forementioned assumed Lords, to
execute their pretended Commission, which accordingly was performed; though
besides the foresaid remonstrance made at the Haghe, diverse very serious and
earnest endeavors were likewise applied in their journey, by several Members of
our Province, and especially by those of Dort, Haerlem, Delft and Amsterdam;
essaying by all manner of reasons, to divert his Highs from the further
prosecution of that design and to dispose him, that he would be pleased to
return to the Haghe, where the business might be transacted in an orderly
way. And though the said Commissioners were desired and autorised no further
in their Instruction, then by all possible means of inducement and persuasions,
to work out that which they had given them in charge; nevertheless they swarved
not a little from that aim in the execution, and particularly at Dort (as by
the Deputies of that City report was made) used in their second audience such
a threatening language, as we could not sufficiently wonder at, declaring there
among the rest, by the mouth of the Lord van Aertsberghen, in most sharp,
bitter and unsufferable terms; That they the Lords Commissioners, could take no
satisfaction, in the dilatorie answer, returned the day before to his Highs
upon the first Proposition, and that they would not stir thence, until the
Lords of the Old-Council of that City had roundly declared to them
(Commissioners) whether they would com into the Union again, which they had
deserted; and till they (Commissioners) had obtained from them a clear, short,
positive, categorical and peremptory answer in writing, to their delivered
Propositions. That the Lords of Dort should likewise have made a prompt and
effectual reparation, for the breach of the Union, of which, together with
other Members of this Province, that had broke the Union, they had made
themselves guilty, and were punishable for it in body and goods etc. And in
case of further delaie of the said reparation, he the said Lord Aerdsbergen
declared, That they (the Commissioners) should tell them another tale yet: all
which has been reported by the Lords Deputies of the City of Dort aforesaid,
by a written Extract out of their Resolution-book, Verbatim; and although, by
reason of the foresaid Deputation against, and in prejudice of our Eminency
and Soveraigntie, together with the foresaid Commination, and diverse other
things thereabout, we had cause enough given Us, to take once for all a clean
other course, laying aside our long-suffering and patience, to expostulate about
the proceedings aforesaid, and to apply such remedies against the same, as we
should have found requisite; nevertheless, though there was a Protestation
ready drawn against the foresaid Sending and consequences thereof; yet we
again endeavored by all compliableness and fairness to try the laying by of
the Differences, keeping reiterated Communication and Conferences with his
Highs the Prince of Orange; and, in good hopes of accommodation, continuing in
the mean time the payment to the forces formerly refused; besides many other
instances applied to his Highs, to procure such a proposition as yet might be
acceptable; but all in vain still and without any fruit or effect; so that at
last by some Members of our Assembly, deputed to his Highs, July 12. 1650. in a
Conference with him, about lessening of the Forces, there was made another
overture on our part, in manner as follows.

That 105 Companies should be discharged, on condition that the Officers
thereof should be retained, with a Moitie of their former Entertainments.

And in case the Deputies of the Provinces shall find themselves obliged, to
communicate first with their Principals about it, that in the mean time, they
would proceed to such a Disbanding, as they had order and Warrant for already.

That there should be entertained one Company of 150 horse, three, each of an
100 and 38, each of 60 Riders, besides 50 Carabins.

That there should be disbanded 26 Companies, and that the Officers should
remain, at half entertainments, whereby there would have remained in the States
service 2884 hors-men, and thus 44 more then by his Highs first proposition of
December. 8. 1649.

And in case that nothing of all this should be accepted by the Deputies of
the Provinces, that then it should be insisted, that the Disbanding should
provisionally be effected, according to our Writs to the Officers, by the
Council of State.

But notwithstanding that this proposition, for number of horse and foot, does
nothing near, as appears, go so far in lessening them, as his Highs himself
had found good in the foresaid project of December. 1649. and that likewise our
most reasonable offer was in effect reiterated again hereby, we being
content, that the State should by provision only be disburdened of such a
Number of forces, as all the Deputies of the Provinces were warranted by their
Principals they might disband, yet his Highs would not relish it; but at last
July 15. 1650. he, together with his Excellcie the Stadtholder and the Council
of State propounded unto their Hi. Mi. and thence was brought by report into
our Assembly a Certain Conciliatorie Proposition, according to which, although
there would have been kept in service 160 horse and 1670 foot-Souldiers more,
then his Highs yielded too at first December 8. 1649. and besides very large
and unreasonabl pensions allowed and continued to the discharged Officers,
Governors of some Frontiers, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels and Majors both
horse and foot, to the unsupportable surcharge of our Treasury; nevertheless
we took the said Proposition so far into our consideration, that we appointed
a Committee of our own Members, ripely to examine both that and the former of
July 12* made unto his Highs, together with some other pieces relating to that
matter, and having advisedly conferred and balanced them one against the
other, to frame such an Expedient of all, as the said Members should judge best,
for to bring the work at length to an happy issue, which being don, it
produced July 16. this following Conciliatorie advice.

That, not to vary and retract, what once was don, there should be disbanded
55 Companies of Foot.

That the Companies of 70 men should be reduced to 60.

That there should be disbanded 20 Companies of horse.

That the Companies of 60 horse, should be reduced to 50.

That the form or manner of disbanding should be referred to his Highs and the
Council of State.

That the military Entertainments should be regulated according to the
project presented upon a certain occasion by our Commissioners in December. 1648.
the same being a good deal larger and more advantageous for the military
Officers, then a certain other advice, projected in the month of July before.

That the Field-Marshal's Entertainment in the foresaid project somewhat
regulated and contracted, should remain nevertheless as it was before, and as
it is set down in the often-mentioned new State of War.

That the discharged Ritmasters should enjoy an Entertainment of M. Gilders per
an.

The Captains of Foot-Companies 700 Gilders per an. provided both the said
Ritmasters and Captains engage not in other Services; and they shall be
recommended to his Highs to be reimploy'd upon occasions; but getting new
employ or engaging elsewhere in service, their respective Entertainments shall
surceas.

That the Companies happening to be vacant shall be given upon the Nomination
of his Highs according to accustomed order, formerly used.

That the Lievtenants of Horse and Foot, shall expire with the present
incumbents.

That the Cuirassiers shall be changed into light-hors; and that 3 of the said
Companies shall remain exempt from that change; to wit, two of his Highs and
one of his Excellcie Stadtholder of Friesland.

That the Lodging-monies shall wholly be cut off, on condition of orderly and
ready payment made to the Souldierie of their full wages.

With this now-mentioned Advice Conciliatorie, though much receding from all
our former Resolutions, and very little differing from the last produced
project of the Council of State, all the Members of our Assembly, upon
precedent communication with their Principals about it, had so far conformed
themselves, that doubtless it would have been concluded on with one consent, but
that the Lords of the Nobility, having deliberated aforehand about it with his
Highs, declared, they could not yield any further, then to the foresaid project
of the Council of State, July 15. 1650. And the whiles we had therefore
desired our Counselor Pensionarie July foresaid 29* to change the foresaid
Advice Conciliatorie, by leaving out some points, according to the Advice of the
Members, into the form of a Resolution, thus to be communicated to his Highs,
and consequently presented to the Generality; and that by reason thereof, the
whole affair seemed now to be brought to such terms, that there might have
succeeded a speedy unanimous Conclusion by all the Provinces, with good
content to his Highs.

There bursted out most unexspectedly the very next morn, viz. Julie 30, such
strange designs, which we durst not have thought upon without horror, viz.
That six Lords of our Sovereign Assembly, being desired to com to his Highs,
were upon arrival into his Chamber, detained there under Guard, and afterward
carried away prisoners by force of Arms, to the house of Loevenstein; and
moreover the City of Amsterdam, being the most considerable of our whole
Provinces, and whose sudden and unexspected ruin would evidently draw on the
undoing of the whole Land, was intended to have been surprised suddenly by the
Forces of the State, conveied thither with great secrecy, and what else there
has past in pursuance of these enterprises at that time, before the face of
Our Selves and all the world.

And thus having set down here the very Truth of the most material passages
between the Deputies of the Provinces, his Highness and Our Selves, touching the
Saving of the Public Charges, and lessening of the Militia, happened in the
years 1649 and 1650, We are very confident it will most clearly appear thence,
that there was nothing in the world don by Us in the whole carriage of this
affair, but what according to the constitution of our Treasury we were bound,
and according to the Freedom and Right belonging to all and every one of the
United Provinces, we were warranted to do; nay, that for accommodation's sake
we still have yielded more and more, and from time to time made offer of
taking and continuing such charges upon us, as most evidently in process of
time, and without relief, would have ruined Us and our good people together,
putting all our hopes in Almighty God, and from Him alone exspecting a good
issue at length in the business aforesaid; and that on the contrary, little or
nothing has been yielded or condescended unto by the Deputies of the other
Provinces; but by his Highs not only nothing yielded, but on the contrary, a
perpetual recoiling used in our regard, insomuch that Complaints of the counter
working of some ill-affected ones, or insolence and stubbornness of some, which
chose rather to see the safety of the Land from without, and the rest and
quiet of the good people within to be laid into a hazardous balance, then
recede but one hair's breadth from their imbibed maltgnancie, wherewith the
foresaid Paper labor's to asspers some of our Members, may more justly be
recorted upon those pernicious and vile Counselors, who, to satisfy their own
private passions, ambitions and interests, have been the contrivers of all
this, and instigated the young Prince to adventure upon the designs and
enterprises aforesaid.

Now that nevertheless we may a little more closely and particularly defend
the foresaid business, or the points thereof, which are so odiously represented
and traduced in the foresaid Paper of his Highs, entitled, Reason and Motives,
etc. and withal refute as well the contents of the said paper, as also diverse
other Arguments upon several occasions made use of to our prejudice and
disadvantage,

We shall in the first place, and before all things show forth, That besides
the extreme necessity, we were sufficiently autorized and warranted to
withold and keep back the paying of the Militia, to the further entertainment
whereof we had often declared we could not yield or consent, and that
therefore the Writs and notifications thereof addressed to the Ritmasters and
Captains of those forces were rightly and lawfully issued by Us.

And Secondly make it appear, That the Sending, decreed upon that occasion
without our Consent, nay against our wills, to be made to all the Cities and
Members of our Province, Julie 5 and 6, 1650, and performed likewise
afterward, was unlawful, directly contrary to the order and form of
Govenment, trenching upon the Eminence and Prerogative of our
State's-Assemblie, and especially derogating to the Freedom of the
Deliberations of the respective Members thereof; And withal how groundless and
impertinent the Reasons are, which in the foresaid Sending were made use of by
his Highs and his fellow Commissioners against Our foresaid proceedings.

And then in the third place we shall evidence that the Enterprise upon the
City of Amsterdam, undertaken Julie 30, 1650, together with the Seizure of the
six Lords out of our Sovereign Assembly, committed the same day, and other
passages relating thereto, were an Attemt upon the Freedom, Eminen^^ and
Sovereigntie of our Province, directly contrary to all the Laws, Rights and
Privileges of the same.

As to the first, it is a thing well known and obvious to any that has but any
knowledge of the form of Government in these Countries, that from all antiquity
it has been and still is the Custom, according to the order of the said
Government, that those of the Council of State of these United Provinces, even
before the exspiring of the year, use to consider and weigh, what they conceiv,
according to the occasions and conditions of affairs, to be needful and
requisite against the next, for the conservation and defense of the Common
Body of the State, comprehending all in one General Proposition addressed to
their Hi. Mi. and afterward transmitted to the respective Provinces, with the
said Council's request, that they would be pleased to grant, and at the
Generality to declare their Consents upon the particulars therein contained;
as likewise the foresaid Proposition is commonly called, The Petition or
Request of the Council.

And thus the said Council of State, adhering to the foresaid fundamentals, and
conformable to the old Maxims, did likewise December. 8, 1648, draw up such a
general Proposition or Petition about the Charges of the ensuing year 1649, and
presented the same to their Hi. Mi. as formerly.

Where the very nature of Request or Petition infers, That those to whom the
said request is addressed, have absolute Liberty to Consent thereunto, or not,
according as they shall find good and think requisite for the condition of
their affair* And thus by lawful consequence suitable to to the known Order of
Government among us, we might claim and exercise the same absolute liberty
and choice of consenting or not, to that which the Council of State was desired
at our hands in their foresaid Petition of December. 8. 1648, for the year
ensuing 1649.

And whereas, according to the old custom, there was beside the foresaid
Proposition, as a part of the Petition, or one particular point thereof,
transmitted withal a project of the State of War for the year 1649, (touching
which state of War there are likewise these very words inserted in the
Petition, We present the same to Your Hi. Mi. with desire, that your Hi. Mi.
will be pleased to grant your Consent thereunto) it fallows again, that it
was in our special choice to consent to the state of War therein comprised, and
the particulars thereof, especially the main and principal touching the Militia
both Horse and Foot, either totally* or in part, so as we should find it most
requisite for the State in general, and for our Province in particular.

Insomuch that we being disposed to make use of our Liberty therein,
according to the order of Government, and especially the 9th Article of the
Union, as being a matter of charge requiring contribution of moneys, we can
nor may not be over-voted in that case.

Or if so be that on the contrary such a thing should have been endeavored to
be put upon us, we might have had liberty then to withold those moneys or
contributions, and forbear them altogether, like as June 1, 1650, we took such
a Resolution, spoken of before at large, and consequently did well and justly
for the preventing of confusion and mu^inie, to give advertisement thereof to
these (viz. Ritmasters, Captains and other Military Officers) who otherwise,
conceiving afterward they were to draw moneys, would together with the
Soldiers under them, have been disgusted in the highest degree, and that not
without great reason.

By all which rational Motives, and from the consequences of true and duly
disposed Premises, the groundlesness of their Supposition is evidently
discernable, which would have drawn the foresaid Liberty of Consents in regard
of the Militia, into question.

It being very remarkable besides, to the further Confusion of such; That
before the beginning of the Peace, that that very party, which so fain would
have seen the foresaid yearly liberty of consenting in these Militia-matters,
justled out, has been very busy about it for a whole twelv month together, as
the Registers of the Resolutions at the Generality show forth, though all in
vain, and without any success, there being inserted into the fundamental
Resolution about the preliminar points before the Treaty of Peace, November. 16,
1646, these express words, Thirdly, concerning the Militia it is found good and
resolved, that the said Militia shall be fit^ed and framed according to the
occasions of times and affairs, and according to the ancient custom, there
shall yearly a Petition be made by his Highs, his Excellcie the Stadholder and
the Council of State, and transmitted to the Provinces for them to deliberate
thereupon about needful Consents, and to return the same to the Generality.

By reason whereof also we always were wont to restrain our Consents which
from time to time were granted by Us, upon the yearly Petition of the Council
of State, and the state of War* with this express claus, That the same was
meant and don for the time of one year, and no further; and never engaged or
promised further then for the year current only, to take fitting order for the
paying of our Quote toward the Militia and other petitioned public charges.

After the quotation of which clear, significant and express words, both of the
foresaid General Resolution, and our own Acts of Consenting, we cannot judge
our foresaid first point should need any further confirmation.

Although ex abundanti it might be showed here, not only that their Hi. Mi.
in general have by several Missives, and particularly that of December. 8, 1648,
and September. 27, 1649 respectively, desired of us, that we would yield our
Consents to the foresaid state of War; but likewise, that all the Provinces in
particular have, in their respective Provincial Advices upon the said projected
state of War, not only acknowledged the said liberty of Consenting, but
likewise themselves plainly made use thereof in several particulars for their
own advantage; for proof whereof we shall content our selves to produce here
only the words of the Province of Zealand, who in their advice returned upon
the foresaid state of War having premised, that in the general Proposition or
Petition they pretended to have their Quote to be lessened or subtracted from
the whole mass or body of the State aforesaid, they claus it with these
following formal words, declaring, That otherwise we will not be bound to
consent to any further charges or Petition.

Whence indeed we took occasion to believ, as also we are still persuaded,
that the foresaid affair was agitated and advanced at the Generality, not
according to the intention, or by the joint acting of the Provinces themselves,
whom we perceiv to have been of one mind with us concerning the main, but
only by some few Deputies, seeking to currie grace and favor from his Highs, or
otherwise biased by particular aims and interests of their own.

Now concerning the Second point propounded above, namely the Sending, Julie 5.
1650, decreed and forthwith expedited to all the Cities and Members of our
Assembly, we have therein observed a twofold unlawfulness and
unbefitttingness; the one in regard of the party giving the Commission, or
decreeing that Deputation; and the other, in respect of the matter it self, or
the aim and drift wherefore the same was undertaken.

As for the givers of the Commission, The truth is and may appear, by the
Notals of the Lords present, in the Register-book of their Hi. Mi. that they
were men in such a scantling Number, that three whole Provinces were
represented there but (Note) by four persons; so that we could not
sufficiently admire, how so small a number of Deputies should dare to undertake
the foresaid general autorisation, a matter of so great weight and consequence,
together with the foresaid never well succeeded Commission and Sending; without
first (as in such matters of importance the usual custom is) being warranted
and ordered thereunto by their Principals, or having understood their minds and
intentions in that behalf; proceeding to grant and decree the same only upon
the Votes of five Provinces, so slenderly represented as said is, against the
standing out of the Deputies of the Province of Gelderland, and the
protestation of Ours.

Besides this, that we are verily persuaded, there were diverse yet among those
few ones, of a contrary opinion and merely over-voiced by their fellow
Deputies, and others some, which by reason of the presence and authority of his
Highs durst not oppose.

Insomuch that even thereby, first it may easily be judged, what is to be
held of the lawfulness of the foresaid Conclusions taken at the Generality
Jan. 5 and 6, aforesaid.

And secondly it is considerable also, in regard of these givers of the
Commission, that though the foresaid Sending had been approved of, and
concluded on by the Lords the States General, or the Deputies of the Provinces,
completely instructed and autorised thereunto, with unanimous consent of six
consonant advices (in regard our own Deputies could not join with them)
nevertheless it had been clearly showed, and will be further very clearly and
evidently deduced, that their Hi. Mi. are in no part warranted nor qualified to
do it.

Being, that all Sendings, decreed or to decree, unto the Provinces, ought
according to the fundamental Order of the Government to be addressed unto the
States-Assemblie, and not to the Cities or particular Members thereof.

Which likewise was always observed in these Countries; and particularly also
by the Lord Stadtholder Count William Lodovick of happy memory, and Deputy
for the Province of Friesland in the year 1587. who understood and declared it
thus, in regard of the Letters and Sendings, by or in the behalf of the E. of
Leicester, then Governor and Captain General of these United Provinces, addressed
to the States of Ostergo, Westergo and Sevenwolden, each apart, besides the
eight fenced Cities of the Province; That the same Act was an
extraordinarie-waie of proceeding, which could tend to nothing else, but to the
making of Separations and Divisions, and consequently Dissentions and Discord
in the Countries there, which to that time was never practiced or used before,
by any Governors, Magistrates, no not the foreign Lords and Potentates
themselves. And that the matter rightly considered, it is indeed the
States-Assemblie of every one of the United Provinces, or the Members and
qualified Cities thereof jointly, to whom the Eminence, Soveraigntie and chief
Government of the Provinces respectively belongs; to whom also in that
regard, all such must address themselves, as have any thing to propound
concerning the public affairs of the common state of the Land, or relating to
the chief Government; so that no such address can be made to the particular
members or Cities, without derogating the said Eminency, Soveraigntie and
Prerogative Provincial. As indeed even his late Highs the Prince of Orange
himself and the fellow Commissioners not obscurely acknowledged in their
Proposition made to some of our Cities, that they meant it not otherwise, saying
in the end of their said Proposition,

That they intended or meant not thereby to prejudice the Eminency,
Prerogative, Rights and Privileges of the Country of Holland and
West-Friesland, the Members or Cities thereof; by words thus seeking to salv
up, or in some sort to qualify that, wherein, reipsa, they had so palpably
transgressed.

Wherefore also such a Sending ought not to have been undertaken at all,
especially by such, which are engaged by Oath, to maintain, support and
strengthen, yea defend and protect each others Freedoms, Rights and Privileges,
by all convenient and possible means, and even with body and goods too, if
need were, against all and every one, whatsoever that should attempt any actual
encroaching or enterprise therein upon them, which is that, the United
Provinces are obliged to perform the one to the other reciprocally, by virtue
of the first Article of the sworn Covenant and Union at Utrecht in the year
1579.

It being likewise worth special consideration, that the said Union is not a
Covenant or Compact, between any Provinces on the one side, and every
particular Member or City of every Province being in that Covenant, on the
other side, but only between Provinces and Provinces in general.

So, that as on the one side the Generality may not make their address to any
Members or Cities in particular, in like manner on the other side the
particular Members or Cities may not without offense to the Eminency and
Soveraigntie of the States of their Province, admit of any such Sending unto
them, they being not themselves the Confederates, but to content themselves that
they are Members of that Province which is confederated with the other
Provinces. Besides that it was in fresh memory yet, That in the year 1639. the
like Sending having been decreed by the Generality to the Burgomaster and 36.
Council of the City of Amsterdam, when their Hi. M. Deputies were showed there
very pregnant reasons, why such a kind of Sending could not be admitted by
them, these said Deputies departed and returned back again, without having had
any Audience with the said Council.

As otherwise also such a kind of Sending from the Generality to a particular
a Member of any Province, is without Example: besides that it is a thing
unheard of that their High Mi. should ever have addressed, any Missives, or
Letters, Acts or Ordinances, or any other thing, directly to any such
particular Member.

Forasmuch as all such things must be directed still to the States of the
Provinces, and in their absence to their Commissioned Council or other
autorised parties, relating to the said States; with desire, if need be, that
the same may thence be sent to the particular Members or Cities; the
Generality having no power, in case the said States or those autorised by
them, should forbear to send those dispatches to the places directed unto,
themselves to send the same, or others in their stead, directly to any such
particular Members or Cities of the Provinces; as indeed not long before the
decreeing of this last Deputation, a very notable example happened, consisting
therein, That there was a certain Missive or Letter made ready by their Hi.
Mi. April 16. 1650. and decreed on the 20th ensuing, by the Generality, which
being sent thus to our Commissioned Council, with desire, that the same
Missive might by Copies be transmitted to the respective Members of our
Province; although our said Commissioned Council, having upon good and weighty
grounds resolved, to delaie it, till such time, as we should meet again in a
States-Assemblie, and thereupon were desired the second time by thhir Hi. Mi.
for to send that Missive as was desired, yet they would not take it upon them,
as finding the same to be contrary to the Order of Government, and
derogatorie to the Eminence, Authority and Prerogative of our States-Assemblie.

By reason whereof we could not sufficiently wonder at, That the same
Assembly, which but in April before had actually acknowledged their being
incapable of addressing themselves by their Missive directly to the particular
Members of our Province, should in June next following forget themselves so
much, as not only by Missives, but by a formal solemn Sending of so great
Lords and Commissioners, to address themselves unto the same Members and
particular Cities of our said Province.

Which address notwithstanding was so much the less to be born with then the
former, as the luster and authority of a Statdtholder of six Provinces,
strengthened by such considerable fellow-Commissioners, besides the awe and
power of a Captain General of the United Netherlands, attended with a train of
about 400 military persons, could not but much more perplex and intimidate the
respective Governors and Magistrates, and consequently also, more prejudice and
preoccupie their free Deliberations, then a few dumb lines could have don.

And as for the unlawfulness and unbefittingness which we observed in the
foresaid Sending in respect of the matter it self, or the Subject, drift and
aim thereof, the same consist's therein, That the foresaid Sending was
undertaken, not for to dispose the Members and Cities of our Province to the
taking of a Resolution, which might be judged serviceable and advantageous for
the State of the Land, but on the contrary to overthrow such a Resolution,
already taken, after so manifold Communications and reports, as may easily be
seen by what has been showed before, and which was taken upon full knowledge
of the matter, with all ripeness and maturitie, and to the taking whereof
Necessities unavoidablness had pressed and constrained Us.

Which caused us to be so much the more astonished after, when in the foresaid
Sending we understood, and afterward by the reading of the foresaid paper
entitled, Reasons and Motives etc. we heard, That the matter was propounded
so, as if the Deputies of the Cities, at the States-Assemblie, had abused, and
abusively informed their respective Commons, and gone beyond the orders and good
intentions of their Principals, whereas on the contrary, it has plainly
appeared to us, by express Declarations from the said Commons, both at the time
of the said Sending and during the troubles ensued, and since that, discharging
their said Deputies respectively of all imputations; That the said Deputies
have with all sincerity and faithfulness followed and executed that which was
given them in charge by their respective Principals, and especially, about the
point of saving the public Charge, and in regard of the Deliberations upon the
projected State of War for the year 1649. as also the withholding of the
Consents for the payment of a part of the Militia, petitioned for in the said
State of War, together with the execution of the Resolution taken by Us in that
behalf, with other matters depending thereon, carried themselves answerably to
the charge and intention of their respective Commons, their Principals, and
served and supplied the same from time to time, with exact, faithful and true
reports of the advices and considerations, as well of the rest of the Members
in our Assembly, as of the Deputies of the Provinces at the Generality, pro
and contra, opened and moved there, and in a word don all, to the said Commons
their full intention, good content and absolute satisfaction; without having
ever showed themselves to be acted or instigated by passion or
ill-affectedness, but on the contrary always directed the businesses
uprightly, sincerely and unpassionately, and indeed as much as in them lay, by
all fit means endeavored to transact and direct all to the further security of
our dear-bought Freedom, together with the welfare of our dear Fatherland, and
the common good of the State.

By all which well*grounded Deductions we persuade our selves to have fully and
abundantly justified the proceedings insisted by Us in the years 1649. and
1650. about the saving of the public Charge and lessening of the Militia, and
therewithal sufficiently showed that the abovementioned Sending was unlawfully
decreed, and contrary to the order and form of Government, to the prejudice
and derogation of our Eminency, Rights and Prerogative, nothing doubting, but
that every one will be easily able to discern thereby, the groundlessness and
impertinencie of the Arguments, which by the abovesaid Commissioners in their
Proposition, and by his High^ in the foresaid Paper and elsewhere were made use
of; these arguments of theirs tending to evince, that on the one hand it should
not have been in our power to demur or discontinue the payment of the foresaid
Militia in manner as you heard before; and on the other, That the safety of
the State should not have been duly provided for, in case our design of
lessening the Militia had taken effect; for which end they labored hard to
prove and confirm their project, as well by persuasive reasoning, as
allegations of former Examples.

Their Reasons used in that behalf consisting mainly therein, That by the joint
Confederates, the Chief Command, taking on and discharging or reducing of the
Militia, should have been committed to his Highs and the Council of State, and
that of them alone should have depended both the swearing of the Militia and
the disengaging of the same again, and that by reason thereof, the foresaid
Discontinuance of payment, should have been a breach of the Union; and the
alleged Examples endeavoring to evidence that we our selves at other times had
understood it thus, yea maintained and helped to resolv upon it, against others
of our Confederates.

So much indeed being true enough that those of the Council of State, as
Executors of the Resolutions of the Common Union, after that all the
Confederates have unanimously declared their Consents of taking on or levying
forces, they are enabled to make the said Levy and to engage the forces by
Oath unto the State, according to the Consents past.

And so likewise, That the Officers taken on in that sort, have, for matter of
military exploits for the service and conservation of the State, stood obliged
to obey the Council of State, and his Highs as appointed Captain General over
them; But the same were never qualified, nor had ever the power committed to
them to levy forces without the Consent of the Provinces, or after the
expiration of that time, wherewith the Consents were limited, to continue the
said forces in service still, much less under pretext of the Oath taken from
them in the Name of the Common Union, to force obedience from them against the
difficulties made by the Members of the said Union, to continue them in service
beyond such a time.

It being likewise evident by the manifest deduction above, that we are
charged with carelessness for the safety of the State without any ground in
the world, whiles indeed on the contrary all our aim and drift has tended to
the Reputation, Honor and Safety of the State, the Reputation consisting
therein, that by a wise and provident managing of things care be had to
strengthen that in time of Peace, which by the exorbitancie of war is weakened;
and the Honor that thereby may be recovered, the ornament of a well-furnished
and well-ordered Treasury; and the Safety it self therein, that by means of
ready payment a well-disciplined Militia may be entertained under complete
Companies; in lieu, that the neglect of such a Management would cause a
slighting of the Government among friends, a further decaie of the Treasury,
low enough already, and among the enemies much rejoicing from an assured hope,
that by our own regardlesness we shall shortly bring that to pass our selves,
which all the power from without for so many years together, through God
Almightie's blessing, was never able to effect: which as on the one side it
could never be answered to posterity, so on the other side it would prove an
high ingratitude to God himself, having not only protected, but likewise
enlarged and amplified this State in all the brunt and length of our Wars; that
so glorious a building, having stood out all the attemts of their powerful
Enemies, should com to decaie and ruin through the heedlesness of friends, and
those to whom the care thereof is committed. As likewise the entertaining of
Forces or other charges, more or beyond that the Revenues can defraie, must
needs and unavoidably cause a decaie in the Treasury, and that decaie, most
slow and doubtful paiments; whence nothing else can be exspected, but a
deserting and diminishing in the Militia, and that which is wors yet, thoughts
and purposes in them of disobedience and disaffectedness, and consequently an
assured disorder and ruinous confusion in the State. These Countries being
withal so situated, that if the Treasury be but in good condition for ready
payment, there may be had forces enough at any time of need. Besides that the
foresaid objection of carelessness and too great a diminishing of the Militia
is made on the one side by him, whose own project in December. 1649, as was
showed above more at large, had yielded to a greater diminishing of the Militia
then ours, and the disbanding of more Soldiers; and on the other, by those
that refused our desire of executing provisionally the very thing, which
formerly by advice in Writing they had assented to, and by an express Deputy
specially desired at our hands, that it might be don.

There being no Examples in the world to be produced, that ever we should
have understood those matters otherwise against our Confederates; those
Resolutions which were alleged to the contrary, in as much as there was found
good and approved by us, relating to matters of a quite different nature, and
particularly that some provinces had either don contrary to their declared
Consents, and so against the tie and obligation thereby undergon; or without
preceding communicaaion with the Confederates of their discontinuing, gone about
to eas themselves by secret and underhand Reduction of forces, or some other
course of saving their charges. And whereas especially to the end aforesaid,
there are produced the words of their Hi. Mi. Resolution of Nov. 1. 1623,
running thus, That no Provinces may of their own authority dissmiss any
companies without precedent Communication and Resolution of their Hi. Mi. and
of the Council of State; and if any thing happen to the contrary, there ought
provision to be taken against it by Authority.

We cannot pass by to show here in particular from the Registers of the
Generality, that as to the state of War, for the foresaid year 1623, presented
by the Council of State, together with their general Petition to their Hi. Mi.
October. 20 1622, the consents of all the Provinces, Friesland only excepted,
were already returned to and declared at the Generality before the date of the
foresaid 1 of November. and consequently before the taking of the foresaid
Resolution; and particularly that Gelderland, Holland, Zealand and Utrecht had
don it together June 20, and Over-Yssell, together with Groninghen and the
Omlands, on the last of Julie; and June 21 all respectively of the year 1623
aforesaid. And whereas it is said in the same Resolution, That diverse Provinces
made difficulty of paying their Companies, and were putting them off from
their Repartition; it does appear, that the said difficulty was made, and the
said putting off endeavored, by those Provinces which already before by their
declared Consents had obliged themselves to the entertaining of the said
Companies; wherefore also it is justly said in the forenamed Resolution, that
against such a practice provision ought to be made by Authority; being that
these and other examples of like nature, could not without reason be judged to
have been contrary to the Union, as whereby the security of the State should
have been diminished, against the express consents, and without the knowledge of
the Common Body of the Union; but whenas any Provinces shall have made known
their disabilitie of bearing the charges assigned them by the Council of State
unto the Confederates, and then made difficulty to consent again to the
further entertaining of such charges which they are not able to bear, and so
put off or with*held the paying thereof; Then it is far from it that ever we
should have maintained in such a case this to have been against the Union, that
on the contrary, we not only have allowed of such a discontinuance or
forbearance, but likewise (if the Land's necessity required it) helped to
support the* excused burdens with our own shoulders.

It appearing by distinct Resolutions of their Hi. Mi. together with the
Registers, as well in the Generalitie's Chamber of accounts, as at the Checquer
General, that through the defects of all the Provinces, (our own only
excepted) by reason that the same from time to time withheld their consents,
and consequently also their paiments, in regard of several Companies assigned
and charged upon them by the successive statings of the War, such great sums
must be taken up, that the same, for the respective Provinces Gelderland,
Zealand, Utrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssell and Groning^en, with the Omlands,
being calculated, were found to amount above a million of Gilders; the
Province of Utrecht and Friesland having besides that withheld their consents
in the hottest times of War for many years together, the one in regard of the
Coast-Navie, or the Sea-forces of this State, as necessary for the
preservation thereof as any; the other in behalf of the Subsidy for the
West-Indie-Companie, for the protecting of the Conquests in Brasile, and
resisting the perfidious force of the Portugals, and consequently contributed
not a penie either to the one or the other respectively.

And truly after that we, through our constant zeal for the common good, had
helped to bear the foresaid excused and refused burdens with great readiness,
we should not have exspected, that when we once, according to the example of
our Confederates, were fain to lay down what we were not able to bear any
longer, and doing therein nothing else but what the Freedom ^reserved by the
Union does warrant and enable us and all the Confederates respectively; we
should nevertheless be held liable to perform even impossibilities; and that
after the Peace purchased we should have Liberty disputed us, which during
the War was never scrupled to the rest of the Confederates; and before the Wars
could not be denied by the Princes of the Countries themselves.

By all which Arguments it being sufficiently asserted, that in the business
aforesaid we proceeded not otherwise then with full Communication with our
Confederates, nor did any thing but what our disabilitie, caused by our
unwearied zeal for the preservation of the State, necessitated us unto; and
that which according to our Right and Freedom stipulated by the Union, we were
warranted to do, and others of our Confederates in more dangerous times had don
before us; for the conservation and maintenance of which Right and Freedom all
the Confederates themselves do stand obliged by the first and most principal
Article of the Union to lend us their helping hand; and that the same has
tended to no other end, but to the Reputation, Honor, and Security of the
State in general, and our own subsistence and preservation in particular, in
whose subsistence and preservation how much all the rest of the Confederates
are concerned, they have frequently tasted during all the Wars; and that the
arguments and examples used and alleged to the contrary are groundless,
impertinent and altogether to no purpose. We shall therefore not extend our
selves any further to all the General clauses inserted in the foresaid Paper
against the known Truth, to the prejudice and charging both of Us in general,
and of some Members and Persons of our Assembly in particular; as holding it
altogether needless and superfluous, by reason of the gross and palpable
Untruths thereof, more particularly to answer and confute them; leaving every
one to judge, by what has been deduced, with what right, and to what end our
foresaid righteous proceedings were opposed and affronted still in such a
violent and detestable manner, holding and reputing the same for an high attemt
against the dear-bought Freedom, and free-sought Eminency and Sovereigntie of
this Province.

The same Freedom consisting chiefly and principally therein, that we, as the
Protectors of our good Commons, and being set over them as Fathers or
Guardians over their Children or Orphans, shall not be surcharged against our
wills with unsufferable burthening of our Subjects, especially when we do
know, that without any disservice of the Land they may be eased thereof; as
likewise the grievance of the tenth and twentieth penie, endeavored by the King
of Spain to be introduced, malgree our forefathers the lawful Governors of the
Land, gave just cause of, and was a great ingredient in the taking up arms
against him, and afterward abjuring his Dominion over us: whenas we formerly
showed at large, that the foresaid whole business was taken in hand by Us upon
this sole occasion, that we would not charge our selves and poor Commons with
such burdens as we judged, according to the foresaid constitution of times
not to be very necessary.

And another thing wherein this Freedom does likewise especially consist,
being this, that the Respective Commons or Commonalties of the Cities, each
within themselves and their Deputies and Commissioners at our State's-Assemblie,
should hold their Deliberations and utter their advices freely, without being
awed, hindered or molested therein; in which regard on the one side by the
foresaid Sending, and especially the Comminatorie Propositions made in diverse
Cities, and by name at Dort, and on the other side by the seizure of the Lords,
this Freedom has been infringed and prejudiced in the highest degree.

Besides that, by the foresaid acts the Eminency and Sovereigntie of this
Province was violated to the utmost, and especially thereby that the highest
and chiefest Government, and consequently the Sovereigntie it self was directly
and immediately set upon by the arrest and and detention of the six Lords, and
that the State's forces were in hostile manner led against integrating members
of our Sovereign Assembly, and even against the mightiest, weightiest and
considerablest of all this Province.

All the said proceedings being likewise directly against all the Laws, Rights
and Privileges of the Land, both in regard that the foresaid Arrest and
detention was don by them, who, though all the charges of the foresaid Paper
against the Persons had been as true as they are not, were not in any degree
warranted or qualified to do such a thing; and besides without any show of
process, or form of Justice, and without any foregoing information, and more
especially yet that the carrying away and incarceration of them in the house of
Loevenstein was don without any precedent sentence or judgment given in that
regard; without cognizance of the matter, without hearing, without plea,
without Law, only by bare force and mere violence.

Whereunto is to be joined, that both the foresaid six Lords, and some others
within the City of Amsterdam, were forced to abstein from all Government, and
to abandon their respective charges; which is likewise directly contrary to
all the known Privileges of the said respective Cities, and especially in
regard of those persons which had the honor to be Members of their Senates;
who, according to the privileges thereof could not be put out thence all their
life time, but must remain and continue therein to their dying day, unless
they forsook the Land, or were put out by court of Law.

And further also, both the Imperial written Laws, and even the Common Right of
all Nations, being grossly transgressed in this, that on the one hand the
foresaid six Lords had in all the affair abovementioned and deduced in the
foresaid Paper of his Highs the Prince of Orange, of immortal memory, don
nothing of their own head, but all by Order and Commifsion from the respective
Senates their Principals; as some of those Senates instantly, and the rest have
fully declared and manifested unto us; and on the other, that the said Lords
cannot be otherwise considered, then Deputies or Ambassadors, and in that
quality were not in capacity to be arrested for executing their Orders even
by the Law of Nations.

All which might be deduced and asserted more at large yet, with an infinite
number of reasons, examples and other arguments, but that we hold it needless
to enlarge our selves further in regard of the undoubted and palpable verity
before our eyes.

Lauding and praising only Almighty God in the inwardst of our souls, That
most unexspectedly, without any helping hand of our own, he has through his
wonderful operation so mercifully delivered us out of all these troublesome
perplexities and difficulties, and withal restored again such an Harmony,
Concord Love and mutual confidence and Affection between the General
Confederates, and thereby recovered the state of the Land from utter confusion
and imminent ruin to such a settledness, as we could hardly have dared to
exspect from his Almighty hand without presumtion. Beseeching him from the
bottom of our hearts, that it may be his favorable pleasure to continue the
gracious blessing of his upon these Countries for all times to com, and to
grant unto us such wisdom, guidance and discretion, and withal to inspire us
with that zeal and courage, that duly acknowledging the foresaid mercies, we
may henceforward so mind and improve the public affairs of the Land, and in
all troublesome occurrences so tender and attend the weal thereof, that we may
leav the state of the Land and the Government to our Posterity in the same
assurance, liberty and freedom as God has put the same at present into our
hands.

Don and determined thus in our Assembly -- 1651.
They of Friesland then, as was said, having propounded, and likewise presented
a Draught of an Amnestia or Oblivion, Julie 20, the same was next day after
committed to the Lord van Omeren, and others of their H. M. Commissioners for
the Conciliatorie Conferences to draw up a Project or Form of an Amnestia.

The same Lord van Omeren and the rest, brought in then also the ensuing Advice
for the deciding of Differences, if any should com to arise among the
Provinces: wherewith these of Gelderland Zealand and Over-Yssell conformed
themselves upon liking of their Principals, as those of Holland did absolutely;
Friesland and Groninghen with the Omlands were desired to do the like. The
tenor of the said Advice was as follows.

I. IF so be that any Disputes or Differences arise among the joint Provinces
in matters where the major Votes have no place, according to the Articles of
the Union, that then there shall be chosen an unpartial, able, peaceable and
expert man in affairs of State, out of every Province, to the number of seven,
to assay the way of friendship betwixt the parties, and the same not
succeeding, the differing Provinces shall make choice of an equal Number of
Arbiters.

II. The same equal Number of Arbiters, shall likewise in the first place and
before all things make trial of the way of Concord, between the differing
parties; but in case that cannot be found then those Arbiters shall by the
major voices ^hoos a Super-Arbiter; but if the voices should be equal, the
matter shall be expedited by Lot, and he on whom the lot falls, be the
Super-Arbiter or Umpire among them.

III, And the foresaid Seven persons, shall make oath to the foresaid even
number of Arbiters and to the Super-Arbiter also, That without respect to any
Province or Members thereof they will judge and pronounce unpartially, what in
conscience, reason, right and equity they shall find due and requisite for the
most quiet peace and Unity of the Provinces.

III. Provided nevertheless, that if any parties conceiv they may have reason
to except against any of the foresaid Seven persons or chosen Arbiters, they
shall have liberty to produce their said reasons, and the remainder of the
foresaid seven persons and arbiters respectively, shall judge and pronounce
touching the suff^iciency of the foresaid Exception; and that forthwith there
be others chosen to supply the places of such as upon good reasons, are
accepted against.

V. That the judgment once pronounced shall be yielded unto and put in
execution, without pretense, and much less admittance of any further appeal or
other proviso, under what pretext whatsoever.

VI. And if the party condemned shall after two or three summons from their
Hi. Mi. delay and fail to obey the sentence pronounced; then shall their Hi.
Mi. take requisite order for to see it don, to the end that the said sentence
become not illusorie, but may be really effected and executed. according to the
23d Article of the Union.

Those of Friesland advised about this matter of Decisions thus.

I. IF there arose any disputes or differences between the joint Provinces, in
matters not subject to over-voting, according to the articles of the Union made
at Utrecht in the year 1579. that besides the Stadholders of such Provinces,
where any is, or may be hereafter, there should be chosen out of every
Province an unpartial, able, peaceable, and expert man in State Affairs, to the
number of seven, to assay the way of friendship between the differing parties,
and the same not succeeding that the party shall each of them make chois of
the like number of arbiters.

II. This number of 21 Arbiters together should likewise first and before all
things assay the way of concord between the differing parties; but not being
able to find the same, the said Arbiters, should proceed unpartially to judge
and pronounce that which in conscience, reason, right, and equity they shall
find fit and requisite.

III. And those former seven persons and all the rest chosen in as aforesaid,
should be obliged to make oath, without respect of any Province or members
thereof, to do right in manner aforesaid, Artic. 2.

IV. And in case that among the 14. adjoined there were any recusable, then the
7 former and the rest of the unsuspected Arbiters, should examine the reasons of
the recusation and judge of the sufficiency thereof and pronounce accordingly;
provided there be presently another supplied by the Provinces, into the place
of him, that upon good reasons was recused thus.

V. That the Sentence once past, it should likewise be performed and executed,
without pretense and much less admittance of any further appeal and other
Provisoes, under what name or pretext soever.

VI. And in case the condemned party shall after 2 or 3 summons from their Hi.
Mi. delaie or fail to obey the sentence pronounced, then the same should take
due and requisite order therein, to see it don, to the end the same sentence
be not rendered illusorie, but really effected and executed according to the
23d Article of the Union.

The Lords of Groninghen and the Omlands declared thereupon in this manner.

THat upon examination of this point, considering that the Provinces, which had
no Stad-holders as yet, had right and reason, to supply that defect, with
choosing of a Stad-holder.

That they likewise had power to do the same, at such times and seasons, as
suited with their Conveniences, and when they should judge the same expedient
for the Provinces.

That in the mean time in these deliberations, and, during the defect of a
Stad-holder, they ought not to be prejudiced in their right of helping to
decide the questions arising between the Provinces.

And besides that, very well considering, it was highly requisite, there should
none, or but very little alteration be made in the Union: but that the same
should be left in an entire State and course.

The Lords Commissioners for Groninghen and the Omlands, are of advice, and
understand, by way of inclination, that the Provinces having no Stad-holders,
might have that defect supplied with a provisional expedient.

And that then, in case any question or difference, should arise beyond
expectation among the joint-provinces, during the foresaid defect, That the
decision thereof should be and remain in the Lords Stad-holders, for the time
being, and such arbiters, as the rest of the Provinces, destitute of
Stad-holders, should choose, each Province one, and join the same with the
Stad-holders aforesaid.

Which Arbiters, should in as much as concerned this difference, abjure their
own respective Provinces, and engage themselves by oath, to help the deciding of
the difference arisen, according to right and reason, and to determine the same
by arbitration or sentence, after after that they shall have assai'd first some
other means of agreement in vain.

This being don, the Province condemned shall be bound without any delaie or
opposition to perform and obey the judgment or sentence pronounced.

And if beyond expectation they should fail thereof, after three summons made
unto them from fortnight to fortnight respectively, that then the 23d Article
of the Union should take place and be fully executed.

The said Lords Commissioners do not hold it fitting, that there should a
special solemn Oath be framed in this behalf; being the same might presuppose
an Innovation to be introduced into the Union; whereas all the Provinces (they
are persuaded) are far from such innovations, and will hold this but a
provisional Expedient, during the Defect of Stadtholders in the other Provinces.

It might therefore be declared by special Resolution of the joint
Confederates, that this Expedient, and the results thereof, ought, during the
Defect aforesaid, to be of equal force and validity as if it had been
inserted in the Union, at the making, decreeing and solemn swearing thereof at
first.

And if it should happen also, that one or other of the Arbiters to be joined
to the Lords Statdtholders, should be recused as suspect; in that case the
Lords Commissioners are of opinion, that the Reason produced by the recusing
party should be examined, by the Lords Stadtholders and the rest of the
unreproached Arbiters, and sentence pronounced accordingly.

July 22. The Lords of Friesland declared themselves yet further about the
deciding of the Differences betwixt the Provinces, thus.

IN case there happen any disputes or differences to arise between the joint
Provinces, in such matters where over-voting has no place according to the
Articles of the Union made at Utrecht in the year 1579. that then besides, the
Stadtholder of the Province, having any, or such as hereafter shall be pleased
to appoint any, there shall be chosen out of every Province, destitute of a
Stadtholder, or one appointed for it, an unpartial, able, peaceable and
well-experienced man in State Affairs, to the Number of 7 in all; for to assay
the way of friendship betwixt the dissenting parties; which not taking effect,
that the differing parties each of them shall choose to and with the former, some
new Arbiters, so as that the same together with the former on both sides,
should make out an equal number, to wit, if one Province stood in debate with
the six others, then the one disputing Province should choose eleven Arbiters
more, and the six other Provinces, six more; if 2 Provinces dispute with 5, the
two should choose 8, and the five, 5 more; if 3 were against 4, the 3 should
choose 9, and the 4, 8 Arbiters.

This Number of Arbiters should by plurality of voices choose a Super-Arbiter;
But the voices being evenly balanced, the matter should be determined by
Lot, and he on whom the Lot does fall, should be the Super-Arbiter; which
Arbiters and Super-Arbiter should first and before all things try the way of
Concord betwixt the parties in difference, and not able to find the same,
proceed then to judge and pronounce unpartially, as in Conscience, Reason, Right
and Equity, they should find requisite.

And the foresaid seven, together with the foresaid equal number of Arbiters,
and the foresaid Super-Arbiter likewise, should be bound to make oath,;
without respect to any Province or Members thereof to judge unpartially
according to Article 2d.

Provided that if any party conceived they had reason of recusing any of the
foresaid Arbiters, they may produce the same; and that the sufficiency thereof
should be judged by remainder of the foresaid Arbiters respectively, and
sentence pronounced accordingly; on condition there be forthwith another
supplied in the place of him, that shall be recused thus with reason.

Also the sentence past, should be performed and executed, without pretense
and much less admittance of any further appeal and other provisoes, under what
pretext soever.

And in case the condemned party, after two or three summons, by their Hi. Mi.
should fail to obey the sentence pronounced, the same should then take a
requisite course for to see it don; that the said sentence be not made
illusorie, but really effected and executed, according to the 23d Article of
the Union.

Concerning the Amnestia (or Act of Oblivion) there was drawn up, and
afterward July 22. presented a frame thereof, to this effect.

THat whereas in the year 1650. there happened some Troubles (or Distempers) in
the Government, and broke out further and further upon the occasion of certain
Resolutions taken June 5 and 6 of the said year, by the Ordinary. Assembly of
the Ordinary Deputies at the Generality, and that afterward it pleased God
Almighty in His Fatherly compassion, wholly to remove again the foresaid
Troubles, and to restore between the General Confederates, such a harmony,
Concord, Love, Confidence and Affection, that all the great and weighty
Deliberations, which through the occasion of the Deceas of his Highs the Prince
of Orange, of high-prais'd memory, were held in the General Assembly of the
respective States of the United Provinces, extraordinarily gathered here in the
Haghe, are brought to an issue now with the unanimous and full Consent of all
the Provinces together, Therefore the respective States of the Provinces of
Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssell and Groninghen
with the Omlands, for to eradicate the thoughts of the foresaid distempers, out
of the memory of both the present and future ages, to strengthen and render
undissoluble the Bond of the foresaid Concord, Love, Confidence and Affection
among the respective Provinces, and thereby to conclude this Illustrious and
great Assembly of the joint Confederates, had declared, and did declare by
these, that neither now, nor ever they will remember any thing of all that
happened in the said year 1650. nor show any resentment in regard thereof, in
any kind whatsoever, against any Province, Persons or Houses in general or
particular, but on the contrary to forget and pass by all, as if nothing at
all had happened of that nature, holding to this end likewise the foresaid
Resolutions of June 5 and 6 aforesaid, as never taken, and therefore null,
invalid and useless, and so in like manner, whatsoever by virtue and
consequence thereof was don, or ensued thereupon in any kind; wherefore also
all the Resolutions, Acts and Agitations, taken or undertaken in that affair
shall be removed, raised and taken forth out of all the public Registers both
of the Generality and the respective Provinces, wheresoever they were inserted.

This Draught did not well pleas the Hollanders, who were willing enough to
pass by what the other Provinces, Members and Subjects thereof might have
misdon against them; but so, as that every Province should be left at
Liberty, to administer Justice, as they should see cause within their own
Jurisdiction; about which there was much bickering for some days yet, as will
be showed anon.

July 14. there were taken into Deliberation the two lists of the respective
Garrisons, which were to be left as well within as without the Voicing
Provinces, so as they had been brought in on the 7th of this instant, by and in
behalf of the Council of State, and vice versa, it seemed good to the Assembly
to return the same to the hands of the said Council, for a review and
re-examination, to be presented afterward to their Hi. Mi. with their further
Consideration and Advice, which being don, the Ordinary Assembly of their H*
M. should then dispose therein, as should be fitting. Yet the Lords of Zeland
consented not to this Conclusion.

About the point of deciding Differences, some further instances being made,
the Lords of Friesland showed to the Assembly by way of further elucidation
of their last advice therein, their opinion was,

That in case it should happen, which God prevent, there did arise any
misunderstanding, dispute, difference, or controversy betwixt the United
Provinces, in matters referred to the disposition of the Generality, by the
the Union of the yeor 1579. and concerning such points, wherein they could not
understand one another, The same, if it had reference to any of the Provinces
in particular, should be judged and decided by the rest of the Provinces, or
them whom they shall depute for that purpose; and if so be the matter concern
all the Provinces in general, that in such a case, besides the Lord Stadtholder
of Friesland, there shall by every one of the six other Provinces be chosen an
unpartial, fit, peaceable and well experienced man in State Affairs, to make up
the number of 7 in all, who should try the way of friendship between the
differing parties, and if the same succeed not, then should the parties on each
side choose to and besides the foresaid 7 persons, some New Arbiters, in such
sort, that the same new chosen Arbiters, joined to the foresaid first
Delegates, it may produce an equal number on both sides: that is to say, if
the Difference be between one Province on the one, and six Provinces on the
other side; in that case that same one Province should choose eleven Arbiters
more, and the six Provinces six more, so that on each side there shall be
employed twelv Arbiters in all; and if the Controversy happened to be between
two Provinces of one side and five of the other, that then, the two should
choose eight Arbiters more and the five, five, so that on each side there be
ten Arbiters in all. And if the controversy arisen were betwixt 3 Provinces of
the one side, and 4 of the other, that the three should then assume nine, and
the four, eight Arbiters more yet, to make up the Number of 12 again, on each
side.

And that the Arbiters chosen thus, should assume to themselves and elect by
plurality of voices a Super-Arbiter: But if the voices were equal, that the
Decision then should be determined by Lot, and he remain the Super-Arbiter on
whom the Lot fell.

And that the foresaid Arbiters and Super-Arbiters should first and before all
things assaie the way of Concord betwixt the differing parties, and failing of
success, impartially judge and pronounce what in Conscience, Reason, Right and
Equity they should find to be requisite; and to this end they should promiss
by Oath, without any regard or affection to any Province or Members thereof,
impartially to declare and pronounce their sentence as before.

Provided, that if any party should conceiv they had reason of recusing any of
the Arbiters or the Super-Arbiter, they may have liberty to allege the same,
and that the sufficiency thereof should be judged, and sentence accordingly
given by the rest of the foresaid Arbiters; on condition there be presently
another supplied in the room of him that was rightfully recused.

That the respective Provinces should promiss to conform and submit to the
Sentence to be given, without doing, causing or suffering to be don any thing
against it, directly or indirectly, in any kind or manner whatsoever, and
without seeking or using of any Exception or Provision thereupon, by way of
either Appeal, Relief, Revision, Nullitie, or what plea soever else it might
be. And if any did or attemted ought to the contrary, that the same be
declared now as then, null and of no force nor validity, under the obligation
of themselves and all the Subjects or Inhabitants of their respective Provinces,
Cities and Members thereof, persons and goods; for in case of contravention,
and failing to satisfy the foresaid sentence in performance of the effect
thereof, and what depend's thereon, to be arrested, detained and prosecuted in
any places, before any Magistrates, Laws, and Judicatures wherever they can or
may be met with; renouncing and rejecting to that end all Exceptions,
Indulgences, Privileges, Reliefs, and generally all other Benefits of Law which
might any ways serve them to the contrary, and especially the Laws which say,
That no General Renunciation is to have place, without the special was made
before.

About this time there were likewise motions made to the Board again and again,
By whom the Governments and Commanderies in the Cities and Forts without the
voicing Provinces were to be bestowed, together with the Majorships in the
foresaid places; as likewise the high Military Charges, having formerly been
at the disposing of their Hi. Mi. or his High^ the Prince of Orange unto
Collonelships exclusively. And lastly, whether the foresaid high Charges,
together with the Governments, Commanderies and Majorships may be conferred
henceforward upon any that is not of the Reformed Religion; but there was no
Resolutions taken in that behalf. As likewise the Commissioners of the Country
of Drent, soliciting for Session in the Generality, or that their business
might be committed to impartial Judges or Arbitrators, were remitted to the
Ordinary Assembly.

The Lords of Holland, Julie 26, brought in their Advice about the Decision of
Differences, which was to this purpose; if it should com to pass,

That besides matters of Consents (in which regard the Provinces are to keep
their liberty, to dispose therein as they themselves shall judge the service of
the Land to require) there do arise, which God prevent, any dispute,
misunderstanding, discord or controversy between the United Provinces in such
matters wherein over-voting take's no place, according to the Union made at
Utrecht in the year 1579, they being not able to understand one another, that
in such a case seven unpartial, able, peaceable and well experienced men in
State*affairs, to wit, out of every Province one (among whom there should be
the Stadtholders of the Provinces, where there are any, or may be hereafter,
and whom the respective Provinces shall pleas to appoint thereunto) should meet
together to assay the w^ie of friendship between the differing parties, and the
same not succeeding, the parties should on both sides make choice of some new
Arbiters to be joined to the foresaid seven persons, in such sort, as that
those new chosen Arbiters joined to the former Delegation, they should make up
an equal number on both sides; to wit, if the difference were arisen between
one Province of the one side, and six on the other, that in such a case that
one Province should choose eleven new Arbiters, and the other six Provinces six
more, so that on both sides the number of Arbiters should be twelv; and if the
differences happened to be between two Provinces of the one and five of the
other side, that then the two Provinces should choose eight Arbiters more for
themselves, and the five other Provinces five more, so that on each side there
may be ten Arbiters; and if the question were betwixt three Provinces of the
one, and four of the other side, that then the three Provinces should choose yet
nine Arbiters for their part, and the foresaid four Provinces eight more, so
that in case there may be in all twelv Arbiters on each side.

And that the foresaid Arbiters thus chosen shall assume to themselves and elect
by plurality of voices a Super-Arbiter; but if the voices were even, that the
Decision should be determinated by Lot, and that person on whom the Lot fell,
should be the Super-Arbiter.

And that the foresaid Arbiters should have their proper Session and Rank, and
voice or vote according to the order of the Provinces, in whose behalf they met
respectively; and likewise first and before all things assay the way of
Concord between the differing parties, and failing thereof, proceed to judge and
pronounce as they find in Conscience, Reason and Equity to be requisite;
being to promiss to this end by Oath, without regard or affection to any
Provinces or Members thereof to judge and pronounce impartially as before.

Provided, that if any parties should conceiv they had reason of recusing any
of the foresaid Arbiter or Super-Arbiter, they may have liberty to allege
their Reasons, and that the sufficiency thereof shall be judged* and sentence
pronounced accordingly by the rest of the said Arbiters, on condition there be
presently another supplied in the room of him that was rightfully Recused.

Moreover, that the respective Provinces should promiss to conform and submit
to the sentence to be given without doing, causing or suffering to be don any
thing against it directly or indirectly, in any kind or manner, without any
seeking or making use of any further exception or provision of the Laws in that
behalf, whether it be by way of Appeal, Relief, Revision, Nullitie, or any
other Evasion or Plea whatsoever. And if any one should do or attemt any thing
against this, the same should be declared now as then, to be Null and of no
validity at all; all this under the obligation of themselves and all the
Inhabitants of the respective Provinces, Cities, and Members thereof, their
persons and goods, for in case of contravention and failing to satisfy the
foresaid Sentence, by performing the effect thereof, and that which depend*s
thereon, to be arrested, detained and prosecuted in any places between
Magistrates, Laws and Judicatures wherever they may be met with, renouncing
and rejecting to that end all Exceptions, Charters, or Grants, Privileges,
Reliefs, and generally all other benefits of the Laws which might stand them in
any stead to the contrary hereof, and especially the Laws which say, That no
General Renunciation ought to have place, without a special one be gone before.

The Point of the New State of War being likewise propounded, was remitted to
the Ordinary Assembly.

It was conceived the great Assembly would have ended on Saturday, July 29.
being just the anniversarie of the siege of Amsterdam, and seizure of the six
Lords; But Friesland and Groninghen with the Omlands insisted still with great
eagerness for the Amnestia; And those of Holland were so indisposed or unreadie
for it; that on the 29. aforesaid there was a Recess made, and the Assembly
adjourned to the 7. of August, against which time the Provinces took upon them,
precisely to meet here again; it being found good, that in the mean time, the
Conference Conciliatorie should be revived again about the remaining and
unresolved points; all the Provinces having undertaken, that against the
foresaid time, they would declare finally, upon the projects about deciding the
differences, which might at any time arise among the Provinces; and so likewise
upon the Amnestia or Oblivion, of the things happened in the Land the last year
1650. and upon the Lists of the Garrisons to be left both within and without
the voicing Provinces. Nevertheless it was Friday first, the eleventh of August
before the Great Assembly met again, at which time the Council of State
brought in their further advice, dated Aug. 8. touching the Lists of the
Garrisons within and without the voicing Provinces; declaring, that, having
examined, what was moved by some Provinces, That some places or Frontiers
situated within the voicing Provinces, were set upon the List, as resorting
under the Generality, and vice versa, for that reason they had in the presence
of his Excellc^e the Stadtholder, in Council, reassumed the Lists aforesaid,
and examined them and accordingly declared, That they met with no place of that
reflection, but in the list of places, without the voicing Provinces, the Forts
of Bourtang, Bellingwold, and Lang acker-sconce, as also Coevorden, and in the
other List, of places within the voicing Provinces, Axel, Neusen, Biervliet,
Lillo and Liefkens-hoeck. As for the Forts of Bourtang, Bellingwold and
Lang-acker-sconce, the same lay not in, or within any of the voicing
Provinces, as neither Coevorden, lying in the Country of Drent, and in that
regard justly placed in the List without the voicing Provinces; and then
concerning Axel, Neusen, Biervliet, Lillo and Liefkens-hoeck, being put upon
the List of the voicing Province of Zealand, it must be understood, that this
was don, not for that the said places lay in or within the Province of
Zealand, which indeed could be said of none; but because that Province, having
otherwise but few Garrisons, the Companies of the foresaid places, might serve
them for the more commodious Execution of their Civil administrations and
commands; without any intention notwithstanding, thereby to prejudice the
Generality; but as the Lords of Zealand had heretofore in time of War the
oversight over the five forenamed places, as well for besetting and fortifying
thereof as otherwise; so likewise had the Provinces of Friesland and Groninghen
with the Omlands together with the Lords Stadtholders of the same Provinces,
the oversight over the 3 first-named Forts, both for the besetting and
fortifying thereof as otherwise; in which regard it is propounded and pressed in
behalf of the 3 foresaid respective Provinces, that those places ought to be
continued to them, forasmuch as they are respectively most highly concerned in
the guarding of them, for the security of their Provinces, and that the
respective Garrisons, continuing thus under their Tuition, they would be the
better accommodated for the executing of their Civil Commands; which being
taken into consideration, the Lords of Zealand and Friesland, were desired with
all speed to bring in their respective proofs and warrants, for the assertion
of the right which they pretended in the authority and inspection or oversight
over those places and forts, lying otherwise without the voicing Provinces,
under the immediate resort or jurisdiction of the Generality.

Those of Holland were much desired by them of Friesland and Groninghen with
the Omlands, to consent to the Amnestia, generally and without reservation, and
consequently, to comprehend therein likewise the Lord v^n Sommersdyck, whose
case bred most of the Difficulties; as likewise, that they would suffer the
matoer of Consents about public charges to be comprised in the Act of
deciding Differences; which Holland instanced, ought to remain Soveraignly and
absolutely in the power of the particular Provinces, according to the Union,
and their Resolution. As for the Amnestia, those of Holland were very loath, to
recoil from their Project; which was, that they would show no Resentment of
things past in the year 1650. against the other Provinces, the Subjects,
Inhabitants or Ministers thereof, of what quality, state or condition soever,
etc. but under these words, against the other Provinces, the Subjects
Inhabitants thereof, did not disable themselves, to exercise resentment against
their own Subjects; which aimed principally at the Lord van Sommersdyck, being
not able to forget or digest, that any one should be a Member of their own
Assembly, and nevertheless do such services to the Stadtholder and Captain
General, as were so much prejudicial to the Assembly, as they maintained. But
they of Friesland maintained the contrary in that sort, that August 18o. they
declared,

They saw well enough, that amidst the affairs of that Illustrious Assembly,
some passions began to play their part, which caused them to fear, the great
aim of that solemn meeting, which had been to reduce Discord into Concord, and
Jealousies into a more firm and confident Correspondence, would fail them, or
at leastwise not hit the main point; and therefore out of zeal to the public
and common interest, they had found good July 20 last past, to move their Hi.
Mi. that this Illustrious Assembly (the principal business being transacted)
might be crowned at parting, with an Amnestia and oblivion, of all that had
past, to and fro in the year 1650. betwixt the Provinces, the Members and
Subjects thereof; which* although it was acceptable in that kind to all the
Provinces, that by the Conciliatorie Conferrence an Act should be drawn to
that effect; the same being don and afterward consented to by the six other
Provinces; nevertheless the Lords of Holland in their memorandum upon the said
Act, but yesterday, had not yet declared themselves, so as the Province of
Friesland and others, after so long a Recess, had confidently hoped they would
have don; being the Act yesterday presented by Holland and West-Friesland
(perhaps not without over-voting, and against the good intention of some of the
chief Members of Holland it self; in effect is all one and the same (by reason
of the words, against the other, as above) with that they brought in three
weeks ago: containing fair words, but little in operation to that which an
Amnestia or oblivion ought to comprehend: the reather, because that none can be
excluded in particular, but the reflection will light upon the Provinces
themselves, which decreed and ratified the Resolutions, pretended to have been
the cause of all the Troubles, though in truth they had an other Rise, as is
well known to this Assembly. And as then the Comissioners for the Province of
Friesland, could not remember (and the like they were persuaded of all the
other Provinces, to have don or committed any thing, which could give way to
such a Relation as the Act of the Lords of Holland, yesterday presented, did
contain; The Lords of Friesland having had no other meaning, but that all, even
imagined and supposed faults, how or by whomsoever committed, might be
obliterated and buried in oblivion, for to encreas the reputations of the
United Provinces jointly, so much the more with their Friends, and make their
Consideration so much the more formidable among their Enemies. Therefore they,
the Commssioners of Friesland desired the Lords, of Holland, that at length
now, they would be pleased to complie with the drawn Resolution of the
Amnestia, as it was presented July 22 last, being the same would not only
agree well with the Proposition the Deputies of Holland made before the
Assembly in the respective Provinces; but most consonant likewise to the
gratulation and welcome reception they found at their arrival here.

In case of default, the Comissioners of Friesland instanced, They were
constrained to declare, That many points, otherwise transacted at this Board,
could not be acceptable nor grateful to their Principals; and therefore they
desired, That in regard of the affairs of this Assembly, it should be entered
in their behalf, That they would be guiltless of all the inconveniences which
through the neglect of such a Christian Request, might in time ensue; being
resolved to assist this Assembly no longer then the end of that week. Some
would have had this protestation served in with harder and sharper terms, as,
that the Province held all the Transactions here for null etc. but the greater
part found it not good, to appear ^o eager in this particular Provincial
business; but advised the Lord of Sommersdyck, by some good means or other to
endeavor giving Content to the Assembly of Holland; as was don likewise, in
manner following, whenas Augusti 19. the Lord Counselor Pensionarie Cats,
declared, in the name of the Nobility, to the Lords the States of Holland,
that, for the preventing of further disturbance in the Province of their N. Gr.
M. and least the great Assembly should part with discord, They (the said
Nobility) had caused the Lord van Sommersdyck, to find good, to absent
himself from the Assembly of the Lords the States, without appearing there
again, till such time as their N. Gr. M. should be disposed by the foresaid
Nobility, to approve of his readmittance; and that consequently, the said Lord
van Sommersdyck should be comprehended in the Amnestia, with annullation, and
expunction out of the Registers of their N. gr. M. of all such Acts and
Resolutions, as shall be found to have been taken about impeaching of the said
Lord van Sommersdyck.

Whereupon report presently after being made by the Lord Pensionarie de Wit,
of the conference held by the Committee of their N. gr. M. about the subject
aforesaid, in manner as follows.

Noble, Great, Mighty Lords!
THe Members by your N. gr. M. commissioned, for to consider, how the business
of the Amnestia may with most and best convenience and satisfaction of the
Provinces be terminated, and the great Assembly concluded and dismissed with
general content, have judged unanimously, That the Lord van Sommersdyck shall
absent himself from the affairs of the Assembly of your N. gr. M. either by a
Voluntary withdrawing, or by the Disposition of a politic Resolution, until
such time, as by full consent of the Members it may be otherwise ordered; and
that moreover the Provincial Act of Holland shall be also published and
affixed in all places fitting, and the Lord van Sommersdyck comprehended
therein, obliterating the things past last year, and consequently the project
of the Amnestia framed by the Commissioners of the Conference Conciliatorie,
and July 22, 1651. reported by them in the great Assembly shall be embraced
by their N. gr. M. referring themselves herein to your N. gr. M. wise disposing.
Don August 19. 1651.

After several Discourses, falling to work, it was found good, that the
foresaid Declaration of the Nobility should be received, and that accordingly
the Lord van Sommersdyck should absent himself out of their N. gr. M.
Assembly, and that all Acts and Resolutions taken for charging or empeaching
the said Lord, should be taken forth out of their N. gr. M. Registers, and
held abolished.

That moreover the Act of the general Amnestia, agreed upon at the
Conciliatorie Conference July 22. brought in at the great Assembly, should be
accepted and was acepted of by their N. gr. M. and that the Lord van
Sommersdyck, should be understood, as comprehended in it.

At last Saturday Aug. 19. the Provinces of Gelderland, Zeland, Utrecht and
Over-Yssell accepted of the Act of Deciding Differences, in manner as follows.

I.
IF it com to pass (which God forbid) that there do arise any dispute,
misunderstanding, contention or discord among the United Provinces in matters,
where no over-voting take's place, according to the Union made in the year
1579. they not being able to understand one another, in that case, there shall
be a meeting of seven unpartial, able, peaceable, and in matters of State well
experienced persons, to wit, one of each Province (of which Number shall be
the Stadtholders of the Provinces, where any are at present, or hereafter may
be, and whom the rest of the respective Provinces shall be pleased to appoint
thereunto) for to try the way of friendship between the differing parties,
which not succeeding, then shall the differing parties on both sides make
choice of some new Arbiters unto the foresaid 7 Reasons, in such sort, that the
new-elected Arbiters joined to the first delegated persons, shall make up on
both sides an equal Number; to wit, if the controversy be between one
Province of one side, and six Provinces of the other, that in that case the
said one Province shall choose eleven Arbiters yet, and the foresaid six
Provinces, six more, to make up thus the Number of 12 Arbiters on each side;
and if the difference be betwixt two Provinces of the one side, and five of
the other* in that case the said two Provinces shall assume eight Arbiters yet,
and the foresaid five, five other, to make up the number of ten on each side.
Lastly if the Question be arisen betwixt three Provinces of the one and 4 of
the other side, that then these 3 Provinces shall choose nine Arbiters yet, and
the foresaid four, eight more, to make up 12 again in all for each side.

II.
And the foresaid thus elected Arbiters, shall assume unto themselves and choose
by plurality of voices, a Super-Arbiter; but if the voices about it fall out
to be even, then the Decision shall be committed to Lot, and he on whom that
falls, shall be the Super-Arbiter.

III.
And the foresaid Arbiters and Super-Arbiter, that have their Sessions and
rank, together with the Voices or Votes, according to the Order of the
Provinces, from whom respectively they com, and likewise first and before all
things assay the way of Concord betwixt the Differing parties, and failing of
success, proceed then impartially to judge and pronounce as in Conscience,
Reason, Right and Equity they shall find requisite; to which end, they shall
promiss by oath, that without respect or affection to any Provinces or Members
thereof, they will pronounce sentence unpartially, as before.

IV.
Provided, that if any party should conceiv they had Reasons of recusing any
of the foresaid Arbiters or the Super-Arbiter, they shall have liberty to show
the same, and that the sufficiency thereof shall be judged, and accordingly
sentence pronounced in that behalf by the foresaid Arbiter; so that presently
there be another supplied in the room of him, that was rightfully recused.

V.
The Respective Provinces having promised, as by these they do promiss, to
conform and submit to the foresaid sentence to be given, without doing, or
causing or suffering ought to be don against it, directly or indirectly in any
kind or manner, and without seeking or making use of any further exception or
other provision in Law, either of Appeal, Relief, Revision, Nullitie, or any
other Evasion or Plea whatsoever; and if any shall have don or attempted ought
to the contrary, they do declare the same now as then, null and of no effect
nor validity; obliging here under themselves and all the Inhabitants of their
respective Provinces, Cities and Members thereof, their goods and persons, for,
in case of contravention, and failing to satisfy the foresaid sentence by
performing the effect thereof, and what depend's thereon, to be arrested,
detained and prosecuted in any places, and by any Magistrates, Laws and
Judicatures, wherever they can be met with; renouncing and rejecting to that
end all Exceptions, Charters or Grants, Privileges, Reliefs, and generally all
other Benefits of the Laws, which might stand them instead to the contrary,
and especially the Laws, which say, That no general Renunciation is to have
place, where the particular went not before.

The Lords of Holland were pretty well satisfied with the frame of this Act,
if they would have but in terms exemted therein the Consents of Charges,
concerning which every Province should retein their Freedom to do and dispose
in that regard as they should judge the service of the Land required it.
Hereupon the said Lords of Holland were desired to bring in their further
consent concerning this at the Ordinary Assembly of their Hi. Mi. as soon as
might be; as also the Lords of Friesland and Groninghen, with the Omlands were
desired to approve of the foresaid frame, and to conform thereunto with the
speediest.

The Lords of Friesland declared, that concerning this they adhered yet to the
Conclusion made by the Lord President on Fridaie last.

The Lords of Groninghen, with the Omlands likewise, declared their adhering
still to their Provincial Advice, brought in upon that subject Julie last 21.
And in regard of the redress of the Instruction for the Council of State,
determined at the Assembly Julie last 18, they declared as follows; to wit,
That they accepted of the Instruction for the Council of State in that sort and
condition as the same was amended and dressed by their Hi. Mi. Commissioners in
the conference Conciliatorie, with that proviso nevertheless, that the 20th
Article, speaking of the Solicitors, could not as yet be put in practice with
them according to the present constitution of the Province of Groninghen and
Omlands; nevertheless they shall be careful, that after the deceas of the
present Solicitors, no Ritmasters or Captains shall be charged with Clerks of
greater Entertainment then is allowed by the state of War; they would likewise
take such order for effective paying of the Souldierie Horse and Foot, that no
just complaints should be presented to the Council of State in that behalf.
Withal they conceived, that the Provinces of Utrecht, Over-Yssell, Groninghen
and Omlands might justly claim and enjoie their Right, according to the example
of other Provinces, of sending each one Commissioner more into the Council; it
standing not with reason, that a more contributing Province should have less,
or not so much to say in a Court or Council of the Generality as one that
contributeth less.

After that the Amnestia or Act of Oblivion was unanimously agreed to and
consequently printed, proclaimed and publicly affixed, as follows.

WHereas in the year 1650 there were risen diverse troubles in the Government,
which afterward went further and further, grounded upon certain Resolutions of
June 5 and 6 the year aforesaid, taken at the Ordinary Assembly of the Lords
Deputies of the Generality; And that afterward it has pleased God Almighty,
according to his Fatherly Goodness wholly to take away again the foresaid
troubles, and therewithal to let shine forth among the General Confederates
such an Harmony, Concord, Love, Confidence and Affection, that all the great
and weighty Deliberations occasioned by the Deceas of his Highness the Prince
of Orange of famous memory, and held in the General Assembly of the
respective States of the United Provinces, extraordinarily gathered here in the
Haghe, are, with unanimous consent and full content of all the United
Provinces, happily ended; Therefore the respective States of the Provinces of
Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssel and Groninghen
with the Omlands, for to eradicate the thoughts of the foresaid distempers out
of the remembrance of both the present and future Ages, and to make the
foresaid Bond of Concord, Love, Confidence and Affection the faster and
indissoluble, and therewith to conclude this Illustrious and Great Assembly of
the joint Confederates have declared, and do declare by these, that neither now
nor ever they shall or will remember any thing happened in the foresaid year
1650; nor show any resentment of the matters aforesaid against any Provinces,
Persons or Houses in general or particular, however qualified; but on the
contrary forget all, as if the same had never happened; holding to that end
the foresaid Resolutions of June 5 and 6 aforesaid as not taken, and withal
for null and invalid; as likewise whatsoever by virtue and pursuance thereof
was don. And for further confirmation of whatsoever is said before, there shall
be put out, razed and taken forth out of the public Registers as well of the
Generality as of the respective Provinces, all the Resolutions, Acts and
Agitations taken in behalf of the matters aforesaid, and inserted there.

Don thus and declared by the foresaid Lords the States of the respective
United Provinces in the great Hall of the Court of Holland this nineteenth day
of August, 1651. Attested, J. Young van Oosterland. vt Underneath stood, It
agrees with the Register. N. Ruysch.

And thus this Great and Extraordinary Assembly of the Confederates was
unanimously and with full content concluded and ended. All other affairs being
remitted to the Ordinary Assembly of their Hi. Mi. and hearty thanks were
returned to the respective Provinces for the good care, seriousness and zeal,
which during these important Deliberations they had contributed and testified
for the good of the Common States interest; as likewise God Almighty the
source and fountain of all good prayed and besought from the inwardst bowels of
all their hearts and reins, that he would be pleased according to his
fatherly goodness and undeserved mercy to keep them knit together, and bless
the state of these Countries with all Benediction prosperity and welfare, and
the Governors thereof especially, with upwright love, Unity, mutual friendship
and Confidence, indissolubly and ever more. Furthermore their Hi. Mi. agreed,
that the said Assembly should be concluded as also it was on Monday August
21, with a Sermon of thanksgiving, performed by Mr Streto one of the Ministers
at the Haghe, whereunto were invited all the Courts of Government, Justice,
Treasuries, besides the Ecclesiastical Senate residing here. At last there was
appointed a general Thanksgiving-Fast and Bid-day to be kept throughout all
the Provinces, associated Countries, Members and Cities thereof, against
Wednesday September 13. next ensuing. And this same day there was likewise all
the Cannon discharged, all the bells rung, and Bonefires made in token of the
public joie and satisfaction.

The Lord Counselor Pensionarie Cats, who at the entrance of this great
Assembly Januarie 18, had made the first speech in Holland's behalf, made
likewise this at conclusion.

High Mighty Lords!
THat every thing has its time, was advertised long before our times unto all
men, by the wisest King of any time.

In regard whereof it may be observed, that in all worldly or humane affairs,
there is a time of meeting, and a time of parting again. There never meet's so
loving and sweet a society, but at length it is determined by parting again.

This being the condition of all assembling (according to the ever variable
condition of mankind here below:) there can be no better course taken (in our
judgment) at meetings, then to consider of, and endeavor for a fair parting, or
good farewell after.

Experience has showed in all ages, That the greater Assemblies, were always
subject to the greater dangers of heavy and grievous Accidents, and very
frequently the causes of them.

This inconvenience (common almost every where) arises doubtless especially
from the inbred variety of men's inward Disposition, and some other outward
accidents joining with it. Nay, experience has often taught, that in the very
purest Assemblies (even where things divine and heavenly were treated of) they
could seldom hit upon an unanimous Consent of any Conclusion: whereof there are
innumerable Examples obvious every where, so that it may be easily proved.

The cause hereof is the great Difference of the humors of those, which meet at
the foresaid great Assemblies; who as they differ in their outward feature,
garb and manner of acting, the one from the other, so they are found to be
altogether as discrepant and unlike one another in their inward Dispositions,
Judgments and Conceptions.

We see this Illustrious Assembly here, consist's of a very great number of
persons, but that among them all, there are not two to be found, which
perfectly resemble one another in the Lineaments of the Face, the posture of
the outward members, or the habitual kind of mooving them. The Diversity is
as great within.

So that such a great Number of Men meeting together and there being oftimes
(besides these Natural Diversities) many different aims and several particular
interests, playing under covert thereof) it must be counted a very great
wonder, when ever so great an assembly, come's to be ended with an unanimous
Conclusion.

There never was so good a feast
That some sat not at eas, at least.
As the proverb goe's. Men have usually the disposition of Seawater; put that
into a small vessel, and it stand's still there and unmovable as it were. But
in the open sea (the assembly of waters) the least wind does rear and stir
and swell the waves past measure. Men in the precinct of their own houses
State, Province, may peradventure remain, or be kept in quiet, but the greater
the assembly is, the more mutual stir and striving there is found of one
against the other.

Where, I pray, is that Kingdom, Country, Province, City, village,
neighborhood, house, Cottage; nay in a house, but man and wife, to be found,
all, or always of one and the same mind; yea, where is the man, that finde's
not another man within himself of contrary bent and disposition.

Nunquam bella piis, nunquam certamina desunt,
E^, quocum certet, men's pia semper habet*
(i. e.)
Good men want never war nor strife,
Whiles they are wandering in this life.
So that it is no wonder, that men coming together, out of several Provinces,
countries, and places, there should be a great diversity in their thoughts
and judgments, one from the other. Distance of place usually causing
discrepancie of humors and dispositions.

Tales sunt hominum mores, qualis pater ipse,
Jupiter aurata perlustrat Lampade terras.
(i. e.)
Men's manners, humors, and condition
Do follow their Sun's disposition.
And if any such great assembly do happen to end peaceably and with one
consent, the same must be ascribed only to the goodness and blessing of
Almighty God.

There have been transacted here (according to the constitution of aflairs)
many difficult and different matters, consisting especially in three Capital
points viz. the Religion, the Union, and the Militia, and things depending
thereon; as likewise an Amnestia, or Act of oblivion of several very troublesome
accidents happened heretofore; and such an intricate business as that was, and
all the toilsomness and tediousness of it was wrapped in, has nevertheless been
overcom, in friendship, and loving affection, and all is terminated and
concluded now with concord and content; and therefore your Hi. Mi. justly found
good, that not only here in this place, there should be a thanksgiving
celebrated to God Almighty; whereunto should be called likewise all the
Courts of Government residing here; but likewise, that throughout all the
United Provinces and associated Countries, a certain day should be set apart
for a general Thanksgiving-Sermon and Prayers, fitted to the occasion, for to
give God the honor of this High and unestimable mercy.

For who else should have the prais returned to him, but that good God, who has
so bountifully poured forth his spirit of concord over this Illustrious
Assembly, and conducted all to this happy Issue.

Especially in the point of the Amnestia. He that reflect's upon the business,
as it stood a twelvmonth ago, would hardly see any grounds, but such as were
laid for an everlasting quarrel, nay, even at the beginning of this very
Assembly, there fell things out, and continued during the same, which might
have turned all upside down, and produced a clean contrary disposition to what
now we see.

To forgive, forget and never to remember wrongs, is no common practice or
easy work; it is a thing above Nature, and the finger of God. Honored and
praised be all those, which contributed their good thoughts and endeavors this
way.

Now for us to keep in fresh memory all the memorable things transacted here
in this Illustrious Assembly; the verge, Localitie (a means of ancient
observation) of this place, that is, the Situation and structure thereof, may
be of singular use unto us.

Those which are conversant about the Art of Memory or Remembrance, for to
strenghthen the same that many things may firmly be retained by it, they use
to make impressions into their scholars by a representation of imaginary
pictures, placing the same upon the walls, windows or doors, where the scholars
are practicing, as diverse Lds here in the assembly may know and remember by
their own former experience.

If therefore we will carry home with Us, what good our Good God has in this
place bestowed upon this State, let us but imprint in our memories the
structure and Situation of this Building and carry that along with us; For
coming to it from without, and drawing near the entrance of this great Hall,
You have on the one hand a House devoted to God's Worship, viz. a Church, where
the word of God is daily taught, the impression of which sight, will present to
your mind (being never so far off) what has been treated and concluded here,
for the good of the true Reformed Religion, by their H. M. in this place.

Being entered into the Hall, You meet there on the one side an ascent to the
place where the Assembly of the Lords the States General is wont to be kept;
and by that, every one shall be able to refresh his thoughts, with what was
transacted here, for the good of the Union; and concerning the State Affairs of
the United Provinces.

On the other side there are the steps and passage to the place, where usually
the Court Provincial is seen to exercise it is function in matters of justice,
whereby we may be put in mind, what was resolved and found good by this
Assembly, for the furtherance and maintenance of justice.

On the other end, there is the way or entrance into the chamber of accounts
and chamber of feudarie matters, which will prompt to your memory, what was
wrought here at the Assembly in the behalf of the Treasury, and the duty of
vassals and other subjects of this State.

The Colors, Standards, Flags and Cornets, waving over our heads here, are so
many Bliss-tokens of the victories vouchsafed unto this State by God Almighty,
minding every one of us, at any distance with what heedfulness things
concerning Military matters and functions together with their dependencies
were here debated, and concluded on by the Assembly, for common security;
which may likewise rouz up every one to true thankfulness, due to Almighty
God, for the manifold mercies by him bestowed upon us.

Casting our eyes up to the very arched roof of this Stately fabric, we cannot
spy upon any of the beams, rafters, laths and other Carpenters-work all along
there, the least webb of any Spider, the nature of the pure materials enduring
no such vermin. The spider is an insect, having a vast belly and long rakers,
using to spread their net abroad at large, to catch all they can. Your Hi. Mi.
have taken very notable resolutions against all Baseness and corruptions used
heretofore about the Administration of Government and justice. The remembrance
whereof will be renewed, as often as we think upon the cleanness of this
fabric.

All this then being past thus, through God's gracious blessing, and so great
a work brought to an unanimous conclusion. Their N. G. Mi. my Lords the States
of Holland and West Friesland, return most serious and serviceable thanks to
this whole Illustrious Assembly and to every member thereof* that upon their
desire and friendly invitation, their N. M. were pleased to repair to this
place for the good of our common Fatherland, and this day to assist so many
weighty consultations about it. Their N. G. Mi. most earnestly desiring all
and every Member of this present Assembly, to part hence and return home with
as good and sincere an intention, as their N. G. M. had before their eyes and
in their hearts at the undertaking of the Work.

Giving thanks at last to the only good and merciful God, for his gracious
blessing abundantly powered forth upon the whole emploiment of this great
Assembly, which Thanksgiving they exspect will be performed more at large
anon by Mr Streto one of the Ministers of the Word of God here in the Haghe
this forenoon yet in this very place; as will likewise be don throughout all
the Provinces at the day appointed.

The same Thanksgiving Sermon and a devout prayer thereupon performed in the
place aforesaid by Mr Streto; and in their Hi. Mi. behalf one thousand
Rixdollers brought by Secretary Ruysch to the Deacons of the Haghe for the
poor; thereupon the great Assembly parted, and in the evening all the Bells
were rung, and all the Canons discharged in token of rejoicing; as also on the
appointed 13 day of September after the like Thanksgiving and public
Testimonies of Rejoicing were more generally and largely performed throughout
all the Land. And after that the managing of all affairs returned again to the
Ordinary Assembly of the States General.

The Lords of Holland and Westfriesland had for many years together found and
judged the place of their Assembly very incommodious and mean; and observing
that by the Deceas of the Prince as Stadtholder most of the upper rooms of the
Court of Holland stood vacant; they appointed a Committee October. 3, viz. the
Lord van Schagen of the Nobility, together with the Lords of Dort, Amsterdam,
Schiedum Alcmaer and Horen, to look out for a more convenient place there;
provided nevertheless, that with the fitting of the place so much time might
be taken up, as that before the meeting of the foresaid Assembly there, the
mourning-year of the House of Orange might be exspired.

The Lord Cats being now 74 years of age, had already at several times
solicited the Lords of Holland for dismissing of him from his charge of
Counsellor-Pensionarie, or Advocate of that Province.

His many acceptable, long and faithful services were such, as that in regard
thereof they were hard to be brought to grant his request. But the great
Assembly being ended, he solicited more seriously yet for the obteinment,
which having gotten at length September. 27, he fell upon his knees in the
Assembly, thanking first Almighty God for his manifold mercies in preserving
him all along in so weighty, toilsom and hazardous an Emploiment; and
afterward the Lords the States of the Province for all their favors by many
elegant expressions, and wishing them all further happiness, bliss and
prosperity.

Thus the Lord Cats being discharged of that place, though continuing in his
Office of keeping the Great Seal, and being Deputy of the Fiefs of Holland;
the Assembly proceeded instantly to the choosing of another
Counsellor-Pensionarie, the necessity and importance of the said Charge being
so great, that a certain learned man called him that was invested with the same
in his time, the Atlas Belgicae Libertatis; Therefore the business admitting no
Delay, there was that very day chose in his Room, by unanimous Voices, the Lord
Adrian Pauw, Lord of Hemstede, etc. First and presiding Counselor and
Controller in the Chamber of Accounts of Holland and Westfriesland, who
likewise before that time had served in this Charge, and been employed in
diverse solemn Embassies with greatest prais, and to the special service of this
State. Next day after this Election was signified unto him by Beaumont
Secretary to the said Assembly, with desire, that his native Country
standing now more in need then ever of his service, he would by no means seek
to wave it; and returning afterward again, brought the Instruction along for
to examine the same, and to lose as little time as may be, offering to amend
what might be found amiss in it. In the mean time he was visited and
entreated both in the Nobilitie's and the Citie's behalf from the Assembly, by
the Lord Cats himself, and by the brethren the Ministers at the Hagbe for to
take the Charge upon him; it being both their and all good Patriots opinion,
that such a person of honor, integrity, faithfulness, knowledge, experience,
discretion and authority as the Lord of Hemstede was, was exceeding necessary
and behoof-ful for the supplying of this Charge, to the good and service of
this Commonwealth.

The Lord of Hemstede was very hardly drawn to declare and resolv hereupon; and
therefore the foresaid Secretary pressing him further in their N. Gr. M.
behalf, he discoursed long thereof, and deduced likewise by word of mouth in
the Assembly it self whatsoever he could to show the weight thereof; and
especially in regard the said Charge and Emploiment was subject to great
trouble and thankless issues, and upon revolutions of times and affairs like to
prove very dangerous; Therefore he desired that he might not be liable to
give account of his doings, actions and administrations to any but their No.
Gr. Mi. full Assembly, and that likewise he might be allowed to have recours
(if need were) to the Courts of Justice in the ordinary course thereof, without
being constreined under any pretext whatsoever to make any appearance, plea or
answer before any delegated or extraordinary Judges, or before any combined
in-landish or outlandish Courts, Civil or Military; or any other Councils,
Courts, or Benches of Judicature here or elswere erected or to be erected in
any place.

That upon all Events, however things might fall out afterward by either
Revolution or mischance, he might keep and effectually enjoie still the rights
and privileges of the Country of Holland and Westfriesland in general, and
particularly the privileges belonging to the City and Citizens of Amsterdam;
and that their N. G. M. would be pleased to confirm the same ex abundanti,
unless they should think better, without prejudice or imminution of the solemn
Act he had obtained formerly from the Burgomasters and Governors of Amsterdam
to grant him some other favorabl privilege for his farther security against any
such sinistrous accident.

That their N. Gr. M. would be pleased to vouchsafe him Letters Patents of
Protection and indemnitie, against all violence, Molestation, Detraction and
other troubles, vexations, damages, and inconveniences, which by reason of his
function might be put or com upon him, in what manner, or under what pretext
soever; with such clauses and proviso's, and dispatched in the best form, as
his Predecessors in office had it, and the like was granted heretofore to
himself in his former emploiment during the Wars.

That in regard and consideration of the Commissions and travels laid upon him
by the Instruction, to perform only within the United Provinces, the better to
attend and wait upon the service of their N. Gr. Mi. looking upon his years,
and forepast manifold Commissions performed forth the Land, he may be and
remain excused from all further Foreign Emploiments and Commissions, and that
he shall not be obliged to the accepting and performing thereof without his
own inclination and conveniencie, but be spared in that particular, as
likewise the same was granted to some of his Predecessors in the same charge
heretofore.

And whereas the Instruction made for the said charge of Counselor
Pensionarie, and delivered into his hands by their N* Gr Ms Secretary,
contained a good number of Articles which partly were not to be found in
former Instructions, and partly differed somewhat from the way and order which
their N. Gr. M. had formerly desired should be observed; and that in the
execution of some of the Articles of the present Instruction, there might likely
some difficulties be discovered; That therefore he might have leav and
liberty, upon the findeing or meeting with any of the said difficulties or
inconveniences, to propound the same from time to time unto their N. Gr. M. as
likewise the same was at other times found good and granted by their N. Gr. M.
to others.

Promiss being made hereupon, that good and full consideration of all this
should be taken, his Honor at last complied, and being sworn in the
accustomed manner, undertook the charge in God's Name.

The great Assembly being ended in this manner, there remained diverse points
of less concernment, or but imperfect and unfinished, referred to the Ordinary
Assembly; which, together with other incident matters, held them busy to near
the end of the year 1651, as especially the granting of leav for absence to the
Military Officers, whilst some of the Officers, against the Act, engaged
themselves in foreign service; others, and particularly the French, English and
Scots being desirous in this time of peace and breathing, to visit their own
Countries once. The States General maintained the right of disposing herein to
belong to them, by such reasons as they sent unto the Provinces Nov. 30.
whereof more shall be said anon. The Council on the other side claimed it to
themselves; protesting the one against the other. For Accommodation whereof
there were propounded several Expedients: as,

That Leaves should be given by their Hi. Mi. and likewise by the Council of
State, the one giving notice thereof to the other, and both Assemblies should
keep exact Registers thereof; provided that neither should grant leav to to him
that was refused by the other.

That Leaves should be sought at and given by both Assemblies, but none should
pass for current or valid but that which has the Seals of both.

That their Hi. Mi. alone should give the Leaves upon precedent advice of the
Council, which should be sealed likewise by the said Council, which they might
not refuse; and that to this end the Council of State should turn back to their
Hi. Mi. all the requests presented to them in that behalf.

That one day in the week should be appointed for to examine the requests of
that nature by a Committee of both Assemblies, and to advise their Hi. Mi.
whether the desired Leav should be granted or not; and that the Leaves to be
given should pass in the name of their Hi. Mi. and the advice of the Council of
State to be witness by their Sealing thereof.

That the like number of Members of both Assemblies might be autorized for to
dispose of these Leav-givings, and that the grants then after report made
thereof, should go forth in both their Names, and under both Seals.

That no Leaves should be asked but of their Hi. Mi. who should have power to
refuse the same, or else to put it off to the Council of State for to dispose
therein; and in case the said Council did yield unto it, that then they should
go in the name of the Council alone, but yet not be valid, till first they
were confirmed by the Seal of their Hi. Mi.

And as soon as the one or the other of these ways should be liked and
determined, that then notice should be given thereof to the Provinces, with
desire that thenceforward they would give no Leaves themselves, but by way of
annexing theirs to the Leav given by their Hi. Mi. or the Council of State; in
such a manner as should then be found good to be granted, for to avoid
confusion and disorder, which else would hardly be avoided.

As for the Absent Officers, the Lords of Holland brought in their Provincial
Resolution Sept. 30, containing a charge to their Commissioned Council, to
issue no pay to any, which contrary to the Act of June 30 this year, had
absented himself forth the Land, or engaged in foreign service, or should do
the like for time to com. Desiring, that the rest of the Provinces would take
the like order in their districts. Whereupon their Hi. Mi. determined, that the
foresaid Act should be executed according to its form and contents.
Nevertheless they agreed not about the manner of the Execution; the Lords of
Holland understanding it, tha^ each Province might do the same upon the
Companies belonging to their respective Repartition.

A good while after viz. October. 24. it was resolved, That their Hi. Mi. alone,
should give the foresaid Leaves, with precedent Advice from the Council of
State, who might not refuse the under-sealing thereof; and that consequently
the Council should return* all the requests presented to them in that behalf,
unto their Hi. Mi. The Provinces in the mean time remaining entire and
unprejudiced, for either to give or to refuse their annexings, to them, which
shall have obtained their leaves in manner aforesaid. The Acts or Instruments of
the foresaid Leav-giving, being to be dispatched with the addition of these
words, after advice taken from the Council of State. But the Council not
satisfied therewith, their Hi. M. writ unto the Provinces, under date of
November. 3c. That after they had caused several Conferences to be held by
Deputies of their Assembly, with a Committee of the Council of State, about
the way and manner to be observed in giving leav to the Military Officers in
service of this State, which was to be don by their Hi. Mi. with precedent
Advice of the said Council, provided that there were besides that annexed
consents to be sought and obtained from the respective Provinces their
pay-masters; nevertheless the Lords of the said Council were not pleased as yet
to acquiesce therein, they maintaining still, that it belonged to them to grant
the same leaves together with Us, according to the Right conferred upon them by
the first Article of the Act in the year 1599. in the point of Mustering; and
the possession ensued, which being not specifically revoked or taken from them
by the Assembly General of all the Confederates kept here in the great Hall,
it ought of right to remain where it was before. Their Hi. Mi. could not
forbear by way of further Elucidation and Information of what is said before,
to represent to their No. Mi. (the particular Provinces) that having ripely
examined and pondered every thing, they could not find the Council's Assertion
to be so grounded, as that the Right of granting the foresaid Leaves at first
instance should irrevocably appertain to them, in regard that according to the
Resolution of June 16. last taken by the foresaid Great Assembly, the chiefest
care, authority and direction over the Militia of this State, was peculiarly
committed to the Generality; to whose disposition principally was left the
granting of Patents, and the taking care for the Frontiers of the said State
together with the consequences and dependencies thereof, only with the
precedent advice of the Council aforesaid; which they understood was likewise
to be observed in this particular; especially considering moreover the
Resolution, likewise taken at the great Hall July last 21. committing to their
hands alone and solely, the whole business of secret Correspondencie (whereby
they could best penitrate, what was specially necessary for the security of
the respective Frontiers of the State aforesaid) and of what a dangerous
consequence it might be, in case the said Leaves should be given by any other
but themselves, when as otherwise it might frequently com to pass, that upon any
Discovery of the condition within and without of one or other Frontier of
greatest importance, the same may by such means be made bare or deprived of a
good part of their Officers, and consequently of their principal security and
direction, against which the alleged Article of the foresaid Act cannot avail,
in as much as in the first place, the said Act was decreed by them (the
Ordinary Assembly of the Generality, and not by the joint Provinces met in
states-Assemblie or summoned together upon precedent intimation of certain
points to be determined, and therefore, might as justly, for pregnant reasons,
be straightened, enlarged or changed by themselves (the Ordinary Assembly)
which could in no wise be disputed by them, that had no other Right, but what
that Act afforded them; besides that it is observable, that notwithstanding the
said Articles, the Captains General had during that time, by little and little
taken that right, for the most part to themselves; insomuch that of the
forecited Possession, the said Council would be able to show and produce very
little or nothing, unless it were the same happened peradventure now and then
for a small time, by reason of the absence, sickness, or other the like
accidents or impediments of the Captains General. But as for their maintaining,
that the foresaid Right and Possession, was not taken from them by the joint
Confederates in the great Hall; and that therefore it ought to be continued to
them; to the solution of this, besides the motives and reasons already
alleged, serves especially the 50th Article of their Instruction, renewed July
last 18. importing, That all things not expressly set down in the said
Instruction, to be at the disposition of the said Council, should remain at
the disposition of the States General, the States of the particular Provinces,
the Magistrates of the Cities, and other lawful Superiors, each within their
own jurisdiction and limits. Now it is plain enough, that in the foresaid
Instruction, there is not the least mention made of the foresaid* Leav-giving,
much less the same referred to the Council, and consequently might not be
exercised by them; but that the same does appertain to them (the Ordinary
Assembly of the States General,) even by virtue of the said Article, and
likewise by the foresaid Resolution of July 18. and from the nature of the
business it self, for the reasons abovesaid; which may yet further be
confirmed by the last Resolution, at the Close of the foresaid Assembly in the
great Hall, taken August last 19. whereby all other businesses and affairs not
determined there, should be left to them (the Ordinary Assembly) and none
else. For which reasons and arguments they had judged it requisite to desire the
Provinces, that they would grant no Annexions to any other Leaves, but such as
should be granted by them (the Ordinary Assembly) saving the Right
nevertheless of the particular Provinces, of granting or refusing their
foresaid Annexions to the Leaves thus obtained, according to the Exigencie of
affairs.

September. 30. The old Instruction for the Generalities Chamber of accounts was
enlarged with the points, declared in the new Instruction for the Council of
State since July last 18. touching the said Chamber of Accounts, and sworn to
by those of the said Chamber of Accounts in manner as follows.

Points and Articles serving for Enlargement of the Instruction past Jan. 21.
1632. for the Generalities Chamber of Accounts, to be observed and performed
in all the parts thereof.
I. (See Artic. 18.) of the Instruction of the Council of State above.
IN the first place; The Commissioners of the Generalities Chamber of Accounts
shall take special care, and industriously look to it, that all Accountants of
the Generalities means, whether of Farmings in Cities or Country, Redemption
of means, Contributions, Oppignerations, Ecclesiastical goods, the Seal,
Domains, Rogations, as also of Provisions and Ammunition for War and of all
other Revenues and Incoms none excepted, do com yearly to the said Chamber of
Accounts, and deliver up three several Accounts, the one for the Council of
State, the second for the said Chamber, and the third for the Receiver, joining
thereunto all the original bills and documents, and other requisites relating
thereunto, that being heard and determined by the foresaid Chamber Coppies may
be delivered forth thereof as before; and that for the preventing of abuses.

II. Turn to Artic. 20. of the foresaid Instruction.
THey shall have an eye upon it, That the respective Provinces do monthly pay
the Companies their full wages; and without any defalcation or surcharging of
them by means of Solicitors, Clarks, Cash money, New-years-gifts, or any other
way whatsoever, directly or indirectly prejudicing their full pay aforesaid.

III. Turn to Artic. 21. as before.
THey shall give good heed that unto all requests for Orders presented to the
Council of State, there be joined with the same, all the bills, particulars
and other evidences, concerning the matter for which the said Orders are
desired; and having viewed examined and cleared the same, as also well
considered, whether the Land does stand engaged or not, for the satisfying of
such particulars; shall return the same to the said Council of State, for to
grant Orders thereupon accordingly; which being first registered folio tali
shall be signed by the Lord President, and two other Lords of the said
Council, being all of them of several Provinces, besides the Treasurer and the
Secretary of the said Assembly; and then the said Orders shall be returned
again together with the Requisites to the foresaid Chamber, for to be
re-examined there, whether they be given according to the Lands order, and
being found answerable thereunto, shall there likewise, at the Chamber of
Accounts, be registered folio tali; insomuch, that no order, wanting these
conditions shall be accepted or paid by the Receiver General, upon pain of
disallowance.

IV. Turn to Artic. 22. of the foresaid Instruction.
THey shall further take care, that the Convoys be uniformly given and
executed according to the Consents and Lists made, and to be made in that
behalf by the States General, and the Licenses in like manner, according to the
List dressed or to be dressed in their behalf.

V. Turn to Artic. 23.
THey shall let the Cities enjoie their Custom, for, in time of need, and when
the matter can suffer no delaie, to arm by Sea and set out men of War, at the
charge of the Land; provided only, they give immediate advertisment thereof to
the Generality, for to be satisfied out of the means aforesaid.

VI. Turn to Artic. 32.
THey shall pass no Pensions or Benefits, at the Land's charge, without the
same be granted by their High Migh.

VII. Turn to Artic. 33.
THey shall allow of no Remission given to any Farmer or other Debtor of the
Land, but with the foreknowledg and consent of the Ordinary Assembly of their
High Might.

VIII. Turn to Artic. 34.
THey shall take good heed, out of the adjoined Bills, whether the works were
put out publicly; and that the said Bills and particulars be annexed to the
Orders; as likewise look to it, that no continuation of undertaken works be
yielded unto; and that no Orders, of what kind soever, shall be otherwise
issued, but to the Receiver General, who shall accommodate the owners of the
said Orders at their desire, with assignations upon the subordinate Receivers,
at the places of their Residence, or where it may be most convenient for them.

IX. Turn to Artic. 49.
THere shall likewise account be rendered of the Rights of the Seal, according
to the Tax ordained, or to be ordained by the States General; whereof good and
exact Registers and Counter-rolls are to be kept. Nevertheless the same may
be converted to the paying of the Officers and other necessary expenses of
the Council of State*

And so likewise was the Instruction of the Receiver General enlarged with
these two Articles.
I.
IN the first place the Receiver General shall hold no Orders valid, nor make
any payment thereupon, unless they be given by the Council of State, and
signed by the Lord President, and two other Lords of the said Council, together
with the Treasurer and Secretary of the same, upon precedent registring
thereof folio tali; and having annexed to it all the bills and requisites about
the particulars for which the respective Orders were granted, and having been
likewise viewed, examined and cleared, that they were given according to the
Land's Order, with the inscription of Registrata folio tali, made by the said
Chamber; without all which the Receiver is to make no payment upon pain of
disallowance.

II.
Nor shall any Orders, of what name or kind soever, be issued or charged but
upon the Receiver General, who shall accommodate the owners of the said Orders
at their desire; with Assignations upon the subordinate Receivers at the places
of their abode, or where it shall be most convenient for them.

There was likewise consultation held several times about dressing of the List
of the Companies, as well for besetting the Frontiers, as for better Execution
of the civil commands in every Province; which continued yet in December; as
likewise the deliberations and considerations about the settling of the State
of War.

The Council of State was also summoned again and again for to com and take
their Oath upon the new Instruction, past Julie 18.

But by reason that through the absence of many the Council was very thin and
uncomplete, they excused and declined it still, until December. 1. they brought
in their Considerations upon the said Instructions; showing, that some points
thereof were not practicable according to the letter; as also that thence would
follow much remissness or slow proceeding in the affairs, and therefore no
small disservice to the Land.

Wherefore they desired, that before the passing of their Oath they might enter
into conference with Commissioners of their Hi. Mi. about those difficulties.

But receiving no answer hereupon, and being pressed anew, with the soonest to
com and take the Oath, they judged it necessary to draw up in writing the
Considerations, which in presence of his Excellcie Count William of Nassaw
Stadtholder, they had observed upon several Articles of the said Instructions,
wherein they found it too difficult for them to yield performance according to
the letter, without knowing the true sense of them by further interpretation;
protesting beforehand that they were sorry they must represent it in this
manner, being constreined to it for the quiet and satisfaction of their
minds; which indeed might well have been prevented, if so be that according
to the 24 Article of the Old Instruction, the alteration or change thereof had
been made with the knowledge and advice of the Council of State, according to
the plain words of the said Article; but now the Council being past by,
contrary to the plain text of the foresaid old ^worn Instruction, they found,
that without scruple they could not safely swear nor duly execute the said New
Instructions.

They said, the Second Article required, That the Lords of the Council should
have their firm Residence at the place of their Assembly; this the Council
held serviceable indeed for the State, if it could be put in practice by the
Lords; but some declared they had taken the Commission upon them on other terms;
and those which were sent hither from the Provinces but for the space of one or
two years, being absent now, they would find themselves put to a great deal of
inconvenience, to quit therefore their habitation in the Provinces, and to
transport their whole families hither for so small a time.

To the Third Article, of gathering in the fore- and afternoon, and that the
Counselors should still be ready at hand where the Council is emploi'd, they
said, they held it sufficient to keep to the old practice, and such as their
Hi. Mi. themselves do, gathering namely in the forenoon in ordinary, and
besides that at any time when the Lord President shall find it requisite for
the service of the Country.

To Article 15, That is was known the Council had no disposing of the common
means within the respective Provinces, but only in the places without the
Provinces resorting under the Generality, where the equality would be
observed well enough, but that it was requisite there should first some
resolution be taken about the difference which was in the common means of the
Bosch, with other places of Braband, for which advice was given a good while
ago; and that the Lists of Braband and Flanders may likewise be looked into,
as not well agreeing yet.

They declared, they could not perform the 19 Article according to the letter,
being the payment of the Souldierie was not made by them; but the same and the
charges of War being charged by Repartition upon the respective Provinces,
they had the disposition over the payment and the managing of their means
themselves. The Generalities means were employed by the Council, upon the
undivided Interests, running upon the account of the Receiver General, and all
other emergent occasions, necessities and charges, incident and incumbent to
and with the Assemblies of the Generality. As for the necessary Mustering and
Discipline over the Souldierie the Council would take care for well enough, but
the paying them by Pole or by the head, was never practiced yet, and beyond the
Council's ability.

To the 20 Article the Council said, it was not in their power to provide for
that, being every Province did therein every one as they found good, and some
did practice the contrary, causing the Companies to be charged; some also not
paying precisely; so that without redressing first the one and other
exorbitancie in the Provinces, and reducing all to an Uniformitie, it was in
vain precisely and duly to effect the rest upon or against the Souldierie.

To the 21, where is said, how the Orders ought to be signed, they observed
there was omitted, that the Secretary of the Council ought to sign the same
likewise, which nevertheless was expressed in the enlargement of the
Instruction for the Receiver General, saying, That none should be paid
otherwise, but being signed also by the Secretary.

The 22 they said did most concern the Courts of the Admiraltie, who had the
direction of the Receipts for Convoys and Licenses, and accordingly ought to
take care, that none indebted that way, may seek to exemt himself. That this
Council was only concerned in judging of such goods in the open Country, as
being stayed by the Souldierie, want passes; of which this Council had always
given Judgment, and the Courts of the Admiralties of such as had passes,
according as it has been practiced these many years.

In the 23 Article it was said, The States shall suffer the, whereas the Old
Instruction has it, The Cities shall suffer the, it were fit to be known
which is to stand.

To the 24 they said, The drawing up or framing, and deliver up such a state
every third month of the charges of War, and the incoms of the means, was not
feasible for the Council, in regard that the Souldierie and charges of War were
divided among the Provinces, and that the Council could do no more, then to
present every year a proposition by way of Petition, What they judged
Necessity did require for the conservation of the state of the Land, it
belonging to the States of the Provinces, by Declarations and Liquidations to
show forth their paiments issued.

The List for the Garrisons whereof the 25 Article treated, the Council was
ready enough (said they) to see it kept exactly; provided only, that the
Provinces transplacing any Companies within their Provinces or places adjacent,
or Patents being sent them with open names, filling them up and yielding the
Companies to be drawn forth, they give immediate advertisement thereof unto
the Council, so as the order of giving of Patents required.

To the 26, the Council would take care for equality of Contribution, but that
first the remaining Differences with some ought to be resolved upon, as was
likewise instanced above upon Article 15.

As to the 27, The Council would continue their wonted care in regard of the
Landforces, on condition, that the Provinces do address such Colonels,
Ritmasters and Captains, as they shall choose in vacant places, unto the
Council, to take this Oath upon their Commission, as likewise to sign the Act
of refusing no manner of service, or suffering no alterations in case of any
delaie of payment, according to the usual, ancient, and hitherto-continued
practice in this Council.

The Council found the 28 needful enough, and should gladly entertain all
Treaties and alliances made within and without the Land; provided, that notice
thereof was given to them, least they should commit any thing against it
unwittingly.

In the 31 there was mention made of ordinary matters, whereas the Old
Instruction speak's of extraordinary matters, whereof they desired explanation.

Concerning the 33 they said, the Council ever proceeded warily, and upon good
knowledge after information, in granting some Remissions to Farmers, as also to
the people of the open Country where any of our Army or Leaguers had been;
and that in such extraordinary Cases, whereof consideration may be desired on
both hands, it were fit to know, whether the intention was that all the
Counselors ought to be personally present, which seldom happen's; or, that
all all the Counselors being at the place where the Council is kept, should
be present in it; however making up the greater part.

To the 34 they said, That the public putting out of Fortification works, was
for a long time observed by the Council by way of affixion of printed Bills,
as also the continuations of entertainments abolished heretofore; but many
times it happened, that the public undertaking of such works could not be
effected by reason of bad payment, whereof we have some late Examples, none
being to be found that would undertake the work at a double rate, because the
Provinces paid not at all, or very slowly; so that for the avoiding of more
mischief, the Works remaining imperfect* the Council was sometimes necessitated
to cause the same to be made up by other means, (when the public course failed)
either by daily pay, or upon declarations; for which cause all could not be
tied thus to the public putting out of the Works without disservice to the
State; but the Council (said they) made indeed trial still of all public
means, and so they would likewise for the future: but if no undertakers could
be found, they must nevertheless still consider the advancement of the Land's
Service, and the managing of it with the least charges that may be. Also since
the Assent to the last state of War no Orders for Works were addressed to the
Receiver General, but Acts only are given for desiring of pay from the
Provinces according to the foresaid state of War, and Instructions for the
Receiver General, and there are no Assignations granted by him upon subordinate
Receivers, but upon precedent Orders from the Council.

To Artic. 35. they said that the same, as to the main, against all gifts or
presents, tending to Corruption, was very good, and would be followed by the
Council accordingly; but for to sharpen it to the least things; as to eating
and drinking wares, among friends; which perhaps a great while after, might get
some business to follow at the Council, that would prove too captious. However,
of such things no more could be made known, then one enjoi'd or remembered yet.

To the 28 they said, it would be very unbeseeming to hang up any such Patent
in the Out-room, or Antichamber, much impairing and derogating to the honor
and respect of the Council, and the Lords in particular; and why to hang up
such a thing more there before the Council, then before the other Courts or
Assemblies of the Generality. The best way were, that the Provinces looked
carefully to it, to entrust and send none with Commission to sit in any of
these Assemblies, but men of integrity; the Ordinance of July 1. being a
sufficient Patent, to give warning to all in that behalf, having been published
and affixed every where, which also sufficiently reached to the Attournies and
Sollicitors, practicing before the Council; there being no ordinary or set
ones there, but every one having liberty to follow and solicit his affairs
before the Council, by whom he conceived it best, and so as might be least
chargeable to Soldiers and poor people, having business there. Insomuch that
they knew not whom to swear; the Council having likewise no Jurisdiction over
the Notaries, Attournies and such like, dwelling in this place, as Townsmen,
against whom they could not execute the penalties.

They said to the 43d, importing, That there ought always to remain in loco,
five persons at the least out of sundry respective Provinces; that if this
could be observed thus, it would doubtless be expedient; but being more
narrowly looked into, if there should be too strict a tie to this, it might
prove many times very disserviceable; it being not feasible that there should
always remain Lords of five several Provinces, and the less because the
Provinces of Utrecht, Over-Yssell and Groninghen, with the Omlands, have but
one Lord a piece in the Council; besides that the Commissioned Lords in the
Council are by some Provinces called and summoned to attend their Landdaies, so
that they cannot be continually present here: again, though there might
Commissioners, be present here of five Provinces, if one of them should fall
sick, or were otherwise hindered to appear, should not the rest then, being for
persons the Major Number (though not just of five Provinces,) be able to
proceed and act, then it would follow that the Council*chamber ought to be
shut up at some times, to the great disservice of such as com up in necessary
affairs of the Land, which require a present and ready dispatch, and many
times can brook no delaie at all, as it is well known does happen very often;
but the Council being so framed, that each Counselor has his own Vote, and
the conclusion is carried by the plurality of voices; it was more fit, That if
but five Lords were present, without regard had, of what Province, the same
might deliberate and resolv upon all matters: as also it was the Custom, that
no process of any matter of importance could be determined without at least
five Lords present, though smaller ordinary businesses might be dispatched by
a less number; the Council trusting, the intention now to be no other.

Touching Artic. 44. they said, They were well contented with the allowance the
Provinces afforded them, and the reglements made or to be made about the
satisfaction for the Freights, Convoys and Charges of their Travels, without
drawing any other vacations: nevertheless they hoped, there was no alteration
intended in the 300 Gilders for House hire, the lay money about 8^ Gilders, the
Cony-monie about 64 Gilders, and the ordinary lays upon the farmings, being
they were things used and enjoied from all antiquity.

The 46 Articl. they said, was taken, according to the old Instruction of the
year 1588., when as there were three Secretaries appointed for the Council of
State each with an Entertainment of 800 Gilders per an. And three Secretaries
there were then, because the Council in those times was fain, according to the
occurrences of affairs to divide themselves, some here, some in other Provinces
and in the Leageurs; where the Secretaries had all the Dispatches, with the
profits and emoluments thereof: they being dead, there were no others put in
their rooms, so that since the year 1605. all was looked to by one Secretary:
and accordingly his entertainment was augmented, and has been above these 30
years enjoied by the predecessors of this present Secretary, viz. up to 1400
Gilders: as may be seen by the State of War in Anno 1628. whence this is
extracted.

The present Secretary (they said) had remonstrated to the Great Assembly his
34 years service, in several qualities, and having been Secretary for above
nine years, did, upon good grounds, then specified, sue for an augmentation of
the foresaid Entertainment of 1400 Gilders; which request of his was by
Resolution of July last 21. returned to the Disposition of the Ordinary
Assembly of their Hi. Mi. Therefore the Council trusted, and d^d recommend to
their Hi. Mi. that they would be pleased, to take it into such consideration,
that instead of lessening the Entertainment it may rather be somewhat amended,
and he not discouraged, but rather cheared and animated in his faithful
service.

To the 49. they said, That the Counter-Seal was wont to be kept by the Lord
President in the Council, but in regard of the troublesomness, there being
oftimes diverse Commissioners and other Dispatches to be Sealed, without the
Councils sitting, the Seal was therefore committed to the hands of the
Secretary of the Council, who kept the same in a peculiar Box under lock,
within the Council Chamger, and delivered yearly a particular List of all the
sealed Dispatches, and the dues received for the same, together with such
moneys as were emploi'd there for public businesses, though but of small
importance; This (they said) had been in use thus for many years, and that if
any alteration was desired therein, the same might be don; but it was worth
considering, whether this service and troublesomness should be undertaken
gratis.

To the 51. they said, they referred the same to Artic. 35. whereby this also
might be considered of.

The 52. they said, was conform to the 6th of the old Instruction, which had it
been thus followed, the Council was of opinion, it would have produced so good
a fruit from the practice of and advice for any alteration, that they might
have taken the oath in behalf thereof, without scruple, and should not have
been troublesome now to their Hi. Mi. with this Remonstrance. Trusting
nevertheless, that there will be so good a regard had unto it, as that the
Council may swear to the Instruction without scruole, and perform and practice
the same with tranquillity of mind, to the best advantage and service of the
Country, which (they said) was their only aim in all this.

And thus the taking of the Oath upon the said Instruction, was put off for
that time.

As for the Lords, which henceforward were to be employed in the name and
behalf of the Generality in any Ambassie, Commission or any other Deputation,
of what nature soever, whether within or without the Land; it was decreed
already August last 10. that they should be prohibited and forbidden to
receiv any Honoraries, gifts or presents from any at any time, neither
themselves, nor by any other directly or indirectly, in what manner or under
what pretext or title soever, of what quality and how small soever the same
shall be; all upon pain of infamy and incapableness of any Charges,
Employments, Offices or Benefits whatsoever, for ever; and that likewise the
said Receivers or Accepters of presents, shall ipso facto be and remain
deprived of all such Charges, Employments, Offices and Benefits, as then they
may have, enjoie or be invested with; and all this without any connivance,
mitigation or moderation, besides other arbitrarie punishment to be inflicted
upon them: of which Resolution Copies were sent to all the public Ministers
employed at present in behalf of the said Generality, in any Ambassie
Commission or Deputation as well within as without the Land, for to govern
themselves according to to the Contents of the same, without failing in the
least particular.

Next day the Lord Wimmenum, presiding at the Assembly, he offered to their
Hi. Mi. consideration, whether according to their former Resolution of October.
9. 1638. the Commissions of the Lords Deputies from their Hi. Mi. going for
Flanders, to renew the Magistrates there; as likewise the Lords Commissioners
for deciding going to Mastricht, ought not to be performed hereafter without
the charge of the Generality, by the ordinary lays respectively assigned
thereunto: but it was only found good, that the said Deputies should regulate
themselves according to the appointments determined July 18. by the great
Assembly, for the vacations and Journies or Traveling Exspences.

After that, September. 16. it was agreed, that all such persons as should be
put in any charge or office, by their Hi. Mi. the Council of State, the
Generalities Chamber of accounts, the respective Courts of the Admiralties, the
Councils of Braband and Flanders respectively, as likewise by the Court of the
Vryen at Sluys, shall be demanded, whether they had seen and considered the
Act against Corruptions published July 1. of this year 1651. if not, that
before the swearing of them, the same shall be read before them, and they
further demanded, whether, for the getting and obtaining of the said office or
employment, they have not trespassed against that Act, and be ready to take
the Oath here ensuin g

The form of the particular Oath, whereby, according to their Hi. Mi.
Resolution of November. 16. all such persons are to be sworn, as shall be put
in any place or office, by the Generality.
I A. B. declare and swear, That for the obtaining of this office, I have
neither directly nor indirectly, presented, promised or given, nor shall
promiss or give any gifts or presents, to any persons, either within or without
the Government under what pretext or title soever. So truly help me God
Almighty.

Of which Resolution, several Extracts together with some Copies of the foresaid
Act against Corruptions were transmitted to the foresaid Council of State, the
Generalities Chamber of accounts, the Courts of the Admiralitie, the Councils
of Braband and Flanders respectively, as also to the Court of the Vryen at
Sluys, to the end the same may be respectively kept and observed, and seen
kept and observed.

On the 20. of November. there was presented before the Lords of the Ordinary
Assemblies of their Hi. Mi. the frame of an Oath, according to which, they
should promiss and swear, That they would not take, accept or enjoy, neither
themselves, nor by their wives, children, or others in relation to them, or any
other whatsoever, nor by any under hand-dealing, sale, exchange or any other
ways, directly or indirectly any Gifts or Presents of any thing, how small
soever, even to eating and drinking wares, from any persons, whom they should
know to have, or likely to get any business before the Assembly of their Hi.
Mi. for pretending, seeking or having obtained there any Charge, Office,
Benefice, Grant, Sentence, Resolution, in any business, or for expedition
thereof, under what pretext soe^ver, whether it were before or after the
business shall be transacted or dispatched, and in case they should have
received or enjoied any such gifts, from any one, whom afterward they
understood, to have something to do at the foresaid Assembly, which at the time
of their receiving the said gifts or presents, they knew not of, that thereof
they should give notice to the said Assembly, and forbear directly or
indirectly to recommend any such business by themselves or others to either the
Assembly or Members ihereof. But for the present, there were only taken
Copies hereof, by reason of the consideration lately presented by the Council
of State upon the 35. Article of their Instruction.

Something there is to be said yet of ^he Princely House Mortuaire.

How the Agreement was made between the Princely Guardians or Administrators
for the young Prince of Orange the same has been deduced above. but there
remaining unadjusted yet the point resulting from the Act of the late Prince,
given to the Count of Dona, touching the Government of Orange; as also, whether
the Magistracy in the City of Breda and elsewhere, places assigned for the
Princess Royal her Dowry should be constituted only by her, or by them
jointly; their Plea's were were heard for some days together about it in the
latter end of November, before the High and Provincial Council to whom they had
amicably compromitted and and referred the said two points.

But the said Princely Guardians met with a more important Difference yet,
though not among themselves, but with the States of Zealand, about the Cities
ter Veer and Flushing, called Vassals; for that they belonged not immediately
to the Earldom, but to the Prince of Orange as Marquis, who by reason of these
two Cities, and as Premier Noble, (the chief Nobleman,) had three Voices or
memberships of the seven in Zealand; and having besides that the placing of the
Magistrate in Middleburgh, Ziriksea and Tolen (Goes only being exemt) had the
full and absolute direction in the said Provinces. Nevertheless the nature and
disposition of the Zelanders, as well as of the other Netherlanders, being
inclined to Freedom, they did for a great while hitherto support the said
direction of the Prince (the rather for that commonly and of necessity he
must sway it by an under-Director) with some impatience, for the asswaging
whereof the late deceased Prince was fain to alter the Direction, and commit
the Direction to other hands. This was no removing of the absolute Direction,
but only of the Director; therefore the cause remaining still the same, the
impatience remained in like manner. To this came also, that those which had the
present Direction labored very much still, during the Great Assembly, against
the intentions of Holland; who for that very purpose sent to the
State's-Assemblie in Zealand the Lords Opdam, de Wit, Nyport and Ricce, who
made in public the Proposition of April 25, above-recited. But underhand
there was discovered, or given to understand, that there was a design on foot
to engage the State in difference with England for such Interests as did
nothing concern the State: that the Provincial liberty was undermined, and
means used to continue the Direction or Government Oligarchical, committing all
to the hands but of a very few, and those none of the best.

The Ministers and Commons at Middleburg were already besides that extremely
unsatisfied with those, which had the Direction there, and were invested with
all the principal offices. It was laid to their charge, that they did many
things contrary to the privileges of the City; which caused at last a total
change of the Magistrate at Middleburg; as oftimes it happen's, when outward
ordinary medicines are destitute of operation, that nature it self begin's to
work a change within: The story and occasion hereof is, that the Cities of
Zeland, had, according to the example of Holland, undertaken and resolved, to
make henceforth their own Magistrates; saving still the Rights, Privileges and
good Customs of the Cities; only supplying the defect of the Stadtholder, and
doing themselves, what he did otherwise.

The Directors at Middleburg, for to retain the Government there, had so
contrived the matter, that the Right or Custom of certain twelv Electors (who
were all to be strangers or forein-born Citizens) was much impaired in the
Grant for the City of Middleburg, and the Election almost totally put into the
hands of those, that were in the Government. This caused a great deal of
murmuring and impatience among the Commons, complaining, that too many
strangers were brought into the Magistracy, whiles other better beloved of the
Citizens and better qualified were excluded.

They likewise complained against a certain Bench, or Seat-monie or
Contribution, which the Church masters (all men of the Government) had put upon
the places or seats in the Church; Item a certain Styver-monie, set upon those,
which were found walking forth the Gates on Sundaies, most lighting upon the
poorer sort.

The Ministers thereupon, and the foresaid encroachings of the privileges,
inveighing against those courses in their Sermons, it happened, that one of the
Magistrates went forth the Church much disgusted, and that the Preacher was
summoned to appear before the red door (as they call it) where it com to that
height, that they began to enjoin the Ministers, they should com that day
before their Sermons, and acquaint the Council what Text they had chosen to
preach upon, and what manner of Explications or Application they intended to
make thereof, threatening them, that the Church, yea and the City too, should
be forbidden them, if they continued refractorie. The Ministers answered, if
they should be put out of the Church, they would preach it in the Streets; and
if forth the City, they would do it in the fields.

Thus one discontent coming upon the neck of another, there being an Assembly
of the States kept at that time, there gathered themselves June 6. a great
number of Citizens near two thousand of them, in the Abbie-Court, desiring
Audience. But the States of Zeland remitted them to the Magistrate of their
City. Hereupon the Citizens desired to speak with the Lord Tibant and
Burgomaster Landsbergen. Tibant remained within, but Landsbergen came forth,
thinking to quiet the Citizens with his gravitie; which fell out contrary; for
he got into such a throng, that once he was quite under their feet; yet,
rescued by the Bailie, he was brought to the Inn, called the court of Holland,
next the Balance; where the Burghers demanding his forthcoming, the Host
told them, he was got out at the backside already, they might com in and look
him; whereupon presuming that he was gone to his own house, the company ran
thither, and without loosing of time, broke the windows and forced the doors
open, and plundered the whole house, breaking all the cabinets and coffers, and
throwing the China wares, out at the windows. This don, they ran to the Lord
Tibant his house, casting abundance of stones at the windows. But there met them
about five of the Ministers, who with their presence and persuasive language,
quieted the multitude somewhat and saved the house from plundering; and for to
determine all fundamentally, there was forthwith put out and published this
ensuing Declaration.

THe Burgomasters, Senators and Council of the City of Middleburg in Zeland do
declare hereby to recall the Constitution of reforming the Laws of this City,
decreed at the Assembly of the Lords the States of Zeland, May 1. 1651. in as
much as concern's the function or office of the Electors; promising to maintain
the same at all times, in their Rights and Privileges; as also their N. do
hereby assure the good Citizens and Commons, that they are unalterably
resolved, now and always in all respects to maintain and protect, as well the
persons as the Office and Function of the Brethren the Ministers, in their
honor, luster and estimation.

Don at the Council June 6. 1651* Me present, P. van der Perre.

The Office of the Electors, (twelv in number, during life, all strangers, or
foreign born, for the improvement and encouragement of Trade, as also to hinder
and prevent Oligarchie;) consisted therein, that they named or chose twelv men
out of all the Citizens, and out of those there were taken six. This course was
much altered by the new Constitution, the power of the Electors being reduced
to narrow limits, and in a manner extinguished, that they must no longer choose
out of the whole number of Citizens, but be tied up, in a certain way, to the
Council, which being an Innovation, and depriving the said Electors of a great
part of their Power, and the same power being impropriated by some few invested
with the Government; those said Electors, being most of them zealous
professors of the Reformed Religion and Church Members; advised with the
Ministers, whether with a safe Conscience they might wink at this proceeding,
in regard of the Oath they had taken for preserving of the Privileges of the
City. The Ministers declared, they could not; and both before and after openly
preached against it as an Infraction. And thereupon ensued the tumult
aforesaid. The abovesaid Act of June 6, being published, and there being some
new Orders requisite, together with a supply of other Persons in the place of
those, that were retired; the Companies of the City, representing the Commons,
presented to the Magistrate several points of Grievances, in manner as
follows.

Right Woe. Wise, Discreet and very prudent Lords!
ALl the Companies within this City of Middleburgh, whereof many Members have
set their hands underneath here, do show, with all due Reverence, that* (God
amend it) their Petitioners, Companies and Privileges, in stead of having their
Ordinances confirmed and strengthened, they see the same daily impaired and
diminished; it being com so far already, through the alterations of our
Citie-Privileges and other encroachings, that, as your N. know, it has caused
a beginning of a sad Commotion; and therefore it is that the said Petitioners,
humbly pray and beseech your N. to grant unto them, and cause to be observed
the ensuing Articles.

First, that none of the Lansbergeus may be admitted any more to any function
or government, Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Item, that all the Books and papers written by the respective Landsbergeus
against all the Ministers, shall be declared from this day infamous books and
libells.

Item, that no Scouts or Sheriffs shall be able to serve within this City,
except they be of the Reformed Religion beforehand.

Item, that the Excise for the building of the new Church shall be taken off,
they the Petitioners being ready to pay down a free will gift to that
purpose, desiring all possible expedition may be made with the building
thereof.

Item, that the Masters of the Orphan's-chamber shall take no higher salarie
from Widows and Orphans, or any other persons, then Mr Adrian Conney enjoi'd in
his time.

Item, that the present Secretary of the Orphan's*chamber shall forthwith be
put out of his Office, and never admitted any more to any Ecclesiastical or
Civil functions.

Item, that M^ Joban van Scroos-kercken shall likewise forthwith be put out of
his Offices and Secretaries places.

Item, that Mr Paulus Scrooskercken shall be emploi'd no more as Receiver in
any Church, Hospital or other God'shouses, nor exercise any public function
Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Item, that henceforward there shall no yearly paiments more be made for any
pews, seats or benches in the Church; and that the said places shall be left
open for any one.

Item, that all such as are in the Citie's service shall hereafter be
dispensed of petitioning yearly for continuation in their Services, and
continue in their Offices during life, unless some notable faults should be
committed by them.

Item, that all the Companies be maintained according to the petitioners
privileges, and none thereof be impaired but rather enlarged, and especially
that the Super-Deacons may not be able to do ought without the assent of the
other Deacons and Members.

Item, that no persons whatever they be, may be allowed to make yearly
Composition for the Watches, but that every one shall watch his turn and time
in person.

Item, that no Citizens shall be molested or surcharged, but rather defended
and protected in their City- Freedoms, and no more be fetched forth out of
their own houses, according to the custom of the City.

To this end the Petitioners desire, That the Privileges and Customs
apperteining to or concerning this famous City may, with the soonest, be
printed in Nether-Dutch, that every Citizen may at his pleasure peruse the
same, and know how to keep his Right.

As likewise the Deacons and Members of the respective Companies are desiring,
that they may assemble yearly every seventh of June, for to see whether their
Companies and privileges be not impaired.

The City of Middleburgh or the Commons thereof being thus disposed and
animated against those, which for a good while hitherto had the Government
there in their own hands, those men were fain to retire themselves the one here,
the other there. Landsbergen and Scroos-kerck were gone to the Haghe; Tibant to
Sluys, from whence within a while after by petition to the Court of Holland
etc. he gave to understand That he Counselor and heretofore Burgomaster of
the City of Midleburg in Zealand, and afterward one of the Commissioned
Counselors of Zealand, and the Admiraltie there, had, for a considerable time
there, exercised the same function of his to the best advantage of the said
City of Middleburg, and therein caused the common good thereof always to
outweigh his particular profit and considerations, as whereunto he had ever
acknowledged himself obliged; nevertheless it happened, That June the 6t last
past, he being at Middleburg aforesaid in the Assembly of the States of
Zealand having made his appearance there together with other, as a member
thereof, a notable tumult arose there before the chamber of the said Assembly,
by a company of common people flock't together that day with great
impetuositie; That he ^elle-quellement (partly) understanding the ground of
the same tumult and flocking together, and therefore finding it not safe to
retire home to his own house, through this rude multitude, as fearing he might
be personally affronted and uncivilly entertained by the said people in some
kind or other, to avoid their rage he withdrew himself out of the chamber of
the said Assembly, by a secret passage; which being com to the ears of the
foresaid tumultuous Company, they presently betook themselves toward the
Petitioner's house and having beaten out all the glass windows with stones, they
would doubtless have proceeded to the plundering and ruining of it, had the
sparing of their design not been even begged by the intercessions of some of the
Magistrates and Ministers there, who were fain the rest of that day and all
night after to keep watch before the said house; within a few days after, a
certain request was presented to him by some of the Ministers, in the name of
some persons, pretending to be the Companies of the City, being in effect
desired thereby, and what else was declared by word of mouth by the foresaid
Ministers, that he would lay down his abovesaid Office and place of
Counsellorship of the City of Middleburgh, if he chose not rather to sell
both his own and some of his friends houses, utterly plundered and ruinated the
first night ensuing, insomuch that then, to avoid more mischief, he was
constrained, to condescend to the said desire with this proviso nevertheless,
that it should be promised him in the foresaid pretended Companies behalf,
that so doing all should be and remain at rest, and himself unmolested any
further, and maintained in his other places and Charges, as also at that time,
the foresaid Ministers declared, they had no other intention. And although he
was ready to go on in the exercise of his other functions, and so continued
still, and therefore ought not to have been disturbed therein in any kind,
nevertheless it was judged at the same time by the foresaid Ministers, for the
further and better quieting (as was pretended) of the tumultous multitude, it
would be best he should retire himself for a while out of the City, which
he was very loath to yield unto, in regard of the foresaid declaration made,
but yet was persuaded at last, the rather for that this same retirement of his
out of the City was afterward found good likewise (as they pretended) by the
ruling Burgo-masters for the time being, who likewise in token thereof,
together with the Baylie, conducted him forth the City themselves, and brought
him to a certain boat in the haven there, bespoken by him. Within 7 or 8 days
after he being returned again into the City, for the discharging of his
other Offices in manner requisite, some of his friends to whom he had
communicated his design, dissuaded him from it, as well assured he could not
escape being affronted going to and fro the streets. Having made the
ruling-Burgo-masters acquainted therewith, and desired to know of them, whether
they did not find their Cities constitution such that they could defend him
against the feared street-injuries, they declared in plain terms, it was not in
their power, whereupon he desiring the said Burgo-masters, they would be
pleased then to consent to his retiring himself to the Spa, for his own and
wifes health sake; the said Burgo-masters gave their consent unto it, and
accordingly he went to the Spa, and being afterward returned thence to Sluys
in Flanders for the dispatching of some particular affairs of his own there, he
thence by letters signified to the Magistrate of Middleburgh, that he was
still disposed and ready, to com and duly to execute his foresaid offices for
the service of the said City, waiting but for their (the said Magistrates)
least intimation and promiss of being protected against all the suspected and
feared insolences or affrontings in the streets. But there being hitherto no
answer at al returned to him upon his said letter, and he therefore not
without reason suspecting, that the constitution of the said City was not yet
so settled, that the Magistrates were able duly to protect him; and that besides
he was from good hands in that City sufficiently informed of the certainty
thereof: That all such tumultarie commotions of the commons were of dangerous
consequence, which, according as now was don in some of the prime places of
Holland, ought to be exemplarily suppressed; and that therefore, he was
constrained now for to be duly and sufficiently freed from all the suspected
street-violence, and other insolences, together with his wife, children,
family, servants, moveable and unmovable goods, and unmolestedly to attend in
due manner upon the discharge of his offices, to apply himself unto this
Court, desiring their provision herein.

Whereupon order was given to the first sworn Messenger, to go to the place
where it shall be requisite, and there in the name and behalf of the Supreme
Magistrate, calling to his assistance (if need be) the officer of the Pleek to
put and take the foresaid Lord Thibant, his wife, Children, men and
maidservants and whole Family into the protection and safeguard of the supreme
Magistrate; Commanding moreover all the Commons' Companies and all other, in
name and behalf as above, upon pain of Death and Confiscation, that they
neither do, nor cause to be don to the foresaid Thibaut, his wife, children,
men and maidservants, and the rest of his family, any manner of injury, in
body or any of their goods, great or small, by words or deeds in any kind;
being that in the name and behalf of the Supreme Magistrate they had put and
taken, and did put and take hereby, all the foresaid persons and goods into the
protection and safeguard of the Supreme Magistrate aforesaid. And to the end
that none may be able to plead or pretend ignorance hereof, and every one
beware of trespassing in this kind, they charged him to make public
Proclamation hereof in the usual places of promulgations, and where it shall
be requisite. Advertising therewithal, all Justices, Officers, Ministers and
subjects of the foresaid Supreme Magistrate, that he executing this, seriously
to assist and obey him therein, as they stood in aw of the Supreme Magistrate's
indignation, and would avoid their peril.

The foresaid Exploiter or Doorkeeper arriving at Middleburgh, he made his
address to the Magistrate; who demanding his Warrant, and having taken it into
deliberation, they found not good that the same should be proclaimed, least
the Commons might thereby be the more irritated, both against the matter it
self, and to the endangering of the Messenger himself; who thereupon returned
back again without performing the Exploit. And the Magistrate finding some
passages in the said Protection to be contrary to the Truth, they sent
Senator Morthamer and Secretary Beaumont to the Court Provincial, whom they
informed otherwise, and in such sort, that the Protection was called in again;
and promiss made, that the Magistates of Middleburg themselves, if need
required, should protect the said Lord Thibaut, and cause him to be protected
sufficiently against all injuries. One night the Lord Thibaut his brother in
Law Peckius went about to set up the foresaid Protection in some of the chief
passages at Middleburg, and to publish the same; but by command of Burgom^ster
Vette, accidentally passing that way, one of them was torn from the wall, and
immediately the Round doubled for to find out who set it up; by and by some
body being discovered busy some where with putting up the like, he for fear
of being apprehended, flung away his Hat, Coat and Sword and showed them a
good pair of heels. The things found being brought before the Senate, it was
soon known they belonged to Pe^kius* who being sent for and questioned about
it, after some tergiversation he confessed the deed; and was thereupon commanded
to depart the City, without ever returning into the same.

This alteration having happened at Middleburgh, and consequently in all
Zeland: the four Cities thereupon, by virtue of an ancient Resolution, and
taken before the alteration, took in hand the business of the Vassal*Cities,
Whether, and how the same henceforward might or ought to have Voice among the
States; Whereupon presupposing that the Prince of Orange had constituted the
Civil Magistrate there, not as Marquis of ter Veer and Flushing, but as
Stadtholder of the Province; they determined, that the constitution thereof was
now of it self necessarily revolved to the States (through the Stadtholders
Deceas) and that they had power now to pass the Grant thereof unto the said
Cities, if they desired it, or else to do it themselves; or in case the said
Cities should continue to suffer the constitution of their Magistrates to be
made by the Prince or his Administrators, then to refuse them Voice and Session
among the States.

The Advice which the Commissioned Council thereupon presented in writing, was
this here ensuing.

Copy of the written Advice of the Commissioned Council of the Lords the
States of Zeland, bearing date September. 1. 1651, touching the Distinction of
the Right belonging on the one side unto the County or Earldom; and on the
other side to the Marquis or Lord of Flushing and Veer, in regard of the
Magistracy and Civil Government of the same.
FOr the pertinent handling whereof there must be taken into consideration
three different cases concerning the said Cities.

First, in what state and condition these places were before they came under
the particular Lords, Vassals of the Earldom.

Secondly, what their constitution was under the said particular Lords.

And Thirdly, how the foresaid Cities ought to be considered* after that in
the beginning of the War they were admitted Members of the Sovereign Government
of this Province.

As to the first, this must be held for assured and unquestionable, that
although an Earl of the Land in those times could justly claim, not only the
Power of Sovereigntie and Resort, but likewise all manner of Jurisdiction and
Roialties in the same; nevertheless there remained and belonged also to the
places themselves ex jure publico Universitatis, some proper and peculiar
authority in matter of Government, distinct and separated from the Earl's
Command, in the behalf and among their own Common Inhabitants.

As likewise it is notorious, that there can no Universitie (or Body Politic)
be otherwise rightly constituted sine aliquo Exercitio Juris publici.

Therefore it appears also, that the same places, before ever they came under
any particular Lords, had several Elections and Privileges granted and
confirmed them by the successive Earls and Countesses, for the use of them and
their Inhabitants, and the administration of their own Government; as is
manifest among other proofs by the old Citie-rights and Charter, given by
William of Hanolt, as Earl of Zeland, to them of Flushing in the year 1315, and
afterward renewed and amplified by the Lady Marie of Burgundy, in the year
1477.

Which thus premised, it is further known and notorious, that the foresaid
Government having originally appertained to the said Cities ex Jure Publico,
the same was not taken from them, but contrarily left entire, when afterward
by the Earls and Countesses of Zeland they were sold and transported to other
Lords.

It being plain for the proof thereof, First, That the said Earls or
Countesses in making those Cessions have, according to the Tenor of their
Instruments, expressly retained no more to themselves then the right of
Sovereigntie, Resort and Homage.

And Secondly, that the foresaid particular Lords, by the Contract of their
foresaid Sale and Transport, they have notoriously past away no more right or
authority over them then the Instruments of Investiture, and the specification
of the Fiefs do contein and hold forth.

Which for all the Concession of as well higher, as middle and lower
Jurisdiction, and diverse other both honorable and profitable rights and
prerogatives made over to the said Lords, do therefore withal in terminis give
up unto them all manner of functions and requisites necessary for the
Direction and Government of a Civil Society; it follows evidently, that
whatsoever (serving to that end, and not belonging to the immediate exercise of
Sovereigntie) is not expressly and by name set down in the foresaid Letters,
the same ought to be left and reserved to the Cities aforesaid.

As indeed the same distinct Right thereof, over the said places belonging on
the one side to the Lord in respect of his Enfeofment, on the other side to the
Citie-Magistrates Ratione Juris publici, may yet further be asserted.

First, from certain immunities and privileges particularly granted unto the
foresaid Cities and their common resort, for their particular accommodation, by
the the Earls and Countesses of Zeland, some even after the time, that the said
Cities were under particular Lords; which are things without dispute, and to
be seen in the Records of the said Cities.

Secondly, from diverse Contracts, Transactions and Agreements solemnly made, as
well of old as later times, betwixt the Lords on the one, and the Governors and
Commonalties of the said Cities on the other side.

And particularly from the Contract made in the year 1530, between Adolph of
Burgundy as Lord of Flushing, and the Burgamasters and Governors of that City
touching the mainteining of the Citie-works to the Sea-ward, and the collecting
of several Incoms and means arising there, a certain distinction being made
therein between party and party, both for charge and benefit thence
accrewing; where is likewise mention made, not only of nulling or repealing a
former Contract, but also (which is worth noting) in the Citie's behalf that
this was don, after due and Legal communication had with the Principal ones and
Commons of the said City; the whole Contract also being confirmed on the one
side with the Seal of the Lord, and on the other with the Seal used for the
Citie-affairs.

As likewise Prince William of Honble Memory, in the year 1582, granted unto
those of Flushing aforesaid for their support and relief, and toward the
mainteining of their Sea works, the Herring-toll there and Heir's-right,
together with the handtoll; under certain conditions set down at large in the
said Concessions.

The like Agreements and Contracts, both touching the fortifications and other
matters, were made at several times between the Marquises and the City Veer
respectively.

All which could not stand in Law if the Governors and Inhabitants of the said
Cities were wholly, and without any exception, depending on their Lords, and
could not in any wise be considered without them; as also in such a case,
being all one with their Lords, it is plain of it self, that they would not
be able to make any Contract with them, Siquidem nemo secum contrahit.

It appears Thirdly also very evidently by the Agreements and Transactions
entered into and past by the said Cities, without their Lords, apart and in
particular with the States of this Province.

For proof whereof does serve especially among others, that which past between
the said Lords the States of Zeland, and the City of Flushing, in the year
1585, touching the Indemnitie desired by them upon the ensurance made to her
Roial Majesty of England.

By which Letters or grant of Indemnitie obtained then, there are engaged to
them and put into their hands, all the Domains, Means and Revenues of the Earl
and Earldom of Zeland, within that City and resort thereof; with autorization,
that of their own power they may seiz upon the same for the Indemnitie of the
City, their Citizens and Inhabitants, against all damages and prejudices,
which by reason of the said transport or surrender the said City might chance
to suffer in their Domains, Incoms and otherwise, or any of their Citizens and
Inhabitants in their concernments.

Being that the foresaid Letters and Acts of Indemnitie (note well) were
granted to the Governors of Flushing for themselves and their Inhabitants in
particular, and upon their particular Request, without any use made in that
behalf of the name and intervention of his Excellency Maurice, being at that
time the Lord of the place.

And that which is more yet, those of Flushing among other points and articles
delivered in by them to the end aforesaid, one was, besides the satisfaction
desired in particular for themselves, that content might be given likewise to
Count Maurice for his Interest; making thus express distinction between the
interest of the one, and that of the other.

As also it is notorious, and appears by the Registers, that after the
foresaid Act of Indemnitie for the Governors and Inhabitants of Flushing,
expedited September. 23, 1585, the Letters of Indemnitie for his Excellency
aforesaid, (in case, that through the foresaid Garrison of the Queen of
England, his Jurisdiction, Domains, Houses and Rights should com to suffer any
damage or inconvenience,) for all the instance of those of Flushing aforesaid,
and the earnest solicitation of the Lord Bruninex, Counselor to his
Ezcellencie were not granted till December thirteenth ensuing.

It being true withal, that the Magistrate and Citizens of Flushing, for the
cause abovesaid, having been engaged by a particular Oath of Fidelity to her
Majesty aforesaid, they were afterward June 14, 1616, particularly likewise
released thereof.

And therefore was it very pertinently said in the 9 Article of the Grant or
Charter given to those of Flushing by his Excellency Prince William of happy
memory, in the year 1574. That according to their ancient Privileges they are
sufficiently qualified and antorized to treat, transact and dispose of all
matters and affairs belonging to the foresaid City.

Fourthly, the grounds of the former assertion are conspicuous also, from the
Contracts and Transactions made as well by the Lords as the Governors of the
the said Cities, intervening, and for their distinct interest with other
foreign Princes and Potentates.

An example whereof we have in the Agreement made in the year 1612 between the
Commissioners of the States of Scotland, by autorization of the King, on the
one part, and the Commissioners both of the Marquess and of the City of Veer
on the other, concerning the foundation of a Staple for the Scottish Wares
within the said City, in most of the Articles principally engaging the
Magistrate there; and in the solemn Signature thereof, the Deputies of the
Marquess standing separated from the Commissioners of the City.

All which had been to no purpose, and could not have been don without
incongruitie, if the Magistrate of the foresaid two Cities had no power and
authority in civil matters without their Lord, but absolutely in all things
depended on him.

Fifthly, the same is put out of all Controversy, in regard of the particular
Domains, Revenues, Royalties, Lordships and Offices which the said Cities of
old have had and still own the propriety of, and whereof they ever had the
sole and full disposing without any intervention or opposition of the Lord.

By reason whereof also it is expressly said in the 5 Article of the Charter
aforesaid, granted to those of Flushing by Prince William, That they shall have
power yearly to Commissionate the Rent*master or Treasurer for Receiver of the
Revenues particularly belonging or appropriated to the said City.

And for further proof may be added, that the foresaid Rentmaster is bound
yearly to bring in a due Account of his Receipt and Administration, together
with his Evidences and Remains, before and in the presence of the Burgomasters
and Senators, without making any mention of the Lord or his Commissioners,
passing by the very Counselors, being that they are particularly put in by
the Lord, for the administration of Justice: as also to this very day there is
not the least notice taken of those things in the Lord's behalf.

Upon which ground also Artic. 7, ensuing, the King's Domains are pertinently
distinguished from the Citie-Revenues.

And Artic. 8, it is again declared, that the Burgomasters, according to their
ancient privileges, should have the Disposing of the City -Revenues, to
emploie them to the use there rehearsed, without any mention made of the Lord.

It being likewise known, that in conformity hereof, the Districts and and
Lordships of Soutelanden and Coudekerck do particularly appertain at present to
the City of Flushing, the Lord not pretending the least Right or Direction
therein.

As also in times past the Lordship of the Oost*Capelle belonged to those of
Veer, which afterward they alienated to their own benefit, without needing or
seeking for the consent of the Marquess.

And further it is as well known, that both the foresaid Cities, for the
maintenance of their said Revenues, Domains and other Rights, sustein and
prosecute all processes of Law actively and passively, in their own name, and
at their own charges; as likewise the Sentences pronounced in that behalf are
directed to and executed accordingly, only in relation to the said Cities.

Sixthly, the same is also strongly manifested thereby, that the Cities
aforesaid were privileged and autorized of old (as is expressly agreed by
Artic. 9, of the foresaid Charter of Prince (...) of their own power to make
themselves such Ordinances, Statutes and Inhibitions, for both Civil Justice and
Go^ernment, as they shall find good and useful for themselves and their
Inhabitants.

The same right and power being grounded partly upon the Jus directum
Universitatis, alleged above, and partly upon the free concession of Count
William or other their Lords, for the better direction of the Civil Society of
the said Cities.

In which regard it is likewise remarkable what is further said in the tenth
Article of the foresaid Charter, That viz. in Case of Discrepancies in opinion
about that point, and differences arising thereupon about Conclusions, the same
should be reserved to be determined by the Discretion and sentence, not of
the Lord or Marquess, but of his Excellency as Stadtholder of the Province,
assisted with the Senate, in the name of the Earldom; an evident testimony,
that the said Cities in the point aforesaid, are all subject to their Lord's
feodataries.

In the seventh place, the Assertion aforesaid is also confirmed thereby, that
the Collation or Conferring of most of the Offices, regarding the
Administration of the Civil Government there, does appertein, not to the Lord,
but unto the Cities themselves, by reason whereof also it is notably declared
Artic. 7, of the Charter abovementioned, That the Burgomasters, Senators and
Counselors of Flushing have the Authority for to create all Officers requisite
for the service and maintenance of the Government there, where the Officers,
requisite for the maintenance of the Lord's Authority, are all of them plainly
and expressly distinguished from the former.

Insomuch, that as among other things, the Lord is qualified and wont, in the
foresaid Cities, to appoint in his own behalf for the direction and assistance
of justice, the Bailifs and Secretaries, and for the administration ofhis
Domaines, and survey of the works standing on his charge, certain Rent-masters
and Clarks; so on the other side the Cities were privileged of old, not only
to appoint, peculiar Treasurers and Receivers, over their proper goods and
revenues, but likewise partly, in matters of Government, such as are called
Assessores Universitatis, Surveyors of the fortifications,, Water-Clarks,
Porters and other Ministers; partly for assisting and dispatching of justice,
the Orphant-Masters, the S^out or Sheriff and elected Senators of the lands
quadri-partition, the Commissioners and Secretaries of the land-right, together
with the Clerks and messengers; and some likewise to oversee the poor and
hospital, and other attendants, belonging thereunto.

So also do the said Cities use of their own authority and without the privitie
or knowledge of the Lord, not only to send their Deputies to the Assembly of
the Provincial Government; but also to Commissionate some persons both for the
Commissioned Council and Court of the Admiraltie, as likewise for the Chamber
of Accounts, and the States of Wolcheren, besides the Elections which are made
by them too, out of the Nomination of the triple number, for Adventures in the
East and West-Indie Companies.

And all this originally from that power, which directly belong's unto them in
matter of Policy and Government, and out of respect of the particular and
singular interest which the foresaid Cities have in the Conservation and
prosperity of the Province.

Eighthly, The same may further be deduced, out of the manifold Privileges and
Immunities granted unto them, not only by the Earls and Countesses of Zeland
(as was told already above) but also by foreign Kings and Princes, as well, if
not more in favor and respect of the Governors and common Inhabitants of the
said Cities, then for their subaltern or subordinate Lord's sake.

Whereunto among others especially relate's a certain Privilege given them by
King Edward of England, in the year 1475. to Henry van Borssele, as Lord of
Veer, together with the Burgomasters and Governors (distinguished from the
Lord) as also the general Inhabitants and Commons of the said City, which then
were, or should be hereafter.

Which kind of Privileges, especially there being many of them, are of that
validity and weight, in regard of the foresaid Cities, and must so be
understood in Law, that although the Lords thereof, should either committ any
felony or delinquencie against the Earl, as the direct Lord, or have given to
the said foreign Potentates* any just cause of offense, and merited thereby to
be deprived of the Disposition and Contents of the foresaid Privileges, so far
forth as concerns them; nevertheless the same could not be interpreted to
the prejudice of the foresaid Cities and Inhabitants, being guiltless of any
such transgression or neglect; nor they deprived of their Interest in the said
rights and privileges, but for their own Delinquencie.

Ninthly, and most principally, the same is ungainsaiably plain, by the often
foresaid grand Charter, given to those of Flushing and Veer respectively by
Prince William of happy memory, in the year 1574.

The same, first, being not granted, by or in the behalf of the Lord (who then
was the King of Spain) but by his Excellency in the Name of the said King, as
Earl of Zealand, and the Earldom it self.

And secondly, given not to the Lord, nor in respect of him, but only upon
request for the common good of the foresaid Cities in regard of their
particular members.

And especially in the third place, That it might serve them for a permanent law
and constitution, whereby the government of the said City, should thenceforward
be regulated, and as near as was feasible equalized as well in respect of
diverse freedoms and prerogatives, as in regard of of the form of Government
with the old free and privileged Cities of the Earldom.

The truth of which threefold qualification, lying so evidently plain
throughout the whole text and disposition of the oft-said Charter, that none of
any sound Judgment can at first view, remain ignorant thereof, much less
contradict the same.

The rather for that his Excellency, as well in the Proem and beginning as the
upshot of all, very plainly avoweth, that he does it in the Name and behalf of
his Majesty, v z as Earl of the Land, and in that Quality being his
Stadtholder within this Province.

Without making any mention of the Right and quality which the foresaid King
was then invested with in regard of these places, being their particular
Fief-Lord.

As likewise that Quality could then not well have been made use of, not only
by his foresaid Excellency without special Order and Commission from the King,
as Lord, wherewith it is known he was not instructed then; but also much less
by the said King himself, in regard that in the foresaid quality and simply
considered as Vassals of the Earldom, he was well known to want the
Qualification of any such Privileges, which apperteined only to the Prince or
States of the Land, or to such as by them are lawfully and solemnly
commissioned and autorized thereunto.

The like power and authority was never committed to the Lords of Flushing and
Veer, in their Letters of investiture, which readily appears in the perusing
of them.

Therefore we see likewise, that in diverse other Privileges and Elections,
wherewith it pleased Prince William of happy memory in those times to
gratify diverse other Cities also, both in this and some neighboring Provinces,
his Excellency every where made use of the Name and Title of Stadtholder, and
as exercising the function of the Supreme Authority.

Whereunto is very appliable, that his said Excellency in the Proeme of the
foresaid Charter says withal, to have don this with the Advice of the Council
assisting him, as also with the consent of the Rulers and Governors of the
Cities, which at that time chiefly represented the Sovereign Government of this
Province, and that in the Name only of the Earldom.

And so likewise the Concl^sion at last, whereby all high and low Judges and
Officers are charged effectually to maintein the foresaid Magistrates and
Inhabitauts, according to the content and purports of the said Graces; and
withal that there is added at the close [for such is Our pleasure] which could
be used by none but the Sovereigns and States of the Land, and can in no wise
be attributed to the power of any Vassal of the Earldom be he never so great
and eminent:

Besides that the advantages and prerogatives themselves also contained in the
said Privileges, in the judgment of all understanding Statesmen, are most of
them of such a nature, that they cannot directly flow from any other source but
from the Earldom; being so inseparably fastened to the disposition of the
Sovereign Government that they shall never be found to have been communicated
by any Letters of Investiture to any Vassal from the Earldom.

As there are among other things Promises of immediateness, protection,
confirmation of the ancient Privileges, Concession of Execution under caution
of all sentences, both interlocutorie and definitive, being repairable, and
not exceeding a certain Sum; the right of appealing omissio medio to the
great Council, the right of Calauge and Execution in matters of Justice, as
well Criminal as Civil, to be don by the Burgomasters in the absence of the
Officers; the erection of the Countrie's Quadripartition, under the managing of
the Scout or Sheriff and Senators, to be appointed by the foresaid Cities,
Dismembring of the high Jurisdiction, having apperteined of old to the
cognizance of the Renomasters at Westerschelt, freedom from Tolls, and
execution of Confiscations, besides the Right of returning some of their
Porteers, which may be elsewhere criminally impeached and sundry other
prerogatives and examinations, recited there at large.

And principally indeed, that both the said Cities are thereby made and created
integrating members of the Sovereign Government of this Province, representing
together with the other, the States of the Land* both of Zealand in general and
of Walcheren in particular, in that efficacy, that they must be called to all
Assemblies, Communications, Account-audites, and all other transactings and
affairs concerning the said States respectively, and being present there, have
their Votes and Voices like the rest, and as other States are wont to have.

Which singular and great Priveleges, without all controversy, not only can
be communicated to the foresaid Cities from none other, but the special free
concession of the Earldoms authority, the qualification and power of the Lord,
coming not into any consideration in these matters; but likewise are granted to
the said Cities in particular and peculiarly, without any respect,
communication and interest of their Lords.

As the same does evidently appear, as well by the Text of the foresaid Charter
throughout, and the known practice ensued, as from the presuppositions and
intentions, whereupon the foresaid concession by Prince William of happy
memory, is said, to be made originally.

Considered that if thereby it might be understood, the same was granted them
for the supplying in the States-Assemblie the vacant places of the Abbot and
Prelate at Middleburg (which nevertheless is constantly maintained by the other
Members of the Earldom, that it could not be) or, that the same was don in
respect of their Contributions and the main interest, which they together with
other Cities of Zealand, have in the conservation of their common weal; yet
neither of these considerations can be made relative or applied to the
intention of the Lords of these places, so as to infer thence, that in the
granting af the foresaid Graces or Privileges, there was some regard or
reflection had to their Persons or condition,

For besides that, in general, it cannot be presumed the foresaid Prince,
being at that time so highly offended and persecuted by the King of Spain, he
should have been disposed then to gratify Him, being the Lord of the places
aforesaid, with any particular advantages; it cannot be conceived in any case,
how the said King otherwise the First and representing the rest of the
Nobility in the Assembly of Zealand, should besides that be able to take
Session there in the place of the Prela^, and having voted once in the
Nobilities behalf among the States should afterward have power to vote again,
by means of those Cities, in behalf of the Prelat, which indeed without
palpable contradiction and absurdity, and the introducing of manifest
confusion in matters of Government, can be maintained by none.

Therefore, and clearly do show, that the said prerogatives were granted
without any regard had to the Lord, and only in the behalf and to the
advantage of the foresaid Cities, and their common inhabitants, by reason of
their particular and common interest, it is said in express terms, both in the
Preface and conclusion of the same, that they are granted upon the humble
petition of the Burgo-masters and Governors, and in the none and behalf of the
said Cities and their Governors to com, together with the common Porteers and
inhabitants thereof.

And to what end? namely, for the furthering of good Government, welfare and
prosperity among them, and that they may be relieved from under the great and
heavy burdens which were fallen upon them, partly by reason of the necessary
Sea-Works, and great arrears of Rents, and partly because of the wars against
Duke d' Alva and his adherents, together with regard had to their good
endeavors and faithful services performed by them in that War.

All which can have and yield no other reflection, but to the commonalitie of
the said Cities, considered apart, without admitting of any further extention;
and so, that the same Cities, (as likewise was touched above) cannot lawfully
be deprived of the same, through any felony, neglect, or delinquencie of
their subaltern Lords.

Which ought to be of so much the more validity, when reflection is made upon
the direction intention and aim, Prince William of happy memory had in
granting of the said Charters to the Cities aforesaid, namely, to compose and
frame the Government and civil admin stration thereof, as near as might be,
equal to the other Cities of the Earldom, as among other appears ungainsayably
by the ensuing Arguments.

And First by this, that there having been of old a Court in the foresaid
Cities, serving originally to the direction and administration of justice, and
the same in are likewise before the war, by contract made between the Lords
and the said Cities, for sake of their Government; now by virtue of the express
text of the foresaid privileges, there is set up and instituted there
respectively a formal Court of Common Council or Citie-Council.

It being well known that (as on the one side the Court of justice was
formerly set up and employed by order of the particular Lords, according to
their letters of investiture, so on the other side) the foresaid Erection of
the Citie-Council there could not be effected otherwise, then with express
consent, and by the immediate Authority of the Earldom.

That same power being one of the most eminent and principal Roialties, which
belong's to the Princes or States of the land here.

As therefore we see likewise, that both in these Neighboring-Provinces, not
only the City Councils themselves, could not be erected without the special
Grant from the Earldom; but likewise not the Least amendment, alteration or
ampliation thereof could be made without the like Grant, and with Unanimous
Consent of all the Members, after the contents of them were first very ripely
and seriously examined.

And that which is more, the remonstrances to this end, made by diverse Cities,
are used to be presented only by the Burgo-Masters and Common Council apart,
with preterition of the Counselors, Who in many places in this country, have
nothing to do with the Government, but are only employed about the exercise
and administration of justice.

As in very truth also, there has ever, time out of mind, been a special
difference in the Cities of this Province betwixt these two sorts of
employments; and the Common-Councils were originally introduced there
(distinguished from justice) only for the keeping of the rights and Privileges
of the Cities whereunto likewise they are particularly sworn; and, as by the
Lords the States it was very well said, in the year 1587* to whom appertain's
the power, not only to resolv but also to dispose of all things, concerning
the state of the Country and the Cities.

Which is the reason likewise, Why the Burgo master* of these Cities are wont
and bound, in all businesses of importance, to understand the good opinion of
the foresaid Common Councils, as whereby the Cities and Commonalties, for
matter of civil Government are properly represented.

And for the same reasons also is the Election of the said Common Council, in
most Cities both of this and Neighboring-Provinces, left by Priveleges from the
Earls or the State thereof, unto the immediate disposition of the Cities
themselves, even to the least inclusively.

Insomuch that it cannot be showed by any letters of Investiture, or other
Feodarie Acts, that ever there was any thing of that nature transported or
communicated to any vassals of the Earldom, much less pretended to, or
practiced by them in any of their Lordships.

Secondly; the foresaid position, viz. That it was the intention of Prince
William of happy memory, by any means to equalize the two foresaid Lordships
with the Cities of the Earldom, is evidenced by this, that although formerly
the Courts of judicature and justice used to be chosen simply without any
Nomination ex arbitrio Dominorum at the pleasure of the Lords, the same cannot
be don so now, because of the foresaid privileges, but upon a precedent
presentation, whether it be, that any Election shall be needful for the
yearly renewing of the Laws, (...) that the same must be made by reason of the
departure or Deceas of any of the Law-keepers for the supplying of the places
which thereby is made vacant.

And thirdly, that though the foresaid presentation and the ensued Election
thereupon of the Counselors, may be made there as well of persons which are
of the Common Council of the said Cities, as of any one from amid'st the
Commonaltie, nevertheless the Burgomasters thereof may not be chosen, but out
of those which shall be named of the said Common Councils, they being the
Head of the Government, and therefore ought always by known course to be of
the number of the Common Council, which in the Counselors, as was said even
now, it is not necessary.

In regard that on the one side for the administration of good Justice in the
general, it suffices, that there are chosen and appointed some understanding,
discreet, and just men; but on the other side for the direction and
well-ordering of Government it is requisite besides, that there be chosen some
likewise which are constantly versed and well-experienced in affairs.

Besides that therein also specially consists the assurance and freedom of
the Cities, that (as the charge and emploiment of Common Counselors ought to
be every where firm and permanent, so likewise) all manner of functions in
matter of Government be as near as may be, conferred upon the Members of the
said Councils only.

Where it is likewise very considerable, that by the abovesaid Charters, the
Election of both Burgomasters out of those nominated of the Common Councils,
and Counselors out of the Commonaltie is left to his Roial Majesty to wit, as
Earl of Zeland; being that the quality of the Lord as concurring therein, is
not all expressed, nor the Designation of his Majesty in this behalf ever used
in all the Charter.

Which nevertheless had been very needful in every regard, if so be that the
meaning of Prince William had been to gratify the King as Lord of the said
places, above the advantages and prerogatives mentioned in the Letters of
Investiture, with sundry other such eminent Concessions; forasmuch as of Right
all Collations of Roialties, whether of Vassa^s or otherwise, ought to be made
plainly and in express downright terms, such as admit not any arguments of
presumtion or inference to the contrary.

But besides that same, beyond all this, would yet imply diverse other palpable
contradictions and absurdities, against the quality and function wherewith his
Excellency was then invested, (as was demonstrated above) it is undoubtedly to
be held, that it was as far from his Excellencie's intention as the East is
from the West,

Not only for that the King so grievously persecuting him at that time had
merited no such thing at his hands; but also because the same could not be
admitted then to the use and exercise of such eminent Roialties with any
safety and quiet of the said Cities; as also that none knew what ^s^ues and
events were like to ensue upon the war begun and the Differec^es then arisen.

And therefore it might well be said and asserted upon good ground, that
although their Excellencies and Highnesses of happy memory did successively
expedite the foresaid Election, that nevertheless they did it not as Lords of
the foresaid places, but as Stadtholders, and in the Name of the Earldom.

The rather, because his often abovesaid Exrellencie Prince William made the
said Election there, from the year 1574 to the year 1582 inclusively, (at which
time he first became the buyer of the two foresaid Lordships) no otherwise and
in no other quality, then as Stadtholder of the Province; and that it was
likewise most reasonable and equal that the Magistracy of the foresaid Cities,
being made integrating Members of the Earldom's Sovereign Government, with so
many prerogatives of the Earldom, should depend of the Earldom, if not entirely
and altogether, yet at least for the most part.

And howbeit that it will be instanced, the appointing of the Counselors
cannot be disputed to the Marquiles or Lords of the foresaid places, being
the power thereof is expressly given them by the Letters of Investiture; yet it
can no ways be conceived or imagined, how or upon what ground the said Lords
or Marquises should have any right or authority over the Election of the Common
Councils, or of the Burgomaster, as the head and chief members thereof.

Being that to the Office of the Consul or Burgomaster there is peculiarly
committed the Ordinary Direction and Command in all Civil affairs, touching as
well the Administration of the Citie's Goods and Revenues, as the welfare and
protection of the Cities.

Concerning which the Feodatarie Letters of the said Lords and Marquises,
forasmuch as now especially they must be considered as integrating Members of
the Sovereigntie, do not make the least mention.

Notwithstanding that those very Letters were granted many years before the
date of the Concession of the foresaid great Privilege; and since the date
thereof to this day were never couched in any other terms then they were
originally, and therefore cannot contein more now, then was granted and
conferred upon them at the original investiture.

A manifest token, that there appertein's no share nor authority to the Lord or
Marquises in the present Government of the said Cities, and that whatsoever
has been indulged to the Bailiffs, Burgomasters, Counselors and Common
Councils thereof in that behalf, the same is not derived unto them from the
Lords, but only from the Earldom.

Which is the more to be credited yet, forasmuch as in the Judgment of all
those which are versed in these matters, it is held altogether incompatible*
and contrary to natural reason, that one and the same persons, Court,
Society, or Universitie in the said quality, shall be Vassal and Independent
together of the Earldom, and on the other side comprehend such a considerable
and main part of the Sovereigntie it self; on the one side to do Oath and
homage, and on the other side to receiv it; to be subject and command all at
once.

As therefore it is well known, that in some of the neighbor Provinces, some
Cities could not be made Members of their Provincial Assemblies, but after
that it was solemnly resolved by the States of that Country, the said Cities
should always and solely depend of the Earldom, without ever being to be
reduced or engaged any more to any particular Lords.

The said States alleging this reason in the Letters solemnly past thereupon,
That thus they do and did for the security of their Province; besides that it
could not but cause a great undervalue and disrespect to the Governors of
integrating Members of the State's Assembly, to be chosen by particular and
subaltern Lords; to say nothing of the disservice to the common interest,
which in many regards, would unavoidably ensue thence.

All which Considerations, of what reflection and weight they are, your N. M.
will easily judge according to their wonted wisdom, and determine by their
Resolution.

Holding nevertheless (under correction) that hereunto is not contrary, that
both here and elsewhere some Ecclesiastical persons, Gentlemen and Citizens,
being Subjects and Vassals of the State, do constitute a part of the Supreme
Magistrate, being that the same does not appertein to them as to Vassals, but
as Commissioners, or being the first and worthiest of certain Bodies or Orders
whereof the foresaid State is composed.

Nor that it is contrary to this, or implies any contradiction, that many of
the foresaid Common Councils are appointed and employed by the Marquess, for
the administration of Justice, and keeping of his Right, Lordships and
Roialties there; being that in Law, one and the same person, considered in
diverse respects, may without any incongruitie or confusion be employed in
distinct services, and engaged under several Oaths, as might be instanced and
verified, if need were, by many examples and autorities.

And consequently the persons which from among the foresaid Common Councils may
be appointed Counselors there, though on the one side they be engaged by
Oath to the Earldom or to the Magistrate of the Cities for being faithful to
the Administ a^ion of the Civil Government thereof, nevertheless they may well
enough also make Oath to the Lord, for the sincere administration of Justice.

As likewise the same Counselors, besides the ordinary duty which they ow to
the inhabitants by Commissions from the Lord, they stand withal engaged to the
Earldom (or State of the Province) to administer good Right and Justice to the
people of the Country assigned to their resort.

Wherewith as we trust, Noble Mighty Lords, to have summarily and no less
usefully elucidated the whole condition of this Affair; so we will not doubt
but the same have sufficiently understood thereby what Difference there is
betwixt the Command and Authority which in the foresaid Cities does belong on
the one side to the Earldom, and on the other to the Lord or Marquess, and in
what points the same respectively does most properly consist.

Therein namely, That to the Earldom, without all Controversy, apperteineth
all the Right of Sovereigntie and Supreme Authority.

That the particular Lords, as Vassals of the Earldom are bound to show to the
said Earldom all due Obedience and homage.

That the said Cities, in respect of the Employment* and Deliberations touching
affairs, as well of the Common Government of the Land, as the particular of
their Cities, do altogether and immediately resort under the said Earldom,
without being bound to acknowledge the Marquess or Lord in that behalf.

And consequently, That the Courts of the Common Councils being originally
erected there by the Authority and in the Name of the Earldom, there is none
can justly pretend to any disposition of confirming, altering or moderating the
same, but only the Lords the States, as representing the said Earldom.

That the Creation and Election of the Burgomasters in those Cities (as being
the Head of the Government, and of the Common Councils, in various relations to
them, according to the 3 and 26 Articles of the foresaid respective Charters)
made heretofore by their Highnesses as Stadtholders of the Province, is now by
their Deceas, apparently devolved into the bosom of the Earldom.

Which might henceforward rather do the same by themselves, or else (in
conformity to the Resolutions taken and already practiced, to the advantage of
the Common Members of the Province) confer the same upon the Magistrates of the
said Cities respectively, in such a way and Reiglement, as was by them drawn
up with the least impairing of their privileges, and might consequently upon
due cognizance of the matters, be autorised and decreed here.

Leaving likewise to their trust and unprejudiced as before, the further
direction in all civil matters and affairs with the said Cities respectively.

Adding this privilege besides, for reasons and in conformity to the common
practices formerly alleged, that they may be enabled to make choice and
election of persons, for the supplying of some vacant places in the Common
Councils, absolutely and definitively by themselves.

As also there ought to be left (under correction) unto the foresaid Lord or
Marquess, unprejudiced and undamnified all such dispositions and authority as
are in express terms given to them over the foresaid places by their Letter of
Investiture.

And that in pursuance thereof the same shall continue to exercise the power
there, for the administration of the criminal and civil Jurisdiction, and
particularly to engage by Oath, according to custom, the Bayli^ts and
Counselors, together with the Secretaries and other attendants of Justice.

Provided notwithstanding, that the foresaid Counselors and Officers being
desired to administer Justice at first instance in criminal, or by appeal in
civil matters, over the Inhabitants of the open Country, having relation to
their appointed resort, they shall be bound and obliged in that regard to
respect, and that immediately, the Commands of the Earldom.

As likewise the Bailiffs and Counselors aforesaid, shall be bound to make
Oath in that behalf unto the Earldom, and likewise in the express Name and
Quadripartition of the same to banish, etc. howbeit as we are informed, the
same has not been absolutely practiced for these many years. Being that the
power of the said Bailiffs and Counselors, of administering Justice in the
foresaid places, is not conferred upon them by Commission of the Lord, who has
not the least thing to say or pretend there, but only by delegation and
permission of the States.

That withal the Marquess or Lord shall have liberty to place for the future
such Officers and Ministers there, for the Receipt and Improvement of his
Demeanes and Royalties-as he was wont to do of old; as likewise the Cities may
dispose in matters of their own, so as they shall find it requisite, for the
adminstration of their Government and best managing of their own means and
revenues.

And thus we conceiv, shall every one be duly maintein'd in the Right
belonging to him, and no body wronged, the Earldom reserving its Right, the
Marquess or Lord the contents of his feodotarie Letters, and both the
respective Cities the substance of their Charter.

Presenting at last unto your N. M. consideration, whether it were not
expedient, that they would be pleased to appoint some Members of their present
Assembly, who might, together with the rest of the Council, frame and draw up
from all that has been represented here a Substantial Ordinance, how the Right
belonging to the Earldom, touching the Magistracy or Government of the
foresaid Cities may henceforward be directed to the best advantage; and
consequently their N. M. conform the taking of their Resolution of it to most
Justice and Equity.

For which end we pray Almighty God to inspire your N. M. with the spirit of
Wisdom and discretion; and to continue blessing the same, with a long-lasting,
peaceable and prosperous Government.

Don and advised thus etc. In Middleburg Sept. 1. 1651.
If his Electorall Highs of Brandenburg in his French letter sent heretofore by
Monsieur Severin to the Princess Royal, had reason to intimate, what detriment
the affairs of the Young Prince did suffer, by reason of their mutual Disputes;
certainly, here was more cause to regreet and rue it. The Princely Guardians or
Administrators notwithstanding, did both underhand and overboard, privately and
publicly whatsoever they could to withstand it.

They wrote October. 23. unto the States of Zealand, That they were informed of
the foresaid Considerations and Advice, and that they were sent to the Members
of the Assembly, as one of the points to be handled, next Session. And whereas
the said advice was greatly tending to the prejudice of the Young Prince his
Right, belonging to him as Marquis and Lord of the foresaid Cities, Therefore
they, in Quality of Guardians of the said Prince, their respective Son, and
Son's Son., Marquess and Lord of those Cities* had found themselves obliged to
cause the Right of the said Prince over the said Cities to be carefully
examined, that thereupon they might so much the better and more fundamentally
be able to inform their N. M. and to show, that diverse positions and arguments
drawn thence, were most* abusively and without any necessary consequence
inserted intothe foresaid Considerations, whereby the right of the said young
Prince-pupil was not shaken at all; for which end there could be produced and
represented the Zelandish Right of Burgomasters and Counselors both for
Government and Justice, and the difference herein from the Hollandish Right,
though likewise not universal, or alike in all Cities.

And withal, That from all antiquity and beyond the memory of men, the
Marquises and Lords of the Cities had created and appointed there, not only
the Counselors, but the Burgomasters also themselves, and that the same Right
had ever solely appertained to them as Lords of the places.

That their N. M. should likewise be showed, that besides diverse other Rights
appertaining to the said Marquis, as well within Flushing as Veer, the Election
of the Counselors within the Marquisate was made by him ever since the year
1581. for the space of 70 years together, all which time of years, the foresaid
Marquisate, was possessed by virtue and title of purchase, by Prince William of
happy memory, and his Illustrious Successors.

That it should likewise be demonstrated to their N. M. as clearly as
Noon-light, that the Marquises all that time, had exercised the Right of
electing the Burgomasters and Council, suo jure, and of their own head, and not
as Stadtholders of the Country of Zeland, or by virtue of any other delegated
power from the Prince of the Country.

And further they said, That their N. M. could very well, according to their
great wisdom and wonted equity, consider the importance of the foresaid Right
in respect of the young Prince-Pupill aforesaid; and that it became them in
quality of Guardians with such an exact care to tender the Conservation of all
his Rights, especially one of that clearness and consequence as this was, as
the Laws required at their hands.

And that, through weighty impediments, and especially, that but lately they
were com to a due settlement about the Guardianship, they had been hindered to
refute the foresaid Considerations and advice of the Commissioned Council of
their N. M. so fully, as the importance of the matter required, and to
represent the business as circumspectly, as they desired.

Wherefore, they were confident, their N. M. would make no difficulty to bear
them so much respect about the matter aforesaid, in their quality of Guardians
of the foresaid Prince Pupil, whose Illustrious forefathers had merited so
much of the state of these Countries, and in particular of their Province; as
to be pleased, to supersede all deliberations upon the foresaid Advice and
Considerations, and in the mean time to let all things remain in the present
state and condition,; not doubting, but they should present their N. M. ere
long with such a grounded Information, as would yield them full and ample
satisfaction.

Not long after there was sent into Zeland to the States-Assemblie there, the
Lord Beaumont, Counselor to the young Prince, who made and in writing
presented them with this ensuing.

Declaration or Counter*Remonstrance of the Commissioners of their Highss the
Guardians of my Lord the Prince of Orange, as Marquis and Lord of the Cities
Flushing and Veer, delivered to the No* Mi. Lords the States of Zeland, by way
of confuting the written Considerations and Advice of their Commissioned
Council, touching the Right of his Highs over the said Cities in respect of the
Magistracy and Government thereof, and for Assertion, that his Highs, cannot
be deprived of the Election of the persons of the Magistrates, or part thereof.
Noble, Mighty Lords!
THeir Highss, the Guardians of the young Prince of Orange having been informed
of the written Considerations, drawn up by your N. M. Commissioned Council, in
pursuance of your N. M. Resolution of April 25. 1651. and together with other
points; whereupon your N. M* were summoned against the 11th of the last month
of September. transmitted to the Members, with the said Council's advice, by way
of Elucidation and Distinguishing (as is pretended) between the Right,
belonging on the one side to the Earldom, and on the other, to the Lord
Marquis, over the said Cities of Flushing and Veer, in respect of their
Magistracy and Government, and consequently, That the Princes of Orange, of
happy memory, should have exercised no other in that regard, but as, or in
quality of Stadtholders of the Province; so that, not till now, by the death
of his late Highs of blessed memory, it was revolved into the Bosom of the
Earldom, to be provided for accordingly.

And their Highss, the Guardians of the said Prince, finding themselves obliged,
to cause his Right over the two said Cities to be examined, that they might be
able so much the better and more fundamentally to inform your N. M. and show,
that diverse positions, and arguments drawn thence, were put into the said
considerations through mistake, and without any necessary consequence; so that
thereby the said Right of the Prince Pupil, is not shaken in the least point;
and it being the part and duty of their Highss as Guardians, to take exact
and perfect care for the conservation of all the Rights belonging to the said
Prince Pupil, and especially of such a clear and principal one, as is the
present; and their Highss, having through special weighty impediments, and
particularly, that the Guardianship was but lately brought into a due settled
course, being hindered, to refute the foresaid Considerations and Advice of the
Council of their N. M. so fully, as the importance of the affair required; and
to the end their Highss might prepare things, according to the desire they had
to represent the same to your N. M. with all circumstances, they sought to your
N. M. by their Letters of October. 23. That it might not seem grievous unto you,
so far forth to respect them in behalf of the foresaid matters, and in the
quality of Guardians to the said Prince Pupil, whose Illustrious forefathers
merited so much of the state of these Countries, and of that Province
especially, That they would be pleased, to supersede but a while all
deliberations upon the foresaid Advice and Considerations, and leav all in the
mean time in the present state and condition, They not doubting, but that they
should present you with such an Information, as would give full satisfaction to
your No. M.

But now their Highss, being by other hands most unexspectedly informed, that,
without heeding the said just desire of their Highss, by giving but a little
respit, the abovesaid point, touching the foresaid considerations and advice,
was brought and taken into Deliberation at the Assembly of your N. M. and that
some Members have already opened their Resolution upon the same, without having
heard, what may be alleged to the contrary against the said considerations
and advice, and for the assertion and maintenance of the said Prince his Right.

Their Highss do find themselves necessitated, so much as the shortness of time
and the unlooked for, unexspected precipitancie permits, summarily to say
and deduce before you.

That in the foresaid Considerations and advice of the Commissioned Council of
your N. M. it appears, That therein they have represented and laid down
before your N. M. as just grounds,

That the Election of the Burgomasters, in the foresaid Cities, as being the
heads of the Government, and Members of the Common Councils, should have been
made heretofore by their Highss as they were Stadtholders of the Province, and
therefore through their Deceas, the same should manifestly be devolved again
into the Bosom of the Earldom.

And that the said Earldom might now henceforward, either make the said
Election themselves, or confer the same upon the Cities aforesaid.

And by further privilege enable them, for the choosing of persons to supply
the vacant places, in the Common Councils, absolutely and definitively by
themselves.

Whereby seeing, that his Highss should com to be deprived of his Rights
lawfully belonging to him and the Princes of Orange his forefathers, as
Marquises; We shall show, for the assertion of his Highs Right, and
confutation of the foresaid Councils Considerations and Advice, all along as
the said Commissioned Council has chalked out the way, in handling and
propounding this matter.

That, touching what the Commissioned Council deduced at large, how the Cities
of Flushing and Veer, had originally, and before ever they came under
particular Lords, Ex jure Universitatis, their own and peculiar authority in
matter of government, and that the same is not taken from, but left entire to
them, after that the Cities were by the Earls transported to the particular
Lords.

So as that the same distinct Right, appertaining to the Lord on the one side,
and to the Magistrates on the other, is endeavored to be prooved by the
foresaid Considerations, from the beginning, all along to the 50. Article.

From the contracts, agreements and transactions both ancient and of later
times, made by the Governors of the said Cities, with the particular Lords of
them in the years 1530. and 1582.

As also with the Lords the States of this Province, touching their indemnitie,
in regard of the assurance made to the Q. of England, in the year 1585.

And the contracts and negotiations with foreign Princes, particularly that of
the year 1612. about the foundation of the Staple for Scottish wares at Veer.

Item, From the Privileges and Immunities, granted to the foresaid Cities
within their Kingdoms, and particularly that that of Edward King of England in
the year 1475.

As likewise, from the possession and enjoyment of the goods and revenues, of
old and still belonging to the said Cities, together with the disposing of the
same, and appointing of Officers for the Administration thereof, and calling of
them to account; as also the conferring of the charges, regarding the
administration of the Government of those Cities; and the undertaking and
prosecuting processes at Law, actively and passively, for the maintenance of
their Rights and Revenues.

And surthermore from that the said Cities were privileged of old, of their own
accord, to make any such Ordinances, Statutes and Inhibitions, both concerning
Civil Justice and Government, as they shall find requisite for the good and
advantage of them and their Inhabitants.

Hereupon your No. Mi. may be pleased to understand, in his Highs behalf, that
forasmuch as there is no difference or question about those things, nor any
thing pertinent hitherto to the matter in hand, for the deciding of the main
point in Question, all these instances might well have been past by.

With this proviso and limitation nevertheless, that the 34, 36, 38, 40, 42,
43, 44, and 45 Articles be understood and granted no otherwise and further,
then that what is touched there, and in other Articles concerning Government,
ought to be don with consent of the Bailiff, and in the Name of the Lord
Marquess.

Nevertheless, seeing that the Lord of the Commissioned Council take upon them
to deduce and assert from hence a fundamental right for their purpose;

The Council of his Highness by way of Reply succinctly shows,

That nothing of all this can or ought to com into any consideration, in such
sort as if it were or had been pretended in the Lord Marquise's behalf, that
the Magistrates of the foresaid Cities had no Right or power there in matter of
Government belonging to them without the Lord, but depended absolutely and in
all things of them, as the same is touched in the 31 Article of the said
Considerations.

That all their Deducings neither, can be so absolutely in all parts yielded
unto, to that end whereunto they labor to reduce it.

And particularly not the inference which is drawn thence in prejudice of the
Marquess his Right and Due, Artic. 13, namely,

That since the Letters of Investiture there are not, together with the
Concession of the high, middle and low Jurisdiction, in express terms,
conferred all manner of functions and requisites necessary for the direction
of a Civil Society; therefore it should follow, that whatsoever served to that
end, and did not belong to the acts of Sovereigntie, or was not expressly named
in the Letter of Investiture, was to be left and reserved to the City.

The Right which apperteineth to the Lord Marquess in the Cities is easy to
be found by the Letters of Transport and Investiture, made by the Earls to the
Lords; more then those Letters import the Marquess does not desire nor pretend
to, in regard of either the Earldom or the Cities.

And so on the other side it is assuredly hoped your N. M. will not take away
or dispossess the Marquess of his Rights and Prerogatives by lawful title
acquired, as indeed could not be avoided, in case the Advice of the
Commissioned Council should be followed.

The City of Veer has ever been under particular Lords; nay and by such it is
believed she was built upon their own ground; and the City of Flushing being
in the year 1477 com by Sale and Cession to the said Lord of Veer, the same by
the Letters thereof was transported to the Lord, with all that belonged to it,
nothing excepted; with all the Jurisdiction, High, Mean, and Low, and
furthermore with all manner of Freedom and Rights, enjoied there by the Earls,
only the Sovereigntie, resort and homage reserved.

The Emperor Charles, in the year 1555, erected both the Cities of Flushing and
Veer, besides other Lordships and Districts named in the Letters, into a
Marquisate, and incorporated and united the same to a full-Fief and Homage of
one and the same nature and condition with the like reserv only as before.

With which Universitie the Marquess being invested, there is conferred
therewithal upon him not only the Rights of personal Dignity, but together
with the Universitie all the jurisdictional parts and interests which the
Superior Lord had there.

To which purpose serv's likewise, that in the Conditions, whereupon the Prince
of Orange bought the City of Flushing in the year 1581, it is expressly set
down;

That all other Domains and Lordly consequences, whereof the the Letters make
not mention, and which the Lord nevertheless or his forefathers had or enjoied,
and might have had and enjoied by Right, the same shall ensue the Buyer without
any reservation.

Whereby there is not acquired to the Lord Marquess any particular right in and
over the said Cities, in respect whereof only those Cities should, tanquam
mixtum statum obtinentes, be owned by and subject to the Marquess, and have
remained without his Jurisdiction immediately under the Earl, so as diverse
Cities in Germany, as Hamburg in respect of the Duke of Holstein, Magdeburg in
respect of Saxony, Brunswick and Cullen in respect of their Princes, and
diverse others, which only in certain respects acknowledge their Lords, and for
the rest are immediately subject to* the Empire.

But the City of Veer has always been subject to their particular Lords, and
the City of Flushing was reduced to the same nature and condition by the Earl
of Zeland, in his foresaid Letters of Transport and Sale in the year 1477.

Whereunto serves ungainsaiably, that the same Letters do expressly contein, a
special charge and command from the Earl to the subjects, portiers and
Inhabitants of the said City, for to obey and swear unto the Buyer, their
Lord, his Heirs and Posterity, as to their just Inheritor and Lord
proprietarie.

To which Letters, and those of Renuntiation* has relation the Decree of the
year 1581 whereby the Cities aforesaid are sold to the Prince of Orange.

Those which are versed and skilled in the Laws and Matters of this nature ever
understanding it thus, That the Cities which are bound to call their Lord,
Inheritor, or, Lord Hereditarie, and must swear hereditarie Allegiance to him,
are to be held subjected Cities absolutely.

The like Oaths of Hereditarie Allegiance being made to the Prince of Orange
in the years 1581, and 1588, there were silver coins thrown abroad in
remembrance thereof, upon which there was the Arms of Nassaw, with this
circumscription, Nodus indissolubilis.

To this serv's further, that by the Grant or Charter of the year 1574, given
to the said Cities by Prince William, the said Prince take's the said Cities
into the Earl's immediate protection and subjection, with promiss never to
alienate the same, which execution had been needless, if those Cities were not
subject to their particular Lord.

From whence may well be considered, that the Lord Marquess has not only ex
praesumta mente, but also by express surrender of the Earl, by virtue of the
foresaid Letters of the year 1477, and all succeeding feodarie Letters
intentionem fundatam to all Rights and Dues which the Earl had in and over the
said Cities.

And that therefore it is a groundless inference for the Commissioned Council
to aver, as they do, Artic. 13. of their Considerations touched above, That
whatsoever belonged not to the Act of Sovereigntie, the same should be left
and reserved to the Cities.

Whence follows likewise, that all the Rights and Prerogatives which the
Cities and Magistrates do enjoie, and which are rehearsed at length by the
Lords of the said Council, beginning from the 13 Artic. to the 15, touching any
Jurisdictional interests, they are deriving from the gracious Concessions both
of the Earls and the particular Lords unto the said Cities, and granted from
time to time unto them; as likewise the same is alleged by the foresaid
Consideration in sundry Articles; and may be seen too in the old Statute-book
of the City of Flushing, that of all ancient times, the Election and
Ordinances in the behalf of Justice, the Orphant's-chamber, the Companies, and
other matters serving for the Government and ordering of the said City, were
made and caused to be promulgated by the Lords of Flushing.

So that all those Privileges are belonging to the said Cities, not of
themselves, ex Jure ullo Universitatis, without the exercise whereof, no
Universitie or Civil Society could be instituted.

Although otherwise also it is conceived, that the Jus illud publicum
Universitatis, is screwed up somewhat too high by the Council in their
Considerations; for the deriving thence such conclusions, as would exceedingly
prejudice the Lord Marquess in his Lordly Prerogatives.

It is a known business in the Laws, that not only Cities, but Castra, Villa,
Vicus, and even Courts or Bodies Collegiate, which are comprehended under the
name of Universitie, may have and possess goods and revenues like unto
particular persons, and may appoint men for to manage, protect and defend the
same; and also dispose of the said goods at pleasure of their own accord.

Which nevertheless they of Flushing may not do without the consent of the
Bailiff, in the Name of the Lord, or at least, without his privitie or notice
given.

That the Universities may both sue and be sued in Law, and also contract
without it. And furthermore, according to the diversity of the Universities,
whether they be Counties, Cities, Villages or bodies Collegiate, expedite the
affairs and negotiations concerning themselves.

But from this Right to attribute so great a Right unto those Cities, as by the
Considerations seems to be don, we hope that shall not be found to have
ground in any Laws.

What kind of authority and power is belonging to the Magistrates of these
Cities, considered in their own nature, as Vassal-Cities, the same would soon
be determined by the Laws if there were any question about that between the
Lord and the Cities.

As also it is an easy matter to know by the Laws what the Magistrate eo ipso,
quod Magistratus factus sit, may do according to the nature of his Office, and
that the greater and populous the Cities be, the more is their authority for
to keep their Citizens in order.

But yet that the said Authority is different from the Jurisdiction and the
rights deriving thence and belonging only to the Lord.

And that the privileges depending thereon cannot com or be acquired to those
Cities, but by gracious Concessions, Purchase, Grants, and other singular
titles past unto them from the Lord.

As the same also appears in what concern's the Cities of Flushing and Veer,
by the Contracts and privileges alleged by the Commissioned Council in the
foresaid considerations, and otherwise well known.

And that consequently those Cities and Magistrates have such acquired
Jurisdictional privileges, not Jure Magistratus proprio, or from the authority
of being Magistrates there, exercising the same but ex accidenti.

Coming herewith to Artic. 51, containing the ninth Argument, brought in by the
Commissioned Council in their Considerations, as the main and principal
foundation of their Pretense; Namely, the great Grant or Charter of Privileges,
given by Prince William of happy Memory to those of Flushing and Veer
respectively, in the year 1574.

In which regard your N. M. are desired to consider in his Highs behalf, that
though the three positions inserted by the Commissioned Council in the 52, 53,
and 54 Articles of their Considerations, were granted,

Namely, that the same Charter was granted by the said Prince, as Stadtholder,
in the name of the King, as Earl of Zeland.

And the same Charter is given directly, not to the Marquis, nor in reshect of
him, but only for the common good of the foresaid Cities, in their particular
interest.

And thirdly, for to serve them as a permanent pathway and constitution,
whereby thenceforward to rule and steer their Government, and that they might
be made coequal with the old free Cities of the Earldom, as in regard of
diverse freedoms and prerogatives, so likewise in respect of their form of
Government.

Nevertheless, the Patrimonial Right, cannot thereby be taken away from the
Lord Marquis.

Those of his Hihs counsel, do willingly grant, That as the Commissioned
Council say, in their 60. Article, the forenamed Prince William, granted and
settled diverse other Privileges and Elections, both in this and other
Provinces, wherein he constantly used the Name and Title of Stadtholder, and
as exercising the Function of Supreme Authority.

As the same is likewise manifestly to be seen, in the business mentioned
Artic. 68. of the said Considerations, touching the Cession, made at the
Assembly of the States to those of Flushing, for to supply the vacant place
of the Abbot and Prelat of Middleburg.

About which there having arisen some difference and dispute, in collecting of
the Votes at the States Assembly, in the year 1579. and the Cities of
Middleburg, Zirk-zee, Romers-Wale, Goes and Tholen, having addressed themselves
afterward with a long Remonstrance unto the said Prince, his Excellency
resolved and declared thereupon, according, as the Act thereof hold's forth, of
June 14. 1579.

That, during the Wars, businesses should be carried by plurality of voices,
beginning with the Premier Noble, and so going or collecting the voices of all
the Cities in Order.

And the War being ended, the Land's affairs should be again decided and
concluded with 3 voices, whereof the Nobles to have the first, the five
forenamed Cities the second, and the Cities of Flushing and Veer the last, by
virtue of the foresaid Privileges, granted unto them by his Excellency.

According to which the Lord Marquis can well allow, that the advantages and
prerogatives, comprehended in the same Charter, are, for a great part of them,
of such a Nature, that they cannot derive directly from any else but the Earldom
it self, such are the prerogatives and privileges rehearsed in the Articles 64.
and 65. of the foresaid Considerations.

That it cannot neither be drawn to any prejudice of the Lord Marquis, That
the Cities of Flushing and Veer, are by the said Privileges created integrating
Members of the Sovereign Government of Zeland, and like to others, equally
representing the States of the Land; and that the same may have been granted,
without respect, communication and interest of their Lord, only to them in
particular, and to further the same Cities good Government and Prosperity, and
to reliev and consider them in regard of the heavy burrhens they bore, and
faithful service they performed in the Wars, according as the same is deduced
in the foresaid Considerations to Article 73.

But if Rerum facies be well considered, so as the same stood, at the time of
granting the said Privileges; and the conjecture may have place, which is put
down *in the 74. Article of the Commissioned Council's Consideration, That viz.
the aim and intention of granting the said Privileges, should have been to
equalize the said Cities in manner of Government or Policy with the other
Cities of the Earldom, there is nothing at all can thence be inferred to the
prejudice of the Lord Marquis.

But rather to the contrary, asserted, that there was no aim nor intention at
all, to deprive the Lord of the Election of the Burgomasters.

Whereunto may serve also, That, as in part is touched by Artic. 75 of the
Consideration of the Council, the Government of the City consisted of old, and
until the time of the Grant of the said great Charter, in the Burgomasters and
Schepens, in regard b th of the administration of Justice, and direction of
Government.

And that, according to the 6. Article of the Contract betwixt the Lord and the
Governors of Flushing, in the year 1530. the Officer of the Lord was to be
present and called, in all matters and affairs concerning the Government and
common welfare of the City, and those of the Law also, to clear and deduce
their accounts and administrations before the Lord, or his Commissioners.

Which Articles, concerning the presence of the Officer, are repeated again in
the Contract of July ult. 1582. between Prince William as Marquis, and the
Burgomasters, Schepens and Council of the City of Flushing, a good many years
after the grant of the foresaid great Charter; they the Governors, promissing
there, that there shall be no Assembly or consultation about the Cities
affairs, but the Baylif shall have a timely call thereunto.

And that no Resolution or Decree shall be past or executed, against which the
Baylif shall have protested either in behalf of his Lords interest, or in
regard of the common welfare of the Burghers and Inhabitants.

That likewise they shall deliver up into the hands of the Lord, or those of
his Council, at any time when his Princely grace shall pleas, an exact state,
of the Cities Revenues or Charges. with a true information, what new Imposts
there are made without License, that they may be either confirmed by his
Grace, or otherwise disposed of, as the same should be held requisite for the
eas and relief of his Subjects.

As also every year, give timely advertisement of the day of rendering the
accounts of the City, and to transmit Copies thereof, to the end, that some
body of his Council, instructed and empowered as is requisite, may com to
audit the same, according as was used of old in the Lord's behalf.

So as likewise is expressly conditioned by the contract made between the said
Prince as Marquis, and those of Veer, Januarie 20. 1582. that always notice
must be given by Letters, for his Princely grace, as those of his Council to
audit the Cities accounts.

As for the further seeting down of the Commissioned Council in their
Considerations, Artic. 75. that by the foresaid Privilege of the year 1574.
there should be set up and instituted a formal Court of Common Council, for
direction of the Government;

The Council of his Highs cannot find the same verified by the contents of the
said Privileges, nor to have been the least part of the meaning, aim and
intention of the said Prince.

But thus much indeed, That, by reason of new and heavy burdens of War, which
must be supplied by the Commons, to make them the better rellisht, and born
with the less repining, when as they should see, that the necessity thereof was
deliberated and resolved upon, by the prime persons, of their own choosing,
joined with the Magistrate.

The Prince had found good, that besides the Baylif, Burgomasters and Schepens,
there might be chosen by the City, some of the ablest men thereof into the
Common Council and Citie-Court.

And that, according to the Text of the Charter, for the governments or civil
administrations of the said Cities, without making any distinction, between
Burgomasters* Schepens and Senate, or of the authority or advantage of them.

As it is likewise well known, that from that very time hitherto, the whole
Common Council there, is consisting, of the Baylif, in the Lord's Name, the
Burgomasters, Schepens and Senators, and that by them, all affairs of
Government, without distinction, are transicted, whether they concern the
City, or the chief Government of the Province.

As also in the same Cities, the Schepens, besides their employment in the
a^ministration of Justice, do perform all the functions else of Senators and
Common Council.

And both indeed take one and the same oath; and that which is more yet, it may
appear by the oath which is taken from the Senators of the City of Flushing,
that the Schepens are the Principal Members of the City Council; The words run
thus,

This I (Senator) do swear, always to do the common advantage of the C^tie
with those of the Law; Item, at all times, when I shall be summoned, upon any
oath, to repair to the Law of Flushing, to hearken there, and to give advice
thereunto, and to follow that which shall be given me to understand there.

That which by the Lords of the Commissioned Council is further deduced in the
76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82 and 83. Articles of their Considerations, touching
the institution and employment of the Common Councils, all to this end, to make
men believ, that in Zeland, matters of Government belong not to the
Counselors, but all Authority and direction thereof to the Common Council and
Senators, with seclusion of the Schepens.

To that the Council of his Highs reply, That such as bave any knowledge of the
Government of the Cities of Zeland; and those of Holland, they may easily
apprehend and understand, that this may only be said of the Government of the
Cities in Holland.

And is no ways agreeing with the Government of the Cities in Zeland; being
that there is no City in Zeland, where the Counselors are excluded, from the
managing, authority and deliberations of affairs of government, whether they
concern the Cities in particular, or the Supreme Government of the Province.

It is manifest and known to every one* That at Middleburgh there are no
affairs of Government transacted, but by the College (or Court) which is called
a Wett and Raedt (a Law and Senate) consisting of Burgomasters, Schepens
(Counselors) and Raedens (Senators).

The like use and practice is observed at Zireck-zee.

In the City of Goes, there are indeed no Counselors or Common Council at
all, nor in the City of Tolen neither; the whole Government consisting there
both for Policy and Justice in the Burgomasters and Schepens.

Whence follows answerably, that the Positions and Inferences of the Lord of
the Commissioned Council in the 84. 85. 86. and 87. Articles of their
Considerations, touching the manner of the Election of Magistrates, and the
persons from among whom the same was made of old, and is now made at present,
are groundless altogether, and cannot serve to their purpose and intentions.

But on the contrary, those very Articles include a Justification of the Lord
Marquess in that, which they meant to deprive him of, That namely the choosing
of the Magistrates, has of old belonged and so continues to this day to the
Lords of Flushing and Veer.

As likewise the same Lords electing of Burgomasters and Schepens can be
showed and verified by the Registers of the said cities for the space of about
two hundred years.

It would withal make a very strange construction if one should argue according
to 84 article of the consideration of the commissioned Council, That the
Prince, for in the matter of Nomination, and election of the Magistrates, to
make an equality with the cities of the Earldom, by the said Privelege,
depriving the Lords of Flushing and Veer of the free Election, which to that
time he had made ex arbitrio, without Nomination, and prescribing an Order,
according to which the Election to be made, out of the precedent Nomination,
now as to this, by that Order, the Election it self should be taken away from
the Lord.

Moreover it turn's likewise for the advantage of his Highs, that it being
presupposed, even according to the sense of the Commissioned Council themselves,
that Prince William his meaning, aim and intention had been to equalize the two
Vassal-cities with the cities of the Earldom;

There is no probability at all that the said Prince should have been minded
to introduce such a form of Government into the said two Cities; as was not
known in any of the Cities of the Earldom; as namely, whereby the Schepens
should be secluded from the cognizance and deliberations of matters of
Government, as is deduced above.

Nay, on the contrary it appears plainly, that this was not the least part of
his intention or meaning by the very text of the said great Charter in several
Articles, where mention being made of the Government of the Cities, all the
disposition is put conjunctim, to the Burgomasters, Counselors and Senators,
and no where to the Senators alone.

As also it cannot so much as be conceived, that the Prince should in that
conjuncture of time have been willing to undertake such a notable alteration,
as to withdraw the cognizance and deliberation of Policy, whereof depend all
the important affairs of the State, from the lawful and ancient Magistrate, and
against the usual order of Government observed in all the Cities of Zeland, to
reduce and confine the same only to the new Senators.

As for the contents of Artic. 88 of the foresaid Considerations, it shall serve
for reply thereunto to say, that a perverted fence is put upon the contents
of the Charter there, whenas the said Article averr's, that the Election to be
made out of the nominated persons, as well of Burgomasters as Schepers, should
be left to his Roial Majesty as Earl of Zeland, being that the quality of
the Lord is not expressed therewithal, nor the Designation of his Majesty any
where in all the Charter exhibited by that Name.

Whereas the contrary hereof is unanswerably manifest by sundry Articles of
the foresaid Charter; as for Example in that of Flushing.

Artic. 2. That his Majesty shall appoint a Bailiff for to keep his Majesty's
and the Citie's Rights. Artic. 7. that the Burgomasters, Schepers and Senate
shall create the Officers requisite for the good of the City, and maintenance
of Government; the King's Majesty's authority and domains remaining still
entire; and so likewise in the 24 and 34 Articles of the Charter of the City
of Veer, That the Fishermen shall not be allowed to sell their fish upon the
stream, but bring the same for rebate into the foresaid City, and pay there
the dues of the Clark-office belonging to his Majesty.

All which Articles have relation to the Domainial Rights belonging to his
Majesty there, not as Earl of Zeland, but as Lord of those two Cities.

For further verification whereof does serve, that the King having by a Decree
of the great Council at Mechelen, in the year 1563, remained Buyer of the
Cities of Flushing and Veer, with the Charges lying upon them;

Though his Majesty did not satisfy the same* nevertheless he carried
himself as the Buier and Proprietarie of the said Cities and the Domainial
Rights thereof.

Which is evidently proved thereby, that the conditions* and cautions,
whereupon the Marquisate with the foresaid Cities were sold to his Majesty in
the year aforesaid by the said Decree, do expressly import,

That the prerogative of representing all the Nobles of Zeland, the second
State of the Country aforesaid, from all times belonging to Lord of Veer, the
same Right and Prerogative, should likewise remain to the Buyer.

In pursuance whereof his Majesty also gave Commission, Junii 21o 1568 to the
Lord Adolph of Burgoigne, to take special heed in the King's behalf, of the
said place of Premier Noble, and that in terms as follows.

Whereas the Lord Maximilian of Burgoin, in his life time Marquess of Veer,
used as Premier Noble of our Country and County of Zeland, by reason of his
Marquisate of Veer and the City of Flushing, to com and appear in person, or
by his Plenipotentiaries into all the Convocations and Assemblies of the
General States of this Country, and that the foresaid Cities are devolved of
late to Us by purchase, we found good therefore to ordein and commissionate a
certain qualified person, in our Name to act in that behalf as Lord of these
Cities, so as the exigencie and opportunity of times shall require; and
likewise to help and further the good weal and profit of the said Cities, in
the same manner as the forenamed late Marquess of Veer was wont to do in his
life time, etc.

By the deduction of which instance there falls to ground the contents of the
89, 90 and 91 Articles of the oft-mentioned Considerations; there being
otherwise also no question here about gratifying the Marquess above the
advantages and prerogatives mentioned in the Letters of Investiture with any
other extraordinary ones.

But whether the Sovereign Lord may dispossess the Lord Marquess of his
Domainial Rights.

That which the Commissioned Council somewhat doubtfully seem to infer in the
Artic. 92 and 93, and afterward positively assert, Artic. 112, That hitherto
the Princes of Orange had made no Election of the Magistrates in the said
Cities as Lords of the places, but only as Stadholders of the Earldom, and
that through their deceas now the said Election should be devolved again into
the bosom of the Earl.

The same is manifestly a wrong conclusion, grounded upon untrue premises,
since the contrary thereof can be fully proved out of the Letters of
Nomination, which from the time when the Princes of Orange purchased the
Marquisate in the year 1581, the Magistrates of the foresaid Cities have yearly
written to their Highnesses for the making of the Election, which Letters can
be produced in originali, showing,

That their Highnesses have made the said Election, not as Stadholders, but as
Lords and Marquises of the said Cities. Whence the Lords of the Commissioned
Council may be desired to consider the reasons which their Nob. Artic 94 say,
could not be conceived or imagined, how there should belong any right or
authority to the Lords Marquises in choosing of the Common Councils or of the
Burgomasters as the Heads and chief Members of the same.

As likewise the contents of Artic. 95 namely, That the Direction and Command
in all politic affairs should peculiarly be committed to the office of the
Burgomasters, which above is proved not to agree with the Government of any
City in Zeland, being that the affairs of policy or Government in the said
Cities are referred to the Buhgomasters, Counselors and Senators, and not as
in Holland, to Burgomasters and Senators, or Common Councils, with seclusion of
the Counselors.

That it is true indeed, that the Feodotarie Letters contein no more now then
the original first Letter of Cession, Erection and Investiture of the years
1477, and 1555 abovementioned; as also there is no more right pretended to by
his Highs, then by those Letters is conferred upon him.

But this only is stood upon. That the Right of Electing the Magistrate, which
undoubtedly is comprehended among the Rights whereof the Letters speak, and
has been acquired by the Prince his forefathers, by lawful Title; and they and
their Predecessors have had in peaceable possession about two hundred years,
cannot be taken from them.

True it is, that as the 97 Article hinteth the Bailiff in the name* of the
Lord, the Burgomasters, Schepens and Raedens are they to whom conjunctim the
rule and government of these Cities (being made integrating Members of the
Sovereigntie) stand's committed by the foresaid Grant or Charter of the year
1574.

And that the same which is granted to the Cities in that behalf, deriveth from
the Earl.

But as for the share or authority of the Lord Marquess, in the present or
former Government of the foresaid two Cities, and the incompatibilitie of one
and the same person or body Collegiate, being Vassal on the one side, and
obliged to make oath and do homage, and on the other side to be an integrant
Member of the same Sovereigntie, and to receiv oath, whereof is spoken by the
Commissioned Council in the 98 and 99 Articles of their Considerations;
together with what is deduced to that purpose in pursuance thereof, to the end
of the Considerations aforesaid.

To that it is replied in his Highs behalf, That from that there can be
nothing at all inferred for the impairing or taking away his Highs Right,
touching the Election of the Magistrate's persons.

Considering that according to the Laws, Aliud sit Magistratus, aliud
Magistratus functio; sicut aliud est Praetura, aliud Praeturae administratio;
aliud Jurisdictio, aliud Jurisdictionis Exercitium.

So also it is quite another thing, the Right of Electing the persons of the
Magistrate, and the Right, function, and authority belonging to the persons of
elected Magistrates, whether the same derive directly from the Earl as
Sovereign Lord, or by the Marquis.

The Lord Marquis, having by his lawfully acquired Right from the Earl, elected
the Magistrates persons.

The functions and employments requisite for the Magistracy, do belong to
those Persons, co ipso, that they are elected to the Magistracy.

Burgomasters and Schepens, sitting in Judgment, do administer ex mandato
Jurisdictionis de Justitia.

The Baylif, Burgomasters and Counselors, with the Senate, transact the affairs
politic, whether it concern the City, ex Jure publico Universitatis,
belonging to them without the Lord; or in other matters politic, by special
Title devolved or granted to them from the Lord, or such affairs, as do concern
the Province, and the state of the Country, committed unto them by the
Sovereign Government, as integrating Members thereof.

All these respective Functions, Employments and Deliberations being quite
different and severed from the Right of electing the Magistrates persons,
belonging to the Marquis.

By all which it having been unanswerably demonstrated, that the Right enjoi'd
hitherto by the Princes of Orange of happy memory, over the Cities of
Flushing and Veer, in respect of their Magistracy and Civil Government, has
been exercised by them, Not as Stadtholders of the Earldom, but as Marquises
and Lords over the said Cities.

By virtue of their own and domainial Right, by lawful Title acquired to
themselves from the Earls of Zeland.

And confirmed by a peaceable and uninterrupted possession of the Predecessors,
Lords of Veer and Flushing, for about two hundred years.

And that therefore, by the Death of his late Highs of happy memory, the same
Right is no way and in no part devolved or relapsed into the Bosom of the
Earldom.

By reason whereof, all the Provision com's to surceas and fall to ground of it
self, which the Lords of the Commissioned Council, in the forementioned seventh
point of intimations, desired of and commended to your N. M.

As also does the Project of the Reiglement, transmitted to your Nob. Migh.
after the foresaid Considerations.

And in case your N. M. should have conceived any further scruple yet from the
foresaid considerations, about the Domainial Right of his Highs, yet,

Their Highss, the Guardians of the Prince-Pupil are confident, your N. M. will
forbear to dispose or determine ought in that behalf;

But, it being no affair of State, to remit the whole business to the Court of
Justice, thence to receiv its determination and accomplishment.

This Counter-Remonstrance, being presented at the Assembly of the States of
Zeland, November. 9. The Counselor Pensionarie of the Country, propounded next
day after, whether it would not be fitting and expedient to proceed therein
with all due Circumspection and equity, that the Lords of the Council should
ripely examine the same, and send their Considerations to the Members, as a
point of intimation. Hereupon it was said by the Lords of Middleburgh, that
having heard the said Counter-Remonstrance, both by word of mouth and lecture
made before them, they had not observed the least therein; that overthrew any
thing of the former advice given, but on the contrary, were much more
confirmed thereby, fully to embrace the same, without any further scrupling,
and that the Lords of Flushing and Veer, ought to draw up and bring in their
respective Reiglements, in conformity thereof; nevertheless, to show how
ready they are to proceed therein with leisurable prudence, they found good,
that the said Counter-Remonstrance, should be put into the hands of the Lords
of the Commissioned Council, who should ripely examine the same, and within a
few days make their Report and communicate their advice to the Lords the
States, by word of mouth, considering especially the great Privilege granted to
the Lords of Flushing in the year 1574. by Prince William, together with the
copies of the Letters of Investiture and Sale, relating to the said Cities;
That thereupon a final Resolution may be taken in this matter, such as should
be found requisite in reason and equity, to which advice Zirick-zee, Goes and
Tholen conformed themselves, Flushing and Veer desired a copy of the said
Counter-Remonstrance, to bring in their Advice with the soonest.

Wednesday November. 15. report being made by the Counselor Pensionarie of the
Land, That the respective Members having heard the day before, the further
Considerations of the Lords of the Council, serving to answer the reasons of
the Counter-Remonstrance made in the behalf of the Prince of Orange, touching
the Right of the Earldom, and the Lord of Flushing and Veer, respectively
deduced, They were desired, this day to advise further upon it; The four
fore-sitting Members, unanimously declared, that in the Counter-Remonstrance
there were no reasons alleged, which could any ways move them to change the
former advice; but on the contrary, they were rather more encouraged therein
by the lecture thereof, and that so much the rather now, since they day before
the heard the further deduction of the Council, by word of mouth, more clearly
yet, justifying the grounds and positions of their advice, and confuting the
allegations of the Counter-Remonstrance: That therefore the business being now
sufficiently and fully verified, the same was readily fitted for to be
determined, and that the Pensionarie of the Land ought to put it in form
without any longer delaie.

The Lords of Flushing, judging this to be a point of great weight and
Consideration, and which should not be entered into, without due search and
ripe deliberation, so as neither on the one nor the other side, any might be
prejudiced; they desired, that what the day before was declared by word of
mouth, might be brought to paper and coppies given thereof unto the Members,
that so the Common Councils might be made acquainted with, and examine the
same, and orderly with all circumspection take further advice about it; to
which Vote the Lords of Veer conformed themselves, relating therewithal, that
the Counselor Beaumont, having presented himself to their Assembly in the
behalf of the Princess of Orange, had desired them to direct their advice
accordingly; as also the Pensionarie of the land declared, that the said
Beaumont had in the same Name desired, that a Copy of the foresaid Verbal
Advice, might be brought to the hands of the Ladies aforesaid, before any
further proceeding in and concluding of so weighty a point; which advices
being heard and the respective Members a second time desired, to consider the
the Desire of Flushing and Veer yet further, the four fore-sitting Members
persisted, That the business being fully discussed now, prooved and justified,
there ought to be used no further delaie, and that the Pensionarie was bound
to conclude, though otherwise they could be content, that Copy of the
foresaid Verbal Advice should be given to the respective Members, to serve them
sooner or later, for the clearer information of all the passages and
transactions in this business. The Lords of Flushing and Veer judging it
strange, that Copy of the Verbal Advice should be yielded, and yet the
conclusion not delai'd, they insisted again on their former desire, and withal
that beside the said copy of the Verbal advice, they might have a view of the
Letters of Sale and Investiture, that so much the better and with full knowledge
of the cause, they might frame their advice: upon which desires no further
conclusions being taken, the Pensionarie of the land desired the Lords of
Flushing and Veer, to make report to their Principals, of the advices and
Considerations advanced by the other Members, that next day they might declare
themselves in the principal matter.

Two days after the Lords of Flushing and Veer respectively, were again
desired to declare themselves upon the seventh point of the Writ, touching the
Right of the Earldom on the one side, and the Lords of Flushing and Veer,
respectively, one the other; but they persisted in their former advices, that
first they might have Copy of the Verbal Advice, against the
Counter-Remonstrance made in behalf of the Prince of Orange; as likewise of the
Letters of Sale (or Transport) and Investiture; upon which dedesire the four
fore-sitting Members being the second time solicited by the Pensionarie of
the land, to advise, They declared, That the business having its accomplishment
of Deliberation, and lying so clear before them, as could not be gainsaid by
any reason, The Conclusion ought to be taken without any further delaie; upon
which the Pensionarie of the land, producing and reading a certain Memorandum
delivered unto him, in behalf of their Highss the Princesses of Orange; after
the reading thereof he propounded, whether the Members might not find good
for to proceed in this weighty affair with all complementarie civilitie and
discreet leisurableness, to communicate copy of what was Verbally brought in
against the Counter-Remonstrance, unto the Commissioner of their Highss, as
Guardians of the Prince of Orange; as likewise to the Lords of Flushing and
Veer copy of the desired pieces, that in convenient time they might produce
what they shall have to say to it: and to the end, that there may no ground
be laid of any prejudice, that the Election of the Magistrate, and all other
matters in Justice and Policy, might the while remain in statu; whereupon the
question being put the second time; The four fore-sitting Members persisted in
their former Advice, and the Pensioner of the land was urged again to proceed
to the Conclusion, Flushing and Veer persisting in their Desires; till upon
reiterated putting the matter to the question, and deliberations past upon the
same, it was found good and resolved, to embrace and in all parts to accept of
the Advice exhibited by the Lords of the Commissioned Council, touching the
Right belonging to the Earldom on the one side, and to the Lord of Flushing and
Veer respectively, on the other, in respect of their Magistracy and Civil
Government; the Lords of Flushing and Veer being desired to draw up and bring
in their respective Reiglements, for to be past and registered, in conformity
of the Resolutions of March 23. and May 1. last past; the Lords of the Council
being autorised, finding the same agreeing with the foresaid advice, to pass
and register the same together with other, both there by the Secretaries* and
in the Chamber of Accounts. At which conclusion this Item was entered, The
Deputies of the Flushing and Veer respectively, have by Order of their
Principals caused to be entered, That they reserved them the Liberty, to
bring in touching this matter hereafter what they shall find requisite.

In Holland, as was intimated before, the Cities had already, immediately
after Prince Williams departure, assumed to themselves the self-choosing of
their Magistrates, by grant of the States of the Province as the Sovereign.

In Gelderland the City of Nimighen undertook the like of her own accord, on
New Years day the 1 of Januar. 1651. as a matter of old, and rights belonging
to them. The City of Tiel obtained it, during the Great Assembly from the
States of Gelderland by way of Grant: all the rest of the Cities in Gelderland
were of old in the possession of making their own Magistrates, as likewise all
the Cities great and small in Over-Yssel and Groninghen.

At Utrecht the Magistrates likewise reassumed it to themselves, as of old and
right belonging unto them; in this manner, Thursday May 22, 1651, the common
Council assembled and there being likewise present among them the Lords, which
otherwise by reason of their Commissions and Offices were not wont to appear;
the first Burgomaster Wyck propounded, That whereas by the death of his Highs
the Prince of Orange of high-praised memory, the Province of Utrecht had no
Stadholder more, and through the Deceas of the old Burgomaster, the Lord John
van der Nyport there was a place vacant in the Council, therefore it had been
found good to desire and call the foresaid Lords, jointly to consider and
resolv upon the form and manner to be observed for time to com about the
supplying of vacant places.

And after mutual communication and mature deliberation, it was unanimously
agreed, That the Right of appointing Burgomasters and Senators in the Common
Council, and Counselors of the City of Utrecht, was and for ever should
remain belonging to the Common Council only; and that it should be decreed as
an unalterable Resolution and everlasting Law, that the said Right shall never
be yielded up, neither whole or in part, on no condition, and in no manner
whatsoever, to any other. Saturdaie May 24 the Common Council being met again
in competent number, there was after diverse propositions made, and ripe
deliberations used, unanimously found good and agreed this following form and
course of Nomination and Election of Senators in the Common Council.

First, That so many papers should be marked with Numbers as there be Members
present in the Common Council, and that by the drawing out of the said papers
the Court should be divided into four parts according to the Order of the
Numbers.

That the partition being made thus, none of the Members should by either
words or signs recommend or intimate any to others, upon pain of loosing his
voice the first time.

That then at last, and during the Council's sitting, the Members of the first
division shall by most voices, with close papers, nominate a person qualified,
according to the order of the Common Council, and ensued Resolutions.

That the voices coming to be even-ballanced amongst those of the first
Division, so that by voicing again with close papers, the person cannot be
found out yet, they shall proceed to lots, by drawing of two papers: And that
the Name of the person thus nominated, shall be set down by the Secretary.

That then successively and orderly in manner as before, the like proceeding
shall be made by the second, third and fourth Division respectively.

Provided nevertheless, that by the subsequent parties none be nominated that
was nominated already by a former, and set down by the Secretary as before.

That four persons being nominated and set down, as said is, there be chosen
one of them, by the joint present Members, with close papers, by plurality of
voices.

None of the Members, by either words or signs, recommending or intimating any
of the four to others, upon pain as before.

And that the voices coming again to be evenly balanced, they shall proceed
to voicing again, or lots, in manner as before.

Furthermore it is unanimously resolved and agreed, that the Common Council
shall yearly upon the 1 day of October proceed to the Election of two
Burgomasters for the year ensuing, and that by close papers and plurality of
voices.

Provided, that one of the ruling Burgomasters, who at that time shall have
been Burgomaster two full years together, may not be nominated or employed for
that time.

Item, that any Burgomaster happening to die, the Common Council shall proceed
within three weeks to the choosing of another in his place.

That in like manner as before, there shall be chosen yearly twelv
Counselors, with that proviso, that such Counselors as shall have been
employed at that time for three years together, may likewise not be nominated
nor continued then.

God Almighty give his blessing to all these good and wholesome actions which
I, so far forth as they have appeared and been known to me and all the world,
thought good to relate thus, without any the least design of willingly or
knowingly offending any.

If nevertheless some shall dislike it, it will be no great wonder. Actions and
Transactions of State relish not alike to all. There are some which in former
times have found, and now, or for the future, think to find their interest in
a Principality or Monarchy; and therefore Monarchy is that which they prais,
not regarding, that a King and Prince has the Name, whenas two or three
Favorites, or Favorites of Favorites, do really reign and rule at their own
pleasure.

There are some here in the Land, even of those that are engaged by oath and
wages of the Land, who nevertheless write Books in the behalf of Monarchy.
Such must not take it ill, if something also be don and written in favor of a
Common wealths Government; though without all affectation and passion, aiming
at nothing but the naked Truth. If here and there, should occurr any aberration
or mistake, ascribe it to humane frailty and want of better Information; we
have don our utmost, to give and impart nothing but things plain and real. They
are not Mysteries and hidden Secrets we pretend to. Most of what we publish,
was either by Authority or connivance of the Government made public before.
And the intention of the State as themselves profess somwhere, was to show and
manifest their actions before all the World; and, to recommend the zeal,
faithfulness and deserts of good Governors to Posteritis, was never
interdicted; Every one is bound to improve his Talent that way; nor was the
time ever stined or limited for any such endeavors. To satisfy all men is
impossible.

Tres mihi Convivae prope dissentire videntur.

(There are scarce three, but disagree.)

And some there be so overrunning full of wisdom and conceitedness, that they
can like nothing, but what they do themselves, and can discern through planks of
Oak, things never seen nor don. Howbeit we shall easily grant every one to
enjoie his opinion, provided they allow like like liberty* to others.

END.
THE CHIEF HEADS AND MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS TREATISE.
THe Union of Utrecht, made in the year 1579. being, That from which the
Confederated Netherlands, were called the United Provinces; premised here, for
the better understanding of the late Transactions. The Province of Holland
seek's to reform and reduce the Army and public charges p. 1. 2. The States
General endeavor to dissuade it p. 4. The States of Holland, having abated much
from their first intents, and obtained nothing, they resolv to proceed of their
own authority, and actually casheir 12 Companies of horse, and 31 Companies of
foot, p. 8, 9. The Prince of Orange and Council of State oppose and countermand
it p. 9. 10. The States General autorise the Prince to repress and quell the
proceedings of the States of Holland p. 11. A Solemn Deputation, decreed to all
the Cities of Holland; and the whole managing thereof, as also the naming of
the Commissioners, referd to him; who resolv's to go along in person, 10, 11,
12. Some Ministers bus^e meddling, p. 13. The Deputies of Holland, pray, this
Course, as a great Innovation and breach of Privilege, may be forborne: but in
vain, p. 14. The Prince with the rest of the Commissioners begin their
Progress, p. 15. Their arrival and Proposition at Dort, 15, 16, etc.
Observation upon the same p. 25, 26, etc. The Answer of Dort, p. 38. The
Commissioners advanceing to Gorkum, Goude, Briel, Rotterdam, Shiedam, Delft, p.
38. 39. to Alckmar, Horn, Enckhuysen, Medenblick, Edam, Amsterdam. (N.) ibid,
to Harelem, Leyden, Schonhoven (N.) p. 40. The said Commissioners return to the
Hague, and report made p. 40. 41, etc. The Approbation p. 44. (The old and new
rate among the Provinces, for entertaining of forces) p. 45. The States General
further address to the States of Holland about complying, p. 45. The particular
Report of the Prince of Orange, together with a smart Charge against the City
of Amsterdam, p. 46. Hollands Carriage and Resolutions thereupon, p. 48, etc.
The Prince of Orange and Council of State present a Proposition for
accommodation, p. 54, etc. The Prince falls sick, and recovereth, p. 58.
Hollands Advice for Reconciliation, p. 59. Their large Letter to the 6 other
Provinces, in justification of their proceedings, p. 60, etc. The answer of
Amsterdam to the Charge made against them, p. 66. etc. The seizing of six
Members of the States of Holland, p. 76. The Enterprise against Amsterdam; and
notable passages about the same, p. 76, etc. The Prince of Orange his Letter
thereupon to all the Provinces, p. 83. A great black Horse, p. 84. The Prince in
person before Amsterdam, p. 85. Amsterdam begin's to Treat, p. 88. The Treaty
concluded, p. 89. The six Members submit, p. and are released, resigning their
charges, p. 93. The Prince his Reasons and Motives for seizing the said Members
etc. sealed up, p. 94. An agreement made about the State of War, p. 96. The
Disbanding of several Companies, 20 French, 32 English and 3 Scottish, besides
the newest horse and some old, p. 100. The Prince of Orange goes to Devren in
Gelderland for to recreate himself, p. 100. Several Letters of thanksgiving
procured, and sent to the Prince, by reason of his late exploits, in reducing
Holland to conformity: first from Zeland p. 100. then from Friesland, both to
the Prince p. 101. and to Count William their Governor) p. 102. from Gelderland
p. 103. Over-Yssel, ib. Utrecht 104, etc. Great murmurings and discontents in
Holland, p. 107. A day of public Thanksgiving endeavored for by the States
General, upon the foresaid account, and hindered by those of Holland, ibid.
Amsterdam stand's upon their guard, 108. many invectives against the Prince,
ibid. The Prince his design of being declared premier Noble in Gelderland,
108. His last sickning, of the small pox; with the whole Narration thereof unto
his Death, as it was set down and attested by his Physicians, 109. 10. etc. The
Ministers warned not to visit him, least their appearance should fright him
into an apprehension of death, 115. The Minister Sterremont his Relation, 111.
Notification given of his death to all the Provinces, Courts, Ambassadors,
Governors, etc. 115. 116. The Princess Royal never saw the Prince in all his
sickness, 117. The Spanish Ambassadors visit, 117. His being pressed to sign*
the Treaty made between the King of Spain and the Prince; and his evasion,
ibid. The Prince his Death variously taken by Courtiers and Patriots, 118. The
carriage of some Ministers, (...). The advice of the States of Holland for a
General Convocation of all the Provinces, 118. Their aversness from having any
Captain General of Stadtholder more, 119. The young Prince of Orange born, p.
119. (The Lord Cats his comparison of Pillars and a Candlestick) 120. Hollands
Deputation to all the Provinces, for a General Assembly, and three main points
to be treated of, 1 Religion, 2 the Union, 3 the Milirid, p. 121, etc. The
Provinces answer and readiness, p. 124. The old Princess Dowager of Orange her
address to the Provinces in behalf of the young Prince her grandchild, p.
125. Count William and Maurice, and the Lord of Bredetode their address to the
States General in their own behalf, 126, 127. Count William chosen Governor of
Groninghen and the Omlands, 127. Knuyt excluded from the Assembly, ibid. The
six outed Members restored to their places and functions, p. 128. Hollands
provisional Government within themselves. p. 128. 129. Differences and jarrings
about the Guardianship of the young Prince of Orange, p. 130. The Princess
Royal her memorandum and address to the States of Holland and West-Friesland,
p. 131. etc. and 134. etc. The Princess Dowager the grandmother, her address to
the States of Holland, p. 137, etc. 140. The Prince Elect. of Brandenburg his
pretension, p. 142. Ubi Cadaver, ibi congregantur Aquilae, 144. The States of
Holland resolv, That no Member of the Government, shall be employed in the
Administration of this Guardianship, p. 145. Lists of all the Companies, horse
and foot, in the States pay* and their wages, p. 146. etc. The Cities of
Holland begin to choose their own Magistrates, which formerly was don by the
Stadtholder, p. 149. They of Zeland arrive the first to the great General
Assembly, p. 149. (An answer of the Queen of Sweden, being advised to
marry,) applied to the doubtfulness what an Infant Stadtholder might proov in
time, and the danger of Lievtenants under him, both to to the State and
himself, p. 150. etc. The arrival of the rest of the Provinces, all but
Groninghen and Omlands, p. 151. The beginning of the great Assembly General,
p. 152 The Lord Cats his first Speech and Proposition there, in behalf of the
States of Holland, p. 152. etc. The Considerations of Gelderland, p. 159, etc.
The Proposition of Zeland, p. 166, etc. The Remonstrance of the Synodical
Ministers, p. 177. etc. Means of hindering the growth of papistrie in the
Provinces, propounded, p. 182, etc. Various Dispositions about matters of
Religion and liberty of conscience, p. 187. The Advice of Holland about the
point of Religion, generally assented to, p. 189. The Minister's
acknowledgment, p. 191. The Considerations and Inclinations of Friesland,
touching Religion, the Union and Militia, p. 192. The Considerations of
Groninghen and the Omlands, p. 197. etc. The Inclinations of Utrecht, p. 204.
etc. The large Justification of Holland's proposition in point of the Militia,
p. 215, etc. Provincial Considerations of Zeland, about giving of Patents or
Commissions, and remooving or transplacing of Garrisons, and conferring of
Military Offices, p. 242. etc. Pensionarie (or Advocate) of Zeland, De Vett
his notable speech against Corruptions, p. 245. The old Instruction for the
Council of State, of An. 1588. p. 260. etc. Considerations of Holland about some
Articles of the Union, p. 281, etc. The Considerations and Inclinations general
of Over-Yssel, p. 285. etc. Hollands Proposition for expediting the affairs to
be debated, by distinguishing matters merely Provincial and General, p. 290.
Two main points propounded, 1 the Direction of the Militia; 2 the giving of
Commissions, p. 294. The Princess Dowager grandmother, her Application to the
great Assembly, for the young Princes succeeding in his Fathers charges, p.
294. laid by, p. 297. Further Advice of Holland about the Militia, p. 297. of
Zeland, 299. of Gelderland, 301. of Friesland, p. 306. Over-Yssel, p. 307.
Frieslands Justification of their former Considerations about Stadtholders,
etc. p. 309. etc. Ambassadors and public Ministers of State, ordered to receiv
no gifts, etc. p. 316. Groninghen and Omlands are desired to send in their
Deputies, p. 317. Several matters brought before the Great Assembly, besides
the first intent; as that of the West Indies, of Denmarck, Sweden, Spain and
France, p. 317. Those of Drent seek to be readmitted at the States of a
peculiar Province, p. 317. their Right and Claim deduced at large, though all
in vain, p. 319. etc. Commissioners appointed for a Conference Conciliatorie, 3
for each Province, to frame an unanimous advice from the respective
considerations presented, p. 329. Gelderland's motion of limiting the military
Commanders in voicing Cities; about the keys, the word etc. and about the
several Oaths to be taken by the Souldierie; with the Resolutions thereupon,
p. 330. The manner of proceeding or voting in the Conference Conciliatorie, p.
332. Holland's Considerations about the Soldier's Oath to the States of the
Province and the Magistrates of the Cities, p. 333, etc. The forms of the said
Oaths p. 337, 338. The Nobility, Gentry and Cities of Braband, under the
Resort of this State, their Address to have place again as equal Confederates
and the first Members of the Unio^; together with the Deduction of their plea,
at large, p. 33^, etc. Continuation of the Dfferences and Altercations, betwixt
(...) Dowagers of Orange, p. 363. The young Prince Christened; notable
circumstances and passages about it. p. 366, etc. His Father's Burial, with the
state and pomp thereof p. 369. etc. Further strife and debates betwixt the
Dowagers about the Guardianship. 373. The Prince Elector of Brandenburgh his
coming to the Hague, diverse animosities and contests, as betwixt the said
Elector and the Princess Roial. p. 374. So especially betwixt him and the Lords
Beverwert and Henvliet. p. 375. The Princess Roial her Address thereupon to the
States of Holland. p. 376. Their Resentment and Resolution. p 377. 378. More
matter of contention about the Principality of Orange, and the Cabinet. 378.
With much ado some Agreement is made among the parties by partnership. p. 380.
The Guardian's further application to the Spanish Ambassador for concluding of
the Treaty made betwixt his King and the late Princes, by virtue of the
Munster-Articles p. 381. The Spaniards Generositie. ibid. Disadvantage of
contentiousness. ibid. The ^^al conclusion and signing of the said Treaty. p.
382. 383. Foreign affair transacted in the great Assembly accidentally. p,
384. French, English, Danish, Swedish, Portugal Ambassadors. p. 384. 385.
Contentions betwixt the Spanish Ambassador and French Resident. p. 386.
Holland's Deputation into Zealand to prevent the choosing of a Stadtholder and
Captain General. 386. Their Propositions at large. p. 386. 387. etc. the answer
and effect. 392 A Motion at the General Assembly for prohibiting of the Popish
Clergie's resort into the Provinces. p. 392. A Motion about the Field-Marshal
to have place in the Council of State. p. 392. A Form of giving Commissions to
Governors and Commanders of places. p. 393. Many Governors solemnly sworn. p.
395. Report from the Conference Conciciliatorie, and the Advice it produced. p.
396. 397 Utrecht demands, they may depute as Members to the Council of State as
any other Province. p. 397 Over-Yssel demand's the like. 398. Orders agreed
upon for giving of Patents or Commissions. p. 398. 399. etc. Special
Instructions for the Deputies at the Generality about the same, p. 405 The
Oath to be made by the Souldierie to the Generality. p. 408. 409 Friesland
and Groninghen conform themselves in this behalf with the rest under respective
Declarations. p. 410. 411. Over-Yssel. 412. Form of the Oath Military to be
made to the particular Provinces under whose Repartition or pay the Companies
are. p. 414. Form of the Oath they are to make to the States of that Province
where they may be placed or garrisoned, not being under the Repartition or
pay of that Province. p. 415. Form of the Oath to be made by them to the
Magistrate of the Cities where they are in Garrison. p. 416. The business
against Corruptions revived. p. 416. 417 The Deputies or Commissioners of the
Ord. Assem of the Generality, sworn. ib. Count William of Nassaw, and all the
Military officers, solemnly sworn, in the great Assembly, as also in the
Assembly of the States of Holland. 417. The Order and Act against Corruptions.
417. 418. Form of giving Patents for remooving of Companies. 421. Lists agreed
upon for Garrisons in the frontiers, and for the execution of civil commands
within the respective Provinces. 422, etc. Matters to be debated yet in the
Great Assembly 426. The Council of State's advice about Mustering. 427, etc. A
second Remonstrance from the Ministers of all the Provinces. 429 etc.
Defraiments. 433. The General Assemblie's Resolution upon the Minister's
Remonstrances where among other things, special charge is given to the States
General in Ordinary, to make strict orders against all gross sins; profanation
of the Sabbath, Fighting of Duels, contentious writings about Religion, and
especially Socinian and other scandalous books. p. 435 The Great Assembly
seems at an end. p. 435. 436. Projects of certain Medailles or Coins in
commemoration of this famous Assembly, com to nothing. 436 The point of secret
correspondencies, Ambassadors, Residents, Agents and Commissioners. 437 The
address of Letters to be made by them and the Governors. ib. and 438 The
manner of opening Letters of Secrecy. 438 All Resolutions of State, and such
like necessary matters to be sent and communicated to the public Ministers,
residing or employed in foreign parts. 438. 439 The New Instruction for the
Council of State, consisting of LII Articles. 440 etc. the point of Defraiments
settled for Commissioners within the Land, traveling in State Affairs. 463. A
motion, that the Resolutionsof this Assembly might be of equal value and
vigor with the Articles of the Union; waved, 464. The Councils of State further
advice, about the point of Musterings, 465. The Advice of Friesland about the
Amnestia or Act of Oblivion, 476. The Lord Cats seek's to be discharged of his
Pensionarie-ship, or place of Advocate General for Holland, 477. He delivers
up the sealed paper of the late Prince of Orange, containing the Motives and
Reasons of seizing the six Members, and besieging of Amsterdam, ibid. The same
paper is read openly in the Assembly, 478. The Resolutions of the States of
Holland thereupon, 481, etc. Several Examinations in that be half, 484. The
Lord van Sommersdyke his purgation of himself before Commissioners, about his
forwarding the enterprise against Amsterdam, 489, etc. His submission. 500.
501. The respective Cities of Holland (whose respective Deputies, the six
seized Members were at the Assembly of the States of that Province) their
solemn Justifications; as, That of Dort, p. 502, etc. of Haerlem, p. 508. of
Delft, p. 511. of Amsterdam, 513. of Horen, p. 515. of Medenblick, 520. A
Declaration of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, touching the late
Prince of Orange, his Charge against the 6 Members and the Governors of
Amsterdam, 522. A large Information and Deduction of the States of Holland
their whole proceeding, about the reducing of their forces and retrenching of
their charges; together with a Refutation of the late Prince of Orange his
foresaid Reasons and Motives of proceeding as he did, against the said
Members, and the City of Amsterdam, 525. etc. Friesland presents a draught
of the Amnestia or General Oblivion, 568. Several projects and advices about
the deciding and determining of Differences, happening among the Provinces,
568. 570. 571. 573. A Draught of the Amnestia, by the Committee for the
Conference Conciliatorie, 574. Some Differences about the Lists of Garrisons,
575. Further Debate and projects about the voiding of Differences among the
Provinces, 576. The disposing of Places of Governments, remitted to the
Ordinary Assembly general, 578. The business of Drent, about Session in the
Generality, likewise remitted thither, ibid. Holland's Advice about deciding
of Differences, 578, 579, 580. The point of a new State of War, referred to the
Ordinary Assembly, 580. Friesland eager, and Holland remiss, about the
Amnestia, 580. 581, etc. That and the rest of the points undetermined,
recommended to the Conference Conciliatorie, 581. Adjournment of the Assembly
for a little while, 581. Their meeting again, and Report from the Conference
Conciliatorie of the Lists of the Garrisons to remain, 581, 582. Contestations
betwixt Holland and Friesland about the Amnestia, 582, etc. The Lord van
Sommerdyck's case, a principal rub in the matter of the Amnestia, 58^.
Friesland's sharp Remonstrance and Protestation, 584, 585 An Expedient found
out and made use of, 585, 586. Further projects about ending of Differences,
587. Some Exceptions against the Qualifications of the Instructions for the
Council of State, 590. The Amnestia or Act of Oblivion solemnly past and
published, 590, 591. Conclusion of the great Assembly, 592. The Lord
Pensionarie Cats his Speech at the breaking up thereof, 592, 593, etc. A Sermon
of thanksgiving in the Assembly, 598. Several Rooms formerly used by the
Stadtholder of Holland, made use of by the States for the enlarging the place
of their provincial Assembly, 598. The Lord Cats resigning his place of
Pensionarie or Advocate of Holland, 598, 599. The Lord Adrian Pauw van
Hemstede, chosen and put in his room, 599. The Condition upon which he
accepted the same, 600, 601. Many difficult businesses left to be determined
by the Ordinary Assembly, 602. especially about granting leaves to military
Officers for some absence, ibid. and about such absents as enter into any other
States service, 603, etc. Some further Points and Articles, relating to the
Instruction for the Council of State, touching the Generalties Chamber of
Accounts, 607, etc. and touching the Receiver General, 610. Further Debates
about the list of the Garrisons, and for executing the civil commands; Item,
about a State of War, etc. 611. The Council of State being summoned to take
their Oath, they demur upon it, and present their Exceptions, in regard of
several of the Articles prescribed them, 611, 612, etc. Resolution, That no
Ambassador or public Minister shall receiv any gifts, 620. Item, about
Defrayments of Commissioners employed within the Land, and their accounts, 621.
Item, That all public Officers beware of transgressing the Act against
Corruptions, ibid. The Oath all Officers of the Generality are to take, that
they have neither given nor promised any thing for their places, 622. Endeavors
for a like Oath to be taken by the Deputies at the Generality, 622. Remaining
Differences among the Guardians of the young Prince of Orange, about the
Government of Orange, the Magistracy of Breda and elsewhere, 623, 624. The
great Difference between the Princely Guardians and those of Zeland, about the
Cities of Veer and Flushing, much animated by Holland, 624. and the Ministers,
625. Great stirr's and tumults thereupon at Middleburgh, 626, etc. The Councils
of Zeland, ample Deduction of the Difference between the Rights of the Earldom
or States of Zeland, as Sovereign, and the Marquisate of the said Cities, which
appertained to the Prince of Orange, as vassal, 635, etc. The Princely
Guardians answer thereunto, 657, and Counter Remonstrance, 660, etc. The
Result, 681, etc. The Cities of the Provinces generally reassume the choosing
of their own Magistrates, 685. Utrecht in an especial manner, ibid, etc. The
Autors Conclusion, 687, 688.
FINIS.

