AESOP AT Epsom: Or, a few Select Fables In VERSE.

By a Cit.

London: Printed for, and Sold by John Nut, near Stationers' Hall, School.

To his Excellency Charles Montague Esquire; one of the Lord Justices for the
Administration of public Affairs during the Kings absence, first Lord
Commissioner of the Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
THOUGH a Present of Fables to Your Excellency the inimitable Author of the
COUNTRY MOUSE, and CITY-MOUSE, may at this time seem improper: Yet a Present of
Loyalty to the same Government, which You have been so Studious and successful
in the preservation of, cannot but carry its Acceptance with it. That Liberty
which Your Excellency gave the World so sweet a t^st of in Your most
incomparable Fable, and which afterward You was so instrumental in continuing
to us, is in part the Subject of these. And as Aesop at Tunbridge, by feigned
and surreptitious Fables, seems to bewail the change of the late Gevernment, so
Aesop at Epsom with real and genuine r^yoyceth at the Establishment of this.
Sir, Your Excellency's great Example has such a prevailing influence, as to
make the meanest Subject solicitous for the Public Good, and to see that
Revolution become the subject of Satyr, which has given such opportunities for
Panegyric, (and whose Royal Author has had such immortal Commendations from
Your Excellency's the best of Pens) could not but add very much to my
Resentments in the following Papers. But, Sir, to give no further interruption
to a Gentleman whose very Leisure is employed for the public Safety, I shall
not encroach upon Your time any further than to beg Your Acceptance of this
poor Entertainment, which shall make me add to my Endeavors of approving my
self in a more substantial way,

Sir, Your Excellency's most Obedient Servant.

AESOP AT Epsom.
FAB. I. Of the Fox, and the Stork.
A Subtle Fox well practiced in design,
Invites a Stork, that He with him will dine,
A match, says Stork, Sir Reynard it is agreed,
And home He goes, and much resolved to feed,
Nothing will serve, but that He Is sure the Beast
Will soon repent He Would brought Him for a Guest,
His Stomach was so empty, and so great,
Zounds! He himself should finish all the treat.
Fox smiles, and in his Cubs the Dinner bring,
Soop, and Pottage, a Banquet for a King.
Fall on, my guest, said Fox, and down he pour's
The liquid Feast which He himself devours.
Dear Stork, He cries, 'Slife Child, why do not Peck,
The Stork he Stretches, and extends his neck.
But nothing can get up within His Bill,
Whilst Reynard licks it up, and Eats his fill;
At length perceiving how he had been served,
He homeward Stalks, or He must else have Starved,
But Mindful of the Fox his empty Treat,
Sends to Invite Him to a dish of Meat.
The Fox not thinking Storks had had the sense
To mind affronts, or take the least offense,
Took him at's word, and said, Sir Stork content,
I Will see what House you keep, and Home wi'him went.
The Table Spread, and every thing complete,
That might put Fox in mind He was to eat:
Two servant Storks upon the Table placed
A Narrow long-neck'd Glass which held the Feast;
Lampreys and Eels within it might be seen,
The Glass was so transparent and so clean,
When Stork, Sans ceremony, Sir, begin,
You see your entertainment here within,
I Will show the way; and in his Beak he thrust
Whilst Reynard tried in vain, and trying cursed.
Lord, said the Stork, are you a Beast of thought,
And yet no Broth, or Soop, or Pottage brought?
I Would even fetch some, and fill the Vessel up,
You then, although You could not eat, might sup.
MORAL.
The Application soon is made
By any that is a Reader,
One in his turn the Fool has played,
And whose turn's now consider:
The Tunbridge Aesop first has given
The Town a Dish of Meat,
And faith, to make the Talli'es even,
Epsom should also treat.
FAB. II. Of the Lamb and the Wolf.
A Wolf as He looked out for prey,
And went in search of food,
Perceived a Lamb and Goat in's way
Come jogging on the Road.
Mutton He loved, but did not dare
Fasten on that He Spied,
Whilst Hircus with his horns was there,
And thus to part them tried.
Home from this beast, for shame, Sir Lamb,
It greives my very Soul,
To See You leave a Noble Dam,
And walk with Goat so foul.
A Goat! fie on it, the very worst
Of all the Brutal Race;
A Stinking Animal and cursed,
The woods, and fields disgrace.
Hark you, said Lamb, I plainly know
Whom You Your tricks would put on,
And what You mean by gaping so,
Poor Wolf! he wants some Mutton.
I thank you for the Advice you lend,
And wonder not you should
Like me much better than my friend,
Since I am better Food.
MORAL.
So when the Wars broke out at first,
And France prepared for fighting,
Lord! how her Mighty Monarch cursed
The Dutch and us uniting!
Per Dieu, said he, the British Race
Of Heroes once the chief
Join with a Land so cursed Base,
And ask of them relief!
But had his aim successful been
And us from them removed,
We then the sad Effects had seen,
And Fables moral proved.
FAB. III. Of the Sun and the North Wind.
BEtwixt the Sun and Wind, arose
A quarrel like to end in blows
If both of 'm had not rather chose
A fitting Mediator:
It seems that this contention grew
From which was Strongest of the two
And down their VVagers strait they threw
Thus to decide the matter.
By chance a Traveller came by,
And both with one united cry,
On Him let us our forces try
To finish the dispute:
He that the first a way could find
To make him leave his Cloak behind
Should win; it is done, agreed, said Wind,
Said Sun, content, I Will do it.
When Boreas summoned every blast,
And at Him all his fury cast,
But flinging round his Cloak, he passed
And forwarded his journey:
Sol smiles, and gathering all his Rays,
Sure of the conquest and the Bays,
I Will make You quit your Cloak, he says,
Or else by God I Will burn ye.
Straight Passinger began to sweary
Enraged and troubled with the heat,
And in a most confounded Pett,
At last flung off the Garment
Boreas, said Sol, See yonder Cloak,
The Wagers Won and Thou art broke,
And up in have The Stakes He took,
And that was all the harm in it.
MORAL.
Thus blustering Kings like Boreas often fail;
Whilst others like the Conquering Sun prevail:
Numbers may fright, and dismal fancies raise,
But what can Numbers in improper ways?
Whilst at Compeign Extended armies Shine,
And France her infant Princes fight, and dine,
Whilst Boufflers treats the Ladies with a Song,
And Duke de Berry learns the Spanish Tongue,
A Prince at Cell, who Seemingly appears
Thoughtless of Arms since now released from Wars:
Amid'st his Sports, shall fit Expedients find
To cheat the dangers by their Arms designed,
And one poor Hunting Match perhaps may break
The Measures which their famed Encampments take.
FAB. IV. Of the Trumpeter.
A Trumpeter in time of War
Was in the Battle taken;
And Dead almost with very fear,
Tried thus to save his Bacon.
Dear Sirs, if guiltless Actions save,
Or Innocence secures,
From you the grant of Life I crave,
Who never endangered yours.
Nor Sword, nor Musket have I born,
Or any other Weapon worn
Than what is in my hand:
This Trumpet never gave a wound,
Or uttered any thing but empty sound,
And that too by command.
Off with the Dog, and fetch the Rope,
Said Enemy, and tie Him up,
A Villain! never spare him.
Zounds! That same Instrument is worse
Than Sword, and Gun, and every Curse;
And we have most cause to fear him,
Since from his blasts, those wounds at first proceed,
By which so many Thousands of us bleed.
MORAL.
So cries an Author who has spent his spleen,
What harm can silly Fables mean?
Or how can Faction takes its birth,
From a few Tales, and unprovoking Mirth?
They may perhaps delight,
But rest assured they will never fight,
The Beasts I treat of cannot plot
Or traffic in Sedition: what of that?
When if he railed like O -- ts, like S -- fought,
Cursed like a Man at Sam's, like M -- thought,
All joined together never was able
To show the malice of one single Fable.
FAB. V. Of the Apple and the Horse-Turd.
AN Apple falling from a Tree
Which near a River stood,
With Horse-Turd in his Company
Was sailing down the Flood.
When Turd ambitious to discourse
A thing so much above it,
Would into Conversation force
As down the River drove it.
Lord! Madam, what a pleasant Stream
Is this in which we ride?
Sister! How we two Apples swim?
The foul Sirrev'rence cried.
MORAL.
A Threadbare Writer who per chance
Has not one Farthing paid,
To carry on the War with France,
Toward the Royal Aid.
Cries, Damn this cursed confounded Peace,
It Forty Millions cost,
And we could not procure our Ease
Till All our Wealth was lost.
FAB. VI. Of the Covetous, and the Envious Man.
TWO men to Jove their prayers made
For some kind Earthly blessing,
One never satisfied with what he had,
Though rich beyond Expressing.
The other was envious, nor cared
What mischief e're befell Him,
So that His Comrade was not Spared,
And what should kill Him, kill him:
Jove Teased with their Petitions, sent
His Son Apollo to 'em,
To try to give 'em both content,
And know what service He could do 'em.
Ask, said Apollo, friends what e're
You want th'out further trouble,
And what is asked from eithers prayer
TO other Shall bave it double.
With that, the parsimonious Cuff,
For Wealth did loudly call,
Which downward fell, but never enough
For his desires could fall.
Still as he asked, the Riches came,
And doubled on the other,
Though Still his prayer was the same
Which Still enriched his Brother,
Next in his turn, Sir Envy kneeled,
And with a bale-ful Eye,
Dear Phoebus to my prayer yield
And Hearken to my cry,
Now oh! just now thou Power divine
This favor let me find,
Put out this single Eye of mine,
That his may both be blind*
FAB. VII. Of the Beaver, and the Hunters.
A Beaver being close pursued
By Hunters, Horse, and Hounds;
And neither safe, within the Wood
Nor in the open Grounds
'I know full well (and stepped aside)
'The reasons why I Am chased, he cried,
'And much lament the Cause,
'My Stones are what they want, and I
'Must either part with them, or die
'And glut the Beagles jaws:
With that, though he was loath to part
With things as precious as his heart,
Or with a quiet mind
Surrender up the pride of all his kind,
Yet life was sweet, and utt'ring forth some groans,
Off went his dear beloved Stones,
Which in the Hunters way
The Melancholy beast did lay,
Call in the Hounds, the fierce pursuers said,
We Have caught the game, and have our markets made;
And taking up the Prize they went
All homeward with content.
Whilst the Enervate beast returned,
To graze in quiet on the plain:
And never after this misfortune mourned,
Or fled from Hunters or from Hounds again.
MORAL.
If a certain great Prince, had but done as this Beast,
And instead of each Stone gotten rid of each Priest,
He had still bin a King, whom his People had blessed.
But since He had rather keep in with Ned Petre
And likes Friars, and Monks for his company fitter:
Let him now keep his Stones, for there is none but has better.
FAB. VIII. The Lion and the Fox.
A Fox, a Lions Chaplain, when
The Beasts began to cry,
And gather round their Monarchs Den
For Ancient Liberty;
Said, may it please my sovereign Lord,
Your Subjects are your Slaves,
And if they dare to Speak a word,
Your Throat may be their Graves.
With that the Monarch Wisely smiled
At good Sir Crapes advice,
And said, go fetch your youngest child,
My Stomach's something nice.
Sir, said the Fox, You Are in the wrong,
I must your pardon crave,
Parsons alone to Jove belong,
And no Controulers have.
MORAL.
So in late times the pulpits rung,
With passive non resistance,
And all the burden of their song
Was Duty and Assistance:
Life, Wealth, and every thing was due
To Him, who over us ruled,
And Whilst that Cant they would pursue,
VVe'd All of's Even been fooled,
Had not their Church's Lands been thought
Belonging to the Throne:
And made 'em change their former note,
And what they, said disown.
FAB. IX. Of Jupiter, and the Monkey.
JOVE was desirous once to know
What Animal did bear
The handsom'st offspring, or could show
A little one most fair.
He summoned every living thing
Unto a certain place,
To come before him, and to bring
A Pattern of it is Race.
Forthwith each female creature came,
Which Air, or Sea, or Earth,
Could for it is proper Tenant claim,
And each produced a Sample of it is birth.
When as the Powerful God was just
Deciding the dispute,
Up to the Throne a Monkey thrust,
A most deformed Brute!
And with her Young one in her hand
(Whilst All the company smiled)
'Vouchsafe great Jove to understand
'Mine is the Finest child:
'Please you my Liege to view this face,
'How regular and sweet!
'How well proportioned every grace!
'And how exact the features meet!
'Surely my Lord can never refuse
'My Child and Me the Bays.
When Jove for laughing could not choose:
And all of 'em went their ways.
MORAL.
So young Aesop from Bath, or Old Aesop from Whitehall,
May amuse Town, and Country with a fab'lous recital,
And in love with themselves think their own things the best,
Whilst the Clergy, they laugh at, escape the dull Jest:
And all the success of each Fable and story
Is to lay down their own faults like the Monkey before ye.
FAB. X. Of the Hares, and the Frogs.
A Time was fixed when Hares should meet,
And for dispatch of Business sit,
Without the least delays,
To remedy their present State,
Or else anticipate their Fate
By proper means and ways.
Strait every Puss the Form forsook,
Which He or She for shelter took,
And hastened to the place
Which by appointment was designed,
To heal the mischiefs of their Kind,
Or make extinct their Race.
The SPEAKER chose, and Members placed,
The House resolved it self at last
Into a grand Committee:
But what a pother, Lord! they kept?
One sighed, another trembling wept,
'Twould move us all to pity.
At length a Chief of high Renown,
And Ranger of some mighty Down,
First asked the House's leave:
And then stood up, whilst all the rest
With sorrows, and with grief oppressed
Could nothing else but grieve.
'Brethren, said he, a wretched Race,
'Whom Men, and Dogs, and Eagles chase,
'The Sport of the Creation,
'In vain we are thinking to redress
'Our Grievances, or make 'em less,
'While in this living Station.
'Hounds will for ever be pursuing,
'And Hunters meditating ruin,
'Whilst we must still be flying;
'We'd better (Friends) if I might give
'Advice, this moment cease to live,
'Than always be a dying.
Though Death is not a thing which suits
With constitutions of such Brutes
As Hares are of, it is certain:
Yet they resolved, with much ado,
To bid the Groves, and Hills adieu,
Though not 'thout tears at parting.
By chance there was a River near
The place, where these Assemblers were
Debating how to die,
Wherefore to put off all delays,
They fixed in that to end their days
The sooner, 'cause so nigh.
But Lord! how Puss would backward shrink,
When almost at the very brink,
And sigh she was so near!
Then tell her Beads, and wish some Saint
Would help her from this damned restraint,
And ease her of her fear!
At last the leading Hares were come,
Prepared and ready for their Doom,
And at the Flood arriving,
A Frog or two into it skip'd,
Which made 'em look before they leaped,
And think of longer living.
'Hark ye, (said Puss who bore the sway)
'Fair and softly wins the Day,
'There's no such need to die yet,
'I'll Home again, and even submit
'To what my Destiny thinks fit,
'And keep my Form in quiet.
'Troth Sirs, the fate of Frogs is worse
'Than ours, which we at present curse,
'And are so much afraid at:
'For we who fear most things beside
'Are feared by them, and that is my Pride
'Since these are us dismayed at.
'Sirs, it would be a pretty Jest
'If since our life is not the best
'It should be made our loathing.
'Faith, though I cannot be the Chief,
'I have this comfort and relief,
'I'm better far than nothing.
MORAL.
Hence let the Male-contented mind
Instructive Lessons draw;
Nor be uneasy, when confined
Within the bounds of Law.
What though his Purse is something drein'd,
For Peace he never desired,
And has in part that Prince maintained
Who might have all required?
A Neighboring King's best Subjects paid
Thrice more than William's worst,
And without Money Laws obeyed,
When His with Money cursed.
If therefore He like Hare should grieve
Since small respect we show Him,
Like Hare in Fable let Him live,
Since He has Frogs below Him.
FINIS.

