THE Art of Logic; OR, THE ENTIRE BODY OF LOGIC In ENGLISH. UNFOLDING To the
meanest Capacity the Way to dispute well, and to refute all Fallacies
whatsoever.

The Second Edition, corrected and amended.

By Zachary Coke of Gray's Inn, Gent.

Jam. 1. 17. (...).

Multi multa canunt admiranda, haud sat credenda.

Cato Lib. 3. Distich. 17. LONDON, Printed for John Streater, and are to be
sold by the Booksellers of London. 1657.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS, His Excellency Oliver Cromwell, GENERALISSIMO OF England,
Scotland, and Ireland, Chancellor of Oxford, etc. AND TO The most Renowned his
General Council of Officers.
SIRS,
THe Commodement of the Public in the Appendages of an holy Peace, as it is
the (...), and just Carac of Heroic Enterprizings; so haerentes capiti multa
cum laud Coronae, the Crown and Apex of their Glories, whom God shall honor
to contribute thereunto, though but a Grain or Atome.

Whereof (my Lords) by the conduct of Providence, and Advantage of your
incomparable Magnanimities, after long Exagitations and Repugnance of Affairs,
we have gotten more then a (glad) glimse, and by your unwearied Zeals may
shortly obtain the full Prospect and Fruition. Doubtless Sir, there is a
Standard of Reforming all things. Nor is any Model so grateful to good men, as
whose footsteps appear in the Word of God; wherein there is no Peccadillo; To
which you do well to take heed, as unto a most exact and perfect Rule.

And because, to Tranquillity of Government, Corruption of Manners, and Mazing
Errors are grandly opposite (these delude and distract, that does deboish a
people,) It will be your Prudence, Sirs, who sit at Helm, steering affairs of
the first Magnitude, to debel and overrun the one, as it may be any ones part
(who to common Weal owes both himself and his Devoire) to abandon in his
capacity the other, as Fatal thereunto; Which humble Attempt, my Lords, here
Implo^eth both your Resentment and Patronage.

The smattering ( Sciolus) Soul of Lapsed man, in its most vigorous contendings
unto Beatitude by its own Acies, cannot now (as in its estate of Native
Innocence) with the Eagle behold the refulgence of Sunny Truths; Soaring in the
highest Region of Contemplations, Penetrating the Arcana, and Essences of
things; But through the flagginesse of her Pinion, flutters Estrich like, in
gross and earthy Idaeas; Forming sensual and faint conceptions, and in its
survey, often taking shows and shaddows for substances, gets the the mind
great of Distemperature, and the State of Insecurity.

But this Iargon, my Lords, or rather System of Logico-Theologie, as it will
medicine the disease, so it will purge out the humor and serve (with Heavens
concurrence) as the Clew of Ariadne, to guide the intricate and perplexed
thoughts of the unfixed people through the great Labyrinth of Time, and
involvednesse of affairs to a point of consistency; and as a Jacobs staff o^
Astralabe, to help them in taking the dimensions and full heights of things, by
an infallible Rule of certitude.

And since knowledge is the excellency of man (seeing he abhorrs more to be
accounted ignorant then vicious) surely the excellentest part of him (needs)
must be that wherein this perfection inthrones, which being no other then
intellect above Inferior Powers, challenges the prerogative of Ayds and
Organs: Of which kind Logic (in our Native Tongue, as most rare, so) is the
greated and most proper, which frames and teaches the use of Instruments
accommodable to every operation of the understanding in its distinct and
deliberate Quests of Truth.

This quality in man is the true Philophers stone it turns all that his mind
touches into Gold and Treasure of satisfaction. It is Janitrix Scientiarum;
the Tutelary and Guardian of all, both Moral and Intellectual Habit: On the
raisen wings of whose perfections, the prone and Reptile Soul soars a pitch,
Circuiting all the stately Provinces and Dominions of knowledge.

This is that which by (Grace) recovers us to our Primogenial condition,
unclouds the masqued mide, plows up, and useals the depths of Reason, Evolves
the hidden Idaeas of things, and unites the knottinesse of every emergency.

By it are confuse things made Distinct; Abstru^e, Obvious: And the Planetick
thoughts to act Syncentrick, and in its Sphere. This also rangeth the Pel-mel
Conceptions to Battlia and Order; It unforks Oracles, making them Toothlesse,
turns into Milk bony Paradoxes, and Cloudy AEnigma's to clear Sunshine.

Ignorance, Sirs, benights the Soul, or rather Eclipseth it: By interposingit
makes a man go all his way groping as he were blind: It is the Rack of
ingenious and generous Spirits; who will often rather drown then not dive beyond
it; Nor did they ever find a better way to chase or conquer it, then by
Logical Adjuments; The faithful Organ to scent the footsteps of Truth (amidst
the various Abolets of Error) in the Indagation and Researches after knowledge.

It is a Zealous (but frivolous) Mistake of (the (...)) some that would be
thought Christians in these times; That Learning aversates, and Logic leads
from the Grace and Truths of God: As if the Donations of Heaven were opposed,
subordinated in man's tendency to Bliss and Glory; Can that be erroneous or
bad, that teaches what things be, or what be not, right and good? Such prove
but the opinion of those men, who affirm the World grows old, in their
beginnings thus to dote and talk idly; Can there be contrariety in means that
conspire one common end, man's perfection and happiness? Gods gifts may serve,
not shut out one another. Wherein Transcended us the first and second Adam and
Solomon too, as to the Complement of their Natures, but in Logic and
Philosophic endowments? The Connaturall Imposition of Names, at first to
things; That Herbal of Herbals, swallowed of Time; And the famous disputes with
the Sanhedrin-doctors, and Saducean Families, abundantly argue the advantages
of acquired Habits; Nor can the manner of their having them, diversie the
Nature of them.

By this time then it transpares, That, as Nature needs Grace, so Grace
desires Nature: and Art both Grace and Nature. Nature without Grace cannot do
well; Grace without Nature cannot do at all: But Grace in Conjunction with
nature and art, can do all things, as the great Apostle and Master of Learning
affirms of himself; and as Symilus says, Without Art Nature cannot be
perfect, and without Nature Art can claim no being, (...).

Now seeing this is the key of the Sciences, the study whereof is not more
pleasing then profitable, and quisque cupit se bear: Why should it longer lie
covert and concealed from the community? Is not Communication the excellency
and measure of Good? Bonum est sui diffusivum; Does not the Glorious and
Superessentiall Being of beings ((...) delight himself in scattering beams, and
filling every thing with the Expandings and Circumfusions of his goodness? And
why should the lesser Beauties of Knowledge, and Arts be veiled with, and
confined to Foreign Languages (to the most, Barbarous and unknown) since
science is no man's property?

I do not derogate Sirs from the Universities, which I know are the Seminaries
and Founts of Learning and Liberal Acquisitions. Rich streams have, do, and
may hereafter flow from thence, to Indent the Land with (Rivulets of)
Refreshing Blessings: Yet believe I not, they should still (as formerly) have
the Monopoly of Letters to inhaunce them as by Patent, above the price of the
meanest capacity (if willing) to purchase them.

There cannot be a greater Prop (next that of quenching the heavenly Tapers of
the Word) to the black Monarchy of the Prince of Darkness, than the
Engrossments and Enclosure of the Sciences (which this lays open.) What were
the Hieroglyphics, and Imagery Resemblances of Egypt, and Ancient Greece, but
to captive the People under blindness of mind, whilst some few obtained Titles
of Magi, Daemones, and Sophoi; The Guerdon of their most injurious services.

But this Book, my Lords, as it designeth the Disempa^ing of the Sciences,
unlocking to the People the Mysteries of them: So Heaven (no doubt) may follow
it with a Correspondence of blessing, and breaking up the Caverns and Cells of
reigning ignorance, may enamour the People with the Attractive Beauty of them,
and clearly inform them (omitting matters of faith) what is payable to the
Magistrate, and practicable each to other. The want whereof agitates their
lighter minds, scorched with flashing Zeal (unduly tempered and set on fire) to
pinch the Magistrate of their duty, whilst they know it not perfectly, and
Ravelling the bond of love in the unity of the Spirit; for minute differences,
uncharitably invade one another, contending as for their Fires and Altars.

And seeing Religion is the Pallisado, or rather the Palladium of Republikes,
and knowledge the Cement of Religion; For that blesses a people, this blasteth
error and drowns their breaches of Harmony; It imports you Sirs whom God
has honored with the chief Conduct of affairs, to promove both (which struck
together, make a Diapason) since not-rare experience has proved, where they
have rung out for one, they have begun to toll for the other.

Indeed my Lords, you drive courageously, you have almost doubled the Cape of
Bon Speranze; Reformation and a happy peace will not longer ride at dead
Anchor. These Mountains now removed, who were so long in travel of a Mouse of
Reformation; We have hopes to receive (by your hands, as by some good Angels)
the first born of our blood, establishment of Religion and liberty, which
lately was like to have miscarried in the birth.

Sirs, God has set you up the Oracles of War, made you to your Enemies Rocks,
dashing them as Waves of the Sea; Your Drums* like Zizca's, conquering with
Alarms, the clashing of your Armor terrible as thunder, your Victories always
as sure as the Rancontre; Every Field to bear you new Palms, immense structures
to be crowded with Ensigns and Trophies of your admirable Successes: But these
my Lords, are but Meteors adding Blaze, little of true Brightness: They have
an Umbrage of Grandeur, not a spark or Dram of Glory; The Enamel of these
Gayeti^s and Gauds, Sully and soon grow Dusky. It is your Zeals to the Interest
of Heavens affairs. and the good of Community, that will be the Heralds to
blazon your Escutcheons without stain, and Aggrandize your names to all
Posterity.

And when the Ardour of Christian Charity in its sweetest Vigor, and the light
of knowledge (by Providence. and your powerful influences) shall flame, and as
a flood break in upon us, and our youthful liberty open into a flower, then
shall we grow rich with the increases of God, and the World venerate each of
you, (...); As a little Deity guesting in a body of flesh.

Or what is it to have the airy titles of a great Alexander, a victorious
Caesar, a politic Hanibal, a valiant Serpio? What Fate attended these
Philomathies? Some of them lived the Idols of the age, and mounting upon the
pinacles of State (elevated on the wings of their ambitions) were most
ingloriously dashed and precipic'd; whilst others like descending spokes of
Fortunes wheel, beheld the solemnities of their Honors funerals: Nor could the
Monuments of these Whirligigs serve Muniments to their expiring glories.

Greatness without goodness is a slippery height: The possessor in
endeavoring to stand. accerseth his fall: But who builds on the Rock of ages,
shall grow still and Bourgeon, his leaves shall refresh and shade the afflicted
of the People; his days shall be many and good, his walks shall be on an
Helix, still dilating.

And since God has made you thus Great, may he also make you grateful; he
has given you the Conquest of affairs, to give him the Conquest of your selves
and wills. Be the shadow and Echo, or rather Heliotropes shutting and opening
to his good pleasure: Then having perfected Deliverance for this Nation (whose
expectations you are) your greatness shall be complemented with goodness, and
your aspirements with Glory.

But that I build not too spacious Gates to my Mynda, or throw the Fabric out
at the Casements, I only add, that your Lordships fixing this Land to a happy
Temperament of Justice, and Equity, advancing Letters, and reforming all things
to the standard of the Word, will render England the Worlds Eutopia, the most
Felicitous of Nations, and having absolved your courses through the Zodiac of
praiseworthy actions, you will set laden with Luster, and satisfying
soulpeace: Treasures of an higher Carac than the worlds Magnalia; And the
prayers of the Saints ascending with you, will Petarr your enterances through
Heavens Portcullis; while you scale the Battlements of Glory to perfect your
Triumphs, and with Seraphic Hierarchies chaunt Eternal Trisagions in ravishing
Division; and every Colon and Column of your lives, quartered with the memory
of your Atchievments, cause your Names (Rivalling with time) to survive on
Earth, perfumed as Incense, and Odorous as a pile of Spices. -- Magnum hoc ego
duco,
Quod placeat tibi, qui turpi secernis honestum.


Your Excellencies, Your Honors, and the Commonwealths most faithful
servant. Zach. Coke.

TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.
GOd has made you an Ingenious and curious People, may he also make you wise
unto Salvation. Not one of you ( I presume) but would know much, and dispute
well: This Book will serve you in both your ends. It will lead you through the
plainness and depths of knowledges, both natural and Divine, which as yet
perhaps seem Mysterious to you, and impenetrable; make it but your own, and you
have conquered the difficulties of all the Sciences; Truths that before
deluge'd you, will take you now but up to the Ancles.

Though it be a little one, it may live to do you much good: and like the Be
of Myrmecides, has not the less Labor and Artifice. It is not the Enchanted
Egg of Oromazes, instead of universal happiness, stuffed only with wind and
Vapor, or as the numerous Tomes of the Times, Cui quidlibet scribendi est
Cacoethes; which serve but to beat down the price of wastepaper, and to make
the world sit straight about you; but securing always the Interests of truth,
It will teach you to dispute and form a right Judgment of any thing, to
discern golden Verities from glaring and gilded; and to assure your faith
against the strongest Sconces of error, to Raze or batter it.

It will not lead you out of the right way (as some blind guides) but help you
to reduce those that are strayed: From it, as from a spiritual Artillery, you
may deprome all weapons of reason, to guard, not affront the truths of God
(which not seldom suffer in men's hands.) But as the end of war is a calm and
good peace, so Harmony and agreemement of spirit, is the Mark, or rather Center
of disputings: for Fencing is but fooling in the Faith.

Look then into it, go over it, and you will quickly see the use and Advantage
of it: Judge it not by the Frontispiece no more then you would the Riches of
the Indian Mines, by the barren and Raggy surface of the Earth, or the Treasure
of a Lapidaries store by the presentment at his Window: Yet when you have read
it, and (perchance) dispute whether it does more please or profit you, know
that as a passion to the common good both* conceived and brought it forth, so I
have obtained, if growing up with the peace of the Nation, it shall beget any
thing of Amity and Unity among the Saints: That Paul being nothing, and Cephas
nothing, The God of Truth and Love may be All in all.

Z. C.

The Art of Logic.
THe prime perfection and pleasure in this life General rules to be foreknown
of Logic.
(second to that supernatural one, Faith in Christ blessed for ever, and
Sanctification through the Spirit) consists in man's conversing according to
understanding and Reason: i. e. to understand, know and judge distinctly of
things as they are in their Natures.

To the attainment of such a knowledge, three things are necessary.

1 The object or thing to be known, viz. Every thing in Nature.

2 A natural faculty or power of understanding, which flows from a
reasonable Soul, and is innate to every man.

3 A certain disposition whereby this power is ordinately and regularly, that
is in order, and without error, led into Act. Now this is either,

1 Immediate, and by infusion of God, which is extraordinary and rare, and in
these Ages of the Church promised to no person in particular.

2 Or it is acquired, and gotten by information and discipline, which is
frequent and ordinary.

Now the disciplines disposing a man's understanding to the knowledge of things,
are either. 1 Objective. 2 Directive.


1 Objective disciplines be such as handle things which Objective disciplines.
are in Nature as Objects of our understanding, which are principally four. 1
Theology. 2 Jurisprudence. 3 Medicine. 4 Philosophy.


1 Divinity, called by the Greeks Theology, which is the knowledge of God, and
things Supernatural, as they are Supernatural, etc.

2 Jurisprudence, or Law, which takes in beside the special Laws of God and
Nature, the Canon, Civil Laws, the Law of Nations, our Laws Common, Statute and
Municipall, etc.

3 Medicine or Physic, both the Speculative and Practique.

4 Philosophy, which comprehends Metaphysics, which considers things as they
are such, etc Also Physiques, or natural Science; next of all Mathematics,
which contains Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy* Music, Optics, and last of
all Ethics, or Morals, containing Occonomicks and Politics, under which again
(beside History) is comprised Strategicks, called Martial Discipline.

Directive Disciplines be such as handle not the things Directive discipline.
themselves to be known, nor do they inform or perfect the understanding of man
in those things, but they prepare only some operation of man, and with framed
Rules and Instruments do guide and direct it.

Now the operations of man requiring and needing such artificial Rules, are
chiefly two. The first is the understanding Observe. All faculties have two
things in them, Matter, and Form, or somewhat not unlike; the Matter, Precepts;
the Form, the order of the Precepts.

The Matter every faculty has of it self, as of its own nature. The Form is by
Logic administered.


or cogitation of things. The second the signification either by word or
writing of those cogitations (as for the Disciplines Directive of the
signification of men's thoughts, as Grammar, Rethorick, Poetry, they are beside
our purpose to treat here) and that which thus directs the understanding or
cogitations, is Logic only: to the consideration whereof, I The AEquivocation
of the word Logic.
mean the Homonomy and AEquivocation of the Word of Term, we now come.

This word Logic
Has diverse significations: For first is meant by it the 1 Natural Logic.
power or faculty of the understanding and reasoning, which is innate, and
flows from man's Essence or Nature.

2 It may be taken for a frame or constitution of Logical precepts, by this or
that man written, called a systeme; which frame may be also taken for an Art,
by a Metonomy of the Cause for the Effect, accepting Art not for an habit
ingenerated in the mind by precepts and use, but for a collection of universal
precepts, to operate in a determinate latitude and limit of End.

3 It may be accepted for a certain part of this whole frame or constitution,
namely that which is of a Syllogism Contingent or Commune.

4 It may signify an Act or Habit, begotten by precepts and use in the mind of
the Artist; as when we say Peter is a good Logician: and this is the most
proper signification of the word Logic, according to which we define it: So
therefore

Logic is an Art of ordering and directing of man's The thoughts of man's mind
is nothing else but his reason or understanding wholly occupate about things.
understanding The first Definition of Logic. The second.
in the knowledge things: Or secondly,

Logic is an Art that teaches how to think and judge distinctly of all things.

In this Definition are contained, 1 The Genus. 2 The Object. 3 The End.


The Genus of Logic is an Art; for Genus The five principal Habits of
Aristotle.
It cannot be Wisdom which teaches and treats of the highest causes and
things.

2 Its not Understanding which contains and consists of the habit of
principles.

3 Nor is it Science, which is made up only of such things Reasons drawn from
the properties.
as are real and universal.

4 Nor can it be Prudence, which teaches things that are particular to be done
and practiced. It remains therefore that it be an Art: For,

First it imitates and perfecteth Nature. Reasons why Logic is an Art.


2 It presupposes a certain end whereunto it directs all the means.

3 It is to be known, not for its own, but for the sake of some other; the
profit thereof being in use, not speculation.

4 It advises nothing of the means, it consults not whether to use these or
those means to obtain the end, for that they all are predetermined, and in a
certain disposition ordinated to their end.

5 It operates without any contrariety, or repugnancy of the appetite and
affections, as not engaging or disengaging them.

6 It is not commendable for the intent or purpose, but for the thing done, the
work it self.

7 It is not to be dispraised when it errs of set purpose and industry (for it
could have done otherwise) but when it errs of ignorance and unwillingly.

8 It is delivered by an Analytical and Resolutive method, proceeding from the
object and end foreknown, unto the means which are to be ordinated.

Ergo, Logic is an Art.

Of the Object of Logic.
2 Object of Logic.
The object of Logic is twofold. 1 That which it directs. Also the primary
object of Logic is Reason, the secondary, Speech, the manifestation and
utterance of Reason.
2 That whereto the understanding is directed.


1 The object which Logic directs, is the Understanding, Reason, Mind or
thought of man: wherein two things are to be foreknown. 1 The properties of the
understanding. 2 The parts and degrees thereof.


1 The properties of the understanding to the preknowledg 9 Properperties of
the understanding.
of Logical precepts necessary, are 1 That those perceived of sense, be first
and best known of the understanding; let By sin there are three defections in
man's Reason. 1 Aberration from the apprebending of things. 2 Obscurity and
difficulty, either not being able to comprehend the natures of things, or to
discern them with their notes and properties, as in a glass. 3 Distraction and
confusion in the apprehension of them.


Logic now has a medicine to cure these, which it does, 1 By the explanation
of things. 2 By the Probation. 3 By Ordination.



the understanding deduce thence its original knowledge. 2 That since the
defection of our first parents in Paradise, our understanding cannot faithfully
and certainly determine to comprehend the natures of things with distinctnesse
and order, and by its own acies and strength to discern the truth, unless by
artificial and outward rules, directed and governed, unto which the
understanding looks, as the Mariner to the Compass; In which respect and
sense, it is in worse case than the sense^, which have conserved themselves
sound and entire since the first apostacy, of their own force and vigor being
still able to determine themselves faithfully to know their own objects. 3 That
the understanding of it self, is rather carried to the cogitation of things
universal (and such objects as are not determined either by will, place, time,
etc. circumstances) then unto determinate things and singular, the effects and
products of sense. 4 That the understanding acts not in a moment, but
successively, in time, and by order. 5 It understands not the same
independently, and of it self, but goes from one thing to another; and hence
it is that the distinct knowledge of God is paramount the reach of the
understanding, there being nothing in God diverse from God, or what is not God
himself: in man there are many things more obvious to knowledge than man
himself, but in God there is no such thing, who is conceivable only (and that
but most imperfectly) by himself. 6 That at one and the same time it is
occupied about, and understands but one thing. 7 That the object must be
proportionate to it self, and finite; it cannot understand God who is infinite.
8. That it may assent certainly to conclusions proved, even Testimony (if
authentic) yet so as no distinct knowledge can be begotten in the
understanding, except there be a mean from the nature of the Predicate or
Subject; for that to know, is by the Cause. 9 That the instruments of its
operation need be pure and composed, should be spirits void of affectuous
humors, as Anger, Fear, Malice, Revenge, etc.

Degrees are three,
1 The first degree of the understanding is simple, viz. 2 The Degrees of the
understanding.
the apprehension of a single Term or Theme, as Peter, Paul, a living Creature.

2 Is the conception of two Terms by way of composition, as when we think, A
man is a living Creature: or, A man is a reasonable Creature.

3 Is when in order we think of more than two Terms passing the thought from
one to the other, till you come to a third. This is discourse.

Discourse now is twofold. (...).
Illative. Ordinative.


Illative is such a moving of our Thoughts, as when by the repeating the
co-ordination of things, that is, the third Term with the two former, we judge
the co-ordination of these two Terms to be true or false: This discourse is
that which is called Syllogistical.

2 Ordinative is a moving of our thoughts from one part of the doctrine to
another, that so we may judge how they consist and hang together. This
discourse is called Methodical.

The Object to which the understanding is directed and ordered, is every thing
in Nature; for the understanding and comprehending of which in our thoughts,
the Understanding needs and seeks rules of Logic.

1 Of this object there is a threefold partition of things. Things to be
known, threefold.
1 Some are infinite, as God, and hereunto the serv'ce of Logical Instruments
is not sufficient for the eliciting of a perfect conception or knowledge:
Others are finite, and create; and of them some be spiritual and imperceptible
by sense, and with much ado can the understanding conceive them: Some also be
corporal, and to know them and their instruments, Logical instruments chiefly
serve.

2 Things in nature are considerable two ways. 1 Indeterminately without
respect or restraint to Term, Place, or other circumstances, as a Man. 2
Determinately unto circumstances, as Peter Paul, etc. About the first (as about
things universal) are Logical instruments and directions primarily and
principally used About the latter (as about singular) they are used but
secondarily.

3 Things are considered absolutely and in themselves, and so are called simple
beings, or entia, or things, as a Man. Sometime as coordinate, and one with
another, as a Man, a living creature: now they are called compounded. About the
first, the first part of Logic is used; about the latter, the second and third
parts.

The proper end of Logic, is, the ordering and directing 3 End of Logic.
of man's cogitations (or the acts of man's understanding) in the knowledge of
things; this is the true and proper end of Mark, other Disciplines do not so
much direct the mind (Physics, Mathematics) as teach and minister the
knowledge of things; whereas Logic of it self is but (...).
Logic. 1 Because every essential end must be equal to its thing ended, (nor
streighter nor larger) because the end constituteth the essence. 2 Every end
must be one, for the unity of an Art depends of the unity of the end; as the
unity of knowledge depends of the unity of the subject. 3 An End in Arts not
conjecturall, such is Logic, must be put when the means are put; and these
three Criteria, or rules, exactly do agree in the direction of the
understanding: and hitherto having minded the nature and essence of Logic,
lets now consider the properties and effects that follows the essence.

Properties of Logic.
1 No discipline more helps the wit, or contemplative Proper acdents, and the
effects of Logic. (...)
sharpness, i. e. the inclination of the temperature to contemplate distinctly
and accurately. 2 Unto the wit belongs, 1, The judgment, or judging faculty,
i. e. a disposition soundly to think and perceive what is true, and what is false
in 2 things. 2 A facility of learning. 3 Discipline. 4 A witty 3 faculty
quickly to find out the mean to prove the truth, and 4 refute the falsehood, all
which Logic helps, orders, directs.

3 Logic is the directory of the thoughts, making them regular, that
whatsoever is conceiveable of a thing, may be drawn to a right sum, for an
orderly process in them, and to avoid confusion.

4 When a man has soundly and well thought on a thing, it enableth him exactly
and in order to reach and write it.

5 It causes a man well to learn that which is well taught.

6 It gives a reflexive knowledge to a man, that is, it makes a man not only
know (directly) but makes him know that he knows a thing.

7 It enableth a man to resolve what is compositively handled by others.

8 It much avails and profits to conference and collations, whether occasional
or other.

9 By it, is a man enabled to an apt and regular placing and acquiring of
intellectual virtues, as on which depends the disposition and order of all
disciplines, as to their frames and constitution.

10 It is the rule of those habits a man has acquired, instructing him to work
aright; yet I mean but the rules of ingenious and intellectual operations.

11 In respect of man (that is to learn) it is the rule of all other
disciplines whatsoever, but especially for Divinity. I say not, it is
essential to the simple knowledge of things substantial to salvation (for
this may be by infusion from heaven, without any humane artifice) but I mean,
the ordinary way of erudition and skill to handle places in Theology, depends
on Logic.

Now unto Logic (as unto every habit) are required three things, (as it were
efficient causes of it) Nature, Method, Exercise.

1. (...) or Nature, that is, a natural faculty, which consists 1 Nature
required unto Logic, as the (as it were) efficient cause.
of the humors, disposition and temperament of the body, whereby a man is
inclinable to this, more then to that Discipline.

2 Method ((...) in the Greek) is a Collection and frame of all Logical
precepts, needful to the acquisition or getting the habit of the Art.

About this frame two things are considerable. 1 Invention. m 2 Conformation. n


The principal Inventor of this Art (as of all other) is the m
Spirit of God, viz. the holy Ghost; then, men his Instruments in all Ages.

Now the Causes motive of men to invent this Art, were 1 The defect of man's
nature, who out of a perception (...)
that the thoughts of men could not well determinate themselves to the
understanding of things without the help of second thoughts, were forced to
frame and devise such, and they call them Logical notions. a

2 (...): Admiration of natural effects, arising out of abstruseness of the
Causes, causing grief to ingenuous spirits (for, wonder speaks ignorance) by
which they were irritated to a serious enquiry after the Causes, which without
Logical determinations was not feasible.

3 A puritation and itch after knowledge (innate to every man) Now he that
desires an end, advises of, and desires the means conducent thereunto, and
such in special is Logic.

The means men used at first (I mean since the Fall) for (...).
the expoliting and adorning of the Art of Logic, is, first, Outward Sense,
principally those of Seeing and Hearing. 2 (...), Observation; and this ever
presupposes For nothing comes into the understanding but that was some manner
of way first in the sense.
remembrance, which is nothing but a reflection upon something formerly taken
notice of. 3 (...), Experience, that is, the collection of many Observations
and Examples, and retaining them in memory. 3 (...), Induction (the third
(...), that is, effect of the understanding, is invention) which from the
judgment of the senses, and experience of observations, forms in the
understanding a common and universal notion, which as it were is a rule by
which the knowledge and virtue of working are directed in the operation to come.

In the Conformation of this whole Logical Constitution, n
two things are very observable. 1 The Formal. q 2 The Material.


1 The formal, etc. consists, 1 In the determinate distribution of the parts. a
2 In the co-ordination of the q
parts so determined, unto the end of the whole: b

1 In the distribution of the parts, these (...), or rules a
are observeable. 1 Every good distribution should be made with words fit and
significative unto the mind, of the parts of the whole distributible, but not
of any thing not therein contained. 2 Division should be of the whole, not of
the parts of the whole. 3 If it be a good division, the parts (divided) will be
equal to the whole, and neither more nor less. 4 It should consist of such
parts only as are in the whole, retaining the same order, and agreeing with
it. 5 In a good partition there should be a disjunction and segregation of the
parts one from another, neither presupposing or including one the other. 6 And
this disjunction of parts must be such a disjoyner which mensurates the whole,
and whereby the whole is constituted. 7 A division should distinguish the
whole, not confound or perplex it. 8 The parts (integral) should be amongst
themselves of the same order and nature with the whole, that the whole might
the better measure them. 9 Lastly, A good division should be commodious, and
apt to notificate the whole.

The second (as it were) efficient cause of Logic, is Method, 2 Method
requisite to Logic.
the division whereof (or the general way to learn it) is into three parts.

1 The first is of the general precepts to be foreknown (which precepts are as
the Porch of a building) as of the signification of the word or name, the
acception of it* the genus, or general title of it, the end, the object, and
the parts.

2 Is the Method or frame of the precepts constitutive of Three parts of Logic
precepts. 1 Directrix (...), 2 Directrix (...) 3 Directrix (...)



the Art; these are the chief rooms of the house.

3 The Exemplar or pattern of this Art of Logic to be used and practiced,
which servs as the Postick and hinder part of this Edifice.

Again, the second of these is tripartite, or admits of a threefold division.
The first is, which shows the cogitation to coordinate two terms one toward
another. The second and third, which direct the discoursive cogitations* when
they are first Illative, and go by way of inference and consequence; Or 2 When
they are ordinative, methodicall, and by conclusion, as is premonstrate; And so
much as to the determinate distribution of the parts.

2 Now come we to the Co-ordination of the parts, concerning b
which, note these (...), or Rules. 1 That every constitution or frame, is a
mean to some determinate and certain end, therefore it ought to be proportioned
and ordered to this end, with a certain proportion, adornment and method, and
adapted to the happy acquisition thereof. 2 Whatsoever is in the end or use,
must be put into the constitution and frame, not more or less. 3 Let no
precept go into the frame, that makes not for the end or use. 4 The use should
easily and plainly be understood by the precepts, it being a thing unfit that
the instrument should be more hardly understood than the use of it. 5 That we
may attain without precepts, there should be no precepts delivered of the same.
And thus much of the Formal, of the frame of Logic, now come we to the
Material.

2 The Material then of the frame of Logic, consists in The Material of the
frame of Logic.
that wherein the partition and conformation before handled is, and it is
twofold. 1 Primary. 2 Representative and Secondary.


The primary Material also is twofold. Simple. a Compound. b


1 The simple material, be the Logical terms, (...).
words a
made to represent the sense of the cogitations, so that the understanding is
as it were limited and confined within it self in cogitating and thinking; they
are called Second Notions.

The first Notions are the conceptions we have of things, as they are things.

Now these second Notions do not directly and by themselves shadow out unto us
the things themselves, nor any thing accidental or appendant unto them, but
point unto certain intellectual Rules, whereby we do with all distinctnesse and
regularity form things, that is, the conceits of things: As the Sailors
Compass does not give direction to the Mariners by subjecting to the sight the
very winds themselves really, but the North Wind, South Wind, etc. as they may
be specificated, or the Regions wherein they range. Those that primarily
imposed names, intended to name first the things themselves, and then secondly
they added second Notions, which we call Mental and Logical: As the word Man,
is to express primarily the conceit which we form of Humane Nature, and is as
the image thereof, and immediately founded therein; for man's nature is the
immediate object, and this is a word of the first intention; but when we say, a
man is a Species, or a Genus, or Difference, etc. these are words of the second
intention, not desumed immediately from the thing, which is humane nature, but
from the manner of understanding, whereby we understand such Terms to agree
unto Peter, John, and every man.

2 The compound Material be the precepts in Logic, b
framed of and from those Notions of second ^ntention, explicitly and plainly
exhibiting to our minds and understandings, those things which the second
Notions themselves do but implicitly and darkly; these therefore are necessary
unto the learning of this Art of Logic, and ought to be formed according to
these subsequent Rules.

1 The precepts of Logic should be made regularly and (...) For the
constituting of Logical precepts.
fully to obtain the End. 2 Both as to the words of them and number, they
should be conceived and set down determinately. 3 They should be Homogeneal,
that is, of the same kind, mensurated and adapted only to this Art and End. 4
They should be framed plain and with perspicuity. 5 They should be apposite and
fit to the teaching and learning of this Art.

And so much for the primary Material of Logic. The secondary Material of
Dogick. (...) Of the secondary Material.


The secondary Material, or representative, are Examples added to the Precepts,
which is only a particular experiment of this or that precept, either upon our
selves or others; wherein are observable these following Rules.

1 Examples ought to be agreeable and fitting to the nature and end of the Art,
deducing carefully the experiments from those had arrived unto the end of the
Art, and that accordingly operated 2 Examples, as accommodate to the precepts,
so they should be very intelligible, fit to be made use of, and proportionate
to the truth and verity of the precepts. And thus much of the first and second
efficient causes, by which the habit of Logic is acquirable ( viz.) the
Nature, and Method. We come briefly to the third Efficient, which is, Exercise
of Logic.

The Exercise then of Logic consists in this, that we frequently 3 Efficient
cause of Logic.
think on, and diligently meditate things conformable to the prescriptions and
rules of Logic, that is, orderly and distinctly: This indeed is the chief,
most principal, and the nearest Efficient Cause of this habit in us of this Art
of Logic, and immediately engenerates and expresses Logic in us, whereas Wit
and Precepts are Causes but remote.

The means and parts of this Exercitation are two. Representative. Operative.


1 Representative are such as are superadded to the The means and parts of
Exercise two.
Rules of Logic, as Experiments and manifest Testimonies, Forms of
Disputation, Resolution, etc.

2 Operative is the very Art it self of this Exercitation and Use, which should
be by an assiduous imitation of the most eminent wits, and by the agitation of
our own. And thus much of the Prolegomena's, and things necessary to the
foreknowledge of Logic.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Art of Logic.
Logic is an Art which conducteth the mind Which directs simple terms. 3
Parts of Logic. (...).
in the knowledge of things.

It has three things to be remarked as parts thereof. The first is, that which
directs the first operation of the mind, which objecteth to it self only
single or simple things, by the mediation of a single or simple term, which is
a notion or instrument of Logic, representing unto the understanding one thing
(called therefore incomplex:) and it is called a second notion as it is the
minds image and pourtraict, shadowing to it self some outward (...).
thing. First notions are (as it were) the string or rule of a Dial; second
notions are (as it were) the ombre and shadow made by that rule or string:
these both show the hour, but the string or stem first and fundamentally; the
second (that is the shadow) but secondarily, as it configurateth to the other.

A single or simple term is, 1 On whom the latter depends, and it Simple terms
twofold.
is either of a word, or of a thing.
2 Arising from the first, and it is also either of a word, or of a thing.



Of a Word or Voice.
The term of a Word is that whereby the naming of a thing is considered; a word
is the sign of things or conceptions, pronounced or written with a certain
frame of letters and syllables.

In a word three things are remarkable. 1 The Material. 2 The formal. 3 The
Imposition.


The Material is the sound in the pronouncing of the letters and syllables,
whereof the word is constituted, either in speaking or writing.

The Formal is the signification of the word, and by consequence the relation
to the conceit of the mind which (...) gives knowledge of: now the efficient
cause of this signifcation, is, the imposition and institution, which in the He
brew Tongue is Divine (as God was the institutor and imposer) in other tongues
humane, as having been invente and imposed by man.

Unto a Word appertain 1 Divisions. 2 Affections.


1 Of the division of words.
1 Words have their divisions either Of the thing signified. a *. Of the manner
and ordering of signifying. b *


Of things signified, some words are Of themselves significative, as a Man or a.
Woman, Worm, etc. and all Nouns that signify a thing wholly.
Consignificative, and that need other words to express their meaning, as
Adverbs, Pronouns, etc.


Significative words also are of the first intention which signify of
themselves without the help of the mind, and they are the things themselves, or

2 Of the second intention, which means not a thing (it self) but the manner of
it, or word of Art, whereby the thing is understood.

Now the division of the manner of signifying words is b


into Abstract Concrete (...).
Abstract, is which signifies a thing apart, causing the mind to meditate the
simple and precise nature of any thing, as Godhead, Manhood, whiteness,
redness, etc.

Concrete is that which signifies things conjoyntly, as having more natures
then one complicate or conjunct, as man, white, holy, etc.

Words also are either of 1 A particular signification, as man. 2 Collective
signification, as a flock, a company, a Church, etc.


Again, of the manner of signifying, words are either Distinct. Ambiguous.


Distinct, which has a certain and distinct signification, as fire, earth,
air, and other names of things existent in nature.

An ambiguous word, is which indistinctly signifies things that in nature are
diverse, as Cancer, which signifies both a living creature and a disease;
hereunto all words that are Eqvivocall, and have diverse senses are referrible.

Now words become doubtful either by chance. of purpose.


Words ambiguous by chance is, when reason cannot be (...).
given why one name should be given to things diverse in nature and definition.

Of purpose doubtful, is when a common name is given to diverse things upon
counsel, and for some certain reasons, and this again is doubtful either of
Dependence. a Similitude. b


Ambiguous of dependence, is when a general name is given a
to diverse things, whereof one is dependant on another (as upon the more
principal) touching the nature of it; as this word thing is most general, and
therefore doubtful, it being attributed both to substances and accidents, but
not equally and alike; for to a substance it is given of it self, and
principally; to an accident, less principally, as having its nature dependent
of the substance, it is therefore called an Analogous (...).
general or Genus.

Ambiguous of similitude, is, when for some consimilitude or likeness,
together, one name is given to diverse things, b d
and is either 1 Simple, d or 2 Compound e

1 Simple, is, when the Similitude lies between two and no more, and is of
Conceit. Things really.


Ambiguous by similitude of conceit, is, when two things altogether diverse (as
God and the Creature) obtain one and the same attribute or name upon the
conception we make of some similitude betwixt them; so God and man are both
said to be good, just, to repent, etc. whereas really, no words can be found to
express Gods most incomprehensible being.

Ambiguous by similitude of things in reality, is, when the significations of
their natures or operation bear an evident and known similitude. As when meat
and medicine are called healthful, because both cause health: Or, as when a
beast and a disease are called a Wolf, because of the rapacity and
ravenousnesse of both; and upon this account are the Seals of Gods Covenant
called Sacraments, because of the correspondence and similitude they bear unto
those Solemn Oaths, wherewith men were in former ages bound and consecrate to
the Wars.

Ambiguous of a Compound Similitude, is, whose likeness e
consists of a proportion between four; and it is called Analogy. As this
word Governor is Analogical and (...).
proportionable, when attributed to a Magistrate and a Shipmaster; for (here is
the proportion between four) as the Master of a ship or Pilot is unto a ship
(whereof he has government) so is the Magistrate unto the Commonwealth. In
like manner, flesh is Analogical in respect of beasts, birds, and of apples,
cherries, etc. And in this sense are Magistrates called Gods upon earth, Psalm.
82. 6. And thus much of the divisions of Words; Now follow their affections, or
their Canons and Rules, which be three.

The first affection of a word, is, that it should be perspicuous, Rules of the
affections of words.
that is, plain, and significative unto the mind of that which it ought to
signify, 2 It should be received by a common consent and use. 3 It should be
proper, determined and adapt to the signifying of the thing to be signified.

Of the Order of things.
Having hitherto treated of the first single Term, which is of a word; the next
thing to be treated of, is the single Term of a Word which without the word
represents to the understanding somewhat of the thing it self.

And it is either The order of things called Predicament, or some Term or Not
on without the Order. (...).


The Predicamental Order is a distinction and disposition of all things by
certain orders, and degrees of orders.

Herein are considerable, 1 The manner how things are received into this order
a What a Predicament is. a 1 The manner of receiving things.
2 The graduation or degrees of this order. b 3 The particular things
themselves. c


1 The manner of receiving them into this order, is first Direct. 2
Proportional. 3 Collateral. 4 Indirect. 5 By accident: all which are declared
by eight Rules following.

First then directly and primarily in the order or Predicamental scale, is a
thing which is, 1 Real and positive. 2 Simple and of it self. 3 Universal. 4
Complete or Whole. 5 Univocal (that is) a thing signified by one distinct and
certain word; these five are as it were conditions of referribility in things
unto a Predicamental order.

2 Receiving things into this order, is by proportion; thus may God (blessed
for ever) be brought in, not directly, because he is a most simple Being, one
in Number, having neither Genus above him, nor difference to restrain him,
because whereof, he cannot be placed in the Predicament of substance, but
Analogically, and by proportion.

3 Collaterally, side-wise, or obliquely; thus a difference is placed in the
Predicamental scale or series (as a reasonable soul, if it be taken for the
difference of a living creature, is placed in the Predicament of Substance, but
sidewise, not directly: hitherto also may be referred Abstracts, to wit,
Abstraction of Inferiors (as they are called) as Humanity, Animality, etc.

4 By Reduction, or indirectly: things placed in this Predicamental scale, are
first Concrete, and which simply consist not of one and the same thing, as
just, merciful, and other Concretes, containing both substances and accidents:
so the Church, the World, and other like Collectives: hither also may the parts
of any whole be referred, as the head, hand, foot, etc. but reductively, and by
reducing them unto their whole.

5 By Accident do appertain to the Predicamental order things compounded; and
this they do by reason of their simple Terms, as Man is a living creature; this
sentence is referred to the order of substance; A man is learned, this is
referred to the order of substance in part, as it respects the man; and partly
to the predicament of quality, as this man is learned. 2 Things Intentional,
without the mind, as the Images of true things, colors seen in a glass, etc.
3 Second Notions, as words of Art, Genus, Species, Difference, etc. 4 Relations
of Reason, as the right or left side of a pillar, etc. 5 Privations, which are
always referred unto the same Predicamental order that the habits thereof are;
as blindness is in the same rank that sight is. 6 Fained things, things of
fiction, as a Golden Mountain, Hirco-cervus, etc. referred to the predicament
of substance.

6 From the predicamentall order be excluded plainly 1 All words of ambiguity
and doubt, at least before they be distinguished and limited. 2 Fained things,
which are absolutely impossible, as a Created God, Deified flesh, an unbloody
Sacrifice, merit of works in a sinner, universal Election, and other such
prodigious fantasies.

7 A thing in it self simply one, pertains to one Predicament; if it be
Concrete, it may be referred to two, but inequally, and so that it be primarily
under one, viz. that which it most respects; so Baptism and the Lords Supper
are not to be referred to Substance or Action, but to Relation, because water
and the washing therewith are but the material things in Baptism; the formal
being the holy Relation in signing and sealing the Spiritual washing away of
sin.

8 Lastly, things themselves are placed in the Predicaments of themselves and
fundamentally; Conceits and Names of things but secondarily, and so far forth
as they represent things: and so much of the manner how things are received
into the Predicamentall scale or order: we pass now to the second, viz. The
degrees of the order, or Predicamentall Series.

The degrees then of this Order, by which things are to be understood in their
ranks, some are superior, some inferior to others, and these degrees are not
unfitly called Predicables.

A Degree is 1 Direct. a a 2 Collateral. b b


1 Direct, when we ascend or descend forthright, that is in a strait and direct
line in order, as Genus, Species, Individuum.

2 Collateral, when the ascent or descent is made in an indirect line, and
side-long, as Difference.

Again, the direct degree is either Primary or Secondary.

Primary, as Genus, and Species: Secondary, as Individual.

Primary, is that which in the Predicamental order is universal or common to
many, and is Genus and Species.

Genus.
Genus, is that which has Species under it, that is, a general is that which
contains two specials or more under it.

The common Rules hereof are four.
Rules 4.
1 The Genus or general is always of the same Predicament 1
or order of things with it Species or special. By which Canon or Rule, you may
discern any, and many false generals, as that the body of Christ is not the
true Genus or general of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; that water is not
the true Genus of Baptism, nor an action the Genus of sin, nor air of sound,
that harmony or number is not the Genus of the soul, for such be not in one
Predicament; by this also Metaphors are removed, as when the Church is called
Noah's Ark, or the Spouse the body of Christ; these are true, but not the true
genera or generals: for Metaphors show not what a thing is, but what a thing is
like to.

2 The Genus is never the cause of his Species, nor the 2
subject, nor the accident, and therefore is never predicated or spoken of his
Species in the Concrete, but always absolutely in the right (that is the
nominative) Case: They therefore err, that in the Meteors make water to be the
Genus of rain; fire the Genus of a Comet; air of the wind; whereas Meteors are
called waterish, fiery, airy; so the cause cannot be the true Genus, as when
dubitation is said to be the counterpoise of equal reason; Anger the boiling of
the blood about the heart; Death the separating of the soul from body, etc. In
such, the causes are placed in stead of generals; so also for the subject, when
we define wind to be the air moved; Original sin to be corrupt nature, etc.

3 The Genus is always and necessarily more large than all the Species of it,
and is not returned or reciprocated with them.

4 The Genus is inseparable from his Species; nor can that be the true Genus
without which the Species are or may be in any, or any where: this proves
motion cannot be the true Genus of pleasure, seeing pleasure may be somewhere,
where motion is not or cease.

Genus is twofold Genus twofold.
Supreme. Subaltern.


1 The highest and most general, is so a Genus, as it can never be a Species.

2 Subaltern Genus is, that is successive and by turn, that is, when it is
Genus of them contained under it, and Species of that which is above it.

Also the Genus is either remote and afar off from the Species, or, 2 Near and
next unto it; as the Genera of a man, a living Creature is the remote Genus,
and Animal is the nearest Genus; for there are none other so near man as those
two.

Again the Genus is Perfect. a Imperfect. b


Perfect Genus, or a Synonymous general is, when his ^
Species all of them take equal part of him; as a living creature is the equal
and perfect Genus of man and beast; for a beast is a living creature no less
than, and equally with a man.

The Canons and Rules of a perfect Genus are five.
1 A perfect Genus has a Nature not separated, but yet 5 Rules of a perfect
Genus.
distinct from all his Species.

2 All that which is in the Genus is equally communicated with the Species, so
as nothing can be said of the Genus, but the same also may, and must be said of
every species.

3 The Genus is in Nature before all his Species, and therefore first in that
knowledge which is according to Nature.

4 The Genus has necessarily many species, as not being able to be conserved
in one; for every genus is perfected in determination of opposite differences,
and opposition implies plurality; so that one genus must of necessity have at
the least two species.

5 A perfect Genus being put, there needs not therefore any determinate or
certain species to be put; and if one species be denied, the genus is not
thereupon denied.

There is an Analogy and similitude between a Genus and Matter: For first as
the matter is more imperfect than the form, etc. So is the genus more imperfect
then the difference or species. 2 As the first matter is undetermined to any of
his forms so is the genus to any of his differences; and as the matters have a
power unto the opposite forms; so has the b
general unto the opposite differences; yet nevertheless there is great
discrimination betwixt the genus and the matter, and they be not the same.

An Imperfect Genus is that which is not communicated with his species equally
and alike, but to one more, to another less.

The Rules and Canons of this be three. 3 Rules of an imperfect Genus.

1 An Imperfect Genus, is immediately, properly and of it self communicated but
with one species, with another it is communicated but mediately and secondarily
in order to the primary species; so this genus (thing or ens) is an imperfect
genus to substance and accident; for thing is communicated primarily to
substance; to accident but secondarily in and by the substance, accidents being
not so much things Create as Concreate.

2 An Imperfect Genus has not a Nature altogether distinct from its species;
so a thing naturally is not altogether distinct from substance or accident.

3 To put an Imperfect Genus, we must needs put some certain species, viz. that
species by which it agrees to the other; and this species being denied, the
genus it self is forthwith denied.

And so much for the first Predicable of the first degree, to wit the genus.

The Species.
Species, or the special, is an universal thing subjected, or subordinate unto
the Genus: and it is, Perfect. a Imperfect. b


Perfect is that which is under a perfect Genus. a


The Rules hereof be four.

1 The Species is in Nature after the Genus, and in Knowledge distinct.

2 It arises from the determination of the Genus, so as it swalloweth up, as
it were, the whole Genus in it self; that whatsoever the Genus has, it also
has.

3 Perfect Species do equally participate of their Genus, one as well as the
other.

4 Perfect Specials be in Nature together. As a Man is not after a Beast in
nature, though in time Beasts were first created. So Baptism and the Lords
Supper be in Nature together (being alike Species of the Sacrament of the new
Testament) though in time Baptism was first.

Imperfect Species, is that which is under an imperfect b
Genus.

The Rules hereof be three.

1 Under an imperfect Genus, one Species is more principal than another. So a
Substance is the more principal Species of a Thing; An Accident is less
principal.

2 The principal Species of an imperfect Genus, communicates as much to the
other Species, as does the Genus it self. So an Accident is as much bound to a
Substance, as to a Thing.

3 The principal Species is in Nature and Knowledge before the less principal,
for it depends wholly on the principal, and is that which it is, by benefit
thereof. This Rule discovers the Popish Error, That in the Mass the
Accidents of Bread and Wine should remain without the Substance.

Also the Species is either Subaltern, that is, Species of one, and Genus of
another. Most special, or lowest Species, never Genus.


The Rules hereof be two.

1 The lowest Species cannot be divided by opposite differences.

2 It may be conserved in one Individuum.

Hitherto of the direct degree Primary. Now follows The Individuum.
the Secondary, or Individuum.

An Individuum or singular thing, (...), is that which under the generals and
specials is determined unto certain circumstances of Existence.

The Rules hereof be four.

1 The note of on Individuum is sometime more strict, sometime more large. The
word whereby an Individuum ^s signified, is sometime single, sometime compound.

Single, as proper names, as Christ, Abraham, Peter, etc. or (...) ^f proper,
as the Apostle, meaning Paul; the Philo^ meaning Aristotle.

1 Compounds be either (...).
Demonstrative, as this Man, that Woman, etc. O^ uttered by commune names (...).
, as a certain man, or the Savior of the world, the Virgins Son, meaning
Christ: the enemy of Mankind, i. e. Satan. These some call Individua vaga, and
Individua vaga ex hypothesi.

2 Singulars, or Individua, as they are the secondary object of Logic, so also
they cannot perfectly be defined; neither of themselves, as they be singulars,
are they considered in disciplines: [for they belong to sense, as to be seen,
felt, etc.] whereas universal things, appertain to reason; and as sense
properly perceives not universal things, so neither does reason singular
things, viz. as they are sensible: nor so excellently as universals.

3 Singulars primarily and by themselves, do exist work, and are perceived, [
(...).
Essence is of universals. (...).
Existence is of singulars:] for hereto is required the Termination of some
certain time and place, which is not in universals.

4 Singulars are incommunicable; for they having a most restrained Nature, have
no inferiors to communicate with.

An Individuum is either, Accidental. a Substantial. b


1 Accidental is, which is under the order of Accidents; [as Accidents have
their Predicaments, so also their Genus, Species, singulars] So an habit is the
Genus of Faith. Faith is the Species; but Abraham's faith, the Centurions faith,
etc. are singulars, or Individua.

Substantial is that which is under the order of Substance.

And is b m n
Absolute. m With Addition. n


Absolute, which is looked on absolutely.

With Adjection, is a person, which is the first substance intelligent,
incommunicable, not part of another, nor sustained by another.

Some singulars be called indirect, as are the names of Cities, Rivers,
Mountains, etc.

Note these Properties, A Person must he 1 A Substance; so no Accident is a
Person: It is 2 The first Substance, or a singular thing; so no Universal is a
Person. It must have 3 Understanding; so no particular Beast, as Balaams Ass,
is a Person. It is 4 Not part of another; so a man's soul is not a Person. It is
not 5 Sustained by another, so Christ's humane Nature is not a Person. It is 6
Not communicable; so the divine Essence is not a Person, for it is communicated
with the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

We have seen the direct degrees; now follow the Collateral, b b
or sidelong, which is called Difference.

Difference is here taken in a strict and peculiar signification, The
Difference.
only for the determination and restraining of the universal and indifferent
Nature, in the Predicamental order, and not for every distinction and diversity
of things, whereof we treat hereafter. And thus Difference pertains to the
degrees of Order, not as constituting or informing, but as binding and
knitting, not as causing any thing properly, but as determining and tying
together the universal in the Predicamental line.

The Difference is that which restrains and determines the Genus in the
Species.

The Rules hereof are eight.

1 The Difference respects the general and the special in a diverse respect:
the general as determinable; the special as determinated.

2 The Difference, as it is a difference, never notes a thing complete and
separate, but always incomplete.

3 The Difference is after the general, and before the special, yet is it in
the general indeterminately, or in (...).
power.

Universals are like a long rope, loose without knot: difference is like a
knot; the special is as a rope tied with a knot. The knot is after the loose
rope, but before the knit rope: and the knot which in power was in the loose
rope, is in act in the tied rope. A rope with knots differs not really from a
rope which has not knots: so the Species restrained by difference, differs
not really from the Genus.

4 Every Difference infers his proper and certain Genus. Therefore
differences should not be transferred from Genus to Genus.

5 The Difference that is to determine the general, must needs be opposite
(...).
; for difference restrains not the Genus, but by a kind of opposition and se
junction of the Species.

6 Every Difference is inseparable from his Species.

7 The Difference is not varied by degrees.

8 The Difference is apt to be avouched ( praedicari) of his Genus, but in the
Concrete, or in quale. For no difference shows what a thing is, but of what
manner it is: As if one ask, What manner of living creature is a man: The
answer is, A reasonable, living creature: so that the difference is not so much
spoken of the Species, Man, as of the Genus, Living Creature, or Animal; for it
makes the Genus to differ, and determines it.

Difference is either, Far off. Nearest.


Far off, is that which is not reciprocate with his Species, called Generica.

Nearest, is that which is equal with his Species: It is call- Specifica.

As sensible makes a man differ from a stone, in a far difference; for other
Species, as Beasts, have the same difference, but reasonable is the nearest,
whereby he differs from a stone, beasts, and all other things.

Hitherto has been handled, 1 The manner how things are received into
Predicamental Order. And 2 The degrees of the Order. Now follow, 3 The
particular Orders, Predicaments. (...).
or Predicaments themselves.

There be ten Predicaments, or Orders, and of them, Some principal. Some less
principal.


The principal are, in which things first and properly so called, are disposed
and ordered: and they be the first six.

And these be either, Of Substance. a Of Accidents. b


1 The Predicament or orderly row of substance, is that Substance. (...).
where in the substance is orderly disposed by his Generals and Specials.

A Substance is a thing subsisting by it self. a


The Rules or properties whereof be three.

1 A substance, as it is a substance, is not contrary to another; but as it
has accidents or qualities, it is contrary, as Fire and Water, Sheep and
Wolves, etc. be contrary in quality and temperature.

2 A substance, as it is a substance, is not varied by degrees, or receives
not more or less; but the variance or comparison is in respect of accidents,
as a Wise man, and a Fool, an Old man, and a Child, one water hotter than
another: these differ in qualities, not in substance.

3 A substance remaining one in number, may receive into it contrary accidents.
As water may be now seething hot, anon frozen cold.

The Order of Substances is to be seen in a Table, As
Substance, is either
Uncreated, infinite, and beyond our understanding, as, the most holy God.
Created, and is either
Spiritual Absolute: as Angels, good and evil. Determined to another: as Man's
soul.
Corporal, and is either Incomplete, and is Passive, called, Matter, first and
second. Active, called Form, first and second.
Complete, or perfect, and is either Far from mixture, as the heavens, whose
parts are Orbs without Star. with Star* Fixed: The firmament. Planets

Stars Fixed. Wandering, Saturn, Mars, etc.

Ordained for mixture (and therefore not existing apart and completely) called
elements, and is Fire. Air Water. Earth.
Mixed Imperfectly, as Smoke, Vapors, whereof are Meteors Fiery, as
Lightenings, Comets, etc. Aerie, as Winds, etc. Waterish, as clouds, rain,
snow, hail, etc.

Perfectly without life Metals, perfect and Imperfect, as gold, silver, brass,
quicksilver, etc. Minerals Hard, as Sand, Stones, precious and base kinds of
earth, etc. Soft, as Salt, Al^um, Pitch, Myrrh, Frankincense, etc.

with life Vegetant, as 1 Trees, fruitful and unfruitful: Oak, Ash, Elm,
Laurel, etc. 2 Bushes, Rose, Bramble. 3 Herbs of all sorts, Wheat, Rye, Pease,
Rise, Beets, Mallows, etc.
Sensible. Reasonable, as Man. Without Reason, as Beasts.


1 Of the Air, Fowls, Swans, Geese. 2 The Earth, Beasts, and creeping things,
Horse, Lion, Dog, Worm. 3 The Water, Fishes of all sorts, Whales, Pikes, Eeles,
Oysters, Serpents, etc.




Compounded of a created and increated Substance, in a mystery of mavelous
union, Christ Jesus, the Son of God and the Virgin.


We have seen the Predicament of substance. Accident: b (...)


Now follows Accidents.

An Accident is a thing which depends upon a substance, for the essence and
existence thereof. The word Accident is commonly used in a large sense, for all
that betideth, chances, or cleaves to any thing: but here it is more properly
taken for that which cleaves to a substance, and is no part thereof, and yet
cannot be without the same.

An Accident is either

Absolute, having an absolute nature, as Relation. Quantity. Quality. Action.
Passion.


The Predicament of quantity, is that wherein the Generals 2 Quantity
and Specials of it are orderly disposed. Note that in every Predicament there
is the Material, or thing it self (which Logic does but lightly touch, as
belonging to another place) and the Formal or disposing, and Table of the
thing, which is chief in all Predicaments.

Quantity is that whereof the greatness or number of any thing is named.

And therefore quantity is either continued, as greatness. dissevered, as
number.


1 Greatness is extension, or stretching out, and is called Properly. 1
Improperly.


Properly so called Extension is of the matter in a Natural Body, which
therefore is said to be continued, and divisible.

The Rules or Notes hereof be five.

1 Greatness has a certain continuance and position of parts.

2 Greatness has of it self no motion, or efficacy.

3 Unto it nothing is contrary; for contrarieties are in qualities.

4 It receives not more or less. As one house is not more or less a house
than another, though one be a greater house than another.

5 Of greatness, the subject is said to be equal or uneequal; greatness or
extension properly so called, is length, breadth, deepnesse or thickness; the
beginning of all which is a point or prick.

Length, is that which of the Mathematics is called a line. Breadth or
latitude, is called the Superficies.

Thickness or deepnesse is the threefold dimension, which is called also
height, and of the Mathematics, Metaphorice, a body.

2 Number or multitude is the gathering together of Unities. And unity is the
beginning of number.

Number is considered 2
Abstractly. a Concretely. b


Abstractly considered, is that which is primarily in this a
Predicament. As 2, 4, 10, etc.

The Rules hereof be five.

1. 1 Number is not coupled with any common term, neither has its parts endued
with Position. As 3 and 7 are coupled with no common Term, though they concur
to the making of 10.

2. 2. Of number, things are said to be even or odd.

3. 3. Number also as it is number, has no force, no efficacy.

4. 4. Number of it self has nothing contrary thereto.

5. 5. Number receives not more and less.

Concretely considered Number here, is, things collective, which may be
referred hither materially. As a Wood contains many Trees, an Host many
Soldiers, an heap many grains, etc.

The Formal thing of this Predicament is the Table or Order of all Quantities:
As,
Quantity is taken either for
Dissevered quantity or number, which is taken Continued extension, which is
taken, either Improperly, and by proportion, as Continuance of any thing: as in
time the (...) of durance. Extension of degree, called Intension, as one heat ^
said to be greater than another. Extension of weight, or heaviness.
Properly so called, which is the extension of a Body only, and it is either
Incomplete, as Length or line, which is either Right or straight. Round or
circular. Mixed of sundry sorts.
Breadth, or superficies, which is either Right lined Of three sides. Of four
sides. Of many sides.
Crooked lined; As a circle. Mixed of right and crooked; As half a circle.

Complete: the threefold dimension called a Body, which is either Regular,
having basis, sides, corners, equal and like, as Pyramides, etc. Irregular, as
a wedge, collar, etc.


Largely, for any multitude of diverse things, and ye call it T^a^scendental
Number. Such as is the holy Trinity, in spirits, and other things that have no
quantity. Strictly for a collection of discontinued quantities. It is called
predicamental number, and considered Absolutely, and either it is Simple either
Perfect, which is equal to his parts. Imperfect A bounding, which is lesser
than the parts of it, as 12. Diminished which is greater than the parts, as 88.
Again both perfect and imperfect is either Even when it may be divided into two
equal parts and it is either A likely even, as 32. A likely odd, as 18.
Unlikely even, as 12.
Odd, which cannot be divided into two equal parts, and is either First, which
unity only measures, as 3, 5, 7. Compound, divided by 2, or more numbers, as
15. Mean as 9, which 3 only measures; 25, which 5.



Figured, which is either Plain, arising of the multiplication of one number by
another, as seven times five are 35. Square, arising from multiplication of
number into it self, as 25. Cubick, arising from a number led in it self, and
that which comes of them multiplied again by the first number, as 125.

Concretely, or determinately unto some subject to be numbered, as a flock, an
host, a talent. Hexameter, for a verse of six feet. A Church, a Commonwealth,
a City, an Oration, etc.





The predicament of quality is, wherein the generals and Quality (...).
specials thereof be disposed.

The general Rules hereof be five.

1 Quality, is of all absolute antecedents, the most copi^us and frequent in
Nature; for whatsoever we see, hear, ^aste, smell, feel, all of it is quality.

2 Of all accidents, quality is most accommodate to the sense.

3 Qualities only have contrariety.

4 Qualities have degrees, or more and less. And these (...).
they have not in respect of the essence, or definition (which is no where
varied) but in respect of the existence or singular cleaving to this or that
subject, disposed so or so; So Faith in general in respect of the essence, is
one and single, without degrees, but faith in this or that person, is greater
or lesser, yet retains it the same essence and definition in all. For a weak
faith, is yet Faith. The like is for other qualities, heat, cold, etc.

5 By reason of qualities, things are said to be like or unlike one another. As
men of one color are said to be alike, but of one stature they are said to be
equal.

Quality has four kinds or specials* 1 Habit. 2 Natural power. 3 Sufferable
quality. 4 Figure.

1 Habit is a quality brought into man, whereby he is liable unto those works
which by Nature alone he cannot do. Here habit is taken properly and strictly,
and not for every accidental form contrary to privation; nor for the habit and
stature of the body, nor for apparel, or any general power, which sometime in a
large use are called habits.

The general Rules of Habit are two.

1 Unto Habit there is required a certain inclination going before, and a power
of Nature.

2 Habit makes easiness and cheerfulness in working ought.

Habit is either begun. a full-ended. b


1 Begun, it is called (...), Disposition. Taken here strictly, though
sometimes it is largely used for all fitness to any thing, or unfitness also
for disposing and ordering parts in method, for degrees of every accident, as
when water waxes warm, it is said to have a disposition to heat.

The Rules of disposition be two.

1 Disposition goes before habit, as a Degree thereto.

2 It is more easily lost then is an habit.

2 Full-ended, or complete habit, is that which has got his confirmation and
complement. And it is either infused, or gotten otherwise.

Infused, is that which is shed by the singular grace of b
the Holy Ghost into men's minds, as Faith, Love and other gifts of God.

Gotten, is that which is gotten by the Humane Industry, precepts and often
repetitions of Actions; As the Art of Logic, Rhetoric, etc.

Natural power, is that which is in us by Nature: And is Active. Passive.


Active, is that whereby we are able and apt to do.

Passive is that by which we are apt to suffer or receive ought.

Natural power also is either First. Second.


The first power is that which next follows from the form of the subject, [as
in a natural body power to move in a man to speak, etc.

The second power is a disposition of the temperature and instruments by which
the first power is brought into act, [as a living creature has not only the
first power of seeing, flowing from the sensitive soul (which it retains
always) but has also a disposition of the eye, (which may lost) whereby one
sees clearer then another. Hereto belongs towardness of wit, strength of
body, original sin, virtues of Herbs, Gems, etc.

3 Sofferable quality, (...), is that which makes suffering or passion in the
senses, Or it may be called ^fficient quality, for it affects the senses, as
sweet smells refreshes a man, and stenches annoy him. So cold and heat.

4 Figure or form is a certain configuration of the color and lineament in the
body, [it may be called Figure in respect of the lineaments and disposition;
and Form in respect of the color or light.

And it is either Natural, Artificial.


Natural is the figure which Nature gives every one.

Artificial is the form which is given by Art: [as the Goldsmith puts Gold into
the form of a Ring, Cup, or Chain, etc.]

The rank and order of all qualities follows.

Quality properly so called, is either Potential. * Actual. * *


Potentiall is either *
Natural. Brought in, and it is called Habit.


Natural is First. a Second. b


First, which is either a
Manifest, whose causes are manifest, as in a man, facility to learn, to laugh,
etc. Hidden.


Hidden, which is given to a thing, either by Proper temperature: As the
Loadstone to draw Iron. Sympathy, as between the Vine and the Elm. Antipathie,
as between the Olive and the Oak.


Second, which is either b
Common. Singular.


Common is the natural disposition of the instruments which every first power
needs, if it should be brought into Act.

Singular arises from the temperature of some persons; as wittiness,
boldness, etc.

Habit brought in, is either Incomplete, called Disposition. Complete, properly
called Habit or Virtue.


Complete Habit is either Extraordinary, such as was in the Prophets and
Apostles, and by the image of God in man before his fall. Ordinary.


Ordinary Habit or Virtue, is either Speculative. m Operative. n


Speculative, is either m
In Part, as opinion and knowledge of some conclusion. Total.


Total or Aggregative, peculiarly called Science, which is either 1
Metaphysick: Or a Physic, under which is Astronomy. 3 Mathematick, under which
is Geometry, Arithmetic, Optic, Music, etc.

Operative is either n
Practick. A Factive. B


Practick is A
More perfect. a More imperfect. b


More perfect, by the special help of the holy Ghost. And is either a
Total. h In part. i


Total or Aggregative is considered h
Absolutely, called Theology. Relatively, called Church-policie.


In part, is called spiritual Virtue, and is i
General. Special.


General, and the common directive of all other virtues; which are 1 Religion,
Love, fear of God, etc. 2 Love of our neighbors. 3 Universal Justice. 4
Prudencie.

Special, and it is ordered toward Our selves. Another.


For ourselves:

To rule: The appetite and pleasure, by Temperance. Anger, by Meekness. Fear,
by Fortitude, Patience, etc.


To another God. Our Neighbor.


Toward God, Worship, Prayer, Profession, Swearing by him, etc.

Toward our Neighbor Superior: Reverence, Obedience. Equal: Particular
Justice, Peace, Concord, Kindness, etc. Inferior: Gentleness, Mercy,
Liberality, etc


More imperfect, by general Grace of God, and for this life; and is also
Total. In part.


Total and Aggregative, and is either Absolute: Ethics, or moral virtue.
Relative, unto The Commonweal, Politics, Law. Families, as Oeconomicks.



In part, commonly called moral virtue, and is General, directing others, as
Universal Justice. Prudency.
Special, which is Absolute. In conversation:



Absolute, about Fear, Fortitude, Pleasure, Temperance, Riches, Liberality,
Magnificence, Honors, Modesty, Magnanimity, Anger, Meekness.

In conversation, (...), as is Gentleness. Kindness. Justice particular.
Urbanity. Commutative. Distributive.



Factive, called Art, and is either E
More worthy or Liberal. a Less worthy or Mechanical. b


Liberal a
Is Directive. Or Principal.


Directive and instrumentary, Governing the Speech by Forming it Grammatically.
Adorning it Rhetorically. Poetry.
Reason, Logic.


Principal, as Medicine: under it Surgery. Apothecary Art:


Mechanical, which is profitable to live either b
1 Absolutely. 2 Commodiously. 3 Comely. 4 Pleasantly.


1 Absolutely: As, 1 A Midwives Art, 2 Husbandry, 3 Shepherdy, 4 Hunting,
Fishing, Fowling. 5 Milners Art. 6 Baking, Brewing, Butchery, etc.

2 Commodiously, of which some be 1 As the Art of Printing. 2 Warfare 3
Building, 4 Book-binding. 5 Merchandise. Mean, As 1 About Metals, Minerals,
Smiths, etc. 2 About Wood, Carpenters, Joyners, etc. 3 About Wool,
Clothmakers, etc. Tailors. 4 About Stones, as Stone-hewing, etc. Base. As
Curriers, Shoomakers, Sadlers, Barbers, etc.


3 Comely, as 1 The art of Painting, 2 Carving, 3 Graving, etc.

4 Pleasantly, as the art of 1 Singing and Minstrel^^e, 2 Dancing, 3 Gaming,
etc.

Actual quality is either * *
Affecting the Senses (...), a Conforming. b


Affecting is a
First. Second.


The first is either More effectual, as Light. Cold. Heat.
Less effectual, as Moistness. Dryness.



The Second arises of the first: either Neat: as Thinness, Thicknes,
Lightness, Heaviness, Softness, Hardness, Smoothness, Roughness,
Slipperinesse, Clamminesse, Dryness. Further off: as, 1 Taste, 2 Smell, 3
Color, 4 Sound:


1 Taste, which is either Hot: as Acrimony, Bitterness, Saltness, Sweetness,
Fatness. Cold: as Sowernesse, A^sterity, Ta^tnesse.


2 Smell Simple. Sweet or stinking. Mixed.


3 Color, which is either Intentional, as they that appear in a Glass. the
Rainbow.
Real and true, and is either Simple. Mixed.



Simple as Whiteness. Blackness.


Mixed of the former two either Exactly, as redness, Inequally, with one of the
First and redness, and that either exceeding Saffron- Color Purple.
wanting as Yellow- Color Greenness.




4 Sound, which is Direct. Reflexive, as the Echo.


Direct is either, 1 Simple, as high and low, or 2 Mixed, as the mean.

Conforming, b
called form and figure, which is either Natural in bodies Unperfect, as
Meteors in the Air. Perfect, as in Plants, Beasts, etc.
Artificial, as the figure of a Garment, Table, Sword, etc.


Action.
Action, is the agitation or stirring of a substance, and as it (...)
were, the flowing out and execution of the forces thereof.

The Rules are four.

1 Every Action is taken in hand, and finished to some End.

2 Every Action is before the Passion, in order of Nature and dignity:
whereupon it is better always to give than to receive.

3 Action takes contrariety: Not of it self, but by and for the qualities, by
means of which the Agent acts. As heating and cooling are two contrary
actions, because heat and cold are contrary.

4 Action receives more and less. In the same respect as before.

Action is either Immanent and tarrying. Transient and passing.


Immanent, is which infers no real and evident change, outward, such is
understanding, willing, perceiving. Transient is, which infers a change
indeed, as warming, cooling, burning etc. Whereby the Patient is changed.

Also Action is either Dividuall. Individual.


Dividuall, which is distinguished as with certain parts of the progress

Individual, which has not many parts of progress. So forgiveness of sins
is an Individual Action; for it is done in a time inobserveable, but
sanctification and regeneration is a divided Action; for it is done by degrees
and successively in the Elect in this life.

A Table of Actions follows.
An Action is either Of God. a Of a creature. b


Of God; either Inward. Outward,


Inward or Absolute, not terminate to creatures, and is Essential, proceeding
from Absolute Essential properties. Personal proceeding from personal
properties, as Generation. Mission. ^




Outward referred to the creatures, and is Commune. A Proper. B


Commune to the three persons, and is General. c Special. d


A General pertaining to all Creatures indifferently, and is Ordinary, as the
Creation, Conservation, Government of the World. Extraordinary, or miraculous.


Extraordinary, when things are either Perfected, as raising up the dead,
healing diseases. Hindered, as the staying of the Sun Josh. 10. of the fire,
Dan. 3. Used for that which is not of their Nature, as a rock to send forth
water: a Virgin to conceive, etc.


Special, pertaining to some creatures, as Election to B
life, calling to Grace, Redemption, Justification, etc.

Proper to some certain Person, as The Father to send the Son. The Son take our
Nature, and be our Mediator. The Holy Ghost to illuminate and sanctify.


A Creatures action b
on is either of a Spiritual, Creature. Temporal, Creature.


1 Spiritual, which is General, or common to all, as local motion. Special of
Angels. A reasonable soul, such as it does apart from the body.



Angels Good, as praising of God, executing his Commandments, etc. Evil, as
afflicting, and tempting of creatures.


2 Corporal, which is Superior, and more worthy, as in the heaven. Circular
motion Illumination by stars: Inferior. Circular motion Illumination by stars:


Inferior in General, and is either Alteration. Local motion rightforth
either Pulsion or driving: Traction or drawing. Vection or carrying.

Special.


In special, of Elements, which have their alteration and motion local. Mixed
things.


Of mixed things that be Without life, as all operations, mineral and
metallical without life or living.

Of living things in General. Special.


In the general, as be either Nourishment, under which be Grouth. Generation
taken actively.


In special, of Plants, as the operations of herbs, trees, etc. Animals or
living Creatures.


Animals or living creatures General. a Special. b


In general, Sense, actively taken Inward Common sense. ^
Fantasy actively taken.
Outward more worthy, as Seeing. Hearing.
less worthy, as Touching Smelling, Tasting.


Appetite Actively taken under which is Desire of Food. of Generation.
Affection (...).
Respiration and local going.


In special Of Man. a Of brute Beasts. b b



a Man, whose actions are Natural. Habitual.


Natural Inward, as be the 1 Understanding The apprehension of simple things,
composition, and division. 2 Remembering The apprehension of simple things,
composition, and division. Discourse
Syllogistical. Methodical.
3 Willing,
Outward, as speaking, laughing, weeping,
Speculation (...), contemplation of the Heavens, and other Natural things.
Practices, (...) Sacred Common, as praying to God, loving of our Neighbor,
etc. Ecclesiastical, as preaching, ministering the Sacraments, etc.
Moral as Comm^on to exercise Temperance, Meekness, etc. Special Political, to
govern a Commonwealth, etc. Oeconomical, to rule the house, bring up children,
etc.


Faction, (...) More worthy, as to read, write, dispute, heal the sick, etc.
Less worthy, as to weave, spin, etc.
Of Brute beasts, which are diverse, according to the b
diversity of kinds in Beasts.


Of Passion.
Passion is the receiving of an Action.

The Canons hereof are three.

1 Passion, is received not so much by the condition of the Agent, as by the
disposition of the Patient. So, many Passions and effects of the holy Ghost are
imperfect, because of us which receive them, not for the condition of the holy
Ghost.

2 Passion receives contrariety.

3 Passion receives more and less.

Passion is either. 1 Transmutative, or 2 Intentional.

1 Transmutative, when some real change is made in the Patient.

2 Intentionall, when no real change is made, but only a Termination of the
Action. Thus a colored thing is said to suffer, because it receives and
terminateth the sight. Some call this Spiritual and Logical Passion.

The Table of Passion follows.
Passion is Perfective. a Defective. b


Perfective of the Creatures, either In general Ordinary, as Government Passive
Sustentation Passive
In special, Extraordinary, as the Sun staye^ from moving.


In special, of Spirits. Bodies.


Of Spirits, as of the Good Angels, which have their passions, joy in God,
anger against his Foes, etc. Holy souls, which also have joy, etc. By which
they are perfected.


Of Bodies, and these Superior, as Heaven, whose circular motion is a kind of
passion. Inferior, and this is either In General, as all alteration and
motion Passive. In Special.



In Special, as of the Elements, in which is mutual alteration. Mixed Bodies.


Of mixed bodies, which be either Common, as to be heated, cooled, moistened,
dried, boiled, etc. Special, of things without life, as passions of Metals,
etc. with life.



With life In general, as Nourishment increasing. In special.


In special either of Plants, as the Passions of herbs, etc. Animals, or
things with soul.


Animals in General. m Special. n


m In general, as the Sense, inward and outward, passive. Appetite either
Desire (...) of Food Dry, as hunger. Moist, as thirst.
Generation, as Lust.
Affections (...) Approving and following Common, as Pleasure. Special of good
Present, as joy, love. Future, as desire.

Eschewing and flying Common, as Dolor. Special of evil present, as sorrow,
anger. future, as fear.






In special Of Brute beasts. Of Man. *


* Of man either Adventitial, as to learn, to receive habit Theoretical.
Ingrafted.


Ingraft Outward, as weeping, laughter passive. Inward.


Inward Receiving of Intellectual Species, etc. Reasonable appetite, or will
Approving and following either Common, as humane pleasure. Special of good
Past, as a good conscience. Present, love, joy. Future, hope, desire.

Shunning Grief of mind Special either of Terrible (...) ones own Present
heaviness. Future fear. Another mercy.

Indignity, as shame.





Defective and privative in Spirits Evil Angels, as hatred of God and good men,
despair, envy, joy in evil. Torments. Souls of Reprobates, despair, pains
eternal.
Bodies Heavenly, as Eclipses of Sun and and Moon. Inferior things In general,
Corruption. In special mixed things Generally, Rottenness. Specially in living
things In general Diseases of death Intemperatenesse Hot, pestilent, Ague,
Apoplexy, Epilepsie, mixed, the joint ague. 2 Ill conformation, as of parts out
of joint. Solution of that which is continued. As wounds, impostumes, etc.
In special in men all commonly Evil concupiscence, terrors of conscience for
sin. Calamities, as punishments.
Specially the Reprobates, as Despair, Torments.







Relation.
We have seen the Order of Absolute Accidents: now follows Relation, which is
the Union of two or more.

The Canons hereof are six.

1 Every Relation is more unworthy than any Absolute Accident, and in Nature
after it. For Relation is not a thing real by it self, but by the foundation of
it, that is, either the subject, or the efficient cause; for every real thing
added to another, makes composition* but Relation added to a Subject, makes no
composition; for in God be many Relations, but in him is no Composition. So the
name of a Doctor or Captain, given to a man, is nothing but a vain title and
shadow, except there be qualities of Learning, Virtue, Fortitude. Also Relation
may be taken from a Subject, it remaining safe as it was. So relation of the
Sacrament may be taken from the water, and yet be water still. So in us after
forgiveness of sins, there remains Original sin, as touching the material
thereof, that is, inclination to evil; though the formal of it, that is,
guiltiness, be taken away by Gods gracious imputation.

2 Relations do in company and multitude exceed all Absolute Accidents: for
infinite references are added both to qualities, and all other Accidents. All
disciplines are full of References. In Theology, all Doctrines have relation,
as of sin, of the Law, of the Mediator, of the Persons in the Trinity, of
Sacraments, of Miracles, etc.

3 Relation by it self is not perceived by the senses. As a man sees a stone in
the field, but knows not whether it be a Dool stone, unless he be admonished of
it. Abimelech saw Sarah to be a fair woman, but could not see her to Abraham's
wife.

The Relate and the Correlate, as they are such, are together both in Nature
and knowledge, and so mutually do put or take away one another, as well in
being as in knowing. So the Father and the Son, as they are Relate and
Correlate, are together, though materially: as the Father is a man, he must
needs be before his Son.

Hereupon Christ says, He that knows me, knows the Father.

5 Every Correlate does so answer to his Relate, that the one may be said to be
of the other So Adam was the Father of Cain, and Cain the son of Adam.

6 Relations need no local Touching for the bringing in or conservation of
themselves. As a Father being in England, may have a son born in France. Christ
now bodily in Heaven, has true and real union and eleaving with his members on
Earth. The same body has also true and real union Sacramental with the Bread
in the Lords Supper. So as there needs no Popish Transubstantiation.

Moreover, the Term of the Relation is not to be tied to the Relate, as the
Communion with the substance and benefits of Christ, is not to be tied to the
bread and wine in the Supper; nor the washing away of sins, to water in Baptism.

The Table of Relations Follows.
Relation is either Natural, (...). a By Institution, (...). b


a Natural which is either 1 Of Measure, either Inward and productive, as is
every cause: hither may be referred the degrees of Kindred, which is either
Outward, Ruling: as every Rule, Square, etc. Adjacent. Place. Time. Primary, as
Degrees of consanguinity in a line. Right, as great Grandfather, Grandfather,
Father, Son, etc. Sideloong, Equal, as Brother* Sister. Unequal, as Uncle,
etc.

Secondary, as degrees of affintiy, Father in Law, Son in Law, etc.



2 Of Convenience. 3 Of Difference. 4 Of Disposition.
2 Of convenience, or, Agreement, and this either in Substance, called ((...))
the self-same absolutely. Quantity, called ((...)) equality and proportion:
Quality, called ((...)) similitude. Representation, called Signification, and
all Natural Signs.
3 Of Difference; as diversity and opposition of things. 4 Of Disposition; or
order and situation in the world and worldly bodies.


b By Institution, either Divine. A Humane. B
A Divine, which is either Of Power, General as the Regiment of the world. Law
of Nature.
Special, as touching. The Church, as the Regiment of the Church. The head of
the Church, Christ Christ the Mediator. Prophet. Priest. King.
The Ministers of the Church, to Preach. Minister Sacraments, etc.

Of Conjunction, as The Law. The Gospel.

Of Confirmation, as touching. Temporal things, as the Rainbow. Spiritual, as
Gods Word, which is a sign formally considered. Figures or Types. Sacraments.
Old; Circumcision, Passover, New; Baptism, Lords Supper.


B Humane which is either Of Power, and Office, and Dignity. Greater, as
Kingdom, King, Prince, Duke, Earl, Consul, etc. Lesser, as Master, Tutor etc.
Of Convention or Consent. To be rightly, as is Marriage. State of the
Commonwealth. Monarchy. Aristocrasie. Democraciy.

To be well, as are Societies and Confederacies, Contracts, Covenants,
Testaments, Obligations, etc. Contracts specially so called, and are either
Named Borowing, Lending, Trusting, Pawning; Buying, Selling.
Un-named.


Of collation, either. Distinction and Disposition: Armies, Order* and Method
of Diciplines. signification Vocal, as all Towns formally. Real Simple, as
signing or confirming, Seal, Diadem, Scepter etc. Soldier Coats, Badges, etc.
Pawns and Pledges Limits, Bounds, etc.







Hitherto of the principal Predicaments; now follow the less principal, in
which only things by accident and secondarily so called, are disposed.

And they be four. When, Where, Situation, Habit.

The Predicament When, is that wherein are placed things in the Concrete,
noting the manner or circumstance of the 7 When.
time. Hereunto belong Ages, Infancy, Youth, Old age, parts of the year,
Summer, Winter, Spring, Autumn, Morning, Noon, Night, etc. Also the Concretes
of Ages, as a Child, an Old man, etc.

The Predicament Where, is that wherein are placed 8 Where.
things in the concrete, noting the manner or circumstance of place. As Europe,
Germany, England, an English man, a Londoner, an Ilander, a Seaman, etc. All
Countries and their Inhabitants.

The Predicament of Situation, is that wherein are placed 9 Situation.
things in the concrete, noting the certain position and order of the parts of
the body. As standing, sitting, lying upright, grovelling, etc.

The Predicament of Habit, is that, wherein are placed 10. Habit.
things in the concrete, noting some artificial Adherent. As armed, cloaked,
booted, spurred, with a breast plate, etc.

Of the Cause.
We have seen the Order of things: now follows the Term without that Order,
which is no degree of the Predicamental rank. And it is either Inward. a a And
it is either Outward. b b


Inward, is that which inwardly cleaves with another. a a


Inwards, be the Cause, the Caused, the Subject, the Accident, the Whole, the
Part.

A Cause, is that whereon the thing caused does depend. Cause (...).
And so it differs from a beginning, which has not always respect of
dependence; as God the Father, may be said to be the beginning of the Son, but
not the cause; for the cause and the caused differ in essence, which the
Persons in the Trinity do not,

The Canons of the Cause are three.

1 Every Cause is before his thing caused, in order of nature, of knowledge,
and dignity.

2 As without a cause nothing is done, so also without it nothing is distinctly
known. Therefore God is without Cause; for he is not made, nor done, but
existeth of himself.

3 There is a certain Order of Causes, neither is there granted in them a
Proceeding to infinite.

There be four Causes. The Efficient, the Matter, the Form, the End.

The efficient Cause, is that whereon the effect depends, and is By it self.
m By accident. n


Efficient by it self, is that whereon the effect depends m
by it self.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 No Efficient does in vain, but all for some certain End.

2 The same Efficient Cause, as it is the same, always does the same thing.
Idem, qua idem, semper facit idem.

3 The Efficient Cause, properly so called, does not effect but some good thing
in it self. For evil things are not things properly, but defects of things. A
Thief puts forth his hand to take another man's goods; this moving of it self
proceeds from the soul that moves, but the misorder [(...)] in this motion, is
not from the soul. So the theft is not properly an effect, but a defect and
ataxie in the motion, proceeding from the ataxie of the appetite.

Moreover the Efficient cause, as it is a cause, is always a simple thing: so
when a man is said to be the cause of his own accidents, properly he is not the
cause, but the subject that has the cause; and things are spoken of him, not
as effects but accidents. A man is not the cause of laughter, but the commotion
of the heart and midriffe by some ridiculous object known; neither is a man the
cause of the faculty of laughter, but a reasonable soul.

The Efficient is of it self divided by 1 The Force and the manner. of
Effecting. 2 The order of Effecting.


1 Of the force of effecting, it is Principal* Less Principal.


Principal, whereon the effect princicipally depends, and s Solitary.
Partaking.


Solitary, is that which has alone the chiefty in producing (...).
the effect, and is therefore called the total cause (...). As Sampson was the
sole cause of carrying away the Philistines gates. Christ, the whole or only
cause of Man's Redemption.

Partaking, is, which not alone, but with others has the chiefty in producing
the effect, and is called partial, (...).

And it is partaking or sociated, either 1 Necessarily, or 2 Contingently,

1 Necessarily sociated, are, when all of them together are needful, if the
effect should be produced.

2 Contingently sociated, are, when there is not need of All, etc. So a man and
a woman are causes necessarily sociated in producing a child. Again,
six-horses may for more pomp be joined together in drawing a chariot, when two
or three are sufficient.

Less Principal, is that whereon the effect less principally depends.

And it is either, 1 Impulsive: or 2 Isntrumental.

Impulsive, is that which impelleth or moves the principal agent, to do.

And it is (...), which within moves to do. (...), which outwardly moves to
do* Occasion.


(...), is always a cause within the Efficient himself; but,

(...), is without the Efficient cause.

So of our Justification, the principal Cause is God. The cause Proegumene, is
Gods good will and love; for these move God in himself to forgive us ou^ si^s.
The Cause Procatactick, is likewise obedience and merit, whereby outwardly he
is provoked to take us into favor, seeing his Justice is satisfied for us. So
in an Ague, the Proegumenon is some corrupt humor in the veins; the
Pr^cata^cticon is outward heat of the Sun, or the Northern wind, whereby the
pores are stopped, and the humor boileth.

2 Isntrumental, is that which is taken of the principal cause, to produce
the effect, called (...), or (...).

The Canons hereof are two.
1 The whole Instrument serves for the Action of the Principal Agent, by whom
it is directed. Therefore when it serves not the principal Agent, it loses
the Nature of an Instrument. As men when they oppose themselves to Gods
Commands and Rule, are not Gods Instruments, but the Devils. Hereupon note,
that an Instrument takes the determination of his action from his principal
Agent. As Ink of its own nature blotteth the Paper, but it fashioneth no
letter, unless the Writer guides the Pen.

The whole force of an Instrument consists in the use; for then it is in Act a
cause, when it is caused; but when it is idle, it is not an Instrument, but
some other thing. Instruments have no dignity of themselves, but of the
principal cause, and serve not but in use and work; when the principal Agent
can use them no more, they are no longer called Instruments, but (...) by
homonymy. And all Instruments* because they are indeterminate, are therefore
(...), i. e. such as one may use well or ill: as a sword, riches (called of
their use (...).)

An Instrument is either Co-operative, Passive.


Co-operative, is that which by an inward force together is moved in producing
the effect. As a servant is an Instrument used by his Master, yet so as he also
moves himself. So the Creatures, though they be instruments in respect of God,
yet have they their action distinct from Gods. As Paul calls Ministers Gods
co-workers (...). Unto such instruments often is given the efficacy of the
principal Agent, as Preachers are said to convert and save souls when the Lord
does these by them; so Baptism is said to regenerate, etc. by an improper
predication; whereof hereafter in the second Book.

Passive is, that moves not it self at all, in producing the effect; as the
earth under us is an instrument of walking, so a copy to write on other things,
or a pattern: some instruments are necessary, some not, as God uses Angels,
etc. when as he needs them not. And it is true the principal efficient cause
works well by evil instruments, to wit when it needs not the instruments. As
God made Joseph* Ruler of Egypt by his envious brethren; and by Balaam blessed
his people; otherwise in necessary instruments such commonly is the action of
the principal doer, as is the instrument; so a man cutteth ill if he have a
blunt knife; rides ill if he have a lame horse, etc. Also in divine things,
often instruments do move, but it is all one as if they moved not; for the
force of the effect is not in them. So Moses staff was moved at the dividing of
the Red Sea, but this motion caused not the Sea to part, save only in a
similitude. So Peter's shadow, Acts 5. Paul's napkins, Acts 19. had of themselves
no force to heal the sick.

Also the efficient cause is either Natural. a Voluntary. b


Natural is, which of the readiness and necessity of Niture a
brings forth the effect. As fire of necessity naturally burns, etc.

The Canons hereof are two.
1 A Natural cause is properly determined unto one of the Opposites; As fire
naturally is carried upward, not downward, only heateth and cools not. The
Loadstone draws iron to it, and does not both draw and drive it away.

2 A Natural cause does not add a certain moderation and dilation of the
action, but it works to the utmost of his power; as fire when it has fuel,
burns without measure.

3 A voluntary cause is, which does of certain foreknowledge b
and counsel.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 A Voluntary cause is free and indifferent to an action; (...)
so as it may do or may not do. And freedom is twofold. 1 of Contradiction,
and 2 of Contrariety; the first is, when a cause may do or not do; and so every
voluntary cause is simply free. But liberty of contrariety is again. 1 Natural,
or 2 Moral. Natural when contrary natural effects proceed, as a Physician may
use medicines, cooling or heating. Moral is, when men may effect things good or
evil, honest or dishonest.

2 A voluntary cause does by certain moderation; and, at his pleasure, can
suspend the action, though occasion be given of doing. So God gives not all his
gifts to one, or always punishes, but deferreth, etc. at his pleasure.

Again, a voluntary cause is free either Merely. After a sort.


Merely free, which with full appetite wills and produces the effect:

And it is called, (...) (...), (...), and (...).

After a sort free, which wills and produces the effect, but with an heavy
and sorrowful appetite. As in a tempest, a Merchant casts his goods into the
Sea to escape Shipwreck.

Moreover, the efficient cause is either Transmutative. Emanative.


Transmutative, which does with some notable change or motion: as when fire
works on water and heateth it, etc.

Emanative, when the effects flow without any notable change: as, from the soul
flow forth the powers of sense, understanding, speaking, etc. From the Sun
comes light, and yet in the soul or Sun is no change.

2 We have seen of the 1 force or manner of effecting; now follow the divisions
of 2 the orders of effecting.

The efficient cause is subordinate either Essentially. m Contingently. n


Essentially, when the inferior does of it self, and necessarily m
depends on the superior in effecting: as in Generation, a man depends on the
Sun.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 In causes of themselves subordinate, there is not granted (...).
a proceeding to infinite; for subordination presupposes order, and order
resists infiniteness.

2 Of causes subordinate, the inferior in causing, hangs on the superior.

3 In causes essentially subordinate, that which is cause of a cause, is the
cause of the thing caused. This is true only in causes essentially subordinate,
but false in contingently subordinate; for God is not the cause of sin, though
he be the cause of man's will; which causes sin, for will is not, o^ it, self
and as it is will, the cause of sin (for then it should sin always) but as it
has defect; so the nature of the horse is not the cause of halting, though it
be the cause of motion.

Causes subordinate be either First. a Second. b


First is that which has the highest place in the Order of a
causing; and it is either, 1 simply first, or 2 after a sort.

1 Absolutely first is, which in no respect is second; as only God.

2 After a sort first, is that which is first in a certain kind only: as in
the moving of living Creatures, the soul is the first cause whereon all other
causes and effects in such creatures depend.

The second cause, is that which hangs on the first, either b
Mediate or Immediate.

Mediate, when others do come between it and the last effect: It is called,
(...) (...), cause in power, for putting it, the last effect is not yet, but
only may be.

And this mediate cause is either Far off. Or near.


Far off, when many come between it and the last effect: as the motion of
Heaven is a cause far off of man's walking, etc. For many other causes come
between.

This pertains not to the first cause, God; for he is not far from every one,
Acts. 7. 27. but he walks immediately with every created Agent.

Near is, when one only comes between it and the effect: as the lifting up of
vapors unto the clouds, is a near cause of rain; for one only comes between,
even the resolution of the cloud.

Immediate cause is, which produces the effect by immediate and next force,
called (...).

The Canons hereof be five.
First, The next cause presupposes all the causes farther off.

2 The next cause being granted, needs must the effect be granted or taken
away, when it is taken away. For the next cause is the cause in Act, and
therefore cannot want an effct, any more then a father can want a child. So
then they greatly err, which strive, that the essential Proprieties may be
taken away, the forms of the subjects remaining safe, whereas the form of the
subject is the next cause of all those properties that are in the subject.

3 One effect has but one next cause, though it may have many effects.

4 By the next cause, Accidents are distinctly and perfectly known.

5 The next cause is enquired, both by sense and observation, and by the Examen
of Logic: these two Instruments God has given men to find out the next
causes, chiefly of Natural effects.

The next cause, is either Inward. Outward.


Inward, which is essential to the subject unto whom it produces the effect.
So forms are always next causes of many faculties in subjects, as a reasonable
soul is the next cause of laughing, speaking, etc.

Outward, which is without the Essence of that subject, to whom it produces
the effect; so the next cause of laughter, is a moving of the heart and midri^^
by some ridiculous object known; and this is called outward, because it is
neither the form, nor matter, though it be in man.

Contingently subordinate causes, are when the Inferior b
hangs not on the superior of its self, and its own Nature. As man depends on
the Sun, and the picture depends on man; but because this picture depends not
on him as a man or natural thing, but as he is an Artificer only, therefore
the picture is subordinate to the Sun contingently; So is it for man's will and
sin; for though sin hang on the will, yet because it hangs not on it according
to the preferment of nature, and as it is will, but as it is corrupted,
therefore are they subordinate contingently.

Hitherto of a cause by its self; now follows a cause (...)
by accident, which is either in 1 Natural, or 2 Voluntary Agents.

First, the Natural Agent; That is called a cause by accident, which brings
not forth the effect of its own Nature, but by something that happens to it; as
an Ague causes temperance, not of its self, but by accident; for of it self
the cause is the will, bridling the appetite. So knowledge puffs up; The Law
causes wrath, for it lights on them that cannot keep it.

2 In voluntary Agents, cause by accident is, which brings forth an effect
besides the intent and purpose, or by ignorance: as a man cutting wood, his
Ax-head flies off, and kills his neighbor unawares. Thus Judas, Pilate, and
the Jews were causes,, by accident of Christ's Passion and man's Redemption; for
they never purposed, nor thought of such a good effect.

Hither belongs Fortune, which sometime is taken largely for any chance: as
when a glass falls, and by fortune is not broken: sometime strictly taken,
Fortune is the cause voluntary by accident, of that effect which one knew not,
meant not, nor hoped for: as a man digging or plowing the ground, finds a bag
of gold. Thus many things amongst men may be said to be done by fortune or
luck, not in respect of God the first Cause, but in respect of secondary causes.

The Canons of causes by Accident, as well Natural as Voluntary, be four.
1 One end of the same thing may be a cause, both by accident and by its self,
in a diverse respect: as the Gospel by its self is the cause of Conversion, by
accident the cause of hardening.

2 Every effect of a cause by accident, is reduced to a cause by its self. And
thus all chances of Fortune, are to be reduced unto God.

3 Things that be done by chance or fortune, be rare, but of causes by
themselves many and often.

4 Causes by accident are infinite and inordinate [(...). Some make it a kind
of cause, Sine qua non, (...). But it needs not; for such causes may be
referred to instruments, or some other before.

The matter next follows, which is either Properly so called. 2 Matter. (...).
Improperly so called.


First, properly so called, is Principal. a Less principal. b


Principal, which is only matter, and in no respect compounded.

Second, which so is matter, as it is also a material compound. As a man's body
is the matter of a man, though it be all compounded of Elements.

The Canons hereof be two.
First, every second matter depends on the first, viz. in a certain Order of
Nature.

2 Every second matter is necessarily determined in a certain quantity to one
only and certain form: So the matter of a man is only determined to a
reasonable soul, and cannot receive any unreasonable, and so in all other
creatures; that vain is the M(...) or transamination of Pythagoras, the Jews,
etc. Hereby is confirmed the doctrine of the Resurrection, when every one shall
receive the same body and soul.

The second matter is either Far off. Near.


Far off, which makes a compound, others coming between. So an humane body is
the next matter of a man.

Less principal is that, whereof it being changed and not b
remaining, a thing is made; Called therefore matter, passing away, whereas the
other is permanent: so seed is the matter passing away of living Creatures; for
it is changed, and as it were perished before the constitution of the body.

And it is either Far off, when things are made of it from far. Near, whereof a
thing is next made.


As of meat and drink a man is engendered afar off, for of it is blood, and of
blood seed, but seed is the next matter.

Matter improperly so called, is in a similitude, and by Analogy or proportion
called matter.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 That which Artizens work on in their Art, and are occupied about, is called
matter. As the matter of the Goldsmith, is gold and silver: The matter of
Idols, is silver, gold, wood, or stone, etc.

2 The Notion of matter is also often given to Accidents: so three Propositions
are called the matter of a syllogism. The two Tables the matter of Gods Law.

3 The name of Matter is also given to a subject wherein the accident is; and
the Object about which the Action of a thing is busied.

The form answers to the matter, and is so called Properly. m 3 Form.
Improperly. n m



Form, properly so called, is a cause that with the Matter constituteth a
substantial compound or body: it is called (...) and (...): And the substantial
Form.

The General Rules hereof be seven.
1 Every form properly called is a substance.

2 The form is the chiefest part of the essential compound, whereby it is
constituted, and essentially distinguished from all others: Every thing is
named not of the matter, but of the form: hereupon the form is called Act; for
the Antecedent matter is not in esse, but in power, till the form come; and
this the Greek name (...) means.

3 Unto the Form are due properly the operations of every compounded thing. The
form being put, three things are put: 1 the being of a thing, 2 the distinction
of it. 3 the operation; and he that grants the form, grants the consequences of
it, that is, the proper operations.

4 The Form in a diverse respect, assumes the relation of the efficient cause
and end. Of the efficient in respect of the powers that flow from it, and
operations in which the powers cease; and of the end, in respect of the
begetter and disposer, who intends nothing but the consequences of the Form.

5 Every Form is more perfect than the matter, and according to Natures scope,
before it: wherefore the form is called species, (...).

6 The Form by it self comes not into the senses; because it is not endued with
qualities, which are the Objects of senses: therefore man who begins to
understand by sense, is very ignorant of forms, and their names; by reason
whereof our knowledge is like the shadow in the Sun.

7 The Form is not varied by degrees, nor increases it by its self, though the
whole compound be varied in quantity. For the Form consists in indivisibility;
it is like a number, which if one add to, or take from it, it continues not
the same it was before.

Form is either First. Second.


First Form is, which in Order goes before all other: in Order I say, not of
intention, but of generation: This also is called the first beginning active,
and the common form of all bodies and Nature.

Second Form is that which follows the first; called also the inferior and the
particular Form, as Nature is called the Universal Form.

The Canons hereof be two.
First, The second Form is not united to the Matter, unless the matter be
rightly disposed and prepared.

Secondly, A certain and specifical Form, is determined to a certain matter, so
as it cannot be communicated with another, nor go out of one unto another, nor
be together in two disjoined Matters. Men's souls cannot go into the bodies of
beasts, etc.

Form, improperly so called is either Natural or Artificial, n (...). Arist. 2.
Phys. cap. 1
of which we have spoken in the Predicament of quality. In a most general
signification, Privation sometime is called a form: so every relation in
Philosophy is called form and formal; as the formal thing of a Syllogism, is,
the order of knitting the three Propositions, which are the Material. What
formal difference is, shall be showed after in distinction.

The End is, that unto which the Efficient is ordained. (...), or (...). End is
diversely taken, as for the last or utmost of any thing; here properly we treat
of the End of intention, called also the scope.

End is either End. (...).
By it self. A * ^ By Accident. B


An end by it self, is that whereunto the efficient and A *
means of their own Nature are ordered:

And it is either so called Primarily. a Secondarily. b


Primarily, which the Efficient intends to attain [called a
Finis, (...), i. e. cujus.]

The General Rules hereof be six.
1 The End moves the efficient to do; therefore is it called the cause of
causes; for Matter without Form is rude. Form, if there want the preparing and
efficient cause, is not brought into the matter; but the efficient works not,
if it be not moved with desire; so without the end, no cause is caused.

2 The end by it self and in its own Nature, is only good and of good. So an
End and Good are convertible; for the end is that which we most would: what we
most would, is most to be desired, and desire naturally is always ordered to
good. All vice wants both efficient and end.

3 Whatsoever has an efficient cause, has also an end.

4 The end is both cause and effect, in a diverse respect; so the celebrating
of Gods Name, is man's action and (...), and yet is also the end of man.

5 The end, as it is an end, is also before and better than the means: before
it, not in order of production, but of perfection and intention: So
Justification is before Faith, though also it be gotten by Faith. I say also (
as it is an end) for otherwise as touching the absolute essence, the means may
be as perfect, or more. Christ's incarnation and office, has greater perfection
than man's Redemption, absolutely considered.

6 The end and the efficient are causes each of other: the end causes the
efficient, as touching causality, not as touching being, and not causality.
Walking before meat is the efficient cause of health, and health is the end or
final cause of such walking.

The end is either Principal. * 1 Less principal. * 2


* 1 Principal, unto which a thing is ordered of its own nature, and by first
intent of the efficient: as the principal end of the Lords Supper is the
confirmation of Faith, and sealing up of Spiritual benefits, with a thankful
rememberance of Christ's death.

And it is either A mean between. a Last of all. b


A mean between, is, which tends yet further. As the a
intermiddle end of a Soldier, is to fight valiantly; but this tends to a
further end, to get the victory.

And it is either Work. Ending of the work.


The work (...) is a certain thing brought forth by Nature, or by the Artizen:
so the house is the end and work of the builder. The ending of the work (...),
is the possession and use thereof. As dwelling is the ending of the house.

The last end is whereunto all the rest are ordered, called b
(...), and (...), the first scope and chief intention.

The Canons hereof are seven.
1 The end, which is last in execution, is first in intention.

2 The last end is necessarily and chiefly good, and chiefly moving or to be
desired, (...). Galen.

3 In the last end, both appetite and operation of the efficient is terminate.

4 It gives to all the means, loveliness; order and measure: So tribulations
for the Gospel are joyful, because the end is eternal life.

5 Only the last end perfecteth both doer and deeds: wherefore we must know
the last end, if we would intend and use the middle end aright; which is
against Popish Doctrine of perfection of virtues, even without respect of the
last End. Bellarm* 5. de great. cap. 9.

6 The End being put, all means to the end are put: As, in Gods predestination,
whom God has destinated to Life, he has also to Faith in good works.

7 The End enters the manner of being, and supplyeth places of Form, viz. in
those things whose essential perfection is in operation.

The last end, is last either Simply. After a sort.


Simply last, which in respect of all things whatsoever is the last: and this
is always the end, and never a mean to the end; so the seeing and celebrating
of God is the last and utmost end wherein man's understanding, will, and
desires, shall rest, Prove. 8.

After a sort last, which in order of some things is the last: thus the last
end of War is Victory and Peace; the last end of Logic, is the direction of
the mind in knowledge.

The less principal end, is, whereto things are less principally * 2
ordered, viz. not of the nature of the thing, but the appointment of the
Agent: So the principal End of the Lords Supper, is, a faithful and thankful
remembrance of Christ's death; but the less principal Ends be many, as
exexercise of Repentance, distinction of the Church from other Companies, etc.

The Canons hereof be two.
1 Less principal Ends are not taken away by the principal.

2 One thing may have many less principal Ends; and they either sub-ordinate,
or well coordinate.

The End secondarily so called, is that whereto the End b
primary so called is intended, called Finis (...) cui.

And it is either of Imperfection. Perfection.


Of Imperfection is, to whose use and need the thing is intended: so the End
cui to whom of health is the sick man* so the end of the Lords Supper, is
faithful people. So Reprobates are not the end cui of Christ's passion; for the
end cui by destination of the efficient and of its nature, ought to be capable
of the end cujus, but Reprobates are not intended by Christ, nor are capable in
applying of it, and therefore are removed by Christ, John. 17. 7.

Of Perfection the End cui is, of whom the efficient receives perfection;
called also the end of assimilation; thus God is the End to whom of all our
actions, as the perfecter of them.

A^ End by Accident, is, unto which the means are ordained * B.
by accident, and not of their Nature. So the End of sin is the manifestation
of Gods Justice: the End of Hereresies and Atheism, is the illustration of the
truth: such Ends are indeterminate and confuse.

Of the Caused.
The Caused is that which hangs (...),
upon the Cause, and is The effect. The Mattered. The Formed. The destinate.


The effect is that which hangs on the Efficient. 1 Effect.


The Canons hereof are three.
First, No effect, exceeds the virtue of its cause: So the Sun, though it has
not formally the heat which it gives, yet it has it eminently, that is,
something much more excellent then that heat, namely, pure light. Absurdly
therefore do the Popish Priests give unto Accidents the power of making a
substance; for they say in the Mass, the accidents of Wine in the cup do
change the water into another substance.

2 As is the cause, such is the caused; This is meant, 1 of causes by
themselves, not of causes by accidents; therefore it follows not, to say,
This Ship-wright is a good man, therefore he makes a good Ship; for he makes
the Ship, not as he is a man or good, but as he is a Wright or Artizen.

2 It is meant in causes natural, and those chiefly particular; so it follows
not, to say the effects of the Sun are hot, therefore the Sun is hot; for the
Sun is a universal thing, and not a particular in causing. 3 It is meant of
causes doing voluntarily, if they would produce an effect conformably: as a
good Ship-wright makes a good Ship if he will. 4 It is meant upon condition and
manner of the receiver, not of the thing received; so the Argument follows not
from the chief perfection of God to the chief perfection of the gifts in the
Creatures; for God works voluntarily, and according to the measure of the
receiver, and when we speak here of goodness, it is not meant moral goodness,
but the Natural and Artificial faculty and force of causing, and by this many
Canons of effects are to be understood.

3 That for which any thing is so, is it self so much more: (...). This Canon
has three limitations. 1 The cause must be by it self; for it follows not,
This man is drunken with wine; therefore this wine is more drunken; because
wine makes not a man drunken, but by the abuse of it. 2 It is required, that
that affection, whereof the cause and effect is named such, be in both. 3 That
it receive more and less.

1 The Mattered is, that which hangs on the matter. 2 Mattered


As the whole compound natural body, is the caused of the matter.

3 The Formed is, that which hangs on the form. As the 3 Form.
said natural informed body.

4 The Destinate is, that which is ordered unto the End; 4 Destinate
it may also be called the Ended; for by the End it is determined; so vocation,
justification, sanctification, are the Destinates of Eternal Life; for they are
ordered as means hereunto.

The Distinctions and Subdivisions of these may be gathered from the divisions
of their causes going before; for among Relates, one is known by another.

Of the Subject and the Accident. (...).

A Subject is that whereunto an Accident sticks ^and is Absolute. a Limited. b


Absolute is, that whereto an Accident sticks absolutely, without any
limitation of part: So Christ's person is the absolute subject of the Mediators
office, and all things thereto pertaining; for to be Mediator agrees to the
whole person as it is the whole: So the whole man is the subject of life and
death; and it cannot rightly be said the body dies; for that which is
compounded, is also dissolved, and consequently dies, and that is the whole
man. So also man is the absolute subject of laughter; and an Animal is the
absolute subject of sense.

And it is either (...).
Proper. Common.


Proper, which is reciprocate with his Accident, viz. so as it be determined to
it alone, not larger nor straighter: so a man is the proper subject of
laughter, and Animal of sense.

Common is, which is not reciprocate with his Accident, but may have, or not
have the accident, as a man is the subject of whiteness.

A Limited Subject is, that whereto an accident is given in b
part, not absolutely; as a Black-moor is the limited subject of whiteness,
being white but in his teeth; so Christ is the subject of accidents limited
(...). As when whole Christ is said to be every where, it is by limitation to
his infinite Nature or Godhead; so when he is said to be born, die, etc. it is
by limitation to his finite nature or manhood: this the Greeks note by the
phrase, (...).

An accident is, that which sticks to the subject; it is (...).
called also adjoynt.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 An Accident by nature is later than his Subject.

2 One Accident in number cannot be in diverse Subjects in number.

3 One Accident in number goes not from Subject to Subject.

An Accident is either Proper. m Common. n


Again proper is so called either m
Absolutely and primarily. After a sort.


Absolutely so called, is reciprocate with the subject of some certain Species.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 Every proper flows from the Essential beginnings of his subject, as the
power of laughter flows from a reasonable soul.

2 Every proper is determined to some certain Species in Nature.

3 Every proper accident of one Species is communicable to another that is
really diverse; every thing to the perfection of it requires three things,
knit, undivided. 1 Essence. 2 Essential properties. 3 Operations, wherefore a
propriety cannot be communicated, unless first the Essence of things be made
common and confounded.

Absolute proper is either Perfect. Imperfect.


Perfect, is that which is not only alone and in all, but always and
perpetually in it, as qualities in respect of a natural body: the faculty of
wit, will, speech, etc. in a man.

The Canons hereof are three.
1 A subject cannot without contradiction be conceived under the denial of a
perfect proper adjoynt: as I cannot conceive man without power of wit, etc. But
it must imply contradiction, a man to be no man.

2 It is not possible for perfect Propers to be severed from their subjects, a
moment of time; because they come from the form of the subject, and the next
cause being put, the effects are put; and contrary, he that takes away
proprieties, takes away Nature.

3 Perfect Propers are first in Universals, as reason is in man generally; then
it is in this or that man, more or less.

Imperfect proper, is, that which is in a thing alone, and in all, but not
always; as the acts of speaking, laughing, weeping, etc. are only in a man,
and in all men, but not always.

Proper after a sort, which is called proper only by comparison with another;
as it is proper for a man to be twofooted in respect of a four-footed beast.
Fewness is proper to the Elect in respect of the Reprobates.

Common accident is, that which commonly and contingently n
is in subjects that be diverse in specie.

The Canons hereof are five.
1 A Common accident flows not from the Essential beginnings of the subject.

2 It is such as a subject may be conceived under the opposite thereof, without
any implying of contradiction: a man may be conceived under the opposite of an
Ague without implying contradiction, a man to be not a man.

3 A common accident may be in two diverse, specifically distinct, subjects.

4 It is more and rather in singulars than universals; for they flow not from
the essence, but from the existence.

5 Common accidents receive degrees; as one man is whiter than another, but one
man is not more risible than another.

A common accident is either Separable. Inseparable.


Separable, which may easily be separated from the subject; as health from a
man, sleep, etc.

Inseparable, which is not easily separated from the subject, though to be
separated nothing repugneth, as blackness is inseparable in a raven.

Of the Whole and the Part.
Now follow the inward terms, the Whole, and the Part.

The Whole is that which has parts, and it is either by it self. a by
accident. b


Whole by it self, is, which has parts properly and perfectly a
so called.

And it is either Universal. Coordinate.


Universal whole, is a thing common and universal in respect of Particulars; as
an Animal is the whole of man and beast.

Coordinate is, which is made of parts coordinate in act, and is Ordinary. a
Extraordinary. b


Ordinary, which has ordinary parts, and is a
Essential. Integral.


Essential, which has essential parts, as Matter and Form, called (...), as a
man in respect of body and soul.

And it is either, 1 Perfectly, or 2 Imperfectly so called.

1 Perfectly called, is substantial, which is compounded of Matter and Form. 2
Improperly so called, as an Oration consists of Letters, Syllables, Words, as
the Material; and the signification as the Formal. A Commonweal of Magistrates
and Subjects as the Material, and of their union by Laws to felicity as the
Formal.

Integral, which consists of Integrant parts, and is Perfectly called,
Imperfectly called,


Perfectly, which consists of substantial parts united.

And is either of The same kind, Homogeneum. Of another kind, Heterogeneum.


Of the same kind, which has parts having the same name with the whole; as
every part of water, wine, blood, etc. is called water, etc.

Of another kind, which has parts having a name diverse from the whole as a
man's body consists of head, breast, belly, etc.

Imperfectly called, is that which consists of parts imperfect.

And is Substantial. Accidental.


Substantial, which consists of the Aggregation of substantial parts, as a heap
of corn of many grains, etc.

Accidental, when an accident is as it were compounded of other accidents; so
the Moral Law is the whole in respect of the ten Commandments; man's conversion
is the whole in respect of mortification and vivification.

Extraordinary whole, is, whose parts are united extraordinarily; ^
such a whole is the person of our Mediator Christ, which consists of Natures,
as of parts; yet is neither a whole essential nor integral, though it have a
great Analogy with the Integral.

The whole by accident, is which is whole improperly and b
plain accidentally: as the caused, which is divided by his causes; the subject
which is divided by accidents, and the accident by the Subject; so heat is the
whole in respect of the Sun and fire.

Parts.
Part.
A Part is that which is referred to the whole, and is either By it self. a By
accident. b (...).



By its self, which is referred to the whole by it self, and is Subject.
Co-ordering.


Subject is that which is subjected to the universal whole, a
as a straighter to a larger; so man and beast are the subjective parts of
Animal.

Co-ordering is, by whose co-ordination the whole is made or compounded
Ordinary. Extraordinary.


The Canons hereof be five.
1 Parts as they make their whole, so also they determine and measure it.

2 Parts differ from their whole, though they be taken together: for, the whole
is never the constituter, but the constituted, and the parts are always
constituters; and the same thing constitutes not it self; also the whole (as it
is the whole) is one thing; parts, though taken together, are many.

3 That which is of a part, (as it is a part) the same also is of the whole,
viz. according to that part. Note that some things are in the part as a part,
that is, cannot be there, but in as much, and as long as it cleaves to the whole.

Again some things are in it, not as it is a part, but as it has a substance
diverse from the whole; and therefore those may remain, though separated from
the whole: of this sort attributes and accidents are not rightly given to the
whole, but only to the part; as it is rightly said, The eye is mixed of
humors, is round, etc. for such is the eye, though it be plucked out of the
body; but it is not properly said, the eye sees, the ear hears, etc. for
those agree to those parts as they are parts and instruments of the whole,
which if it be extinct, the eye sees not, nor the ear hears. The like is in
all other parts, in every essential and integral whole that is one by it self;
for in Aggregate totals, as a heap, etc. it is otherwise; for they are not
indeed totals; this has great use in the Doctrine of Christ's Person, which is
the whole consisting of two Natures; for rightly and really do agree to the
whole person the attributes of either Nature; fitly therefore it is said,
Christ is omnipotent, as touching his Divinity; Christ died for us touching his
Humanity; and this is more aptly spoken thus than in the Abstract.

4 Note, whatsoever is of the whole, is also of the part. Here distinguish
between the whole Universal, and the whole Essential and Integral. For
whatsoever is in an universal whole, as an Animal, the same is in the parts of
man and beast; but in other totals it is not so; for there, what the whole
has, cannot be properly given to the parts, because such parts receive not the
definition of their totals, as in the Universal whole; it is not fitly said,
the soul understands, thinks, pitieth, etc. but the man that has the soul
does those things; so whatsoever is spoken of whole Christ, or the person of
the Mediator, is not properly spoken of the Humane Nature, nor of the Divine.

5 Every part in respect of his whole, is an imperfect thing; as the soul and
body are things incomplete; but a man, complete.

And this part is either Essential. a Integral. b


Essential, is, which is referred to the Essential whole. And is Perfectly
called. a
Imperfectly called.


Perfectly, which is referred to an Essential whole, perfectly so called; as
soul and body are perfectly Essential parts; for they make a perfect Essential
whole.

Imperfectly, which is referred to an Essential whole imperfectly so called: so
sound and signification, are the Essential parts of Speech, but imperfectly
called, the sound as the Matter, the signification as the Form.

Integral, is, which is referred to an Integral whole. b


And is also Perfectly called. Imperfectly called.


Perfectly, which is referred to an Integral whole, having quantity.

And perfectly so called. And it is either Of the same, Homogenea. Of another
kind, Heterogenea.


Of the same kind, which has the same Name with the whole; as every part of
flesh is called flesh; of blood, blood; of gold, gold, etc.

Of another kind is, which has a diverse Name from the whole; as the parts of
a man; head, hands, feet, etc.

And it is either Principal. Less Principal.


1 Principal, without which the whole cannot be: As in man, the heart, the
brain, etc.

2 Less principal, which may be away without the destruction of the whole, as
the finger, toe, etc.

Imperfectly so called, is, which is referred to an Integral whole, imperfectly
so called, named (...), Intelligible part; such parts be the propositions in a
Syllogism; the ministering of the Word and Sacraments, are the parts of the
Ministry.

An Extraordinary part, is, which is referred to an Extraordinary whole; as the
two Natures in Christ's person.

A Part by accident, is that which is referred to an whole b
by accident: as subjects when they are divided by their accidents, and
accidents by their subjects, causes by the effects, etc.

Outward Terms.
We have seen the simple terms inward. Now follows the b b
outward term which is preferred unto others outwardly, so as it constituteth
them not inwardly; but, in deed and place, is diverse and distinct from them.

The outward Term is either Adherent. m * Concomitant. n *


Adherent is either (...), Adjacent. a m *
(...), Object. b


Adjacent, (...), again is either Knit together. 1 Circumstance. 2 a
Adjoynt. 3


1 Knit together, or Connex, is that which happens, and is done together with
the thing: as with Christ's passion the darkening of the Sun, the rending of the
veil, etc.

2 Circumstance is, which is about a thing, and to it adjacent, as place and
time, named (...); so the circumstances of Christ's suffering, were the place,
Golgotha; the time, Tiberius reign; the day, hour, etc. So shadow is the
circumstance of the body.

3 Adjoynt, is that which is adjoined near to a thing, as the Thoray Crown,
Reed, Purple Robe of Christ, etc.

An Object, is about which a thing or operation of a thing ^
is busied.

And it is either By it self. e By accident. f


By it self, unto which a thing is ordered by its self, and e
of its own Nature; such an Object of the Will, is Good, of the understanding,
Truth, etc.

And it is either Common. Proper.


Common, is about which many things together are busied; so the common object
of all the senses is greatness, figure, and motion; for these are apprehended
and judged of all the senses in common.

Proper, is which is determined to one, as color to seeing, sound to hearing,
etc.

Both of them again is Primary. Secondary.


Primary, unto which a thing is first carried; as universal things, (...), are
the primary object of the understanding. And God is of the Philosopher ( Ethic.
10.) acknowledged to be, (...).

Secondary, unto which a thing is secondly carried; as things singular in
respect of the understanding, and things universal in respect of sense.

Also the object is either Mediate. Immediate.


Mediate, which is objected by means of another: as sensible substances are
objects of the senses by means of the qualities*

Immediate, which is objected without any means; so qualities are objects of
the senses, as color of sight, etc.

An Object by accident, is about which a thing is busied by f
accident; and this is meant both in respect of the action, and of the object;
so evil is the object of the will by accident; for about it the will is busied,
not of its own Nature, as it is will, but of vice and defect outwardly
accident; thus also the understanding by accident is busied about falsehood; the
preaching of the Gospel about Reprobates. And of the object, Sarah Abraham's
wife was sensible by her accident, when the King saw her not as Abraham's wife,
but as a fair woman, etc.

Concomitant, is either Antecedent. 1 n *
Consequent. 2


1 Antecedent is, which goes in order of time before a thing, so as it cannot
be the cause.

And it is either Necessary. Contingent.


Necessary which goes before necessarily, either by nature or by will, as
Childhood goes before Manhood, Spring time before Harvest, Resurrection before
Eternal Life.

Contingent, which goes before a thing contingently; as the redness of the
evening, in respect of the next day's fair weather, the red lowering of the
morning in respect of rain at evening. Such antecedents may be called signs.

2 Consequent is, which follows the thing, so as it is not the effect. And it
is either Necessary. Contingent.


Necessary, which needs must follow the antecedent, as in the necessity of Gods
decree, Christ's suffering necessarily followed his last Supper, death followed
his suffering, resurrection his death and burial, etc.

Contingent, which follows contingently; so fair weather contingently, or it
may be follows the white Moon, for sometime it does not, etc.

Of simple Terms arising from the first.
Having seen the first single Terms; next follow those that arise, and are
conceived by means of the first.

A Term arising from the first is either of A Word. 1 * A Thing. 2 *


Of a Word.
The Term of a Word is either the a Explication of a Word. 1 *
b Conjugation of a Word.


The Explication of a Word, is either 1 a Definition of a
a Name; or 2 a Distinction of a doubtful word; or a 3 clearing of a dark word.

1 A Definition of a Name, is, which turns up and unfoldeth the signification
of a Word, and is either by a Word, (...). by Notation, (...).


Definition by a word, is, which declares the signification of a word by some
other that is more known, either by a Synonymy and Metalepsis, or by a contrary
word: As when I say a Condition is a Promise; Stibium is Antimony; Antichrist
is he that is against Christ and for the Devil, etc.

Etymology.
Definition by Notation or Etymology, is, which declares the Word by the
Original of it; and this not Grammatically, but Logically, for the meaning and
explaning of a thing; as Noble is he which by virtue is noscible, famous or
well known.

The Canons or Etymology are three.

1 The Etymology of all words is not to be sought; for many words are
primitive.

2 In Etymologies we must not go on without End, but must stay in some that is
first; as the English word, Mix, may come from the Latin Misceo, and that from
the Greek (...). And the Greek from the Hebrew (...) Masach. And here we must
rest; for the Hebrew is the first tongue, and many words in it are primitive.

3 Etymologies are taken from the end, effects, proprieties, object, and
opposites of a thing; and are therefore from these to be derived, and these by
those to be declared; as a River comes from the Latin Rivus, and both of them
from the Hebrew (...) Ravah, which signifies to wet or moisten, because Rivers
do moisten the dry Land. World so called of War*old, because the older it is,
the War or worse it is, etc.

Distinction 2.
A Distinction is, the freeing of a doubtful word from the variety of hidden
significations.

The Canons hereof are seven.

1 The Distinction of a doubtful word must be first in all consideration of
things.

2 When one word or name is given to things of diverse Orders and kinds, it is
doubtful, and needs distinction; as if one speak of a Canker, it is to be
known whether it be of the Canker-worm, or the Canker-sore, etc.

3 When a word is given to any in a diverse respect, viz. Absolutely, and by
relation, it is doubtful, and needs distinction: as Justification is taken
either absolutely, as it is in the Justified person only, Romans 4. or relatively
to our neighbor, as he may acknowledge us to be justified by the effects of
Faith. Jam. 2.

4 When a word means sometime more things, sometimes fewer, it is doubtful:
as Faith is sometime largely used, sometime strictly; so Church, Grace,
Election, etc.

5 When the opposite of any word is doubtful, the word it self is doubtful; as
Election to life has opposite, Reprobation: Election to an Office has no
opposite; therefore Election is a doubtful word.

6 When a Primitive word is doubtful, the Derivative is so too; and if one of
the conjugates be doubtful, so is the other; as Faith is diversely taken;
therefore a faithful man or infidel, is diversely to be taken.

7 Distinction of a word, repugneth not the Nature and use of things, neither
darkeneth it, but clears the understanding of the mind, viz. a good
distinction; but evil distinction does darken and confound things.

Illustration.
8 The clearing or Illustration of a dark word, is the reducing of it to
perspicuity.

The Canons hereof be four.

1 When a word is dark by barbarousnesse or Soloecism, it is to be judged by
Grammar Rules: as Transubstantiation is a monstrous word, and has bred as
monstrous opinions, so Opus operatum, etc.

2 When a word is dark for want of use, let a more usual and safe word be put
in place: as the Sacrament of the Altar is an unproper word, not to be used for
the Lords Supper.

3 When a word is larger or straighter than the thing meant thereby, let
another word, if it may be had, be put in the room; as when the word Clergy is
applied to the Ministers only, which is said to be common to all the Saints, 1
Pet. 5.

4 When a word is figurative, not for any need, but for finenesse sake, put a
proper word for it.

The Conjugation, (...), or yoking together of words, b
is a depending of words yoked together. And is Primitive. Derivative.


Primitive, on which another word hangs in deduction.

Derivative, which hangs on the Primitive; as faithful on Faith.

And they are either Of a word only. Of thing.


Of word only, when not so much the Natural Order of signifying is looked on,
as the forming of words, one from another.

Of thing, when there is a union of signification, and is Primary. Secondary.


Primary, which is in which the dependence, both of signification and
determination is observed; of Faith faithful, and Justice just, etc.

Secondary, In which there is a dependence of signification only, and not of
termination also; as when of virtue one is said to be studious, gracious, etc.

Of a thing.
2 *
The arising term of a thing without the word is Resolving. Conferring.


Resolving is either Definition. Division.


Of a Definition. Definition, (...).

Definition, is the unfolding, or turning out of the defined thing.

And it is either 1 Perfect. 2 Imperfect.


1 Perfect is the unfolding of the thing by essential terms, (...).

The Canons hereof be five.
1 Every defined thing of perfect definition must be by it self, and directly
in the predicamental order of things; so then there can be no perfect
definition of doubtful things, of Fictions, or Privations, as sin, etc. of
things concrete, incomplete, etc.

2 Whatsoever is perfectly defined, is a Species.

3 A Definition must be formed perspicuous and determinate, viz. free from all
ambiguity.

4 A Definition should be reciprocal and equal to the thing defined.

5 An essential Definition must consist of things simply before more known, and
so indemonstrable. Not regarding what we must know, or what this or that man is
able to comprehend, but absolutely and simply what is first in nature, and more
known according to the Essential Order of things.

Definition has two Notions and Conceits.
1 The one of agreement or conveniencie, called the Genus.

2 The other of distinction or difference, called the Difference.

The conceit of agreement, or Genus, both of Substances and Accidents, is found
by bringing the defined thing into his predicamental Order, and by conferring
with his superiors, by the Canons of a true and next Genus.

The Notion of Distinction or Difference, is either Of Substances. Of Accidents.


In Substances, there is one only and simple Difference, which also may easily
be known by the same predicamental Table.

In Definition of Accidents, the Difference is taken from the Subject, the
Efficient, the End, and Object.

The Canons of Defining Accidents by every of the Orders are nine.
1 Proper Accidents are defined by the Subject made equal, and the next
efficient cause.

2 Common Accidents are defined by the mention of the efficient cause.

3 Quantity taken in general, and completely, is defined by mention of the
subject and the efficient: as that it is ^ bodies Accident, arising from the
extension of the matter. Special quantities, as a line, etc. are not defined,
because they are things incomplete; neither is number.

4 Qualities potentiall natural, are defined by the subject, the efficient
cause, and act, unto which they are carried as to an end; As, risibility is the
power of man to laugh, proceeding from a reasonable soul.

5 Habits are defined by the end and the object: as Logic is an Art directing
the operations of the mind about the knowledge of things, Liberality is a
virtue of taking and bestowing.

6 Qualities patible, are defined by the efficient cause, and the subject, if
they be proper accidents; as color is the quality of a mixed body, arising from
the tempering together of bright and dark. Smell is an affecting quality of a
mixed body, arising from the predominion of a d^y thing savouring tempered with
moist.

7 Actions are defined by mention of the subject, the object, the efficient and
the end; as sense is the knowledge of a sensible object, arising from the
receiving of sensible species, by a fit sensory instrument, to the conservation
and perfection of the living creature. Sight is a sense about Color and light,
arising from the receiving of both by their species, unto the perfection of the
living Creature. Adoration is an holy operation of a Faithful man* arising
from the acknowledgement, and trust of God Almighty, and (in his Son)
merciful, by the holy Ghost stirred up, to the honor of God, and the
faithful man's salvation.

8 A Passion is defined by the subject, and the efficient cause; as, anger is
an affection arising from heat of the blood, moved about the heart for some
hu^t done. Sleep is a passion ceasing from operations in living creatures,
arising from the Alimentary, nourishing and profitable humor, imbruing the
brain, and as it were congealing the passages of the Animal Spirits.

9 Relations are defined by the subject relate, correlate, foundation and term.

The subject rela^e and correlate, is wherein the relation is of mutual part;
some call it the material; as the subject of marriage, is man and woman;
hereupon the Relate and Correlate is the husband and wife.

The Foundation, is, from which the relation rises, or for which it is in the
subjects: the foundation is ratio referendi, without which it would be nothing;
it is answerable to the efficient cause, and is either near or far off; as the
next foundation of Marriage is the lawful consent of each party; the far
Foundation, is Gods first institution in Paradise.

The term is as the end for which the relation is brought into the subject* it
is the office and effect of the relation; so the term of Baptism is the seal
and confirmation of the washing of sins by Christ's blood; so marriage is an
order or union between husband and wife, established by mutual consent for
procreation of seed, and pleasant society of life and goods.

Description (...):
An Imperfect definition is the unfolding of a thing by terms less essential;
it is called

Description: and is either. Principal. Less Principal.


Principal, which unfoldeth the thing by the Genus, and the Accidents, or the
proper effects; as a man is a living Creature that can laugh, go upright, made
after Gods Image.

Less Principal, is the unfolding of a thing by terms merely contingent, or
outward, without assigning the exact Genus, called (...), showing not what, but
what manner a thing, it is.

And it is either. 1 Of the part of the concrete, or, 2 of the part of the
thing. Of the part of the concrete, when a thing by its nature capable of a
perfect definition, is yet unfolded to us unperfectly,

Of the part of the thing, when the thing it self is not capable of a perfect
definition; as be all privatives, incomplete, concrete, etc.

The Canons hereof be two.
1 Privations are described by mention of the habits whose privations they are;
as original sin is an ataxie, or disorder of the understanding, will and
appetite, born with us, and opposite to Gods Image.

1 Concrete accidents are not unfitly described by putting the subject in the
place of the genus: as a Minister of the word is a person lawfully called and
ordained to the preaching of the word, and administrating of the Sacraments. A
Magistrate is a public person, ordained of God, to rule and defend the
Subjects with Justice, Prudence, and Fortitude.

Boethius gathers from the Greeks ten forms of Descriptions
1 (...), when the name of a thing is unfolded, as Antichrist is he that is
against Christ. Justification is a reputing for Just.

2 (...), when a thing is declared by its difference; as hatred is that which
dureth longer than wrath.

3 (...), when a thing is said to be that which it is like to; as a man is a
bubble; the Church is Noah's Ark.

4 (...), when a thing is declared by removing the contrary; as virtue is to
flee vice; death is the privation of life.

5 (...), by circumlocution; as Paul was the Teacher of the Gentiles.

6 (...), by Example; as a substance is, for examples sake, a man, a horse, etc.

7 (...), by want of the full of the same kind. As an Enthymeme is that which
wants one of the premises to be a Syllogism.

8 (...), by praise; as a history is the witness of Times, the light of Truth,
the life of memory, the mistress of life, the shower of Antiquity; also by
dispraise; as riches ate the enticements to evil.

9 (...), when one thing is said to be another, for natural similitude: as a
man is a little world; wine is the soul of a Banquet.

10 (...), by Notation; as the World is that which waxes worse and old.

Of Division.
Division is the resolving of the whole into parts, and is Perfect. a
Imperfect. b


Perfect, is the resolving of the whole properly so called a
and perfect, into parts properly called.

The Canons hereof are nine.
1 That which is rightly divided, must needs have parts;

Therefore the truth is ill divided into Philosophical; seeing, it is not an
whole thing, but simple and impartible. So Omnisciency into Ubiquity, etc.

2 The divided and division should be without all doubtfulness and darkness; as
works should not be divided into operation, and operantis; nor Faith into
Historical, Miraculous, and saving Faith; not blindness into corporal and
spiritual, nor liberty into civil and spiritual.

3 The members dividing should agree with the whole; therefore Logic is not
well divided into Invention and Judgment, seeing these are actions, and Logic
a quality.

4 The members dividing should be equal to the whole; so ceremonies are ill
divided into godly and ungodly; for this contains not the whole Nature of
ceremonies, because some are mean or indifferent.

5 The members dividing should be disjoined one from another; so a body, is ill
divided into head, eyes, belly, heart, etc. for the eyes are contained in that
head, and the heart in that body, etc.

6 Division should be made into the next and immediate members: so a body is
ill divided into man, beast, and tree; for many members that come between are
leaped over; for next a body is, either simple or compound.

7 Division should consist of as few members or parts as the nature of the
whole that is to be divided will bear.

8 A true division should be made by those things which are in the whole, and
not by the things outward and accidents to the whole; so quantity is ill
divided into Mathematical, Physical, and Logical; for Disciplines are
accidentary, and outward to things; neither is a thing by and by diverse, when
it is diversely considered by sundry disciplines.

9 A perfect division is the beginning of understanding, and of constituting
the method of things and disciplines.

A perfect division also is either of The whole Subordering. The Co-ordered,


Of the sub-ordering is, which resolves the general into the specials that are
subordered or subjected thereto, as to divide Animal into man and beast.

The Canons hereof are two.
1 The divided must be a general; we must learn to discern the diverse respects
and considerations of things from the divisions; as when the Church is
distinguished into visible and invisible, it is not properly a division, much
less a division of the general into specials; for a Church is a lowest special;
but it is only a diverse respect and manner of considering the Church; likewise
when a man is divided into inward and outward.

2 The difference by whose means the general is divided, should be essential
and proper, viz. not translated from one general to another.

The division of the co-ordered, is which resolves the whole into parts
co-ordered: and is either Essential. a Integral. b


Essential, which resolves the essential whole into essential a
parts, and is either 1 First, or 2 Secondarily so called.

1 First, is when the Essential whole properly called is resolved into matter
and form: as a man into soul and body. And here, the true and next matter and
form must be taken.

Secondarily so called, is when an Essential whole improperly so called, is
resolved into his material and formal; as an Oration into a sound, or words
written, and their signification. A Church into men called, etc. The union of
th^se with Christ, and one with another by faith and obedience of the Faith;
whereof these are the material of the Church, those the formal.

Integral division is which resolves the whole into integral parts, and it is
also either, 1 First primarily. 2 Secondarily so called.

1 Primary, is which resolves into parts the entire whole properly called; as
the Tabernacle was divided into the Court, the holy, and the most holy.

This manner of partition should be instituted in right order, descending from
the more principal and greater parts unto the lesser.

Secondarily called, is, which resolves into parts an entire whole improperly
called, such as accidents be; as a Syllogism is resolved into three
Propositions and Terms: the Law into two Tables, or ten Precepts.

An imperfect division is, when the whole is resolved into b
parts by accident; and it is either: 1 Of the subject into his accidents and
circumstances: or 2 Of accidents by their subjects. 3 Or of the effects by
their efficient, or final causes: or 4 Of causes by the effects: or 5 Of things
by their objects: as 1 Of men, some are tall, some low, some learned, some
unlearned, some dwell in hot countries, some in cold. 2 Agues, some are in the
spirits, some in the humors, some in the solid parts. 3 The Scriptures, some
were written by the Prophets, some by the Apostles. Gardens, some are for
profit, some for pleasure. 4 Gods word, either terrifieth the conscience, as
the Law; or comfort it, as the Gospel. 5 Love is either of God, or of our
neighbor.

Of the self-same being.
Hitherto of the arising term resolving; now follows the conferring, whereby
thing with thing is compared.

And is either Consentany. Dissentany.


Consentany (or agreeing) is when the Identity, (...), or self-same being of
things is looked on.

Indentity, is the unity and agreement of things, and is Ordinary. a a
Extraordinary. b b



Ordinary in ordinary things, and is either Greater. a Lesser. b


Greater Identity of them, which is are the same in some greater manner, and as
it were absolutely. a


And is either Formal. Numerical.


Formal, is of them which differ only in evolution of definition, otherwise
are the same in all things. As a man and a reasonable Animal.

Numerical Identity, is the unity of one singular undivided thing.

And is either; 1 Primary. or 2 Secondary.

1 Primary, which simply and properly is one in Number; As Heaven, Peter.

2 Secondary; Which are one in Number by some outward conjunction. As one
Church under Christ the head; One heap of Corn, etc. b


Lesser Identity, is of them which are one after a sort.

And is Inward. Outward.


Inward, is of them which agree in some inward manner or Term.

And is either, 1 Subordinate, or 2 Coordinate.

1 Subordinate, is of them which agree under the Predidicamentall Order, and is
either Conjunctive, Disjunctive.


Identity of Conjunctive subordination, is of them which in the Predicamentall
order do straight follow one another: As be all Generals with their
subordinate specials: These are called really the same; as a man, and an
Animal; for they are not two disjoined things, but only subordinate,

The Canons hereof are two.

1 They which are really the same, of them the Superior concurreth to the
constitution and the definition of the Inferior.

2 They which are really the same, fight not in anything.

Identity of disjunctive Subordination, is of them which so agree under the
predicamentall Order, that they are notwithstanding disjoined one from another,
as two diverse things.

And is either General. Or Specificall.


General, of them which agree in the General, (...), As a man and and a beast
agree in an Animal.

Specificall, which agree under one lowest special: As Peter and Paul agree in
humane Species, (...).

2 Coordinate, is of them which agree in Coordinate Terms, and is Causall.
Co-haesive.


Causall Identity is of them which agree in the causes, or caused: So in 1 Cor.
12. the distinct gifts agree in one efficient, God, etc.

Cohaesive Identity, is either of the Subject, or of the Accident.

Of the Subject, is of Accidents which are in one Subject, (...): As the
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly Office in Christ; this may also be called
the same really: so the faculty to understand, to will, etc.

Accidental Identity is of them that agree in Accidents; as a Moor, and a
Raven agree in blackness:

And it is either Primary, Secondary.


Primary, is of them which agree in Primary and properly called Accidents.

And it is either Parity. Similitude.


Parity, is the Identity of things that agree in quantity: As when two men are
of like stature, or having a like number of children.

Of Similitude.
Similitude is the Agreement of things in quality chiefly; and then also in
action, passion, and relation.

And is either Absolute. Parabolicall.


Absolute, is the agreement of things in quality, Action; Passion, Absolutely
and simply.

Parabolicall, is when the Accidents of things have a kind of Image among
themselves: As Christ's Parables, Mat. 13. etc.

The Canons hereof are four.

1 Parabolicall similitude is the most fit instrument for plain and popular
kind of Teaching: Seeing all our Doctrine proceeds from known to unknown, we
must needs learn so much the more easily, as that is easy from whence the
beginnings of learning are taken, as, are in Parables, sensible things.

2 Every like is also unlike, Simile non estidem.

3 Similitude must not be made between things too much dissevered; As some have
compared the ten Commandments with the ten plagues of Egypt.

4 A Parable must be fitted to the Principal scope and intent of the Declarer,
and not be stretched beyond this; As when Christ likeneth his coming to a
thief, etc.

Similitude is either Simple. Compound.


Simple, which is between two Terms: As a subtle wit likened to fire.

Compound, which is between four: So a Magistrate is to the Commonwealth in
War, as a Governor is to a Ship in a tempest.

Secondary Accidental Identity, is of them that agree in relations: Thus two
parts are said to be same, as two Masters, as two Sons, etc:

Outward Indentity, is when things agree in outward Terms, as in Time, Place,
Objects, Antecedents, Consequents As Moses and Balaam lived in one age, etc.

Extraordinary Identity is when things agree extraordinarily.

And it is either Essential. Hypostatical.


Essential, is in three persons of the holy Trinity which communicate in one
essence in number: Called (...).

Hypostatical, is when two complete Natures are united in one Hypostasis, or
persons, called (...), whereof there is only example in the person of our
Mediator Christ, where the Divine and Humane Nature are said to be the same in
Hypostasis: such are called (...); as they that agree in Essence, are called
(...).

Of Distinction.
Hitherto of the arising Term Consentany; Dissentany follows, whereby the
diversity of things is understood.

And is either Distinction. Opposition.


Distinction is the diversity of things without sight.

And it is either Primarily so called. Or Secondarily.


Secondary is that which is only in consideration and conceit of mind: As when
we distinguish in mind the right side of a Pillar from the left; so in light,
though it be a most simple quality, we distinguish the form of warming, and of
drying. So in the attributes of God from the Essence, and one from another; as
when we distinguish between Gods understanding, Willing, Punishing, Pardoning,
etc. Though in the Godhead there is properly no distinction indeed; but only
thus in reason.

Primarily called distinction, is, which is in things immediately without the
mind.

And is either Ordinary. Extraordinary.


Ordinary is in ordinary things, as in the Creatures.

And is Formal. a Real. b Modal. c


Formal, is of those whereof one is taken in the definition a
of another; as between Genus and Species; Species and Singulars, etc.

The Canons hereof are two.
1 They that are formally distinguished, are not as thing and thing, nor as two
separated things; as substance cannot be separate from man, etc.

2 They that are formally distinct, do yet communicate in the same nature and
properties.

Real distinction, is of them that are as two severed and b
distinct things.

The Canons are three.
1 Things that really differ, may be severed one from another, as water from
cold.

2 They are never subordinate one to another.

3 They may receive opposition and repugnancie; as, man and beast.

Real distinction is either Inward. Outward.


Inward is of them which differ in inward Terms.

And is Subordinate. Coordinate.


Subordinate, is of them which differ in subordinate or predicamental Terms.

And is either Generical Distinction. Specifical Distinction. Individual
Distinction.


Generical, is of them which differ in the general, far off or near: As, man
and virtue; For one is a substance, and the other is a quality.

Specifical, is of them which coming of one general, are separated by essential
differences, or put under sundry specials: Thus man and beast differ in
species. Also Man, and Lion, Horse, etc.

Individual, is a separation of two or more singulars, which also are said to
differ in number: As Peter, Paul, James, etc.

Coordinate distinction, is, which is made by coordinate Terms:

And is Causal. Subjective.


Causal is of them which differ in cause far off or near: As man and beast
differ in form; laughing and weeping differ in the efficient and end.

Subjective, is either of The Subject. The Accident.


Distinction of Subject, is when accidents differ in subject; as speaking and
bleating, laughing and neighing, etc.

Distinction of accidents, is of subjects that differ in accidents.

And is either Primary. Secondary.


Primary, is of them that differ in accidents primarily called.

And it is either, 1 Imparity, 2 Dissimilitude.

1 Imparity is when things differ in greater or lesser quantity; as love excels
faith, 1 Cor. 13. The soul excels the body, etc.

2 Dissimilitude is distinction of things after diverse qualities, actions,
passions, and the image of all these.

Secondary distinction of accidents, is of them that differ in relations: as
when one is a father or a master, another not.

Outward real distinction, is when things are distinguished by outward Terms,
as by Objects, Time, Place, Antecedents, Consequents, etc.

Modal distinction, is when not the things so much as the c
manners of the things are distinct; either things by their manners, or manners
by their things.

And it is either Simple. Comparative.


Simple, when manners of things are simply distinguished: so essence and
existence differ in a simple modal distinction.

Comparative, is when the same thing or quality is distinguished by more and
less. As between hot and lukewarm.

1 More and less do never vary the species; so weak faith and strong faith;
Paul a child and a man, do not differ in specie.

2 Things compared by more and less, must not be AEquivocall: As the
sharpness of voice, and of a sword, may not be compared.

3 Things compared by more or less, must be of the same species and nature; so
it is not meet to compare a Smiths saw to a Carpenters mallet; nor to ask,
which was best learned, of Galen (a Physician) or of Bartolus (a Lawyer.)

Extraordinary distinction, is in things extraordinary.

And it is either between God and the Creatures, or between the essence and
persons of the Godhead, or of the persons one from another: God differs from
Creatures more than in general, and agrees only in Analogy; in the persons
there is distinction somewhat like the Modall: For Justin Martyr calls the
persons (...).

Of Opposition.
Now follows Opposition, which is the Fighting together of two simple Terms,
so as neither the one can agree with the other, nor both of them with the
third, after one and the same manner. They agree not (...), nor (...), nor
(...), nor (...);

The Canons of Opposition are two.
1 Opposites so far forth as they are such, are together.

2 One Opposite helps the knowledge of another in that that is an Opposite.
(...).

Opposition is either Common. a Special. b


Common, is contradiction, which is the first opposition of a
a thing and not a thing.

The Canons hereof are four.
1 Contradiction is of all Oppositions the first, and so the measure of all the
rest: Cold and heat were not opposed, unless Cold were not Heat, and Heat not
Cold.

2 Contradiction is of Oppositions the simplest.

3 It wants simply all mean: For between a thing and not a thing, there is no
mean thing.

4 It is of all Oppositions the greatest or strongest.

Contradiction, is either 1 Expressed. 2 Employed.


1 Expressed, when the note of denial is plainly put to one part: As a man, and
not a man.

2 Implicit, when the note of denial being omitted, one part overthrows
another: As an unbloody Sacrifice: For that which is not bloody, is not a
Sacrifice: so the Catholic Roman Church; Christ's every where present Body;
for if it be every where, it not a body.

Special Opposition, is which is between special extremes; and is Primary. b
Secondary.


Primary, whose parts are most strongly opposed.

And is either 1 Privative. 2 Disparation. 3 Repugnancy. 4 Contrariety.


1 Privative Opposition, is the fighting betwixt habit and privation* Habit is
the presence of a thing that cleaves to some certain and fit Subject.
Privation is the absence of an habit in a Substance capable of the habit. (...)
or (...).

The Canons hereof are five.
1 A privative Opposition is near akin to Contradictory.

2 Privative Opposition admits a Mean; as, to the eye, twilight is a Mean
between light and dark; God is neither moveable, nor immovable, Privatively.

3 Privative Oppositions have extremes of the same Genus, the Habit directly,
the Privation indirectly; as sight and blindness.

4 Habit and Privation are about the same Subject: As, because an Animal only
has sight, therefore an Animal only is blind, not a stone, etc.

5 Privative Opposition requires determination of a certain time* neither can
privation be given to a Subject but after the time that by its nature and
fitness it might receive the habit; as none can be said to be bald until the
time by Nature they should have hair.

Privation is either Natural. Coming otherwise.


Natural, when that is wanting which the Subjects should Naturally have,
whether it be Accident that is due to the Subject, or a part required to the
constitution of the whole.

And it is again, either, First total, or Secondly after a sort.

Total privation, is from which there is granted no ordinary regresse to the
habit.

The Canons hereof are three.
1 Total privation is properly of dispositions, or powers only.

2 Total privation is beside Nature

3 From privation to habit no regresse is granted: As, he that is once quite
blind, can never see more, viz. ordinarily.

Privation after a sort, or in part, is when an ordinary, and easy regresse is
granted from the privation to that habit. As darkness of the night, which at
morning returns to light; so sleep to awaking, sickness to health, etc.

Privation adventitial, or coming otherwise, is of a thing outwardly cleaving;
as poverty is the privation of riches, imprisonment of liberty, etc.

2 Disparation is an opposition of specialls, arising from the division of one
General by opposite differences; as a man and a beast are disparates, or
dissevered.

The Canons hereof are three.
1 Disparates never agree to the same things as they are Disparates; So, bread
is the body of Christ, cannot be spoken substantially, but only relatively, as
bread has relation to Christ's body.

2. Complete Disparates do not concur as body and soul to make a man; so God
and man concur to one hypostaticall thing in Christ, but not essential.

3. Repugnancy is opposition either between one Disparate, and the property of
another, or between two or more properties of Disparates, and also properties of
contraries, and their antecedents and consequencies: As to feign, and to be
indeed a friend, to be elect, and to fall from the grace of God* To be bread,
and to be born of the Virgin: To be prudent, and not to be able to dissemble
anger; for this is Repugnant to prudency.

4 Contrariety is an opposition between two qualities that drive out one
another.

And it is either By it self. By Accident.


Contrariety by its self is of qualites by themselves, and absolutely taken,

The Canons hereof be eight.
1. Of contrariety, each part is positive, as hot, and cold.

2. Of contraries, both are under a certain general, near or far; As white, and
black are under the general of color.

3. Contraries are about the same subject, viz. either the general or the
special; But not always about the same in number, or those things which only
differ in Accidents: So white and black are in the same mixed body generally
taken, but not in the same body in number; As a Swan, and a Raven, etc.

4 If one of the contraries be, the other also must needs be, or at least have
possibility to be: If in nature there be fire, there must also be water.

5 Contraries cannot be in the same degree that excel; But may be in degrees
that are remiss: So what is hot in extremity, is not cold at all.

6. One contrary if it* overcomes, corrupts another.

7 The remission of one contrary often comes to pass by the weakening of the
other.

8 Contraries have contrary Causes, Effects, Properties, and next Subjects: So
Virtue is of God, Vice of the Devil, Temyerance helps health, Intemperance
hurts it, etc.

Contraties by themselves, are either Mediate. Immediate.


Mediate, which do admit a Mean, viz. of taking part with the extremes; as heat
and cold admit between, lukewarmness

Immediate, which do not admit a Mean: As Virtue and Vice.

Contrariety by accident, is which agrees unto other things for the qualities:
as fire and water are contrary, because of heat and cold.

The secondary opposition is betwixt the Relation and the Correlate.

The Canons hereof be three.
1 Relative opposition is of all the weakest.

2 Opposites relatively have no Mean, viz. which takes part of the extremes, as
Father and Son,

3, Opposites relatively are both affirmative.

And thus much of the simple Terms of the first part of Logic.
A General Sum of the first Part of Logic.
The first part of Logic is about a simple Term, and is either The first which
is either, Of a word with the Divisions. Canons.
Of a thing which is either The predicamental Row wherein is considered The
manner how things are received into the Rows. The degree, Direct which is
Primary The General. The Special.
Secondary, the singular.
Collateral, or sidelong, the difference.
The partition; for a predicament is either Primary. Of Substance. Of
Accidents. Absolute. Quantity. Quality. Action. Passion.
Of Relation.

Secondary, as When. Where. Situation. Habit.


the term about the Row, which is either Inward. The cause Efficient. Matter.
Form. End.
The caused. The Subject and Accident. The Whole and the Part.
Outward. Adherent either Adjacent which is either Connex. Circumstance.
Adjoint.
Concomitant, which is either Antecedent. Consequent.




Arising of the first, and is either Of a word, and is either The unfolding of
a word. Conjugates. Definition of a Name. Distinction of the doubtful.
Clearing of the obscure.

Of a thing, and either Resolving, and is either Definition. Division.
Conferring, and either is Consentany, as the identity of things. Dissentany,
as Diversity. Distinction. Opposition.






THE SECOND BOOK, Handling the Second Part OF LOGIC; Which is a Director of a
Compound conceit.
Of a Proposition.
THe second Part of Logic directs a compounded conceit, which is done by
Precepts concerning a Proposition.

A Proposition is a sentence wherein one thing is affirmed or denied of another.

And it is considered either In general, and is called Formal. a a In Special,
and determinatly called material. b b


In General, when the disposition of a sentence is looked a a
on nakedly, and absolutely, without any special condition of the things
themselves.

And is again either Primary, or simple, and Categorically perfect. c c
Secondary, or Compound, and Hypothetical, and Imperfect. d d


Primary or Simple, is, which in one simple Composition c c
propounds any thing to be or not to be. Of this we are to consider both the
1 Constitution, and 2 Division, and also the 3 Affections.

The Constitution of a Proposition is of the parts, and the Constitution.
disposing of the parts, of which those may be called the material, and this
the Formal.

The Parts are either the Signed, or the Signers, or Signs. Material.


The parts Signed, or Absolute, are The Antecedent, or Subject. The Consequent,
or Predicate, or Attribute.


The Subject or Antecedent, is, of which any thing is pronounced.

The Consequent or Predicate, is, that which is pronounced of the Subject; As
in this sentence, True faith does work by love: the first part, true faith, is
called the Subject, or Antecdent; the latter part, work by love, is called the
Consequent, or Attribute, or Predication.

The Canons of the Subject and Attribute are two.
1 That is the true natural subject (or antecedent) in a Proposition, which
without the proposition, even in the Nature of things is subjected; And that is
the true Natural attribute or consequent, which in the very Nature of things is
in another: and if in any Proposition that be put first, which is not first in
Nature; or last, which is not last in Nature: it is called a proposition
against Nature, and Inordinate, which must be marked and brought into order;
as, It is not good for man to be alone: Here good is not the true Antecedent or
Subject, but the Lonedom of the man, of which it is said that it is not good.

2. The Consequent or Attribute must be diverse from the Subject: For the same
is not to be pronounced of the same; as a Sword is a Sword; no though it be in
other Terms as the Gospel is glad tidings. Stibium is Antinomy.

The Signing parts of Signs be either Significative, Categorematical.
Consignificative, Syncategorematical.


A Significative Sign, is which represents to the mind a certain Antecedent and
Consequent.

And it either A Noun. A Verb.


A Noun is a simple word, signifying a certain and absolute thing without time.

The Canons of a Noun are six.
1. A Noun is a simple word, and never a whole sentence.

2. A Noun should be instituted to signify some certain thine, by institution
of God and man.

3. A Noun should be one in Unity of Signification, not equivocal.

4. A Noun should be of finite Signification.

5. A Noun of the first or right case, is properly a Noun i. e. Nominative Case.
in Latin.

6. A Noun by it self signifies not distinction of time.

A Verb is a simple word, inferring with the principal signification of Action
or Passion, Distinction of time.

The Canons hereof are four.
1. Every Verb includes in it some Noun or Signification of a certain thing: As
I speak, Includes in it Speech.

2. A Verb beside the conceit of some certain things notes fitness of avouching
of some other.

3. A Verb primarily infers with it a certain distinction of the time present.

4. A Verb of the Indicative mood is of all, most fit for Enunciative
composition and division.

A Consignificative Sign, is, which signifies no certain thing in the
Proposition; But the manner only of a thing; As, all, none, some, etc

The Formal thing in a Proposition, is A disposing of the Formal.
Parts to others: And it is either Signed or Signing.

Signed, is, the Order of the parts of the Proposition absolutely looked on in
the mind, agreeing with the order of things without the mind.

Signing is, an outward note of this Disposition and Order.

And it is either Expressed or Included in the Verb.

Expressed, when the antecedent is put with the consequent, by mean of the Verb
Substantive [ls] as* Faith without works is dead.

Included, is, when a Verb Consequent, or Attribute, is immediately added to a
Noun Antecedent or Subject, As for Peter runs, understand, Peter is running.

Thus have I shown the constitution of a Proposition. Division from the
Material.


Now follows the Division, taken partly from the Material, partly from the
Formal.

Of the Material, a Proposition is either Finite. Infinite.


Finite, is, which consists of a finite Antecedent and Consequent.

Infinite, which consists of an Infinite Term: as, Faith justifies, faith is
not without works, these are Finite. But, Peter will do any thing rather than
deny christ: This is an Infinite affirmation. Man was able not to sin, and man
was not able to sin; the first is an Infinite affirmative, the later a Negative.

Both of these is either, 1 Universal. 2 Particular, or 3 Singular.

1 Universal, whose Subject or antecedent is universal.

And is either Definite. a Indefinite. b


Definite, which has the Sign of Universality expressly a
added to the Subject: As all, every one, none, etc.

This Consignificative not all, is either Distributive. c Collective. d


Distributive, when it signifies that the Consequent may c
be distributed into those things which are contained in the Antecedent.

And it is again either distributive into Singulars of the Generals, or into
Generals of the Singulars.

Distributive into Singulars of the Generals, is which signifies that the
Consequent is distributed into every singular thing contained in the antecedent.

And it is again either Restrained, or Limited. Absolute.


Absolute, when a thing to which the note of Universality is added, is
absolutely distributed without restraint; As, every man is a living creature.

Limited, when there is a restraint included to be understood: As Psalm 8. Thou
have put all things under his feet. Yet he himself is restrained that put all
things under, 1 Cor. 15. So, No man received his Testimony, meaning no
Reprobate man, etc.

Distributive into Generals of the Singulars, is when the Consequent is
distributed not into every singular thing, but into certain Orders and Estates
of the Singulars; as, every beast was in Noah's Ark, that is, not every Singular
or Particular beast; But some singulars of all sorts of Beasts. Christ cured
every disease, that is, every kind of disease; God would all men to be saved,
that is, all sorts of men.

Collective, is when the antecedent is so taken under a ^
numbering Collection, that the Consequent cannot be distributed into the
Inferiors* As, all the Apostles were twelve, all the Evangelists were four, all
the Commandments ware ten; of this we cannot gather, Peter is an Apostle,
therefore he is twelve.

The Canons of an Universal Sign are these.
A Note or Sign of Universality is not added to the Consequent: As we cannot
say, every man is every living Creature; But here it must be excepted, if the
Consequent be a Verb Adjective; for we may say God preserves all men, Christ
redeemed all the Elect, etc.

2 Adverbs that have the place of a Noun, make also universal propositions: as,
Never do the Godly want affliction: No where are the Saints free from troubles?

2 Every Note Collective, as also Distributive into Generals of the Singulars,
Imperfectly, and Secondarily, do b (...).
make an Universal Proposition.

An Indefinite Universal, is which has an Universal Subject (or Antecedent)
without Note.

The Canons hereof are two.
1. The chief force and use of Indefinites is in Propositions of the Idea: That
is, in such, as where the Universal Subject is taken absolutely: As, The Lords
Supper is a Sacrament, Man is the Noblest Creature, The soul of man is
immortal, etc.

2. There is also an use of Indefinites; to signify that the Consequent is in
the antecedent, for the most part, though not always (...) As, The Cretians be
liars, Mothers are too much Cockerers of their children, etc,

2. A Particular is, which to a particular antecedent adds a particular Note:
as, Some men fear God, Few are Elected, not many are Called, etc.

3. A Singular is, which has an Antecedent singular or undivided: as, John
Baptist is not the Christ; This man is a true Christian, etc.

The Canons hereof are two.
1 When a Note of Universality is added to a singular Antecedent, it means
nothing but a Collection of singulars: as all Pharoahs were Tyrants. All Herod's
were cruel.

2. To the Antecedent of a singular Proposition, may not be added a denial
Infinite.

From the Formal, a Proposition is divided into Affirming. Division from the
Formal.
Denying.


Affirmative is when the Consequent is joined with the antecedent.

The Affirmation is before, and more worthy than the Negation.

Denying or Negative, is which divides the Consequent from the Antecedent, As,
Good works do not justify: A man is not a stone.

The Canons are two.
1 That a Proposition may be a Negative, it is necessary that the Particle of
denying be either set before the whole Proposition: as, No Elect are damned; or
be immediately added to the Coupler, and Verb adjective that has the force of
the Coupler, or Band; as, Marriage is not a Sacrament; Works justify not.

2 Every true Negation hangs on a true Affirmation: For it could not rightly be
said, Works justify not, unless it were true, that Faith only justifies.

Both of these (Affirmative and Negative) is either Pure. Modal.


Pure, is, wherein the Consequent is purely disposed with the antecedent,
without the express manner of disposition.

Modal, is, which is affected with a certain mood or manner of disposition.

And it is either Primary. a Secondary. b


Primary, is, which is affected with some Primary manner, a 1 (...). 2 (...).
as be those four. 1 Necessary, or needs. 2 Impossible. 3 Possible. 3 (...). 4
(...).
4 Contingent, or perhaps.


1 As, It is necessary that a Creature be finite. The Elect must needs be
saved. 2 It is impossible that God should be created. 3 It is possible for him
that fights to win the victory. 4 It is contingent for a man to sit, for he
may also not sit.

The Canons of those Modal propositions are five.
1 There is more use of those Modals among the Greeks than the Latins.

2 No other Modes (or manners) are here looked on than Formal, that is such as
affect the disposition of the Consequent with the Antecedent.

3 A Modal Proposition has the manner for the Consequent indirect, and by
Analogy so called: in every Modal Proposition, there are two things, the
Saying, and the manner; as in this, It is impossible that the Elect should be
deceived. That the Elect should be deceived, is a saying; impossible is the
manner; the saying is put in stead of the Antecedent, the manner in stead of
the consequent, but this must narrowly be taken.

4 The quantity of a Modal proposition is esteemed partly by the saying, partly
by the manner; but chiefly and properly by the saying, as that which has the
quantity of multitude. Secondarily by the manner, as that which has the
quantity of time; Necessary has the force of an Adverb universally affirming;
as, It is necessary for a man to be reasonable, that is, a man is always
reasonable; Impossible, has the force of an universal Negative, as, It is
impossible for a man to be a Stone, that is, a man is never a stone: Possible
and contingent, have the force of particulars, as sometimes, for the most part,
etc.

5 The quality or affirmation and Negation of a modal proposition is esteemed
by the manner: as, It is impossible for the Elect to perish. This is a
Negative: It is necessary that Christ should be true man, this is affirmative
by reason of these Manners, Necessary and Impossible.

Secondary Modals which have a secondary manner, are either 1 Exclusive. b
2 Exceptive. 3 Restrictive.


Exclusive, which has an exclusive significative word, as only, alone, etc.

And it is Exclusive either of the Antecedent or Subject. Consequent.


Exclusive of the antecedent, is, which with an exclusive word set before it,
excludes or shuts out other antecedents from participation of the same
consequent: as, Only faith justifies; Only God is uncreated.

The Exclusive of the antecedent, excludes not concomitants, or them that
accompany the same: as only the Father is true God, excludes not the
concomitant, the Son and the holy Ghost, but false gods, idols, etc.

Exclusive of the consequent, is, which by a sign of Exclusion put between
antecedent and consequent, excludes other consequents from the same antecedent,
as, Reprobates do evil only; Carthusians do only eat fish.

2 Exceptive, is, which consists of an excepting particle, as Except, Besides,
Unless, etc.

The Canons be four.
1 In an Exceptive proposition, always the antecedent is excepted from
participation of the consequent, and not contrary as was in the Exclusive.

2 The antecedent excepted must be contained under the Excepter: For it is
foolish to say, Every man, except a beast, is able to laugh, because a beast is
not contained under a man.

3 The antecedent from which the exception is made, must be an Universal, that
it may be distributed: As it is foolish to say, Some man except Judas is
elected.

4 That which is excepted should be straiter than that from which it is
excepted; For it is vain to say, A man, except a man, runs.

3 Restrictive is, which consists of restraint or limitation; as far forth as,
in respect of, according to, etc.

Limitation is the determination of that according to which the Consequent
agrees with the Antecedent, or not agrees.

And is General. Special.


General, which is conceived with general terms.

Special, which is conceived with special Terms, that is, which pertain to any
thing in special, and properly.

And it is either of One Noun. Diverse.


Of one Noun, is, which limits the thing by it self, that the Consequent may be
understood to agree essentially: As, A man, as he is a man, has reason.

Of a diverse Noun, which limits the Antecedent by something diverse from the
Antecedent.

And it is either Essential. a Accidental. b


Essential, which is done by an essential term. a


And is either General. Partial.


General, when it is limited by his Genus: as, a man, as he is a body, is
local; as he is a living thing, he is nourished; as he is Animal, he has
sense, etc.

Partial, when a thing is limited by some part Essential, or Integral: As, A
man touching his soul is Immortal: Sacraments touching their matter are
visible, touching their form are invisible; Christ as man died, etc.

Accidental is which limits a thing Accidentally.

And is Inward. Outward.


Inward, when a thing is limited by some Inward accident either absolute or
Relative: as, Fire, as it is hot, burns; not as it is dry: God wills
hardening of sinners; not as it is sin, but as it is a punishment.

Outward, when a thing is limited by some outward comparison and respect; as
when a mean man is said to be great in respect of a dwarf, Isaac was a Son in
respect of Abraham, and a Fat^her in respect of Jacob; Faith justifies as it
has reference to Christ.

The Canons of limitation are six.
1. A Consequent or Attribute contradictory, can with no Limitation, be made to
agree with the antecedent (...); False therefore are the Popish Limitations to
prove that Accidents may be without the Subject in their Transubstantiated
Sacrament; For it implies a contradiction.

2. Every lawful Limitation should have possibility to be referred to some
form of Limitation, delivered by the Art of Logic,

3. A Limitation should be made by that which agreeably is in the antecedent,
or Consequent, whether it be in it absolutely, or Relatively.

4. The manner Limiting in part should be distinct in deed and words, from the
Limited in the antecedent and Consequent.

5. Limitation should be perspicuous, casie to be explained.

6. Limitation in a diverse respect, pertains to the antecedent and
Consequent of the proposition Limited.

The Affection of propositions either Consentany. a 3 Affections.
Dissentany. b


Consentany, whereby propositions agree together,

And is Equal valor (...) a a
Conversion, b


The Canons of equal valor are either General. Special.


General, which pertain as well to the Pure as to the a
Modal, though chiefly to the Pure.

And they be ten.
1. Equal Valor of Propositions which is taken from the Signs of quantity, is
showed by the signification of the Signs and their mutual correspondence: These
therefore are equivalent, Not every man is elected, and some man is not
elected; there is no man that is not a sinuer, and every man is a sinner. Not
any man is good, and, No man is good, etc.

2. Diversity of words takes not away the equal value of sense, when the things
signified by the words in the sense and meaning of the Speaker are the same:
These therefore are equipollent, Bread is the body of Christ, and bread is the
Communion of Christ's body; For its Christ's intendment, as Paul expounds him.

3. Equivalents should have Antecedent and consequent the same indeed: The
transplacing of antecedents and Consequents changes the sense of propositions;
For these are not equivalent, to say, Bread is Christ's body, and in bread is
Christ's body, or Christ's body is in the bread; nor these, Bread is Christ's
body, and, let Bread be Christ's body, etc.

4. Of Equivalents, one may be more forcible and significant then another; and
yet the agreement of sense remain safe: As these agree in sense, Bread is
Christ's body, and read is an holy sign of Christ's body; Though the first has a
more forcible signification.

5. A Proposition of this sign [all] having limitation, is of equal value with
the particular, when the limitation is taken away: as, All men that believe
shall be saved, and, only some men shall be saved.

6 A proposition of the sign All, distributing into general of the singulars,
is of equal value also with a particular; as, God would all men to be saved;
and, God would some of every sort of men to be saved.

7 A proposition of the sign All collective, is equal to an indefinite; as,
All the outward senses are five; and there are five outward senses. Note also,
that in the Hebrew, not all, is equivalent to none, as Psalm. 143. Not all
living shall be justified, i. e. no living.

8 Indefinites sometime are equivalent to universals, sometime to particulars;
to those in a matter necessary, to these in a contingent.

9 The affirming of a privation, and denial of an habit, are equivalent in an
hable subject; as, He is not just, therefore he is unjust; this is true in a
man, not in an infant, nor in a stone.

10 He that puts one eqvivalent, puts also the other; and contrary, He that
takes away one, takes away the other: so when Christ says, Few are chosen, he
says in effect, All are not chosen.

The special Canons which pertain to the Modals only are five.
1 Propositions of necessary and impossible are equivalent when they have the
manner of the same spoken of a diverse quality, as, It is necessary that
offenses arise; and, it is impossible that offenses should not arise.

2 Propositions of necessary and contingent are equivalent when they have a
diverse quality in a word and in manner; It is necessary for the Elect to abide
in Gods grace; It is not contingent for the Elect to abide in Gods grace.

3 Propositions of impossible and possible are eqvivalent when they have the
saying of the same, and the manner of a diverse quality; It is impossible for
the Elect to perish; It is not possible for the Elect to perish.

4 Propositions of possible and contingent, in the Greek, phrase are often
equivalent, when the manners considered in themselves import a diverse
signification.

5 In Modals secondarily so called, an exclusive in a necessary matter is
eqvivalent to an universal; as, The elect only are saved, and all the elect are
saved.

Conversion, is the agreement of two propositions by (...).
transposing of the parts; and it is either 1 simple, or 2 by accident, or 3 by
counterplacing. 1 Simple, is the mutual change of the Antecedent and
consequent, the quantity and quality abiding the same; first, and properly
about an universal denyer, and particular affirmer: 2 And by reason of the
matter, about an universal affirm, necessary and reciprocal; as, No
unbeleever eats Christ's flesh; therefore none that eats Christ's flesh is an
unbeleever.

2 By accident is the mutual change of antecedent and consequent, the quality
abiding, but the quantity being changed, viz. the universal into a particular
affirmant; as, Every man is a living creature; therefore, some living creature
is a man.

3 By counterplacing is the mutual transplacing of the consequent and
antecedent, the quantity abiding, but the quality changed, viz. about an
universal affirmant; as* All that are ordained to life do believe; therefore
they that believe not, are not ordained to life, Acts 13.

The Canons of conversion are nine, of which the first four are general, the
other pertain to the Modais.
1 That which is to be converted, must have a proper connection, understood
without any ambiguity; these therefore are not to be turned; Christ is a vine;
Bread is Christ's body, etc.

3 The whole antecedent of that which is converted, must be made the consequent
of the converter, not maimed or cut off.

4 In converting, the obique Cases must be made light, as not because, Some
tree is in the Garden, therefore some Garden is in the Tree; but thus;
therefore something that is in the Garden is a Tree.

5 Conversion of Modals is made by change of those extremes which are in the
saying, the manner always abiding fast, and the quality of the saying* kept.

6 There is no other conversion in Modals then simple and by accident.

7 Propositions of the manner necessary are converted so as the pure simply,
when they are universal negatives, or particular affimatives; and by accident*
when they are universal affirmants, though so also they be simply converted;
as, It is necessary that no man be a stone, is converted simply, therefore it
is necessary that no stone be a man.

8 Propositions of possible are converted as the former of necessary.

9 Propositions of contingent, if they be affirmative, are converted as the
former, but negatives not so; for particulars are converted simply, but
universals no way.

Thus much of the consentany affections.

Dissentany is the opposition of Propofitions.

Opposition, is the fight of two Propositions according to ^
the disposition, in affirming and denying.

The Canons hereof be four.
1 Opposition must have the same antecedent and consequent understood without
ambiguity; as, It is not good for man to be alone; it is good for man to be
alone; here is no opposition; for the one is meant simply, the other
respectively.

2 Opposition, must be (...) in the same respect, i. e. the consequent must be
disposed with the antecedent according to the same part and nature of the
antecedent, as, Christ was before Abraham; Christ was not before Abraham: the
first is Time, meant as he is God: the other, as he is man; so here is no
opposition.

3 Opposition must be (...) unto the same: as the Sun is darkened, the Sun is
not darkened; by limitation both those are true, and not opposite; for in
respect of our sight the Sun is darkened, but in it self the Sun is not
darkened.

4 Opposition must be in respect of the same time; otherwise both may be true;
as, Paul was at Rome, Paul was not at Rome, viz. at the same time.

Opposition is either Contradictory. a Contrary. b


Contradictory (...), which is of perpetual dis-junction; a
and it is principal or less principal.

Principal, is the fight of Propositions both in quality and quantity, as is
between an universal affirmant, and a particular negant; also between a
particular affirmant, and universal negant; as, All men are good, Some men are
not good, etc.

Less principal, is between two singulars, two indefinites, and two immediate
universals, fighting in quality only; as Peter was at Rome: Peter was not at
Rome. A man is good; A man is not good, etc.

The Canons of contradiction are three.
1 Contradiction, is of all oppositions the first, the most perfect, and most
fighting, and therefore the measure of them.

2 Contradiction, is of eternal dis-junction, so as it is impossible for both
parts to be together true or false.

3 Contradiction wants all mean.

Contrariety is opposition between two universals, viz. them whose antecedent
or subject is manifest without the consequence; as, Every man is wise; no man
is wise.

2 Two contraries can never be together true, though they may be together false.

The opposition of Modals has three Canons.
1 Contradictory Modals are, which have the same manner of diverse qualities,
but the saying of the same quality; as, It is not possible for the elect to be
deceived, It is possible for the elect to be deceived.

2 Contrary Medals are, two universals having the same universal manner
affirmant; but the saying in one denying, in another affirming; as, It is
possible to be; It is possible not to be.

3 In Exclusives (which are Modals secondary) the particular negative added to
the only manner exclusive, makes the opposition: as, Only the elect are
reconciled to God; not only the elect are reconciled, etc.

Hitherto of a simple proposition: now follows the compound, which consists
of a sense or sentence compounded.

And it is either 1 Expressed. m 2 Implied. n


1 Expressed, which has the express note of composition. ^


And it is either by conjunction, or particular relatives.

Compounded by Conjunction, is, whose parts are tied by a Grammatical
Conjunction.

And it is either Connexive. Separative.


Connexive, whose parts are tied by a connection, and is Copulative. Conditional.


Copulative, whose conjunction is copulative; as, Love God and thy brother.

The Canons are four.
1 A Copulative is affirmed and denied by reason of the i. e. Proposition.
conjunction copulative, whereto if a negation be added, it always makes a
negative; We are justified by faith, and not by works, etc. this is
affirmative. Not by faith and works are we justified; this is negative.

2 The whole copulative proposition is esteemed by reason of the conjunction
copulative.

3 To the truth of a copulative, there is required the truth of either part;
and if one part be false, the proposition wholly is false.

4 Copulation noting the time, is to be taken in respect of one and the same
time; otherwise the copulation will be false; as, Paul was at Rome, and saw
Jerusalem. This is a deceitful copulation, for both were not at one time; but
at several times both were true.

Conditional, is, whose conjunction is conditional, as, If thou sin, thou shall
die.

The Canons are six.
1 A conditional has two parts, whereof the first is called the antecedent,
which contains the condition; the latter the consequent.

2 A conditional puts nothing in esse, and only suspendeth the sentence, or
sense of the mind, unless the manner and condition be put, which the
antecedent designeth.

3 All the truth and force of it, is in the union and coherence of the parts,
whereby the consequent rightly follows from the antecedent.

4 The measure of it is some simple composition, to which it must be resolved,
that the force of it may appear, and the reason of the connection be manifest.

5 The affirmation hangs on the affirmation of the condition; therefore it is
then Negative, when the denial is put before the conjunction If, not when it is
put after: So, If the Lord keep not the city, the Keepers watch in vain: this
is affirmative, not negative.

6 A conditional, having an impossible condition annexed, is equivalent to a
simple denial: as, If the sands can be numbered, Abraham's seed shall be
numbered, meaning they shall not be numbered.

Separative, which has a separative conjunction: and is either Disjoined. a
Discrete. b


Disjoined, whose conjunction is disjunctive; as, either a
we are justified by faith, or by works.

The Canons hereof be five.
1 The disjoined parts of a proposition must be subordinate; it is therefore
vain to say, Either it is a living creature, or a man.

2 The affirmation or negation is esteemed by the disjunctive conjunction
only, whereto there must needs be added a negation, if the sentence must be
negative.

3 For the truth of the disjunctive, it is enough if one part be true.

4 That therefore is false which has no part true, and wherein taking away
one, another member can be given which is true: as, Either the Pope is head of
the Church, or it has no head; both are false; and a third is true, Christ is
the head, Colos. 1.

5 When the disjunctive opposition is immediate, and either member is removed,
it makes the rest requivalent exclusively; as, Either we are justified by
faith, or by works; but works are removed, Romans 3. Therefore this exclusive
sentence is true, Only by faith are we justified.

A discrete sentence, is, which has a discrete conjunction; b
as, although, yet, notwithstanding, etc.

The Canons are two.
1 To the truth of a discretive is required the truth of both parts.

2 False therefore is the discretive when any one part is false; as, Christ's
humane nature is not eternal, yet it is every where present.

Compounded of particular relatives, is, which has notes of comparison
according to quality, quantity, time and place: as, Such as the Shepherd is,
such is the sheep. He is as honest as he is learned* Where the treasure is,
there is the heart. Then men fast when the Bridegroom is gone, etc.

2 An employed compound sentence, is, which has no express note of composition.

The Canons are two*
1 The truth or falsehood of an employed sentence, wholly depends upon the
manner of the consequence, or knitting of the antecedent or consequent; as,
They that are guilty of Christ's body, they eat Christ, body; this is a false
compound proposition; for there is no connection of parts.

2 As much as may be, this proposition is to be reduced to a mere simple.

Hitherto of a proposition common, called formal; now follows a proposition
in special, called material; which is determined to a certain condition of
things antecedent and consequent.

It is divided partly by the words, partly by the things, and partly by both
together.

First therefore every proposition is either Dark. Clear.


Dark, when the sense needs Interpretation; Interpretation is the unfolding
of the sense or sentence, and bringing of it to clearness.

The darkness of a sentence is cured by six Canons; According to which every
lawful Interpretation is to be made.

1 A dark proposition must first of all be called back to a certain Method of
some kind of discipline, and judged by the principles and analogy of the
things delivered therein.

2 Interpretation is to be made according to the first intent and scope of the
Speaker or Writer.

3 The order of the context is carefully to be weighed, and interpretation to
be made by the knitting of the antecedents and consequents.

4 Like places are to be compared together, and by conference and agreement the
sense to be set down.

5 Let the agreeing expositions of famous Interpreters be looked unto.

6 The dark places are to be expounded by the more clear, and not the dark by
as dark.

A clear proposition, is, whose sense is manifest by its self, and needs no
interpretation.

Again each of them is either True. False.


True, is, which agrees to the composition and division of things without the
mind, or which affirms or denies as the thing is.

And it is either Connominative Synonimical. Denominative Paronimicall.


Synomina, be those that have a common name, and in regard thereof, one and the
same essential definition.

Paronima, be those that be derived, and have their denomination from others.

Connominative, is, in which the consequent is spoken of the aatecedent
connominatively, Synonimice.

And it is either Notional, Or Real.


Notionall, in which the second Notion is avouched of the first; as Animal is
the Genus, Man is the species, etc.

Real, is, in which the consequent Synonimicall Real is disposed with the
Antecedent, As, A man is an animal, Faith justifies.

And it is Ordinary. Or Extraordinary.


Ordinary, in which the consequent is ordinarily disposed with the antecedent:
As, A man is an animal; Peter is a man; Whiteness is a Color.

Whatsoever is said of the consequent by a Synonimical attribution, the same
may also be said of the antecedent.

Extraordinary, is, in which there is a disposition of the Consequent
connominative, with an extraordinary antecedent, viz. the Person of the
Mediator Christ; as, Christ is God, Christ is man.

Denominative (or paronimical) attribution, is, which consists of an attribute
(or consequent) paronimicall, as when either difference, or part, or accident,
or circumstance, and. is spoken of the Subject, or antecedent; as, A man is
reasonable; a man is bodied, is headed, is booted, is Temporal, is Local, etc.
So, Christ is Eternal, is the Mediator, King, Priest, Prophet; Christ has
redeemed us with his blood, etc.

Each attribution, as well connominative, as denominative,

Is either Proper. Improper.


Proper, is, whose disposition and words are proper.

And it is Necessary, or Contingent.

Necessary, in which the Consequent is necessarily disposed with the antecedent.

The degrees hereof are three 1 (...). Universal. 2 (...). Immediate or of it
self. 3 (...). Reciprocal.


(...); Or Universal, is, when the Consequent is attributed to an universal
antecedent.

And it is either of the Subject or Antecedent. Adjacent.


(...), (or Universal) of the Subject, is, when the consequent agrees to all
contained under the subject, viz. Specials or Singulars: as, an animal has
sense, this is spoken of man and beast, as also of all singular men and beasts.
Therefore it is an attribution universal, ((...)) by reason of the subject.

Universal ((...)) of the adjacent, is, when the consequent is attributed to
the antecedent without any exception of time or place: as, Every man is
reasonable; this is true in all time and places.

(...), Or Immediate, is when the consequent is in the antecedent immediately.

And it is either of The First Manner. The Second Manner.


Of the first manner, is, when the consequent is of the Essence or definition
of the antecedent: As, a man is a living creature, a man is reasonable,
Melchizedeck was a man, etc.

Of the second manner, when the antecedent is of the Essence or definition of
the consequent; and this is either principal, or less principal.

Principal, when an accident perfectly proper is given to the subject: As, a
man laugheth, weepeth, learneth, etc.

Less principal, when an accident imperfectly proper, is given to the subject;
as a man is risible, and every risible thing is a man: This is the highest
degree of necessity; noted therefore with two titles, (...) and (...).

(...), Universe, respects the consequent, and signifies that it is wholly,
and every whit drawn up of the antecedent, so as it is neither straighter, nor
larger than it. It is not therefore (...) when I say, A man moves. For moving
is also without a man, and is not all contained in him; nor is it (...) when I
say, A man is learned; for this consequent is more narrow than a man, and
extends not so large; Seeing there are many men that are not learned.

The other term (...), 1 Respects the subject or antecedent, and says that
that is the only and sole thing, of which the consequent is strictly spoken, so
as there is no other subject to whom it is rather than to this, as there is no
subject wherein laughter rather and nearer is; than a man.

The Canons of necessary propositions are six.
1 A Necessary proposition, is not only affirmant but also negant: As, Christ's
body is not every where; A man is not a stone. As in affirmatives it is (...);
so in Negatives it is (...), in none at all.

2 Of necessary avouching, some is pure, some mixed of necessity, and
contingencie: As, A man laugheth: this is mixed.

3 In pure Necessaries the couple or word Is, is freed from all difference of
time or place, and from all existence.

4 A necessary consequent can in no respect, limitation, or Distinction be
denied of the antecedent: as, A body is finite.

5 The latter degree of necessary propositions, is always more perfect than the
former which it includes: So a perfect (...) includes a (...), and a (...)
includes both a (...), and a (...).

6 Necessary attributions have the force of principles or beginnings; A
Contingent proposition, is, wherein the consequent is contingently, or
changeably disposed with the antecedent.

The Canons hereof are three.
1 A Contingent attribution has such a consequent as may without contradiction
be separated from the antecedent, when it is affirmative, or be given to it
when it is a Negative.

2 Contingent propositions chiefly consist of common accidents, and integral
parts less principal, and of adherents: As, A man is white, is bearded,
booted, etc.

3 Contingent propositions are said to be probable, when the truth of them is
neither by sense nor by other reason manifest unto us; For that is probable,
which when it can neither certainly be affirmed, nor certainly be denied,
inclines the assent unto the one part.

An improper attribution, is, in which the consequent is improperly disposed
with the antecedent.

And it is either by reason of The Disposition* a The Words. b


By reason of the disposition, is, when proper words being a
retained, the consequent (...) for any inward or Essential ^lation or Union.

And it is either Common, Or Mystical.


Common, is, when an outward consequent is given to an antecedent for some
vulgar and common Union or Relation: these Relations are of four sorts.

1 The Relation of the cause to the effect; As, The Sun is said to be hot,
because it causes heat; the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation.

2 The Relation or Union of place, and cleaving to; as when Iron is said to
burn for the fire united unto it.

3 The Relation or representation; as when the title of the Prince is given to
his Ambassador.

4 The Union of consent and indissoluble society; as when the wife has the
titles and dignity of her husband, as to be called Princess, Prophetess,
Doctoresse, etc.

Mystical, is, in which the outward consequent is given to the antecedent for
mystical or holy relation.

And it is either Typical, Or Sacramental.


Typical, when for the certainty of the representation, that is given to the
Type which belongs to the Antitype. These attributions are simple or compound.

Simple, as when that which is due to Christ only, is given to his Type and
Figure; as of David it is said, Psalm. 16. Thou shall not suffer thy holy One to
see corruption; Of Solomon, I will establish his house for ever, 2 Samuel 7.
These are fulfilled in Christ alone.

Compound, when partly they agree to the type, partly to the antitype, as, thou
shall not break a bone of him, Exodus 12. Joh. 19.

Sacramental, is, in which for the Union Sacramental, and certainty of sealing
up, the thing signed or propriety thereof is given to the holy sign: As,
Circumcision is a Covenant, the Lamb is a Passover, Sacrifices are expiations
of sins, Bread is Christ's body, Baptism is the laver of Regeneration, Bread is
the Communion of Christ's body, etc.

Improper by reason of the words, is, in which a word is ^
transferred from the Native signification to some other: As when we say, The
Woods do sing, The Seas clap their hands, The Fields laugh, and other
figurative speeches.

A false attribution, is, which answers not to the composition and division
of things out of the mind; and it is either wholly false, or false in part;
also either necessarily, or contingently false.

And thus much of the second part of Logic.
A Summary View of the Second Part of Logic.
The 2d. part of Logic is about a proposition, which is considered either
Commonly, and so is Simple, in which the Constitution of Parts Signed
Antecedent, or subject. Consequent, or attribute.
Signing Significative Noun. Verb.
Consignificative.
Disposition of parts which is either, Sign Signing Express. Employed.


Division from the Material Finite both either Infinite both either Universal
Secondary Definite. Indefinite


Formal Affirming Each either Denying Each either Pure Modal Primary Secondary
Exclusive Exceptive Restrictive.




Affection Consentany Equivalence Conversion
Dissentany, opposition, either Contradictory. Contrary.


Specially and conditionally, and is Compounded Expressed by. Employed
Conjunction Connexive Copulative. Conditional.
Separative Disjoined. Discrete.

Relative particles.

Dark Both is either Clear Both is either True Connominative Notionall. Real
Ordinary. Extraordinary.

False Denominative, And both of them either Proper Necessary. Contingent.
Improper by the Disposition. Common. Mystical. Typical. Sarcamental

Words.








THE THIRD BOOK, Handling the Third Part OF LOGIC; Which is the Director of
DISCOURSE.
Of a Syllogism.
THE third part of Logic is busied in directing The definition of Discourse.
the Discourse.

Discourse is an act of the mind of man, moving it self forward from a known
thing to an unknown, by a fit collation of things former and latter.

And it is either Inferring. Ordering.


Inferring Discourse is an action of man's mind by certain premised propositions
proving another proposition, or improving it, by help of the Precepts of a
Syllogism.

A Syllogism is considered, either (...).
Commonly. a Specially, in certain conditions of matter. b


A Syllogism commonly considered, is either perfectly so a
called, or imperfectly.

Perfectly called, is, the disposition of three Propositions, wherein from the
two former and better known, a third A Perfect Syllogism.
more unknown or doubtful is fitly inferred, and gathered.

In this are to be considered the Constitution. Division.


A Syllogism is constituted of the Material. m Formal. n


The Material, is either 1. Simple, or 2. Compound. m


1. Simple are the Terms into which at last the Syllogism is resolved.

The Term is either the utmost or the mean.

The utmost or extreme, is that which is put both in the Conclusion and in the
Premises. And it is greater, or lesser.

The greater or Major, is the Consequent of the Conclusion, Major.
always to be put in the first Proposition.

The lesser or Minor, is the Antecedent or Subject of the Minor.
Conclusion, always to be put in the second Proposition.

The Mean, is, by means whereof the extremes are disposed Mean.
together.

The compound matter of a Syllogism, is a Proposition.

A Proposition, is either inferring or inferred.

Inferring, is, which infers the Conclusion: called therefore Premises: and
it is either the major or minor.

The Major, or greater, is, in which the greater extreme is disposed with the
Mean.

The Minor, or lesser, is, in which the less extreme is disposed with the
Mean.

The Inferred, is that which is gathered from the Premises.

The Formal of a Syllogism, is the fit disposition of the ^
Mean with the extremes.

The disposition of the Mean arises from the finding of it out.

The finding out of the Mean, consists in two things. 1. The foreknowledge of
the Conclusion. 2. The Collation of the extremes one with another.

1. The foreknowledge of the Conclusion, is either Simple. a Compound. b


Simple, is, when the nature and propriety is foreknown a
of both the extremes, as well the Antecedent as the Consequent.

Of this Foreknowledge there are three Canons.
1. Let the Word or Voice of both extremes be diligently examined, what it is,
and of what sort; and if it be doubtful, let it be carefully distinguished, and
that distinction be presupposed in place of a Principle, as well for
confirmation as refutation.

2. Let it be observed, whether the extremes of the conclusion be universal or
singular.

3. Let the causes, proprieties, and whole definition of both extremes be set
down, either implicitly or expressly, as a certain and necessary Principle of
the confirmation and refutation to come.

The Compound foreknowledge of the conclusion, is, when the nature, quality,
and quantity thereof is considered.

The Canons hereof are seven:
1. Let the conclusion or state of the controversy be rightly informed.

2. Let a compound or Hypothetical, never be put in the place of a conclusion,
but only a Simple or Categorical.

3. That conclusion is more easily proved, which may be concluded in many
figures and moods; And that which can be but in few, is harder to be proved.

4. An universal affirmative is hardly proved, not easily refuted.

5. An universal negative is easily proved, hardly refelled.

6. A particular affirmant is more easily proved, more hardly refelled.

7 A particular negant is easy to prove, most hard to refute.

2. Now follows the taking of the mean by Collation of the extremes.

The mean or medium, is either Perfectly so called or Imperfectly.

Perfectly called, is that simple Term which being taken from the nature of
both extremes, either knitteth or disjoyneth them one with another.

Hereof, are three Canons.
1. Every mean is taken from the Terms of both extremes in the conclusion, as
well the natural, as the repugnant Terms; therefore he that would find a
medium, must mind the general, the special, the causes, the accidents, the
parts, the cognata, the opposites of both Terms in the conclusion.

2. What manner of mean is required to make a Syllogism of this or that
quantity, the Vowel Letters in the Modes of every Figure, do evidently show.

3. The mean, though it may be taken from the part of the antecedent as well as
of the consequent, yet that is counted more noble which is drawn from the
nature of the consequent; As for example, a mean is to be found to prove this
conclusion, Every man is an Animal; mind the nature of this consequent Animal,
and from it take the property of it, which is sense; this agrees with both
Terms, and is an excellent mean, or Argument to prove the conclusion, thus,
Every thing that has sense is an Animal. Every man has sense; therefore every
man is an Animal.

4. One and the same mean for a diverse respect of the Antecedent or
consequent, may be referred to diverse places of Inventiom; as for example, A
man has sense, because he is an Animal: This Argument in respect of the
Antecedent man, is from the place of the genus; but in respect of the
consequent, it is from the place of the subject; for an Animal is the proper
subject of sense.

5. Store of Means or Arguments is gotten chiefly two ways: 1. By deducing both
extremes one after another through the places of invention, as well contingent
as necessary. 2. By discerning the principal means from the less principal; for
example, take the consequent of thy opposed conclusion particularly, and lead
it through the contingent places; argue and reason from the Notation of it, the
likes, equales, conjugates, and the other contingent titles of places: which
are at least 16. now thou have so many Means. Then come to the others
storehouse of necessary places; and reason from the Genus, the difference, the
subject and accident, the proper, the causes, and the other titles of necessary
places, which are at least 17. Then do the like about the Antecedent of the
proposed conclusion; and thus may thou have for one Conclusion fifty Means or
Arguments: but not the store of Arguments is to be respected so much as the
weight or force of them; three or four sound Arguments are enough to prove any
common Conclusion.

The Mean imperfectly so called, is when a Testimony, or speech of any Author
is taken to prove the conclusion. This mean is called (...) inartificial,
because testimonies want artificial force to prove any thing of themselves. It
is called also the Place from authority, that is, the dignity of the speaket.

And thus much of the constitution of a Syllogism; Now follows the division
of it.

Of the three Figures of Syllogisms,
A Syllogism is divided by three Figures.

A Figure is the conformation of a Syllogism, according to the certain
situation of the Mean term, and certain manners (or modes) of quantity and
quality; Figura est (...). Alexand.

A mode or manner, is a lawful constitution of Propositions in every figure,
according to the quality and quantity.

And it is either Principal. Less Principal.


Principal, is, when the Propositions are general, that is, joined with
universals, or indefinite, or particular.

Less Principal, is, when the premises are singular.

The Figures of Syllogisms are three:
The first Figure, is, in which the mean or middle Term is the Antecedent
(subject or foregoer) in the major or first proposition: and the consequent
(Attribute or follower) in the minor or second Proposition.

The Modes of this Figure are four, called Barbara* Celarent, Darii, Ferio;
these are but words of Art, and serve for no other meaning then that the vowel
Letters in them denote the quality and quantity of the Propositions; a notes
an universal affirmative; e an universal negative. i Notes a particular
affirmative, and o notes a particular negative.

As may be seen in the examples following. Barbara.
Every sinner is subject to Gods wrath. Every man is a sinner: therefore, Every
man is subject to Gods wrath.
Celarent.
No sinner deserves Gods favor. Every man is a sinner: therefore, No man
deserves Gods favor.
Darii.
All sin is to be shunned. Some pleasure is sin: therefore, Some pleasure is to
be shunned.
Ferio.
No sin gives a man true comfort: Some pleasure is sin: therefore, Some
pleasure gives a man no true comfort.


A Singular Syllogism.
The promised Messiah ought to die for the sins of the world. Jesus Christ is
the promised Messiah: Therefore, He ought to die for the sins of the world.


The second Figure, is, in which the Mean or middle term is in both the
Premises put in the place of the Consequent.

The Modes of this Figure are also four, Called, Cesare, Camestres, Festino,
Baroco. Cesare.
No true Christian loves this worlds good: Every covetous man loves this
worlds good: therefore, No covetous man is a true Christian.
Camestres.
All righteousness pleases God. No faith without works pleases God:
therefore, No faith without works is righteousness.
Festino.
No true Worship displeases God: Some prayer displeases God: therefore, Some
prayer is not true worship.
Baroco.
All virtue deserves praise: Some love deserves not praise: therefore, Some
love is not virtue.


Singular Syllogisms.
Jupiter Belus was an Assyrian. Jupiter of the Poets was not an Assyrian:
therefore, Jupiter of the Poets, is not Jupiter Belus.
Jude Iscariot was a Traitor. Jude that wrote the Epistle, was not a Ttaytor:
therefore, Jude that wrote the Epistle, was not Jude Iscariot.


The third Figure is, in which the Mean or Medium is put 3. Figure.
in the place of the Antecedent in both premises.

The Modes of this Figure are six.
Called, Darapti, Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison. Darapti.
Every godly man is happy. Every godly man is hated of the world; therefore,
Some that is hated of the world is happy.
Felapton.
No will worship pleases God. All will worship is the invention of man:
therefore, Some invention of man pleases not God.
Disamis.
Some man shall be saved, Every man is a sinner: therefore, Some sinner shall
be saved.
Datisi.
Every holy man is loved of God. Some holy man is afflicted of God: therefore,
Some that is afflicted of God, is loved of God.
Bocardo.
Some in the visible Church shall not be saved. All in the visible Church
profess Christ* therefore, Some that profess Christ shall not be saved.
Ferison.
None whom God loves are wretched. Some whom God loves are poor: therefore,
Some poor men are not wretched.


Singular Syllogisms:
Judas was not saved. Judas was an Apostle: therefore, Some Apostle was not
saved.
Abraham entered into the Kingdom of Heaven. Abraham was rich: therefore, Some
rich man enters into the Kingdom of Heaven.


And thus much of the Species or Figures of a perfect Syllogism.

Now follows the proprieties.

Of the Proprieties of a Syllogism.
The Proprieties of a Syllogism are either General. Special.


General, are which agree to all the Figures together.

And they are comprehended in these Canons.

1. The disposition of a Syllogism is called by the principles set in the mind
of man, of which the first is that which is called Spoken of All, and of None;
to wit, when any thing is said or denied of the Universal, the same is also
said or denied of the particulars contained under it.

The other Principle is of proportion.

Whatsoever do agree in one third Term, do agree between themselves; and they
that dis-agree in one third, disagree between themselves.

2. In a Syllogism three Terms are only disposed, not more, nor fewer: The
fourth Term must needs trouble the frame: For the mean is referred unto two:
And four Terms may either be expressed, or employed in a doubtful word; For
every doubtful word, is a double word. Neither can there be less then three
Terms; For two extremes cannot be disposed and knit without a third mean; Not
but that one Term repeated more effectually may stand for two Terms; as in this
A man in extreme poverty is yet a man.

3. The mean (or middle Term) may not come into the conclusion.

4. If Abstract Terms be confounded with Concrete: and Oblique cases, with
Right; so as the Principle of the spoken Of all, Of none, be violated, or that
there be four Terms, the Syllogism must needs be naught.

5. Let there be a right placing of consignificative, or exceptive, and
restrictive words, lest that which pertains to the conclusion be plucked from
it, or lest the particular restrictive be twice repeated in the premises; For
if that be, it is mere trifling; As in this example, Good, as it is good, is
lovely; Justice is good, as it is good, Ergo, etc.

6. A Syllogism consisting of mere particulars is naught. One Term must be
universal, else it is against both those Syllogistical principles noted before
in the first Canon of All, and of None, and agreeing in one third; Moreover in
pure particulars there be four Terms; For the Major speaks of one subject, and
the Minor of another; As Some man is rich, some man is learned, Therefore
learned men are rich.

7. A Syllogism of mere Negatives is naught: For it is against the second
Syllogistical principle, which will have the middle Term at least attributed to
the one extreme. Example, No Infidel pleases God; No Elect is an Infidel;
Therefore, No Elect pleases God.

8. Let the Premises in a Syllogism have the same kind of Attribution, or
Predication; that is, the major must not be proper, and the minor improper, or
otherwise. As, Bread is eaten with the mouth; Bread is Christ's body; Therefore,
Christ's body is eaten with the mouth: Here that which is attributed or spoken
of the Bread, in the first proposition, is proper; in the 2d. figurative: the
conclusion therefore is false.

9. The major and minor Term, must be brought into the conclusion, as they were
disposed in the Premises, not changed or maimed; Therefore it is not right to
say; All sinners repentant find mercy; Some men find not mercy; Therefore, some
men are not finners: Here the conclusion is maimed, and is not as in the first
proposition.

10. There must be no more in the conclusion then was in the premises.

11. The conclusion must imitate the more unworthy and weaker part that is
premised: The worthiness is esteemed by the quality, and quantity; so that an
Affirmative is always more worthy then a Negative, and an Universal then a
Particular. It is therefore ill to reason thus; Some faithful are saved; Every
faithful man is called; Therefore, every man that is called is saved. Here, of
a particular Major is inferred a general conclusion; And it follows not the
weaker, but the stronger.

12. In a Syllogism, sometime by reason of the form, a true conclusion is
gathered from false premises: But it is impossible for a false Conclusion to be
gathered from true premises: Truth cannot be gathered from falsehood* but by
accident; as, Every man is a Living creature: Every man is a stone: therefore,
Every man is a living creature: Here the conclusion is true, (by reason of the
form) though both the premises be false.

13. Of one Syllogism rightly framed, many conclusions may be gathered. And
this, four manner of ways.

1. By consequence; As, They that have communion with the Devil abide not in
Christ, and consequently do not eat Christ's body.

2. By conversion of propositions; As, No elect abides in sin all his life;
Every believer is an elect; Therefore, none that abides in sin all his life,
is a Believer.

3. By inclusion of one proposition in another; As, All the Elect believe in
Christ; Some men believe not in Christ; Therefore some men are not Elect;
Therefore also it is false that all men are Elect; For in proving the truth of
the one part of the contradictory, the falsehood of the other part is included
and proved.

4. By descention, or undertaking a particular term under an Universal; As, All
that conserveth society, is profitable; All virtue conserveth society;
Therefore, all Virtue is profitable, Therefore every lawful contract (because
it conserveth society) is profitable.

And thus much of the general properties, common to all the Figures. Now
follows the special.

Of these some pertain to the Primary. Figure. Secondary, Figure.


The properties of the primary Figure, are five, contained in so many Canons

1. The disposition (or frame) of the first Figure, is most perfect: And this
for three causes.

1. Because the frame of this Figure most agrees to natural sense, and the
Syllogistical principles that are in all men, and is of all the most evident.

2. Because the Mean of this Figure, is indeed the Mean or middle in place and
situation; whereas in other figures, it is the Mean (...), and by reason of
illation.

3. Because in this, all kind of conclusion may be gathered; Affirmative,
Negative, Universal, and Particulars, which is done in none of the other
Figures.

2. In the first figure there is a proceeding from Universals to Particulars,
or from the Genus to the Species.

3. The major of the first Figure must always be Universal.

4. The minor must always be Affirmative.

5. The Antecedent of the minor proposition in the first figure, must be
included in the Antecedent of the Major, as the Special in his General. This
Canon is most profitable to be noted: For the whole frame, and form of this
first figure is overthrown, if in the Antecedents of the major, and minor be
two disjoined things, and not subordinate one to another.

The properties of the secondary figures, are either common to both, as well
the second as the third, or special to each one.

Common to both, is imperfection arising both from lesser evidence, and from
placing of the mean with the extremes.

Imperfection requires both Reduction, and Exposition.


Reduction, is the transforming of a Syllogism formed in the first or second
Figure, into a Syllogism of the first Figure.

Reduction is either Direct, or Indirect.


1. Direct, is, which is done by the only transposing, or turning of the
Propositions, the extremes of the conclusion remaining.

The Canons of this Reduction are eight.
1. Reduction of the second and third Figure unto the first, is not always
necessary; therefore not always carefully to be essayed.

2. The Consonants in the beginning and the midst, do show the manner of
Reduction.

3. The Consonanrs in the beginning are four; B C D F* showing unto which Mode
of the figure, every Mode of the second and third figure is to be reduced;
Namely to that which begins with the same Consonant. As Cesare and Camestres
are reduced to Celarent; Festino and Felapton unto Ferio; Disamis and Datisi
unto Darii.

4. Also the four Consonants in the midst. C M P S, do show by what Instrument
the reduction is to be made, whether by Conversion, Transposition, or deduction
unto impossible.

5. C, therefore notes indirect Reduction, or that which is done by the
Impossible, and is only in those words, Baroco and Bocardo.

6. M, notes that there must be a transposition made of the propositions, the
Minor in the place of the Major, and the Major in place of the Minor.

7. P, notes conversion of the proposition by accident: to wit of the minor,
into which the syllable having P, falls, if the syllable of the modes be
rightly distributed into the propositions.

8. S, shows that there must be a simple conversion made either of the Major,
or the Minor, and the conclusion together: as this letter is hard, either in
the first, or middle, or last syllable: For if it be heard in the first
syllable, As Cesare, it notes the simple conversion of the major; if in the
midst, it notes the conversion of the minor: And if in the last, the conversion
of the conclusion, as in Camestres it is twice heard, in the midst and the
last, and therefore notes the conversion to be made of the Minor and of the
conclusion. As take the syllogism in Cesare. Cessare.
No true Christian loves the World, Every covetous man loves the World:
therefore No covetous man is a true Christian.


First the letter C shows it must be reduced to Celarent; S, in the first
syllable shows the manner of reduction; to wit, by a simple conversion of the
major, thus. Celarent
None that loves the world is a true Christian. Every covetous man loves the
world: therefore, No covetous man is a true Christian.


Indirect Reduction, is, when we show the evidence of the Illation by absurdity
of the contradiction to be admitted.

The Canons hereof are six.
1. Indirect Reduction has place only in two Moods Baroco of the second, and
Bocardo of the third Figure.

2 Indirect Reduction is made by concession, and by Assumption.

3. By concession, because the adversary grants both premises, and yet denies
the inference of the Conclusion.

4. The premises therefore, being granted, by supposition, the contradictory is
to be taken of the conclusion, which is in the imper ect Syllogism, that is to
be reduced.

5. The contradictory of the conclusion being taken, is put in the place of the
Minor, if it be Baroco of the second Figure: and in place of the Major, if it
be Bocardo of the third Figure: and so the Major in the second Figure, is always
left in his place, as the Minor in the third.

6. Hence is made the conclusion in the first Figure, wherein contradiction is
made to the proposition left of the imperfect Syllogism; and so the adversary
is driven to an absurdity, that is, to the contradictory of that proposition,
which before he had granted as true.

And thus much of showing the evidence by Reduction.

Exposition, is the declaration of a Syllogism formed (...).
with a middle Mean general Term in the third Figure, by a singular Mean
contained under the general, as nearer to the sense; for example, None of the
Elect sin unto death. Some of the elect sin grievously, Therefore, Some that
sin grievously, sin not to death.


Exposition of this may be made by singulars known unto us, as David, Peter,
etc. David sinned not unto death; David sinned grievously; therefore, some
grievously sinning, sin not to death.

The Properties peculiar to the second Figure now follow, which are
comprehended in three Canons.
1. The second Figure is ((...)) most sit to refute with; for it disjoyneth two
diverse things, because they agree not in one third.

2. In the second Figure the Major must always be Universal, even as in the
first Figure.

3 In the second Figure, may be no mere affirmants.

The Proprieties of the third Figure, are four, set down in four Canons.
1. The proceeding of the third Figure is, for the most part, from the
straighter to the larger. Therefore Logicians say, the first figure has
process (...): the third, (...).

2. The Minor must always be affirmant.

3. The whole and entire consequent of the Minor must needs be inferred in the
conclusion, and put in the place of the Antecedent; for if it be maimed, or in
part, all is troubled, and there are four Terms. As, Whole Christ is every
where; whole Christ consists of the Godhead and the Manhood; therefore the
Manhood is every where. Yea, though the Matter be good, the Form may be evil;
as, God is the God of the living; God is the God of Abraham: therefore, Abraham
lives. Here, in the Conclusion, the Consequent of the Minor is impaired; which
whole is not Abraham, but the God of Abraham. The Argument then must not be in
the third, but the first Figure; thus, They, of whom God is God, do live; but
God yet, is the God of Abraham; therefore he lives: the Major follows,
because to be God, is to exercise Divine properties in the Object; and in whom
such things are done, he must needs exist.

4. The Conclusion in the third Figure, is never Universal. And hitherto, of a
perfect Syllogism.

Animperfect Syllogism, is, which has an imperfect disposition Imperfect
Syllogism.
of Syllogistical Form.

And it is Direct. f Indirect. g


g Indirect, is which concludes by indirect or absurd.

And it is Primary. a Secondary. b


Primary, is, when the adversary by the contradictory of a
the conclusion which he denies, and by the complication of a proposition
manifestly true and granted, is driven to an absurdity.

The Canons hereof are seven.
1. Let the contradictory be taken of the conclusion which the adversary
denies.

2. Let a contradiction be assumed manifestly true, and which the adversary
cannot deny; and let that be placed instead of the Major.

3. Let the contradictory of the conolusion be put instead of the Minor: and
thereupon with the Major manifestly true, let be inferrd an absurd conclusion.

4. From the absurd conclusion inferred, go back to the absurd proposition, or
contradictory of the first conclusion.

5. The falsehood of the Minor being showed by the force of the contradictory
principle, let it be showed that the first conclusion is true, as, that whereto
the Minor is contradictorily opposed; for example, Arians deny this conclusion,
The Holy Ghost is God. I take the contradictory, The Holy Ghost is not God, but
a Creature: and thus I infer, The spirit of God is not God, but a Creature;
therefore, the The spirit of God is without God. This Conclusion is absurd; for
no spirit is without that whose spirit it is: therefore Paul says plainly, The
spirit of God is in God. Therefore either the Major or Minor is absurd; not the
Major, for it is manifest, the creatures are without the Creator; therefore the
Minor: And therefore the right conclusion is true, which is opposed to this
Minor.

6 Therefore a Syllogism leading to absurdity, is faulty either when the Major
is infirm, or the conclusion not absurd or opposed to a true conclusion.

7 A Syllogism leading to absurdity, much urges in disputing, and has the
chief use in showing the verity of principles, and specially of those
conclusions which are nigh to principles, so as they cannot well be proved by
demonstration.

Secondary, is, which by the Adversaries grant of concontradictories, infers
the denial of the same by it self; as, No Natural body is infinite; some
body, viz. Christ's, by the Ubiquitaries opinion is infinite: therefore some
body, viz. Christ's, is not a body.

A direct, imperfect Syllogism, is, 1 Enthymema. 2 Consecution of sentences. 3
Induction. 4 Sorites

1 An Enthymema is a Syllogism wherein one of the premises is kept in.

The Canons are three.
1 In an Enthymema; the first proposition is called the antecedent, the other
the consequent.

2 It may easily be made a Syllogism by adding the proposition that wants.

3 Which of the premises is wanting, may easily be judged by the conclusion;
whereof, if the attribute (or latter part) appear not in the antecedent; the
Major is wanting: if the subject (or first part) appear not, the Minor is
wanting; as, a living creature moves; therefore man moves. Here wants the
Minor; for this word man appears not in the antecedent. A man is aliving
creature; therefore he moves; Here wants the Major; for the attribute in the
conclusion, moves, appears not in the antecedent.

Consecution of sentences, is, when without disposition of the Mean, one
sentence follows another.

And it is Consentanie. a Dissentanie. b


Consentanie, is, when the consecution proceeds by consent of the sentences;
Namely by conversion, inclusion, and other natural Relations of the Sentences.
a


The Canons hereof are nine.
1 The converting to the converted* in all kinds of conversion, follows
rightly: as, No Infidel eats Christ's body; therefore, None that eats Christ's
body is an Infidel.

2 That inference which is made from a contrary sense is near kin to conversion
by contrary placing: as, Virtue is to be praised, therefore, Vice is to be
dispraised.

3 From the Superior or Universal unto the Inferior or Particular
distributely there is a good consecution: as, All sinners repenting find
mercy: Therefore all great sinners repenting do find mercy. But from one
particular to another, it follows not rightly; As to say: Some sin is not
forgiven in the life to come, therefore some sin is forgiven in the life to
come.

4 From the affirmative of a finite consequent (or attribute) follows the
Negative of an infinite consequent: as man is just, therefore man is not
not-just.

5 From the affirmative of an infinite consequent follows the Negative of a
finite consequent, if the antecedent be capable of the habit: as, Man is not
just, therefore neither is he just, neither un just. But of an infant it
follows not, he is not just, therefore he is unjust; for he is not capable.

6 From a conjoined consequent are inferred things divided, where there is no
ambiguity nor repugnancy in the adject: as, Man is a living sensible body;
Therefore man is a body, man is living, man is sensible. But it follows not, a
Carkase is a dead man, therefore it is a man; For between a Carkase and a man
there is a repugnancy.

7 From two or mo disjoined consequents that cleave together by themselves, and
are taken without ambiguity, we may infer conjoined things: as, Man is a body,
and he is mixed, and he is living, and he is sensible; therefore, man is a
living mixed sensible body. But it follows not if one say; This man is a
Musician, and he is good, therefore he is a good Musician; because Musician and
good, cleave together by accident; And there is ambiguity in the word good,
which may be understood either of Moral good, or of perfection of Arts. Neither
is this right to say; This servant is a father, and he is thine; therefore, he
is thy father; For there is ambiguity in the word thing.

8 From an exclusive to an Universal of transposed terms, is a good
consequence. As, Only man can laugh* therefore whatsoever can laugh is a man.

9 From the removing of the one immediate member, unto the exclusive, is a good
consequence: As, We are not justified by works: therefore by faith only.

Dissentany consecution, is, when from the truth of the one b
of the opposites is understood the falsehood of the other; and contrary from
the falsehood of the one, the truth of the other. As, It is true that some man
is not chosen to life: therefore, It is false that every man is chosen to life.
It is true that every Christian man is to be baptized: therefore, it is false
that no Christian Infant is to be baptized.

Induction is either Principal. a Less principal. b


Principal, is, when from many singulars, or particulars, a
there is drawn a general conclusion.

The Canons hereof are three.
1 An Induction standing of particular propositions, may bring in all the
particulars: As if one would prove that Wine heateth, he may reckon up all
sorts of Wine in the World, as French, Spanish, Rhenish, European, Asian,
Affrican Wine, etc.

2 When singulars are infinite, it is enough to allege some chief, with
addition of this clause, Neither can an unlike example be shown: As Paul in
Heb. 11. to prove that all that are saved, are not saved but by faith,
alleges Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, etc. and at last
says, There are many more examples; Neither can any be showed unlike to those.

3 An Induction may be made a Syllogism of the first Figure, by putting in the
place of the Major such a proposition in which the consequent of the conclusion
is spoken of all particulars or singulars (reckoned up or understood) as of the
mean; and adding a Minor, in which the same particulars or singulars are spoken
of the Antecedent (or first part) of the conclusion. As, Spanish, French,
Rhenish, and all Wines do heat. All Wine is Spanish, French, Rhenish, etc.
therefore, all Wines do heat.

Less Principal Induction, is, when one or two singulars b
are induced, or when one is proved by another: As, Abraham was justified by
faith: therefore, other godly are so justified also.

Sorites is an imperfect Syllogism, wherein the consequent of the first
proposition is made the Antecedent of the second; and so forward as by a chain,
until at length the last consequent be spoken of the Antecedent of the first
propoposition: (...) an heap, (...) a coacervator, an heaper together. This is
called a Stoical argument.

The Canons are five.
1 The reason of the consequence in a Sorites is both the connection of the
subordinates in the same predicament, and also the coherence of the causes and
effects by themselves.

For Example. A man is an animal, an animal is a sensual body, a sensual body
is living, that that is living is mixed, that that is mixed is a substance:
therefore, a man is a substance; also, Romans 8. All foreknown are predestinate,
all predestinate are called, all called are justified, all justified are
glorified: therefore, all foreknown are glorified.

2 When terms not subordinate are confounded, and causes by themselves are mixed
with causes by accident, the Sorites is naught: as, Of evil manners spring good
Laws, good Laws are worthy of praise, things worthy of praise are to be
desired: therefore, Evil manners are to be desired. This conclusion is naught;
for evil manners are not causes of themselves of good Laws, but by accident.

3 A denial makes a faulty Sorites, when it cannot be reduced to some figure;
and begets either both premises negant, or a negant Minor in the first
figure: otherwise when there is a good connection of negative consequents or
attributes, Negative Sorites are not simply to be rejected; as, Affliction
brings patience, patience brings experience, experience brings forth hope,
hope makes not ashamed, therefore affliction makes not ashamed.

4 When a particular proposition in a Sorites it put in the second or third
place, or when the particular negant is put in any place, the Sorites is
naught; for the Major is particular, or the Minor negant in the first Figure.

5 In a Sorites, the Antecedent or first part of the conclusion is the Minor
term, the consequent the Major; the other which besides these are found in a
Sorites, are Means; and look how many Means, so many Syllogisms.

An imperfect Syllogism also, is either Simple. A compound or hypothetical
Syllogism.
Compound.


Simple, which consists of simple Propositions; of which we have heard before.

Compound, is, which consists of a compound Proposition, called also
hypothetical, and (...).

And it is either 1 Conditional. 2 Disjunctive.


Conditional, whose Major is Conditional or Hyprthetical.

The Canons hereof are seven.
1 An Hypothetical Syllogism, consists of antecedent and consequent: the
antecedent is of the first part of the Proposition; the consequent of the
latter.

2 The Union of antecedent and consequent, is called the reason of the
consequent, which is the very form of an hypothetical Syllogism; and therefore
if it cannot be granted, the hypothetical Syllogism must needs be faulty.

3 That Hypothetical Syllogism is good, which may be reduced to a good simple
Syllogism; for as the perfect is always the measure of the unperfect, so a
simple Syllogism is the measure of a compound.

4 Therefore in an Hypothetical Syllogism, from the assumption of the
antecedent to the conclusion of the consequent, the inference is of force, but
not from the assumption or putting of the consequent, to the putting of the
antecedent; for so in the second figure should be mere affirmants; as, If
Infidels be grafted into Christ, they eat his flesh: But they eat his flesh;
therefore they are grafted into Christ. The Argument is not of force.

5 From removing the consequent to the removing of the antecedent, the
inference is of force; but not from the destruction of the antecedent to the
destruction of the consequent; for so there should be a minor negant in the
first figure: as, If he be a man, he has reason; but he is not a man:
therefore he has not reason. The Conclusion is true, but it follows not of
the premises formally, but by accident only.

6 When an Hypothetical has three terms in the first Proposition, it is easily
reduced to a Categoricall (or simple) Syllogism; for the reason of the
consequence being granted, is put for the Major in a simple Syllogism, and then
the Minor follows of its own accord; as, If the Heaven be hot, it may be
corrupted by another body: the reason of the consequence is, Every hot thing
may be corrupted with another body that is cold; but it is not corruptible;
therefore neither is it hot. Here of make a simple Syllogism in the second
figure, thus* Every hot thing is corruptible. Heaven is not corruptible:
therefore Heaven is not hot.

7 But when four terms are in the first Proposition, the reduction is hard and
laborious, because the reason of the consequence cannot so easily be rendered
by a simple Proposition: as, I^ Justice be by the Law, Christ died in vain; But
Christ died not in vain: therefore Justice is not by the Law. Here are four
terms in the first Proposition.

2 A Disjunctive Syllogism is, which has the first Proposition a Disjunctive.

And it is either Uniform. c Biformed, or a Dilemma. d


Uniform, is, which of members disjoined takes away the c
one to put the other, or puts the one to take away the other. as, Either we
are justified by faith, or by works: not by works; therefore by Faith.

The Canons hereof are two.
1 The whole force of the consequence in a disjoined Syllogism, consists in the
opposition and disjunction of the parts, whereupon that must needs be naught
whose parts are subordinate: as, We have instruction either from God, or from
our teachers; but it is from God; therefore not from our teachers. The
disjunction is naught, for it disjoyneth things subordinate.

2 A right disjunction, requires a full enumeration of parts: if therefore a
third part can be given, or a fourth, the disjunction is naught: as, Heaven is
either Hot or Cold: but it is not cold; therefore it is hot,

Here the first proposition has an imperfect enumeration; for we should add,
or else it is without all Elementary quality.

A Biformed disjunctive is, that when a disjunction of parts is made, which
soever be granted, the adversary is fast: d
it is called a Dilemma (...), as it were (...), twice taken and taking; also
an Horned Syllogism, and a Crocodiline Syllogism. As, John's Baptism is either
of God or of men. If of God, why do we not receive it? If of men, we are in
danger of the people which count him a Prophet.

The Conons hereof are four.
1 The force of consequence in a Dilemma depends on the full enumeration of
the disjoined members, and the convenient removing of them both.

2 The Dilemma has no force, if there be not a full disjunction, but a third
or fourth member may be given.

3 It is also without force if both members be granted, as making nothing
against us. As the Jews reasoned against Christ: Tribute must be given to
Caesar, o^ unto God; If to God, then not to Caesar, and this is Treason: If to
Caesar, then not to God, and this is Sacrilege. Our Savior answers by
granting both, Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is
Gods.

4 Finally, A Dilemma has no force if it may be turned and returned upon the
adversary.

Often also in the undertaking of a Dilemma, they are faulty in evil
consequence, and then we must answer by denying the consequence, as, Infants
which while they are a Baptizing, do cry and resist, either they understand, or
not: If they understand not, neither believe they; and therefore should not be
baptized: If they understand, they are Sacrilegious that oppugn Gods
Institution.

Here be evil consequences in both branches; for it follows not, That Infants
do believe, although they understand not explicitly what there is done.
Neither follows it, That they are Sacrilegious and repugne Gods Ordinance
though they cry and struggle; for they stuggle not against the water as it is
an holy sign, or with formal reason; but as it is a cold Element oftensive to
their tender body. Even as a godly man that loves no wine, does naturally abhor
the wine which is in the Lords Supper; but he abhors it only as it is wine, and
not as it is a Sacred sign of Christ's blood.

And thus much of a Syllogism Formal, or commonly considered.

A Special or Material Syllogism, is, which is restrained unto certain
conditions of matter.

And it is either True. Apparent.


True, is, when not only the form, but also the matter of it is good.

And is either Notional. a Real. b


A notionall Syllogism, is, whose conclusion and premises a
have some second Notion or term of Logic.

The Canons hereof are two.
Of which the first for foreknowledge of the conclusion.

The latter is for finding out of the mean.

1. Every simple Notion handled in the first part of Logic comes into the
conclusion of a National Sillogism; for every second Notion may be compared
with the first. We ask, Whether time and place be words conjoined or absolute?
Whether the Genus of sin be an action, or the Genus of faith be knowledge?
Whether Antichrist is to be one singular person? Whether faith be proper to the
Elect? Whether persons in the Trinity be really, modally, or formally
distinguished, and so of all other points. So as there is great use of a
Notional Syllogism.

2. The Mean term for a notional Syllogysm, is easily taken from the nature and
properties of that second Notion, of which question is made in the conclusion;
so as from the first part of Logic the Canons of every second Notion may be
put for the Major in the Syllogism, and then let the assumption be made
affirmative or negative.

For example. It is asked, Whether an action be the genus of sin, or not. For a
denial, there is found out a mean term, from the nature and properties of a
good genus. As by this Canon. No subject is the genus of that whereof it is the
subject. l. 4. Top. cap. 6. But an action is the subject whereto sin cleaves;
therefore it is not the genus of sin.

Again, It is asked, Whether good works be the cause of Justification. Take for
Major this Canon of a cause; No cause is after the effect; but good works are
after Justification; for the person must first be justified and please God
before he can do any good work: therefore good works are not the cause. And so
of all other Notions, with their Canons treated of in the first part of Logic,
whereby appears the great use of those Rules: and that there needs here no
long discourse of a Notional or topical Syllogism.

A Comparative Syllogism.
Seeing every Syllogism is first absolute; As when we ask whether this be that
or not: or else secondly Comparative, as when we ask whether this be more or
less then that; here shall be added Canons of a Comparative Syllogism.

The general Canons hereof are two.
The 1 For the foreknowledge of the conclusion. 2 The other to find the Mean.

1 The conclusion of a Comparative Syllogism being contingent, and for the most
part taken confusedly, needs therefore diligent distinction and limitation:
As it one ask, whether this or that be better; We must distinguish between
better simply and absolutely, (...), and better in respect, and after a sort,
(...), and (...), rather to be chosen in respect of time and place: So marriage
is simply better than a single life, because of propagation, Genesis 2. Yet single
life is rather to be chosen in time of persecution, 1 Cor. 7.

2 The mean term of a comparative Syllogism, is hardly found by the places of
real invention; because the attribute is most common, and almost Notional, not
real; therefore this is here handled after a Notional Syllogism.

The special Canons pertain either to the question as it is asked
indefinitely, whether this be rather then that? or unto the question as it is
asked, whether this be better then that, or worse?

1 That which is such by Nature, is rather such then that which is not such by
Nature; as, flowers are fairer then garments; For, they have a natural beauty,
these but an artificial.

2 That which makes an other such, is rather such then that which makes not;
and if both do make, that which rather makes, is rather such; As Fire is
hotter then Water; for it makes the Water such.

The Canons pertaining to a conclusion, better or not better, are these.
1 That which is more lasting and constant, is better than that which is less
lasting; So 1 Cor. 13. Love is better than faith; For love endures always.

2 That which is of it self good, is better than that which is good by another,
and by accident; So, To live is better than to eat, because we eat to live, and
live not to eat.

3 Simply good, is better than that which is good for some; As marriage is
better than single life; Study of learning better than Merchandise.

4 That is more excellent which is in the more worthy and honorable thing; As
a Monarchy is the best Regiment; For God is a Monarch. It is better to give,
than to receive; For God gives only.

5 The end is better than the means unto the end; As better is health than the
use of Physic; better is peace than Triumph.

6 That which is possible, is better than that which is impossible.

7 That is better which of it self is more fair and honorable.

8 That which is after, is oftentimes better than the former; to wit, if other
things be like, etc. As, the later thoughts are better than the former.

9 Many good things are to be preserred before few.

10 That which effects many good things, is better than that which does but
few; So a Public person is better than a Private.

11 That which is joined with pleasure, is better than that which wants
pleasure.

12 At what time a thing is more necessary, at that time it is more to be
chosen; So comfort is better in sorrow than in prosperity.

13 That which is always profitable, is better than that which is but
sometime; So, Bread is better then all Phesants, Partridges, etc. For it is
always needful.

14 That which has all kinds of good, as honest, profitable, and pleasant, is
better than that which is under but one kind of good.

15 That is most to be shunned, which most hinders things to be chosen.

16 They are most to be chosen, whose opposites are most to be shunned: So
prudence is better than knowledge, because imprudence is more hurtful than
simple ignorance.

17 That is best which is most famous and notable.

18 Hard things are to be preferred before easy.

19 Things that we may communicate with others, specially with friends, are
better than those which we may not; So learning is better than health,
liberality than temperance.

20 That is best which is most proper; So Gods grace is better for his
children, than worldly riches; For these are common with the wicked, that
proper to the elect; To use reason, is better than to use sense; For that is
proper to man, this is common with beasts. So wit is better than memory, which
many fools have.

21 Of those which are under the same Genus or Species, that is better which
has its own proper virtue; So cold water is better than hot; Natural gesture
than affected.

22 They which are of abundant, seem better than necessary things; As to have
fair clothes better than mean, to be a good Artizen better than a mean.

23 Things that cannot be given by men, are better than those that can: So wit
is better than riches.

24 That is more to be chosen, the abundance whereof is more to be chosen than
of any other thing.

25 Better is when a thing may be chosen without an other, than when without an
other it is not to be chosen: As prudence is better than strength.

26 Of what things we deny the one, that the other may seem to be in it; that
is the better which we would have seem to be in it: So many deny they took
pains about a thing, that they may seem to be witty; therefore, wit is better
than pains taking.

27 Such things as whose loss we take not more grievoussy, we are more blamed
for, are more to be chosen, As children than riches, for we are more blamed if
we be not sorry for loss of our children, than of our goods.

28 That which effects good, is better than that which does not.

29 Conjugates follow mutually; therefore, if one be better, the other also
shall be better; As the New Testament is better than the old; therefore, also a
Minister of the New, is better than a Minister of the old.

30 That which pleases God, is better than that which pleases man.

31 That which we choose for it self, is better than that which we choose for
glory.

And this much of a Notional Syllogism, and a comparative.

A Real Syllogism, is, whose terms are Real: that is, first b
Notions put without the mind.

And it is either Contingent. a Or Necessary. b


A Contingent is, whose contingent mean contingently a
disposed with the extremes, gets a suspended and weak assent to the
conclusion, and is called opinion.

A contingent mean, is that which is taken from a contingent place.

Contingent places be either From the word. c From the things. d


Places from the word, are either 1 From the definition of a Noun. 2 From the
Conjugates.


A place from the definition of a Noun, has three Canons.

1 To what the definition and notation of a noun is given, to that also the
defined thing is given.

2 When the definition and Notation is larger than the thing defined and noted,
the consequence is of force only negatively; As, it is not a sacred sign;
therefore, not a Sacrament.

3 When the Notation is equal to the noted, the consequence is of force as
well affirmatively as negatively: as, He foretells things to come, therefore he
is a prophet: he is not a prophet, therefore he foretells not things to come.

A place of Conjugates has three Canons.
1 One of the conjugates being put, another is put; and one taken away, another
is taken away; as, Sin pleases not God: therefore not the sinner.

^ That which is given to one of the Conjugates, is given also to the other:
as, Religion is contemned, because the Religious are contemned. They that have
one God, one Spirit, one Baptism, ought to have Unity amongst themselves: In
the Trinity there is Unity, because the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are
one.

A place from the things is either Artificial. h Inartificial. i


Artificial, is, which contains Terms arguing of themselves. b


And it is either First. Or, rising from the first.


First, is, which contains the first Terms.

And it is either Inward. m Outward. n


Inward, is, which contains inward Terms: as, Of the m
cause and caused, of the subject and accident; of the whole and the part.

The place of the cause and caused has five Canons.
1 The far-off efficient cause being put, it is probable that the effect should
be put: as, The clouds gather, therefore it will rain.

2 The cause (...) and (...) being put, it is probable the effect is put, and
contrariwise; also the effect being put, it is probable such a cause is put:
as, He loves her, therefore he will marry her: He married her, therefore he
loved her.

3 The Instruments being put, it is probable the effect is put; and contrary,
the effect being put, it is probable the instruments are put, and contrary: as,
He reads good books, therefore he will be learned: He uses proper physic;
therefore he shall recover health, etc.

4 From the common matter put or taken away, or the matter whereof, to put or
take away the mattered, and so on the contrary, is a contingent inference: as,
In Germany is much wood, therefore they have many ships.

5 From a voluntary end to the means, and from these to the end, is a
contingent inference: as, He studied hard, therefore he means to have the
degree of a Doctor, etc.

The Canons of Subject and Accident, Whole and Part, are four.
1 From the common accident being put unto the subject, is a contingent
inference; as from the accident removed, to the removing of the subject: as, It
is a black Bird, therefore a Crow: She loves the child, therefore she is the
mother of it.

2 From a common subject being put, to the putting of a common accident, and
contrary, is a contingent infference: as, She is a Mother, therefore she loves
the children: He is a Cretian, therefore a liar.

3 The whole being put, it is probable this or that part is put: as, He is a
man grown, therefore he has a Beard.

4 Some integral part being put, it is probable the whole is put; and
contrariwise: as, There is a foundation and walls, therefore a house.

Places of outward terms have five Canons.
b
1 The adherent being put, it is probable that is put which it is wont to
cleave to, and contrary; As he goes brave; therefore he is rich.

2 The contingent object being put, it is probable that is put, about which it
is busied, and contrary; as, There are many sick; therefore, many Physicians.

3 The circumstance of place or time being put, it is probable that is put
which is wont to be therein, and contrary; as, It is eight of the clock in the
morning; therefore, he is not drunk: He was not seen about the house in the
night, therefore, he is a thief.

4 The antecedent being put, it is probable the consequent is put, and
contrary; as, The Moon is pale; therefore, it will rain.

5 The con^ingent consequent being put, it is probable the antecedent was, and
contrary; as, It raineth; therefore, the Moon was pale.

Places of terms arising from the first,

Are either From Description. From Comparison.


The place from description has one Canon.
To whom the less principal description agrees, it is probable that the
described agrees, or agrees not thereto; as, It is not a Bush bigger then a
Biamble, with strong twigs, and red Berries; therefore, it is not the
Dogg-bryar.

The place from comparisons, the place is either from Consentany a Comparison.
Dissentany b Comparison.


From consentany comparisons, a
the place is either from, Even. Like.


The place from Even has two Canons.
1. Even things agree to Even; and what is given to the one, is given to the
other of even things, and contrary: as Romans 5. By one man salvation may be
restored to the world; seeing by one man sin and death came on the world.

2. Whereto one of the even things agrees or not, thereto it is probable the
other also agrees, or not; as, Christ had power to heal the Palsie-sick;
therefore, he had power to forgive sins, Mat. 9.

The place from Like has three Canons.
1 That which agrees or not, to one of the like things, that also agrees or
not to the other: as, The rain returns not back to heaven, but waters the
earth; neither Gods Word returns in vain.

2. To whom one of the Similies agrees, or not* the other also agrees, or not.

3. A similitude, or comparison allegericall, if it should have any force in
arguing, it must needs have authority in the Scriptures, and application
Ministered by the Holy Ghost.

Of Proportionals, there is the same Judgment; and what is affirmed or denied
of one by proportion, that is also of another: For as is the seed in the land,
so is the word to the heart, but seed falling into good ground, bears good
fruit; therefore does Gods Word likewise in a good heart.

Near to the place of Even and Like things, is the pla^^ from a singular thing
and example, whose Canon is one.
Of Even* and Like things, there is the same Judgment; and that which agrees,
or not, to one singular of the same kind, does so to the other: as, Abraham
was justified by faith, therefore also other men.

An example is either True. Feigned.


True, which has indeed come to pass.

Feigned, which is devised for the teaching of children.

And it is A Parable. A Fable.


A Parable, is a feigned example, drawn from such actions of men, as may or are
wont to be done.

A Fable, is a feigned example, drawn from beasts and other such things,
whereunto humane actions do not agree.

From dissentany comparison the places are from Uneven. Unlike. b



Uneven, either greater or lesser.

The place from the greater has two Canons.
1. If there be the greater, there will also be the lesser, and whereto the
greater agrees, the less does also: as, God has given us life, therefore he
will give us food and raiment.

2. That which in the same proportion agrees not to the greater, agrees not
also to the lesser: as, The Just is scarce saved, therefore much less the
wicked.

The place from the Lesser, has only this one Canon.

If the lesser be not, then the greater will not be; as, Of our selves we
cannot think a good thought; much less, do a a good deed.

2. The place from Unlike, is either Simple. Compound.


Simple Unlikes agree to Unlikes; and whatsoever agrees to one of the Unlikes,
as it is unlike* agrees not to the other: as, Though beasts have all things
common, it is unfitting men should.

For compound unlikes, they which are not proportionate, to them proportionals
do not agree: as, A good shepherd deals not with his flock like an hireling:
the hireling flies when the wolf comes; therefore the good shepherd does not
so. And thus much of places Artificial.

Inartificial, is a place which argues not of it self, but b
by the assumed force of an artificial place, and it is called the place of
testimony.

Contingent testimony, is that which comes from man as he is man.

The Canons of humane Testimony are 13.
1 Though no humane testimony as such, be of necessary truth, yet admits it
certain degrees, and one is more strong, or weak than the other.

2 Proper, or ones own testimony of things, done or not done, especially in the
worser part, if it be not wrung out of force, is counted for firm.

3 Public testimonies of public seals are firm.

4 Testimony of public and long-lasting fame is also to be esteemed for meanly
firm,

5 Old testimony is more worth than new.

6 Grammatical testimonies, to wit, which treat of the use, signification,
quantity of words, syllables, etc. gathered out of the best Authors, are firm.

7 Testimonies Practick, that is Ethick, Politic, Legal, of honest, filthy,
right, wrong, spoken of grave Authors, are firm.

8 Testimonies historical, of approved Historians, are firm.

9 Testimonies Theoretical of some great and received Author, alleged after
reasons of a Theoretical conclusion, have great force.

10 Testimony of many Wise men and Famous, is to be preferred before the
testimony of one and an obscure man.

11 Testimony of a skillful Artizen, is to be preferred before the testimony of
another unskilful, however famous otherwise.

12. Testimonies of ancient Fathers, if they be subordinate to the holy
Scripture, have a force in proving Theological conclusions, but no proving
humane, yet greater.

13. An Argument from humane Testimony negatively, is of no force.

And thus much of a contingent Syllogism.

Of a necessary Syllogism.
A necessary Syllogism, is, which has a Mean or Medium of necessary
disposition to b^ get in the mind firm and immovable assent to the conclusion.
It is called Science.

The general Canons thereof are three.
1. The Conclusion of a necessary Syllogism sometime is pure, ^r proper to one
discipline; sometime mixed, or of diverse Disciplines: as, Only Faith
justifies, this is a pure conclusion; for both the terms, faith, and
justifies, are terms of Theology, and handled therein.

A narurall body is in a place; this is pu^e; for only Natural Philosophy
treats of a place, and a body; but this, Accidents in the Lords Supper are
not without the holy bread and wine, is necessary, and may be proved by a
ne^essary Syllogism; but it is not pure; for the word Accident is Metaphysical
o^ Logical; the other terms Theological.

2. In a pure conclusion we must needs use a Mean of the same kind, that is,
such as together with the extreme of the conclusion, pertains to one and the
same discipline, and not to diverse.

3. Of a necessary Syllogism, the propositions also are necessary.

A necessary Syllogism is either Monstrative, (...). f Demonstrative, (...). g


Monstrative, is, whose Mean is taken from a monstrative f
place that is, from every place of necessary invention* except the place of
the efficient cause, the end, and the effect.

And it is either Artificial. c Inartificial. d


Artificial places again are either of first Terms, or secondly c
of Arisen.

Places of the first terms be Inward. a Outward. b


Inward, are they which are taken from inward terms, and a
they are nine.

1. From the Genus. 2. From the Species. 3. From the cause material. 4. The
Formal. 5. The Subject. 6* The Accident. 7. The proper. 8. The whole. 9. And
the part.

The first place of the Genus has two Canons.
1. To what the Genus is given, to the same some Species must needs be given,
but indeterminate; as, It is sin; therefore Original, or Actual.

2. From what the Genus is taken away, from that necessarily all the Species
are taken: as, It is no sin, therefore neither original nor actual; therefore
no sin.

The place of the Species has two Canons.
1. To what the Species is given, to the same the Genus must needs be given:
as, He is a man, therefore a living creature.

2. From what all the Species are taken, from it the Genus must needs be taken:
as, It is neither original (...) actual sin, therefore no sin.

The place from the Form and specifical difference has two Canons.
1. Whereto the Form is given, or taken away, thereto the formed is given or
taken away: as, Satyrs have no reason, therefore are ^o men.

2 Whereto the Form is given, thereto the determinate matter must needs also be
given; and contrariwise: as, Nebuchadnezzar kept the Form of a man still;
therefore also the body.

The place from the matter has three Canons.
1. Whereto the matter is given or taken away, thereto the mattered thing must
needs also be given or taken away: as, Glorified bodies shall consist of the
four Elemements; therefore they shall be mixed

2. Whereto the matter is given, thereto the determined Form must needs also be
given; and contrariwise* as, Pig^eyes have the bodies of men, therefore the
Forms also.

3. As is the matter, such is the mattered thing: as, The Image is of rotten
wood; therefore it is also rotten.

The place from the proper subject has this one Canon.
Whereto a proper accident is given, or taken from it, thereto the subject also
m^st needs be given or taken from it: as, Christ is God, therefore has power
to forgive sins.

The place from the proper accident has two Canons.
1. Whereto a proper accident is given, or taken from it, thereto the subject
must needs be given, or taken from it: as, Christ forgiveth sins, has life*in
himself, and gives ^
life to others; and therefore he is God.

2. That which is said of the proper accident in theiconcrete, is said also of
the subject: as, A questioner is to be shunned, because a blab is to be shunned.

The place from the whole and parts has three Canons.
1. The whole being put or taken away, needs must the parts be put or taken
away: as, the whole Supper pertains to Lay men, therefore the Cup.

2. That which agrees, or not, to an whole of the same kind, that also
agrees, or not, to the part, if the attribute be such, as may by proportion
agree to the part: as, Water is moist, therefore every drop of water is so.

3 One principal part being destroyed, the whole is taken away. as, This
building has no Roof, therefore is no house: He has no head, therefore is no
living body.

Places of outward terms, are Circumstances, Object, b
Concomitancy.

The place of Circumstances has this one Canon.
Circumstances being put or taken away, the adject is put or taken away; and
the adject put or taken away, so is the Circumstance: as, The flowers are
badded, therefore it is spring time: it is a body, therefore there is a place
wherein it is.

The place of the necessary object has also one Canon.
Whereto an even object is given or taken from it, thereto that which is busied
about the object is given or taken from it; and contrariwise: as, He is
exercised about the worship of Idols; therefore he is an Idolater: Christ is
true God; therefore he is to be worshipped.

The place from the necessary Antecedent, has this one Canon.
A necessary Antecedent being put or taken away, the consequent of it, is put
or taken away: as, he is dead in Christ, therefore he shall rise to eternal
(...). The woman is not with child, therefore she shall not bring forth.

The place from the necessary consequent has also one Canon.
A necessary consequent being put, the antecedent is put* as, The woman brought
forth, therefore she had conceived: he is a man, therefore he was a child.

2. Places of terms arisen from the first, are of Definition, Division, and
Opposites.

The place of definition and description principal, has one Canon.
Whereto a definition or description is given or taken from it, thereto the
defined or described thing is given or taken from it; and that which agrees, or
not, to the definition, or description, the same agrees, or not, to the
defined or described; and contrariwise: as, In the Old Testament there was a
state of worshipping God in and by Christ; therefore in the Old Testament,
there were Christians.

The place of Division has these two Canons.
1. All the members of the divided being taken away, the divided it self is
taken away.

2. One of the Immediate members of a Division being taken away, the other is
left.

The place of Opposites has seven Canons.
1. Of Opposites, so far forth as they be such, the attributes are opposite; so
as the opposition be made by the differences whereby the opposites disagree,
and not by the genus or common accidents* and that proportion be kept between
the causes and effects of the opposites. So, It follows not, Whiteness is
color, therefore blackness is no color; for the opposition is made by the
common Genus. Neither follows this, Evil works condemn, therefore good works
justify; for there is no proportion of good works to salvation, when our works
cannot be said to be truly good of themselves, as Evil deeds are truly evil.
Neither this, We must do good to our friends; therefore evil to our Enemies;
For Enemies, in that respect that injuries are to be forgiven them, are not so
much our enemies as our friends. Neither follows, virginity is good,
therefore marriage is evil; for goodness is common to both in diverse respects*
But this follweth, Heat disseve^eth things of diverse kinds, therefore cold
gathers them: Purity cherishes the Spirit, therefore impurity expels it.

2. From what a disparate is removed, from it all in the disparate are removed:
As 1 Samuel 15. God is not as man, that he should lie, or the Son of man, that he
should repent.

3. One of the (...) and repugnants being put, the other is removed; As, It is
unbloody; therefore, it is no Sacrifice; For these are contradictory, 1 Cor.
10. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and of Devils.

4. One of the contraries in an high degree being put, the other is removed.
As, He is in despair: therefore, he has no comfort.

5. One of the privatives being put, the other is removed, and contrariwise:
As, He is blind: therefore he sees not.

6. One of the Relatives being put, the other is put; As, God is an eternal
Father; therefore he has a coeternall Son. Christ is always Mediator and
head: therefore, he will always have a Church.

7. Whereto one of the Relatives is giving, thereto the other cannot be given
in the same respect; And from the remotion of the Relative* to the remotion of
the Correlative, the inference is right: As Christ is David's Lord: therefore,
he is not his servant.

An Inartificiall place, is necessary Testimony. b


Necessary Testimony, is either Of God. a Or of the Senses. b.


Gods Testimony is a sentence spoken of God. a Testimony.


And is Mediate. Immediate.


Immediate, which God utters without means of any Minister.

And it is either. First, By Vision, as of old to the Prophets.

Or Secondly, By Voice; as, at Christ's Baptism,

Mediate, is, which God has uttered by his Son sent in the flesh; Or by
inferior Ministers, the Prophets and Apostles.

The Canons of Gods Testimony, Mediate, and Immediate, are twelve.
1. Gods Testimony is believed for God himself, and his Authority, not for the
man's sake by whom it was uttered.

2. There is no Divine testimony written this day; But in the Bible.

3. All principles of Theological conclusions, pertaining to the perfection
and Salvation of the Elect, are sufficiently delivered in the Scriptures.

4. Argumentation from Gods testimony, proceeds both Affirmatively and
Negatively in things pertaining to Salvation.

5. It cease to be the testimony of God, if wrested either to a wrong sense
or unmeet allegories.

6. From places or testimonies doubtful, Doctrines of faith are not firmly
stablished.

7 That which by good consequence is gathered from any Divine testimony, it
has the same force with it.

8. What is proved or explained by the Scripture, that is understood to be also
proved and explained by the true Church, Lawful Councels, and Ancient Doctors.

9. From Gods revealed will to his power, the argumeent always is of force;
But it follows not, because he will not, that therefore he cannot.

10. From Gods will Indefinite and Hypothetical unto the simple execution
thereof, an argument is not of Force: as, God would all men should be saved:
therefore, they shall all be saved; It follows not; For that Will is
Hypotheticall or Conditional, If they believe.

11. Gods affirmative Commandments are to be taken with limitation.

12. Gods negative Commandments do bind simply.

Testimony of sense, is that which every ones sense tells b
him.

And it is Outward. Inward.


Inward, is, which Laws of Nature and Conscience tells us.

Outward, is, that with the outward senses (as seeing, hearing, etc.) rightly
disposed, and so the sensual observation and experience does confirm: Matthew.
11. Go tell John what ye hear and see. Come see the place where the Lord was
laid.

And thus much of the first kind of necessary Syllogism.

The other kind of necessary Syllogism has the mean term from the place of the
Efficient cause, the Final, and Demonstration. (...).
the Effect. And it is called Demonstration (...).

And it is either Perfect, (...). a Imperfect. (...). b


Perfect Demonstration called (...). ( i. e.) Wherefore, is, whose mean is
taken from the place of the efficient cause or end, for to get the knowledge of
such a conclusion as wherein the accident is attributed to (or spoken of) his
subject.

The general Canons of this Demonstration are eight.
1 Three things are in every demonstration. 1 The subject (...). 2 The
affection, or accident (...). 3 The cause (...).

2 The conclusion of a demonstration consists of two extremes, viz. the
affection or accident which is put in place of the attribute; and then
secondly, the subject wherein the affection is.

3 The foreknowledge of the conclusion is the same that was of others, viz.
that the subjects both name and existence, and definition of the Essence be
foreknown, and the name of the attribute or affection.

4 The finding of the mean also agrees unto the general precepts; For it is
taken from the nature of the extremes, viz. the efficient cause of the
attribute, which often is the form of the Subject, and from the end of the same
attribute.

9. A demonstation has certain degrees; So that one exceeds another in
necessity, and so has propositions, one more necessary, another less.

6. Demonstrations are given in all kinds of disciplines contemplative, of
practick, though the demonstrations of contemplative disciplines be more worthy.

7. There are given demonstrations as well Negative as Affirmative, though the
affirmative be more worthy.

8. A Demonstration perfect ((...)) has great kin with the perfect definition
of an accident: For the things that are in a perfect definition, as Efficient,
Cause, End, and Subject, the same are also in a demonstration.

A perfect Demonstration, is either Of the Efficient. a Of the End. b


A Demonstration of the efficient cause, is, whose mean ^
is taken from the place of the next efficient cause.

And it is either Principal. c c Less Principal. d d


Principal, whose mean is the next principal efficient c c
cause; and it is either of the inward cause, or Outward.

Of the Inward, whose mean is the next principal efficient.

Outward, whose mean is the outward principal next efficient cause.

The Canons of both these are two.
1. Whereto the next efficient cause is given, thereto the effect must needs be
given; and from what the cause is taken, the effect is also.

2. A Demonstration of the Inward cause, is perfecter then a Demonstration of
the Outward cause: Examples of Demonstration: That which has the guilt of sin,
is wretched; But all mankind since the fall, has guiltiness: therefore, it is
wretched. Whatsoever differs from the Law and will of God, deserves Gods
wrath; but every small sin differs, etc. therefore, it deserves Gods wrath.
He that has satisfied Gods wrath, has perfectly redeemed us; Only Christ
has satisfied, etc. therefore, he has redeemed us. They that are constantly
kept of God in the purpose of Election once mode, their Salvation is sure: But
all the faithful are so kept: therefore, their Salvation is sure. Whatsoever
has matter, is moveable; Every natural body has matter; therefore, Every
natural body is moveable.

Less Principal, is, whose mean term is a less principal d d
efficient cause, viz. either* Impulsive, or first Isntrumental.

The Canon hereof, is.
Whereto the Impulsive and Isntrumental which is more matching, is given;
thereto also must needs be given the effect and power or faculty unto which the
instrument is ordained: and contrary, from what the instrument is taken, from
that also the end or effect must needs be taken; Thus Demonstration is made*
that fishes do not breathe, because they have no lungs, that the wicked eat not
Christ's body, because they have no faith; So man is a communicable and sociable
creature, because he has speech, the Instrument of communion.

Demonstration of the end, is, whose mean term is drawn b
from the place of the final cause.

The Canons thereof are two.
1. The end being put, (specially the fitted end) needs must the means to the
end be put, or contrariwise.

2. Even as the end is either fitted and principal, or less principal,
accordingly the Demonstration is more perfect, or imperfect. Thus Christ showed
they ought not to buy and sell in the Temple, because it was an house of
prayer. Heresies must be, that the approved may be known; etc.

Imperfect Demonstration (or (...): That a thing is) b
whose mean is taken from the place of the effect.

The Canons hereof are three.
1* The effect being put, the cause is necessarily put; and the effect being
taken away, so is the cause (as it is a cause of that effect); So it is showed
that some men are Elect; because in time they are called justified, and
sanctified; and contrary, that some are not Elect, because they are not called,
etc. So, Infants are sinners, because they die, Romans 5.

2. Even as the effect is either principal, or less principal, accordingly is
the demonstration more or less principal.

3. When by the effect it is proved, the cause is, or not; on the contrary
also, the effect may be showed by the cause; which Reciprocation, Logicians
call Regresse.

And thus much of Demonstration:

Of an Apparent Syllogism, or Fallacy.
Hitherto we have treated of a true Syllogism; Now follows the Apparent,
which has a false disposition or matter, painted with a show of a true;
Whereupon ignorance or naughty disposition is begotten in the mind.

The Doctrine hereof has two parts.
The 1. whereof is the caution of a deprehended Fallacy.

The 2. is, Showing and loosing of that Fallacy.

First, Of the deprehension, or finding out of a Fallacy.
A Sophism or Fallacy is a deceit, either In Form. a In Matter. b


A Fallacy of Form, is when men sin against the disposition a
of a Syllogism, violating the Canons, either general or special of all the
Figures.

A Fallacy of matter, is either In words. m b
In things. n


A Fallacy of words, is either in a word Simple. g m
Compound. b g



A fallacy of a simple word is either Of want of use. k Of Ambiguity. l


A Fallacy of the want of use of a word, is either 1. For the darkness of it.
2. For the oldnesse. k
3. For the Novelty. 4. For the impropriety of it.


These are opened in the first part of Logic.

Ambiguity of a word is either For the many meanings. For the doubtful
forming. l



Ambiguity for many meanings, is, when a term in a Syllogism is taken in this
meaning or in that: as, That which is begotten begins to be: The Son of God
is begotten, therefore begins to be.

Here is ambiguity in the word, begetting; for the generation that is in the
Holy Trinity, differs generally from the generation of the creatures.

Ambiguity for the forming of a word, is either in respect of the 1.
Orthography. 2. Etymology, 3. Prosodie.


1. In respect of the Orthography, is when the doubtfulnesse arises from the
diverse pronouncing of word, or writing: as, If a man, pretending to make one
his heir, should say, I will make thee mine hair; or to commend one for a full-
hardy soldier, says, He is foolhardy.

2. In respect of the Etymology, doubtfulnesse is which arises either of
likeness of ending, or confounding one number for another. This Fallacy is
called, (...).

3. In respect of Pro^odie, doubtfulnesse is which a^i^eth from wrong
pronounciation; a long syllable for a short, or otherwise.

A Fallacy of a compound word, is, which is in a sentence and is called
Amphib^lie* which is a double uncertainty of the meaning in a sentence.

And it arises either 1. Of the construction and distinction. 2. Of the
phrase. 3. Of the Composition and Division.


1. Of the construction, when the coherence and construction of words is
doubtful.

2. Of the phrase, when not the construction, but the kind of speech makes
uncertainty of sense: as, Christ went up to Heaven to fill all things.
Therefore, His body is diffused everywhere. It is a Fallacy, by not
understanding the Apostles phrase, Fill all things, which is meant of the
effusion of the Holy Ghost, not of the diffusion of his body.

3. Of Composition and Division, when words are joined together which should be
disjoined, or contrariwise: as, Two, and three are even and odd; but five are
two and three; therefore five are even and odd.

A Fallacy in things, is either n
1. About the conclusion, or question. a 2. About the proof of the concluon, on
o^^^^ing the Mean. b


About the conclusion, is either a
1. Asking of many questions, (...). 2. Asking of another question, (...). 3.
Ignorance of the argument (...).


1 The Fallacy of many questions, is, when many questions or conclusions are
confounded in one: As, Were Moses, and Aaron, and David, good Kings? Here is
confusion; for Aaron was not a King. So, when we ask, Have you left your
stealing? If one answer, Yea, it intimates he was once a thief; if he
answers, No, he argues himself now to be a thief.

For every ambiguous question is not one, but manifold. As, Was Judas elected?
Here it is doubtful, whether it is meant Election to life, or election to an
Apostleship; therefore, it is no simple question.

Ubiquitaries reason thus; That which is Sacramentally united with the Bread,
is eaten; though not after a natural, yet a supernatural manner. But Christ's
body is Sacramentally united with the Bread: Therefore, it is eaten, though not
after a natural manner, etc. Answer is, In the conclusion, there is (...).

For two questions are confounded, 1 Whether Christ's body be eaten. 2 How it is
eaten.


2 Ignorance of the Argument or Elench, is, when either the state of the
question is quite turned and wrested, or the adversaries conclusion is not
directly opposite to our Thesis, according to the Canons of lawful opposition:
As, They that are conceived and born in sin, are not holy, The children of the
faithful are conceived and born in sin: therefore, the children of the faithful
are not holy. Here is ignorance of the Elench; for the conclusion is not
directly opposed to our conclusion, who make the children of the faithful holy
with the holiness of the Covenant of calling and promise; But the Adversaries
conclusion speaks of holiness which is immunity from sin.

About the proof of the conclusion, Fallacies are either 1 About the finding of
the mean. b
2 About the premises risen of the disposition of the mean.


1 About the finding of the mean is Begging of the question. a Assumption of a
false mean, b


Begging of the question (or Petitio Principii) is when a
no mean is taken, but the conclusion is proved by it self, repeated either by
the same words, or by others Equivalent: As if one would prove pleasure to be
the chiefest good, because delight is the chiefest good; or one would prove
Jeconias to be the father of Salathiel, because Salathiel was son of Jeconias.

The Fallacy of a false mean, is when to prove a question, b
there is taken a false mean having the appearance of a true: Whereupon, either
the Major, or Minor is false.

A false mean is either Of Contingency apparent. Of Necessity apparent.


Of Contingency apparent, is that which seems to be drawn from some place of
contingent invention: As Peter is named a Petra, the Rock of the Church:
therefore, he is the Foundation and Head.

Answer. It is a Sophistical Syllogism taken from the place of false Notation;
And so of the places.

Of Necessity apparent, is, when a false mean is so propounded as taken from
some necessary place, Monstrative, or Demonstrative: As from a false Genus,
false Difference, Definition, etc.

As, Extreme Unction is a Sacrament: therefore, it seals spiritual graces:
It is from a false Genus.

Also, That which is united to the word, is every where; Christ's humane nature
is united to the word: therefore, it is everywhere; It is a Sophism, having for
the Medium a false efficient cause.

2 Fallacies about the premises or disposition of the mean, are Fallacy of the
consequent. Fallacy from a thing spoken after a sort.


Fallacy of the consequent, is, when there is a naughty connection of the mean
with the greater extreme in the Major Proposition: as, He that said, Bread is
my body, said, my body lies hid in the Bread, but Christ said, etc, Ergo It is
a Sophism of the consequence, whereof no good reason can be rendered: So Christ
taught us to pray for our daily Bread: therefore, Laymen must not drink of the
Wine in the Lords Supper.

Fallacy from a thing spoken after a sort, to spoken simply, is when from the
mean Term disposed with limitation, or after a sort with both or either of the
extremes, a conclusion is inferred absolutely and simply true: as, He that is
less then the father is not equal with him; Christ is less then the Father.
Joh. 14. therefore, he is not equal with him. It is a Sophism from that which
is limited, to that which is not limited. It should be thus, He that is less,
simply and in all respects, is not equal: but then the Minor is false, For
Christ is less, not in degree of Essence, or of substantial perfection; But,
First, By hiding the Godhead in the State of Humility. Secondly, By Office of
Mediator, whose parts he handles with the Father. So he that says, thy words
are words, says true; He that says, thy words are lying
words, says, thy words are words: therefore, He that says thy words are
lying words, says true. Answer, He that says thy words are words, viz.
Absolutely, or Indeterminately, not adding false difference, says true, and so
the Minor is false. Under this is contained Fallacia Accidentis.

Of the loosing or soluting of Fallacies.
The Detection and loosing of Fallacies,

Is either True. a Apparent, b


True Solution, is the showing of the deceit used by the Sophister.

And it is either Direct. a Indirect. b


Direct, is when answer is made directly to the Syllogism a
Showing, and naming the Fallacy.

And it is either of the 1 Form. 2 Matter.


Solution of the Form, is the rejecting of the Syllogism; by showing some
Syllogisticall Canon against which the form of it sins.

Solution of the matter, is either of the Word. Thing.


Solution of the word, is, when the ambiguitie of simple words, and the
amphiboly of joined words is showed and distinguished.

Solution of the Thing, is, either of the Question. Proof.


Solution of the Question, is, when the state of the controversy is rightly
constituted, the manifold question discerned, and the fault of evil opposition
showed.

Solution of the proof, is either about the 1 Finding of the Mean. 2
Disposition with the Extremes.


About the finding of the Mean, is either the showing, and denying of a vicious
consequence in the Major, or a limitation: when there is a fault by omitting a
limitation.

So there are in all, five direct Solutions and answers to the matter.

1 Distinction or explication of a word simple or conjoined.

2 Information and distinction of the conclusion or question,

3 Denial of one of the Premises.

4 Rejection of a naughty consequence. And

5 Limitation.

Of these three be three Canons.
1 When the form is plain, straightwayes we must think of the conclusion of the
proposed Syllogism* and see whether it be constituted rightly, or opposed to
our position.

2 When the conclusion is plain, We must answer to the Premises either by
distinguishing and limiting, or by denying.

3 We must never answer by denial when the argument b
may be soluted by distinguishing and limiting.

Indirect Solution, is when we answer indirectly, and thwartly to the Syllogism
proposed.

And that is either unto the Thing. Person. *


Indirect answer unto the thing, is either 1 By Retortion. 2 By Contrary
objection. 3 By showing contradiction. 4 By opposition of equal or less
private
authority. 5 By comparison, etc.


1 Answer by Retortion, is, when we show that the mean or proof brought by the
adversary makes for us, or overthrows the same conclusion which he would
prove by it, or at least other assertions of the adversary: As, Christ is first
begotten before the creature: therefore he is a creature. Answer, Nay,
therefore he is not a creature, because he was begotten before any creature was.

2 Solution by contrary objection ((...)) is when the objection is not solved,
but another stronger objection is propounded to the adversary: So Christ
answered them that would have the Ointment sold and given to the poor, by
opposing a stronger reason: The poor ye have always with you, but me not.

3 Showing of contradiction, (...), is when we show contradiction in our
adversaries words* As, when the Papists except that in their Mass, Christ is
not crucified again, because the sacrifice is unbloody; it is (...): for a
Sacrifice and unbloody are contradictory.

4 Opposition of equal authority, is, when to an humane Testimony we oppose
another Testimony as good, or better.

5 Comparison with like absurd, is when we compare our adversaris argument with
the like absurd.

Indirect answer unto the person, is either * *
A Blame. A Comparison.


A Blam or chiding ((...)) is, when we blame the adversary for that he
disputes against Piety and Honesty, or against manifest sense and Experience.

A Comparison of the like, or greater, is, when we put away any thing objected
against our or an others person, with an other personal objection: As, Christ,
when the Pharisees blamed his Disciples for eating with unwashed hands,
answered, Why do you also transgress Gods Commandments by your traditions?

Apparent Solutions, are, by which nothing is fitly answered; b
Only in show something is said.

Of this Solution there be five sorts.
1 The first, when nothing is answered to the Syllogism propounded: But
somewhat is said of the thing generally, lest the Answerer should seem to say
nothing.

2 When general and ill understood Fallacies are applied, which pertain not to
the Syllogism proposed.

3 Provocation unto wrath.

4 Is a setting at naught ((...)) when we mock the adversaries reasons as light.

5 Is running aside ((...)) and leading from the matter in hand ((...))

And thus much touching the Doctrine of Syllogism.

A Type of the whole Doctrine of the Fallacies.
The finding out of the Fallacies; For it is either of the Form In the word
Simple of Want of use. Ambiguity.
Compound, wherein is Amphiboly by the Construction. Phrase. Composition. And
division.

Matter and that Out of the word, and that either about. The conclusion or
question. Many questions. Ignorance of the Elench.
The proof and that either The Mean Begging of the question. Taking a false
Mean.
The premises as the Fallacy Of consequence. From spoken after a sort. to
spoken absolutely.






The resolution, which is either True. Direct Of the Form. Of the matter. 1
True constitution of the state of the controversy. 2 Distinction and
Explication of doubtful words and phrase. 3 Denial of false premises. 4
Rejection of a naughty consequence, 5 Limitation.

Indirect; which is either unto* The thing Retortion. Contrary Objection.
Showing contradiction. Opposition of Authority. Comparison.
The person Blame. Comparison.





Apparent, 1 When nothing is answered to the matter. 2 Applying of a fallacy
ill understood. 3 Provoking of the Adversary. 4 Setting at naught. 5 Running
aside.


A Type of the Doctrine of Syllogisms.
A Syllogism is to be considered.
Commonly Primary of the Figure, First, Second, and Third, Secondary either
Indirect, Prima. Secondary. Both which are
Simple. Compound: Conditional Disjunctive. Uniform. Biform, or Dilemma.



Diarect, Enthymeme. Consecution of sentences. Induction. Sorites.


Speially under condition of some certain matter, and it is either. True Real
which is either, Contingent which is either Notionall Of the word Definition.
Conjugates.

Of things which is either Artificial, which is either First, Inward Caused
caused. Subject, Accident. Whole, part.

Outward Adjacent Object. Concomitant,

Risen of the First from Description. Comparison. Consentany. Even. Example,
Like.
Dissentany Uneven. Unlike. Great. Less.




Inartificiall, Humane Testimony.



Apparent of which see before, Necessary. Monstrative from places. Artificial.
First. Arisen. Definition. Opposites. Inward Genus, Species. Matter, Form,
Proper Subject. Proper accident. Whole, parts.
Outward. Circumstances. Objects concomimitants.




Demonstrative, or Apodictike. which is either Inartificiall or testimony, Of
God. Of the Senses.
Perfect The efficient. The End, Principal. Less principal.

(...) Imperfect (...) from the place of the effects.





OF METHOD, OR ORDER.
HItherto has been the directnesse of discourse Illative.

Now follows the directnesse of discourse Ordinative, which is an act of the
mind or understanding proceeding from one part of Doctrine to another, by
conferring them one with another, and knitting them together with the help of
the precepts of the Method.

Method is the constitution of the parts of Doctrine, from a
a certain beginning unto a certain end.

And it is either Artificial. a Inartificial. b


Artificial, is which is Instituted according to the Nature of Things, and
Rules of art.

The Canons hereof are five.
1 Let no Part be wanting, none Overplus.

2 Let the proceeding of Method imitate the natural proceeding and order of
things; going on from things first and best known, to things after.

3 The parts before and after distinct between themselves, must agree with a
kind of Harmony, in a certain beginning* and end, or scope.

4 The knitting together of things before and after, should be showed in the
Chapters, and Heads of the Treatise by Bands and Forms of Transition.

5 Let all the parts of the Method be of the same kind.

Method also is either Compositive, Synthetical. a Resolutive, Analytical. bb


The Canons of the Preceps of a Discipline are two.
1 Let every Precept be, Definition, Division, or Canou.

2 Let the Precepts be True, Methodical, Profitable, and informed with proper
and perspicuous words.

Compositive Method, is wherein the parts of a contemplative a
Discipline are so disposed as that progress is made from the Universal
Subject of contemplation unto the particulars, and so from Simples to Compounds.

The Canons hereof are five,
1 The parts of Compositive Method are three; First, the Subject. Secondly, The
beginnings or causes. Thirdly, The affections.

2 The subject of a Science is necessarily one in Unity of Collection, and of
Universality

3 The Subject is foreknown. First, That it is, Secondly, What it is. Thirdly
That it has certain Properties, or Affections.

4 The beginnings are foreknown that they are, and what they signify.

5 The Affections are foreknown what they signify.

Resolutive Method, is, wherein the parts of an operative bb
discipline are disposed so as that from the knowledge of the end, the
progress is made to the knowledge of the beginnings or means, by which that
end may be brought into his subject,

The Canons hereof are six.
1 The Parts of this Method are three. First, the end to to brought in.
Secondly, the Subject whereinto it is brought. Thirdly, the beginnings or means
by which the end is brought in.

2 The end is foreknown, First, that it is, or that it may be produced: and
Secondly, What it is.

3 The end has double accidents; Of which, some pertain to the finding of the
means by which it should be produced, and they are to be known at the first;
Others pertain to the Possession and conservation of the end, and that is not
needful to be foreknown.

4 The Unity of an operative discipline, depends on the Unity of the end.

5 The Subject is foreknown. First, that it is. Secondly, that it is capable of
the end. Thirdly, that it has accidents, which pertain next unto the end.

6 The means are not foreknown, but are handled in proceeding from Universals
to Particulars; from Simples to Compounds; so as that they be profitable, and
sufficient for the end.

Particular Method, is wherein a certain and special theme b
is disposed.

And it is either of a theme, Simple a Compound. b


Method of a Simple, is, in which a simple Theme is handled a
and declared.

And it is either Principal. 1 Less Principal. 2


Principal, is, in which a full Progress is made from simples to more
compounded.

This Progress has nine parts.
1 The name or word of every simple thing is considered, whether Concrete, or
Abstract; Withal the definition of the name is given, etc. If it be ambiguous,
it is distinguished.

2 The Genus of the thing is found out by looking in the predicamental order.

3 The causes are found out and put; In substances, in respect of the Essence,
Matter, and Form, in respect of the Existence, Efficient, and End; In
accidentals, because Essence and Existence fall together, the Efficient and
Final causes, the Object and the Subject are found out.

4 If it be a singular accident, also the antecedents, consequents, and other
circumstances are considered.

5 The whole definition is made, viz. diverse, even as the Theme is either
Accident, or Substance.

6 The proper accidents and Effects of this thing are proposed, and often also
the adjacents and concomitants are taught.

7 The theme is divided into the parts chiefly integrall; For the division into
the Species, if the theme be a Genus, is kept till the last place, if one would
handle the matter at large.

8 The things akin unto it are laid down. 2


9 The things diverse and opposite are added.

Less Principal, is, when first the Definition is laid down, b
and then it is resolved by parts.

The Method of a compound or conjoined theme, is, wherein the handling of a
conjoynt question or problem is instituted.

The parts thereof are eight.
1 A right constitution of the problem or state of the controversy.

2 A choice or setting down of a position, Negative; or Affirmative, which you
will defend.

3 A foreknowledge of both extremes, viz. of the antecedent and consequent; as
touching Limitations, Definitions, Distinctions, and so the presupposition of
thine Hypothesis.

4 Confirmation of thy position.

5 A laying down of the adversaries position.

6 A foreknowledge and refutation of the adversaties distinctions.

7 A solution of the adversaries Objections.

8 A repetition of the proved position, and a collection of consequences or
conclusions.

In artificial Method, is, which is instituted not so much by b
the Order of Nature and rules of Art, as by the circumstance of the Learner
and Auditor at the discretion and pleasure of the Teacher and Learner.

And thus much of the whole frame and body of the art of Logic.

OF The use and Exercise OF LOGIC.
AFter the absolute Frame or method of the Precepts of Logic, follows in
order of Nature, and of Doctrine, the use and Exercise of the Art more fully
and plainly to be delivered.

Exercise of Logic, is a function of the mind or reason, whereby the Precepts
of art comprehended in the mind are indeed and work applied to the things that
are to be known out of the art.

And it is either Particular. Universal.


The particular or special Exercise of Logic, is, when some one particular
Logical precept, is by the example thereof illustrated and exercised: Unto this
special use there need no other direction then the frame of Logical Precepts
before laid down; For there the use through every Precept is declared by
special Examples,

The Universal Exercise, is when some whole Rank of Logical precepts is
applied to things that are to be known or recognized: Like as a Smith, when
some little part of a work is to be done, takes in his hand the Hammer only,
or the Tongs; But when he has a whole work to do, he uses the furniture of
all his Smiths Tools.

So in Logic, sometime the genus, or the cause, or some accident of a thing
only, is to be dealt of, and proved or refuted by a Syllogism or two; and for
this the special Rules before delivered are sufficient: But these are not
enough when one has a general argument, or whole matter to treat of Logically.
For a larger course is now to be taken.

This Universal Exercise is either The handling of a thing, called (...). The
recognizing of a thing handled, called (...).


Of the Tractation or handling of a thing, called (...), or Generation.
Tractation (or Handling) is the meditation of a Theme, or matter to be done by
Instruments of Art.

And it is either Simple. a Conjunct. b


Simple treating, is, whereby a simple Theme is explained. a


A simple Theme is one thing signified by one Term only.

The handling of a simple Theme, is either Universal. Singular.


The general Canons of handling a Theme are five.
1 Let the name of the propounded theme be considered, whether it be simple;
and if it be not simple, but combined of many words, whether it may be reduced
to one simple word, either in the Latin, or in the Greek, or other tongue. For
a word of that language is to be preferred, which signifies a simple thing
most simply.

2 When the word is found to be simple; Let it be considered whether it be a
Noun Abstract or Concrete.

3 It is also to be considered whether the word of the proposed Theme be
certain, or ambiguous; and if it be ambiguous, let it carefully be
distinguished.

Let there be added a definition of the Noun; Either (...), according to the
term, or (...), according to the Etymology and Notation: And especially the
latter.

5 Having considered the definition, think then carefully of the Genus (or
general) of a Theme; Namely, in what order of things, and how it is placed: and
if it be no where found in this order among the predicaments, let it be counted
for a Non ^ns; And so the handling of it be ended with the consideration of the
Name.

For example. If a man would treat of Purgatory; First, let him weigh the name;
Then mind the Definition and Declaration of the Name by the Etymology, viz.
That by this Name is signified some Infernal fire; But somewhat gentler,
wherein the souls of them that are to be saved, must be purged, and roasted
therein, so long as till full satisfaction be made for their sins. This
Declaration of the name shows that such a fire there is no where: therefore,
Not to be sought in any predicament (or Rank of things.) And so it is but
folly, either to define it, or declare it by the causes and properties thereof.
But here note, that this consideration, Whether a thing be or not, is not to be
according to the Existence ((...)) in some certain place, or time; but it is to
be minded essentially ((...)) As if one would treat of Christ's Incarnation; The
question, Whether it be or no, is not to be minded so, as whether it be to day,
or whether it shall be; But this is enough, that at any time it has been, and
now also dureth in effect, although Christ be no more Incarnate, nor brought
forth. The like is also to be minded for things to come, as the day of
Judgment, Resurrection, etc. For though these have not yet Existence, yet have
they Essence; and because it is sure they shall be, they are to be treated of,
in order and manner of things that now are.

Treating also is either Of a Perfect Theme. a b Of an Imperfect Theme. a b


A perfect theme, is, that which is perfectly placed in the a
order of things or predicaments; as an Universal thing, one, and whole by it
self.

And it is either Substantial. Accidental.


The treating of both these is either Primary. 1 Secondary. 2


Primary treating is, which, when the beginnings of the Definition are
foreknown, gathers from them the Definition, and then uses the other Logical
terms for explaning the term, according to those Canons that follow pertaining
to the explication of a substance.

1 When the name of the theme is weighed, and the lawful A Theme substiantial
Genus found, let the difference be sought for, either by the predicamental
Tables, or by some notable effect, or antecedent of a Theme known to the senses.

2 When the Genus and difference are found by its self, the Definition must be
gathered and made.

3 The Definition of a substance being gathered, the form thereof and matter is
distinctly to be considered.

4 Let the Form then be assigned, and (so far as the perspicuity of the
Doctrine will suffer) declared.

5 After the Form, let the matter generally be weighed.

6 After, the Integral parts, which make the matter entire; let those parts at
least be considered which are most principal, and primary Instruments to bring
forth the operations of the Form.

7 The efficient cause Principal and Instrumental, although it pertains not to
the Essence of a Substance, yet it is to be considered for the knowledge of the
Existence; The like is also to be minded for the final cause.

8 The proper accidents or effects flowing from the Form, and cleaving to the
whole compound, must be reckoned.

9 Then let there be added a Division of the proposed substance, by the Primary
accidents, by the Integral parts, inferring a manifest distinction; and if the
Theme be a Genus, let the Species thereof be recounted, which after may have
their peculiar handling also if the handler be so purposed.

10 Let the things that are akin to the proposed substance be added.

11 And then let there be showed the things that are diverse and contrary.

For example, Let this Theme Animal (or living crea^ure) be to be handled.

1 Weigh the name, which in Latin is of Anima, a Soul; which signifies any
living Form, which also is in plants; but is by an excellency given to other
sensible creatures, in whom the Soul more manifestly appears by sense and
motion. In Hebrew it is called (...) Cajah, of life; for that such creatures
seem only to have life. Of the ambiguity of the name, or concretion, or
abstraction, there needs none ado.

2 Next look for the Genus which is found in the Table of Substances to be a
living body.

3 The difference restraining that Genus, is found in the same Table also to be
sensitive.

4 The whole Definition therefore is, that an Animal is a living body sensitive.

5 The matter far off of an Animal, are the Instruments of life; The next
matter is the Instruments of sense and motion; which taken all together are
called the body of the Animal.

6 The Form near, is the Soul Vegetant; the nearest, is the Soul sensitive,
which by the effects or proper accidents that cleave to the Animal, are as it
were by the latter words evidently perceived.

7 Then come to the existence, and here weigh the efficient cause of an Animal:
The principal Efficient, is the Forming of the youngling of an Animal, whereby
the sensitive Soul is united with the body; The Instrumental cause is the Seed,
the Womb, the Birth; all which may be treated of peculiarly.

8 The end is to be showed wherefore an Animal was at first created, and
wherefore in time gendered; The End Universal is the glory of God the Creator;
The particular is the Complement of all the degrees of life, and so the
perfection of the World and Creatures, which require not only a Body vegetant,
but also sensible.

9 The proper accidents of an Animal are principally, 1 Sense Inward and
Outward. 2 Appetite. 3 Going. Secondarily, 1 Breathing, 2 Watching, Sleep,
Dreaming.

10 The Integrant parts of the body or matter, are, 1 Similary parts, as blood
and other Humors, Flesh, Bones, Sinews, Arteries. 2 Dissimilary parts
principal, are the Brain, Heart, Stomach, Liver; and other less principal all
over the body.

11 The division of an Animal, is, 1 By reason of the temperature and parts,
into Male, and Female. 2 By the Species, into Man and Beast, which also may
severally and distinctly be considered.

12 The things akin to an Animal, are, Plants, especially those that are called
(...) Plant Animals, and half Animals, as Sponges, etc.

13 The Opposites of an Animal, are things that want Life, Sense and Motion;
and Poisons, which are pernicious to the Life.

And thus much for handling a perfect Theme Substantial.

A Theme Accidental is handled according to these Canons. b A Theme accidental.


1 After due consideration of the name, First think of the Order or predicament
of the proposed accident; whether it be quantity, quality, Action, Passion, or
Relation; For so it will appear, whether it indeed be an accident, or a Non
ens, and feigned Theme.

2 When the Genus is found, let the Subject of the accident be showed; And
withal, consider whether the accident treated of, be common or proper; For
these two have diverse explications; Wherefore an accident should always be
reduced to his first and even subject, that of a common it may be made proper.

3 Because Relation is busied between two Subjects, of which one is called the
Relate, the other the Correlate, therefore in explaning of a relation, both of
them must be assigned.

4 The Object then is to be minded about which the accident is occupied; and
Objects bear rule in qualities and Actions.

5 The Principal efficient causes must be found out; First the near, and then
the nearest causes.

6 In Relations the ground or Fundament must be enquired, and it differs not
from the nearest cause.

7 Then let the end of the accident be showed, which also bears sway chiefly in
quality and action.

8 But in Relations the Term must be enquired, which is the same with the final
cause.

9 Then give the definition of the accident according to the nature of every
predicament, assigning besides the Genus the essential terms, as the Subject,
the Object, the Efficient cause, and the End.

10 Often also the Antecedents, Connexes, Circumstances and Consequences are to
be reckoned; As when the propounded Theme is an Action or Passion.

11 The effects of the proposed accident must be distinctly told.

12 A Division must be added, either into the Species, if the proposed accident
be a Genus: or into other members fitting to an accident.

13 Then show the things akin thereto, or which have some affinity of nature
with the proposed theme.

14 Let the diversity which is between Themes akin be showed.

15 Let the Opposites or Contraries be added.

For Example. This accidental Theme is to be handled; Calling upon God.

1 The Name is absolute.

2 The Genus in the Predicament of Action is found to be this, a religious
action.

3 The Subject of this Action, is, a faithful man.

4 The Object, First, to whom it should be directed, is the whole Trinity, and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, reconciled by the Son. Secondly, The
Object of the things to be asked, which are Bodily and Spiritual. Thirdly, The
Object for whom, is our selves and others.

5 The Efficient cause principal, is, the manner of confidence, stirred up by
the holy Ghost, by the authority and merit of Christ the Mediator, Joh. 4. Romans
6. The outward moving cause ((...)) is Gods commandment, and his promise to
hear us, Joh. 16. Psalm. 150. The inward moving cause ((...)) is, the feeling of
our own wants, and remembrance of Gods benefits before received* The
Isntrumental causes are the Form given by Christ, Mat. 6. and our members
Inward and Outward; as heart, tongues, eyes, hands, knees, etc.

6 The end, is the obtaining of benefits, and thankful glorifying of God.

7 So the whole definition is this; Invocation is a Religious action, or
operation from the motion of faith, kindled by the holy Ghost, with trust and
authority of Christ the Mediator, done by a faithful man, and directed unto
God propitious in his Son, for the obtaining of good things needful, and for
the glorification of Gods holy Name.

8 The proper accidents or things requisite, are, First, That it be done in
true faith without wavering. Jam. 1. Secondly, That it be directed to Gods
will. Thirdly, That it be with devout inward Motions and outward gestures (if
it may be.) Fourthly, That it be not hasty, limiting God a time or manner.
Jsaiah 28. Fifthly, That it be conceived with brief words without any
redundance of speech.

9. The effects, are Union with God, joy and comfort of mind, the obtaining of
good things needful.

10. The Circumstances, are the place, now free. Joh. 4. public, or private;
the time also free, at all hours, etc.

11. The things connexed unto it, are, purity of life, sobriety, tentations of
the Devil much to be resisted.

12. The Division, is by circumstance of the place, public or private: By the
object: it is supplication ((...)) Prayer ((...)) Intercession ((...))

13. The things akin unto it, are, diligent reading of the Scripture,
Meditation of holy things, continual diligence in the works of our calling.

14. The contraries, are, A corrupt conscience, an unclean life, doubting,
profaness, and contempt, blasphemy and execration.

And thus much of the primary handling of a perfect Theme.

The Secondary, is when the Definition of a Theme is put at the first
beginning, and afterward is resolved and explained by parts: This way is
commonly used of many in an their treatises: And though it be good, yet is it
not so artificial and profitable as the former.

Now follows the handling of Imperfect Themes.

Imperfect Themes, are they that are imperfectly placed in the Predicaments and
Order of things. Imperfect* Theme.


And they are imperfect, either In respect of our understanding. Of their own
Nature.


In respect of our understanding, only the nature of the most high God cannot
perfectly be treated of and explained.

Of its own nature, a Theme Imperfect is five-fold, 1 A singular thing. 2 A
Part. 3 A Concrete. 4 A Collective. 5 A Privation.


A Singular thing or Individuum, is either Substantial. a 1
Accidental. b


Substantial has these Canons.
a
1 Among substantial Themes, those chiefly come to be handled in use which are
called persons.

2 The Genus and Species are, in secret thought, presupposed in singulars.

3 The persons name, and Etymology, and reason of the giving of it, is to be
considered.

4 Then comes to be considered the efficient cause, or beginning and birth of
the person, with the Circumstances of place and Country, of time when; and
then the subjects of this birth, his Father and Mother.

5 These are to be told; the accidents of the person; First, Pertaining to his
body; as Stature, and Health. Secondly, to his mind; as Wit, Judgment,
Memory, Learning; Also Moral Virtues, Chastity, Liberality, etc. And these may
be led along his ages, as his childhood, youth, man's age,

6 The effects of the person are to be recited, what memorable things he has
done in every age, especially in his manhood.

7* Let the things which are akin be showed, as they that live in his time, his
friends, and the things wherein the person most delights.

8 Finally, let the diverse things and contrary to the person, be rehearsed, as
Foes, Enviers; and his death with the cause thereof, as the disease; or if it
were violent, by what adversity he perished; Then the things connex to his
death, if any strange signs went before: or if he spoke any memorable thing at
last; whereto add the consequents of his death, as his Burial and Funerals.

A singular accident, is, which cleaves to a singular substance, [ b]
as either the quality* or action, or Passion, or Relation of it.

The Canons for handling this Theme are these.
1 Let the name be weighed, as was in a theme universal.

2 Let the Genus and Species of the propounded theme be presupposed.

3 The Subject, namely, the singular substance is to be considered; as also the
Object about which it is occupied.

4 Let the antecedents, connexes, adjacents, and circumstances specially be
explaned.

5 Let the causes Efficient, both Principal, and Impulsive, and Instrumental be
diligently discussed, and the final cause also added.

6 Let the description be gathered, by naming of the Species, assignation also
of the subject, object, circumstances of time and place, with mention also of
the efficient and final causes.

7 Let the proper Requisites and Effects be added.

8 Let the Consequents be named.

9 Let the things akin be rehearsed,

10 Let the things diverse be compared, and the opposites at last assigned.

For example, Let Christ's ascension be the theme to be handled,

1 Ascension is the scansion or moving from an inferior place to a superior.

2 The Genus of it is a motion local, whose extremes are (...) what, and unto
what, and then the mean by which the (...) is made* Now here we are to mind
whether Christ's Ascension be a Natural moving, or Supernatural. And we may find
it to be a Natural moving, First, In respect of the Subject, which is a
natural Body. Secondly, and in respect of the terms and mean. But in respect of
the Efficient cause and end, it is Supernatural.

3 The Subject of this ascension, is Christ's whole person; not absolutely, but
restrictively, according to that part which could move from place to place,
which is his humane nature. As for the Object, Local moving is not occupied
about it.

4 The Antecedents far off, were Christ's Ministry, and all that he did in his
life, the nearer, are his Passion, Resurrection, conversing after with his
Disciples forty days, and bringing of them to Mount-Olivet etc. The Connexes,
are the term from whence; Namely, Mount-Olivet: The term whereto, namely, the
Heaven of Heavens. The means by which, are the Air, and Sphere of fire, and
other Orbs, through which his Body went. The Circumstance of places agrees with
the terms; The time was forty days after his Resurrection: The other Connexes,
were, the gazing of his Disciples, the appearing of the Angels, etc.

5 The principal Efficient cause, was the virtue of the Godhead, the inward
moving cause ((...)) is Christ's love to his Elect: The outward moving cause
((...)) is the profit and salvation of his Elect. The final cause in respect of
Christ, is, the full possession of glory. Secondly, In respect of his Elect, to
fulfill his kingly office, by defending and ruling of his Church; Also, his
Prophetical and Priestly office, by sending the holy Ghost to teach them, and
the interceding for them with the Father.

6 Hereupon the Description arises, this, That Christ's ascension was a Local
moving, whereby he, as touching his body, leaving the earth on Mount-Olivet,
came through all the Regions of the Elements by virtue of the Godhead into the
glorious Heaven to possess full glory, and to defend his Church against all
Enemies, and by the power of the holy Ghost from Heaven to teach and instruct,
and by Intercession to commend us to the Father.

7 The Effects of his ascension, are, the sending of the holy Ghost, the
gathering of his Church by the Ministry of his Apostles; the suppressing of
the Enemies, and defense of his Church; sitting on Gods right hand, and
Intercession.

8 The Consequent of his Ascension, was, the Apostles wondering, and returning
to Jerusalem; Fear, and dwelling together till the Spirit was sent down.

9 The things akin to his Ascension, were, his Resurrection, the ascending of
Enoch, and especially of Elias.

10 Diversity may be showed between those; for the ascension of Enoch and Elias
was not a Victory over sin and the Devil; nor a triumph of merit, but of grace;
not by their own power, but by another, etc. And the Opposites of his
ascension, are, His base estate on earth, and that disparition and vanishing
away, which Ubiquitaries feign of his Body, etc.

And thus much of the handling of a singular accident.

The handling of a Part has these Canons. 2

1 Let the name of the part in several tongues be considered, and the Notation
showed.

2 Because every Part is a thing Incomplete, a complete Genus or Species of it
cannot be had, but it must be referred unto the predicament in which the whole
is: therefore, by Comparison to the whole, and Relation to the whole, the
Nature of the Part is of our understanding to be conceived; For every part is
part of the whole; and if it be cut from the whole, it deserves almost no
consideration, because the use of it is ceased.

3 It must be considered whether the part be Essential, or Integral.

4 If the part be Essential, let it be minded whether it be the Form, or the
Matter: If the Form, it must chiefly be explained by his Operations, or Forces,
and Effects. If it be the Matter, the disposition of it must be considered, by
which it is apt to receive the Form, and so the Instruments by which the
operations of the Form are wrought; and so let the whole body be subdivided
into parts greater and principal, lesser and least of all.

5 Let it be considered, whether the Integral part be similar, or dissimilar:
For Similars come rarely under consideration, because it is of the same name,
nature, and properties with the whole, but dissimilars are wont chiefly to
deserve explication.

6 In every part therefore, besides the name, there must be considered 1 The
quantity and figure* 2 The quality or temperature. 3 The situation, and how it
is placed, and knit with other parts. 4 The uses or actions of the parts, for
whose sake this Instrument is of Nature made. 5 The lesser parts of which it is
compounded.

7 After this, let the things akin to the part be weighed as are either parts
like unto it; and finally let the Opposites be added, as are in man's body, the
peculiar diseases of the parts.

The use of this Doctrine of the Part is chiefly seen in anatomies, and in
astronomy, and architecture or building; But most of all in the anatomy, and
parts of a man's body.

A Concrete accident is explained chiefly by these Canons. 3


1 Besides the ambiguity of the name, and the Etymology, let the Absolute
accident be considered of which the Concrete is denominated, because the
resolution of the Concrete into the Absolute is the best explication of the
Concrete.

2 In the accident absolute, whereinto the Concrete is resolved; let the Genus,
Causes, Objects, Effects, Things akin, and Opposites be considered, and let
them be applied to the Concrete accident after the same manner.

3 In relations, concrets are often wont to be taken for absolutes, by the
unheedy: therefore, there needs great discretion.

4 When the nature of the absolute accident is perceived, the description of
the Concrete may be annexed, viz. that which is builded by the consideration of
the absolute. 4


Collectives are diverse things, especially substances united together, not by
any essential Band, but by Number and Relation.

The Canons for explaining Collectives, are these.
1 Besides the Name, consider whether the Collection be made of many accidents,
or of Substances.

2 Consider whither unto those many Subjects gathered together, there cleave
any Relation, and then that Relation is to be explained by the Precepts given
before.

For example. To treat of the Church, which is a collection of many singular
persons, 1 Consider the name in Hebrew, Greek, and other Languages; And then
mind it after a double kind. 1 In respect of the Material thing. 2 And in
respect of the Formal. The Material of the Church, be Gods people: therefore,
the Church may after a sort be referred unto Substance: And after a sort to
quantity, or Number. But because to this Number there cleaves a Relation,
therefore first of all thou must turn thy mind to Relation: For the Church is
the Communion of Saints; and all Communion is Relation. Now the Relation of the
Church is twofold. 1 Of the members to the head. 2 And of the members one to
another: therefore, the Church may be defined, The company of the Elect united
in one head Christ, and one with another in the Bond of the Holy Ghost, unto
the fruition of eternal Salvation.

A Privative Theme has these Canons. 5

1 Besides the name, consider the Genus of that thing whose Privation is
propounded, to wit, so as that there may be a calling back unto the Habit.

2 Then let the description of the Privation be added, the Privative causes
being added to the denial of the habit, and the Subject wherein the privation
is.

3 Things akin and repugnant, may so be added in Privatives, that it may be
thought the opposition of the privation is perfection.

And thus much of the handling of a simple Theme. *


A conjoined Theme, is, which is combined of simples; So as it is made the
matter and object of the second and third function which the reason or
understanding of man exercises.

The handling of a conjunct Theme, according to the second part of Logic, is,
which combineth and constituteth some proposition or sentence.

The Canons hereof are these.
1 Let the antecedent and consequent of the proposition be rightly ordered,
each one in his place.

2 Let the Negative Particle to make a Negative Proposition, be put in that
place where the Band of the Affirmation may be broken.

3 Let the note of universality be rightly placed, and showed, whether it be
absolute or limited, distributive or collective.

4 Let the consequent rightly be restrained and limited to the antecedent.

5 Let the Conjunctions, specially the conditionals rightly be distinguished in
the proposition from the other parts.

6 Let a conditional proposition be revoked by cogitation of the mind unto a
simple proposition.

7 Let the sentence constituted be rightly reciprocate and turned.

8 Let an improper proposition be reduced to a proper.

9 Let a contingent proposition be called to a necessary.

10 Let it be considered unto what Discipline the proposed sentence does
pertain: Which may be learned by the Nature of the simple terms in the
proposition; For if these be Theological, the proposition belongs to Theology:
If Political, to Politics, and so the rest.

And this may suffice for the handling of a conjoynt theme, by the Instruments
of the second part of Logic.

The handling or generation of the third part, is either Syllogistical. a
Methodical. b


Syllogistical, is, when any problem or conjoynt proposition a
is handled by confirming, or refuting, that the truth, if it be unknown, may
be found out: if obscure, may be declared; if doubtful, may be confirmed.

And this handling of Logic, is called Disputation. Disputation is either
Solitary. 1 * Social. 2 *


Solitary disputation, is when our selves secretly treat of 1 *
any controverted Problem, or question, the adversary being not present, or
instant.

In this, two things are to be considered. 1 The question it self, or state of
the controversy. 2 The manner of confirming and refuting.

The question (or Problem) is the matter subjected to Disputation. The Canons
of this matter are these.

1 Let not the matter propounded to be disputed of, violate Piety and Religion.
(As, whether there be a God, whether Parents are to be honored, etc.)

2 Let it not be of things plainly manifest, and without doubt.

3 Let it be profitable, grave, not inept, or ridiculous.

4 Let it not exceed the capacity of man's mind.

5 Let it be framed with words perspicuous, and not ambiguous.

6 Let it be such as is this day controversed.

A Problem propounded to be disputed of, is either Perfect. Imperfect.


Perfect is, whose terms are Universal, so as they may be proved, or disproved,
by necessary and artificial arguments.

Imperfect, is, whose terms are singular, so as they have need to be proved;
chiefly by Inartificial arguments taken from authority of Writers, or from
testimony of the senses.

The handling of a Problem, is either Primary. Secondary.


Primary, is, which is instituted according to these Canons.

1 Let the state of the controversy be rightly constituted, and without all
ambiguity, by choosing the Affirmant, or Negant Thesis which thou will defend.

2 Let a full precognition of the future proving and refuting be instituted by
definition of the Antecedent and Consequent; Also by fit Limitations and
Distinctions which are the future Principles of all the disputation to come.

3 Let the propounded Thesis be confirmed by arguments. 1 Artificial, drawn
from the nature of the Antecedent and Consequent. 2 By Inartificial, that is,
Testimonies and Authorities.

4 After confirmation let our Adversaries Thesis be set down directly opposite
to our Thesis.

5 Let a Refutation be added, both of the Distinctions by which they answer
unto our arguments, and also of the adversaries Objections.

6 Let the proved Thesis be repeated, and let the Consequences ((...)) be
gathered from the conclusion, confirmed by the arguments.

Sociall disputation has in it two parts, one of the Opponent, 2*
the other of the Answerer.

The Canons of these parts, some are common to both parts, and some proper to
each of them.

The common Canons are six.
1 Let there be brought unto disputation a good intention of the mind, which
seeks not glory, but truth.

2 Let the mind be pure from all prejudices.

3 Let the disputers agree whether of them shall oppose, or answer.

4 Let both parties bind themselves to the Laws and Rules of Logic.

5 Let them agree between themselves of certain foreknown Principles.

6 Let brevity and plainness be kept in opposing, and answering all
ambiguities, and Ambages of Oratorious Declamations be avoided.

The Canons of the Opponent are six.
1 The Opponents parts are two: 1 To move the objection. 2 To insist upon the
solution given

2 As touching moving the question, let the position diligently be weighed,
against which thou will oppose.

3 The position being carefully weighed, let the mean terms be brought forth
for that conclusion thou desire to infer, from the nature of the Antecedent
and Consequent, and then also from testimony of chief Authors; Yet having
withal a choice of arguments.

4 Let the arguments be clearly and briefly included in a Syllogistical Form.

5 Let the Opponent use a double kind of argumentation; Direct, or Offensive,
and then that which leads to absurdity; and let him prefer this often times
before the other

6 If either of the premises in the Syllogism need manifest proof, let not the
Opponent expect until the proof of the Major, or Minor be required; But let
himself by and by confirm his proposition by making a Prosyllogism.

The Opponents duty in urging, or insisting on the Objection, has these Canons.

1 Having heard the answer to the objection, let the Opponent in secret thought
examine with himself, whether it be unto the Form, or the Matter.

2 If the Form of the argument be refused, let the Rule of Logic, against
which it faulteth, be required; and if he acknowledge it to be a fault, let him
urge it no more. For it is childish to go about to defend a naughty Form of
Syllogism.

3 If answer be given to the matter, as for the most part it is, he must look
whether it be by the distinction of an ambiguous Word, or a Limitation, or a
Denial; And if it be none of these, let the Answerer be minded to deal
Logically, and to use some certain form of Answer, which is fitting unto either
of the Premises.

4 If the Answer be by Distinction, let it be examined by the Rules and Laws of
a good Distinction, set down in the Frame of Logic, and let the like be done
for Limitation.

5 Let there be endevor also that from the answer given there be a Syllogism
made leading to absu^dity: Namely, so that the sum of the answer be put in
place of the Minor, and some other proposition manifestly true in plac^ of the
Major; from which an absurd conclusion being inferred, may convince the answer
to have been evil.

And thus much for the Opponents duty.

The Answerer is either Inferior, or Superior.

The Inferior Answerer, is he that absolutely is so called, as that has
propounded the Thesis to dispute of.

The Answerers duty, is both to assume the argument, and to solve it.

The taking of the argument has two Canons.
1 Let the Answerer diligently look that he take the argument faithfully
without any Circumlocutions; and for that purpose let him take to himself some
leisure.

2 If the argument be not formed by the Opponent, let him bid it to be formed;
and if he cannot form it, let the Objection be rejected; or if the Form of the
argument be not plainly desperate, let the Answerer himself form it.

His other Duty to Solve, has these Canons,
1 When the Form is agreed of, let first the conclusion be minded, as whether
the Opponent has rightly formed the state of the controversy: and whether he
has lawfully opposed his position or conclusion unto our position.

2 If the conclusion be rightly framed, Let the mind have recourse straightway
to the Major Proposition: As, weigh whether it be true, and whether it be
simply true, or but after a sort, and whether it be compounded, having a faulty
knitting or composition.

3 Let the Answer never be by denial, if the argument may be by Distinction and
Limitation.

4 The Minor Proposition seldom comes to be limited, or distinguished, but
often to be denied.

5 Let not the Answerer rashly reject the authorities of famous men, but deal
thus. 1 Let him cause their words faithfully to be recited. 2 Let him reconcile
them what he he can to his sentence. 3 If he cannot, then let him oppose the
authority of another man as famous as he, or more.

6 To a direct Answer, which is so to be made as we now have showed, let there
be sometime added an indirect answer, as, chiefly a Retortion, whereby we show
how the Adversaries argument makes for us.

The duties of the Superior Answerer or President, are two, to Rule, and to
Help.

For Ruling, Let the President diligently attend whether they dispute to the
purpose, and abide in the matter that is within the lists of Disputation: which
if it be not done, let him warn both the Opponent and Answerer of their duty.

For Help. If the Answerer fail, let the President show a more solid and firm
answer; Yet, without the Answerers shame; But if the Answerer give a tolerable
answer, let him praise it, and explain it somewhat more fully for the Audtories
sake.

And thus much for Generation, or Syllogistical handling.

The Generation or handling of Method, is, whereby we frame a Method and Order
to our Tractation.

Ordination therefore or Disposition, is either Particular. Universal.


Particular Ordination, is, whereby the Method is framed of any simple or
conjoined Question or Theme; This has been treated of enough before in the
Precepts of handling a single and conjoined Theme.

Universal Ordination, is whereby the whole Discipline or Frame of any Art or
Science is disposed.

The Canons hereof are these.
1. He that would orderly Frame any Discipline, let him first mind of what sort
it is, either Contemplative, or Operative.

2. Necessary things which cannot by man be produced, are Delivered in
Contemplative Disciplines, whose Method is called Compositive.

3. He therefore that would dispose a Contemplative Discipline, must proceed
thus. 1. That he fore know the Subject of it touching the name. 2. That he
deliver the Principles of the Subject. 3. And that he follow the properties of
the Subject which flow from the Principles or Causes.

4. Operative Disciplines are handled. 1. By the End. 2. By the Subject
whereinto the end is to be brought. And 3. By the means whereby his end may be
obtained. And this Method is called Resolutive, ((...)).

The Operative Disciplines thus to be disposed, are, Grammar, Rhetoric,
Logic, Ethics, Oeconomicks, Politics; and the three Superior Faculties,
Theology, Law, Physic or Medicine.

For example, In the disposition of Logic, First, there is mention made of the
end; Namely, The direction of men's thoughts in the knowledge of things; then
the Subject of it: Namely, the three Operations of man's mind. And then that which
remains in this Art, is all spent in handling the Instruments or means, by
which this end may be obtained of man, which means are taught in the three
parts of Logic.

Hitherto we have heard of handling or Generation separate, or a part, which is
instituted according to each of the parts of Logic.

Now follows combined generation which mingleth the The way of teaching well.
use of all the parts of Logic together.

Combined generation or treating is either In Teaching. a In Learning. b


Teaching is of a
two kinds, Accurate or exact, called Acroamatical* a Popular, called
Exoterical, b


The accurate kind of Teaching, is, which is instituted according a
to the strict Rules of Logic, and is not so much applied to the capacity of
the Learner, as to the nature and distinct knowledge of the things.

The General Canons hereof are five.
1. In Teaching, three things are to be looked on. 1. The Teacher. 2. The
Learner. 3. The manner of teaching.

2. Let the Teacher apply himself chiefly to the nature of that thing which he
would teach; and therefore let him not choose every Learner; but one that is of
a good wit, and capable of exact Doctrine.

3. The Method of teaching must be esteemed by the nature of the things and
Laws of Logic, not by the pleasure of the Teacher, or capacity of the Learner.

4. Let brevity in teaching be used, such as is fitted for the nature and
greatness of the thing.

5. Let the words be fitted only to the understanding and mind, not to the
affections and delight.

Exact manner of teaching is either a
Free. a Textual. b


Free, is when we do not explain other men's words or writings: But we our
selves propound the thing

And it is either a
Of the whole Discipline. a Of some part or Theme. b


A whole entire Discipline is taught by these Canons.

1. Let the Teachers first care be, to perceive whether the Discipline that he
will teach, be Contemplative or Operative.

2. Let the Frame of the Discipline, if it be Contemplative* be disposed
according to the Precepts of Compositiv^ Method; if it be Operative, according
to the Precepts of resolutive Method.

3. After the things to be foreknown, let there be a right partition of the
Discipline.

4. Let the Precepts be given in a Lawful Order by Partition, and Subpartition,
by Definitions, Divisions and Canons.

5. Let the Precepts have these three Requisites. 1. That they be true. 2. That
they be profitable. 3. That they be Methodically disposed.

6. Let Commentaries be added to the Precepts; But so as the Scholar may
discern the difference between the Precepts and Commentaries.

A Theme is taught by these Canons.
b
1. Let the teacher look whether the Theme he is about to propound be Simple or
Compound.

2. If it be Simple, let him handle it by a simple Method; if conjoined, then
by a conjoynt Method [Of both these, Rules have been before.]

Textual, or a strict kind of teaching, is when we declare b
to the Hearers any Authors text.

And this is handled both by Resolution. Illustration.


Resolution, is the recognizing of those Artifices by which the Author has
handled his purpose.

Illustration, is either of Words or Things.

Words are either Simple. Conjoynt.


Both of them are Illustrated by help of Grammar. Logic.


By Grammar help, the Natural meaning of words is showed, Synonomies are
compared, Constructions are weighed.

By help of Logic a doubtful word is distinguished, and a Figurative is
reduced to a Proper, a dark Proposition is made clear.

The Things themselves are declared by the Essential ^ope of the text
propounded.

Ev^ry Text is either Doctrinal. 1. (...) Practical. 2. Mixed. 3.


A Doctrinal Text, is, which is referred unto knowledge 1
only. This is declared, 1. By revocation to some Method. 2. By filling up
those things which in the Text are wanting for the full handling of it.

Practical writings are declared either 2.
Historically. Rhetorically.


Historically we declare any thing, 1. By bringing like Histories. 2. By
explaining the Chronology, Topography, and Prosopography (that is, description
of time, place and person,) 3. And by translating the Hypothesis to a Thesis,
or Particular to a General.

Rhetorical kind of Teaching pertains to popular, and consists chiefly in
Amplifying and Augmenting: Of these it is not here further to be spoken of,
they rather pertaining to Rhetoric then Logic.

And thus much for the way of right teaching.

To Learn, is to comprehend in mind those things which the The way of Learning
well.
Teacher propounds, and we in our Judgment do approve.

The manner of Learning is either Exact. Popular.


To Learn exactly, Acroamatice, is to conform ones judgment b
in the comprehension of things to the Nature and Order of the things
themselves, and to the exact judgment of the Teacher.

And thus men learn by these four things. 1. Attention* 2. Ordination. 3.
Selection. 4. Imitation. 1.


Attention, is the attaining and firm impression of the things taught.

The Canons hereof are three.
1. Let a Teacher be chosen Methodical and perspicuous, and one that knows
the exact manner of teaching, and is willing faithfully to communicate it with
thee.

2. A living voice is always to be preferred before a dead or written.

3. Let the Learner meditate with himself alone the things heard or read, and
let him take occasion of speaking to others that which he learneth.

The Ordination or ordering of studies has these Canons. 2.


1. Let the Study of words be discerned at first from the Study of things, and
let one time be bestowed in the learning of Tongues, another in the
comprehending of things.

2. On Tongues, let the flowring years of youth be bestowed: For unto these
there needs little judgment, but only memory which has vigor in youth.

3. Because Tongues are learned for the things, and Words are only Images of
things: therefore less time is to be bestowed in manly age, on words, then on
things.

4. For the right ordering of the Study of any Tongue, two things are required.
1. A Methodical and dexter Frame of the Art of Grammar. 2. A Comprehension of
the meaning of every word in that Tongue.

5. As for the Study of things, they are learned either in whole Disciplines,
or in particular Themes.

6. Frames of Instrumental Disciplines must needs be learned before the
Principal.

7. Instrumental Disciplines pertaining to things, are Rhetoric and Logic,
needful to be learned before other Disciplines: For they are the keys whereby
the doors of other Disciplines are unlocked.

8. Among Principal Disciplines, one may begin with Ethics then proceed to
Physics, Mathematics, Metaphysics, till at length they stay in Theology, or
some other that is aimed at.

9. When the Frame of the Discipline is rightly ordered and comprehended in the
mind, then come to the reading of Authors, which serve to confirm or illustrate
that Discipline.

10. The Learner must diligently distinguish the Commentaries of the Precepts,
from the Precepts themselves: and in the Precepts observe this Order, that he
keep in mind the Definitions and Divisions, making Tables for the same use; And
then, that he turn him to the Canons and Rules, and have them diligently, both
in understanding and Memory.

11. Let the Learner handle one Discipline only at one time; and having done
that, let him go then to another in order as before is said, beginning at the
Instrumentals.

12. In the Learning, let Ardent love of the thing which is learned be
cherished in thy mind; and that which is begun, let it be continued without
interruption. 3


Selection, is whereby the things which we read in others, worthy observation;
or which we our selves do find out, we dispose under certain Classes and
Titles: commonly it is called the gathering of Common places.

Common places are titles Methodically disposed, unto which things read and
meditated, are referred.

And they are either of Words. Things.


Places of Words are either of Common Words. Words of Art.


Places of common Words, are again either of Single. Words. Conjoynt. Words.


Places of Single words are in Lexicons, and in the Nomenclator.

Places of Conjoynt Words or Phrases, seem to be things best disposed, if you
gather only the more solemn and usual Forms, either in common life, or in the
faculty which thou professest according to the order of the things themselves.

Common places of Words of Art, are so gathered as the places of the things
themselves.

Places of things themselves are either Theoretical. Practical.


Theoretical, which pertain to knowledge only.

And they be either of Essential Precepts. Commentaries.


Places of Precepts, are the seats of matters which are disposed in every
Discipline, according to the proper Method; The matters of every Discipline are
to be disposed according to the Method of the simple Question, as, that the
fr^t title be of the name of every Theme, another of the Genus, and so forward
as the Order is diligently designed in the handling of a simple Theme.

Places or Commentaries pertain chiefly to Disputations and Controversies which
are moved about any matter of the Frame of any Discipline.

The Canons of the common places of controverses, are.
1. The Controversies that fall about the matter, ought diligently to be
severed, and the titles or places of these, from the titles of the simple
things themselves looked upon in their nature.

2. The order of the Controversies, depends upon the Order of the things.

3. Under-titles also of Controversies must be disposed according to the
members of the Problem to be handled.

4. But whether to absolute simple titles any man will subject the titles of
Controversies, or assign a peculiar Volume to Controversies, that is Arbitrary,
or at ones pleasure.

5. Controversies should be brought to a few, as much as may be, that in every
Discipline, only the necessary sums, and such as be this day in use, be set
into a common place.

Practick places be either Rhetorical. a Historical. b


By Rhetorical places here we mean not those that pertain ^
to the Precepts of Rhetoric; But which are referred to the use and practice
of the Precepts.

The Canons of gathering common places Ecclesiastical are these.

1. Let the Common places of Ecclesiastical Rhetoric be distributed into two
Volumes; Of which let the first contain places gathered for teaching, the other
places that p^rtain to moving.

2. The first Volume of teaching-places, let it be so furnished, that, according
to the Chapters of the Catechism, the titles of the Common places, of which the
people are wont to be taught, may be noted.

3. Under these titles, let Forms be written in which any head of Religion may
popularly be propounded in the mother Tongue, that the people may be taught
both truly and perspicuously.

4. The other Volume of moving places, should be disposed according to the
chief affections, which by Sermons are to be moved.

5. In the first place may be put the title of the motion of Repentance, which
again may be divided into his undertitles.

6. Next we may come to the Affection of love and desire, or Adhortation.

7. Let the last Affection be of Joy and Consolation.

Historical places are either b
Simple. Compound.


Simple, are examples of Virtues, Vices, Punishment^, and of Rewards, whose
disposition is to be made according to the Frame of Ethics.

Compound places are titles of Aphorisms, Ethick, Oeconomick, Politic,
Ecclesiastic; which (as it were Practick Conclusions) are proved by their
Examples as Induction.

Imitation is the Conformation of the Learner unto the 4
Image of some Notable Doctor.

Imitation is either Grammatical. Rhetorical. Logical.


Grammatical Imitation is about Words and Phrases.

Rhetorical is chiefly in Amplifying and Adorning, and it is learned in
Institutes best from Rhetorical common places.

Logical Imitation, is, when we conform our understanding unto the
understanding and judgment of excellentest Wits in the handling of a simple
and conjoined Theme.

And thus much of the first part of the Exercise of Logic; Namely, of
Tractation or Generation.

OF The Recognizing of a thing handled, OR ANALYSIS.
ANalysis (or Resolution) is a Logical Exercise whereby the Artifices are
recognized, by which the handling of any matter has been instituted.

The General Canons of Resolution are two.
1. Every Resolution is understood by the Construction; for with what Artifices
any thing is constructed or framed; with them it is also resolved or unloosed.

2. Every Analysis consists in two things. 1. In the knowledge of the thing
or work to be resolved. 2. In the weighing the manner or Artifice whereby the
work is Framed.

Analysis is either Grammatical. Rhetorical. Logical.


Grammatical resolution, is which weighs a simple or compounded word, as
touching the forming and fit knitting together for the learning of any Language.

Rhetorical resolution, is whereby the Artifices are examined of Amplifications
and Adornations in any Oration, or other writing.

Logical resolution, is whereby are weighed the Artifices of Explication,
Probation, and Ordination or Method: which are used of the Author in making the
work.

This resolution is either Separate. a Combined. b


Separate, wherein the handling of one Theme is weighed a
apart.

And it is either of a Theme Simple, a Conjoined. b


Resolution of a Simple Theme, is whereby the Artifices a
used in a simple Tractation are Recognized.

The Canons hereof are these.
First of all, let the Theme it self be gathered out of the Text, as being the
Object and Scope of the whole Resolution.

2. Let it be diligently minded, whether the The^e be perfect or imperfect,
Singular or Universal; for hereon hangs the applying of the Terms, which may
be used in the handling of any Theme.

3. It is also to be minded to what Discipline the Theme of the propounded Text
does belong.

4. Because it seldom falls out that the Authors do explain any Theme by all
the Instruments of the first Part of Logic: therefore in Resolving, the mind
is to be applied unto some certain Instruments by which the Author handled his
Theme.

5. Let Amplifications be diligently severed from the Explication of the Theme,
instituted by the Terms thereof.

6. Let the Terms by which a Theme is handled of an Author, be judged by the
Canons of the first Part of Logic; as whether it be a Genus, a Cause, a
Property, or an Effect.

Resolution of a conjoined Theme is either of the second, b
or of the third Part of Logic.

Resolution of the second part of Logic, is, which turns over Sententious
Texts; wherein mere propositions are contained without proofs.

Resolution of the third Part of Logic is either. Syllogistical. a Methodical.
b


Syllogistical Resolution, is, whereby the handling of a a
Conjoynt Question is unfolded, According to these Canons following.

1. Let the Propositions or Conjoynt Theme of the Author be first of all
gathered out of the Text.

2. That Proposition, if it be not by the Author put in the Indicative Mood
must be reduced thereunto.

We must look if the proposition be often repeated in the Text; for these
repetitions must be gathered into one, and counted but for one Proposition.

4. But if the Proposition be not only repeated, but also explained, or limited
by the Author, that explication and limitation is to be showed before the
Resolution of the Arguments. And if the Author have not explained or limited
it, and yet the Proposition needs explanation and limitation, we our selves
ought to do it.

5. Let it be considered, whether the propounded Theme be universal or
singular, or whether it be a (...), or an (...).

6. Let it also be considered whether it be a Theme doctrinal, or practical.

7. After the Theme is thus considered, let the next ca^e be of the Means by
which the Theme is handled of the Author, which are Arguments either proving or
refuting, or Anticipations, or unloosing of objections, or amplifications, or
exaggerations.

8. Of the Arguments, We are first to mind whether they be artificial, or
inartificial i. e. Testimonies.

9. Let the artificial Mean be reduced to the place of Invention; and conferred
with the Antecedent and Consequent of the propounded Conclusion.

10. We must look whether any of the premises be omitted* by the Author in the
Text, and then he that resolves must add them.

11. If any of the Premises be proved by a Prosyllogism, then must we use the
same process in resolving the Prosyllogism that was used before in the primary
Syllogism.

12. Let the confirming Arguments be distinguished from the refuting.

13. If the Author bring in a secret Objection, that also must diligently be
distinguished from the Confirmation, and reduced to a syllogistical form: We
must also mark how the Text answers to this Objection.

14. Let Amplifications be referred to their certain places, and Adornations to
the certain Figures of Rhetoric.

Methodical Resolution, is, whereby the Artifices of Method b
are examined.

The Canons thereof are three.
1. As Method is Universal or Particular; so must the Resolution also needs be
made, Either according to the Parts of Universal Method, or according to the
Canons of particular Method.

2. The Bonds of knitting together, and of passing from one point to another in
the Method, must in the Resolving diligently be showed.

3. If any things occur in the Author, either superfluous, or strange from the
propounded Theme; he that resolves must give warning of them.

And thus much of Simple Resolution or separate.

Combined Resolution, is, whereby is unfolded any Treatise made by the Author,
according to more Parts of Logic.

And it is either of a whole Discipline, or of some Writing or Treatise
pertaining to some Discipline.

The Resolution of a whole Discipline, is, whereby the Method of any Frame or
Body of Discipline is unfolded.

The Canons of which Resolution, are these.
1. Let the Praecognita, or things fore-known of the proposed Discipline be so
instituted, that first it may appear whether it be a Contemplative, or an
Operative Discipline.

2. If it be Contemplative, then the whole Resolution must be directed to these
three as to a most certain Loadstar; Namely, that first the Subject of the
Discipline be enquired; Afterward, the Species of this Subject, and also the
affections both General and Special, and then the causes or beginnings of these
affections.

3. And if it be an Operative Discipline, also three things must be enquired in
the Authors Writings. 1. The end that is to be got by the Operation. 2. The
Subject whereunto this end is to be brought. And 3. The means by which it is to
be brought in.

4. Let the Precepts always be distinguished from the Commentaries.

An Authors Treatise is Resolved by these Canons.
1. Mind, whether the writing be accurate (Acroamatical)* or popu^ar
(Exoterical), or mixed.

2. Let lawful foreknowledges be made of the Efficient cause, or Author of the
Writing, of the Scope of his Writing; of the Object, if it be an Epistle to any.

3. Let a general partition be made of the whole Treatise; and if it be divided
into Chapters, let every Chapter be referred to his part.

4. A general Resolution being so made, then come to a particular Resolution of
every Member and Chapter; wherein, when any Theme, Simple or Conjoynt is
handled, let the process of the Resolution be made according to the Precepts
before given of either Theme.

And thus ends the Doctrine of the Exercise of Logic:
Blessed be God.
FINIS.

