Henry Cornelius Agrippa's Fourth BOOK OF OCCULT PHILOSOPHY, AND GEOMANCY.
Magical Elements of PETER de ABANO. ASTRONOMICAL GEOMANCY. THE NATURE of
SPIRITS: And ARBATEL of MAGIC.

Translated into English by Robert Turner. Philomathees.

LONDON: Printed in the Year. M. DC. LV.

The PREFACE. To the unprejudiced Reader.
AS the fall of man made himself and all other creatures subject to vanity; so,
by reason thereof, the most noble and excellent arts wherewith the rational
soul was endued, are by the rusty canker of time brought into corruption. For
Magic itself, which the ancients did so divinely contemplate, is scandalized
with bearing the badge of all diabolical sorceries: which art (says Mirandula)
Pauci intelligunt, multi reprihendunt, and sicut canes ignotos semper
allatrant: Few understand, many reprehend, and as dogs bark at those they know
not: so do many condemn and hate the things they understand not. Many men there
are, that abhor the very name and word Magus, because of Simon Magus, who being
indeed not Magus, but Goes, that is, familiar with evil spirits, usurped that
title. But Magic and Witchcraft are far different sciences; whereof Pliny
being ignorant, scoffeth thereat: for Nero (says Pliny Pliny lib. 30 Not. Hist.
) who had the most excellent Magicians of the East sent him by Tyridates King
of Armenia, who held that kingdom by him, found the art after long study and
labor altogether ridiculous. Now Witchcraft and Sorcery, are works done merely
by the Devil, which with respect unto some covenant made with man, he acts by
men his instruments, to accomplish his evil ends: of these, the histories of
all ages, people and countries, as also the holy Scriptures, afford us sundry
examples.

But Magus is a Persian word primitively, whereby is expressed such a one as is
altogether conversant in things divine; and as Plato affirms, the art of
Magic is the art of worshipping God: and the Persians called their gods Magous,
hence Appollonius says, that Magus is either o kaka phusin Theos or
therapeutees Theone, that is, that Magus is a name sometimes of him that is a
God by nature, and sometimes of him that is in the service of God: in which
latter sense it is taken in Matthew. 2.1, 2. when the wise men came to worship
Jesus, and this is the first and highest kind, which is called divine Magic;
and these the Latins did entitle sapienties, or wise men: for the fear and
worship of God, is the beginning of knowledge. These wise men the Greeks call
Philosophers; and among the Egyptians they were termed Priests: the Hebrews
termed them Cabalistos, Prophets, Scribes and Pharisees; and amongst the
Babylonians they where known by the name of Caldeans; and by the Persians they
were called Magicians: and one speaking of Sosthenes, one of the ancient
Magicians, uses these words: Et verum Deum merita majestate prosequitur, and
angelos ministros Dei sed very ejus venerationi novit assistere; idem daemonas
prodit terrenos, Vagos, humanetatis inimicos: Sosthenes ascribes the due
Majesty to the true God, and acknowledges that his Angels are ministers and
messengers which attend the worship of the true God; he also has delivered,
that there are Devils earthly and wandering, and enemies to mankind.

So that the word Magus of itself imports a contemplator of divine and heavenly
Sciences; but under the name of Magic are all unlawful Arts comprehended; as
Necromancy and witchcraft, and such Arts which are effected by combination with
the Devil, and whereof he is a party.

These Witches and Necromancers are also called Malefici or venefici; sorcerers
or poisoners; of which name Witches are rightly called, who without the art of
Magic do indeed use the help of the devil himself to do mischief; practicing
to mix the powder of dead bodies with other things by the help of the Devil
prepared; and at other times to make pictures of wax, clay; or otherwise (as it
were sacramentaliter) to effect those things which the Devil by other means
brings to pass. Such were, and to this day partly, if not altogether, are the
corruptions which have made odious the very name of Magic, having chiefly
sought, as the manner of all impostures is, to countefeit the highest and most
noble part of it.

A second kind of Magic is Astrology, which judges of the events of things to
come, natural and human, by the motions and influences of the stars upon these
lower elements, by them observed and understood.

Philo Judeus affirms, that by this part of Magic or Astrology, together
with the motions of the stars and other heavenly bodies, Abraham found out the
knowledge of the true God while he lived in Caldea, Qui contemplatione
Creaturarum, cognovit Creatorem (says Damascen) who knew the Creator by the
contemplation of the creature. Josephus reports of Abraham, that he
instructed the Egyptians in Arithmetic and Astronomy; who before Abraham's
coming unto them, knew none of these Sciences.

Abraham sanctitate and sapientia omnium praestantissimus, primum Caldaeos,
deinde Phenices, demum Egyptios Sacerdotes, Astrologia and Divina docuerit.
Abraham the holiest and wisest of men, did first teach the Caldeans, then the
Phoenicians, lastly the Egyptian Priests, Astrology and Divine knowledge.

Without doubt Hermes Trismegistus, that divine Magician and Philosopher, who
(as some say) lived long before Noah, attained to much Divine knowledge of the
Creator through the study of Magic and Astrology; as his writings, to this day
extant among us testify.

The third kind of Magic contains the whole Philosophy of nature; which
brings to light the inmost virtues, and extracteth them out of natures hidden
bosom to human use: Virtutes in centro centri latentes; Virtues hidden in the
center of the Center, according to the Chemists: of this sort were Albertus,
Arnaldus de villa nova, Raymond, Bacon, and others, etc.

The Magic these men professed are thus defined. Magia est connexio a viro
sapiente agentium per naturam cum patientibus, sibi, congruenter
respondentibus, ut inde opera prodeant, non sine eorum admiratione qui causam
ignorant. Magic is the connection of natural agents and patients, a^swerable to
each other, wrought by a wise man, to the bringing forth of such effects as are
wonderful to those that know not their causes.

In all these, Zoroaster was well learned, especially in the first and the
highest: for in his Oracles he confesses God to be the first and the highest;
he believes of the Trinity, which he would not investigate by any natural
knowledge: he speaks of Angels, and of Paradise; approves the immortallity
of the soul; teaches Truth, Faith, Hope, and Love; discoursing of the
abstinence and charity of the Magi.

Of this Zoroaster, Eusebius in the Theology of the Phoenicions, using
Zoroaster's own words: Haec ad verbum scribit (says Eusebius) Deus primus,
incorruptibillium, sempiternus ingenitus, expers partium, sibiipsi simillimus,
bonorum omnium auriga, munera non expectans, optimus, prudentissimus, pater
juris, sine doctrina justitiam perdoctus, natura perfectus, sapiens, sacrae
naturae unicus inventor, etc. Thus says Zoroaster, word for word: God the
first, incorruptable, everlasting, unbegotten, without parts, most like
himself, the guide of all good* expecting no reward, the best, the wisest, the
father of right, having learned justice without teaching, perfect, wise by
nature, the only inventor thereof.

So that a Magician is no other but divinorum cultor and interpres, a studious
observer and expounder of divine things; and the art itself is none other than
quam Naturalis Philosophiae absoluta consummatio, than the absolute perfection
of natural Philosophy. Nevertheless there is a mixture in all things, of good
with evil, of falsehood with truth, of corruption with purity. The good, the
truth, the purity, in every kind, may well be embraced: as in the ancient
worshipping of God by Sacrifice, there was no man knowing God among the Elders,
that did forbear to worship the God of all power, or condemn that kind of
Worship, because the Devil was so adored in the Image of Baal, Dagon, Astaroth,
Chemosh, Jupiter, Apollo, and the like.

Neither did the abuse of Astrology terrify Abraham, (if we believe the most
ancient and religious Writers) from observing the motions and natures of the
heavenly bodies. Neither can it dehort wise and learned men in these days from
attributing those virtues, influences, and inclinations, to the St^rs and other
Lights of heaven, which God has given to those his glorious creatures.

I must expect some calumnies and obtrectations against this from the malicious
prejudiced man, and the lazy affecters of ^gnorance, of whom this age swarms:
but ^he voice and sound of the Snake and the Goose is all one. But our stomachs
are not now so queazy and tender, after so long time feeding upon solid
Divinity; nor are we so umbragious and startling having been so long
enlightened in Gods path, that we should relapse into that childish Age, in
which Aristotle's Metaphysics, in a council in France, was forbid to be read.

But I incite the Reader to a charitable opinion hereof, with a Christian
Protestation of an innocent purpose therein; and entreat the Reader to follow
this advice of Tabaeus, Qui litigant, sint ambo in conspectu tuo mali and rei.
And if there be any scandel in this enterprise of mine, it is taken, not given.
And this comfort I have in that Axiom of Trismegistus, Qui pius est, sum
philosophatur. And therefore I present it without disguise, and object it to
all of candor and indifference: and of readers, of whom there be four sorts, as
one observes: Spunges, which attract all without distinguishing; Hour-glasses,
which receive, and pour out as fast; Bags, which retain only the dregs of
Spices, and let the Wine escape: and Sieves, which retain the best only. Some
there are of the last sort, and to them I present this Occult Philosophy,
knowing that they may reap good thereby. And they who are severe against it,
they shall pardon this my opinion, that such their severity proceeds from
Self-guiltiness; and give me leave to apply that of Ennodius, that it is the
nature of the Self-wickedness, to think that of others, which they themselves
deserve. And it is all the comfort which the guilty have, Not to find any
innocent. But that amongst others this may find some acceptance, is the desire
of

R. TURNER.
London, Aug. 1654.
To his special friend Mr. R. Turner, on his judicious Translation of Corn.
Agrippa.
AS one that just out of a trance appears,
Amazed with stranger sights, whose secret fears
Are scarcely past, but doubtful whether he
May cr^dit's eyes, remains steadfastly
Fixed on those objects; just like him I stand,
Rapt in amazement to behold that can
By art come near the Gods, that far excel
The Angels that in those bright spheres do dwell.
Behold Agrippa mounting the lofty skies,
Talking with Gods; and then anon he pries
Int' earths deep cabinet, as to Mercury,
All kinds o^ spirits willing subjects be,
And more than this his book supplies: but we
Blind mortals, no ways could be led to see
That light without a taper: then thou to us,
Must be Agripga and an Oedipus.
Agrippa once again appears, by thee
Pulled out of the ashes of Antiquity.
Let squint-eyed envy pine away, whilst thou
Wear'st crowns of Praise on thy deserving brow.
I^ P. B. Cantabrigiae.

To his ingenious friend Mr. Turner, upon his Translation.
THrice noble Soul! renowned Epitome,
Of Learning and Occult Philosophy;
That unknown Geomancy do impart,
With profound secrets of that abstruce Art!
TO expound Natural Magic is thy task;
Not hell born Necromancy to unmask;
Exposing mysteries to public view,
That heretofore were known to very few.
Thou do not keep thy knowledge to thy self,
(As base covetous Misers do their pelf;
Whose numerous b^gs of rust-eaten gold,
Profits none, till themselves are laid in mold)
But studious of public good do make
All of the fruits of thy labors to partake.
Therefore if some captious Critic blame
Thy writings, surely then his judgment's lame.
Art has no hater but an empty pate,
Which can far better carp, than imitate,
Nay Zoilus or Momus will not dare
Blame thy translation, without compare
Excellent. So that if an hundred tongues
Dame nature had bestowed, and brazen lungs*
Yet rightly to ebuccinate thy praises,
I should want strength, as well as polite phrases.
But if the gods will grant what I do crave,
Then Enoch's translation shall thou have.
W. P. S. John's Cambr.

To his friend the Author, on his Translation.
WHat not a Sibyl or Cassandra left?
Apollo ceased? has sharp-fang'd time bereft
Us of the Oracles? Is Dodan's grove
Cut down? Does never a word proceed from Jove
Into the ears of mortals that inherit
Tiresias soul, or the great Calcha's spirit?
What is become of the Augurs that foretold
Nature's intents? Are the Magi dead that could
Tell what was done in every sphere? Shall we
Not know what is done in the remot'st Country
Without great travel? Cannot we below descry
The mind of the gods above? All Is done by thee,
Agrippa; all their arts lie couched in thee.
The art that before in diverse heads did lie,
Is now collect int' one Monopoly.
But all is in vain; we lacked an Oedipus,
Who should interpret's meaning unto us:
This thou effect'st with such dexterity,
Adding perhaps what the Author never did see;
That we may say, thou do the art renew:
To thee the greater half of the praise is due.
J. B. Cantabrigiae.

To the Author, on his Translation of Cornelius Agrippa.
PAllas of learning the art, if Goddess ^am'd;
Which Prototype thy knowledge has explained;
Which nature also striving to combine,
Science and Learning in this form of thine,
To us not darkly, but does clearly show
Knowledge of Mysteries as the shrine in you.
By thy permission it is, we have access
Into Geomancy; which yet, unless
Thou had unmasked, a mystery 't had lain,
A task too hard for mortals to explain.
Which since thou have from the Lethaean floods
Preserved we'll consecrate the Laurel buds
To thee: ( Phoebus dismissed) thine shall be
The Oracle, to which all men shall flee
In the time of danger; thy predictions shall,
To whatsoever thou command'st, inthral
Our willing hearts; yea, thou shall be
Sole Prophet, we obedient to thee.
J^ R.

To the Author, on his ingenious Transla^ion of Cornelius Agrippa.
WHat is 't I view? Agrippa made to wear
An English habit? sure it is something rare.
Or are his Roman garments, by thy Wit,
Translated to an English garb so fit
TO illustrate him? for that thou have, we see,
Enlightened his obscure Philosophy;
And that which did so intricate remain,
Thou have exposed to every vulgar brain.
If then thy beams through such dark works shine clear,
How splendent will they in thine own appear;
Then go thou on, brave soul, to spread such rays
Of Learning through the world, may speak thy praise.
And fear no Critics: for thou, by a spell,
Can force their tongues within their teeth to dwell.
Jo. Tabor. of St. John's in Cambrige.

To the Author, on his Translation of Cornelius Agrippa.
Does Phoebus cease to answer to our demands,
Or will he not accept at mortals hands
A sad bidental? and is Sibyls cave,
Inhabitable? or may Tiresias have
No successor nor rival? how shall we
Then Oedipus to the world direct; if he
Do incess add to parricide, the are dumb
That could predict what things should surely come:
And they are silent that knew when to apply
TO our body-politic purge and phlebotomy.
How will bold thieves our treasures rob, who shall
Lost goods regain, or by his charms recall
The nocent? The art by thee reprieved:
In thee the Magi seem to be revived.
Phoebus is not brainsick, Jove's doves not dead,
The oracles not ceased: Agrippa's bed
(Like the Arabian birds self-builded nest,
Which first her urn proves, then her quickening rest)
Has thee produced more than his equal sure,
Else had this art as yet remained obscure,
A miracle to vulgars, well known to none,
Scarce read by deepest apprehension.
Then I Will conclude, since thou do him explain,
That the younger brother has the better brain.
John Tomlinson, of St. John's in Cambridge.

To his good friend the Author, on his Translation of Occult Philosophy and
Geomancy.
MOST noble undertakings! as if art
And prudence should a bargain make to impart
Refulgent lustres: you send forth a ray,
Which noblest partons never could display,
Well may Diana love you and inspire,
Your noblest genius with caelestial fire,
Whose sparkling fancy with more power can quell,
And sooner conquer than a magic spell.
The author thought not, (when he penned the book)
To be surmounted with a higher look,
Or be o'ertopt b' a more triumphant strein,
Which should exalt his then most pleasant vein,
But seeing that a later progeny
Has snatched his honor from obscurity,
Both shall revive, and make spectators know
The best deservers of the laurel bow,
Nature and art here strive, the victory
To get: and though to yield he does deny,
The have got the start: though he triumph in praise,
Yet may his Ivy wait upon your bays.
M. S. Contabrigiae.

Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Of Geomancy.
GEOMANCY is an art of divination, whereby the judgment may be rendered by lot,
or destiny to every question of every thing whatsoever: but the art hereof
consists especially in certain points, whereof certain figures are deducted
according to the reason or rule of equallity or inequallity, likeness or
unlikeness; which figures are also reduced to the caelestial figures, assuming
their natures and properties, according to the course and forms of the signs
and planets. Notwithstanding this in the first place we are to consider, that
this kind of art can declare or show forth nothing of verity, unless it shall
be radical in some divine virtue; and this the authors of this science have
demonstrated to be too-fold: the one whereof consists in religion and
ceremonies; and therefore they will have the projecting of the points of this
art to be made with signs in the earth: wherefore the art is appropriated to
this element the earth, even as pyroman^^ to the the fire, and hydromancy to
the element of water: then whereas they judged the hand of the projector or
worker to be most powerfully moved, and directed to the terrestrial spirits;
and therefore they first used certain holy incantations and deprecations, with
other rites and observations, provoking and alluring spirits of this nature
hereunto.

Another power there is that does direct and rule this lot or fortune, which is
in the very soul itself of the projector, when he is carried to this work with
some great egress of his own desire, for this art has a natural obedience to
the soul itself, and of necessity has efficacy and is moved to that which the
soul itself desires; and this way is by far more true and pure: neither matters
it where or how those points are projected: therefore this art has the same
radix with the art of Astrological questions: which also can no otherwise be
verified, unless with a constant and excessive affection of the Querent
himself. Now then that we may proceed to the praxis of this art; first it is to
be known, that all figures upon which this whole art is founded are only
sixteen, as in this following table you shall see noted, with their names.

Greater Fortune.

* * * * * *

Lesser Fortune.

* * * * * *

Solis.

Via

* * * *

Populus

* * * * * * * *

Lunae.

Acquisit

* * * * * *

Laetitia.

* * * * * * *

Jovis.

Puella

* * * * *

Amissio

* * * * * *

Veneris.

Conjunct

* * * * * *

Albus

* * * * * * *

Mercury

Puer.

* * * * *

Rubeus

* * * * * * *

Martis.

Carcer.

* * * * * *

Tristitia

* * * * * * *

Saturn.

Drag head.

* * * * *

drag tail.

* * * * *



Now we proceed to declare with what planets these figures are distributed: for
hereupon all the propriety and nature of figures, and the judgment of the whole
art depends: therefore the greater and lesser fortune are ascribed to the
Sun; but the first or greater fortune is when the sun is diurnal, and posited
in his dignities; the other, or lesser fortune, is when the sun is nocturnal,
or placed in less dignities. Via, and Populus, (that is, the way, and people)
are referred to the moon; the first from her beginning and increasing, the
second from her full light and quarter decreasing. Acquisitio, and Laetitia,
(which is gain, profit; Joy and gladness) are of Jupiter: but the first has
Jupiter the greater fortune, the second the less, but without detriment. Puella
and Amissio are of Venus; the first fortunate, the other (as it were)
retrograde, or combust. Conjunctio and Albus are both figures of Mercury, and
are both good: but the first the more fortunate. Puer and Rubeus are figures
ascribed to Mars; the first whereof has Mars benevolent, the second
malevolent. Carcer and Tristtitia are both figures of Saturn, and both evil;
but the first of the greater detrement. The Dargons head and Dragons tail do
follow their own natures.

And these are the infallable comparisons of the figures, and from these we may
easily discern the equality of their signs; therefore the greater and lesser
fortunes have the sign of Leo, which is the house of the Sun: Via and Populus
have the sign of Cancer, which is the house of the Moon: Acquisitio has for
his sign Pisces; and Laetitia Sagittary, which are both the houses of Jupiter:
Puella has the sign of Taurus, and Amissio of Libra, which are the houses of
Venus: Conjunctio has for his sign Virgo. and Albus the sign Gemini, the
houses of Mercury: Puella and Rubeus have for their sign Scorpio, the house of
Mars: Carcer has the sign Capricorn, and Tristitia Aquary, the houses of
Saturn: the Dragons head and tail are thus divided, the head to Capricorn, and
the Dragons tail adhereth to Scorpio: and from hence you may easily obtain the
Triplicities of these signs, after the manner of the triplicities of the signs
of the zodiac: Puer therefore, both fortunes, and Laetitia, do govern the
fiery triplicity; Puella, Conjunctio, Carcer, and the Dragons head, the earthly
triplicity: Albus, Amissio, and Tristitia, do make the airy triplicity: and
Via, Populus, and Rubeus, with the Dragons tail, and Acquisitio, do rule the
watery triplicity; and this order is taken according to the course or manner of
the signs.

But if any will constitute these triplicities according to the natures of the
planets, and figures themselves, let him observe this rule, that Fortuna major,
Rubeus, Puer, and Amissio, do make the fiery triplicity: Fortuna minor, Puella,
Laetitia, and Conjunctio, the triplicity of the air: Acquisitio, the Dragons
tail, Via, and Populus, do govern the watery triplicity; and the earthly
triplicity is ruled by Carcer, Tristitia, Albus, and the Dragons head. And this
way is rather to be observed than the first which we have set forth; because it
is constituted according to the rule and manner of the signs.

This order is far more true and rational than that which vulgarly is used,
which is described after this manner: of the fiery triplicity are, Cauda,
Fortuna minor, Amissio, and Rubeus: of the airy triplicity are, Acquisitio,
Laetetia, Puer, and Conjunct^o: of the watery triplicity are, Populus, Via,
Albus, Puella: and Caput, Fortuna major, Carcer, and Tristitia, are of the
earthly triplicity.

They do likewise distribute these figures to the twelve signs of the zodiac,
after this manner; Acquisitio, is given to Aries; Fortuna both major and minor
to Taurus; Laetitia to the sign Gemini; Puella and Rubeus to Cancer; Albus is
assigned to Leo, Via to Virgo; the Dragons head and Conjunctio to Libra; Puer
is submitted to Scorpio; Tristitia and Amissio are assigned to Sagittary; the
Dragons tail to Capricorn; Populus to Aquarius and Carcer is assigned to to the
sign Pisces.

And now we come to speak of the manner of projecting or setting down these
figures, which is thus; that we set down the points according to their course
in four lines, from the right hand toward the left, and this in four courses:
there will therefore result unto us four figures made in four several lines,
according to the even or uneven marking every several line; which four figures
are wont to be called Matres: which do bring forth the rest, filling up and
completing the whole figure of judgment, an example whereof you may see here
following.



Of these four Matres are also produced four other secondary figures, which
they call Filiae, or succedents, which are gathered together after this manner,
that is to say, by making the four Matres according to their order, placing
them by course one after another **; then that which shall result out of every
line makes the figure of Fileae, the order whereof is by descending from the
superior points through both m^diums to the lowest: as in this example.

Filiae produced. Matres. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



And these figures do make 8 houses of heaven, after this manner, by placing
the figures from the left hand toward the right: as the four Matres do make
the four first houses, so the four Filiae do make the four following houses,
which are the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth: and the rest of the houses are
found after this manner; that is to say, out of the first and second is derived
the ninth; out of the third and fourth the tenth; out of the fifth and sixth
the eleventh; and out of the seventh and eighth the twelfth: by the combination
of joining together of two figures according to the rule of the even or uneven
number in the remaining points of each figure. After the same manner they are
produced out of the last four figures, that is to say, of the ninth, tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth, two figures, which they call Coadjutrices or Testes; out
of which two is also one constituted, which is called the index of the whole
figure, or thing quesited: as appears in this example following.

A Theme of Geomancy.
Filiae.

Matres.



And this which we have declared is the common manner observed by Geomancers,
which we do not altogether reject, neither extol; therefore this is only to be
considered in our judgments: now therefore I will give you the true figure of
Geomancy, according to the right constitution of Astrological reason, which is
thus.

As the former Matres do make the four angles of an house, the first makes the
first angle, the second the second angle, the third makes the third angle, and
the fourth the fourth angle; so the four Filiae arising from the Matres, do
constitute the four succedent houses; the first makes the second house, the
second the eleventh, the third the eighth, and the fourth makes the first
house; the rest of the houses, which are cadents, are to be calculated
according to the rule of their triplicity; that is to say, by making the ninth
out of the fourth and fifth, and the sixth out of the tenth and second, of the
seventh and eleventh the thi^d, and of the fourth and eighth the twelfth.

And now you have the whole figure of true judgment constituted according to
true and e^^icacious reasons, whereby I shall show how you shall complete it:
the figure which shall be in the first house shall give you the sign ascending,
which the first figure shows; which being done, you shall attribute their
signs to the rest of their houses, according to the order of the signs: then ^n
every house you shall note the planets according to the nature of the figure:
then from all these you shall build your jud^ment according to the
^ignification of the planets in the signs and houses wherein they shall be
found, and according to their aspects among themselves, and to the place o^ the
querent and thing quesited; and you shall judge according to the nature of the
signs ascend^^g in their houses, an^ according to the nature and properties of
the figure^ which they have placed in to the several houses and according to
commisture of other figures aspecting them: the index of the figure which the
Geomancers for the most part have made, how it is found in the former figure.

But here we shall give you the secret of the art of finding out the Index in
the subsequent figure, which is thus: that you number all the points which are
contained in the lines of the projections, and this you shall divide by twelve:
and that which remains project from the ascendent by the several houses, and
upon which house there falls a final unity, that figure gives you a
competent judgment of the thing quesited; and this together with the
significations of the judgments aforesaid. But if on either part they shall be
equal, or ambiguous, then the index alone shall certify you of the thing
quesited. The example of this Figure is here placed.

There remains out of the division of the projections 6 points; wherefore
Jupiter in the sixth house shows the index.


It remains now, that we declare, of what thing and to what house a question
does appertain. Then, what every Figure does show or signify ^oncerning all
questions in every house.

First therefore we shall handle the significations of the houses; which are
these.

The first house shows the person of the querent, as often as a question
shall be proposed concerning himself, of his own matters, or any thing
appertaining to him. And this house declares the judgment of the life, form,
state, condition, habit, disposition, form and figure, and of the color of
men. The second house contains the judgment of substance, riches, poverty,
gain and loss, good fortune and evil fortune: and of accidents in substance; as
theft, loss or negligence. The third house signifies brethren, sisters and
collaterals in blood: it judges of small journeys, and fidelities of men. The
fourth house signifies father and grandfathers, patrimony and inheritance,
possessions, buildings, fields, treasure, and things hidden: It gives also the
description of those who want any thing by theft, losing, or negligence. The
fifth house gives judgment of legates, messengers, rumors, news; of honor,
and of accidents after death: and of questions that may be propounded
concerning women with child, or creatures pregnant. The sixth house gives
judgment of infirmities, and medicines; of familiars and servants; of cattle
and domestic animals. the seventh house signifies wedlock, whoredom, and
fornication; rendereth judgment of friends, strifes, and controversies;
rendereth judgment of Judges. The eighth has signification of death, and of
those things which come by death of legates, and hereditaments; of the dowry or
portion of a wife. The ninth house shows journeys, faith, and constancy;
dreams, divine sciences, and religion. The tenth house has signification of
honors, and of magisterial offices. The eleventh house signifies friends, and
the substance of Princes. The twelfth house signifies en^mi^s, servants,
imprisonment, and misfortune, and w^^tsoever evil can happen besides death an^
sickness, the judgments whereof are to be required in the sixth house, and in
the eighth.

It rests now, that we show you what every figure before spoken of signifies
in these places; which we shall now unfold.

Fortuna major being found in the first house, gives long life and freeth from
the molestation of diseases: it demonstrateth a man to be noble, magnanimous,
of good manners, mean of stature, complexion ruddy, hair curling, and his
superior members greater than his inferior. In the second house, he signifies
manifest riches and manifest gain, good fortune, and the gaining of any thing
lost or mislaid; the taking of a thief, and recovery of things stolen. In the
third house, he signifies brethren and kinsmen* nobles, and persons of good
conversation; journeys to be prosperous and gainful with honor: it
demonstrateth men to be faithful, and their friendship to be unfeigned. In the
fourth house, he represents a father to be noble, and of good reputation, and
known by many people: he enlarges possessions in cities, increases
patrimonies, and discovers hidden treasures. In this place he likewise
signifies theft, and recovers every thing lost In the fifth house, he gives by
children, and causes them to attain to great honors: Embassages he rendereth
prosperous; but they are purchased with pains and prayers: he notes rumors to
be true: he bestows public honors, and causes a man to be very famous after
death: foresheweth a woman with child ^o bring forth a man child. In the sixth
house, he freeth from diseases: shows those that have infirmities shall in a
short time recover: signifies a physician to be faithful and honest, to
administer good Physic, of which there ought to be had no suspicion; household
servants and ministers to be faithful: and of animals he chiefly signifies
horses. In the seventh house, he gives a wife rich, honest and of good
manners; loving and pleasant: he overcom^th strifes and contentions. But if the
question be concerning them, he signifies the adversaries to be very potent,
and great favorites. In the eighth house, if a question be proposed of the
death of any one, it signifies he shall live: the kind of death he shows to
be good and natural; an honest burial, and honorable funerals: he foresheweth
a wife to have a rich dowry, legacies and inheritances. In the ninth house, he
signifies journeys to be prosperous; and by land on horseback, rather th^n on
foot; to be long, and not soon accomplished: he shows the return of those
that are absent; signifies men to be of good faith, and constant in their
intentions; and religious; and that never change or alter their faith: Dreams
he presageth to be true; signifies true and perfect sciences. In the tenth
House, he foresheweth great honors, bestows public Offices, Majestracy, and
Judgments; and honors in the courts of Princes: signifies Judges to be just,
and not corrupted with gifts; brings a Cause to be easily and soon expedited:
shows Kings to be potent, fortunate, and victorious: denotes victory to be
certain: signifies a mother to be noble, and of long life. In the eleventh
house, he signifies true friends, and profitable; a Prince rich and liberal:
makes a man fortunate, and beloved of his Prince. In the twelfth house, if a
question be proposed of the quality of enemies, it demonstrateth them to be
potent and noble, and hardly to be resisted; But if a question shall be
concerning any other condition or respect of the enemies, he will deliver from
their treacheries. It signifies faithful servants; reduces fugitives; has
signification of animals, as horses, lions, and bulls: freeth from
imprisonments; and eminent dangers he either mitigateth or takes away.

Fortuna minor in the first house, gives long life, but encumbered with diverse
molestations and sicknesses: it signifies a person of short stature, a lean
body, having a mold or mark in his forehead or right eye. In the second house,
he signifies substance, and that to be consumed with too much prodigality:
hides a thief; and a thing stolen is scarsely to be recovered, but great
labor. In the third house, he causes dicord amongst brethren and kinsfolk;
threateneth danger to be in a journey, but escapes it: rendereth men to be of
good faith, but of close and hidden minds. In the fourth house, he prejudiceth
patrimonies and inheritances; concealeth treasures; and things lost cannot be
regained, but with great difficulty: he signifies a father to be honest, but a
spender of his estate through prodigality, leaving small portions to his
children. Fortuna minor in the fifth house, gives few children; a woman with
child he signifies shall have a woman-child; signifies Embassages to be
honorable, but little profitable; raises to mean honors; gives a good fame
after death, but not much divulged; nor of lasting memory. In the sixth house,
he signifies diseases, both sanguine and choleric; shows the sick person to
be in great danger, but shall recover: signifies faithful servants, but
slothful and unprofitable: and the same of other animals. In the seventh house,
he gives a wife of a good progeny descended; but you shall be encumbered with
many troubles with her: causes love to be anxious and unconstant: prolongeth
contentions, and makes ones adversaries to circumvent him with many
cavillations; but in process of time he gives victory. In the eighth house, he
shows the kind of death to be good and honest; but obscure, or in a strange
place, or pilgrimage; discovers Legacies and possessions; but to be obtained
with suit and difficulty; denotes Funerals and buryings to be obscure, the
portion of a wife to be hardy gotten, but easily spent. In the ninth house, he
makes journeys to be dangerous; and a party absent slowly to return: causes
men to be occupied in offices of religion: shows sciences to be
unaccomplished; but keeps constancy in faith and religion. In the tenth
house, he signifies Kings and princes to be potent; but to gain their power
with war and violence: banished men he shows shall soon return: it likewise
discovers honors, great Offices and benefits; but for which you shall
continually labor and strive, and wherein you shall have no staple
continuance; A Judge shall not favor you: Suits and contentions he prolongeth:
A father and mother he shows shall soon die, and always to be affected with
many diseases. In the eleventh house, he makes many friends, but such as are
poor and unprofitable, and not able to relieve thy necessities: it ingratiates
you with Princes, and gives great hopes, but small gains; neither long to
continue in any benefice or offices bestowed by a Prince. In the twelfth house,
he shows enemies to be crafty, subtle, and fraudulent, and studying to
circumvent you with many secret factions: signifies one in prison to be long
detained, but at length to be delivered: Animals he shows to be unfruitful,
and servants unprofitable; and the changes of fortune to be frequent, from good
to evil, and from bad to good.

Via in the first house, bestows a long and prosperous life; gives
signification of a stranger; lean of body, and tall of stature; fair of
complexion, having a small beard: a person liberal and pleasant; but slow, and
little addicted to labor. In the second house, he increases substance and
riches; recovereth any thing that is stolen or lost, but signifies the thief to
be departed without the City. in the third house, he multiplies brethren and
kinsfolks; signifies continual journeys, and prosperous; men that are publicly
known, honest, and of good conversation.

Via in the fourth house, signifies the father to be honest; increases the
patrimony and Inheritance; produces wealthy fields; shows treasure to be in
the place inquired after; recovereth any thing lost. In the fifth house, he
increases the company of male Children; shows a woman with child to bring
forth a male child; sends Embassages to strange and remote parts; increases
public honors; signifies an honest kind of death, and to be known through
many Provinces.

Via in the sixth house, preserves from sickness; signifies the diseased soon
to recover: gives profitable servants, and animals fruitful and profitable. In
the seventh house, he bestows a wife fair and pleasant, with whom you shall
enjoy perpetual felicity: causes strifes and controversies most speedily to be
determined; adversaries to be easily overcome, and that shall willingly submit
their controversies to the arbitration of good men. In the eighth house, he
shows the kind of death to proceed from Phlegmatic diseases; to be honest,
and of good report: discovers great Legacies, and rich inheritances to be
obtained by the dead: and if any one has been reported to be dead, it shows
him to be alive.

Via in the ninth house, causes long journeys by water, especially by sea, and
portendeth very great gains to be acquired thereby; he denotes Priesthoods,
and profits from Ecclesiastical employments: makes men of good religion,
upright, and constant faith: shows dreams to be true, whose signification
shall suddenly appear: increases Philosophical and Grammatical sciences, and
those things which appertain to the instruction and bringing up of children.

In the tenth house if Via be found, he makes Kings and Princes happy and
fortunate, and such as shall maintain continual peace with their Allies; and
that they shall require amity and friendship amongst many Princes by their
several Embassages: promoteth public honors, offices, and Magistracy amongst
the vulgar and common people: or about things pertaining to the water,
journeys, or about gathering Taxes and Assessments: shows Judges to be just
and merciful, and that shall quickly dispatch Causes depending before them: and
denotes a mother to of good repute, healthy, and of a long life.

In the eleventh house, he raises many wealthy friends, and acquireth faithful
friends in foreign Provinces and Countries, and that shall willingly relieve
him that requires them, with all help and diligence: It ingratiates persons
with profit and trust amongst Princes, employing him in such offices, as he
shall be encumbered with continual travels.

Via in the twelfth house, causes many enemies, but such as of whom little
hurt or danger is to be feared: signifies servants and animals to be
profitable: whosoever is in prison, to be escaped, or speedily to be delivered
from thence: and preserves a man from the evil accidents of fortune.

Populus being found in the first house, if a Question be propounded concerning
that house, shows a mean life, of a middle age, but inconstant, with diverse
sicknesses, and various successes, of fortune: signifies a man of a middle
stature, a gross body, well set in his members; perhaps some mold or mark about
his left eye. But if a Question shall be proposed concerning the figure of a
man, and to this figure if there be joined any of the figures of Saturn or
Rubeus, it shows the man to be monstrously deformed; and that deformity he
signifies to proceed from his birth: but if in the fifth house, if he be
encompassed with malevolent Aspects, then that monstrousness is to come. In the
second house, Populus shows a mean substance, and that to be gotten with
great difficulty: makes a man also always sensible of laborious toil: things
stolen are never regained: what is lost shall never be wholly recovered: that
which is hidden shall not be found. But if the question be of a thief, it
declares him not yet to be fled away, but to lie lurking within the City. In
the third house, Populus raises few friends, either of brethren or kindred;
foresheweth journeys, but with labor and trouble; notwithstanding some profit
may accrue by them: denotes a man unstable in his faith, and causes a man
often to be deceived by his companions. In the fourth house, it signifies a
father to be sickly, and of a laborious life, and his earthly possessions and
inheritane to be taken away: shows profit to be gained by water: shows
treasure not to be hid; or if there be any hidden, that it shall not be found:
a patrimony to be preserved with great labor. In the Fifth house, he shows
no honest messages, but either makes the messengers to be porters, or public
carriers: he devulgeth false rumors, which notwithstanding have the likeness
of some truth, and seem to have their original from truth, which is not
reported as it is done: it signifies a woman to be barren, and causes such as
are great with child to be abortives: appoints an inglorious funeral, and an
ill report after death. In the sixth house, Populus shows cold sicknesses;
and chiefly affecting the lower parts of the body; a Physician is declared to
be careless and negligent in administering physic to the sick, and signifies
those that are affected with sickness to be in danger of death, and scarcely to
recover at all: it notes the deceitfulness of servants, and detriment of
cattle. In the seventh house, it shows a wife to be fair and pleasant; but
one that shall be solicited with the love of many wooers: signifies her loves
to be feigned and dissembling: makes weak and impotent adversaries soon to
desert prosecuting. In the eight house, it denotes sudden death without any
long sickness or anguish, and oftentimes shows death by the water; gives no
inheritance, possession or legacies from the dead; and if any be, they shall be
lost by some intervening contentions, or other discord: he signifies the dowry
of a wife to be little or none. Populus in the ninth house, shows false
dreams, personates a man of rude wit, without any learning or science; in
religion he signifies inferior offices, such as serve to cleanse the Church, or
ring the bells; and he signifies a man little curious or studious in religion,
neither one that is troubled with much conscience. In the tenth house, he
signifies such Kings and Princes, as for the most part are expulsed out of
their rule and dominions, or either suffer continual trouble and detriment
about them: he signifies offices and magistracy, which appertain to matters
concerning the waters, as about the navy, bridges, fishings, shores, meadows,
and things of the like sort: makes Judges to be variable and slow in
expediting causes before them; declares a Mother to be sickly, and of a short
life. In the eleventh house, he gives few friends, and may flatterers; and
with Princes gives neither favor nor fortune. In the twelfth house, he
shows weak and ignoble enemies; declares one in prison not to be delivered;
discovers dangers in waters, and watery places.

Acquisitio found in the first house, gives a long life and prosperous old
age; signifies a man of a middle stature, and a great head, a countenance very
well to be distinguished or known a long nose, much beard, hair curling, and
fair eyes; free of his meat and drink, but in all things else sp^ring, and not
liberal. In the second house, he signifies very great riches, apprehending all
the^ves, and causes whatsoever is lost to be re^overed. In the third house,
many brethren and they to be wealthy; many gainful journeys; signi^^es a man of
good faith. In the fourth is signified a patrimony of much riches, many
pos^essions of copious fruits; he signi^ieth that treasure hid in any place
shall be found and shows a f^ther to be very rich, but covetous. In the Fi^th
house, Acquisitio signifies many children of both sexes, but more males than
females; shows a woman to be with child, and that she shall be delivered
without danger^ and if a question be propounded concerning an^ sex, he
signi^^es it to be masculine: increases gainful profitable embassages and
messages, but extends fame not far after death, yet causes a man to be
inherited of his own, and signifies rumors to be true. In the sixth house, he
signifies many and grievous sicknesses, and long to continue; makes the sick
to be in danger of death and often to die: yet he declares a Physician to be
learned and honest; gives many servants and cattle, and gains to be acquired
from them. In the seventh house, he signifies a wife to be rich, but either a
widow, or a woman of a well grown age; signifies suits and contentions to be
great and durable, and that love and wedlock shall be effected by lot. In the
eight house, if a man be inquired after, it shows him to be dead, signifies
the kind of death to be short, and sickness to last but a few days; discovers
very profitable legacies and inheritances, and signifies a wife to have a rich
dowry. In the ninth house, he signifies long and profitable journeys; shows
if any one be absent he shall soon return; causes gain to be obtained from
Religious and Ecclesiastical persons or scholars, and signifies a man of a true
and perfect sciencs. In the tenth house, he makes Princes to enlarge their
dominions; a Judge favorable, but one that must be continually presented with
gifts; causes office and magistracy to be very gainful; signifies a mother
rich and happy. In the eleventh house, Acquisitio multiplieth friends, and
brings profit from them, and increases favor with Princes. In the twelfth
house, he signifies a man shall have many powerful or potent enemies; reduces
and brings home servants fled away, and cattle strayed; and signifies he that
is in prison shall not be delivered.

Laetitia in the first house signifies long life with prosperity, and much joy
and gladness, and causes a man to outlive and be more victorious than all his
brethren; signifies a man of a tall stature, fair members, a broad forehead,
having great and broad teeth; and that has a face comely and well colored. In
the second house, it signifies riches and many gains, but great expense and
various mutations of ones state and condition; theft and any thing lost is
recovered and returned; but if the question be concerning a thief, it declares
him to be fled awa^. In the third house, Laetitia shows brethren to be of a
good conversation, but of a short life; journeys pleasant and comfortable; men
of good credit and faith. In the fourth he signifies happy patrimonies and
possessions, a father to be noble, and honored with the dignity of some
princely office; shows treasure to be in the place inquired after, but of
less worth and value than is suposed, and causes it to be found. In the Fifth
house he gives obedient children, endued with good manners, and in whom shall
be had the greatest joy and comfort of old age; signifies a woman with child to
bring forth a daughter; shows honorable embassages, and declares rumou^s and
news to be altogether true, and leave^h ^^od and ample fame after death. In the
six^^ hou^^ i^ sh^weth it shows the sick shall recover; denotes good
servants, good and profitable c^ttle and animals. In the seventh house Laetitia
gives a wise fair, beautiful and young; ov^rcometh strifes and contentions,
and rendereth the suc^ess thereof to be love. Laetitia in the eighth house
gives legacies and possessions, and a commendable portion with a wife: if a
question be proposed conc^rni^g the condition of any man, it ^ignif^es him to
be alive, and declares an honest, quiet, and me^k kind of death. In the n^nth
house L^etitia signifies few journeys; and those that do apply themselves to
travel, their journeys ^ith^r are about the mess^ges and (...) of (...), or
pil^rimages to fulfill holy (...) of a good religion, of (...) who ^^sily
apprehends all (...) g^nuity. In the tenth (...) princes to honor (...)
famous by (...) times; signifies (...) offices and (...) th^ng^ which are
exer^i^ed (...) affairs, schools, or the (...) shows a moth^r (...) shall be
married ag^in. (...) increases (...) friends. And in the twelfth house
Laetitia gives the victory over enemies; causes good servants and families,
delivers from imprisonment, and preserves from future evils.

Puella in the first house signifies a person of a short life weak constitution
of body, middle stature, little f^t, but fair, effeminate and luxurious, and
one who will incur many troubles and dangers in his life time, for the love of
women. In the second house, it neither increases riches, nor diminishes
poverty; signifies a thief not to be departed from the city, and a thing stolen
to be alien^ted and made away: if a question be of treas^re in a place, it is
resolved there is none. In the third house Puella signifi^s more sisters than
br^thren, and incre^seth and continues good fri^ndship and amity amongst them;
denotes journ^ys to be ple^s^nt and joyous, and men of good conv^rsations. In
the fourth house Pu^lla signif^^s a very ^mall p^trimony, and a father not
(...) but makes the Fields fertile with g^od (...) Fifth house a woman with
ch^ld to brin^ f^rth ^ woman-child; denotes no (...) much commerce with wom^n;
and (...) be obtained from them. Puella in the ^irth house signifies much
weakness of the sic^, but cau^eth the sick shortly to rec^ver; and shows a
Physician to be both unlearned and uns^ilful, but one who is much esteemed of
in the opinion of the vulg^r people; gives good servants, handmaids, cattle
and animals. In the seventh house Puella gives a wife fair, beautiful and
pleasant, leading a peaceable conversation with her husband, notwithstanding
one that shall burn much with lust, and be coveted and lusted after of many
men; denotes no suits or controversies which shall depend before a Judge, but
some jars and wranglin^s with the common people one amongst another, which
shall be easily dissolved and ended. In the eighth house, if a question be of
one reputed to be dead, Puella declares him to be alive; gives a small
portion with a wife, but that which contenteth her husband. In the ninth house
Puella signifies very few journeys, shows a man of good religion, indifferent
skill and knowledge in sciences, unless happily music as well vocal as
instrumental. In the tenth house Puella signifies princes not to be very
potent, but notwithstanding they shall govern peaceably within their dominions,
and shall be beloved of their neighbors and subjects; it causes them to be
affable, mild and courteous, and that they shall always exercise themselves
with continual mirth, plays and huntings; maket^ judges to be good, godly and
merciful; gives offices about women, or especially from noble women. In the
eleventh house Puella ^iveth many friends, and increases favor with women. In
the twelfth house Puella signifies few enemies, but contention with women; and
delivers prisoners out of prison through the intercession of friends.

Amissio in the first house signifies the sick not to live long, and shows a
short life; signifies a man of disproportioned members of his body, and one of
a wicked life and conversation, and who is marked with some notorious and
remarkable defect in some part of his body, as either lame, or maimed, or the
like. Amissio in the second house, consumes all substance, and makes one to
suffer and under go the burden of miserable poverty; neither thief nor the
thing stolen shall be found; signifies treasure not to be in the place sought
after, and to be sought after with loss and damage. In the third house Amissio
signifies death of brethren, or the want of them, and of kindred and friends;
si^nifieth no journeys, and causes one to be deceived of many. In the fourth
house Amissio signifies the utter destruction of ones patrimony; shows the
father to be poor, and son to die. Amissio in the Fifth house, shows death of
children, and afflicts a man with diverse sorrows; signifies a woman not to be
with child, or else to have miscarried; raising no fame or honors, and
disperseth false rumors. In the Sixth house Amissio signifies the sick to be
recovered, or that he shall soon recover; but causes loss and damage by
servants and cattle. In the seventh house Amissio gives an adulterous wife,
contradicting her husband with continual contention; nevertheless she shall not
live long: and it causes contentions to be end^d. In the eighth house Amissio
signifi^s a man to be d^ad; consumes the dowry of a wife; be^t^weth or sende^h
no inheritances or legaci^s. In the nin^h house Amissio causes no journ^y^,
but such as shall be compassed with great loss; signifies men to be inconstant
in religion and oft^n changing their opinion from one sect to another, and
altogether ignorant of learning. In the tenth house Amissio r^nder^th Princes
to be most unfortunate, and shows that they shall be compelled to end their
lives in exile and banishment; judges to be wicked; and signifies offices and
magistracy to be d^m^geable, and shows the death of a mother. In the eleventh
house Amissio signifies few friends, and causes them to be easily lost, and
turns to become enemies; caus^th a m^n to have no favor with hi^ prince,
unles^ it be hurtful to him. In the twe^^^h house Amissio d^^troyeth all
enemies, detaineth long in prison, but preserves from danger.

Conjunctio in the First house makes a prosperous ^ife, and signifies a man of
a middle stature, not lean nor fat, long face, plain hair, a little heard, long
Fingers ang thighs, liberal, amiable, and a friend to many people. In the
second house Conjunctio does not signify any riches to be gotten, but
preserves a man secure and free from the calamities of poverty; detecteth both
the thief and the thing stolen, and acquireth hidden treasure. In the third
house he gives various journeys with various success, and signifies good faith
and constancy. In the fourth house Conjunctio shows a mean patrimony; causes
a father to be honest, of good report, and of good under^tanding. In the Fifth
house he gives children of subtle ingenuity and wit, shows a woman pregn^nt
to h^^e a male-child, and raises men to honors by their own proper wit and
ingenuity, and disperseth their fame and credit far abroad; and also signifies
news and rumors to be true. In the Sixth house Conjunctio signifies sickness
to be tedious and of long continuance; but foresheweth the physician to be
learned and well experienced; and shows servants to be faithful and
blameless, and animals profitable. In the seventh house he gives a wife very
obedient, conformable, and dutiful to her husband, and one of a good wit and
ingenuity, causes difficult suits and controversies, and crafty, subtle, and
mali^ious adversaries. In the eighth house, him of whom a question is
propounded, Conjunctio signifies him to be dead, and pretends some gain to be
acquired by his death; shows a wife shall not be very rich. In the ninth
house he gives a few journeys, but long and tedious, and shows one that is
absent shall after a long season return. Conjunctio in this house increases
diverse arts, sciences, and mysteries of religion; and gives a quick,
perspicuous, and efficacious wit. In the tenth house Conjunctio makes princes
liberal, affable and benevolent, and who are much delighted and affected with
diverse sciences and secret arts, and with men learned therein; causes Judges
to be just, and such who with a piercing and subtle speculation, do easily
discern causes in controversy before them; enlarges offices which are
concerned about letters, learning, sound doctrines and sciences; and signi^^es
a mother to be honest, of good ingenuity and wise, and also one of a prosperous
life. In the eleventh house Conjunctio signifies great increase of friends; and
very much procures the grace and savor of princes, powerful and noble men. In
the twelfth house Conjunctio signifies wary and quick-witted enemies; causes
such as are in prison to remain and continue so very long, and causes a man to
eschew very many dangers in his life.

Albus in the First house signifies a life vexed with continual sickness and
grievous diseases; signifies a man of a short stature, broad breast, and gross
arms, having curled or crisped hair, one of broad full mouth, a great talker
and babbler, given much to use vain and unprofitable discourse; but one that is
merry, joyous and jocund, and much pleasing to men. In the second house Albus
enlarges and augmenteth substance gained by sports, plays, vile and base arts
and exercises, but such as are pleasing and delightful; as by plays, pastimes,
dancings and lau^hters: he discovers both the thief, and the theft or thing
stolen, and hides and concealeth treasure. In the third house albus signifies
very few brethren, gives not many but tedious and warisome journeys, and
signifies all deceivers. In the fourth house he shows very small or no
patrimony, and the father to be a man much known; but declares him to be a man
of some base and inferior office and employment. In the Fifth house albus
gives no children, or if any, that they shall soon die; declares a woman to
be servile, and causes such as are with young to miscarry, or else to bring
forth monsters; denotes all rumors to be false, and raises to no honor. In
the Sixth house albus causes very tedious sichnesses and diseases; discovers
the fraud, deceit, and wickedness of servants; and signifies diseases and
infirmities of cattle to be mortal. and makes the physician to be suspected of
the sick patient. Albus in the seventh house gives a barren wife, but one that
is fair and beautiful; few suits or controversies, but such as shall be of very
long continuance. In the eighth house if a question be propounded of any one,
albus shows the party to be dead; gives little portion or dowry with a wife,
and causes that to be much strived and contended for. In the ninth house albus
denotes some journeys to be accomplished, but with mean profit; hinders him
that is absent, and signifies he shall not return; and declares a man to be
superstitious in religion, and given to false and deceitful sciences. In the
tenth house albus causes princes and judges to be malevolent; shows vile and
base offices and magistracies; signifies a mother to be a whore, or one much
suspected for adultery. In the eleventh house albus makes dissembling and
false f^iends; causes love and favor to be incons^^^t. Albus in the twelfth
house denotes vile, impotent and rustical enemies; shows such as are in
prison shall not escape, and signi^^es a great many and various troubles and
discommodities of ones life.

Puer in the First house gives an indifferent long life, but laborious;
raises men to great fame through military dignity, signifies a person of a
strong body, ruddy complexion, fair countenance, and black hair. In the second
house puer increases substance, obtained by other men's goods, by plunderings,
rapines, confiscations, military laws, and such like; he concealeth both the
thief and thing stolen, but discovers no treasure. In the third house puer
raises a man to honor above his brethren, and to be feared of them; signifies
journeys to be dangerous, and denotes persons of good credit. In the fourth
house puer signifies dubious inheritances and possessions, signifies a father
to attain to his substance and estate through violence, In the Fifth house puer
shows good children, and such as shall obtain to honors and dignities; he
signifies a woman to have a male-child, and shows honors to be acquired
through military discipline, and great and full fame. In the Sixth house puer
causes violent diseases and infirmities, as wounds, falls, contusions,
bruises, but easily delivering the Sick, and shows the physician and Surgeon
to be good; denotes servants and animals to be good, strong and profitable. In
the seventh house puer causes a wise to be a virago, of a stout spirit, of
good fidelity, and one that loves to bear the rule and government of a house;
makes cruel strifs and contentions, and such adversaries, as shall scarcely be
restrained by Justice. Puer in the eighth house shows him that is supposed to
be dead to live, signifies the kind of death not to be p^inful or laborious,
but to proceed from some hot humor, or by iron, or by the sword, or some other
cause of the like kind; shows a man to have no legacies or other inheritance.
In the ninth house puer shows journeys not to be undergone without peril and
danger of life, yet nevertheless declares them to be accomplished prosperously
and safely; shows persons of little reli^ion* and using little conscience;
notwithstanding gives the knowledge of natural philosophy and physic, and many
other liberal and excellent arts. Puer in the tenth house signifies princes to
be powerful, glorious, and famous in warlike atchievments; but they shall be
unconstant and changeable, by reason of the mutable and various success of
victory. Puer in this house causes judges to be cruel and unmerciful;
increases offices in warlike affairs; signifies magistracy to be exercised by
Fire and sword; hurts a mother, and endangereth her life. In the eleventh
house puer shows noble friends, and noble men, and such as shall much
frequent the courts of princes, and follow after warfare; and causes many to
adhere to cruel men: nevertheless he causes much esteem with princes; but
their favor is to be suspected. puer in the twelfth house causes enemies to
be cruel and pernicious; those that are in prison shall escape and makes them
to eschew many dangers.

Rubeus in the First house, signifies a short life, and an evil end; signifies
a man to be filthy, unprofitable, and of an evil, cruel and malicious
countenance, having some remarkable and notable sign or scar in some part of
his body. In the second house Rubeus signifies poverty, and makes thieves and
robbers, and such persons, as shall acquire and seek after their maintenance
and livelihoods by using false, wicked, and evil and unlawful arts; preserves
thieves, and concealeth theft; and signifies no treasure to be hid nor found.
In the third house Rubeus renders brethren and kinsmen to be full of hatred,
and odious one to another, and shows them to be of evil manners and ill
dispositon; causes journeys to be very dangerous, and foresheweth false faith
and treachery. In the fourth house he destroys and consumes partimonies, and
disperseth and wastes inheritances, causes them to come to nothing;
destroys the fruits of the Field by tempestuous seasons, and malignancy of
the earth; and brings the father to a sudden death. Rubeus in the Fifth house
gives many children; but either they shall be wicked and disobedient, or else
shall afflict their Parents with grief, disgrace and infamy. In the Sixth house
Rubeus causes mortal wounds, Sicknesses and diseases; him that is sick shall
die; the physician shall err, serv^nts shall be false and treacherous, cattle
and beasts shall procure hurt and danger. In the seventh house Rubeus signifies
a wife to be infamous, publicly adulterate, and contentious; deceitful and
treacherous adversaries, who shall endeavor to over come you, by crafty and
subtle wiles and circumventions of the law. In the eighth house Rubeus
signifies a violent death to be inflicted, by the execution of public justice;
and signifies if any one be inquired after, he is certainly dead; and a wife to
have no portion or dowry. Rubeus in the ninth house shows journeys to be evil
and dangerous, and that a man shall be in danger either to be spoiled by
thieves and robbers, or to be taken by plunderers and robbers; declares men to
be of most wicked opinions in religion, and of evil faith, and such as will
often e^sil^ be induced to deny and go from their faith for every small
occasion; denotes sciences to be false and deceitful, and the professors
thereof to be ignorant. In the tenth house Rubeus si^nifies princes to be cruel
and tyrannical, and that their power shall come to an evil end, as that either
they shall be cruelly murdered and destroyed by their own subjects, or that
they shall be taken captive by their Conquerors, and put to an i^nominious and
cruel death, or shall miserably end their lives in hard imprisonm^nt; signifies
Judges and officers to be false, thieves, and such as shall be adicted to
usury; shows that a mother shall soon die, and denotes her to be blemished
with an ill report. In the elevent^ house Rubeus gives no true, nor any
faithful friends; shows men to be of wi^k^d lives and conversation, and
caus^th a man to be rejected and cast out of all society and con^^rsation with
good and noble persons. Rub^us i^ the twelfth house makes enemies to be ^^^^l
and traitorous, of whom we are circumsp^ctly ^o beware; signifies such as are
in prison sh^l^ ^ome to an evil end; and shows a great many incon^^niences
and mischiefs to happen in a man's life.

Carcer in the first house being posited, gives a short life; signif^es men
mostly to be wicked, of a filthy and cruel unclean figure and shape, and such
as are h^ted and despised of all men. Carcer in the second house, causes most
cruel and miserable poverty; signifies both the thief and thing stolen to be
taken and regained; and shows no treasure to be hid. In the third house,
Carcer signifies hatred and dissension amongst brethren; evil journeys, most
wicked faith and conversation. Carcer in the fourth house signifies a man to
have no possessions or inheritances, a father to be most wicked, and to die a
sudden and evil death. In the fifth house Carcer gives many children; shows
a woman not to be with child, and provokes those that are with child to
miscarry of their own consent, or slays the child, signifies no honors, and
disperseth most false rumors. In the sixth house Carcer causes the diseased
to undergo long sickness; servants to be wicked, rather unprofitable;
physicians ignorant. In the seventh house Carcer shows the wife shall be
hated of her husband, and signifies suits and contentions, to be ill ended and
determined. In the eighth house Carcer declares the kind of death to be by
some fall, mischance, or false accusation, or that men shall be condemned in
prison, or in public judgment, and shows them to be put to death, or that
they shall often lay violent and deadly hands upon themselves; denies a wife
to have any portion or legacies. Carcer in the ninth house, shows he that is
(...) shall not return, and signifies some evil sh^l^ happen to him in his
journey; it deno^^s p^r^on^ ^f no Religion, a wicked conscience, and ignorant
of learning. In the tenth house Carcer causes Princes to be very wicked, and
wretchedly to perish, because when they are established in their power, they
will wholly adict themselves to every voluptuous lust, pleasure and tyranny;
causes Judges to be unjust and false; declares the mother to be cruel, and
infamous, and noted with the badge of adultery; gives no Offices nor
Magistracies, but such as are gotten and obtained either by lying, or through
theft, and base and cruel robbery. In the eleventh house Carcer causes no
friends, nor love, nor favor amongst men. In the twelfth house it raises
enemies, detaineth in prison, and inflicteth many evils.

Tristitia in the first house does not abbreviate life but afflicts it with
many molestations; signifies a person of good manners and carriage, but one
that is solitary, and slow in all his business and occasions; one that is
solitary, melancholy, seldom laughing, but most coveteous after all things. In
the second house it gives much substance and riches, but they that have them,
shall not enjoy them, but shall rather hide them, and shall scarce afford to
themselves food or sustenance therefrom; treasure shall not be found, neither
shall the thief nor the theft. Tristitia in the third house signifies a man to
have few brethren, but shows that he shall out live them all; causes unhappy
journeys, but gives good faith. In the fourth house Tristitia consumes and
destroys fields, possessions and inheritances; causes a father to be old and
of long life, and a very covetous hoarder up of money. In the fifth house it
signifies no children, or that they shall soon die, shows a woman with child
to bring forth a woman child, gives no fame nor honors. In the sixth house
Tristitia shows that the sick shall die; servants shall be good but slothful;
and signifies cattle shall be of a small price or value. In the seventh house
Tristitia shows that the wife shall soon die; and declares suits and
contentions to be very hurtful, and determined against you. In the eighth house
it signifies the kind of death to be with long and grievous sickness, and much
dolor and pain; gives legacies and an inheritance, and indoweth a wife with a
portion. Tristitia in the ninth house shows that he that is absent shall
perish in his journey; or signifies that some evil mischance shall happen unto
him; causes journeys to be very unfortunate, but declares men to be of good
religion, devout, and profound Scholars. In the tenth house Tristitia signifies
Princes to be severe, but very good lovers of Justice; it causes just Judges,
but such as are tedious and flow in determining of causes; brings a mother to
a good old age, with integrity and honesty of life, but mixed with diverse
discommodities and misfortunes; it raises to great offices, but they shall not
be long enjoyed persevered in; it signifies such offices as appertain to the
water, or tillage, and manuring of the earth, or such as are to be employed
about matters of Religion and wisdom. In the eleventh house Trstitia signifies
scarcity of friends, and the death of friends; and also signifies the little
love or favor. In the twelfth house it shows no enemies; wretchedly
condemns the imprisoned; and causes many discommodities and disprofits to
happen in ones life.

Caput Draconis in the first house augmenteth life and fortune. In the second
house he increases riches and substance; saves and concealeth a thief; and
signifies treasure to be hid. In the third house Caput Draconis gives many
brethren, causes journeys, kinsmen, and good faith and credit. In the fourth
house he gives wealthy inheritances; causes the father to attain to old age.
In the fifth house Caput Draconis gives may children; signifies women with
child to bring forth women children, and oftentimes to have twins; it shows
great honors and fame; and signifies news and rumors to be true. Caput
Draconis in the sixth house increases sicknesses and diseases; signifies the
Physician to be learned, and gives very many servants and chattel. In the
seventh house he signifies a man shall have many wives; multiplies and
stirs up many adversaries and suits. In the eighth house he shows the
death to be certain, increases legacies and inheritances, and gives a good
portion with a wife. In the ninth house Caput Draconis signifies many journeys,
many sciences, and good Religion; and shows that those that are absent shall
soon return. In the tenth house he signifies glorious Princes, great and
magnificent Judges, great offices, and gainful Magistracy. In the eleventh
house he causes many friends, and to be beloved of all men. In the twelfth
house Caput Draconis signifies men to have many enemies, and many women;
detaineth the imprisoned, and evilly punishes them.

Cauda Draconis, in all and singular the respective houses aforesaid, gives
the contrary judgment to Caput. And these are the natures of the figures of
Geomancy and their judgments, in all and singular their houses, upon all manner
of questions to be propounded, of, or concerning any matter or thing whatsoever.

But now in the manner of proceeding to judgment, this you are especially to
observe; that whenever any question shall be proposed to you, which is
contained in any of the houses, that you shall not only answer thereunto by the
figure contained in such a house; but be holding and diligently respecting all
the figures, and the Index it self in two houses, you shall ground the face of
judgment. You shall therefore consider the figure of the thing quesited or
enquired after, if he shall multiply himself by the other places of the figure
that you may cause them also to be partakers in your judgment: as for example,
if a Question shall be propounded of the second house concerning a thief, and
the figure of the second house shall be found in the sixth, it declares the
thief to be some of ones own household or servants: and after this manner shall
you judge and consider of the rest; for this whole Art consists in the
commixtures of the figures, and the natures thereof; which whosoever does
rightly practice, he shall always declare most true and certain judgments upon
every particular thing whatsoever.

Book the Fourth of OCCULT PHILOSOPHY, OR OF MAGICAL CEREMONIES.
Written by Henry Cornelius Agrippa.
IN our Books of Occult Philosophy, we have not so compendiously, as copiously,
declared the principles, grounds, and reasons of Magic itself, and after what
manner the experiments thereof are to be chosen, elected, and compounded, to
produce many wonderful effects; but because in those books they are treated of,
rather Theorically, than Practically; and some also are not handled completely
and fully, and others very figuratively, and as it were Enigmatically and
obscure Riddles, as being those we have attained to with great study,
diligence, and very curious searching and exploration, and are heretofore set
forth in a more rude and unfashioned manner.

Therefore in this book, which we have composed and made as it were a
Complement and Key of our other books of Occult Philosophy, and of all Magical
Operations, we will give unto thee the documents of holy and undefiled verity,
and inexpugnable and unresistable Magical discipline, and the most pleasant and
delectable experiments of the sacred deities. So that as by the reading of our
other books of Occult Philosophy, thou may earnestly covet the knowledge of
these things; even so with reading this Book, thou shall truly triumph.
Wherefore let silence hide these things within the secret Closets of thy
Religious Breast, and conceal them with constant Taciturnity.

This therefore is to be known, That the names of the intelligent presidents of
every one of the Planets are constituted after this manner: that is to say, by
collecting together the letters out of the figure of the World, from the rising
of the body of the Planet, according to the succession of the Signs through the
several degrees; and out of the several degrees, from the Aspects of the Planet
himself, the calculation being made from the degree of the ascendant.

In the like manner are constituted the names of the Princes of the evil
Spirits; they are taken under all the Planets of the presidents in a retrograde
order, the projection being made contrary to the succession of the Signs, from
the beginning of the seventh house. Now the name of the supreme and highest
intelligence, which many do suppose to be the soul of the world, is collected
out of the four Cardinal points of the figure of the world, after the manner
already delivered: and by the opposite and contrary way, is known the name of
the great Demon, or evil Spirit, upon the four Cadent Angles.

In the like manner shall thou understand the names of the great presidential
Spirits ruling in the Air, from the four Angles of the succedant houses: so
that as to obtain the names of the good spirits, the calculation is to be made
according to the succession of the signs, beginning from the degree of the
ascendant: and to attain to the names of the evil spirits, by working the
contrary way.

You must also observe, that the names of the evil spirits are extracted, as
well from the names of the good spirits, as of the evil: so notwithstanding,
that if we enter the table with the name of a good spirit of the second order,
the name of the evil spirit shall be extracted from the order of the Princes
and Governors: but if we enter the table with the name of a good Spirit of the
third order, or with the name of an evil Spirit a Governor, after what manner
soever they are extracted, whether by this table, or from a celestial figure,
the names which do proceed from hence, shall be the names of the evil spirits,
the Ministers of the inferior order.

It is further to be noted, That as often as we enter this table with the good
Spirits of the second order, the names extracted are of the second order; and
if under them we extract the name of an evil Spirit, he is of the superior
order of the Governors. The same order is, if we enter with the name of an evil
Spirit of the superior order. If therefore we enter this table with the names
of the Spirits of the third order, or with the names of the ministering Spirits
as well of the good Spirits, as of the evil, the names extracted shall be the
names of the ministering Spirits of the inferior order.

But many Magicians, men of no small Authority, will have the tables of this
kind to be extended with Latin Letters: so that by the same tables also, out of
the name of any office or effect, might be found out the name of any spirit, as
well good as evil, by the same manner which is above delivered, by taking the
name of the office or of the effect, in the column of letters, in their own
line, under their own star. And of this practice Trismegistus is a great
Author, who delivered this kind of calculation in Egyptian letters: not
unproperly also may they be referred to other letters of other tongues, for the
reasons assigned to the signs; for truly he only is extant of all men, who have
treated concerning the attaining to the names of spirits.

Therefore the force, secrecy and power, in what manner the sacred names of
spirits are truly and rightly found out, consists in the disposing of vowels,
which do make the name of a spirit, and wherewith is constituted the true name
and right word. Now this art is thus perfected and brought to pass; first, we
are to take heed of placing the vowels of the letters, which are found by the
calculation of the celestial fi^ure, to find the names of the spirits of the
second order, Presidents and Governors. And this in the good spirits, is thus
brought to effect, by considering the stars which do constitute and make the
letters, and by placing them according to their order: First let the degree of
the eleventh house be subtracted from the degree of that star which is First
in order; and that which remains thereof, let it be projected from the degree
of the ascendant; and where that number ends, there is part of the vowel of
the First letter: begin therefore to calculate the vowels of these letters,
according to their number and order; and the vowel which falls in the place
of the star, which is the first in order, the same vowel is attributed to the
First letter. Then afterward thou shall find the part of the second letter,
but substracting the degree of a star, which is the second in order from the
first star; and that which remains, cast from the ascendant. And this is the
part from which thou shall begin the calculation of the vowels; and that vowel
which falls upon the second star, the same is the vowel of the second letter:
and so consequently may thou search out the vowels of the following letters
always, by substracting the degree of the following star, from the degree of
the star next preceding and going before. And so also all calculations, and
numerations in the names of the good spirits, ought to be made according to the
successions of the signs. And in calculating the n^mes of the evil spirits,
where in the names of the good spirits is taking the degree of the eleventh
house, in these ought to be taken the degree of the twelfth house. And all
numerations and calculations may be made with the succession of the signs, by
taking the beginning from the degree of the tenth house.

But in all extractions by tables, the vowels are placed after another manner.
In the first place therefore is taken the certain number of letters making the
name itself, and is thus numbered from the beginning of the column of the first
letter, or whereupon the name is extracted; and the letter on which this number
falls, is referred to the first letter of the name, extracted by taking the
distance of the one from the other, according to the order of the alphabet. But
the number of that distance is projected from the beginning of his column; and
where it ends, there is part of the first vowel: from thence therefore thou
shall calcul^te the vowels themselves, in their own number and order, in the
same column; and the vowel which shall fall upon the first letter of a name,
the same shall be at^ributed to that name. Now thou shall find the following
vowels, by taking the distance from the precedent vowel to the following: and
so consequently according to the succession of the alphabet. And the number of
that distance is to be numbered from the beginning of his own column; and where
he shall cease, there is part of the vowel sought after. From thence therefore
must you calculate the vowels, as we have abovesaid; and those vowels which
shall fall upon your own letters, are to be attributed unto them: if therefore
any vowel should happen to fall upon a vowel, the former must give place to the
latter: and this you are to understand only of the good spirits. In the evil
spirits also you may proceed in the same way; except only that you make the
numerations after a contrary and backward order, contrary to the succession of
the alphabet, and contrary to the order of the columns (that is to say) in
ascending.

The name of good Angels, and of every man, which we have taught how to find
out, in our third book of Occult Philosophy, according to that manner, is of no
little authority, nor of a mean foundation. But now we will give unto thee some
other ways, illustrated with no vain reasons. one whereof is, by taking in the
figure of the nativity, the five places of Hylech; which being noted, the
characters of the letters are projected in their order and number from the
beginning of Aries; and those letters which fall upon the degrees of the said
places, according to their order and dignity disposed and aspected, do make the
name of an Angel. There is also another way wherein they do take Almutel, which
is the ruling and governing star over the aforesaid five places; and the
projection is to be made from the degree of the ascendant; which is done by
gathering together the letters falling upon Almutel, which being placed in
order, according to their dignity, do make the name of an Angel. There is
furthermore another way used, and very much had in observation from the
Egyptians, by making their calculations from the degree of the ascendant, and
by gathering together the letters according to the Almutel of the eleventh
house; which house they call a good Damon: which being placed according to
their dignities, the names of the Angels are constituted. Now the names of the
evil Angels are known after the like manner except only that the projections
must be performed contrary to the course and order of the succession of the
signs: so that whereas in seeking the names of good spirits, we are to
calculate from the beginning of Aries; contrariwise, in attaining the names of
the evil, we ought to account from the beginning of Libra. And whereas in the
good spirits we number from the degree of the ascendant; contrarily, in the
evil, we must calculate from the degree of the seventh house. But according to
the Egyptians, the name of an Angel is collected according to the Almutel of
the twelfth house which they call an evil spirit. Now all those rites, which
are elsewhere already by us delivered in our third book of Occult Philosophy,
may be made by the characters of any language. In all which (as we have
abovesaid) there is a mystical and divine number, order and figure; from whence
it comes to pass, that the same spirit may be called by diverse names. But
others are discovered from the name of the spirit himself, of the good or evil,
by tables formed to this purpose.

Now these celestial characters do consist of lines and heads: the heads are
six, according to the six magnitudes of the stars, whereunto the planets also
are reduced. The first magnitude holds a star, with the Sun, or a cross. The
second with Jupiter a circular point. The third holds with Saturn, a
semicircle, a triangle, either crooked, round or accute. The fourth with Mars,
a little stroke penetrating the line, either square, straight, or oblique. The
fifth with Venus and Mercury, a little stroke or point with a tail, ascending
or descending. The sixth with the Moon, a point made black. All which you may
see in the ensuing table. The heads then being posited according to the site of
the stars of the figure of heaven, then the lines are to be drawn out according
to the congruency or agreement of their natures. And this you are to understand
of the fixed stars. But in the erecting of the Planets, the lines are drawn
out, the heads being posited according to their course and nature amongst
themselves.

Stars. Heads. lines joined to the heads I. ^ ^ -- II -- III ^ ^ -- ^ IIII -- V
^ ^ -- ^ VI ^ ^ -- ^ -- ^

When therefore a character is to be found of any celestial Image ascending in
any degree or face of a sign, which do consist of Stars of the same magnitude
and nature; then the number of these Stars being posited according to their
place and order, the lines are drawn after the similitude of the Image
signified, as copiously as the same can be done.

But the characters which are extracted according to the name of a spirit, are
composed by the table following, by giving to every letter that name which
agrees unto him, out of the table; which although it may appear easy to those
that apprehend it, yet there is herein no small difficulty; to wit, when the
letter of a name falls upon the line of letters or figures, that we may know
which figure or which letter is to be taken. And this may be thus known: for if
a letter falls upon the line of letters, consider of what number this letter
may be in the order of the name; as the second or the third: then how many
letters that name contains; as five or seven; and multiply these numbers one
after another by themselves, and treble the product then cast the whole (being
added together) from the beginning of the letters according to the succession
of the alphabet: and the letter upon which that number shall happen to fall,
ought to be placed for the character of that spirit. But if any letter of a
name fall on the line of figures, it is thus to be wrought. Take the number how
many this letter is in the order of the name, and let it be multiplied by the
number of which this letter is in the order of the alphabet; and being added
together, divide it by nine, and the remainder shows the figure or number to
be placed in the character: and this may be put either in a Geometrical or
Arithmetical figure of number; which notwithstanding ought not to exceed the
number of nine, or nine Angels.

The Characters of good Spirits.
A simple point. Round. Starry. Straight standing line, Lying. Oblique. Line
crooked like a bow. Like waves. Toothed. Intersection right. Inherent. Adherent
separate. Oblique intersection simple. Mixed. Manifold. Perpendicular right
dexter. Sinister. Neuter. A whole figure. Broken. Half. A letter inhering.
Adhering. Separate.

The Characters of evil Spirits.
A right line. Crooked. Reflexed. A simple figure. Penetrate. Broken. A right
letter. Retrograde. Invers'd. Flame. Wind. Water. A mass. Rain. Clay. A flying
thing. A creeping thing. A Serpent. An eye. A hand. A foot. A crown. A crest.
Horns. A Scepter. A Sword. A S^ourge.

But the Characters which are understood by the revelation, of Spirits, take
their virtue from thence; because they are as it were, certain hidden seats,
making the harmony of some divinity: either they are signs of a covenant
entered into and of promised and plighted faith, or of obedience. And those
characters cannot by any other means be searched out.

Moreover, besides these Characters, there are certain familiar Figures and
Images of evil spirits, under which forms they are wont to appear, and yield
obedience to them that invoke them. And all these characters or Images may be
seen by the table following, according to the course of the letters
constituting the names of spirits themselves: so that if in any letter there is
found more than the name of one spirit, his Image holds the preeminence the
others imparting their own order; so that they which are the first orders, to
them is attributed the head, the upper part of the body, according to their own
figure; those which are lowest do possess the thighs and feet; so also the
midde letters do attribute like to themsel^es the middle parts of the body, to
give the parts that sit. But if their happen any contrarity, that letter which
is the stronger in the number shall bear rule: and if they are equal, they all
impart equal things. Furthermore if any name shall obtain any notable character
or instrument out of the table, he shall likewise have the same character in
the Image.

We may also attain to the knowledge of the dignities of the evil spirits, by
the same tables of characters and images: for upon what spirit soever their
falls any excellent sign or instrument out of the table of characters, he
possesses that dignity. As if their should be a crown, it shows a Kingly
dignity; if a crest or plume, a Dukedom; if a horn, a county, if without these
there be a scepter, sword, or forked instrument, it shows rule and authority.
Likewise out of the table of images you shall find them which bear the chief
Kingly dignity: from the crown judge dignity; and from the instruments, rule
and authority. Lastly, they which bear an human shape and figure, have greater
dignity than those which appear under the forms and images of beasts; they also
who ride, do excel them which appear on foot. And thus according to all their
commixtures, you may judge the dignity and excellency of spirits, one before
another. Moreover, you must understand, that the spirits of the inferior order,
of what dignity soever they be, are always subject to the spirits of the
superior order: so also, that it is not incongruent for their Kings and Dukes
to be subject and minister to the presidents of the superior order.

The shapes familiar to the Spirits of Saturn.
THey appear for the most part with a tall, lean and slender body, with an
angry countenance, having four faces; one in the hinder part of the head, one
on the former part of the head, and on each side nosed or beaked: there
likewise appears a face on each knee, of a black shining color; their motion
is the moving of the wind, with a kind of earthquake: their sign is white
earth, whiter than any snow.

The particular f^^ms are,
A King having a beard. riding on a Dragon. An Old man with a beard. -- An Old
woman leaning on a staff. A Hog. -- A Dragon. -- An Owl. -- A black Garment. A
Hook or Sickle. -- A Juniper-tree.
The familiar forms to the Spirits of Jupiter.
THe spirits of Jupiter do appear with a body sanguine and choleric, of a
middle stature, with a horrible fearful motion; but with a mild countenance, a
gentle speech, and of the color of Iron. The motion of them is flashings of
Lightning and Thunder; their sign is, there will appear men about the Circle,
who shall seem to be devoured of ^ions.

Their particular forms ar^,
A King with a Sword drawn, riding on a Stag. A Man wearing a Mitre in long
raiment. A Maid with a Laurel Crown adorned with Flowers. A Bull. -- A Stag. --
A Peac^ck. An azure garment. -- A Sword. -- A Box-tree.
The familiar forms of the Spirits of Mars.
THey appear in a tall body, choleric, a filthy countenance, of color brown,
swa^^hy or red, h^ving horns like Hearts horns, and Griphins claws, bes^^wing
l^ke wild Bulls. Their Motion is like fire burning; their si^n Thunder and
Lightning about the Circle.

Their parti^ular shapes are,
A King armed riding upon a Wolf. -- A Man armed. A Woman holding a buckler on
her thigh. A she Goat. -- A Horse. -- A Stag. A red Garment. -- Wool. -- A
Cheeslip.
Shapes familiar to the Spirits of the Sun.
THE Spirits of the Sun do for the most part appear in a large, full and great
body, sanguine and gross, in a gold color, with the tincture of blood. Their
motion is as the Lightning of Heaven; their sign is to move the person to sweat
that calls them. But their particular forms are,

A King having a Scepter riding on a Lion. A King crowned. -- A Queen with a
Scepter. A Bird. -- A Lion. -- A Cock. A yellow or Golden Garment. A Scepter.
-- Caudatus.
Familiar shapes of the Spirits of Venus.
THEY do appear with a fair body. of middle stature, with an amiable and
pleasant countenance, of color white or green, the upper part Golden. The
motion of them is as it were a most clear Star. For their sign, there will seem
to be maids playing without the circle, which will provoke and alure him that
calls them to play. But their particular forms are, A King with a Scepter
riding on a Camel. A Maid naked. -- A she Goat. A Camel. -- A Dove. A white or
green Garment. Flowers. -- The herb Savine.


The familiar forms of the Spirits of Mercury.
THE Spirits of Mercury will appear for the most part in a body of a middle
stature, cold, liquid and moist, fair, and of an affable speech; in a human
shape and form, like unto a Knight armed; of color clear and bright. The
motion of them is as it were silver-coloured clouds. For their sign, they cause
and bring horror and fear to him that calls them. But their particular shapes
are,

A King riding upon a Bear. A fair Youth. -- A Woman holding a distaff. A Dog.
-- A she Bear. -- A Magpy. A Garment of sundry changeable colors. A Rod. -- A
little staff.
The forms familiar to the Spirits of the Moon.
THEY will for the most part appear in a great and full body, soft and
phlegmatic, of ^o^our ^ike a black obscure cloud, having a swe^ling
c^untenance, with eyes red and full of water, a b^ld head, and teeth like a
wild boar. Their mo^^on is as it were an exceeding great ten pest o^ ^he sea.
^or their sign, there will appear exceeding g^ea^ (...) about the circle. and
their particular sh^pes are*

A King like an Archer riding upon a Do. A little Boy. A Woman-hunter with a
bow and arrows, A Cow. -- A little Do. -- A Goose. A Garment green or
silver-coloured. An Arrow. -- A Creature ^aving many feet.
But we now come to speak of the holy and sacred Pentacles and S^g^ls. Now
these pentacles are as it were c^rtain h^l^ signs preserving us from evil
chances and ^vents, and helping and assisting us to bind, exter^inate, and
drive away evil spirits, and allurin^ the good spirits, and reconciling them
unto us. And these pentacles do consist either of characters of the good
spirits, of the superior order, or of sacred pictures of holy letters or
revelati^ns, with apt and fit versicles, which are compo^ed either of
Geometrical figures and holy names o^ God, according to the course and manner
of many of them; or they are compounded of all of them; or very many of them
mixed. And the characters which are useful for us to constitute and make the
pentacles, they are the characters of the good spirits, especially and chiefly
of the good spirits of the first and second order, and sometimes also of the
third order. And these kind of characters are especially to be named holy; and
then those characters which we have above called holy. What character soever
therefore of this kind is to be instituted we must draw about him a double
circle, wherein we must write the name of his Angel: and if we will add some
divine name congruent with his spirit and office, it will be of the greater
force and efficacy. And if we will draw about him any angular figure, according
to the manner of his numbers, that also shall be lawful to be done. But the
holy pictures which do make the pentacles are they which every where are
delivered unto us in the Prophets and sacred writings, as well of the old as of
the new Testament: even as the figure of the serpent hanging on the cross, and
such like; whereof very many may be found out of the visions of the Prophets,
as of Esaias, Daniel, Esdras, and others, and also out of the revelations of
the Apocalypse. And we have spoken of them in our third Book of Occult
philosophy, where we have made mention of holy things. Therefore when any
picture is posited of any of these holy Images, let the circle be drawn round
about it on each side thereof, wherein let there be written some divine name,
that is apt and conformed to the effect of that figure, or else there may be
written about it some versicle taken out of part of the body of holy Scripture,
which may desire to ascertain or deprecate the desired effect. As, if a
pentacle were to be made to gain victory or revenge against ones enemies, as
well visible as in invisible, the figure may be taken out of the second book of
the Macchabees: that is to say, a hand holding a golden sword drawn, about
which let there be written the versicle there contained; to wit, Ac^ipe gl^dium
san^tum, (...) a Deo, in quo (...) adv^r^^r^^^ ^opuli m^^ I^rael.
Take the holy sword the gift of God, wherewith thou shall slay the adversaries
of my people Israel. Or else there may be written about it a versicle of the
fifth Psalm: In this is the strength of thy arm: before thy face there is
death; or some other such like versicle. But if you will write a divine name
about the figure, then let some name be taken that signifies fear, a sword,
wrath, the revenge of God, or some suchlike name congruent and agreeing with
the effect desired. And if there shall be written any angular figure, let him
be taken accoring to the reason and rule of the numbers, as we have taught in
our second book of Occult Philosophy, where we have treated of the numbers, and
of the like operations. And of this sort there are two pentacles of sublime
virtue and great power, very useful and necessary to be used in the
consecration of experiments and spirits: one whereof is that in the 1st.
chapter of Apocalypse; to wit, a figure of the Majesty of God sitting upon a
throne, having in his mouth a two-edged sword, as there is written, about which
let there be written, Ego primu^ and (...). v^vus and su^ mortuus and ^^c s^o,
v^v^n^ in s^^ula se^ulorum* and habe^ (...) mortis and inferni,
I am Alpha and Omega. the beginning and the end, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty. I am the first and the last, who am living, and
was dead, and behold I live for ever and ever; and I have the keys of death and
hell. Then there shall be written about it these three versicles.

Manda Deus virtui tuae, etc. Give commandment O God, to thy strength.
Confirm, O God, thy work in us.
Let them be as dust before the face of the wind. And let the Ang^l of the Lord
scatter them. Let all their ways be darkness and uncertain. And let the Ang^l
of the Lord persecute them.

Moreover, let there be written about in the ten ^eneral names, which are, El,
Elohim, Elohe, Zebaoth, El^on, Escerchie, Adonay, J^h, Tetragrammaton, Saday.

There is another pentacle, the figure whereof is like unto a Lamb slain,
having s^ven eyes, and seven horns, and under his feet a book seal^d with seven
seals, as it is in the 5. chap. of the Apochalypse. Whereabout let it be
written this versicle; Behold the Lion has overcome the tribe of Judah, the
Root of David. I will open the Book, and unloose the seven seals thereof. And
one other versicle: I saw Satan like lightning fall down from heaven. Behold, I
have given you power to tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the
power of your enemies, and nothing shall be able to hurt you. And let there be
also written about it the ten general names, as aforesaid.

But those pentacles which are thus made of figures and names, let them keep
this order: for when any figure is posited, conformable to any number, to
produce any certain effect or virtue, there must be written thereupon, in all
the several angles, some divine name, obtaining the force and efficacy of the
thing desired: yet so nevertheless, that the name which is of this sort do
consist of just so many l^tters, as the figure may constitute a number; or of
so many letters of a name, as joined together amongst themselves, may make the
number of a figure; or by any number which may be divided without any
super^luity or diminution. Now such a name being found, whether it beonly one
name or more, or diverse names, it is to be written in a^l the several an^les in
the figure: but in the middle of the f^gure let the revolution of the name be
whole and totally placed, or at least principally.

Oftentimes also we constitute pentacles, by making the revolution of some kind
of name, in a square table, and by drawing about it a single or double circle,
and by writing therein some holy versicle competent and befiting this name, or
from which that name is extracted. And this is the way of making the pentacles,
according to their several distinct forms and fashions, which we may as we
please either multiply or commix together by course among themselves, to work
the greater efficacy, and extention and enlargment of force and virtue.

As, if a deprication would be made for the overthrow and destruction of ones
enemies, then we are to mind and call to remembrance how God destroyed the face
fo the whole earth in the deluge of waters, and the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrha, by raining down fire and brimstone; likewise, how God overthrew
Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea, and to call to mind if any other
malediction or curse be found in holy writ. And thus in things of the like
sort. So likewise in depricating and praying against perils and dangers of
waters, we ought to call to remembrance the saving of Noah in the deluge of
waters the passing of the children of Israel through the Red Sea; and also we
are to mind how Christ walked on the waters, and how he saved the ship in
danger to be cast away with the tempest; and how he commanded the winds and the
waves and they obeyed him; and also, that he drew Peter out of the water, being
in danger of drowning, and the like. And lastly, with these we invoke and call
upon some certain and holy names of God; to wit, such as are significative to
accomplish our desire, and accommodated to the desired effect: as, if it be to
overthrow enemies, we are to invoke and call upon the names of wrath, revenge,
fear justice, and fortitude of God: and if we would avoid and escape any evil
or danger, we then call upon the names of mercy, defense, salvation, fortitude,
goodness, and such like names of God. When also we pray unto God that he would
grant unto us our desires, we are likewise to intermix therewith the name of
some good spirit, whether one only, or more, whose office it is to execute our
desires: and sometimes also we require some evil spirit to restrain or compel,
whose name likewise we intermingle; and that rightly, especially, if it be to
execute any evil work; as, revenge, punishment, or destruction.

Furthermore, if there be any versicle in the Psalms, or in any other part of
holy Scripture, that shall seem congruent and agreeable to our desire, the same
is to be mingled with our prayers. Now after prayer has been made unto God, it
is expedient afterward to make an Oration to that executioner whom in our
precedent prayer unto God we have desired should a^minister unto us, whether
one or more, or whet^er he be an Angel, or star, or soul, or any of the noble
Angels. But this kind of Oration ought to be composed according to the rules
which we have delivered in the second book of Occult Philosophy, where we have
treated of the manner of the composition of enchantments.

You may know further, that these kind of bonds have a threefold difference:
for the first bond is when we conjure by natural things; the second is
compounded of religious myst^ries, by Sacraments, Miracles, and things o^ this
sort; and the third is constituted by divine names, and holy Sigils. And these
kind of bon^s, (...) may bind not only spirits, but also other creat^res
whatsoever, as anima^s, tempests, (...).
burnings, floods of waters, and the force and power of arms. Oftentimes also
we use these bonds aforesaid, not only by con^uration* but sometimes also using
the means of d^precation and benediction. Moreover, it conduces much to this
purpose, to join some sentence of holy Scripture, if any shall be found
convenient ther^unto: as, in the conjuration of Serpents, by commemorating the
curse of the Serpent in the earthly Paradise, and the setting up the S^rpent in
the wilderness; and further added that versicle, Super aspidem and basiliscum
ambulabis, etc.
Thou shall walk upon the Asp and the Basilisk, etc. Superstition also is of
much prevalency herein, by the translation of some sacramental rites, to bind
that which we intend to hinder; as, the rites of excommunication, of sepulcres,
funerals, buryings, and the like.

And now we come to treat of the consecrations which men ought to make upon all
instruments and things necessary to be used in this art: and the virtue of this
consecration most chiefly consists in two things; to wit, in the power of the
person consecrating, and by the virtue of the prayer by which the consecration
is made. For in the person consecrating, there is required holiness of life,
and power of sanctifying: both which are acquired by dignification and
initiation. And that the person himself shall with a firm and undoubted faith
believe the virtue, power, and efficacy thereof. And then in the prayer itself,
by which this consecration is made, there is required the like holiness; which
either solely consists in the prayer itself, as, if it be by divine
inspiration ordained to this purpose, such as we have in many places of the
holy Bible; or that it be hereunto instituted through the power of the holy
spirit, in the ordination of the Church. Otherwise there is in the prayer a
sanctimony, which is not only by itself, but by the commemoration of holy
things; as, the commemoration holy Scriptures, histories, works, miracles,
effects, graces, promises, sacraments and sacr^mental things, and the like.
Which things, ^y a certain similitude, do seem properly or i^^^^perly to
appertain to the thing cons^crate^.

There is used also the invocation of some (...) names, with the consignation
of holy seals* (...) things of the like sort, which do conduc^^ ^^^ctification
and expiation; such as are the (...) with holy-wat^r, unctions with (...) and
adoriferous suffumigations (...) holy worship. And therefore in every (...)
there is chiefly used the bene^iction (...) consecration of water, oil, fire,
and fu^^gatio^s, used every where with holy wax-lights or lamps burning: for
without lights no sacraments is rightly performed. This is therefore to be
known and firmly observed, that if any consecration be to be made of things
profane, in which there is any pollution, or defilement, then an exorcising and
expiation of those things ought to precede the consecration. Which things being
so made pure, are more apt to receive the influences of the divine virtues. We
are also to observe, that in the end of every consecration after that the
prayer is ^ightly pe^formed, the person consecrating ought to bless the thing
consecrated, by breathing out some words, with divine virtue and power of the
present consecration, with the commemoration of his virtue and authority, that
it may be the more duly performed, and with an earnest and intentive mind. And
therefore we will here lay down some examples hereof, whereby the way to the
whole perfection hereof may the more easily be made to appear unto you.

So then, in the consecration of water, we ought to commemorate how that God
has placed the firmament in the midst of the waters, and in what manner that
God placed the fountain of waters in the earthly Paradise, from thence sprang
four holy rivers, which watered the whole earth. Likewise we are to call to
remembrance in what manner God made the water to be the instrument of executing
his Justice in the destruction of the giants in the general deluge over all the
earth, and in the overthrow of the host of Pharaoh in the Red Sea; also how God
led his own people through the midst of the sea on dry ground, and through the
midst of the river of Jordan; and likewise how marvelously he drew forth water
out of the stony rock in the wilderness; and how at the prayer of Sampson, he
caused a fountain of running water to flow out of the cheek tooth of the jaw
bone of an ass: and likewise, how God has made waters the instrument of his
mercy, and of salvation, for the expiation of original sin: also, how Christ
was baptized in Jordan, and has hereby sanctified and cleansed the waters.
Moreover, certain divine names are to be invocated, which are con^o^mable
hereunto; as, that God is a living founta^n, living water, the fountain of
mercy; and names of the like kind.

And likewise in the co^^ec^a^ion of fire, we are to commemorate how that God
has created the fire to be an Instrument (...) his justice, for punishment,
(...) and for the expiation of sins: also, when Go^ ^^all come to judge the
world, he will comm^nd a conflagration of fire to go before him. And we are to
call to remembrance in what m^nner God appeared to Moses in the burning bu^^;
and also, how he went before the children of Israel in a pillar of fire; and
that nothing can be duly offered, sacrificed, or sanctified, without fire; and
how that God instituted fire to be kept continually in the tabernacle of the
covenant; and how miraculously he re-kindled the same, being extinct, and
preserved it elsewhere from going out, being hidden under the waters: and
things of this sort. Likewise the names of God are to be called upon which are
consonant hereunto, as, it is read in the Law and the Prophets, that God is a
consuming fire, and if there be any of the divine name which signify fire, or
suchlike names; as the glory of God, the light of God, the splendour and
brightness of God.

And likewise in the consecration of Oil and Perfumes, we are to call
remembrance such holy things as are pertinent to this purpose, which we read in
Exodus of the holy anointing Oil, and divine names significant thereunto, such
as is the name Christ, which signifies anointed: and what mysteries there are
hereof; as that in the Revelations of the two Olive Trees distilling holy oil
into the lamps that burn before the face of God and the like.

And the blessing of the lights, wax, and lamps, is taken from the fire, and
the altar which contains the substance of the flame: and what other such
similitudes as are in mysteries; as that of the seven candlesticks and lamps
burning before the face of God.

These therefore are the consecrations which first of all are necessary to be
used in every kind of devotion, and ought to precede it, and without which
nothing in holy Rites can be duly performed.

In the next place now we shall show unto you the consecration of places,
instruments, and such like things.

Therefore when you would consecrate any place or circle, you ought to take the
prayer of Solomon used in the dedication of the Temple: and moreover, you must
bless the place with the sprinkling of holy water, and with fumigations; by
commemorating in the benediction holy mysteries; such as these are, Sanctum
sanctorum.
The sanctification of the throne of God, of mount Sinai, of the tabernacle of
the covenant, of the holy of holies, of the temple o^ Jerusal^^ (...) ^^so, the
sanctification of mount Golo^ha, (...) ^he crucifying of Christ; the
s^nct^fication (...) temple of Christ; of mount Tabor, by the (...)
^^^f^gur^tion and ascension of Christ: and the (...). And by invocating divine
names which a^e si^nificant hereunto; such as the place of God (...) t^rone of
God, the Chair of God, the tabern^c^e o^ God, the altar of God, the habitation
of God, and such like divine names of this sort. which are to be written about
the circle or place to be consecrated.

And in the consecration of instruments and of all other things whatsoever that
are serviceable to this art, you shall proceed after the same manner, by
sprinkling the same with holy water, perfuming the same with holy fumagations,
anointing it with holy oil, sealing it with some holy Sigil, and blessing it
with prayer; and by commemorating holy things out of the sacred Scriptures,
religion, and divine names which shall be found agreeable to the thing that is
to be consecrated: as for example sake, in consecrating a sword, we are to call
to remembrance that in the Gospel, Qui habet duas tunicas, etc.
He that has two coats, etc. and that place in the second of Maccabees, that a
sword was divinely and miraculously sent to Judas Macchabeus. And if there be
any thing of the like in the prophets; as that place, Accippe v^bus gladios bis
ac^u^os
Take unto you two-edge swords, etc.

In like m^n^^ yo^ shall consecrate experiments and books, an^ wh^^soever of
the like nature, as it is contained in ^ritings, pictures, and the like, by
sprinkling, perfu^ing, anointing, sealing, and bl^ssing with holy
commemorations, and calling to remem^rance the sanctification of mysteries; as
the sanc^ifications of the tables of the ten commandments, which were delivered
to Moses by God in mount Sinai; the sanctification of the testaments of God,
the old and the new; the sanctification of the law, and of the Prophets, and
Scriptures, which are promulgated by the holy Ghost. Moreover, there is to be
commemorated such divine n^mes ^s are fit and convenient hereunto; as these
are; the Testament of God, the book of (...), ^he book of life, the knowledge
of God, the wisdom of God; and the like. And with such k^nd of rites is the
personal consecration perfo^med.

There is furthermore, besides these, another rite of consecration, of
wonderful power, and much efficacy; And this is out of the kinds of
superstitions; that is to say, when the rite of consecration or collection of
any Sacrament in the Church is transferred to that thing which we would
consecrate.

It is to be known also, that vows, Oblations, and Sacrafice, have the power of
Consecration, as well real as personal; and they are as it were certain
covenants and conventions between those names with which they are made, and us
who make them, strongly cleaving to our desire and wished effect: as when we
dedicate, offer, and sacrafice, with certain names or things; as, fumigations,
unctions, rings, images, looking-glasses; and things less material, as deities,
sigils, pentacles, enchantments, orations, pictures, and Scriptures: of which
we have largely spoken in our third book of Occult philosophy.

There is extant amongst those magicians (who do most use the ministry of evil
spirits a certain rite of invocating spirits by a book to be Consecrating
before to that purpose; which is properly called, Liber S^iritum:
A book of Spirits; whereof we shall now speak a few w^rds. For this book is to
be Consecrated; a book of evil spirits, ceremoniously to be composed in their
name and order: whereunto they bind with a certain holy oath, the ready and
present obedience of the spirit therein written.

Now this book is to be made of most pure and clean paper, that has never been
used before; which many do call Virgin paper. And this book must be inscribed
after this manner; that is to say, let there be placed on the left side the
image of the spirit, and on the right side his character, with the oath above
it containing the name of the spirit and his dignity and place, with his office
and power. Yet very many do compose this book otherwise omitting the characters
or image: but it is more efficatious not to neglect any thing which conduces
to it.

Moreover, there is to be observed the circumst^nces of places, times, hours,
according to the stars which these spirits are under, and are seen to agree
unto; their site, rite, and order being applied.

Which book being so written, and well bound, is to be adorned, garnish^d, and
kept secure, with registers and se^ls, lest it should happen after the
consecration to open in some place not intended, and end^nger the op^rator.
Furthermore, this b^ok ou^ht to be k^pt as reverently as may be: for
irr^ver^nce of m^nd causes it to lose its virtue with pollution and
prof^nation.

Now this sacred book b^ing thus composed according to to the manner al^ (...)
delivered, we are then to proceed to the con^^^^atio^ thereof after a two fold
way: one whereof i^, that ^ll and singular the spirits who are written in the
book be called to the circle, according to the rites and order which we have
before taught; and the book that is to be consecrated, let it be placed without
the Circle in a triangle. And in the first place, let there be read in the
presence of the spirits all the oaths which are written in that book; and then
the book to be consecrated being placed without the Circle in a t^iangle there
drawn, let all the spirits be compelled to impose their hands where their
images and characters are drawn, and to confirm and Consecrate the same with a
special and common oath. Which being done, let the book be taken and shut, and
preserved as we have before spoken, and let the spirits be licensed to depart,
according to due and right order.

There is another manner of Consecrating a book of spirits which is more easy,
and of much efficacy to produce every effect, except that in opening this book
the spirits do not always come visible. And this way is thus: let there be made
a book of spirits as we have before set forth; but in the end thereof let there
be written invocations and bonds and strong Conjurations wherewith every spirit
may be bound. Then this book must be bound between two tables or lamens, and in
the inside thereof let there be drawn the holy pentacles of the divine Majesty,
which we have before set forth and described out of the Apocalypse: then let
the first of them be placed in the beginning of the book, and the second at the
end of the same. This book being perfected after this manner, let it be brought
in a clear and fair time, to a Circle prepared in a cross way, according to the
Art which we have before delivered; and there in the first place the book being
opened. let it be Consecrated to the rites and ways which we have before
declared concerning Consecration. Which being done, let all the spirits be
called which are written in the book in their own order and place, by conjuring
them thrice by the bonds described in the book, that they come unto that place
within the space of three days, to assure their obedience, and confirm the
same, to the book so to be consecrated. Then let the book be wrapped up in
clean linen, and buried in the middle of the Circle, and there fast stopped up:
and then the Circle being destroyed, after the spirits are licensed, depart
before the rising of the Sun: and on the third day, about the middle of the
night, return, and new make the Circle, and with bended knees make prayer and
giving thanks unto God, and let a precious perfume be made, and open the hole,
and take out the book; and so let it be kept, not opening the same. Then you
shall license the spirits in there order, and destroying the Circle, depart
before the sun rise. And this is the last rite and manner of consecrating
profitable to whatsoever writings and experiments, which do direct the spirits,
placing the same between two holy lamens or pentacles, as before is shown.

But the operator, when he would work by the Book thus consecrated, let him do
it in a fair and clear season, when the spirits are least troubled; and let him
place himself tow^rds the region of the spirits. Then let him open the book
under a due register; let him invoke the spirits by their oath there described
and confirmed, and by the name of their character and image, to that purpose
which you desire: and if there be need, conjure them by the bonds placed in the
end of the book. And having attained your desired effect, then you shall
license the spirits to depart.

And now we shall come to speak concerning the invocation of spirits, as well
of the good spirits as of the bad.

The good spirits may be invocated of us diverse ways, and in sundry manners do
offer themselves unto us. For they do openly speak to those that watch* and do
offer themselves to our sight, or do inform us in dreams by oracle of those
things which are desired. Whosoever therefore would call any good spirit, to
speak or appear in sight, it behooves them especially to observe two thing: one
whreof is about the disposition of the invocant; the other about those things
which are outwardly to be adhibited to the invocation, for the conformity of
the spirits to be called. It behooves therefore that the invocant himself be
religiou^ly disposed for many days to such a mystery. In the first place
therefore, he ought to be confessed and contrite, both inwardly and outwardly,
and rightly expiated by daily washing himself with holy water. Moreover, the
invocant ought to conserve himself all these days, chaste, abstinent, and to
separate himself as much as may be done, from all preturbation of mind, and
from all manner of foreign and secular business. Also, he shall observe fasting
all these days, as much as shall seem convenient to him to be done. Also, let
him daily between sunrising and sunsetting, being clothed with a holy linen
garment, seven times call upon God, and make a deprecation to the Angels to be
called according to the rule which we have before taught. Now the number of
days of fasting and preparation is commonly the time of a whole Lunation. There
is also another number observed amongst the Cabalists, which is forty days.

Now concerning those things which do appertain to this rite of invocation, the
first is, that a place be chosen, clean, pure, close, quiet, free from all
manner of noise, and not subject to any strangers sight. This place must first
be exorcised and consecrated: and let there be a table or altar placed therein,
covered with clean white linen, and set toward the east: and on each side
thereof let there be set two consecrated wax-lights burning, the flame whereof
ought not to go out all these days. In the middle of the altar, let there be
placed lamens, or the holy paper which we have before described, covered with
fine linen; which is not to be opened until the end of these days of the
consecration. You shall also have in readiness a precious perfume, and pure
anointing oil; and let them be both kept consecrated. There must also a Censer
be set on the head of the altar, wherein you shall kindle the holy fire, and
make a perfume every day that you shall pray. You shall also have a long
garment of white linen, close before and behi^d, which man cover the whole body
and the ^eet, and girt about you with a girdle. You shall als^ have a veil made
of pure clean linen, and in the forepart thereof let there be fixed golden or
gilded Lamens, with the inscription of the name Tetragrammaton; all which
things are to to be sanctified and consecrated in order. But you must not enter
into the holy place, unless it be first washed, and arrayed with a holy garment;
and then you shall enter into it with your fee^ naked. And when you enter
therein, you shall sprinkle it with holy water; then you shall make a perfume
upon the altar, and afterward with bended knees pray before the altar as we
have directed.

But in the end of these days, on the last day. you shall fast more strictly:
and fasting on the day following, at the rising of the Sun, you may enter into
the holy place, using the ceremonies before spoken of, first by sprinkling
yourself, then with making a perfume, yo shall sign yourself with holy oil in
the forehead and anoint your eyes; using prayer in all these consecrations.
Then you shall open the holy lamen, and pray before the altar upon your knees,
as abovesaid; and then an invocation being made to the Angels, they will appear
unto you, which you desire; which you shall entertain with a benign and chaste
communication, and license them to depart.

Now the Lamen which is to be used to invoke any good spirit, you shall make
after this manner; either in metal conformable, or in new wax, mixed with spices
and colors coformable: or it may be made with clean paper, with convenient
colors: and the outward form or figure thereof may be square, circular, or
triangular, or of the like sort, according to the rule of the numbers: in which
there must be written the divine names, as well the general names as the
special. And in the center of the Lamen, let there be drawn a character of
Hexagonus.
fix corners; in the middle whereof, let there be written the name and
character of the star, or of the spirit his governor, to whom the good spirit
that is to be called is subject. And about this character, let there be placed
so many characters of Pentagonus.
five corners, as the spirits we would call together at once. And if we shall
call only one spirit, nevertheless there shall be made four Pentagones, wherein
the name of the spirit or spirits, with their characters, is to be written^ Now
this table ought to be composed when the Moon is increasing, on those days and
hours which then agree to the spirit. And if we take a fortunate star herewith,
it will be the better. Which table being made in this manner, it is to be
consecrated according to the rules a^o^^ delivered.

And this is the way of m^ki^g ^he general table, serving for the invoca^ing of
all good spirits whatsoever. Nevertheless we ^ay m^ke special tables congruent
to every spir^t, by the rule which we have above spoken of concerning holy
pentacles.

And now we will declare unto you another rite more easy to perform this thing:
that is to say, let the man that is to receive and Oracle from the good
spirits, be chaste, pure, and confessed. Then a place being prepared pure and
clean, and covered every where with white linen, on the Lords day in the new of
the Moon let him enter into that place, clothed with clean white garments; and
let him exorci^e the place, and bless it, and make a Circle therein with a
sanctified cole; and let there be written in the uttermost part of the Circle
the names of the Angels, and and in the inner part thereof let there be written
the mighty names of God: and let him place within the Circle, at the four
angles of the World, the Censers for the perfumes. Then let him enter the place
fasting, and washed, and let him begin to pray toward the east this whole
Psalm: Psalm 119.
Beati immaculati in via, etc. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, etc. by
perfuming; and in the end depricating the Angels, by the said divine names,
that they will deign to discover and reveal that which he desires: and that
let him do six days, continuing washed and fasting. And on the seventh day,
which is the Sabbath, let him, being washed and fasting, enter the Circle, and
perfume it, and anoint himself with holy anointing oil, by anointing his
forehead, and upon both his eyes, and in the palms of his hands, and upon his
feet. Then upon his knees let him say the Psalm aforesaid, with divine and
Angelical names. Which being said let him arise, let him begin to walk about in
a Circle within the said Circle from the east to the west, until he is wearied
with a dizziness of his brain: let him fall ^own in the Circle, and there he
may rest; and forthwith he shall be wrapped up in an ecstasy, and a spirit will
appear unto him, which will inform him of all things. We must observe also,
that in the Circle there ought to be four holy candles burning at the four
parts of the world, which ought not to want light for the space of a whole
week. And the manner of fasting must be such, that he abstain from all things
having a life of sense, and from those which do proceed from them: and let him
only drink pure running water: neither let him take any food till the going
down of the sun. And let the perfume and the holy anointing oil be made, as is
set forth in Exodus and the other holy books of the Bible. It is also to be
observed, that always as often as he enters into the Circle, he has upon his
forehead a golden Lamen, upon which there must be written the name
Tetragrammaton, as we have before spoken.

But natural things, and their commixtures, do also belong unto us, and are
conducing to receive Oracles from any spirit by a dream: which are either
perfumes, unctions, and meats or drinks: which you may understand in our first
book of Occult Philosophy.

But he that is willing always and readily to receive the oracles of a dream,
let him make unto himself a ring of the Sun or of Saturn for this purpose.
There is also an image to be made, of excellent efficacy and power to work this
effect; which being put under his head when he goes to sleep, does effectually
give true dreams of what thing soever the mind has before determined or
consulted on. The table of numbers do likewise confer to receive an oracle,
being duly formed under their own Constellations. And these thou may know
in the third book of Occult Philosophy.

Holy tables and papers do also serve to this effect, being specially composed
and consecrated: such as is the Almudel of Solomon, and the table of the
revolutions of the name Tetragrammaton. And those things which are of this
kind, and written unto these things, out diverse figures, numbers, holy
pictures, with the inscriptions of the holy names of God and of Angels; the
composition whereof is taken out of diverse places of the holy Scriptures,
Psalms, and versicles, and other certain promises of the divine revelations and
prophecies.

To the same effect do conduce holy prayers and imprecations, as well unto God,
as to the holy Angels and heroes: the imprecations of which prayers are to be
composed as we have before shown, according to some religious similitude of
miracles, graces, and the like, making mention of those things which we intend
to do: as, out of the old Testament, of the dream of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh,
Daniel, and Nebuchadnezzer: if out of the new Testament, of the dream of Joseph
the husband of the virgin Mary; of the dream of the three wisemen; of John the
Evangelist sleeping upon the breast of our Lord; and whatsoever of the like
kind can be found in religion, miracles, and revelations; as, the revelation of
the cross to Helen, the revelations of Constantine and Charles the great, the
revelations of Bridget, Cyril, Methodius, Mechtild, Joachim, Merhir, and such
like. According to which let the deprecations be composed, if when he goes to
sleep it be with a firm intention: and the rest well disposing themselves, let
them pray devoutly, and without doubt they will afford a powerful effect.

Now he that knows how to compose those things which we have now spoken of,
he shall receive the most true oracles of dreams. And this he shall do; observe
those things which in the second book of Occult Philosophy are directed
concerning this thing. He that is desirous therefore to receive an oracle, let
him abstain from supper and from drink, and be otherwise well disposed, his
brain being free from turbulent vapors; let him also have his bedchamber fair
and clean, exorcised and consecrated if he will; then let him perfume the same
with some convenient fumigation; and let him anoint his temples with some
unguent efficatious hereunto, and put a ring upon his finger, of the things
above spoken of: let him take either some image, or holy table, or holy paper,
and place the same under his head: then having made a devout prayer, let him go
unto his bed, and meditating upon that thing which he desires to know, let him
so sleep; for so shall he receive a most certain and undoubted oracle by a
dream, when the Moon goes through that sign which was in the ninth house of
his nativity, and also when she goes through the sign of the ninth house of
the revolution of his nativity; and when she is in the ninth sign from the sign
of perfection. And this is the way and means whereby we may obtain all sciences
and arts whatsoever, suddenly and perfectly, with a true illumination of our
understanding; although all inferior familiar spirits whatsoever do conduce to
this effect; and sometimes also evil spirits sensibly informing us
intrinsically or extrinsically.

But if we would call any evil spirit to the circle, it first behooves us to
consider, and to know his nature, to which of the planets it agrees, and what
offices are distributed to him from the Planet; and being known, let there be
sought out a place fit and proper for his invocation, according to the nature
of the Planet, and the quality of the offices of the said spirit, as near as
the same may be done: as, if their power be over the Sea, Rivers or Floods,
then let the the place be chosen in the shore; and so of the rest. Then let
there be chosen a convenient time, both for the quality of the air, serene,
clear, quiet, and fitting for the spirits to assume bodies; as also of the
quality and nature of the planet, and of the spirit, as to wit, on his day, or
the time wherein he rules: he may be fortunate or unfortunate, sometimes of
the day, and sometimes of the night, as the stars and spirits do require. These
things being considered, let there be a circle framed in the place elected, as
well for the defense of the invocant, as for the confirmation of the spirit.
And in the circle itself there are to be written the divine general names, and
those things which do yield defense unto us; and with them, those divine names
which do rule this planet, and the offices of the spirit himself; there shall
also be written therein, the names of the good spirits which do bear rule, and
are able to bind and constrain that spirit which we intend to call. And if we
will any more fortify and strengthen our circle, we may add characters and
pentacles agreeing to the work; then also if we will, we may either within or
without the circle, frame an angular figure, with the inscription of such
convenient numbers, as are congruent amongst themselves to our work, which are
also to be known, according to the manner of numbers and figures: of which in
the second book of occult philosophy it is sufficiently spoken. Furthermore, he
is to be provided of lights, perfumes, unguents and medicines compounded
according to the nature of the planet and spirit: which do partly agree with
the spirit, by reason of their natural and celestial virtue; and partly are
exhibited to the spirit for religious and superstitious worship. Then he must
be furnished with holy and consecrated things, necessary as well for the
defense of the invocant, and his fellows, as also serving for bonds to bind and
constrain the spirits; such as are either holy papers, lamens, pictures,
pentacles, swords, scepters, garments of convenient matter and color, and
things of the like sort. Then when all these things are provided, and the
Master and his fellows being in the circle, in the first place let him
consecrate the circle, and all those things which he uses; which being
performed with a conenient gesture and countenance, let him begin to pray with
a loud voice, after this manner. First let him make an oration unto God, and
then let him entreat the good spirits: and if he will read any prayers, psalms,
or gospels for his defense, they ought to take the first place. After these
prayers and orations are said, then let him begin to invoeate the spirit which
he desires, with a gentle and loving Enchantment, to all the coasts of the
world, with the commemoration of of his own authority and power. And then let
him rest a little, looking about him, to see if any spirit do appear; which if
he delay, then let him repeat his invocation, as abovesaid, until he has done
it three times; and if the spirit be pertinacious, obstinate, and will not
appear, then let him begin to conjure him with divine power; so also that the
conjurations and all his commemorations do agree with the nature and offices of
the spirit himself; and reiterate the same three times, from stronger to
stronger, using objurgations, contumelies, cursings, and punishments, and
suspension from his office and power, and the like.

And after all the courses are finished, then cease a little; and if any spirit
shall appear, let the invocant turn himself toward the spirit and courteously
receive him, and earnestly entreating him, let him require his name: and then
proceeding further, let him ask him ^hatsoever he will: and if in any thing the
spirit shall show himself obstinate or lying, let him be bound by convenient
conjurations: and if you doubt of any lie, make without the circle with the
consecrated sword, the figure of a triangle or A Character with five Corners.
Pentagone, and compel the spirit to enter into it: and if thou receivest any
promise which thou would have to be confirmed with an oath, let him stretch
the sword out of the circle, and swear the spirit, by laying his hand upon the
sword. Then having obt^ined of the spirit that which you desire, or are
otherwise contented, license him to depart with courteous words, giving command
unto him, that he do no hurt: and if he will not depart, compel him by powerful
conjurations; and if need require, expel him by exorcisms, and by making
contrary fumigations. And when he is departed, go not out of the circle, but
make a stay, making prayer, and giving of thanks unto God and the good Angels,
and also praying for your defense and conservation; and then all those things
being orderly performed, you may depart.

But if your hopes are frustrated, and no spirit will appear, yet for this do
not despair; but leaving the circle, return again at other times, doing as
before. And if you shall judge that you have erred in any thing, then you shall
amend by adding or demishing; for the constancy of reiteration does often
increase your authority and power, and strikes terror into the spirits, and
humbles them to obey.

And therefore some use to make a gate in the circle, whereby they go in and
out, which they open and shut as they please, and fortify it with holy names
and pentacles.

This also we are to take notice of, that when no spirits will appear, but the
Master being wearied has determined to cease and give over; let him not
therefore depart without licensing the spirits: for they that do negl^ct this,
are very greatly in danger, except they are fortified with some sublime defense.

Oftentimes also the spirits do come, although they appear not visible, (for to
cause terror to him that calls them) either in the thing which he uses* or in
the operation it self. But this kind of licensing is not given simply, but by a
kind of dispensation with suspension, until in the following terms they shall
render themselves obedient. Also without a Circle these spirits may be called
to appear according to the way which is above delivered about the consecration
of a book.

But when we intend to execute any effect by evil spirits, where an apparition
is not needful; then that is to be done, by making and forming that which is to
be unto us an instrument, or subject of the experiment itself; as whether it be
an image, or a ring, or a writing, or any character, candle, or sacrifice, or
any thing of the like sort; then the name of the spirit is to be wirtten
therein, with his character, according to the exigency of the experiment,
either by writing it with some blood, or otherwise using a perfume agreeable to
the spirit. Oftentimes also making prayer and orations to God and the good
Angels before we invocate the evil spirit, conjuring him by the divine power.

There is another kind of spirits which we have spoken of in our third book of
occult philosophy, not so hurtful, and nearest to men; so also, that they are
affected with human passions, and do joy in the conversation of men, and freely
do inhabit with them: and others do dwell in the woods and Deserts; and others
delight in the company of diverse domestics, animals and wild beasts: and
othersome do inhabit about fountains and meadows. Whosoever therefore would
call up these kind of spirits, in the place where they abide, it ought to be
done with odoriferous perfumes, and with sweet sounds and instruments of music,
specially composed for the business, with using of songs, enchantments and
pleasant verses, with praises and promises.

But those that are obstinate to yield to these things are to be compelled with
threatenings, comminations, cursings, delusions, contumelies, and especially by
threatening them to expel them from those places where they are conversant.

Further, if need be, thou may betake thee to use Exorcisms; but the
chiefest thing that ought to be observed, is, constancy of mind, and boldness,
free and alienated form fear.

Lastly, when you would invocate these kind of spirits, you ought to prepare a
table in the place of invocation, covered with clean linen; whereupon you shall
set new bread, and running water or milk in new earthen vessels, and new
knives. And you shall make a fire, whereupon a perfume shall be made. But let
the invocant go unto the head of the table, and round about it let there be
seats placed for the spirits, as you please; and the spirits being called, you
shall invite them to drink and eat. But if perchance you shall ^ear any evil
spirit, then draw a circle about it, and let that part of the table at which
the invocant sits, be within the circle, and the rest of the table without the
circle.

In our third ^ook of Occult Philosophy, we have taught how and by what means
the soul is joined to the body; and, what happeneh to the soul after death.

Thou may know further, that those souls do still love their relinquished
bodies after death, as it were a certain affin^ty alluring them; such as are
the souls of noxious men, which have violently relinquished their bodies, and
souls wanting a due burial, which do still wander in a liquid and turbulent
spirits about their dead carcasses; for these souls by the known means by which
heretofore they were conjoined to their bodies, by the like vapors, liquors,
and favors, are easily drawn unto them.

From hence it is, that the souls of the dead are not to be called up without
blood, or by the application of some part of their relict body.

In the raising up of these shadows, we are to perfume with new blood, with the
bones of the dead, and with Flesh, Eggs, Milk, Honey and Oil, and such like
things, which do attribute to the souls a means apt to receive their bodies.

It is also to be understood, those who are desirous to raise up any souls of
the dead, they ought to do it in those places, wherein these kind of souls are
most known to be conversant; or for some alliance alluring those souls into
their forsaken body; or some kind of affection in times past, impressed in them
in their life, drawing the said souls to certain places, things, or persons; or
for the forcible nature of some place fitted and prepared for to purge or
punish these souls. Which places for the most part are to be known by the
experience of visions, nightly incursions, and apparitions, and such like
prodigies seen.

Therefore the places most fitting for these things, are Churchyards. And
better than them, are those places wherein there is the execution of criminal
judgments. And better than these, are those places, in which of late years
there have been some public slaughters of men. Furthermore, that place is
better than these, where some dead carcass, that came by violent death, is not
yet expiated, nor lately buried, and was lately buried; for the expiation of
those places, is also a holy rite duly to be adhibited to the burial of the
bodies, and oftentimes prohibiteth the souls to come unto their bodies, and
expels them far off unto the places of judgment.

And from hence it is, that the souls of the dead are not easily to be raised
up, except it be the souls of them whom we know to be evil, or to have perished
by a violent death, and whose bodies do want a rite and due burial.

Now although we have spoken concerning such places of this kind, it will not
be safe or commodious to go unto them, but it behooves us to take to what place
soever is to be chosen, some principal part of the body that is relict, and
therewith to make perfume in due manner, and to perform other competent rites.

It is also to be known, that because the souls are certain spiritual lights,
therefore artificial lights, especially if they be framed out of certain
competent things, compounded according to a true rule, with congruant
inscriptions of names and seals, do very much avail to the raising up of
departed souls.

Moreover, these things which are now spoken of, are not always sufficient to
raise up souls, because of an extranatural portion of understanding and reason,
which is above, and known only to the heaven and destinies, and their powers.

We ought therefore to allure the said souls, by supernatural and celestial
powers duly administered, even by those things which do m^^e the very harmony
of the soul, as well imaginative, as rational and intellectual; as are voices,
songs, sounds, enchantments: and religious things; as prayers, conjurations,
exorcisms, and other holy rites, which may very commodiously be administered
hereunto.

The end of the fourth book of Agrippa.
HEPTAMERON: OR MAGICAL ELEMENTS OF PETER de ABANO, PHILOSOPHER.
IN the former book, which is the fourth book of Agrippa, it is sufficiently
spoken concerning Magical ceremonies, and Initiations.

But because he seems to have written to the 1earned, and well experienced in
this art; because he does not specially treat of the ceremonies, but rather
speaking of them in general, it was therefore thought good to add hereunto the
magical elements of Peter de Abano: that those who are hitherto ignorant, and
have not tasted of magical superstitions, may have them in readiness, how they
may exercise themselves therein. For we see in this book, as it were a certain
introduction of magical vanity; and as it were in present exercise, they may
behold the distinct functions of spirits, how they may be drawn to discourse
and communication; what is to be done every day, and every hour; and how they
shall be read, as if they were described syllable by syllable.

In brief, in this book are kept the principles of magical conveyances. But
because the greatest power is attributed to the Circles; (For they are certain
fortresses to defend the operators safe from the evil spirits;) in the first
place we will treat concerning the composition of a Circle.

Of the Circle, and the composition thereof.
THE form of Circles is not always one and the same; but uses to be changed
according to the order of the spirits that are to be called, their places,
times, days and hours. For in making a circle, it ought to be considered in
what time of the year, what day, and what hour, that you make the circle; what
spirits you would call, to what star and region they do belong, and what
functions they have. Therefore let there be made three circles of the latitude
of nine foot, and let them be distant one from another a hands breadth; and in
the middle circle, first, write the name of the hour wherein you do the work.
In the second place, write the name of the Angel of the hour. In the third
place, the Sigil of the Angel of the hour. Fourthly, the name of the Angel that
rules that day wherein you do the work, and the names of his ministers. In the
fifth place, the name of the present time. Sixthly, the name of the spirits
ruling in that part of time, and their Presidents. Seventhly, the name of the
head of the sign ruling in that part of time wherein you work. Eighthly, the
name of the earth, according to that part of time wherein you work. Ninthly,
and for the completing of the middle circle, write the name of the sun and of
the moon, according to the said rule of time; for as the time is changed, so
the names are to be altered. And in the outermost circle, let there be drawn in
the four angles, the names of the presidential Angels of the air, that day
wherein you would do this work; to wit, the name of the King and his three
ministers. Without the Circle, in four Angles, let Pentagones be made. In the
inner circle let there be written four divine names with crosses interposed in
the middle of the circle; to wit, toward the East let there be written Alpha,
and toward the West let there be writt^n Omega; and let a cross divide the
middle of the circle. When the the circle is thus finished, according to the
rule now before written, you shall proceed.

Of the names of the hours, and the Angels ruling them.
IT is also to be known, that the Angels do rule the hours in a successive
order, according to the course of the heavens, and planets unto which they are
subject; so that that spirit which governs the day rules also the first hour
of the day; the second from this governs the second hour; the third, the
third hour, and so consequently: and when seven planets and hours have made
there revolution, it returns again to the first which rules the day.
Therefore we shall first speak of the names of the hours.

Hours of the day.
1. Yain. 2. Janor. 3. Nasnia. 4. Salla. 5. Sadedali. 6. Thamur. 7. Ourer. 8.
Thamic. 9. Neron. 10. Jayon. 11. Abai. 12. Natalon.
Hours of the night.
1. Beron, 2. Barol. 3. Thami. 4. Athar. 5. Methon. 6. Rana. 7. Netos. 8.
Tusrac. 9. Sassur. 10. Agle. 11. Calerva. 12. Salam.
Of the names of the Angels and their Sigils, it shall be spoken of in their
proper places. Now let us take a view of the names of the times. A year
therefore is fourfold, and is divided into the spring, summer, harvest, and
winter; the names whereof are these.

The spring, Talvi. The summer, Casmaran. Autumn, Adarael. Winer, Farlas.

The Angels of the spring, Caracasa, Core, Amatiel, Commissoros.

The head of the sign of the spring, Spugliguel.

The name of the earth in the spring, Amadai.

The names of the sun and moon in the spring; the sun, Abraym; the moon.
Agusita.

The Angels of the summer, Gargatel, Tariel, Gaviel.

The head of the sign of the summer, Tubiel.

The name of the earth in summer, Festativi.

The names of the sun and moon in summer; the sun, Athemay. The moon. Armatus.

The Angels of Autumn, Tarquam, Guabarel.

The head of the sign of Autumn, Torquaret.

The name of the earth in Autumn, Rabinnara.

The names of the sun and moon in Autumn, the sun, Abragini. The moon,
Matasignais.

Ths Angels of the winter, Amabael, Ctarari,

The head of the sign of winter, Altarib,

The name of the earth in winter, Geremiah,

The names of the sun and moon in winter; the sun, Commutaff. The moon,
Affaterim.

The Consecrations and Benedictions: and first of the Benediction of the Circle.
WHen the circle is ritely perfected, sprinkle the same with holy or purged
water, and say, Thou shall purge me with hysop, O Lord, and I shall be clean:
thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.

The Benediction of Perfumes.
THE God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, bless here the creatures of
these kinds, that they may fill up the power and virtue of their odours; so
that neither the enemy, nor any false Imagination, may be able to enter into
them: through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Then let them be sprinkled with holy
water.

The Exorcism of fire upon which the perfumes are to be put.
THE fire which is to be used for fumigations, is to be in a new vessel of
earth or iron: and let it be exorcised after this manner. I exorcise thee, O
thou creature of fire, by him by whom all things are made, that forthwith thou
cast away every phantasm from thee, that it shall not be able to do any hurt in
any thing. Then say, Bless, O Lord this creature of fire, and sanctify it, that
it may be blessed to set forth the praise of thy holy name, that no hurt may
come to the exorcisers or spectat^rs: through ^ur Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Of the garment and pentacle.
LET it be a Priests garment, if it can be: but if it cannot be had, let it be
of linen, and clean. Then take this pentacle made in the day and hour of
Mercury, the moon increasing written in parchment made of a kids skin. But
first let there be said over it the mass of the holy Ghost, and let it be
sprinkled with water of baptism.



An Oration to be said, when the Vesture is put on.
A Noor, Amacer, Amides, Theodonias, Anitor, by the merits of the a^gels, O
Lord. I will put on the garment ^f salvation, that this which I I desire I may
bring to effect: through thee the most holy Adonay, whose kingdom endures for
ever and ever, Amen

Of the manner of working.
LET the moon be increasing and equal, if it may then be done, and let her not
be combust.

The operator ought to be clean and purified by the space of nine days before
the beginning of the work, and to be confessed, and receive the holy communion.
Let him have ready the perfume appropriated to the day wherein he would perform
the work. He ought also to have holy water from a Priest, and a new earthen
vessel with fire, a Vesture and pentacle; and let all these things be rightly
and duly consecrated and prepared. Let one of the servants carry the earthen
vessel full of fire, and the perfumes, and let another bear the book, another
the garment and pentacle, and let the Master carry the sword; over which there
must be said one mass of the Holy Ghost; and on the middle of the sword, let
there be written this name Alga, and on the other side thereof the name On. And
as he goes to the consecrated place, let him continually read Letanies, the
servants answering. And when he comes to the place where he will erect the
circle, let him draw the lines of the circle as we have before taught: and
after he has made it, let him sprinkle the circle with holy water, saying
Asperges me domine, etc.

The Master therefore ought to be purified with fasting, chastity, and
abstinency from all luxury the space of three whole days before the day of the
operation. And on the day that he would do the work, being clothed with pure
garments, and furnished with pentacles, perfumes, and other things necessary
hereunto, let him enter the circle, and call the Angels from the four parts of
the world, which do govern the seven planets the seven days of the week,
colors and metals; whose names you shall see in their places. And with bended
knees invocating the said Angels particularly, let him say, O Angeli
supradicti, est^te adjutores meae petitioni, and in adjutorium mihi, in meis
rebus and petitionibus.

Then let him call the Angels from the four parts of the world, that rule the
air the same day wherein he does the work or experiment. And having implored
specially all the names and spirits written in the circle, let him say, O vos
omnes, adjuro atque contestor per sedem Adonay, per Hagios, Theos, Ischyros,
Athanatos, Paracletos Alpha and Omega, and per haec tria nomina secreta, Agla,
On, Tetragrammaton, quod body debeatis adimplere quod cupio.

These things being performed, let him read the conjuration assigned for the
day wherein he makes the experiment, as we have before spoken; but if they
shall be pertinacious and refractory, and will not yield themselves obedient,
neither to the conjuration assigned to the day, nor to the prayers before made,
then use the conjuration and exorcism, following.

An Exorcism of the Spirits of the air.
NOS facti ad imaginem Dei, datati potentia Dei, and ejus facti voluntate, per
potentissimum and corroboratum nomen D^i El, forte and admirabile, vos
exorcizamus (here he shall name the spirits be would have appear, of what order
soever they be) and imperamus per eum qui dixit, and factum est, and per omnia
nomina Dei, and per nomen Adonay, El, Elohim, Elohe, Z^baoth, Elion, Escerchie,
Jah. Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Dominus Deus, excelsus, exorcizamus vos, atque
pot^nter imperamus, ut appareatis statim nobis hic juxta Circulum in pulebra
forma, videlicet humana, and sine deformitate and tortuositate aliqua. Venite
vos omnes tal^^, qui^ vobis imperamus, per nomen Y and V quod Adam audivit, and
locutus est: and per nomen Dei Agla, quod Loath audivit, and factum s^lvus cum
sua familia: and per nomen Joth quod Jacob audivit ab Angelo secum luctantes,
and liberatus est de manu fratris sui Esau: and by the name An^phexeton, quod
Aaron audivit, and loquens, and sapiens factus est: and per nomen Zebaoth, quod
Moses nominavit, and omnia flumina and plaudes de terra Aegypti versae fuerunt
in sanguinem: and per nomen Ecerchie Oriston, quod Moses nominavit, and omnes
fluvii ebullierunt ranas, and ascenderunt in domos Aegyptiorum, omnia
destruentes: and per nomen Elion, quod Moses nominavit, and fuit grando talis;
qualis non fuit ab initio mundi: and per nomen Adonay, quod Moses nominavit,
and fuerunt locustae, and apparuerunt super terram Aegyptiorum, and comederunt
quae residua erant grandini: and per nomen Schemes amathia, quod Josua vocavit,
et remoratus est Sol cursum: and per nomen Alpha and Omega, quod Daniel
nominavit, and destruxit Beel, and Draconem interfecit: and in nomine Emmanuel,
quod tres pueri, Sidrach, Misach and Abdenago, in camino ignis ardentis,
cantaverunt, and liberati fuerunt: and per nomen Hagaios, and sedem Adonay, and
per Theos, Iscyros, Athanatos, Paracletus; and per haee tria secreta nomina
Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, adjuro, contestor, and per haec nomina, and per alia
nomina Domini nostri Dei Omnipotentis, vivi and very, vos qui vestra culpa de
Caelis ejecti fuistis usque ad infernum locum, exorcizamus, and viriliter
imperamus, per eum qui dixit, and factum est, cui omnes obediunt creaturae, and
per illud tremendum Dei judicium: and per mare omnibus incertum, vitreum, quod
est ante conspectum divinae majestatis gradiens, and potentiale: and per
quatuor divina animalia T. ante sedem divinae majestatis gradienta, and oculos
ante and retro habentia; and per ignem ante ejus thronum circumstantem* and per
sanctos Angelos Caelorum, T. and per eam quae Ecclesia Dei nominatur: and per
summam sapientiam Omnipotentis Dei viriliter exorcizamus, ut nobis hic ante
circulum appareatis, ut faciendam nostram voluntatem, in omnibus prout
placuerit nobis: per sedem Baldachiae, and per hoc nomen Primeumaton, quod
Moses nominavit, and in cavernis abyssi fuerunt profundati vel absorpti, Datan,
Corah and Abiron: and in virtute istius nominis Primeumaton, tota Caeli militia
compellente, maledicimus vos, privamus vos omni officio, loco and gaudio
vestro, usque in profundum abyssi, and usque ad ultimum diem judicii vos
ponimus, and relegamus in ignem aeternum, and in stagnum ignis and sulphuris,
nisi statim appareatis hic coram nobis, ante Circulum, ad faciendum voluntatem
nostram. In omnibus venite per haec nomina, Adonay Zebaoth, Adonay Amioram.
Venite, venite, imperat vobis, Adonay, Saday, Rex regum potentissimus and
tremendissimus, cujus vires nulla subterfugere potest creatura vobis
pertinacissimis futuris nisi obedieritis, and appareatis ante hunc Circulum,
affabiles subito, tandem ruina flebilis miserabilisque, and ignis perpetuum
inextinguibilis vos manet. Venite ergo in nomine Adonay Zebaoth, Adonay
Amioram: venite, venite, quid tardatis? festinate imperat vobis Adonay, Saday,
Rex regum, El, Aty, Titcip, Azia, Hyn, Jen, Minosel, Achadan, Vay, Vaa, Ey,
Haa, Eye, Exe, a, El, El, El, a, Hy, Hau, Hau, Hau, Va, Va, Va, Va.

An Exorcism of the Spirits of the Air.
WE being made after the Image of God, endued with power from God, and made
after his will, do exorcize you by the most mighty and powerful name of God,
El, strong and wonderful ( here he shall name the Spirits he would have appear,
of what order soever they be) and we command you by him, who said the word and
it was done, and by all the names of God, and by the name Adonay, El, Elohim,
Elche, Zebaoth, Elion, Escerchie, Jah, Tetragrammaton, Saday, Lord God most
high: we exorcize you, and powerfully command you, that you forthwith appear
unto us, here before this circle, in a fair human shape, without any deformity
or tortuosity; come ye all such, because we command you by the name Y and V,
which Adam heard and spoke, and by the name of God Agla, which Lot heard and
was saved with his family; and by the name Joth, which Jocob heard from the
Angel wrestling with him, and was delivered from the hand of his brother Esau;
and by the name Anaphexeton, which Aaron heard and spoke, and was made wise;
and by the name Zebaoth, which Moses named, and all the rivers and waters in
the land of Egypt were turned into blood; and by the name Ecerchie Oriston,
which Moses named, and all the rivers brought forth frogs, and they ascended
into the houses of the Egyptians, destroying all things; and by the name Elion,
which Moses named, and the^e was great hail, such as has not been since the
beginning of the world; and by the name Adonay, which Moses named, and there
came up locusts, which appeared upon the whole land of Egypt, and devoured all
which the hail had left: and by the name Schemes amathia, which Joshua called
upon, and the Sun stayed his course; and by the name Alpha and Omega, which
Daniel named and destroyed Bell and slew the Dragon; and in the name Emmanuel,
which the three children, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, sung in the midst of
the fiery surnace, and were delivered; and by the name Hagios, and by the seal
of Adonay, and by Iscyros, Athanatos, Paracletus; and by these three secret
names, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, I do adjure and contest you; and by these
names, and by all the other names of the living and true God, and by our Lord
Almighty, I exorcise and command you, by him that spoke the word and it was
done, to whom all creatures are obedient; and by the dreadful Judgment of God;
by ^he uncertain sea of glass; which is before the face of the divine Majesty
mighty and powerful; by the four beasts before the throne, having eyes before
and behind, and by the fire round about his throne, and by the holy Angels of
heaven; by the mighty wisdom of God, we do powerfully exorcise you, that you
appear here before this Circle to fulfill our will in all things which shall
seem good unto us; by the seal of Baldachia, and by this name Primeumaton,
which Moses named, and the earth opened and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram; and in the power of that name Primeumaton, commanding the whole host of
heaven, we curse you and deprive you from all your office, joy and place, and
do bind you in the depth of the bottomless Pit, there to remain until the day
of the last judgment; and we bind you into eternal fire, and into the lake of
fire and brimstone, unless you forthwith appear here before this Circle to do
our will: Therefore come ye by these names, Adonay, Zebaoth, Adonay Amioran;
come ye, come y^, Adonay commands you; Saday, the most m^^^ty and dreadful
King of Kings, whose (...) no creature is able to resist, be unto you most
dreadful, unless ye obey, and forthwith affably appear before this circle, let
miserable ruin and fire unquenchable remain with you: therefore come ye in the
name of Adonay Zebaoth, Adonay Amioram; come, come, why stay you? hasten:
Adonay, Saday, the King of Kings commands you; El, Aty, Titeip, Azia, Hin, Jen,
Minosel, Achadan, Vay, Vaah, Ey, Exe, a, El, El, El, a, Hy, Hau, Hau, Hau, Va,
Va, Va, Va.

A Prayea to God, to be said in the four parts of the world, in the Circle.
A Morule, Taneha, Latisten, Rabur, Teneba, Latisten, Escha, Aladia, Alpha and
Omega, Leyste, Oriston, Adonay: O my most merciful heavenly Father, have mercy
upon me, although a sinner: make appear the arm of thy power in me this day
(although thy unworthy child) against these obstinate and pernicious Spirits,
that I by thy will may be made a contemplator of thy divine works, and may be
illustrated with all wisdom, and always worship and glorify thy name. I humbly
implore and beseech thee, that these Spirits which I call by thy judgment, may
be bound and constrained to come, and give true and perfect answers to those
things which I shall ask them, and that they may declare and show unto us those
things which by me or us may be commanded them, not hurting any creature,
neither injuring nor terrifying me or my fellows nor hurting any other
creature, and affrighting no man; but let them be obedient to my requests in
all these things which I command them. Then let him stand in the middle of the
Circle, and hold his hand toward the pentacle, and say, Per Pentaculum
Salomonis advocavi, dent mihi responsum verum. By the Pentacle of Solomon I
have called you, give me a true answer.

Then let him say, Beralanensis, Baldachiensis, Paumachiae and Apologiae seeds,
per Reges protestatesq magnanimas, ac principes praepotentes, genio, Liachidae,
ministri tartareae seeds: primac, hic princeps sedis Apologiae nona coherte;
Ego vos invoco, and invocando vos conjuro, atque superna Majestatis munitus
virtute potenter imperio, per cum qui dixit, and factum est, and cui obediunt
omnes creaturae: and per hoc nomen ineffabile, Tetragrammaton Johovah, in quo
est plasinatum omne seculum, quo audito elementa corruunt, aer concutitur, mare
retrograditur, ignis extinguitur, terra tremit, omnesque exercitus Caelestium,
Terrestrium, and infernorum tremunt, turbantur and corruunt: quatenus cito and
sine mora and omni occasion remota, ab universis mundi partibus veniatis, et
rationabiliter de omnibus quacunque interrogavero, respondeatis vos, et
veniatis pacifice, visibiles, et affabiles: nunc et sine mora manifestantes
quod eupimus: conjurati per nomen aeterni vivi et very Dei Helioren, et mandata
nostra perficientes, persistentes semper usque ad finem, et intentionem meam,
visibiles nobis, et effabiles, clara voce nobis, intelligibile, et sine omni
ambiguitate.

BEralaneusis, Baldachiensis, Paumachiae et Apologiae seeds, by the most mighty
Kings and Potestates, and the most powerful Princes Genio, Liachidae, Ministers
of the Tartarean seat, chief Prince of the seat of Apolig^a in the ninth
Legion; I invoke you, and by invocating conjure you, and being armed with power
from the supreme Majesty, I strongly command you, by him who spoke and it was
done, and to whom all creatures are obedient; and by this ineffable name
Tetragrmmaton Jehovah, which being heard, the Elements are overthrown, the Air
is shaken, the Sea runs back, the fire is quenched, the earth trembles, and
all the host of Celestials, Terrestrials and Infernals do tremble, and are
troubled and confounded together: Wherefore forthwith and without delay, do you
come from all parts of the world, and make rational answers unto all things I
shall ask of you, and come ye peaceably, visibly, and affably, now without
delay manifesting what we desire, being conjured by the name of the eternal,
living and true God Helioren, and fulfill our commands, and persist unto the
end, and according to our intentions, visibly and affably speaking unto us with
a clear voice, intelligible and without any ambiguity.

Visions and apparitions.
QUibus rite peractis, apparebunt infinitae, visiones, et phantasmata pulsantia
organa et omnis generis instrumenta musica, idque sit a spiritibus, ut terrore
compulsi socii abeant a Circulo, quia nihil adversus magistrum possunt. Post
haec videbis infinitos sagittarios cum infinita multitudine bestia^um
horribilem: quae ita se componunt, ac si vellent devorare socios: et tamen nil
timeant. Tunc Sacerdos sive Magister, adhibens manum Pentaculo, dicat: fugiat
hinc iniquitas vestra, virtute vexilli Dei. Et tunc spiritus obedire magistro
coguntur, et socii nil amplius videbunt.

Then let the exorcist say, stretching out his hand to the Pentacle, Ecce
Pentaculum Salomonis, quod ante vestram adduxi praesentiam exorcizatoris in
medio Exorcismi, qui est optime a Deo mutinus, intrepidus, providus, qui
viribus potens vos exorcizando invocavii et vocat. Venite ergo cum sestinatione
in virtute nominum istorum, Aye, Saraye, Aye, Saraye, Aye, Saraye, ne
differatis venire, per nomina aeterna Dei vivi et very Eloy, Archima, Kabut: et
per hoc praesens Pentaculum, quod super vos potenter imperat: et per virtutem
caelestium spirituum dominorum vestrorum: et per personam exorcizatoris,
conjurati, festinati venire et obedire praeceptori vestro, qui vocator
Octinomos. His peractis, sibiles in quatuor angulis mundi. Et videbis immediate
magnos motus: et cum videris, dicas: Quid tardatis? quid moramini? quid
facitis? praeparate vos et obedite praeceptori vestro, in nomine Domini Bathat,
vel Vachat super Abrac ruens, supervenieus, Abeor super Aberer.

Tunc immediate venient in sua forma propria. Et quando videbis eos juxta
Circulum, ostende illis Pentaculum cooperatum syndone sacro, et discooperiatur,
^t dicat, Ecce conclusionem vestram, nolite fieri inobedientes. Et subito
videbis eos in pacifica forma: et dicent tibi, Pete quid vis, quia nos sumus
parati complere omnia mandata tua, quia dominus ad haec nos subjugavit. Cum
autem apparuerint Spiritus, tunc dicas, Been veneritis Spiritus, vel reges
nobilissimi, quia vos vocavi per illum cui omne genu flectitur caelestium,
terrestrium et infernorum: cujus in manu omnia regna regum sunt, nec est quiae
suae contrarius esse possit Majestati. Quatenus constringuo vos, ut hic ante
circulum visibiles, affabiles permanetis, tamdiu tamque constantes, nec sint
licentia mea recedatis, donec meam sine fallacia aliqua et veredice perficiatis
voluntatem, per potentiae illius virtutem, qui mare posuit terminum suum, quem
praeterire non protest, et lege illius potentiae, non pertransit fines suos,
Dei scilicet altissimi, regis, domini, qui cuncta creavit, Amen. Then command
what you will, and it shall be done: afterward license them thus. In nomine
Paetris, Filii, et Spiritus sancti, ite in pace ad loca vestra: et pax sit
inter nos et vos, parati sitis venire vocati.

Visions and apparitions.
THESE things duly performed there will appear infinite Visions and Phantasms,
beating of organs and all kinds of musical Instruments, which is done by the
spirits, that with the terror they might force the companions to go out of the
Circle, because they can do nothing against the Master. After this you shall
see an infinite company of archers, with a great multitude of horrible beasts,
which will so compose themselves, as if they would devour the fellows:
nevertheless fear nothing.

Then the Priest or Master holding his hand toward the pentacle, shall say,
Avoid hence these iniquities by virtue of the banner of God; and then will the
spirits be compelled to obey the Master, and the company shall see no more.

Then let the exorcist, stretching out his hand to the pentacle say, Behold the
pentacle of Solomon which I have brought before your presence. Behold the
person of the exorcist in the middle of the exorcism, who is armed by God, and
without fear, and well provided, who potently invocateth and calls you by
exorcizing; come therefore with speed, in the virtue of these names, Aye
Saraye, Aye Saraye; defer not to come by the eternal names of the living and
true God, Eloy, Archima, Rabur, and by the pentacle here present, which
powerfully reigns over you, and by virtue of the celestial spirits your Lords,
and by the person of the exorci^t, being conjured, make haste to come and yield
obedience to your Master, who is called Octinomos. This being performed, there
w^^l be ^issi^gs in the four parts of the world, and then immediately you shall
see great motions; and when you see them, say, why stay you? wherefore do you
delay? what do you? prepare yourselves to be obedient to your Master, in the
name of the Lord Bathat or Vachat rushing upon Abrac, Abeor coming upon Aberer.

Then they will immediately come in their proper form; and when you see them
before the Circle, show them the Pentacle covered with fine linen; uncover it
and say, behold your confusion, if you refuse to be obedient; and suddenly they
will appear in a peaceable form, and will say, ask what you will, for we are
prepared to fulfill all your commands, for the Lord has subjected us hereunto:
and when the spirits have appeared, then you shall say, welcome spirits, or
most noble Kings, because I have called you through him to whom every knee does
bow, both of things in heaven and things on earth, and things under the earth,
in whose hands are all the kingdoms of Kings, neither is their any that can
contradict his Majesty. Wherefore I bind you, that you remain affable and
visible before this circle, so long and so constant; neither shall ye depart
without my license, until you have truly and without any fallacy performed my
will, by virtue of his power, who has set the sea her bounds, beyond which
these cannot pass, nor go beyond the law of his power, to wit, of the most high
God, Lord and King, who has created all things, Amen. In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, go in peace unto your places;
peace be between us and you, be ye ready to come when ye are called.

These are the things which Peter de Abano has spoken concerning magical
elements.

But that you may the better know the manner of composing a Circle, I will set
down one scheme so that if any one would make a Circle in springtime for the
first hour of the Lord's day, it must be in the same manner as is the figure
following.

The figure of a Circle for the first hour of the Lord's day in Springtime.
Varcan Rex Tus Andos Cynabal
Michail Dardid Huratapel Talui Caracasa Cor An^aliel Commissoros Spughguel
Amaday Abraym Aguista Yayn Michel Adonay / Eloy / Agla / Tetragrammaton
Alpha et o




It remains now, that we explain the week, the several days thereof; and
first of the Lord's day.

Considerations of the Lord's day.
THE Angel of the Lord's day, his Sigil, Planet, Sign of the Planet, and the
name of the fourth heaven.

Michai^l ^ Machen.

The Ang^ls of the Lord's day; Michael, Dardiel, Hurat^pal.

The Angels of the air ruling on the Lord's day; Varcan. King.

His ministers; Tus, Andas, Cynabal.

The wind which the Angels of the air abovesaid are under; the North Wind.

The Angels of the fourth heaven, ruling on the Lord's day, which ought to be
called from the four parts of the world. At the East, Samael, Baciel, Atel,
Gabriel, Vionatraba.

At the West; Anael, Pabel, Ustael, Burchat, Suceratos, Capabili.

At the North; Aiel, Aniel, vel Aquiel. Masgabriel, Sapiel, Matuyel.

At the South; Haludiel, Machasiel, Charsiel, Uriel, Naromiel.

The perfume of the Lord's day, Red Sanders.

The Conjuration of the Lord's day,
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Angeli fortes Dei, and sancti, in nomine
Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eya, qui est ille, qui fuit, est and erit, Eye, Abr^ye; and
in nomine Saday, Cados, Cados, Cados, alte sedentis super Cherubin, and per
nomen magnum ipsius Dei fortis and potentis, exaltatique super omnes caelos,
Eye, Seraye, plasma^^ris seculorum, qui creavit mundum, caelum, (...), mare,
and omnia quae in eis sunt in primo (...) and sigillavit ea sancto nomine suo
Phaa: and (...) nomina sanctorum Angelorum, qui domi^^tur in q^arto exercitu,
and serviunt coram po^^^issimo Salamia, Angelo magno and honorato: (...) p^r
nomen stellae, quae est Sol, and per signum, (...) p^r immensum nomen Dei vivi,
and per nomina omnia praedicta; conjuro te Michael angele magn^, qui es
praepositus Diei Dominicae: and per nomen Adonay, Dei Israel, qui creavit
mundum and quinquid in eo est, quod pro melabores, and adimpleas omnem meam
petitionem, juxta meum velle and votum meum, in negotio and causa mea. And here
thou shall declare thy cause and business, and for what thing thou make this
conjuration.

The Conjuration of the Lord's day.
I Conjure and confirm upon you, ye strong and holy Angels of God, in the name
Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eya, which is he who was, and is, and is to come, Eye Abray;
and in the name Saday, Cados, Cados, Cados, sitting on high upon the Cherubin;
and by the great name of God himself, strong and powerful, who is exalted above
all heavens, Eye, Saray, maker of the world, who created the world, the heaven,
the earth the sea, and all that in them is in the first day, and sealed them
with his holy name Phaa; and by the name of the holy Angels who rule in the
fourth Heaven, and serve before the most mighty Salamia, an Angel great and
honorable; and by the name of his star, which is Sol; and by his sign; and by
the immense name of the living God, and by all the names aforesaid, I conjure
thee Michael, Oh! great Angel, who art chief ruler of the Lord's day; and by
the name Adonay, the God of Israel, who has created the world, and all that
therein is, That thou labor for me, and fulfill all my petitions, according to
my will and desire, in my cause and business.

The spirits of the air of the Lord's day, are under the north wind; their
nature is to procure gold, gems, carbuncles, riches; to cause one to obtain
favor and benevolence; to dissolve the enmities of men; to raise men to
honors; to carry or take away infirmities. But in what manner they appear, is
spoken already in the former book of magical ceremonies.

Consideration of Monday.
THE Angel of Monday, his Sigil, Planet, the Sign of the Planet, and name of
the first heaven.

Gabriel ^ Shamain

The Angels of Monday; Gabriel, Michael, Samael.

The Angels o^ the Air ruling on Monday, Arcan, King.

His ministers; Bilet, Missabu, Abuzaha.

The wind which the said Angels of the Air are subject to: the West-wind.

The Angels of the first heaven, ruling on Monday, which ought to be called
from the four parts of the world. From the east, Gabriel, Gabrael, Madiel,
Deamiel, Janaek.

From the west; Sachiel, Zaniel, Habaiel, Bachanael, Corabael.

From the north; Mael, Uvael, Valnum, Baliel, Balay, Humastrau.

From the south; Curaniel, Dabriel, Darquiel, Hanun, Anayl, Vetuel.

The perfume of Monday. Aloes.

The Conjuration of Monday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Angeli fortes and boni, in nomine Adonay,
Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eye, Cados, Cados, Cados, Achim, Achim, Ja, Ja,
Fortis, Ja, qui apparuit monte Sinai, cum glorificatione regis Adonay, Saday,
Zebaoth, Anathay, Ya, Ya, Ya, Ma^inata, Abim, Jeia, qui maria creavit, stagna
and omnes aquas in secundo die, quasdam super caelos, and quasdam in terra.
Sigillavit mare in alio nomine suo, and terminum, quem sibi po^uit, non
praeteribit: and per nomina Ang^lorum, qui dominantur in primo excercitu, qui
serviunt ^rphaniel Angelo magno, precioso and honorato: and per nomen stellae,
quae est Luna: and per nomina praedicta, super te conjuro, scilicet Gabriel,
qui es praepositus diei Lunae secundo, quod pro me labores and adimpleas, etc.
As the conjuration of Sunday.

The Conjuration of Monday.
I Conjure and confirm upon you ye strong and good Angels, in the name of
Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eye, Cados, Cados, Cados, Achim, Achim, Ja,
Ja, strong Ja, who appeared in mount Sinai, with the glorification of King
Adonay, Saday, Zebaoth, Anathay* Ya, Ya, Ya, Marinata, Abim, Jeia, who created
the Sea and all lakes and waters in the second day, which are above the heavens
and in the earth, and sealed the Sea in his high name, and gave it bounds,
beyond which it cannot pass: and by the names of the Angels, who rule in the
first Legion, who serve Orphaniel,, a great, precious and honorable Angel, and
by the name of his star, which is; and by all the names aforesaid, I conjure
thee Gabriel, who art chief ruler of Monday the second day, that for me thou
labor and fulfill, etc.

The Spirits of the air of Monday are subject to the west-wind which is the
wind of the moon: their nature is to give silver; to convey things from place
to place; to make horses swift, and to disclose the secrets of persons both
present and future; but in what manner they appear you may see in the former
book.

Considerations of Tuesday.
THE Angels of Tuesday, his Sigil, his Planet, the Sign governing that Planet,
and the name of the fifth heaven.

Samael... ^.. Machon.

The Angels of Tuesday: Samael, Satael, Amabiel.

The Angels of the Air ruling on Tuesday, Samax, King.

His ministers, Carmax, Ismoli, Paffran.

The wind to which the said Angels are subject. The East Wind.

The Angels of the fifth heaven ruling on Tuesday, which ought to be called
from the four parts of the World. At the east; Friagne, Guael, Damael, Calzas,
Arragon.

At the west: Lama, Astagna. Lobquin, Soncas, Jazel, Isiael, Irel.

At the north: Rahumel, Hyniel, Rayel, Seraphiel, Mathiel, Fraciel.

At the south: Sacriel, Janiel, Galdel, Osael, Vianuel, Zaliel.

The perfume of Tuesday. Pepper.

The Conjuration of Tuesday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos, Angeli fortes and sancti, per nomen Ya, Ya,
Ya, He, He, He, Va, Hy, Hy, Ha, Ha, Ha, Va, Va, Va, An, An, An, Aie, Aie, Aie,
El, Ay, Elibra, Eloim, Eloim, and per nomina ipsius alti Dei, qui fecit aquam
aridam apparere, and vocavit terram, and produxit arbores, and herbas de ea and
sigillavit super eam cum precioso, honorato, metuendo and sancto nomine suo:
and per nomen angelorum dominantium in quinto exercitu, qui serviunt Acimoy
Angelo magno, forti, potenti, and honorato: and per nomen Stellae, quae est
Mars: and per nomina praedicta conjuro super te Samael, Angele magne, qui
praepositus es diei Martis; and per nomina Adonay, Dei vivi and very, quod pro
me labores, and adimpleas, etc. As in the Conjuration of Sunday.

The Conjuration of Tuesday.
I Conjure and call upon you, ye strong and good Angels! in the name Ya Ya Ya,
He He He, Va, Hy Hy, Ha Ha Ha, Va Va Va, An An An, Aia Aia Aia, El, Ay, Elibra,
Eloim Eloim, and by the names of him the high God; who has made the Sea into
dry Land, and by his word has made the Earth, and produced Trees and has set
his Seal upon the Plants of it, with his precious, honored, revered, and holy
name: and by the name of the Angels governing in the fifth House, who are
subservient to the great Angel Acimoy, who is strong, powerful, and honored,
and by the name of the Constellation, which is called Mars. And I call upon
thee Samael, and the names above mentioned, thou great Angel! who presidest
over the day of Mars; and by the name Adonay the living and true God, that you
assist me in accomplishing my labors, etc. As in the Conjuration of Sunday.

The Spirits of the Air of Tuesday are under the East Wind: their nature is to
cause wars, mortallity, death and combustions; and to give two thousand
Soldiers at a time; to bring death, infirmities or health. The manner of their
appearing you may see in the former book.

Considerations of Wednesday.
THE Angel of Wednesday, his Sigil, Planet, the Sign governing that Planet, and
the name of the second heaven.

Raphael ^ Raquie.

The Angels of Wednesday. Raphael, Meil, Seraphiel.

The Angels of the air ruling on Wednesday. Mediat or Modiat, Rex.

Ministers. Suquinos. Sallales.

The wind to which the said Angels of the Air are subject. The South-west-wind.

The Angels of the second heaven governing Wednesday, which ought to be called
from the four parts of the world.

At the East: Mathlai, Tarmiel, Baraborat.

At the West; Jerescue, Mitraton.

At the north: Thiel, Rael, Jariahel, Venahel, Velel, Abuiori, Ucirnuel.

At the south; Milliel, Nelapa, Babel, Caluel, Vel, Laquel.

The fumigation of Wednesday. Mastick.

The Conjuration of Wednesday.
COnjuro and confirmo vos angeli fortes, sancti and potentes, in nomine fortes,
metuendissimi and ben dicti Ja, Adonay, Eloim, Saday, Saday, Saday, Eye, Eye,
Eye, Asamie, Asaraie: and in nomine Adonay Dei Israel, qui creavit luminaria
magna, ad distinguendum diem a nocte: and per nomen omnium Angelorum
deservientium in exercitu secundo coram Tetra Angelo majori, atque forti and
potenti: and per nomen Stellae, quae est Mercurius: and per nomen Sigilli, quae
sigillatur a Deo fortissimo and honorato: per omnia praedicta supet te Raphael
Angele magne, conjuro, qui es praepositus diei quartae: and per nomen sanctum
quod erat scriptum in front Aaron sacerdotis altissimi creatoris: and per
nomina Angelorum, qui in gratiam Salvatoris confirmati sunt: and per nomen
sedis Ammalium, habentium senas alas, quod pro me labores, etc. As in the
Conjuration of Sunday.

The Spirits of the air of Wednesday are subject to the South-west-wind: their
nature is to give all metals; to reveal all earthly things past, present and to
come; to pacify Judges, to give victories in war, to re-edify, and teach
experiments and all decayed sciences, and to change bodies mixed of elements
coditionally out of one into another; to give infirmities or health; to raise
the poor, and cast down the high ones; to bind or loose spirits; to open locks
or bolts: such-kind of spirits have the operation of others, but not in their
perfect power, but in virtue or knowledge. In what manner they appear, it is
before spoken.

Considerations of Thursday
THE Angel of Thursday, his Sigil, Planet, the sign of the Planet, and the name
of the sixth heaven.

Sachiel. ^ Zebul.

The Angels of Thursday; Sachiel, Castiel, Asasiel.

The Angels of the Air governing Thursday. Suth, Rex.

Ministers. Maguth, Gutrix.

The wind which the said Angels of the Air are under. The South Wind.

But because there are no Angels of the Air to be found above the fifth heaven,
therefore on Thursday say the prayers following in the four parts of the world.

At the east: O Deus magne and excelse, and honorate per infinita secula. That
is to say, O great and most high God, honored world without end.

At the west: O Deus sapiens, and clare, and just, ac divina clementia: ego
rogo te piissime Pater, quod meum petitionem, quod meum opus, and meum laborem
hodie debeam complere, and perfect intelligere. Tu qui vivis and regnas per
infinita secula seculorum, Amen. That is to say, O wise, pure and just God, of
divine clemency, I beseech thee most holy father, that this day I may perfectly
understand and accomplish my petition, work, and labor; thou who live and
reignest world without end, Amen.

At the north: O Deus potens, fortis, and sine principio. That is to say, O God
strong and mighty from everlasting.

At the south: O Deus potens and misericors.

That is to say, O mighty and merciful God.

The perfume of Thursday. Saffron.

The Conjuration of Thursday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos, Angeli sancti, per nomen Cados, Cados Cados,
Eschereie, Eschereie, Eschereie, Hatim, ya, fortis firmator seculorum, Cantine,
Jaym, Janic, Anic, Calbat, Sabbac, Berisay, Alnaym: and per nomen Adonay, qui
creavit pisces reptilia in aquis, and aves super faciem terrae, volantes versus
coelos die quinto: and per nomina Angelorum servientium in sexto exercitu coram
Pastore Angelo sancto and magno and potenti principe: and per nomen stellae,
quae est Jupiter, and per nomen Sigili sui: and per nomen Adonay, summi Dei,
omnium creatoris: and per nomen omnium stellarum, and per vim and virtutem
earum: and per nomina praedicta, conjuro te Sachiel Angele magne, qui es
praepositus diei Jovis, ut pro me labores, etc. As in the conjuration of the
Lord's day.

The Conjuration of Thursday.
I Conjure and confirm upon you ye holy Angels, and by the name Cados, Cados,
Cados, Eschereie, Eschereie, Eschereie, Hatim, ya, strong founder of the
worlds, Cantine, Jaym, Janic, Anic, Calbot, Sabbac, Berisay, Alnaym: and by
name Adonay, who created fishes, and creeping things in the waters, and birds
upon the face of the earth, and flying toward heaven, in the fifth day; and by
the names of the Angels serving in the fixth host, before Pastor, a holy Angel,
and a great and powerful Prince; and by the name of his star which is Jupeter,
and by the name of his seal, and by the name Adonay, the great God, creator of
all things; and by the name of all stars, and by their power and virtue, and by
all the names aforesaid, I conjure thee Sachiel a great Angel, who art chief
ruler of Thursday, that for me thou labor, etc.

The spirits of the Air of Thursday, are subject to the south wind; their
nature is to procure the love of women, to cause men to be merry and joyful; to
pacify strife and contentions; to appease enemies; to heal the diseased, and to
disease the whole; and procures losses, or takes them away. Their manner of
appearing is spoken of already.

Considerations of Friday.
THE Angel of Friday, his Sigil, his Planet, the sign governing that Planet,
and name of the third heaven.

Anael. ^ Sagun.

The Angels of Friday; Anael, Rachiel, Sachiel.

The Angels of the Air reigning on Friday. Sarabotes, King.

Ministers: Amahiel, Aba, Abalidoth, Blaef.

Tho wind which the said Angels of the Air are under. The west-wind.

Angels of the third heaven, ruling on Friday, which are to be called from the
four parts of the world. At the east: Setchiel, Chedusitaniel, Corat, Tamael,
Tenaciel.

At the west: Turiel, Coniel, Babiel, Kadie, Maltiel, Huphaltiel.

At the north: Peniel, Penael, Penat, Raphael, Raniel. Doremiel.

At the south: Porna, Sachiel, Chermiel, Samael, Santanael, Famiel.

The Perfume of Friday. Pepperwort.

The Conjuration of Friday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Angeli fortes, sancti atque potentes, in nomine
On, Hey, Heya, Ja, Je, Adonay, Saday, and in nomine Saday, qui creavit
quadrupedia and animalia reptilia, and homines in sexto die, and Adae dedit
potestatem super omnia animalia; unde benedictum sit nomen creatoris in loco
fuo: and per nomina Angelorum servientium in tertio exercitu, coram Dagiel
Angelo magno, principe forti atque potenti: and pe^ nomen stellae quae est
Venus: and per sigillum ejus, quod quidem est sanctum: and per nomina praedicta
conjuro super te Anael, qui es praepositus diei sextae, ut pro me labores, etc.
As before in the conjuration of Sunday.

The Conjuration of Friday.
I Conjure and confirm upon you ye strong Angels, holy and powerful; in the
name On, Hey, Heya, Ja, Je, Adonay, Saday, and in the name Saday, who created
fourfooted beasts, and creeping things, and man in the sixth day, and gave to
Adam power over all creatures; wherefore blessed be the name of the creator in
his place: and by the name of the Angels serving in the third host, before
Dagiel a great Angel, and a strong and powerful Prince: and by the name of the
star which is Venus, and by his seal which is holy, and by all the names
aforesaid, I conjure upon thee Anael, who art chief ruler of the sixth day,
that thou labor for me, etc.

The spirits of the Air of Friday are subject to the west-wind; their nature is
to give silver; to excite men, and incline them to luxury; to reconcile enemies
through luxury; and to make marriages; to allure men to love women; to cause,
or take away infirmities; and to do all things which have motion.

Considerations of Saturday, or the Sabbath day.
THE Angel of Saturday, his Seal, his Planet, and the Sign governing the Planet.

Cassiel ^

The Angels of Saturday: Cassiel, Machatan, Uriel.

The Angels of the Air ruling on Saturday. Maymon, King.

Ministers. Abumalith, Assaibi, Balidet.

The wind which the said Angels of the Air aforesaid are under.

The South Wind.

The fumigation of Saturday. Sulpher.

It is already declared in the consideration of Thursday, that there are no
Angels ruling the Air, above the fifth heaven; therefore in the four Angles of
the world, use those orations which you see applied to that purpose on thursday.

The Conjuration of Saturday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Caphriel vel Cassiel, Machatori, and Seraquiel
Angeli fortes and potentes: and per nomen Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye,
Eye, Acim, Acim, Cados, Cados, Ina vel Ima, Ima, Saclay, Ja, Sar, Domini
formatoris seculorum, qui in septimo die quievit: and per illum qui in
beneplacito suo filiis Israel in haereditatem observandum dedit, ut eum firmter
custodirent, and sanctificarent, ad habendam inde bonam in alio secula
remunerationem: and per nomina Angelorum servientium in exercitu septimo Pooel
Angelo magno, and per potenti principi; and per nomen stellae quae est
Saturnus, and per sanctum Sigillum ejus: and per nomina praedicta conjuro super
te Caphriel, qui praepositus es diei septimae quae est dies Sabbati, quod pro
me labores, etc. As it is set down in the conjuration of the Lord's day.

The Conjuration of Saturday.
I Conjure and confirm upon you, Caphriel or Cassiel, Machator, and Seraquiel,
strong and powerful Angels; and by the name Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye,
Eye, Acim, Acim, Acim, Cabos, Cados, Ina, or Ima, Ima, Sallay, Ja, Sar, Lord
and maker of the world, who rested on the seventh day: and by him who of his
good pleasure gave the same to be observed by the children of Israel,
throughout their Generations, that they should keep and sanctify the same, to
have thereby a good reward in the world to come, and by the names of the Angels
serving in the seventh host, before Booel, a great Angel and powerful prince;
and by the name of his star, which is Saturn; and by his holy seal; and by the
names before spoken, I conjure upon thee Caphriel, who art chief ruler of the
seventh day, which is the Sabbath day, that for me thou labor, etc.

The Spirits of the Air of Saturday are subject to the South-west-wind: the
nature of them is is to sow discords, hatred, evil thoughts and cogitations; to
give leave freely to slay and kill every one, and to lame or maim every member.
Their manner of appearing is declared in the former book.

Tables of the Angels of the Hours, according to the course of the days.
SUNDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Michael. 1. Beron. Sachiel. 2. Janor. Anael. 2. Barol. Samael.
3. Nasnia. Raphael. 3. Thanu. Michael. 4. Salla. Gabriel. 4. Athir. Anael. 5.
Sadedali. Cassiel. 5. Mathon, Raphael. 6. Thamur. Sachiel. 6. Rana. Gabriel. 7.
Ourer. Samael. 7. Netos. Cassiel. 8. Tanic. Michael. 8. Ta^rac. Sachiel. 9^
Neron. Anael. 9. Sassur. Samael. 10. Jayon. Raphael. 10. Aglo. Michael. 11.
Abay. Gabriel. 11. Calerna. Anael. 12. Natalon. Cassiel. 12. Salam. Raphael.

MONDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Gabriel. 1. Beron. Anael. 2. Janor. Cassiel. 2. Barol. Raphael.
3. Nasnia. Sachiel. 3. T^anu. Gabriel. 4. Salla. Samael. 4. Athir. Cassi^l. 5.
Sadedali. Michael. 5. Mathon. S^c^iel. 6. Thamur, Anael. 6. Rana. Samael. 7.
Ourer, Raphael. 7. Netos. Michael. 8. Tanic. Gabriel. 8. Tafrac. Anael. 9.
Neron. C^ssiel. 9. Sassur. Raphael. 10. Jayon. Sachiel. 10. Ag^o. Gabriel. 11.
Abay. Samael. 11. Calerno. Cassiel. 12. Natalon. Michael. 12. Salam. Sachiel.

TUESDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1, Yayn, Samael. 1, Beron, Cassiel. 2, Janor, Michael. 2, Barol,
Sachiel. 3, Nasnia, Anael. 3, Thanu, Samael. 4, Salla, Raphael, 4, Athir,
Michael. 5, Sadedali, Gabriel. 5, Mathon, Anael. 6, Thamur, Cassiel. 6, Rana,
Raphael. 7, Ourer, Sachiel. 7, Netos, Gabriel. 8, Tanic, Samael. 8, Tafrac,
Cassiel. 9, Neron, Michael. 9, Sussur, Sachiel. 10, Jayon, Anael. 10, Aglo,
Samael. 11, Abay, Raphel. 11, Calerna, Michael. 12, Natalon, Gabriel. 12,
Salam, Anael,

WEDNESDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours, Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1, Yayn, Raphael. 1, Beron, Michael. 2, Janor, Gabriel. 2, Barol, Anael.
3, Nasnia, Cassiel. 3, Thanu, Raphael. 4, Salla, Sachiel. 4, Athir, Gabriel. 5,
Sadedali, Samael. 5, Mathon, Cassiel. 6, Thamur, Michael. 6. Rana, Sachiel, 7,
Ourer, Anael. 7, Netos, Samael, 8, Tanic, Raphael. 8, Tafrac. Michael. 9,
Neron, Gabriel. 9, Sassur, Anael. 10, Jayon, Cassiel, 10, Aglo, Raphael. 11,
Abay, Sachiel. 11, Calerna, Gabriel. 12, Natalon, Samael. 12, Salam, Cassiel.

THURSDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1, Yayn, Sachiel. 1, Beron, Gabriel, 2, Janor, Samael. 2, Barol,
Cassiel. 3, Nasnia, Michael, 3, Thanu, Sachiel. 4, Salla, Anael, 4, Athir,
Samael, 5, Sadedali, Raphael. 5, Mathon, Michael. 6, Thamur, Gabriel. 6, Rana,
Anael, 7, Ourer, Cassiel, 7, Netos, Zaphael. 8, Tanic, Sachiel. 8, Tafrac,
Gabriel, 9, Neron, Samael. 9, Sassur, Cassiel. 10, Jayon, Michael. 10, Aglo,
Sachiel. 11, Abay, Anael. 11, Calerna, Samael. 12, Natalon, Raphael. 12, Salam,
Michael.

FRIDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1, Yayn, Anael. 1, Beron, Samael, 2, Janor, Raphael. 2, Barol, Michael.
3, Nasnia, Gabriel. 3, Thanu, Anael. 4, Salla, Cassiel. 4, Athir, Raphael. 5,
Sadedali, Sachiel. 5, Mathon, Gabriel. 6, Thamur, Samael. 6, Rana, Cassiel. 7,
Ourer, Michael, 7, Netos. Sachiel. 8, Tanic, Anael. 8, Tafrac, Samael. 9,
Neron, Raphael. 9, Sassur, Michael. 10, Jayon, Gabriel. 10, Aglo, Anael. 11.
Abay, Cassiel. 11, Calerna, Raphael. 12. Natalon, Sachiel. 12, Salam, Gabriel.

SATURDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1, Yayn, Cassiel. 1, Beron, Raphael. 2, Janor, Sachiel. 2, Barol,
Gabriel. 3, Nasnia. Samael. 3, Thanu, Cassiel. 4, Salla, Michael. 4, Athir,
Sachiel. 5, Sadedali, Anael, 5, Mathon, Samael. 6, Thamur, Raphael. 6, Rana,
Michael. 7, Ourer, Gabriel. 7, Netos, Anael, 8, Tanic, Cassiel. 8, Tafrac,
Raphael* 9, Neron. Sachiel. 9, Sassur, Gabriel. 10, Jayon, Samael. 10, Aglo,
Cassiel 11, Abay, Michael. 11, Calerna, Sachiel. 12, Natalon, Anael. 12, Salam,
Samael.

But this is to be observed by the way, that the first hour of the day, of
every Country, and in every season whatsoever, is to be assigned to the
Sunrising, when he first appears arising in the horizon: and the first hour
of the night is to be the thirteenth hour, from the first hour of the day. But
of these things it is sufficiently spoken.

FINIS.
ISAGOGE: An Introductory DISCOURSE Of the nature of such Spirits as are
excercised in the sublunary bounds; their Original, Nam^s, Offices, Illusions,
power, Prophesies, Miracles; and how they may be expelled and driven away.
By Geo. Victorius Villinganus Dr. in Physic.
In a Discourse between CASTOR and POLLUX.

Castor. THE Greeks do report, that Castor and Pollux have both proceeded from
one Egg; but this I scarcely credit, by reason of the difference of your minds;
for thou affectest the heavens, but she meditates upon the earth and slaughters.


Pollux. And from thence perhaps was derived that argument, That liberty of
lying was always assigned to the Greeks.


Castor. Principally.


Pollux. But it is not to be supposed that the Greeks are vain in all things;
but as many others, when they speak out of a three-footed thing; whereof also
the Poet Ovid speaks in verse, -- Nec singunt omnia Graeci.


Castor. In this proverb I protest they are most true, without any exception,
that is, one Man to another is a Devil.


Pollux. Wherefore believe thou this to be most true, Castor?


Castor. Truly, that man to man is a devil and a ravening wolf, daily events do
most certainly prove, if we do but note the treacheries that one man invents
daily against another, the roberies, thefts, plunderings, rapes* slaughters,
deceits, adulteries, and an hundred vipers of this nature; the fathers
persecutes the son, with a serpentine and poisonous biting; one friend seeks to
devour another, neither can the guest be safe with his host.


Pollux. I confess it is truth thou speak; but for ought I hear, thou do
misunderstand the Etymology of the word compared in this Proverb; for Demon
here it is not an horrible or odious name, but the name of one that does
administer help or succor unto another, and whom Pliny calls a God.


Castor. Therefore do thou affirm the word Demon in this Proverb to signify
any other than a cunning and malicious accuser?


Pollux. Thou have not shot besides the mark: for, that there are more Demons
than that sublunary one which thou understandest, every one may easily
perceive; who has not negligently read the opinions of the most excellent
Plato.


Castor. I desire therefore, that thou would not conce^l such his writings;
but that I may apprehend the marrow thereof.


Pollux. I will embrace such thy desire, for truly I do delight to treat with
thee concerning this subject; mark therefore and give attention.

Plato divided the order of Devils or Spirits into three degrees, which as they
are distinct in the greatness of their dignity, so also they are different in
the distance and holding of their places. And the first order he ascribes to
those spirits whose bodies are nourished of the most pure element of air,
wrought and joined together, in a manner, as it were with splended threads, not
having so much reference to the element of fire, that they may be perspicuous
to the sight; neither do they so much participate of the earth, that they may
be touched or felt; and they do inhabit the Celestial theater attending and
waiting on their Prince, not to be declared by any human tongue, or beyond the
commands of the most wise God.

But the other degree is derived from those Spirits which Apuleius terms
rational animals, passive in their mind, and eternal in their time,
understanding the apostate spirits spread abroad from the bounds and borders of
the Moon, unto us under the dominion of their Prince Beelzebub, which before
the fall of Lucifer had pure clarified bodies; and now, like unto the former,
do wander up and down, after their transgression, in the form of an airy
quallity.


Castor. These I do not conceive are understood in the Greek Proverb: for these
do hurt, and are the accusers and betrayers of men, But proceed.


Pollux. The third degree of spirits is of a divine deity, which is called by
Hermes, a divine miracle to man, if he do not degenerate from the Kingly habit
of his first form; whom therefore of this kind the Greeks and Plato have called
Demons, that is, God; and that man may be like unto God, and profitable and
commodious one to another; and so also (the Syrian being witness) we have known
Plato himself to have been called Demon, because he had set forth very many
things of very high matters, for the good of the commmon wealth; and so
likewise Aristotle, because he very largely disputed of sublunaries, and all
such things as are subject to motion and sense. Homer calls good and evil
Spirits, Demons, without putting a discrimination.


Castor. Thou have committed the ship to the waves Pollux; therefore cease not
to proceed, and declare something more concerning the Office and employment of
these Spirits, to whom Plato attributes the second degree, and calls them
Lunaries.


Pollux. What shall I say?


Castor. In the first place, declare wherefore thou have before termed these
spirits cunning and much knowing accusers.


Pollux. St. Augustine unfoldeth this difficulty, and says, that a Devil does
so far signify the cunning and much knowing quickness and vivacity of his
deceitful wit, that by the congruent and agreeable seminal mixture of elements,
he does so know the secret and unknown virtues of men, as those things which
may be effected and wrought by themselves successively and leisurely according
to the course of nature, he by a speedy hasting or forcing of the works of
nature, or by his own art, sooner brings the same to pass. An example hereof
he gives in the wise men of Pharaoh, who immediately brought forth frogs and
serpents at the commandment of the King, which nature more slowly and leisurely
procreateth.


Castor. Thou have excellently answered to the question, Pollux; but add
something concerning the original of those Spirits which do resist and refuse
virtue; for oftentimes doubting, I have been persuaded that such Erynnes as are
from God, do not appear out of the earth.


Pollux. The Ecclesiastical Scripture every where makes mention of the rising
of them; but I will unfold such a doubt: and there do arise many and various
opinions of writers, but more commonly Peter Lombardus in his book of
Sentences, draws his Allegations out of St. Augustine upon Genesis; to wit,
that the Devil was before his fall an Archangel, and had a fine tender body,
composed by God, out of the serenity and purest matter of the sky and air, but
then after his fall from an Archangel, he was made an Apostate, and his body no
more fine and subtle; but his body was made that it might suffer the effect of
a more gross substance, from the quality of the more obscure, dark, and
spissious air, which body also was stricken and astonished with the raging
madness of pride, did draw away very many which were then Angels with him into
his service and bondage, that they might be made Devils, who in this
troublesome world do exercise their servile courses for him, and they do compel
the inhabitants therein, or rather entice them; and to this purpose they
undertake various endeavors, and do attempt various and manifold horrible
studies, that are abominable unto God, and they serve in slavery and thraldom
to Beelzebub their Prince, and are held in most strong captivity.


Castor. What? have we the fall of this Archangel no where else in holy writ,
but in the writings of St. Augustine.


Pollux. We have also the fall of other Angels.


Cast^r. Where?


Pollux. In Esaias, to whom thou shall give the honor of an Evangelist, rather
than a Prophet, because he so fully and plainly foretold of Christ and his
kingdom: he makes mention here of in his 14 Chapter. And we have them also
spoken of by the Apostle Peter, when he says, God sp^red not his Angels which
sinned. 2 Epist. 2.


Castor. Have the Devils a select place appointed them by God, which they
inhabit?


Pollux. Peter the head of the Church, in the place before quoted, affirms
them to be c^st headlong into ^ell, reserved in the c^ains of hell, from whence
(as Cortesius ^^ith (...) go out, unless it be to tempt, provok^ and (...) m^n.
But St. Augustine the ch^^pion ^f Christ, in his book of the ago^y (...),
teach^th, That these kin^ (...) sublunar^ r^gion. And in his 4^ Epist. he ^et^
f^rth, That the most dark an^ (...), is predestin^ted (...) may the more nearly
(...) the^r (...) of (...) and detaining.


Castor. Origin has taught, that the p^^ishment of the Devils are appointed
for a time; what say thou to this?


Pollux. What shall I say? unless I should bewail and deplore the opinion of so
great a man.


Castor. Wherefore should thou do so?


Pollux. Truly if they have hardened themselves in wickedness, time cannot
purge nor cleanse them; or if they never so much desire it, they can never be
able to accomplish it; for there is no space of repentance, nor time to recall
what is past, given unto them.


Castor. Thou have now declared that the Archangel that became an Apostate, did
draw away very many other Angels with him in his fall, that they might become
Devils: could not he of his own proper inseperate malice after his fall
sufficiently rule over his own Province, without the Angels that fell with him?


Pollux. He could: but being allured by that pride, which made him so
arrogantly affect the Majesty of God, he did so far strive to be like unto God,
that he chose very many Ministers, unto himself, to which in general he does
not commit all things he would have effected, but diverse things to diverse
Ministers, as may be gathered from the Hebrew Astronomers. Those which we call
Jovii and Antemeridianii, which are false Gods, that is, liars, which desire to
be esteemed and adored for Gods, and they are appointed as Servants and slaves
to the Devil their Prince, that they might allure the people of the earth into
a common love of themselves, which Plato says, Is the fountain of all
wickedness, that they may aspire to authority and greatness, covet to be
gorgeously clothed, to be called Monarchs of the earth in perpetual power, and
Gods upon earth. It is said, that it was one of these that spoke to our
Savior, showing him all the Kingdoms of the earth, saying, All these things
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.


Castor. Certainly these Meridiani, I have almost declared to appear a madness
in Libieus Sapho and Dioclesian the Emperor, who accounted, it the utmost
degree of blessedness was, to be reputed for Gods.


Pollux. Truly, this is a certain natural foolishness of the mind, and of human
nature: he began, having taken certain little birds, to teach them by little
and little to pronounce human words, and say, Sapho is a great God. Which birds
when they could pronounce the words perfectly, he sent them abroad for this end
and purpose, that flying every where abroad, they might repeat those words; and
the people which were ignorant of his deceitful invention, were drawn to
believe, that those words were spoken by divine instinct, and thereupon adore
and worship him for a God. The other would compel his Subjects hereunto, that
prostrating themselves down, and lifting up their hands, they should worship
him as Almighty.


Castor. But are not they the captives of the Devil, who s^ir up wars, which
are called bloody-men in Scripture?


Pollux. The Martialists of the north part of the world, are called
executioners of vengeance authors of devastations, and sowers of evil, wor^ing
and executing judgment with Asmod^us, for their King Abadaon or Applyon, whom
St. John in his Rvelations, mentions to be ban^^hed and expelled; for these
Spirits h^ve committed to them rapines, hatred, envy, robberies, wrath, anger,
the excitements and provocations to sin, war and fury; sometimes making the
Meridional Spirits their M^ssengers. And Arioch the Spirit of vengence, whose
work is to cause discord among brethren, to break wedlock, and disolve conjugal
love, that it is impossible to be renewed; of these mention is made in the 39
Chapter of Ecclesiast^c^s. And Esaias the heavenly Prophet speaks of other
Spirits sent from God to the Egyptians to make them err, which were spirits of
darkness, that is, of lies: and this kind of spirit they call Bolichim.


Castor. Is unlawful venery, and excessive gluttony, also to be imputed to the
Devils?


Pollux. Yes chiefly; for Iamblicus does assert, That the Spirits of the the
water of the western part of the world, and some meridional Spirits, are
pred^stinated to this purpose; such as Nisrach and Kollen, that do so frame and
contrive unlawful loves which produce shame and dishonesty, revellings and
gr^^andizings, surfeitings, with excessive drunken^ss, wanton dances, gluttony
and vomiting, they (...) about lakes, fish ponds and rivers, a^^ (...) are the
worst, soul and most fraudulent kind ^f Spiri^s: an^ by Al^inach an occidental
spir^^; ^e (...) se^k s^ipwrecks, tempests, earthquakes, (...) and frequ^ntly
subverteth and over-(...) ships; and if he will appear visible, he (...) and is
seen in the shape of a woman. The (...) Astronomers before spoken of, do say,
(...) spirits of the air, do cause thunders, (...) and t^underbolts, that so
they might (...) and infect the air, and produce pestilence (...). Of such kind
of spirits St. John (...) in the 9 Chapter of the Revela^^^^, (...) Meceris for
their tutelar, which is a spirit causing heat in the time of noon. St. Paul
calle^h him, The prince of the power of the air, and the spirit that rules in
the children of disobedience.


Castor. Are there so many monsters in phlegeton, Pollux?


Pollux. And many more; for the same Hebrew Assertors do declare and maintain,
that there are are spirits of the fiery element, raging about like the fierce
Panthers, which are conversant under the lunary regions, that whatsoever is
committed to them, they forthwith execute the same. And there are spirits of
the earth, which inhabit in groves, woods and wildernesses, and are the plague
and mischief of hunters; and sometimes they frequent open fields, endeavoring
to seduce travelers and passengers out of their right way, or to deceive them
with false and wicked illusions; or else they seek to afflict men with a
hurtful melancholy, to make them furious or mad, that they may hurt them, and
sometimes almost kill them. The chief of these are Sanyaab and Achimael, which
are oriental spirits, a kind unapt for wickedness, by reason of the constancy
of their dispositions. There are also subterranean spirits which do inhabit in
dens and caverns of the earth, and in remote concavities of mountains, that
they might invade deep pits, and the bowels of the earth; these do dig up
metals, and keep treasures, which oftentimes they do transport from one place
to another, lest any man should make use thereof: they stir up winds with
flashing flames of fires: they smite the foundations of buildings, acting
frightful dances in the night, from which they suddenly vanish away, with
making a noise and sound of bells, thereby causing fear in the beholders; and
sometimes dissembling, and faining themselves to be the souls of the dead:
notwithstanding they are ignorant in compassing their deceits upon women; of
which company the Negromancers do say, is Gazael, Fegor and Anarazol, Meridian
spirits.


Castor. How warily ought a man to walk Pollux, amongst so many gins and snares?


Pollux. A man never walks safely, unless he fortify and strengthen himself
with the armor of God, which is, that his loins be girt about him with truth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, let him walk with his feet
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, and let him take the shield
of faith and the helmet of salvation, whereby he shall dash in pieces all the
darts of his adversaries. But hear further: there are also besides these, other
lying spirits (although they are all liars) yet these are more apt to lie; they
are called Pythons, from whence Apollo is called Pythius. They have a Prince,
of whom mention is made in the book of the Kings, where it is said, I will be a
lying Spirit in the mouth of all thy prophets; from whom the spirits of
iniquity do but a little differ, which also are called vessels of wrath.
Belial, whom they have interpreted to be without any equal, and Paul calls
him an apostate or transgressor, is filthily inserviant for the worst
inventions. Plato affirms Theut to have have been such a one, who was the
first that found out and invented plays and dice: to whom we will join the
Monk, who invented the use of Gunpowder, in his Engines of war. Of these Jacob
makes mention in Genesis. where he blessed his Sons: he says, Simeon, and Levi
are bloody vessels of iniquity; Oh my soul, come not thou into their counsels.
The Psalmist terms these Spirits, vessels of death; Jeremiah, ves^els of
wrath; Ezekiel, calls them, vessels of death and destruction. The
N^gromancers do call the said Belial, Chodar, an oriental spirit, which has
under him also the spirits of Juglers, who do imitate and endeavor to act
miracles, that they may seduce false Magicians and wicked persons. It is
apparently manifest, that the serpent which deceived Eve, was such a seducer,
and Satan is his Prince, of whom it is spoken in the Revelations, that he
should deceive the whole world. And such a one was he, that at Tubinga, in the
sight of many people devoured a whole Chariot and some horses.


Castor. And what shall be the end of these false Prophets and workers of
wickedness? I can scarce believe that there is any angle or corner in the whole
fabric of the world, that is free from them.


Poll. Scarce the smallest mite that may be seen.


Castor. Therefore thou do truly call the world the receptacle of those f^lse
lights.


Poll. If it were not more s^fely purged with the Sword of the word of God, it
would forthwith be worse.


Castor. Without doubt.


Pollux. Nevertheless I have seen many that remain, whom I have not yet
inscribed in this frantique Catalogue.


Castor. Who are they?


Pollux. False accusers and spies, obedient to Astaroth, who is called a devil
among the Greeks; and John calls him the accuser of the brethren. Also there
are tempters and deceivers that lie in wait to deceive, who are present with
every man; and these we term evil Angels, which have Mammon for their King, and
they do affect men with an insatiable avarice and thirsty desire after
authority and dominion. There are others called Lucifugi, which fly from the
light, never appearing in the day, but delighting in darkness, maliciously
vexing and troubling men, and sometimes by Gods permission, either by some
touching, breathing or inspiration, do hurt to them: but truly they are a kind
which are unapt for to do much wickedness, because they eschew and fly from any
communication with men, Pliny the 2d. relates, that there was such a one at
Athens, in a certain spacious house, which Anthenodorus the Philosopher
happened to purchase. And Suetonius in his sixth book of Caesar, makes mention
of another to have long continued in the garden of Lamianus.


Castor. I desire, if it be not too Irksom to thee, declare unto me what Pliny
speaks concerning this spirit of Anthenodorus.


Pollux. The story is something long and prolixious, yet it shall not much
trouble me to relate it. It is thus: Pliny in the seventh book of his Epistles
writes, of a certain large spacious house at Athens, which no body would
inhabit by reason of the nocturnal incursions of spirits, which were so
formidable to the inhabitants, that sometimes in the daytime, and when they
were watching, they would cast them into dreams, so always, that the shapes and
forms which they then saw, were ever present in their memory. Where at length a
certain Philosopher named Anthenodorus happened to purchase that house, and
prepared and furnished the same for himself to dwell in; and because all men
had an evil suspicion of that house, he forthwith commanded his servants to
provide him a bed and tables, that after he had completed and finished his
study he might go to bed. He therefore (says Pliny) when he went in (in the
evening) and applied himself to his study, suddenly heard the locks to shake
open, and the chains to be moved; nevertheless he did not lift up his eyes, nor
stirred from his book, but stopped his ears with his fingers, lest that furious
tumult might work a vain fear upon him; but the noise still approaching nearer
unto him, at length he looked up, and saw an effiges like unto a finger
beckening and calling unto him; which he little regarded, until it had touched
him three times, and the noise drew near unto the table; and then he looked up,
and took a light, beheld the spirit, as it were an old man worn away with
withered leaness and deformity, his beard hanging down long, horrible and
deformed hair, his legs and feet were as it were laden with chains and fetters:
he went toward a gate which was bolted, and there left the Philosopher, and
vanished away.


Castor. What fearful things thou relatest, Pollux! but what was the event of
this sad spectacle?


Pollux. The next day he related the whole matter to the Magistrates in order,
as he had seen the same, admonishing them that they should dig diligently about
the threshold of the door; for there it was probable they might find something,
which might cause the house to be quiet and habitable.


Castor. What did they find?


Pollux. Having dug up the earth, Pliny says, they found a dead carcass,
bound and entangled in chains and fetters, his flesh being consumed with
devouring time, which without delay they caused to be buried, according to the
Christian ceremonies.


Castor. But this being performed, did the house afterward become quiet and
habitable?


Pollux. Yes, very well.


Castor. What madness therefore possesses them who profane and destroy
Churchyards, where the sacred organs of the holy and blessed spirit do rest;
and do give the bones of the dead for meat to the spirit Zazelus, of whom
mention is made in the 3 of the Kings; and we read in Pausanias, amongst the
histories of Delphos, that he was called Eurynomus.


Poll. Thou shall find, that the Governors of Cities that were of the opinion
and judgment of Christians, did subvert, destroy and profane these holy
places, that herein the youth might dance their mocking interludes, after the
furious sound of the drum or tabor, and sing Iopaeen; or, there the poor
inferior old women did sell base trumpery or Lupines, which God would have to
be purged with holy prayer, for the salvation of souls, or breaking of bread to
the hungry.


Castor. But it is an impious and heathenish thing so to have touched the
anointed of God.


Pollux. And worse than heathenish; for the heathens did highly esteem the
rites and ceremonies of burials, as Elpinor is witness in Homer, where he
yeildeth up his life; and in Homer he speaks to Ulysses, I entreat thee, O
Ulysses, to be mindful of me, and not depart away hence and leave me
uninterred, lest that, not being ritely buried, I shall be made the wrath of
the Gods. And Achita the Philosopher in Flaccus, thus speaks to the Mariner.

Me quoque divexi Rapidus comes rionis,
Illyricis Notus obruit undis.
At tu Nauta vagae ne parce malignus arenae,
Ossibus and capiti inhumato.
Particulam dare; si quodcunque minabitur Eurus
Fluctibus Hesperiis, Venusinae
Plectantur silvae, te sospite multaque merces
Unde potest tibi defluat aequo.
Ab Jove, Neptuno, sacri Custode Tarenti.
Negligis immeritis nocituram,
Post modo te natis fraudem committere: fors and,
Debita Jura vicesque superbae
Te manent ipsum praecibus non linquar multis
Teque piacula nulla resolvent.
Orion's rapid Comrade Notus, me
O'erwhelmed in the Illyrian Sea,
Oh Seaman frowning, not forbear to spread
Upon my bones, and inhum'd head,
A ^ittle fleeting sand! what the east does threat,
Hesperian waves may only beat.
Vainly Venusimu's woods, whilst safe and rich,
Thou climbst to fortunes highest pitch.
Jove kind, and Neptune too, Tarentum's power
Thou slights; what on the guiltless score,
Of thy ensuing sons may fall: like Urne,
Like funeral, and proud return,
May wait thee too; my curses shall have force
Whence no Attonements get remorse.
And Polinurus to Aeneas in his sixth book of Virgils Aeneids.

Nunc me fluctus habent versantque in littore venti,
Quod te per Caeli jucundum humen and auras,
Per genitorem oro, per spem, surgentis Juli.
Eripe me his invicte malis, aut tu mihi terram
Injice namque potes.
I Am now in the waves winds toss me against the shore,
By heavens rejoicing light I thee implore;
And by the Air, by old Anchyses too,
And by the hopes of young Julius, thou
Unconquered Hero, help me but away,
From these sad troubles, or my body lay
IN the earth; for thou can do it.

Castor. Have the Gentiles so greatly esteemed the ceremony of burials?


Pollux. Yes, very much, for their religion did hold that the soul of a body
which was uninterred, was void of any intelligible essence, and left to the
power and command of a raging furious fancy, and subject to the torment and
affliction of corporal qualities; so that it being an airy body, sometimes the
departed shadow would speak unto his remaining friends, and sometimes evilly
vex and torment his enemies with revenge, as in the Poet, Dido threathneth
Aeneas, saying, Omnibus umbra locis adero dabis improbe penas.
My ghost shall every where attend thee, Villian
I will torment thee. --
Suetonius, as we have shown before, adds the like concerning the dead body
of C. Caligula the Emperor in the Garden of Lamius, being not duly buried; for
this body because it was only covered with a light turf, did very much disquiet
and trouble the possessors of the Garden, with violent incursions in the night;
until by his sisters, who were returned from banishment, it was taken up again
and ritely and duly by them buried.


Castor. And the house wherein the same Emperor died, could by no other way or
means be freed from the fury of these shadows or spirits, as history makes
mention, but by burning thereof.


Pollux. Aristotle speaking of miracles, mentions a certain mountain in
Norway, named Hechelberg, environed about with the Sea, that continually sent
forth such lamentable voices, like the yelling and howling of infernal devils,
insomuch that the noise and clamor of their terrible roaring might be heard
almost a mile; and the flocking together of great ravens and vultures near it,
did prohibit any access thereunto. And he reported that in Lyppora near about
the Aeolian Islands, there was a certain hill from whence in the night there
was heard Cymbals, and sounds of tinkling instruments of brass, with certain
secret and hidden screechings, laughings and roarings of spirits. But even now,
Castor, thou did make mention of Zazelus, whom also thou did assert to have
have been called Eurynomus by Pausania; I desire the to show me something more
largely concerning this spirit.


Castor. They do declare that he lives altogether by the flesh of the dead; so
as sometimes he does not leave the bones.


Pollux. Saxo Grammaticus, in the fifth book of his Danish history, does most
truly subscribe their consents and agreements to this thy assertion; for there
he sets before our eyes an admirable history of one Asuitus and Asmundus, which
easily proves all thy sayings.


Castor. I beseech thee declare this unto me, Pollux.


Pollux. Give attention; it is thus: Asuitus and Asmundus had sworn with mutual
vows each to other, that he which should live longest of them would entomb
himself alive. Now sickness did consume away Asuitus before Asmundus; whereupon
Asmundus for his oath of friendship sake, with his dog and his horse entombed
himself alive in a vast deep den, having carried with him some meat, whereupon
a long time he fed. And at length Ericus the King of Succia came into that
place with an Army, and broke open the tomb of Asuitus; (supposing their had
been treasure hid therein) but when the cave was opened, he drew out Asmundus.
and brought him into the light, who was covered with a deformed sharp
countenance, a deadly deformity, and gored with blood flowing from his fresh
wounds.


Castor. But this story pertains not to our purpose.


Pollux. Truly it does, if you diligently mark these verses, which set forth
the cause of his wounds.


Castor. Show me those verses if thou have them.


Pollux. They are these which follow.

Quid stupedis qui relictum me Color cernitis?
Obsolescit nempe vivus omnis inter mortuos,
Nescio quo Stygii numinis ausu,
Missus ab inferis Spiritus affiuit
Savis alipedem dentibus ^dit,
Infandoque Canem praebuit ori,
Non contentus equi vel canis esu,
Mox in me rapidos tra^stulit ungues,
Discissaque gena sustulit aurem;
Huic laceri vultus horret imago,
Emicat inque fero vulnere sanguis
Haud impune tamen monst^ifer egit,
Nam ferro servi mox caput ejus,
Persodique nocens stipite Corpus.
Why are ye amazed to see me pale!
Amongst the dead what is living needs must fail:
By what strange warrant from black hell,
A Spirit sent, I know not, fell
With mercile^s teeth upon my H^rs^,
And next my Dog without remor^e,
Devoured: but not with Dog and Horse
Contented, he on me the force
Of his sharp nails tried, hence did tear,
Part of this cheek, and one whole ear;
So my torn face does look thus ill,
And all this blood appears still.
But yet this monstrous fiend from me,
I do assure you escaped not free;
His head my sword did from him take,
And's trunk to the ground I fixed with stake.

Castor. I observe here, that Asmundus did cut the head of the spirit Zazelus
or Eurynomus, and struck and pierced his body with a club; what? have spirits
bodies, that may be seen and handled by men?


Pollux. Cortesius does not deny, but that their natures may receive the habit
and covering of vegitable bodies, and be transformed in several kinds of
shapes, whereby they can the more craftily and subtly delude and deceive the
improvident wits of men. Basilius Magnus also testifies the same, and
witnesses, that they have bodies appropriated to themselves, as likewise also
have the pure Angels. Psellus a Necroman^er does also report the same; and he
also teaches, That sometimes they sleep or rest, and do change their places,
and show themselves visible to the senses of men. Socrates asserteth, that a
Spirit did speak with him, which also sometimes he saw and felt; but their
bodies cannot be discerned to be different in sex. But Marcus Cherronesus, an
excellent searcher into the natures of Spirits, writes, that they have simple
bodies and that there does belong a difference of sex to compound bodies: yet
their bodies are easily drawn to motion and flexibility, and naturally apt to
receive every configuration. For, says he, even as the clouds do show forth
the apparition and resemblance sometimes of men, and sometimes of every thing
you conceive; so likewise do the bodies of Spirits receive various shapes, as
they please, by reason whereof they transform themselves into the forms
sometimes of men, and sometimes of women. Nevertheless this is not free to them
all, but only to the fiery and airy Spirits. For he teaches, that the Spirits
of the water have more slow and less active bodies, which by reason of the
slowness and softness of that element, they do most especially resemble birds
and women; of which kind the Naiades and Nereides are, celebrated by the Poets.
Trimetius testifies, that the Devils do desire to assume the shapes of men
rather than any other form; but when they cannot find the matter of the air
convenient and befitting for that purpose. And he says, that they frame such
kind of appearances to themselves. as the contrary humor or vapor will
afford; and so they are seen sometimes in the form and shape of a Lion, a Wolf,
a Sow, an Ass, a Centaure, of a Man horned, having feet like a Goat: such as it
is reported were seen in the mountain of Thrungia, where there was heard a
terrible roaring,

Castor, Porphyrius in Eusebius, in his fourth book of Evangelical
preparations, teaches, that some of these are good spirits, and some bad; but
I have counted them to be all, evil, Pollux.


Pollux. Then it seems that thou art not seduced with the assertions either
of Porphyrius, or Apuieus, or Proclus, or of some other Platonicks, which are
mentioned in St. Augustines book of the City of God, 1, 2, and 3, chapter, who
also do affirm that there are some of these Spirits good; for Eusebius in the
said book and 6 Chapter; and St. Augustine concerning the same in his book of
The City of God, the 9 Chapter and the 8, with very great and strong arguments
do convince the Platonicks, that none of these Demons are good, but all evil;
and that we do also approve of from their names, which are every where set
forth in holy Scripture; for the Devil is called Diabolus, that is, flowing
downwards: that he which swelling with pride, determined to reign in high
places, fell flowing downwards to the lowest parts, like the torrent of a
violent stream, as Cassiodorus writes. And he is called Satan, that is, an
adversary; who as St. Jerome testifies, by reason of the corruption of his own
malice, he continually resists, and is an adversary against God, who is the
chiefest good. He is called Behemoth in the 40 Chapter of Job, which signifies
an Ox; for even as an Ox desires hay, so he with the teeth of his suggestions,
coveteth to destroy the upright lives of spiritual men. And Leviathan in the
same place, which signifies an addition, because the Devil always endeavors to
add evil to evil, and punishment to punishment. He is also called in Revelation
15. Apollion, signifying a rooter out, for he rooteth out the virtues which God
planteth in the soul. He is called a Serpent in the 12 of the Revelation, by
reason of his virulency. A Lion in the 1 Epist. Peter and the last chapter,
which roareth about seeking whom he may devour. He is called a cunning workman
Is. 55. because by his malice the vessels that are elected and approved. He is
called Isa. 34. Onocentaurus Erynus, Pilosus, Siren, Lamia Ulula, Struthio. And
by David in the 90 Psalm, an Aspe, Basilisk and Dragon. In the Gospel Mammon,
the Prince of this world, and Ruler of darkness.


Castor. Why therefore have the Divines declared, that the Almighty has given
two kinds of Spirits unto men; the one good, the keeper and preserver of their
lives, the other evil, resisting the good: if they are all evil?


Pollux. The holy Doctors do understand by the good Spirit a good Angel, such
as we read Raphael was to Tobias, who bound the evil spirit Asmodeus in the
wilderness of the furthest parts of Egypt, that he might be the more safe.


Castor. It had been more safe for every man to have been without the evil
spirits; what therefore was the will of the heavenly Father concerning them?


Pollux. That by the assistance of the good spirits, we might courageously wage
continual war against the evil spirits; but being clothed with the harness of
righteousness, like valiant Soldiers we may gird our loins with truth, and with
the shield of faith resist and fight against all his darts.


Castor. If we condescend unto this warfare of Spirits, it seems good to
enquire whether the Devils have power of doing hurt, granted them by God; or
whether of themselves they can hurt as much as they please?


Pollux. If the last where true, who could compare the end of their hurtings?
but it is manifest, that their authority from on high is of so great existancy,
that John the Evangelist doubts not to name the Devils the princes of the
earth.


Castor. In what manner therefore do they hurt?


Pollux. Although they be most mighty and powerful spirits, yet they can do no
hurt unless it be by permission; or as Damacenus says, by dispensation. And
Chrysostom says, they have a limited power; for truly without the will of
God, they cannot touch a hair of any man's head. The Devil could not have
deceived the Prophets of Ahab, if he had not received power from God; neither
could he have brought any detriment upon Job, either unto his body or his
goods, but by the power God had given him. In the 7 of Exodus the Magicians
made frogs and serpents by the power of the Devil permissively: but lice they
could not bring forth, by reason of the greater power of God prohibiting them,
Neither in the Gospel could the Devils hurt the swine until Christ had given
them leave.


Castor. Therefore the Devil is not so much to be feared, but the Lord our God,
that either he would not suffer him to rage against us; or if at any time by
his own determinate counsel he let loose his chains, that then he would defend
and mercifully preserve us.


Pollux. Thou say well; for even as a wild boar is not to be feared if he be
bound, and held with a strong chain by a powerful strong man, and who is able
by his strength to restrain the fierceness of the boar; but the man is to be
feared, and requested, that he would not let loose the boar: so also Satan is
not to be feared, being bound with the cords of the Almighty; but the Almighty
rather, who holds him with a cord, lest at any time he should let loose his
cord, for to execute his will against us.


Castor. We know that the Devils, after the incarnation of the word, were
called the Lords of the earth; but I wonder, where the word is not yet
incarnate, whether they have power also over men.


Pollux. If it pleases God, they have very much; but take a demonstration
thereof Castor, from the Caldeans, amongst whom the Devil raged with so much
power and dominion, that they made no esteem of the true God, but worshipped the
elements. There needs not ^ demonstration of the Greeks; for the fury of the
Devil did so much reign amongst them, that by his arguments, they accounted
Saturn for a very great God, devouring their own proper children; and Jupiter,
an adulterer and father of all filthiness, they named to be the father of Gods
and men; Bacchus, the most wicked example of all servitude and bondage, they
called a free father: Venus a strumpet, they termed a pure virgin: and they
worshipped Flora an harlot, as a type or example of virginity. There is no man
that is ignorant, that the Egyptians have been worse than the Greeks, when they
made peculiar Gods to themselves, by the inanimate persuasions of the Devil;
for one worshipped a sheep, another a goat, another a calf, very many did
worship hogs, crows, hawks, vultures, eagles, crocodiles, cats, dogs, wolves,
asses, dragons; and things growing also, as onions, garlic, and thorns: as
every one that is coveteous of reading, shall find in Damascenus, in his
history of Josaphat and Barlaas, and in Eusebius, in the fourth book, and first
Chapter of Evangelical Preparations; neither do I account the (...) (who glory
in being the offspring of their f^ther Abraham) to have been better than the
former, when also by the instinct of the devil, after their coming up out of
Egypt, with cruel hands they violently assaulted the Prophets and holy men of
God, whom at length they also slew: that I may hold my peace, how diligently
they have brought into their religion the Gods, or rather devils of the
Gentiles.


Castor. I perceive by these thy assertions, that one Devil, and another Devil,
has been adored for Gods; for thou have now said, that the Greeks, by the
madness wherewith the Devil possessed them, have made unto themselves, Saturn,
Jupiter, Bacchus, Venus and Flora, for Gods; which Lactantius in his fourth
book De vera Sapientia, also accounted for Devils.


Pol. Declare I pray thee the words of Lactantius.


Castor. Mark them; they are thus: The same Devils are the Gods of the
Gentiles; but if any one will not believe these things of me; then let him
credit Homer, who joineth the great Jupiter to the great Devils; and the other
Poets and Philosophers do call them sometimes Gods, and sometimes Devils
whereof there is one true, and another false: for the most wicked spirits when
they are conjured, do confess themselves to be Devils; but where they are
worshipped, they declare themselves to be Gods, that they may thrust men into
errors, and draw them from the worship of the true God; through whom alone
eternal death can be escaped.


Pollux. It is expedient for me now to be more inquisitive in this discourse;
whether there be power given to the Devils to foretell things to come?
concerning which thing hitherto I have not been able to dart at the right mark;
for this question seems sufficiently doubtful unto me.


Castor. St. Augustine in his book De Natura Daemonum, dissolveth this
Gordoneus knot, and says, that the damned spirits being filled full of all
manner of impiety and wickedness, do sometimes challenge to themselves power of
foreseeing things to come, because in the sense of their airy bodies, they have
a far more strong and prevalent power of foreknowing, than men of earthly
bodies can have; or because of the incomparable swiftness of their airy bodies,
which wonderfully exceeds not only the celerity of men and wild beasts, but
also the flying of birds: by which means, they are able to declare things long
before they come to be known; which we, by reason of the earthly slowness of
our sense, cease not to wonder at and admire: or because of the benefit of
their continual life, they obtain this wonderful experience of things, which we
cannot attain to, because of the shortness of our momentaneous life, which is
but as it were a bubble.


Poll. This last assertion of St. Augustine seems unto me to be more true
than the rest, because the series of many years does cause great experience.


Cast. If any one shall deny these opinions of Augustine, as erroneous,
Damascenus sets a greater witnes^ of these things, without all exception,
before our eyes; who in his second book of Orthodox faith says thus: That the
devils cannot foreknow things to come, for that belongs only unto God: but so
much as they are able to know, they have from the disposition of the celestial
and inferior bodies.


Poll. Why therefore do the Devils so willingly and of their own accord
undertake Prophecies, and to answer Oracles? what benefit have they from hence?


Cast. Nothing, but that hereby they seek to get great estimation, and covet to
be counted worthy of admiration, and to be adored instead of Gods.


Poll. We know that the devil is the father of lies, Castor: from whence we are
piously to believe, that those things which he foretells, he extracteth from
his own lies.


Cast. Furthermore the Prophet Esaias says thus, Show the things that are to
come hereafter, and tell us, that we may know that ye are Gods. And the Apostle
Peter also says, The prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.


Poll. No man therefore will deny that they do sometimes fortel things to come.


Cast. No man certainly; but for what cause that it attained to, Crysostome
does most clearly teach, in these words: It is granted, he says, that
sometimes the devil does speak truth, that he might commend his own lying with
verity: whereas, if he should never tell the truth, he could deceive no man,
neither would his lying suffice him to tempt with. Thus far Chrysostom.
Notwithstanding, If he understand that he has not grace granted unto him of
himself to foretell the truth, he fortelleth things nevertheless, but so
obscurely, says St. Augustine, that he always lays the blame of the things
by him so foretold, upon the interpreter thereof. Porphyrius, in his book of
Oracles, although he be the greatest maintainer of Devils, and the most expert
teacher of diabolical Arts, nevertheless he says with the aforesaid Doctors,
that the foreknowledge of things to come, is not only intricate to men, but
uncertain to the gods; and full of many obscurities.


Poll. Thou have said, that the predictions of the devils are done in this
manner, that they may gain authority to themselves amongst the credulous
people, and be worshipped instead of Gods, for what end do the evil spirits work
miracles?


Cast. What is a Miracle, Pollux?


Poll. A new and unwonted accident, which comes to pass contrary to its course
and custom and draws men into admiration thereof.


Cast. But do they work Miracles?


Poll. They do: for whereby do thou believe that Aesculapius was honored in
his consecration for a God, but only by the means of a miracle, when he
conveyed a serpent from Epidaurus to Rome,? What gave so great authority to
Juno, but only the working of a miracle? when her Image of wood was asked by
Furius Camillu^ whether it would be carried to Rome, and it answered with a
human voice, It would. Also from thence Fortune was made a Goddess, because her
Statua, in the way of Latium, in the hearing of many people, not once, but
oftentimes spoke with a human voice. In the 8 Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, we read of miracles done by Simon the son of Rachel; and in Exodus 8.
of the Magicians of Pharaoh, who in the sight of many people brought forth
frogs and serpents, and turned the waters into blood. Apuleus does testify the
power of men to be so great in Enchantments, that the Devils do not only work
miracles by the means of men, but they are able also to subvert nature, and,
with a Demoniacal Incantation, make violent streams to stay their course to
turn the winds, to make the sun stand still, to break the course of the moon,
to lay impediments upon the stars, to prolong the day, and to shorten the
night; as Lucanus excellently shows. Cessaverre vices rerum, dilataque longa,
Haesit nocte dies, legi non paruit ether,
Torruit and praeceps audito Carmine mundus.
The course of things did cease, obstructed light
Oppressed, stuck fast in dusky shades of night:
Amazed skies their usual laws forbear,
The world was scorched when it her charms did hear.
And Tibullus of a certain Demoniacal Charm.

Hanc ego de coelo ducentem sydera vidi,
Fulminus ac rapidi Carmine vertit iter,
Haec cantu funditque solum manesque sepulchris
Elicit, and tepido devorat ossa rogo.
Cum libet haec tristi depellit lumina coelo,
Cum libet aestivo convocat orb nives.
Her have I seen draw down nights sparkling eyes,
With a dead Palsy swiftest streams surprise;
Turn earth to water, from a desert tomb
Make the departed drowsy Manes come.
With charms she will muffle the sad skies in mist,
In Summer Winters snow bring when she list.

Cast. I do not any more wonder that Moses called God Wonderful, that he does
so connive at this sink of wickedness, and most wicked seducers, that he
grants them power to act such things so freely.


Poll. Firmianus excellently shows why God does so, in his last book but one
of the works of God, De opificio Dei: for he says, that virtue is not virtue,
unless it have some like, in ruling whereof it may show and exercise its power:
for he says, As Victory cannot stand without virtue, so neither can virtue
subsist without an Enemy; which virtue no sooner had the Almighty endued man
withal, but he forthwith added unto him an enemy, lest that virtue should lose
its nature, being stupefied with idleness. He says, that a man cannot
otherwise attain to the highest step, unless he have always an active hand; and
that he shall establish and build up his salvation with a continual warfare and
contention: for God will not that mortal men shall come to immortal blessedness
with an easy journey, but he must wrestle and strive with sails and oars
against the author and inventor of all evils and errors, who causes and
works execrable things and miracles.


Cast. But sometimes it comes to pass, that by reason of the subtle snares and
stratagems of the devil, which he so craftily prepares against us, and
especially against simple persons, whom he intangleth with vain religions, so
that we cannot resist him; or if we suppose our selves to be very able to
withstand him, yet nevertheless we shall be very much deceived by him; as we
read he oftentimes did to the good, but almost foolish pastor, of whom
Tritemius makes men^ion.


Poll. But what happened to this good Pastor, and whom thou termest simple?


Cast. Tritemius says, Insomuch that he was not strong in faith, therefore he
made more account of the name of Saint Blaze, and attributed more power and
custody unto it. than unto the name of God, the best and greatest good.


Poll. In what manner?


Cast. He had in his walking staff, or pastoral crook, a Schedule inscribed
with the name of St. Blaze; by the power and virtue of which staff, he did
believe his swine were safely defended from the ravening of the wolves: and he
did attribute so great a deity to this Schedule, that he would leave his herd
of swine to feed in the fields alone: notwithstanding, a certain time coming
when the pastor was absent from his flock, and a certain man coming in the mean
time, saw the devil keeping them; and he asked him what he kept here, who is
the worst persecutor of the salvation of men? he answered, I keep these swine.
The other replied By whose command? the devil says, By the foolish confidence
of the pastor: for he included a certain Schedule in his staff, unto which he
ascribes divine virtue, or to the inscription of the name of St. Blaze; and
now, contrary to his own law, he believes that his hogs are thereby defended
from the injury of wolves; inhering to me with a false superstition; where when
he has been by me called again and again, and has not appeared, I have taken
this custody upon myself instead of St. Blaze: for I always freely stand
instead of God and his saints: so also now most freely do I keep his swine for
St. Blaze, that I may magnify and confirm the foolish man in his vain
confidence; and thereby I may seduce him so, that he may esteem this Schedule
more than God.


Poll. This is a pleasant story: but I do not wonder that the devil should
impose so much upon so simple a pastor, when he does in many things prevail
over the more wise, if they do fit themselves to his opportunities; which the
Church contradicts.


Poll. But are all things wrought and brought to pass by means of the devil
which men call miracles?


Cast. No: for we must give unto nature that which seems to belong unto her,
who is said to be the greatest worker of miracles; as that which we have
experienced in the stone Asbestos, which as Solinus witnesses, being once set
on fire, cannot be quenched: and the root Baara, described by Josephus in the
history of Jerusalem, which he testified to be the color of a flame of fire,
splendent and shining in the night; but so difficult to be taken, that it
always flies from under the hand of him that would take it, and deceives his
eyes so long, until it be sprinkled with the urine of a menstruous woman; and
when it is retained by this means, it may not be gathered or plucked up without
danger; for present death follows him that gathers or plucketh it up,
unless he shall be for^ifi^d with a pres^rvative about his neck, of the sam^
root. For which cause, they who want the same root, do scarify it round about;
and having bound the root about with a bond, they tie the ^ame to a dog, and
sudenly depart away. Whereupon, the dog, too much endeavoring to follow after
him, draw^th up the root, and, as if the dog where to perform the turn of his
master, he forthwith dies; and afterward^ the same root may be taken and
handled without any danger to any man. And the same Josephus teaches, that the
same root is of such present force for expiations, that also those who are
vexed and tormented with unclean spirits, are immediately delivered, if they
carry this root about them Notwithstanding there is nothing hinders, but that
art also may imitate nature in the working of miracles; as we may read in
Aristotle, of the Greek fire that would burn in water: of which the said
author, in his singular treatise concerning this, has described very many
compositions. And concerning the fire which is extinguished with oil, and
kindled with cold water, when it is besprinkled over therewith.


Poll. It sometimes happened that the devils do cloth themselves, sometimes in
more slender, and sometimes in more gross habits, that thereby they may very
much affright and molest men with horrible fantasies, and terrible sights;
with ghosts appearing in diverse and several shapes and aspects. What, cannot we
be fortified with any thing to force and compel them to fly from us?


Cast. Origin, in his book against Celsus, says, that there is no way more
certain, than the naming of JESUS the true God. For he says he has oftentimes
seen innumerable spirits so driven away, both from the souls and bodies of men,
St. Athanasius, in his book de variis Quaestion, testifies, that the most
present remedy against the insultations of evil spirits, is the beginning of the
67 Psalm, Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. Cyprian, in his book
Quod idola dii non sint, commands that the devils should be conjured away by
the true God. Some men have declared, that fire, which is the most holy of all
elements, and the creed, and also the instrument whereon the fire was carried,
were very profitable for this purpose: from whence, in their sacrifices about
the sepulchers of the dead they diligently observed the use of lights: or else
from thence that Pythagoras did determine, that God could in no wise be truly
worshipped without lights burning. Some others do bind swords for this intent
and purpose, taking the same out of the 11 Ode of Homer, where he writes, that
Ulysses, when he offered a sacrifice to his mother, had a sword drawn present
by him, wherewith he expelled and drove away the spirits from the blood of his
sacrifice. And in the sixth of Virgil, when the Sybil led Aeneas into hell, she
says thus.

-- Procul, O procul este profani,
Tuque invade viam, vaginaque eripe ferrum.
Hence, hence, all ye profane! do thou invade
The way, and from'ts confinement take thy blade.
Philostratus writes, that he compelled Apollonius, a spirit, obvious to him
and his companions, to flight, with contumelies and direful imprecations; that
the vision making a noise, and with great horror vanished away from them. Very
many do much commend a perfume of Calamint, Piony, mint, Palma Christi, and
Parsley, to be used in this case. Many do keep present with them red coral,
mugwort, hypericon, rue, or vervin, for this purpose. Some do use for this
business the tinkling of keys, sounding of consecrated bells or the terrible
rattling of Armor.


Poll. I have sometimes heard from our Elders, that they made them Sigils
inscribed with Pentapentagones; by virtue whereof, the spirits might be
expelled and driven away. What say thou to these?


Cast. Averrois writes against Algazelus, affirmed such things to be almost
nothing worth unless to them that have confederated with the spirits. If
therefore Averrois says the truth, how then can the d^vils kingdom stand,
divided against itself?


Poll. But we read that Solomom, a singular man with God, did make such Sigils.


Cast. We do read truly that Solomon did make them; but it was at such time
when he worshipped Idols, and not when he was in the state of salvation.
Tertullian offered a more certain antidote than all the former, and exhorts
us, as Job, the most strong champion of God, to fight against all the assaults
of temptation: he admonishes us to be clothed with the silken garment of
honesty, the purple robe of modesty and shame-facedness, and the cloak of
patience: and he persuades us to meditate upon all those things which the
devil does devise and invent, to overthrow our integrity; that his falling may
be proved the glory of our constancy, and that we be willing constantly to war
against all machinations, which are permitted by God for this end. And the
Prophet Jeremiah teaches the same, in these words: The Lord of hosts is the
approver of the just.

D. Maximus, in his book de charitate, commands us to bind and kill the
devils. He says we do then bind them, when by diligent observation of the
Commandments of God, we do diminish and quash those affections that do boil up
in us: and we are said to kill them, when we so truly mortify our lusts, that
we cut him off from all occasions of accusing; saying with the Prophet, Depart,
O homicide, the Lord the strong warrior is with me: thou shall fall, and shall
be vanquished from me for ever. Olympiadorus, 10 cap. when he interprets the
Ecclesiastical history, says, that all sensual appetites are to be shut out
and excluded, so that the devil may not be admitted, neither by the allurements
of the eyes, nor by itching ears, nor by the petulancy and frowardness of an
hurtful tongue: for this he accounts to be the most absolute seal against the
power of the devils. Some do admonish us, in our going forth to war against the
devil, to use two sorts of weapons: the one is pure prayer, which may raise up
our affections unto heaven; and true and perfect knowledge, which may
communicate and fill our understandings with wholesome doctrines, and may
suggest unto us what we are to pray for, that we may pray ardently, according
to St. James, and not doubtingly. In the Prophecy of Isaiah, and the Epistles
of St. Paul, we may find the same things; Isai. 59. Ephesians. 6. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.
which may be as a remedy against vain Ghosts that they may be expelled.


Poll. For a remedy against Ghosts? do thou conceive that a Ghost is diverse
and different from a spirit?


Cast. I know not truly what I may think hereof: for flowing in so spacious a
sea of many opinions, I am so led in doubt, that I cannot easily attain to a
certain Port of judgment: for there are some which do suppose that these Ghosts
are devils, by reason of the great fear and terror wherewith they ragingly
molest men by night in their houses; and sometimes for their innate nature to
do hurt. There are others that do believe these spirits are deceitful
fantasies, deceiving those that are of evil belief: who by their fallacious
visions and Imaginations do deceive and frighten the Inhabitants in their
houses and do deny that they are spirits indeed, because the spirits have a
body without hands or feet; wherefore they can hurt no man, nor make any
tumult: being ignorant that the Angel (who also has a body without hands and
feet) did carry Habakkuk with his whole dinner, by the hair of his head, into
Babylon, and afterward brought him back again, and set him in his own place:
neither considering that the spirit of the Lord, also without a body, snatched
up Philip, and carried him to Azotus: that I may forbear to speak concerning a
certain incorporeal spirit, which did so disquiet the house of my grandfather,
that by the space of almost thirty years he caused it to be uninhabitable,
unless it were when a lamp was burning therein; neither did that then
sufficiently quiet the same: for going out of the house, they did so molest
them with stones from above in the streets, that the would cast out of their
hands the hearts of Pine-trees, which they used for torches. Concerning the
Ghost that haunted the house of Anthenodorus the Philosopher, and the
tumultuous spirit of C. Caligula, there may more be spoken: but thou have
understood the relations of them already in the foregoing discourse. From all
which, we may easily convince the opinions of those, who deny that the spirits
can walk, or make any motion: but of how much truth we may hold the assertions
of them, who do suppose that these tumultuous spirits are neither devils, nor
phantasms, but the souls of the dead, now hearken unto.


Poll. Are there they who are of that opinion?


Cast. There are they who are of both opinions: for they do declare that these
are the souls of them who have departed from their bodies laden and clogged in
their sins; which are therefore heard to be more or less turbulent in houses,
according as they have any sensible ardent spark of that sin more or less; so
that except in the mean time they are expelled and driven away from thence, or
expiated by Alms or intercessions, they are compelled to a certain bound or
liberty, wandering thereabouts in expectation of the last Judgment.


Poll. Wherefore?


Cast. Because I believe that the souls of them which sleep in Christ, do live
with Christ, and do not wander about the earth; and the souls of them who are
oppressed and burdened with the grievous weight of their Sins, since they are
the members of Satan, are bound with Satan in the chains of darkness, expecting
judgment in hell.


Poll. But Firmianus, a Writer of no mean judgment, thinks the contrary, in
his Book which he has written de devino premio.


Cast. How is that?


Poll. These are his words: Let not any man conceive that the souls of the dead
are judged immediately after death: for they are all detained in one common
custody until the time shall come, wherein the Almighty Judge shall make
examination and inquisition of their deeds. Then they who shall be found
righteous, shall receive the reward of immortality; but they whose sins and
wickedness shall then be detected, shall not arise again, but shall be enclosed
with the wicked in darkness, and destined to eternal punishments.


Cast. St. Augustine subscribeth to Lactantius in his Enchiridion, saying, that
the time which is interposed between the death of mankind and the last
resurrection, contains the souls in secret hidden receptacles, where every
soul receives condign rest or misery, for the good or evil which he did in the
body while he lived.


Poll. Neither does St. Ambrose disagree from this: in his second book of Cain
and Abel, he says, that the soul is loosed from the body, and after the end of
this life, is suspended to the ambiguous time of the last judgment.


.Cast. So also some have declared, that the soul of Trajanus Caesar did wander
about; but the soul of St. George was freed from such suffrage.


Poll. Thou have even now spoke, and that truly, that spacious is the sea of
various opinions concerning these spirits; for so indeed it is: but what Port
thou toutchest at, I desire thee it may not seem troublesome to thee to tell
me: for I am not as yet satisfied of the certainty hereof by our discourse.


Cast. That which thou desire, I conceive to be this: I hold that these
tumultuous spirits are mere images of Satan; which are not to be feared,
neither is their any credit to be given to their answers: and are in no wise
the souls of the dead, which either live with Christ, if they have done well;
or else are bound in chains with Satan if they have done evil.


Poll. It remains that we fifth out this, Castor: for it happens now
sometimes, that my Father appears to me in my sleep; perhaps that may also
seem unto thee to be a Spirit.


Cast. It may seem so: but I will not in any thing contradict thee beyond
reason: of myself I will add nothing; but at leastwise I will annihilate thy
opinion with the assertions of St. Augustine.


Poll. What assertions are those?


.Cast In his 11 book, which he intitleth De mortuorum cura, he offers them as
a means, saying, Human infirmaty does so believe of himself, that when he sees
any one that is dead, in his sleep, he supposes that he sees the soul of that
dead person; but when he dreameth of any one that is alive, he then is out of
doubt, that neither his soul nor his body, but the similitude of the man
appeared unto him: as if they could be ignorant, that the souls of dead men do
not appear unto them in dreams, but only the similitudes of the persons
deceased. And he proves both these to be done, by two examples which were as
Mediolanus; whereof the first he shows to have been the image of a certain
father that was dead, who appeared to his son, admonishing him that he should
not pay again a debt to an unjust creditor, which the father had paid him
before: for he says the case was thus: the father had paid a debt to a certain
creditor, which after the death of the father, the creditor endeavored by
force to recover the same again of his son, who was ignorant of the payment
thereof: to whom the image of his father appeared when he was sleeping, and
showed him where the writing was hid. Whereupon, the son awaking from his
sleep, sought for the paper in the place he was directed, and found it, and
thereby overthrew the malice of his deceitful creditor. The second example is,
whereby the same St. Augustine shows that the living do appear to the living,
in their sleep: for he says, that Eurologius the Rhetorician, professing the
Rhetoric of Cicero at Carthage, he found a difficult and obscure place that
was not declared unto him; so that waking and sleeping he vexed himself by
reason of his ignorance; but, in a certain night, the image of Aurelius
Augustine appeared to him, and taught him in what manner the dark and difficult
place was to be understood.


Poll. Augustine does therefore conclude, without doubt, that they are not
souls.


Cast. He does so conclude: and the greater to strengthen such his judgment, he
adds, that if the souls of the dead have any interest or council in the
affairs of the living, he undoubtedly knew, that his own pious mother did not
desert him not for one night, but when she was living, followed him both by sea
and land: neither did he at any time sustain any anguish of heart but comforted
his sorrows. And that this may not seem too hard a speech, the president of
Christ teaches, that they do not err, who affirm that the good Angels, by the
appointment of God, and divine dispensation, do sometimes come to, and visit
men, both living and sleeping, and sometimes to the place where souls endure
punishment: notwithstanding, it is not unto all, but only unto those who have
so lived, that God shall judge them worthy of his mercy: or unto those upon
whom, without any respect unto their deserts, God will be pleased to glorify
his unspeakable mercy; that by the prayers of the living they may obtain pardon
of their sins, and deliverance from the prison of torments.


Poll. I have sometimes read, that the same St. Augustine did write, that it is
better for a man to doubt of secret things, than to contend about things
uncertain.


Cast. That is certainly true; neither does he declare himself to be an offense
to those who do leave all these things to the unsearchable judgments of God,
and labor not to find out the secrets thereof.


Poll. Because I have easily understood thy answers hitherto, I will not desist
till thou have fully resolved me concerning this subject. I desire therefore to
know whether all miracles which the devils perform, are done really, or
imaginary phant^sies.


Cast. That they perform many things really, and many things only seemingly, we
have already manifested out of the writings of St. Augustine. For that great
prelate of the Christian Church, writes, in the 11 chapter of his book de
Trinitate, that it is a very easy thing for the wicked Spirits, through the
airy substance of their bodies, to perform many things which seem wonderful (to
the souls that are oppressed with earthly bodies) to be done. He also says,
that earthly bodies may be so qualified with art and exercise, that in public
Theaters they may perform such wonderful things, that those who never have seen
them will not believe them, but that they were done by the assistance of the
devil and his ministers, to make their bodies of such an airy element, that the
flesh wonders at. Or else which is much, he says also, that they do contrive
with occult inspirations, forms, and fantasies of images, to delude human
sense: wherewith, waking or sleeping, they may be deceived. Thus far Augustine,
But, if thou will, I will produce also another witness without exception,
Pollux.


Poll. I would have thee tell me who that is.


Cast. Abbas Tritemius, in his third Question to St. Maximus Emilianus, which
is spoken of before, says thus: The devils, amongst unfaithful people, do seem
to raise up the dead to life, and to show miracles to curious men, that they
might as it were swallow them up with error instead of miracles; and are
altogether pertinatious and obstinate: but they cannot truly and realy raise up
the dead, but do variously deceive the senses of men, showing them feigned
resemblances of the dead, For it is certainly manifest, that the devils can do
all things but only in a false similitude of holy miracles in truth.


Poll. Some say that the devils are obedient to wicked men, because of the
similitude of their malice. How seems that to thee?


Cast. It seems to me, that they are obedient to evil men, but not to all men.


Poll. But to whom?


Cast. To those certainly with whom they have contracted and made compacts and
covenants; as those women which they call Pythonists are accounted, who have
vowed themselves by promise unto him.


Poll. But although they are compelled to be so serviceable unto them, yet is
this service true or feigned?


Cast. It is feigned, certainly: for they are subservient unto men of their own
accord, and genuine work, that they may deceive them, and allure them to
themselves. Although we do not deny that their service is sometimes true, but
only toward those men, whose faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, by the merit of
his holiness, has caused them to be acceptable, and friends unto him, And that
Lactantius also testifies, in these words, in his second book De origin
Erroris, and 16 Chap. That the devils do fear the just, that is, those that
worship God, in whose Name they are conjured ^o depart out of bodies, and with
whose words they are beaten with scourges, and they do not only confess that
they are devils, but do declare their names: neither can they lie unto the
just. And the same Lactantius in his fourth book De vera Sapientia, Chapter 27.
says, It is necessary that they who are of the true Christian Religion, should
know the course and order of the devils, and understand their subtily, and
restrain their force, and conquer and subdue them with Spiritual weapons, and
force them to obey him.


Poll. I am now by thee sufficiently informed of all things which I have
hitherto desired to know; wherefore I shall not any further trouble thee with
my questions, or rather riddles, but leave thee to thy own occasions.


Cast. Neither have I counted myself idle in answering thee: but let the use
thereof yield us each to other an equal recompense. Farewell therefore.


Poll. And thee also.


GERARD CREMONENSIS: OF ASTRONOMICAL GEOMANCY.
BEcause Astronomy is so transendant and subtle an art in itself, that therein
a man ought to have respect unto so many things before he can attain to true
judgment thereby, because the eye of the understanding will not pierce unto the
half thereof, and few Doctors of our latter time have been found so experienced
therein, that they know sufficiently how to judge thereby; therefore I have
composed this work, which I will have to be named Astronomical Geomancy;
wherein, I will sufficiently teach how to judge with less labor and study. For
in this present science it is not requisite to behold neither the Ascendant,
nor the hour in a Table, as it is in Astrology.

It is expedient therefore to make four unequal lines, by the points casually
set down; and to join together those points; and out of the points which are
not joined together, which do remain in the heads of the lines, (as it is done
in Geomancy) extract one figure; and the sign of the Zodiac that answers to
the figure, put for the Ascendant, for the words sake. If Acquisitio arise from
the heads of those four lines, let Aries be placed in the Ascendant; if
Laetitia, or the lesser Fortune put Taurus in the Ascendant; if Puer or Rubeus,
place Gemini; if Albus, Cancer; if Via, Leo; if Conjunctio or the Dragons head,
Virgo; if Puella, Libra; if Amissio or Tristitia, Scorpio; if the Dragons Tail,
Sagittary; if Populus, Capricorn; if Fortuna major, Aquary; if Carcer, then put
Pisces for the Ascendant. Afterward in the second house, let that sign be
placed which immediately succeeds the other. In the third house, the third
sign, and so place the rest in order until you come unto the end of the signs;
and make one square figure divided into twelve equal parts, and therein place
the signs in order, as it is in Astrology, and as you may find them in this
figure: neither are we here to regard the witnesses, or Judge, or any other
thing which belongs to Geomancy; but only the sixteen figures, that by them we
may have the twelve signs, to which they agree; and observe the manner of the
figure as it is here placed.

Look how the twelve Signs are placed in the figure, and so may any other Sign
be ascending in his turn, as Aries is here.


Afterward it is requisite to make four lines by course for every Planet, by
points casually pricked down; and likewise for the Dragons Head, as you have
done for the Ascendant, and divide those points by twelve, and that which
remains above twelve, or the twelfth itself, if a greater number does not
remain, retain, and the Planet for which the projection was made, place in that
house of which the superabounding number shall be; that is, if there remain
twelve, let the Planet be placed in the twelfth house; if ten, in the tenth
house; if one, in the first house; if two, in the second house; and so of the
rest. And you ought always to begin from the Sun, and afterward from the Moon,
then from Venus and Mercury, and from S^turn, Jupiter and Mars, and the Dragons
Head and Dragons Tail; but you must always take heed, that you do not make a
question in a rainy, cloudy, or a very windy season, or when thou art angry, or
thy mind busied with many affairs; nor for tempters or deriders, neither that
you may renew and reiterate the same Question again under the same figure or
form; for that is error.

Questions of the first House.
IF you are desirous to know concerning the life of any man whether it be long
or short, behold the Lord of the Ascendant, who if he be in strong Angles, it
signifies long life; in succedents, a middle age; and in cadent houses, a short
life; and if he be in strong Angles, he signifies greater years; if in
Succedents, meaner years; if in Cadents, lesser years. The lesser years of
Saturn are thirty, the meaner are forty four years, and the greater fifty
eight. The lesser years of Jupiter are twelve, the meaner years forty, and the
greater accordingly are forty seven. The lesser years of Mars are fifteen, his
mean years forty, and the greater years forty seven. The lesser years of the
Sun are nineteen, his mean years forty five, and his greater years eighty two.
The lesser years of Venus are eight, her mean years forty five, and her greater
years eighty two. Mercury's lesser years are twenty, his mean years forty nine*
and his greater years eighty. The lesser years of the Moon are fifteen, her
mean years thirty nine, and her greater years a hundred and seven. And also
look if Mars or Saturn shall be in the first house, and the Lord of the eighth
with them, and if the Sun shall be in the eighth, the Querent shall not live:
likewise if the Lord of the Ascendant shall happen to be void of course, and
Mars be in the eighth, the Querent shall not live; but if the Sun and the Moon
shall be in conjunction in the seventh house, and Venus in the second, he shall
live well.

The accidents of the nativity are likewise to be considered. If you find
Saturn or Mercury in the first, he is foolish and talkative; if it be Mars and
Mercury, he will not be servile, but a wrangler and scoffer; if the Sun and
Mercury, he will be a speaker of truth, and if the Sun be in Aires, he will
apply himself to learn whatsoever he shall hear; if Venus be in the seventh, he
will be luxurious; and if Saturn, Mercury and Venus be in their fall, he will
be a Sodomite; if the Sun and Venus be in the tenth, and the Moon in the first,
he will be very liberal; if Venus, Mercury and the Dragons Head be in the
first, he will be covetous; if the Moon and Mars be in the first, he will be
subject to great bondage; and if Mars; be Lord of the nativity, he will be rich
and an evil speaker, and litigious; and if the Sun be in the first, he will be
envious, having a fair body, not very lean, nor very fat; and if Venus be in
the first, he will be white and fair; if Mercury be in the first, he will not
be staple, but always in motion; but if the Moon be found there, it denotes him
to have a graceful face, breast and arms; if Saturn be there, the man will be
black and filthy; if Jupiter, he will have a round face, a fair forehead, a
ruddy complexion mixed with a little white. If you would know his office or art:
if the Moon be in the seventh with Saturn, or in the fourth, or in the tenth;
or in the first, it is not good for him to build any house in a City, nor to
build a ship, neither is it good for him to be a tiller of land, or to dress
vines, or plant trees; but to be employed about some office belonging to the
water, or concerning marriages or to be a Post or a Messenger; neither let him
apply himself much to his Master, because he shall gain no repute from him: if
the Moon be in the fifth or third, it will be good to him; in the second,
eighth, sixth, and twelfth, neither good nor evil.

Jupiter signifies Bishops, Prelates, Nobles, Potentates, Judges, Wise men,
Merchants, and Userers.

Mars signifies Warriors, Incendiaries, Homicides, Physicians, Barbers,
Hangmen, Goldsmiths, Cooks, furnaces and all fireworks. And if Mars be in the
strong signs, he will be poor and die in captivity, unless he put himself in
arms with some Soldier or vassal.

The Sun signifies Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Lords and Judges.

Venus signifies Queens and Ladies, Marriages, Communications, Friendship,
Apothecaries, Tailors, and such as make Ornaments for plays, sellers of Cloth,
Jesters, Vintners, Players at dice, Whores and Ro^be^s.

Mercury signifies Clerks, Philosophers, Astrologers, Geometrician^,
Arithmeticians, Latin writers, and Painters, and all subtle Artist, as well men
as women, and their Arts.

Concerning the intentions of the Querent, look unto the sign ascending, and
his Lord; and where you find the Lord of the Ascendant, he comes to inquire
about something pertaining to that house; and if the Sun be Lord of the
Ascendant, his Question is concerning fear which he is in of some man; if
Venus, he enquireth of arts, that he may know some proper Arts, or he enquireth
concerning things belonging to women. If Mercury be Lord of the Ascendant, he
seeks after some thing that is lost, or enquireth concerning some infirmity.
If the Moon, he seeks also for something lost, or enquireth about sickness,
or some disease in his eyes. If Saturn be Lord of the Ascendant, he enquireth
about some sickness, or concerning a Prince; and keeps silence, but has some
great grief or anguish in his heart. If Jupiter be Lord of the Ascendant, his
Question is concerning some infirmity, or restitution, or for some office which
he desires to have. If Mars, he enquireth for some fear, or of an enemy,
death, sickness, riches, or substance.

Questions of the second house.
IF you would be informed concerning the substance of any man whether he shall
be rich or not, behold the Lord of the second, which if he shall be with a good
Planet, and a good Planet likewise in the second, he shall be rich; but if the
Lord of the second be joined with evil Planets, and an evil Planet shall be in
the second, he shall be poor.

If you would know whether you shall have again a thing lent, or not, look if
there be an evil Planet in the second, and disagreeing with his Lord; then he
that detaineth the thing lent, will not willingly render back the same: But if
there be a good Planet in the second, and agreeing with his Lord, it shall
easily be recovered; and if the Lord of the second be exalted and be evil, or
if an evil Planet be with him in the second, or if the Lord of the second be
exalted, he which keeps the thing deposited, will not willingly restore the
same, but he shall do it whether he will or not. And if an evil Planet be in
the second, it is to be recovered: but if Mercury be in the second so that he be
his Lord, and brings contrarity, then it shall be recovered; and if a good
Planet be in the second house, he signifies recovery, although he be the Lord
thereof.

Mark therefore the concord and discord of the Planets: the Moon and Jupiter
are friends, the Moon and Mars enemies; Mercury and the Sun are friends,
Mercury and Venus enemies; Venus and Jupiter are friends, Jupiter and the Moon
are enemies.

The Planets are said to be friends, when they agree in one nature and
quallity, as Mars and the Sun, because both their natures is hot and dry; Venus
and the Moon do agree in cold and moisture; or when Planets do agree in
substance and nature, as Jupiter and Venus are friends: or when the house of
one is the exaltation of another, or on the contrary.

Questions of the third House.
IF that you desire to know, how many brethren a man has, see the Lord of the
third, and it is to be held, that to so many Planets as he is joined, so many
brethren the Querent has; and the Masculine Planets signify brethren and the
female Planets sisters; and note, that Saturn and Mars, the Sun, Jupiter, and
the Dragons Head, are masculine; but the Moon, Venus and the Dragons Tail are
feminine: but Mercury is promiscuous, sometimes masculine and sometimes
feminine; he is masculine when he joined to masculine Planets, or when he is in
a masculine quarter of the Zodiac; and he is feminine, when he is joined to
feminine Planets, or when he is in a feminine quarter of the Zodiac.

Questions of the fourth House.
IF thou would know whether it be good for thee to stay in any Land, City,
Village, Territory, or House, or not, behold the Lord of the Ascendant of the
fourth, and of the seventh; and if the Lord of the fourth be in the seventh,
and be good, and the Lords of the first and the tenth house be good, and with
good Planets, then it is good for thee to continue in that place wherein thou
art. And if the Lord of the seventh be with a good Planet, and the Lord of the
fourth with an evil Planet, then it is not good for thee to abide there,
because if thou do continue there, thou shall suffer many losses, and have
evil reports raised on thee in that Country.

But if thou would know when any one that is absent will return, behold the
Lord of the Ascendant; and if you find him in any one of the four Angles, he
will return in that year; and if he be not in an Angle, then see how far he is
distant from the first Angle; for so long he will stay, and so many years as
there be houses.

If you would be informed of the dearth or plenty of things, behold the strong
houses, the Succedents and the Cadents; for the strong houses signify dearth
and scarcity, the Succedents a moderate season, neither too dear, nor too
cheap, the Cadents signify plenty and profitableness of things. Consider also
the Planets, and their places, which if they be in strong houses, the things
which are signified by those Planets will be rare: and note, that Saturn does
signify fields, vines, and instruments to work in fields; and leather, and of
fruits, corn, acorns, oak-apples, and pomgranates. Jupiter has oil, honey,
silkworms, cloth, wine, and grass, and things that are odoriferous. Mars
signifies wine, and flesh, and especially hogs, wars, and armor, and such
things as belong thereunto, and red garments. The Sun has signification of
wheat, and wine, purple colors, and cloth, and all things that are affimulated
unto gold, horses and birds, such as hawks and falcons. Venus hoth signify
fatness and grapes, sigs and dates, fish and pastimes. Mercury has barley,
millet, grain, money, and quicksilver. The Moon signifies oats, milk, cheese,
fire and salt, cows, rams, hens, and silver, and accordingly plenty and
scarcity of them.

Questions of the fifth House.
IF you would know whether a woman be with Child, or whether she will have any
children, or not, look if the Lord of the Ascendant be in the seventh, or the
Lord of the fifth in the first, or the Lord of the first in the fifth, or if
the Lord of the fifth be in the seventh, or if the Lord of the seventh be in
the fifth, or the Moon will them; or if good Planets be in the first, or the
fifth, or with the Lord of the fifth, or *R* in Angles, she is with child, or
may have children; but if you find none of them, but evil Planets in the same
places, she neither is with child, neither will she have any children: and if
there be both good and evil Planets in the said places, then happily she may
have children, but they will not live; but if Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces shall
be in the first or fifth house, she may have children; but if Leo and Virgo be
there, she is not with child neither shall she ever have any children; or if
the Lord of the fifth shall be in them houses.

And if you would know, within how many years she shall have children, look
where you find the Lord of the fifth; for in that year she shall have issue; if
he be in the first, in the first year; if in the second, in the second year;
and so you may number unto the twelfth house. And if mean signs be in the
Ascendant, she that is with child has twins in her womb, which will live, if a
good Planet be in the first; and if an evil Planet, they will die; and if there
be one good and another evil, one shall live, and another die; and if a mean
sign shall be ascending, and Mars in that sign, the mother shall die, and not
the child; if Saturn, both the mother and child shall die; and if the Dragons
Tail be there, it is possible they will both die; but the infant shall not
escape; and if the Dragons Tail be in the first, and the tenth house fallen:
the mother shall die; likewise Mars and the Moon, or Mars and Saturn be in the
first, seventh or tenth, the mother shall die.

Whether the party with child shall miscarry, or not. Consider if a moveable
sign be ascending, because if it be so, she will miscarry.

If you would know whether a woman shall bring forth a man-child, or a
woman-child; behold the Ascendant and his Lord, which if he be masculine, and
in a masculine sign, or in a masculine quarter of the figure, it is a
male-child; but if the Lord of the Ascendant be feminine, and in a feminine
sign, or in a feminine quarter of the Circle, it will be a woman-child; and so
you shall consider also of the Moon. Consider also if more of the Planets be in
masculine signs, then it will be a male-child; and if many Planets be in
feminine signs, then it is a female-child.

And if you would know whether the child be legitimate or adulterate; see if
Saturn, Mars or the Dragons Tail be in the fifth, or with the Lord of the
fifth; because if it be so, it is adulterate; but if a good Planet shall be
there, it is legitimate: and if the Lord of the first, be in the fifth, or with
his Lord, it is legitimate; and so likewise if the Lord of the fifth be found
in the first, or with the Lord of the first.

If you desire to know whether rumors be true or false, see if you find
Saturn, Mars or the Dragons Tail, in the Ascendant; because if they be so, then
the rumors are false; but if you find the Sun, Jupiter or the Dragons Head
there, then they are true; and if there be masculine Planets in masculine
Signs, and feminine Planets in feminine Signs, then they are true; and if both
good and evil Planets be there, then they are partly true and partly false: and
if there be good sign with the Planet, it testifies the truth; and if the
Planet fall with an evil Sign, then it is false: likewise if Mercury be in the
first, the news is false: but if the Moon be in the first in a feminine Sign,
or joined with the Lord of the ascendant in a feminine sign, then the rumors
are true; also if good Planets be in the first, fifth or ninth, and feminine
Signs, they are true; but if otherwise, they are not.

If you would know whether any one that is absent will return, and when; see
the Lord of the Ascendant and the first, which if you find them together, for
certain he will come, and is now beginning his Journey. Likewise if the Lord of
the fifth be in the first, or with the Lord of the first, and if he be in his
fall, the messenger is sick in his way; but if the Lord of the fifth be
exalted, then he comes joyfully. And if he be in a cadent Sign, he shall be
grievously afflicted with sickness, or shall die.

If you would know if he brings that with him for which he went, or not,
behold the Lord of the seventh; which if he be good, he brings that which he
sought for; and if he be in his fall, or an evil Planet be there, he brings
nothing with him.

Questions of the sixth House.
WHether the sick shall recover his health, or die. If the Question be
concerning his sickness, see if Saturn, or Mars, or the Dragons Tail be in the
first, and whether his Lord be joined with an evil Planet, then he shall die
soon. And if the Lord of the first be good, and evil Planets be in the first
with his Lord, or likewise in the first or the eighth, for certain he will die:
but if the Lord of the first be in the eighth, or with the Lord of the eighth;
or the Lord of the eighth in the first, or with the Lord of the first, there is
doubt of his death. And if evil Planets do possess the Angles, evil and
destruction is threatened to the sick. But if good Planets shall be in the
first, sixth and eighth, and likewise in the Angles, and the Lord of the first
be from the eighth and his Lord, then the sick person shall live and recover
his health.

If you desire to know whether he will be cured by medicines, give the first
house of the Physician, the tenth to the sick, the seventh to his diseases, and
the fourth to the medicines. If evil Planets be in the first, the Physician
shall profit him nothing; but they testify that this will be worse for the
diseased: but the fortunes do signify, that he shall be profitable to him. And
if evil Planets do occupy the tenth house the sick person is the cause, for
they testify, that he himself is the cause of his own disease: but the Fortunes
being there, signify the contrary. But if evil Planets be in the tenth house,
they change the condition of the sick out of one disease into another; but the
Fortunes being there, do deliver him without the help of Physicians or
medicines. Also evil Planets being in the fourth, do testify, that the
medicines do augment his grief; and the Fortunes being there, do mitigate and
heal him.

If thou would know if thou shall go unto the person and heal him; consider
the place then: for if he shall be with Saturn, Mars or the Dragons Tail, or
*R* with the Sun, go not unto him; but if Jupiter, Venus or the Dragons Head be
in the first, or in the seventh, go, for it will be good: and if there be the
Moon with a good Planet, go, and give him Physic; but if she shall be with an
evil Planet and especially in the seventh house, then thou shall not go;
because thou shall profit him nothing: and if there be good Planets there, go
and look diligently to him, where or in what members he suffers; because Aries
has the head, Taurus the neck, Cancer the breast and lungs, Leo the heart and
stomach, Virgo the belly and intestines, Libra, the reins and loins, Scorpio
the secret members, Sagittary the thighs, Capricorn the knees, Aquary the legs,
and Pisces the feet.

Questions of the seventh House.
FOR theft, look unto the Lord of the seventh: which if he be in the first,
then the theft shall be restored again; but if the Lord of the first be in the
seventh, it shall be a long time sought after, and at length shall be found:
but if the Moon be in the first, or with his Lord, it shall be found; if the
Moon be in the fifth, or with the Lord of the first, or *R* in the first, it
may be found; but the Sun and the Moon be in the ^^fth, and if the Lord of the
eighth be with the Lord of the first in the first, it shall be found; but if
the Lord of the second be in the eighth, it shall not be found. And if Saturn,
or Mars, or the Dragons Tail be in the second, it shall not be found, nor be
altogether lost. And if the Lord of the second be in the first, the thing that
is lost shall be found; but it shall not be known from whence it came. If the
Lord of the first be in the second, it may be found after much labor. And if
the Lord of the second be in his fall, it will never be found; but if he be
exalted, it shall be found very well: but the seventh house shows the thief.

But if you would know what it is that is stolen, behold the Lord of the
second; which if he be Saturn, it is lead, iron, a kettle, a trivet, a garment,
or some black thing, or leather. If he be Jupiter, then it is some white thing,
as tin, silver, or mixed with white and yellow veins. The Sun signifies gold and
precious pearls. Mars signifies things belonging to the fire. Venus signifies
things belonging to women, as gloves, rings, and fair ornaments. The Moon,
beasts, such as horses, mules, etc. perfumes and wars. Mercury signifies money,
books, writings, pictures, or garment of diverse colors.

If you would know how many thieves there were, see the Lord of the sixth;
which if he be in the second, or with the Lord of the second, there were may
thieves; and if they be in the third, the brethren or kinsmen of the Querent
have committed the theft.

If you would know whether the thief do yet remain in the Town: if they be in
succedent houses, he is not gone far off; but if they be in cadent houses, he
is far remote.

If you desire to know toward what Country the thief is fled, see in what sign
the Lord of the seventh is; for if he be in Aries, he is in the middle of the
East part. if in Taurus, in the South toward the East. If in Gemini, in the
West toward the South. If in Cancer, full North. If in Leo, in the East
toward the North. If in Virgo, in the South toward the West. If in Libra,
full West. If in Scorpio, in the North near the West. If in Sagittary, in the
East nigh the North. If in Capricorn, full South. If in Aquary, in the West
toward the North. And if in Pisces, in the North toward the West.

If you would know whether the thief has carried all the things stolen away
with him, see the Lord of the seventh and the eighth; and if the Lord of the
seventh be in an Angle, he had a desire to carry away the same with him, but
could not. If the Lord of the eighth be in a mean house, or in a cadent house,
and the Lord of the second in a strong house, he has carried the theft wholly
with him. And if the Lord of the seventh and the eighth be both in cadent
houses, he neither carried it away, nor has it. See by the seventh who is his
companion, and what is his gain.

If you would know the descent or nobility of a man or woman, look unto the
Lord of the seventh; which if you find him in Angles, and the Lord of the first
in succedents or cadents, the woman is more noble than the man. But if the Lord
of the Ascendant be in an Angle, and the Lord of the seventh in a succedent or
cadent house, the man is more noble than the woman. And after the same manner
thou may judge of two companions, or of any other persons whatsoever. And if
the Lord of the seventh be in the ninth House, he will take a wife out of a
foreign Country.

If you desire to know whether an intended marriage shall take effect, or not,
look to the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Moon, for the Querent; and the
seventh house, and his Lord, for the woman. And if the Lord of the Ascendant or
the Moon be joined to the Lord of the seventh, or be in the seventh, the
marriage will be effected; or if the Lord of the seventh be in the first, or
with the Lord of the first, it will easily be brought to pass; and the woman be
more desirous thereof, than the man.

If you would know whether thy wife or friend has any other lover or not, look
if Mars be in the seventh, so that he be not in his own house, for then she
has not any other lover. And if Saturn be there, she loves another; but he
lies not with her. And if the Dragons Tail be in the seventh, he lies with
her. And if Jupiter be there, she hardly contains herself chaste. If Venus,
she is merry, and much given to play and laughter, by reason whereof, she may
be accountted a whore, and is not so. If Mercury be in the seventh, she had a
lover, but now has none. But if the Moon be in the seventh, she has had no
lover as yet, but will have one, and will be common. But if the Sun or the
Dragons Head be there, she is chaste. And after the same manner may you judge
in the *ninth* concerning friends or lovers.

If you would know which of them shall live longest, see the Lord of the first
and of the seventh, which of them shall be in the stronger and better place, or
joined to the strongest Planets; and that person who is most free and remote
from the Lord of the eighth and his participation, to whom the Lord of his
house answers, shall live longest.

If you desire to make a society or alliance, and would know whether it shall
be brought to pass or not, or what shall happen thereupon, see if there be good
Planets in the seventh and the first: and if so, the fellowship will be made,
and good will come thereof; and you may judge it to continue so many years,
months or days, as the Lord of the seventh has signification of.

If you would know when such society shall be, look what Planet is in the
seventh; for if he be good, it shall come to pass that same year: or wedlock,
*R* if the Question be thereof.

If you would know whether they will well agree, see the first and his Lord,
which is the signifier of the Querent; and the seventh house and his Lord,
which is the house of companions, wives, and concubines; which if they be
concordant amongst themselves, there will be peace and union between them, and
they shall profit; but if the Planets be in discord, there will be strife
between them, and the society will not profit.

If you would know which of them shall gain most, see the first and his Lord,
and the seventh and his Lord, and which of them stands best; or if they be
evil, which of them falls: and he that falls shall lose, and he that is
exalted shall gain. Or otherwise, and which is better, see the second and his
Lord, and the eighth and his Lord; and in which house is the better Planet, or
his Lord that shall be found in the better place, or joined with the better
Planets, he shall be the greater gainer. The second House of his Lord signifies
the gain of the Querent: and the eighth house and his Lord signifies the gain
of his fellow, or his part: and if they be both good, they shall both gain; and
if both evil, they shall both lose; and if one be good and the other evil, he
whose significator is good, shall gain; and he whose is evil, shall lose.

And if you would know if two fellows shall love one another, look if the Lords
of the first and the seventh be friends, and agreeing, then they will love one
another; but if they be enemies and disagree, then they will not.

If you desire to know who shall overcome in any cause, matter or controversy,
behold the Lords of the first and the seventh, which if they be in Angles,
neither of them shall overcome; and see which of them is joined with an evil
Plane^, because he shall overcome; and if the Planet be evil from them both,
the victor shall kill the conquered; if one of them be strong, and the other
weak, and the Planet which is in the strong house do not fall, nor has not an
evil Planet with him; and if he which is weak be not in his own house, nor in
his exaltation, nor with a good Planet, he whose Planet is in the strong house,
shall overcome; likewise he whose significator is in a mean house, shall have
great fear and doubt in his heart, because sometimes he shall hope to conquer,
and otherwhiles fear to be overcome, And note, that in a question concerning
war and kingdom, it is said that there is more power and efficacy, or fortitude
in the exaltation of a Planet, than in his house; but in all other Questions
the contrary.

If you would be informed concerning any one being, that is gone to any fight,
whether he shall return safe, see the Lord of the Ascendant; if he be good,
that is, with good Planets, and a good Planet in the first, he will return
safe, but if the Sun be with the Lord of the first, in any part of the
Question, let him not go, because the Sun burns him. And if the Lord of the
seventh be with a good Planet, and the Lord of the first with a good Planet,
likewise, he shall have some impediment in the way; but he will not die. And if
an evil Planet be with the Lord of the first, and a good Planet in the first,
if he goes he shall suffer great damage, but not death; nevertheless he may be
grievously wounded. And if Saturn be in the first, or with the Lord of the
first, let him not go; because some impediment will happen unto him by some man
that he will meet. And if there be an evil Planet with the Lord of the first,
or Saturn be in the first, or with the Lord of the first, he will be wounded
with wood or with a stone. If Mars and the Dragons Tail be in the first, or
with the Lord of the first; or if there be evil Planets in the first, or with
the Lord of the first, he will suffer wounds or death. See likewise if there be
an evil Planet in the eighth, because then death is to be feared. And if the
Sun be with the Lord of the seventh, or in the eighth, it signifies that it is
ill to go. The like judgment is of the seventh and the tenth.

And if a Question be proposed concerning the event of war, see the seventh and
the first, and their Lords: for the first house and his Lord signifies the
Querent; in the seventh and his Lord the adversary. So that if there be good
Planets in the first, and evil in the seventh; and if the Lord of the first and
seventh be evil, the Querent shall overcome: but if there be an evil Planet
with the Lord of the first, and an evil Planet in the first, and the Lord of
the seventh good, or *R.* in the seventh, the Querent shall be overcome, or
taken, or slain. And if the Lords of them both be in the first, and there be
good Planets from the part of the first house, unto the end of the house, which
is the middle of the Question; and if evil Planets do possess the other half of
the Question, that is to say, from the seventh unto the end of the twelfth
house, the adversary shall overcome. But if both the Lords be in the Ascendant,
and if they be good from the part of the first, and evil from the part of the
seventh, they shall both suffer great loss; but the Querent shall have the
better in the end. But if the Lord of the Ascendant be in the seventh, or in
his Question, it signifies fortitude of the adversary: and if the Lord of the
seventh be in the first, or in his Question, it signifies fortitude of the
actor. And if the Lord of the Ascendant be in the eighth, or with the Lord of
the eighth; or the Lord of the eighth in the first, or with the Lord of the
first, it signifies the death of the Querent. And if the Lord of the seventh be
in the second, or with his Lord; or the Lord of the second in the seventh, or
with the Lord of the seventh, it signifies the death of the enemy.

If you would know whether war shall continue long or not, if mean or meanly;
if the Lords of the first and the seventh do agree, the parties shall be
pacified after the war.

If thou would depart from the place wherein thou art, and remove thyself to
some other place; and if thou would know whether it be better for thee to
stay or go: or concerning two businesses, if thou desire to know which of
them is most expedient for thee to undertake, consider the Lords of the first
and the second, for those places to which thou would go, the place wherein
thou art, and the gain which thou gettest there; and the seventh and the
eighth, and their Lords, for the place to which thou would go, and the gain
which thou may get there: and those places choose, whose Lords are the
better, or joined to the better Planets. Or otherwise: behold the Lord of the
Ascendant, and the Moon; which if they be separated from evil Planets, and
joined to good and fortunate Planets, it is better for thee to go from the
places where thou art, than to stay there, and to do whatsoever business thou
have in thy mind. And if the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon be separated
from the Fortunes, and joined to evil Planets, then it is not good for thee to
remove thyself, nor to do thy business. Or thus: See the Moon; and if the the
Planet from which she is separated be better than that to whom she is joined,
do not remove: and if the Planet which she is joined to, be better than that
from which she is separated, then go.

Questions of the eighth House.
COncerning any Man or woman, if you would know what kind of death they shall
die, see if Leo, Scorpio, or R. Mars, be in the eighth, the party shall die by
a beast. And if Saturn be in the eighth, or with the Lord of the eighth in
Scorpio, Cancer, or Pisces, he shall die in water. And if an evil Planet be in
the eighth, or with the Lord of the eighth; or if Mars or the Dragons Tail be
there, he shall die by fire, iron, or of a fever. And if there be a good Planet
in the eighth, or with the Lord of the eighth, he shall die a good death.

Questions of the ninth House.
COncerning long journeys, see if the Lord of the eighth have good Planets with
him: and if Saturn be in the ninth, and exalted in the tenth, so that he be not
in his own House, do not go: for thou shall meet with many obstacles, and War.
And if an evil Planet be in the ninth, or with the Lord of the ninth, and the
Lord of the ninth in his fall, he shall suffer great damage in the way: for if
he goes by water, he shall suffer shipwreck; and if by Land, he shall have
misfortunes, be taken, or die. If Saturn be in the ninth, or with his Lord, go
securely. And if a good Planet be in the ninth, or with the Lord of the ninth,
the way is good and secure. And if Mars be in the ninth, thou may not go:
for thou will meet with mortal enemies in the way. And if the Lord of the ninth
be with an evil Planet, or the Sun, it signifies ill: but he shall not be
taken. And if the Lord of the ninth have a good Planet near him, he shall
escape: but if evil, he shall be taken. If Venus be in the ninth, or with the
Lord of the ninth, the way will be good, because he shall have comfort from
women. And if Mercury be in the ninth, and the Lord of the ninth with good
Planets, the way will be very good: and if he be with evil Planets, it will be
evil. And the same is said of the Moon, as of Mercury. If the Dragons Tail be
in the ninth. he will meet with thieves, or some evil people. And if the
Dragons Head be in the ninth, the way will be good, because he shall be
accompanied with Noblemen. And in this manner you may judge in the third House
concerning short journeys.

If you would know when the journey shall be accomplished, see the Lord of the
ninth, and according to his fortitude or debility judge, because according to
the place wherein he is, is signified years, months, or days: and so you shall
judge concerning his stay, about what time he will come, by turning the years
of the Lord of the ninth into days; because so many days he shall tarry, as the
Planet signifies in the place where he is. Or otherwise: weak Angles signify a
speedy journey, mean Angles a mean journey; and the Lord of the ninth likewise,
according to the place wherein he is found.

And this I say concerning his return.

If you would know whether he shall return from his journey with an imperfect
voyage or not, see if the Moon be joined with the Lord of the first, the third,
or the ninth, and the Planet thereof be in his fall; because if it be so, he
shall return with an imperfect voyage. And if the Moon be in her exaltation,
the journey shall speedily be effected. And if there be two strong Planets, and
one cadent, the journey shall be made: and if one be strong, and another in his
fall, he shall retire back.

Questions of the tenth House.
IF thou would know whether thou shall have any honor or benefit from a
King, a Bishop, or Lord, or not, look unto the first house, and the ninth, and
their Lords,: and if the Lord of the first be in the ninth, or with the Lord of
the ninth, or with any other good Planet; or if the Lord of the ninth be in the
first, or with the Lord of the first, or with any other good Planet, as Vinus,
Jupiter, or the Dragons Head; or if any of them be the Lord of the ninth, or
*R.* of the the first, he shall receive honor and benefits from them.

And if you would know whether he shall have it in his own country, or in a
foreign country, look if the Lord of the ninth be in Angles, then it shall be
in his own country: and if in succedents, it shall be near; but if in cadent
houses, very far off.

Questions of the eleventh House.
IF you would know when it is good to set forth a Ship to Sea, see the
Ascendant; which if it be staple, the Ship will be ponderous; but if the Lord
thereof be with a good Planet, she will sustain a great weight. And if the
Ascendant be instaple, and with a good Planet, the Ship will be swift and carry
a good burden. And meanly, if the Ascendant be mean. And after this manner you
may judge concerning an Horse, if a Question be thereof.

And if any unstaple Sign be ascending, and his Lord be in his exaltation, or
otherwise fortunate, and the Moon behold him with a lowering Aspect, or Sextile;
let the Ship be applied to the water, because she will be very swift. And if
any evil be imposed upon her, or that she be like to be drawn into it; then set
her out when a staple Sign is ascending, or when the Moon is in the third,
fifth, eighth, ninth, or tenth house or mansion.

If you would know what wind she shall have, behold the Ascendant and his Lord,
whether he be with good or evil Planets, and in what place, and accordingly
judge.

And if you would have a strong wind, spread forth your sails at the rising of
Aquary: if a small wind, spread your Canvas when Libra is ascending: If a
moderate wind, then direct your Sails under Gemini.

Questions of the twelfth House.
FOR Imprisonment, consider the twelfth and the first; and if the Lord of the
twelfth be in the first or with the Lord of the first, etc.

(...) Of the MAGIC of the Ancients, The greatest Study of WISDOM. In all
things, ask counsel of the Lord; and do not thou think, speak, or do any thing,
wherein God is not thy Counselor.

Proverbs 11. He that walks fraudulently, reveals secrets: but he that is
of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter. ARBATEL of MAGIC: OR, The
spiritual Wisdom of the Ancients, as well Wisemen of the people of God, as
MAGI of the Gentiles: for the ilustration of the glory of God, and his love to
Mankind. Now first of all produced out of darkness into the light, against all
caco-Magicians, and contemners of the gifts of God; for the profit and
delectation of all those, who do truly and piously love the creatures of God,
and do use them with thanksgiving, to the honor of God, and profit to
themselves and their Neighbors. Containing nine Tomes, and seven Septinaries
of APHORISMS.

The first is called Isagoge, or, a Book of the Institutions of Magic: which
in forty and nine Aphorisms comprehends the most general precepts of the
whole Art.

The second is Microcosmical Magic, what Microcosmus has effected Magically,
by his spirit and Genius adicted to him from his Nativity, that is, spiritual
wisdom: and how the same is effected.

The third is Olympic Magic, in what manner a man may do and suffer by the
spirits of Olympus.

The fourth is Hesiodiacal, and Homerical Magic, which teaches the operations
by the spirits called Cacodemones, as it were not adversaries to mankind.

The fifth is Roman or Sibylline Magic, which acts and operates with tutelar
spirits and Lords, to whom the whole orb of the earth is distributed. This is
valde insignis Magia. To this the doctrine of the Druids referred.

The sixth is Pythagorical Magic, which only acts with spirits to whom is
given the doctrine of Arts, as Physic, Medicines, Mathematics. Alchymy, and
such kind of Arts.

The seventh is the Magic of Appolonius, and the like, and agrees with the
Roman and Microcosmical Magic: only it has this thing peculiar, that it has
power over the hostile part of mankind.

The eighth is Hermitical, that is Aegyptical Magic; and differs not much
from divine Magic.

The ninth is that wisdom which depends solely upon the word of God: and this
is called Prophetical Magic.

The first Tome of the Book of ARBATEL of MAGIC, called ISAGOGE.
IN the name of the Creator of all things both visible and invisible, who
reveals his Mysteries out of his treasures to them that call upon him; and
fatherly and mercifully bestows those his secrets upon us without measure.
May he grant unto us, through his only-begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord, his
ministering spirits, the revealers of his secrets, that we may write this Book
of Arbatel, concerning the greatest secrets which are lawful for man to know,
and to use them without offense unto God. Amen.

The first Septinary of Aphorisms.
The first Aphorism.
Whosoever would know secrets, let him know how to keep secret things secretly;
and to reveal those things that are to be revealed, and to seal those things
which are to be sealed: and not to give holy things to dogs, nor to cast pearls
before swine. Observe this Law, and the eyes of thy Understanding shall be
opened, to understand secret things; and thou shall have whatsoever thy mind
desires to be divinely revealed unto thee. Thou shall have also the Angels and
Spirits of God prompt and ready in their nature to minister unto thee, as much
as any human mind can desire.

Aphor. 2.
In all things call upon the name of the Lord: and without prayer unto God
through his only-begotten Son, do not thou undertake to do or think any thing.
And use the Spirits given and attributed unto thee, as ministers, without
rashness and presumption, as the messengers of God; having a due reverence
toward the Lord of Spirits. And the remainder of thy life do thou accomplish,
demeaning thyself peaceably, to the honor of God, and the profit of thyself
and thy neighbor.

Aphor. 3.
Live to thyself and the Muses: avoid the friendship of the multitude: be thou
coveteous of time, benificial to all men. Use thy gifts, be vigilant in thy
calling; and let the word of God never depart from thy mouth.

Aphor. 4.
Be obedient to good Admonitions: avoid all procrastination: accustom thyself
to constancy and Gravity, both in thy words and deeds. Resist the temptations
of the tempter, by the word of God. Flee from earthly things; seek after
heavenly things. Put no confidence in thy own wisdom; but look unto God in all
things, according to that sentence of the Scripture: When we know not what we
shall do, unto thee, O God, do we lift up our eyes, and from thee we expect our
help. For where all human refuges do forsake us, there will the help of God
shine forth, according to the saying of Philo.

Aphor. 5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
strength, and thy neighbor as thy self: and the Lord will keep thee as the
apple of his eye, and will deliver thee from all evil, and will replenish thee
with all good; and nothing shall thy soul desire, but thou shall be fully
endued therewith, so that it be contingent to the salvation of thy soul and
body.

Aphor. 6.
Whatsoever thou have learned, frequently repeat, and fix the same in thy mind:
and learn much, but not many things, because a human understanding cannot be
alike capable in all things, unless it be such a one that is divinely
regenerated; unto him nothing is so difficult or manifold, which he may not be
able equally to attain to.

Aphor. 7.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
glorify me, says the Lord. For all Ignorance is tribulation of the mind;
therefore call upon the Lord in thy ignorance, and he will hear thee. And
remember that thou give honor unto God, and say with the Psalmist, Not unto
us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory.

The second Septinary.
Aphor. 8.
Even as the Scripture testifies, that God appoints names to things or
persons, and also with them has distributed certain powers and offices out of
his treasures: so the Characters and names of Stars have not any power by
reason of their figure or pronunciation, but by reason of the virtue or office
which God has ordained by nature either to such a name or character. For there
is no power either in heaven or in earth, or hell, which does not descend from
God; and without his permission, they can neither give or draw forth into any
action, any thing they have.

Aphor. 9.
That is the chiefest wisdom, which is from God; and next, that which is in
spiritual creatures; afterward in corporal creatures, fourthly, in nature, and
natural things. The spirits that are apostate, and reserved to the last
judgment, do follow these, after a long interval. Sixthly, the ministers of
punishments in hell, and the obedient unto God. Seventhly, the Pigmies do not
possess the lowest place, and they who inhabit in elements, and elementary
things. It is convenient therefore to know and discern all differences of the
wisdom of the Creator and the Creatures, that it may be certainly manifest unto
us, what we ought to assume to our use of every thing, and that we may know in
truth how and in what manner that may be done. For truly every creature is
ordained for some profitable end to human nature, and for the service thereof;
as the holy Scriptures, Reason, and Experience, do testify.

Aphor. 10.
God the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things
visible and invisible, in the holy Scriptures proposes himself to have an eye
over us; and as a tender father which loves his children, he teaches us what
is profitable, and what not; what we are to avoid, and what we are to embrace:
then he allureth us to obedience with great promises of corporal and eternal
benefits, and deterreth us (with threatening of punishments) from those things
which are not profitable for us. Turn over therefore with thy hand, both night
and day, those holy Writings, that thou may be happy in things present, and
blessed to all eternity. Do this, and thou shall live, which the holy Books
have taught thee.

Aphor. 11.
A number of four is Pythagorical, and the first Quedrate; therefore here let
us place the foundation of all wisdom, after the wisdom of God revealed in the
holy Scriptures, and to the consideration proposed in nature.

Appoint therefore to him who solely depends upon God, the wisdom of every
creature to serve and obey him, nolens volens, willing or unwilling. And in
this, the omnipotency of God shines forth. It consists therefore in this,
that we will discern the creatures which serve us, from those that are
unwilling; and that we may learn how to accommodate the wisdom and office of
every creature unto ourselves. This art is not delivered, but divinely. Unto
whom God will, he reveals his secrets; but to whom he will not bestow any
thing out of his treasuries, that person shall attain to nothing without the
will of God.

Therefore we ought truly to desire from God alone, which will mercifully
impart these things unto us. For he who has given us his Son, and commanded us
to pray for his holy Spirit, how much more will he subject unto us the whole
creature, and things visible and invisible? Whatsoever ye ask, ye shall
receive. Beware that ye do not abuse the gifts of God, and all things shall
work together unto you for your salvation. And before all things, be watchful
in this, that your names be written in heaven: this is more light, that the
spirits be obedient unto you, as Christ admonishes.

Aphor. 12.
In the Acts of the Apostles, the Spirit says unto Peter after the Vision, Go
down, and doubt not but I have sent them, when he was sent for by Cornelius the
Centurion. After this manner, in vocal words, are all disciplines delivered, by
the holy Angels of God, as it appears out of the Monuments of the Egyptians.
And these things afterward were vitiated and corrupted with human opinions;
and by the instigation of evil spirits, who sow tares amongst the children of
disobedience, as it is manifest out of St. Paul, and Hermes Trismegistus. There
is no other manner of restoring these arts, than by the doctrine of the holy
spirits of God; because true faith comes by hearing. But because thou may
be certain of the truth, and may not doubt whether the spirits that speak
with thee, do declare things true or false, let it only depend upon thy faith
in God; that thou may say with Paul, I know on whom I trust. If no sparrow
can fall to the ground without the will of the Father which is in heaven, How
much more will not God suffer thee to be deceived, O thou of little faith, if
thou dependest wholly upon God, and adherest only to him?

Aphor. 13.
The Lord lives; and all things which live, do live in him. And he is truly
(...), who has given unto all things, that they be that which they are: and by
his word alone, through his Son, has produced all things out of nothing, which
are in being. He calls all the stars, and all the host of heaven by their
names. He therefore knows the true strength and nature of things, the order
and Policy of every creature visible and invisible, to whom God has revealed
the names of his creatures. It remains also, that he receive power from God,
to extract the virtues in nature, and hidden secrets of the creature and to
produce their power into action, out of darkness into light. Thy scope
therefore ought to be, that thou have the names of the spirits, that is, their
powers and offices, and how they are subjected and appointed by God to minister
unto thee; even as Raphael was sent to Tobias, that he should heal his father,
and deliver his son from dangers, and bring him to a wife. So Michael, the
fortitude of God governs the people of God: Gabriel, the messenger of God,
was sent to Daniel, Mary, and Zachary the father of John Baptist. And he shall
be given to thee that desires him, who will teach thee whatsoever thy soul
shall desire, in the nature of things. His ministry thou shall use with
trembling and fear of thy Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, that is to say,
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: and do not thou let slip any occasion of
learning, and be vigilant in thy calling, and thou shall want nothing that is
necessary for ^hee.

Aphor. 14.
Thy soul lives for ever, through him that has created thee: call therefore
upon the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. This thou shall do, if
thou will perform that end for which thou art ordained of God, and what thou
owe to God and to thy neighbor. God requires of thee a mind, that thou
should honor his Son, and keep the words of the Son in thy heart: if thou
honor him, thou have done the will of thy Father which is in heaven. To thy
neighbor thou owe offices of humanity, and that thou draw all men that come
to thee, to honor the Son. This is the Law and the Prophets. In temporal
things, thou ought to call upon God as a father, that he would give unto
thee all necessaries of this life: and thou ought to help thy neighbor with
the gifts which God bestows upon thee, whither they be spiri^ual or corporal.

Therefore thou shall pray thus:

O Lord of heaven and earth, Creator and Maker of all t^ings ^isible and
invisible; I, though unworthy, b^ thy assi^^ance call upon ^hee, through thy
only-beg^tten Son Jesus Christ our Lord, that thou will give unto me thy holy
Spirit, to direct me in thy truth unto all good. Amen.

Because I earnestly desire perfectly to know the Arts of this life, and such
things as are necessary for us, which are so overwelmed in darkness, and
polluted with infinite human opinions, that I of my own power can attain to no
knowledge in them, unless thou teach it me: Grant me therefore one of thy
spirits, who may teach me those things which thou would have me to know and
learn, to thy praise and glory, and the profit of our neighbor. Give me also
an apt and teachable heart, that I may easily understand those things which
thou shall teach me, and may hide them in my understanding, that I may bring
them forth as out of thy inexhaustable treasures, to all necessary uses. And
give me grace, that I may use such thy gifts humbly, with fear and trembling,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, with thy holy Spirit. Amen.

The third Septinary.
Aphor. 15.
They are called Olympic spirits which do inhabit in the firmament, and in the
stars of the firmament: and the office of these spirits is to declare
destinies, and to administer fatal charms, so far forth as God pleases to
permit them: for nothing, neither evil spirit nor evil destiny, shall be able
to hur^ him who has the most high for his refuge. If therefore any of the
Olympic spirits shall teach or declare that which his star to which he is
appointed portendeth, nevertheless he can bring forth nothing into action,
unless he be permitted by the divine power. It is God alone who gives them
power to effect it. Unto God the maker of all things, are obedient all things
celestial, sublunary, and infernal. Therefore rest in this; let God be thy
guide in all things which thou undertakest, and all things shall attain to a
happy and desired end; even as the history of the whole world testifies, and
daily experience shows. There is peace to the godly: there is no peace to the
wicked, says the Lord.

Aphor. 16.
There are seven different governments of the Spirits of Olympus, by whom God
has appointed the whole frame and universe of this world to be governed: and
their visible stars are ARATRON, BETHOR, PHALEG, OCH, HAGITH, OPHIEL, PHUL.
after the Olympic speech. Every one of these has under him a mighty Militia
in the firmament.

ARATRON rules visible Provinces XLIX.

BETHOR, XXXII. -- PHALEG, XXXV.

OCH, XXVIII. -- HAGITH, XXI.

OHIEL, XIV. -- PHUL, VII.

So that there are 186 Olympic Provinces in the whole Universe, where in the
seven Governors do exercise their power: all which are elegantly set forth in
Astronomy. But in this place it is to be explained, in what manner these
Princes and Powers may be drawn into communication. Aratron appears in the
first hour of Saturday, and very truly gives answers concerning his Provinces
and Provincials. So likewise do the rest appe^r in order in their days and
hours. Also every one of them rules 490 years. The beginning of their simple
Anomaly, in the ^o^h ye^r before the Nativity of Christ, was the beginning of
the administration of Bethor; and it lasted until the year of our Lord Christ
430. To whom succeeded Phal^g, until the 920th year. Then began Och, and
continued until the year 1410. and thenceforth Hagith rules until the year
1900.

Aphor. 17.
Magically the Princes of the seven Governors are called simply, in that time,
day, and hour wherein they rule visibly or invisibly, by their Names and
Offices which God has given unto them; and by proposing their Character which
they have given or confirmed.

The Governor Aratron has in his power those things which he does naturally,
that is, after the same manner and subject as those things which in Astronomy
are ascribed to the power of Saturn. Those things which he does of his own
free will, are.

1. That he can convert any thing into a stone in a moment, either animal or
plant, retaining the same object to the sight.

2. He converteth treasures into coals, and coals into treasure.

3. He gives familiars with a definite power.

4. He teaches Al^hymy, Magic, and Physic.

5. He reconcileth the subterranean spirits to men; makes hairy men.

6. He causes one to be invisible.

7. The barren he makes fruitful, and gives long life.

His Character.


He has under him 49 Kings, 42 Princes, 35 Presidents, 28 Dukes, 21 Ministers,
standing before him; 14 familiars, seven messengers: he commands 36000
legions of spirits; a legion is 490.

Bether governs those things which are ascribed to Jupiter: he soon comes
being called. He that is dignified with his character, he raises to very great
dignities, to cast open treasures: he reconcileth the spirits of the air, that
they give true answers: they transport precious stones from place to place, and
they make medicines to work miraculously in their effects: he gives also the
familiars of the firmament, and prolongeth life to 700 years if God will.

His Character.


He has under him 42 Kings, 35 Princes, 28 Dukes, 21 Counselors, 14
Ministers, 7 Messengers, 29000 legions of spirits.

Phaleg rules those things which are attributed to Mars, the Prince of peace.
He that has his character, he raises to great honors in warlike affairs.

His Character.


Och governs solar things he gives 600 years, with perfect health; he
bestows great wisdom* gives the most excellent Spirits, teaches perfect
medicines: he converteth all things into most pure gold and precious stones: he
gives gold, and a purse springing with gold. He that is dignified with his
character, he makes him to be worshipped as a Deity, by the Kings of the whole
world.

The Character.


He has under him 36536 legions: he administereth all things alone: and all
his spirits serve him by centuries.

Hagith governs Venereous things. He that is dignified with his character, he
makes very fair, and to be adorned with all beauty. He converteth copper into
gold, in a moment, and gold into copper: he gives Spirits which do faithfully
serve those to whom they are adicted.

His Character.


He has 4000 legions of spirits, and over every thousand he ordains Kings
for their appointed seasons.

Ophiel is the governor of such things as are attributed to Mercury: his
Character is this.



His spirits are 100000 legions: he easily gives familiar spirits: he teaches
all Arts: and he that is dignified with his character, he makes him to be able
in a moment to convert Quicksilver into the Philosophers stone.

Phul has this Character.


He changes all metals into silver, in word and deed; governs Lunary things;
heals the dropsy: he gives spirits of the water, who do serve men in a
corporal and visible form; and makes men to live 300 years.

The most general Precepts of this Secret.
1. Every Governor acts with all his spirits, either naturally, to wit,
always after the same manner; or otherwise of their own free will, if God
hinder them not. 2. Every Governor is able to do all things which are done
naturally in a long time, out of matter before prepared; and also to do them
suddenly, out of matter not before prepared. As Och, the Prince of Solar
things, prepares gold in the mountains in a long time; in a less time, by the
Chemical art; and Magically in a moment. 3. The true and divine Magician may
use all the creatures of God, and offices of the Governors of the world, at his
own will, for that the Governors of the world are obedient to them, and come
when they are called, and do execute their commands: but God is the Author
thereof: as Joshua caused the Sun to stand still in heaven.

They send some of their spirits to the mean Magicians, which do obey them only
in some determinate business: but they hear not the fa^^e Magicians, but expose
them to the deceits of the d^vils and cast them into diverse dangers by the
command of God; as the Prophet Jeremiah testifies, in his eighth Chapter,
concerning the Jews.

4. In all the elements there are the seven Governors with their hosts, who do
move with the equal motion of the firmament; and the inferiors do always depend
upon the superiors, as it is taught in Philosophy. 5. A man that is a true
Magician. is brought forth a Magician from his mothers womb: others, who do
give themselves to this office, are unhappy. This is that which John the
Baptist speaks of: No man can do any thing of himself, except it be given him
from above. 6. Every Character given from a spirit, for what cause soever, has
his efficacy in this business, for which it is given, in the time prefixed: but
it is to be used the same day and Planetary hour wherein it is given. 7. God
lives, and thy soul lives: keep thy Covenant, and thou have whatsoever the
spirit shall reveal unto thee in God, because all things shall be done which
the spirit promises unto thee.
Aphor. 18.
There are other names of the Olympic spirits delivered by others; but they
only are effectual, which are delivered to any one, by the Spirit the revealer,
visible or invisible: and they are delivered to every one as they are
predestined: therefore they are called Constellations; and they seldom have
any efficacy above 40 years. Therefore it is more safe, for the young practicer
of Art, that they work by the offices of the spirits alone, without their
names; and if they are preordained to attain the art of Magic, the other parts
of the Art will offer themselves unto them of their own accord. Pray therefore
for a constant faith, and God will bring to pass all things in due season.

Aphor. 19.
Olympus and the inhabitants thereof, do of their own accord offer themselves
to men in the forms of spirits; and are ready to perform their offices for
them, whether they will or not: by how much the rather will they attend you, if
they are desired? But there do appear also evil spirits, and destroyers, which
is caused by the envy and malice of the devil; and because men do allure and
draw them unto themselves with their sins, as a punishment due to sinners.
Whosover therefore desires familiarly to have a conversation with spirits, let
him keep himself from all enormious sins, and diligently pray to the most High
to be his keeper; and he shall break through all the snares and impediments of
the devil: and let him apply himself to the service of God, and he will give
him an increase in wisdom.

Aphor. 20.
All things are possible to them that believe them, and are willing to receive
them; but to the incredulous and unwilling, all things are unpossible: there is
no greater hinderance than a wavering mind, levity, unconstancy, foolish
babbling, drunkenness, lusts, and disobedience to the word of God. A Magician
therefore ought to be a man that is godly, honest, constant in his words and
deeds, having a firm faith toward God, prudent, and covetous of nothing but
wisdom about divine things.

Aphor. 21.
When you would call any of the Olympic spirits, observe the rising of the Sun
that day, and of what nature the spirit is which you desire; and saying the
Prayer following, your desires shall be perfected.

Omnipotent and eternal God, who have ordained the whole creation for thy
praise and glory, and for the salvation of man, I beseech thee that thou
would send thy Spirit N. N. of the solar order, who shall inform and teach
me those things which I shall ask of him; or, that he may bring me medicine
against the dropsy, etc. Nevertheless not my will be done, but thine, through
Jesus Christ thy only begotten Son our Lord. Amen.

But thou shall not detain the spirit above a full hour unless he be familiarly
adicted to thee. Forasmuch as thou came in peace and quietly, and have
answered unto my petitions; I give thanks unto God, in whose name thou came:
and now thou may depart in peace unto thy orders; and return to me again
when I shall call thee by thy name, or by thy order, or by thy office, which is
granted from the Creator, Amen.

Ecclesiast. Chap. 5. Be not rash with thy mouth, neither let thy heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and thou on earth:
Therefore let thy words be few, for a dream comes through the multitude of
business.

The third Septenary.
Aphor. 22.
We call that a secret, which no man can attain unto by human industry without
revelation; which Science lies obscured, hidden by God in the creature; which
nevertheless he does permit to be revealed by spirits, to a due use of the
thing itself. And these secrets are either concerning things divine, natural or
human. But thou may examine a few, and the most select, which thou will
commend with a many more.

Aphor. 23.
Make the beginning of the nature of the secret, either by a spirit in the form
of a person, or by virtues separate, either in human Organs, or by what manner
soever the same may be effected; and this being known, require of a spirit
which knows that art, that he would briefly declare unto thee whatsoever that
secret is: and pray unto God, that he would inspire thee with his grace,
whereby thou may bring the secret to the end thou desire, for the praise
and glory of God, and the profit of thy neighbor.

Aphor. 24.
The greatest secrets are in number seven.
1. The first is the curing of all diseases in the space of seven days, either
by characters, or by natural things, or by the superior spirits with the divine
assistance. 2. The second is, to be able to prolong life to whatsoever age we
please: I say, a corporal and natural life. 3. The third is, to have the
obedience of the creatures in the elements which are in the forms of personal
spirits; also of Pigmies, Sagani, Nymphs, Dryades, and spirits of the woods. 4.
The fourth is, to be able to discourse with knowledge and understanding of all
things visible and invisible, and to understand the power of every thing, and
to what it belongs. 5. The fifth is, that a man be able to govern himself
according to that end for which God has appointed him. 6. The sixth is, to
know God, and Christ, and his holy spirit: this is the perfection of the
Microcosmus. 7. The seventh, to be regenerate, as Henochius the King of the
inferior world.
These seven secrets a man of an honest and constant mind may learn of the
Spirits, without any offense unto God.

The mean secrets are likewise seven in number.
1. The first is, the transmutation of Metals, which is vulgarly called
Alchymy; which certainly is given to very few, and not but of special grace. 2.
The second is, the curing of diseases with Metals, either by the magnetic
virtues of precious stones, or by the use of the Philosophers stone, and the
like. 3. The third is, to be able to perform Astronomical and Mathematical
miracles, such as are Hydraulick-engines, to administer business by the
influence of Heaven, and things which are of the like sort. 4. The fourth is,
to perform the works of natural Magic, of what sort soever they be. 5. The
fifth is, to know all Physical secrets. 6. The sixth is, to know the foundation
of all Arts which are exercised with the hands and offices of the body. 7. The
seventh is, to know the foundation of all Arts which are exercised by the
angelical nature of man.
The lesser secrets are seven.
1. The first is, to do a thing diligently, and to gather together much money.
2. The second is, to ascend from a mean state to dignities and honors, and to
establish a newer family, which may be illustrious and do great things. 3. The
third is, to excel in military affairs, and happily to atchieve to great
things, and to be an head of the head of Kings and Princes. 4. To be a good
housekeeper both in the Country and City. 5. The fifth is, to be an
industrious and fortunate Merchant. 6. To be a Philosopher, Mathematician, and
Physician, according to Aristotle, Plato, Ptolomy, Euclides, Hippocrates and
Galen, 7. To be a divine according to the Bible and Schools, which all writers
of divinity both old and new have taught.
Aphor. 25.
We have already declared what a secret is, the kinds and species thereof: it
remains now to show how we may attain to know those things which we desire,

The true and only way to all secrets, is to have recourse unto God the Author
of all good; and as Christ teaches, In the first place seek ye the kingdom of
God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

2. Also see that your hearts be not burdened with surfeting, and drunkenness,
and the cares of this life.

3. Also commit your cares unto the Lord, and he will do it.

4. Also I the Lord thy God do teach thee, what things are profitable for thee,
and do guide thee in the way wherein thou walk.

5. And I will give thee understanding, and will teach thee in the way wherein
thou shall go, and I will guide thee with my eye.

6. Also if you which are evil, know how to give good things to your children,
how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give his holy Spirit to them
that ask him?

7. If you do the will of my Father which is in heaven, ye are truly my
disciples, and we will come unto you, and make our abode with you.

If you draw these seven places of Scripture from the letter unto the spirit,
or into action, thou can not err, but shall attain to the desired bound; thou
shall not err from the mark, and God himself by his holy Spirit will teach thee
true and profitable things: he will give also his ministering Angels unto thee,
to be thy companions, helpers, and teachers of all the secrets of the wo^ld,
and he will command every creature to be obedient unto thee, so that cheerfully
rejoicing thou may say with the Apostles, That the Spirits are obedient unto
thee; so that at length th^^ shall be certain of the greatest thing of all,
That thy name is written in heaven.

The fourth Septinary.
Apor. 26.
There is another way which is more common, that secrets may be revealed unto
thee also, (...) thou art unwitting thereof, either by God, (...) Spirits which
have secrets in their power; (...) dreams, or by strong imagination^ and (...)
or by the constellations of a nativity (...) knowledge. After this manner are
made heroic men, such as there are many, and all learned men in the world,
Plato* Aristotle, Hippocrates, Galen, Euclides, Archimedes, Hermes Trismegistus
the father of secrets, with Theophrastus, Paracelsus; all which men had in
themselves all the virtues of secrets. Hitherto also are referred, Homer,
Hesiod, Orpheus, Pytagoras; but these had not such gifts of secrets as the
former. To this are referred, the Nymphs, and sons of Melusina, and Gods of the
Gentiles, Achilles, Aeneas, Hercules: also Cyrus, Alexander the great, Julius
Caesar, Lucullus, Sylla, Marius.

It is a canon, that every one know his own Angel, and that he obey him
according to the word of God; and let him beware of the snares of the evil
Angel, lest he be involved in the calamities of Brute and Marcus Antonius. To
this referr the book of Jovianus Pontanus of Fortune, and his Eutichus.

The third way is, diligent and hard labor, without which no great thing can
be obtained from the divine Deity worthy admiration, as it is said. Tu nihil
invita dices faciesve Minerva. Nothing can thou do or say against Minerva's
will.

We do detest all evil Magicians, who make themselves associates with the
devils, with their unlawful superstitions, and do obtain and effect some things
which God permits to be done, instead of the punishments of the devils. So
also they do other evil acts, the devil being the author, as the Scriptures
testify of Judas. To these are referred all idolaters of old, and of our age,
and abusers of fortune, such as the heathens are full of. And to these do
appertain all Charontick evocation of Spirits, as the work of Saul with the
woman, and Lucanus prophesy of the deceased Soldier, concerning the event of
the Pharsalian war, and the like.

Aphor. 27.
Make a Circle with a center A, which is B. C. D. E. At the East let their be
B. C. a square. At the North, C. D. At the West, D. E. And at the South, E. D.
Divide the several quadrants into seven parts, that there may be in the whole
28 parts: and let them be again divided into four parts, that there may be 112
parts of the Circle: and so many are the true secrets to be revealed. And this
Circle in this manner divided, is the seal of the secrets of the world, which
they draw from the only center A, that is, from the invisible God, unto the
whole creature. The Prince of the Oriental secrets is resident in the middle,
and has three nobles on either side, every one whereof has four under him,
and the Prince himself has four appertaining unto him. And in this manner the
other Princes and Nobles have their quadrants of secrets, with their four
secrets. But the Oriental secret is the study of all wisdom; the West, of
strength; the South, of tillage; the North, of more rigid life. So that the
Eastern secrets are commended to be the best; the Meridian to be mean; and the
East and North to be lesser. The use of this seal of secrets is, that thereby
thou may know whence the Spirits or Angels are produced, which may teach the
secrets delivered unto them from God. But they have names taken from their
offices and powers, according to the gift which God has severally distributed
to every one of them. One has the power of the sword; another, of the
pestilence; and another, of inflicting famine upon the people, as it is
ordained by God. Some are destroyers of Cities, as those two were, who were
sent to overthrow Sodom and Gomorrha, and the places adjacent, examples whereof
the holy Scripture witnesses. Some are the watchmen over Kingdoms; others,
the keepers of private persons; and from thence, any one may easily form their
names in his own language: so that he which will, may ask a physical Angel,
mathematical, or philosophical, or an Angel of civil wisdom, or of supernatural
or natural wisdom, or for any thing whatsoever; and let him ask seriously, with
a great desire of his mind, and with faith and constancy; and without doubt,
that which he asks he shall receive from the Father and God of all spirits.
This faith surmounteth all seals, and brings them into subjection to the will
of man. The Characteristical manner of calling Angles succeeds this faith,
which depends only on divine revelation; But without the said faith
preceding it, it lies in obscurity. Nevertheless, if any one will use them
for a memorial, and no otherwise, and as a thing simply created by God for this
purpose, to which such a spiritual power or essence is bound; he may use them
without any offense unto God. But let him bew^re, lest he fall into idolatry,
and the snares of the devil, who with his cunning sorceries, easily deceives
the unwary. And he is not taken but only by the finger of God, and is appointed
to the service of man; so that they unwillingly s^rve the godly; but not
without temptations and tribulations, because the commandment has it, that he
shall bruise the heel of Christ, the seed of the woman. We are therefore to
exercise our selves about spiritual things, with fear and trembling, and with
great reverence toward God, and to be conversant in spiritual essences with
gravity and justice. And he which meddleth with such things, let him beware of
all levity, pride, covetousness, vanity, envy and ungodliness, unless he will
miserably perish.

Aphor. 28.
Because all good is from God, who is only good, those things which we would
obtain of him, we ought to seek them by prayer in spirit and truth, and a
simple heart. The conclusion of the secret of secrets is, that every one
exercise himself in prayer, for those things which he desires, and he shall not
suffer a repulse. Let not any one despise prayer; for by whom God is prayed
unto, to him he both can and will give. Now let us acknowledge him the Author,
from whom let us humbly seek for our desires. A merciful and good Father.
loves the sons of desires, as Daniel; and sooner hears us, than we are able
to overcome the hardness of our hearts to pray. But he will not that we give
holy things to dogs, nor despise and contemn the gifts of his treasury.
Therefore diligently and often read over and over the first Septinary of
secrets, and guide and direct thy life and all thy thoughts according to those
precepts; and all things shall yield to the desires of thy mind in the Lord, to
whom thou trustest.

The fifth Septenary.
Aphor. 29.
As our study of Magic proceeds in order from general Rules premised, let us
now come to a particular explication thereof. Spirits either are divine
ministers of the word, and of the Church, and the members thereof; or else they
are servient to the Creatures in corporal things, partly for the salvation of
he soul and body, and partly for its destruction. And there is nothing done,
whether good or evil, without a certain and determinate order and government.
He that seeks after a good end, let him follow it; and he that desires an
evil end, pursues that also, and that earnestly, from divine punishment, and
turns away from the divine will. Therefore let every one compare his ends
with the word of God, and as a touchstone that will judge between good and
evil; and let him propose unto himself what is to be avoided, and what is to be
sought after; and that which he constituteth and determines unto himself, let
him follow diligently, not procrastinaing or delaying, until he attain to his
appointed bound.

Aphor. 30.
They which desire riches, glory of this world, Magistracy, honors, dignities,
tyrannies, (and that magically) if they endeavor diligently after them, they
shall obtain them, every one according to his destiny, industry, and magical
sciences, as the history of Melesina witnesses, and the Magicians thereof, who
ordained, that none of the Italian nation should for ever obtain the rule or
Kingdom of Naples; and brought it to pass, that he who reigned in his age, to
be thrown down from his seat: so great is the power of the guardian or tutelar
Angels of the Kingdoms of the world.

Aphor. 31.
Call the Prince of the Kingdom, and lay a command upon him, and command what
thou will, and it shall be done, if that Prince be not again absolved from his
obedience by a succeeding Magician. Therefore the Kingdom of Naples may be
again restored to the Italians, if any Magician shall call him who Instituted
this order, and compel him to recall his deed; he may be compelled also to
restore the secret powers taken from the treasury of Magic; a Book a Gem, a
Magical Horn, which being had, any one may easily, if he will make himself the
Monarch of the world. But Judaeus chused rather to live among Gods until the
judgment, before the transitory good of this world; and his heart is so blind,
that he understands nothing of the God of heaven and earth, or thinks more,
but enjoys the delights of things immortal, to his own eternal destruction.
And he may be easier called up, than the Angel of Plotinus in the Temple of
Isis.

Aphor. 32.
In like manner also, the Romans were taught by the Sibyls books; and by that
means made themselves the Lords of the world, as histories witness. But the
Lords of the Prince of a Kingdom do bestow the lesser Magistracies. He
therefore that desires to have a lesser office, or dignity, let him magically
call a noble of the Prince, and his desires shall be ful^^lled.

Aphor. 33.
But he who coveteth contemptible dignities, as riches alone, let him call the
Prince of riches, or one of his Lords, and he shall obtain his desire in that
kind, whereby he would grow rich, either in earthly goods, or merchandise, or
with the gifts of Princes, or by the study of Metals, or Chemistry: as he
produces any president of growing rich by these means, he shall obtain his
desire therein.

Aphor. 34.
All manner of evocation is of the same kind and form, and this way was
familiar of old time to the Sibyls and chief Priests. This in our time, through
ignorance and impiety, is totally lost; and that which remains, is depraved
with infinite lies and superstitions.

Aphor. 35.
The human understanding is the only effecter of all wonderful works, so that
it may be joined to any Spirit; and being joined, she produces what ^he will.
Therefore we are carefully to proceed in Magic, lest that Sirens and other
^onsters deceive us, which likewise do desire the society of the human soul.
^et the Magician carefully hide himself al^^ys under the wings of the most
High, lest h^ off^r himself to be devoured of the roaring Lion; (...) they who
desire e^rthly things, do very hard^y escape ^he shares of the ^evil.

The sixth Septinary.
Aphor. 36.
Care is to be taken, that experiments be not mixed with experiments; but that
every one be only simple and several. for God and Nature have ordained all
things to a certain and appointed end: so that for examples sake, they who
perform cures with the most simple herbs and roots, do cure most happily of
all. And in this manner, in Constellations, Words and Characters, Stones, and
such like, do lie hid the greatest influences or virtues in deed, which are
instead of a miracle.

So also are words, which being pronounced, do forthwith cause creatures both
visible and invisible to yield obedience, as well creatures of this our world,
as of the watery, airy, subterranean, and Olympic, supercelestial and
infernal, and also the divine.

Therefore simplicity is chiefly to be studied, and the knowledge of such
simples is to be sought for from God; otherwise by no other means or experience
they can be found out.

Aphor. 37.
And let all lots have their place decently: Order, Reason and Means, are the
three things which do easily render all learning as well of the visible as
invisible creatures. This is the course of Order, that some creatures are
creatures of the light; others, of darkness: these are subject to vanity,
because they run headlong into darkness, and inthral themselves in eternal
punishments for their rebellion. Their Kingdom is partly very beautiful in
transitory and corruptable things on the one part, because it cannot consist
without some virtue and great gifts of God; and partly most filthy and horrid
to be spoken of, because it abounds with all wickedness and sin, idolatry,
contempt of God, blasphemies against the true God and his works, worshipping of
devils, disobedience toward Magistrates, seditions, homicides, robberies,
tyranny, adulteries, wicked lusts, rapes, thefts, lies, perjuries, pride, and a
covetous desire of rule; in this mixture consists the Kingdom of darkness:
but the creatures of the light, are filled with eternal truth, and with the
grace of God, and are Lords of the whole world, and do reign over the Lords of
darkness, as the members of Christ. Between these and the other, there is a
continual war, until God shall put an end to their strife, by his last judgment.

Aphor. 38.
Therefore Magic is twofold in its first division; the one is of God, which he
bestows on the creatures of light; the other also is of God, but it is the
gift which he gives unto the creatures of darkness: and this is also twofold:
the one is to a good end, as when the Princes of darkness are compelled to do
good unto the creatures, God enforcing them; the other is for an evil end, when
God permits such to punish evil persons, that magically they are deceived to
destruction; or, also he commands such to be cast out into destruction.

The second division of Magic is, that it brings to pass some works with
visible instruments, through visible things; and it effects other works with
invisible instruments by invisible things; and it acts other things, as well
with mixed means, as instruments and effects.

The third division is, There are some things which are brought to pass by
invocation of God alone: this is partly Prophetical, and Philosophical; and
partly, as it were Theophrastical.

Other things there are, which by reason of the ignorance of the the true God,
are done with the Princes of Spirits, that his desires may be fulfilled; such
is the work of the Mercurialists.

The fourth division is, that some exercise their Magic with the good Angels
instead of God, as it were descended down from the most high God: such was the
Magic of Baalim.

Another Magic is, that which exercises their actions with the chief of the
evil Spirits; such were they who wrought by the the minor Gods of the heathens.

The fifth division is, that some do act with spirits openly, and face to face;
which is given to few: others do work by dreams and other signs; which the
ancients took from their auguries and sacrifices.

The sixth division is, that some work by immortal creatures, others by mortal
creatures, as Nymphs, Satyrs, and suchlike inhabitants of other elements,
Pigmies, etc.

The seventh division is, that the Spirits do serve some of their own accord,
without art; others they will scarce attend being called by art.

Among these species of Magic, that is the most excellent of all, which
depends upon God alone. The second, them whom the Spirits do serve faithfully
of their own accord. The third is, that which is the property of Christians,
which depends on the power of Christ which he has in heaven and earth.

Aphor. 39. There is a sevenfold preparation to learn the Magic Art.
The first is, to meditate day and night how to attain to the true knowledge of
God, both by his word revealed from the foundation of the world; as also by the
seal of the creation, and of the creatures; and by the wonderful effects which
the visible and invisible creatures of God do show forth.

Secondly, it is requisite, that a man descend down into himself, and chiefly
study to know himself; what mortal part he has in him, and what immortal; and
what part is proper to himself, and what diverse.

Thirdly, that he learn by immortal part of himself, to worship, love and fear
the eternal God, and to adore him in spirit and truth; and with his mortal
part, to do those things which he knows to be axceptable to God, and
profitable to his neighbors.

These are the three first and chiefest precepts of Magic, wherein let every
one prepare himself that covets to obtain true Magic or divine wisdom, that he
may be accounted worthy thereof, and one to whom the Angelical creatures
willingly do service, not occultly only, but also manifestly, and as it were
face to face.

Fourthly, whereas every man is to be vigilant to see to what kind of life he
shall be called from his mothers womb, that every one may know whether he be
born to Magic, and to what species thereof, which every one may perceive
easily that reads these things, and by experience may have success therein;
for such things and such gifts are not given but only to the low and humble.

In the fifth place we are to take care, that we understand when the Spirits
are assisting us, in undertaking the greatest business; and he that understands
this, it is manifest, that he shall be made a Magician of the ordination of
God; that is, such a person who uses the ministry of the Spirits to bring
excellent things to pass. Here, as for the most part, they sin, either through
negligence, ignorance, or contempt, or by too much superstition; they offend
also by ingratitude toward God, whereby many famous men have afterward drawn
upon themselves destruction: they sin also by rashness and obstinacy; and also
when they do not use their gifts for that honor of God which is required.

Sixthly, The Magician has need of faith and taciturnity, especially, that he
disclose no secret which the spirit has forbid him, as he commanded Daniel to
seal some things, that is, not to declare them in public; so as it was not
lawful for Paul to speak openly of all things which he saw in a vision. No man
will believe how much is contained in this one precept.

Seventhly, In him that would be a Magician, there is required the greatest
justice, that he undertake nothing that is ungodly, wicked or unjust, nor to
let it once come into his mind; and so he shall be divinely defended from all
evil.

Aphor. 40.
When the Magician determines with himself to do any incorporal thing, either
with any exterior or interior sense, then let him govern himself according to
these seven subsequent laws, to accomplish his Magical end.

The first Law is this, That he know that such a Spirit is ordained unto him
from God; and let him meditate that God is the beholder of all his thoughts and
actions; therefore let him direct all the course of his life according to the
rule prescribed in the word of God.

Secondly, Always pray with David, Take not thy holy Spirit from me; and
strengthen me with thy free Spirit; and lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil: I beseech thee, O heavenly Father, do not give power unto
any lying Spirit, as thou did over Ahab that he perished; but keep me in thy
truth. Amen.

Thirdly, Let him accustom himself to try the Spirits, as the Scripture
admonishes; for grapes cannot be gathered of thorns: let us try all things,
and hold fast that which is good and laudable, that we may avoid every thing
that is repugnant to the divine power.

The fourth is, To be remote and clear from all manner of superstition; for
this is superstition, to attribute divinity in this place to things, wherein
there is nothing at all divine; or to choose or frame to ourselves, to worship
God with some kind of worship which he has not commanded: such are the Magical
ceremonies of Satan, whereby he impudently offers himself to be worshipped as
God.

The fifth thing to be eschewed, is all worship of Idols, which binds any
divine power to idols or other things of their own proper motion, where they
are not placed by the Creator, or by the order of nature: which things many
false and wicked Magicians fe^gn.

Sixthly, All the deceitful imitations and affections of the devil are also to
be avoided, whereby imitateth the power of the Creation, and of the Creator,
that he may produce things with a word, that they may not be what they are.
Which belongs only to the Omnipotency of God, and is not communicable to the
creature.

Seventhly, Let us cleave fast to the gifts of God, and of his holy spirit,
that we may know them, and diligently embrace them with our whole heart, and
all our strength.

Aphor. 41.
We come now to the nine last Aphorisms of this whole Tome; wherein we will,
the divine mercy assisting us, conclude this Magical Isagoge.

Therefore in the first place it is to be observed, what we understand by
Magician in this work.

Him then we count to be a Magician to whom by the grace of God the spiritual
essences do serve to manifest the knowledge of the whole universe, and of the
secrets of nature contained therein whether they are visible or invisible. This
description of a Magician plainly appears, and is universal.

An evil Magician is he, whom by the divine permission the evil spirits do
serve, to his temporal and eternal destruction and perdition, to deceive men,
and draw them away from God; such was Simon Magus, of whom mention is made in
the Acts of the Apostles, and in Clemens; whom St. Peter commanded to be thrown
down upon the earth, whereas he had commanded himself, as it were a God, to be
raised up in the air by the unclean Spirits.

Unto this order are also to be referred all those who are noted in two Tables
of the Law; and are set forth with their evil deeds.

The subdivisions and species of both kinds of Magic, we will note in the
Tomes following. In this place it shall suffice, that we distinguish the
Sciences, which is good, and which is evil: whereas man sought to obtain them
both at first, to his own ruin and destruction, as Moses and Hermes do
demonstrate.

Aphor. 42.
Secondly, we are to know, That a Magician is a person predestined to this
work from his mothers womb; neither let him assume any such great things to
himself, unless he be called divinely by grace hereunto, for some good end; to
a bad end is, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, It must be that offenses
will come; but woe be to that man through whom they come. Therefore as we have
before oftentimes admonished, With fear and trembling we must live in this
world.

Notwithstanding I will not deny, but that some men may with study and
diligence obtain some species of both kinds of Magic, if it may be admitted.
But he shall never aspire to the highest kinds thereof; yet if he covet to
assail them, he shall doubtless offend both in soul and body. Such are they,
who by the operations of false Magicians, are sometimes carried to Mount Horeb,
or in some wilderness or defarts; or they are maimed in some member, or are
simply torn in pieces, or are deprived of their understanding; even as many
such things happen by the use thereof, where men are forsaken by God and
delivered to the power of Satan.

The seventh Septinary.
Aphor. 43.
The Lord lives, and the works of God do live in him by his appointment,
whereby he wills them to be; for he will have them to use their liberty in
obedience to his commands, or disobedience thereof. To the obedient, he has
proposed their rewards; to the disobedient he has propounded their deserved
punishment. Therefore these spirits of their free will, through their pride and
contempt of the Son of God, have revolted from God their Creator, and are
reserved unto the day of wrath; and there is left in them a very great power in
the creation; but notwithstanding it is limited, and they are confined to their
bounds with the bridle of God. Therefore the Magician of God, which signifies a
wise man of God, or one informed of God, is led forth by the hand of God unto
all everlasting good, both mean things, and also the chiefest corporal things.

Great is the power of Satan, by reason of the great sins of men. Therefore
also the Magicians of Satan do perform great things, and greater than any man
would believe: although they do subsist in their own limits, nevertheless they
are above all human apprehension, as to the corporal and transitory things of
this life; which many ancient histories, and daily examples do testify. Both
kinds of Magic are different one from the other in their ends: the one leads
to eternal good, and uses temporal things with thanksgivings; the other is a
little sollicitous about eternal things; but wholly exercises himself about
corporal things, that he may freely enjoy all his lusts and delights in
contempt of God and his anger.

Aphor. 44.
The passage from the common life of man unto a Magical life, is no other but a
sleep, from that l^fe; and an awaking to this life; for those things which
happen to ignorant and unwise men in the^r ^^mmon life, the same things happen
to the willing and knowing Magician.

The Magician understands when the mind does meditate of himself; he
deliberateth, reasons, constituteth and determines what is to be done; he
observes when his cogitations to proceed from a divine separate essence, and
he proves of what order that divine separate essence is.

But the man that is ignorant of Magic, is carried to and fro, as it were in
war with his affections; he knows not when they issue out of his own mind, or
are impressed by the assisting essence and he knows not how to overthrow the
counsels of his enemies by the word of God, or to keep himself from the snares
and deceits of the tempter.

Aphor. 45.
The greatest precept of Magic is, to know what every man ought to receive for
his use from the assisting Spirit, and what to refuse: which he may learn of
the Psalmist, saying, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? in keeping
thy word, O Lord. To keep the word of God, so that the evil one snatch it not
out of the heart* is the chiefest precept of wisdom. It is lawful to admit of,
and exercise other suggestions which are not contrary to the glory of God, and
charity toward our neighbors. not inquiring from what Spirit such suggestions
proceed; but we ought to take heed, that we are not too much busied about
unnecessary things, according to the admonition of Christ; Martha, Martha, thou
art troubled about many things; but Mary has chosen the better part, which
shall not be taken from her. Therefore let us always have regard unto the
saying of Christ, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you. All other things, that is, all things
which are due to the mortal Microcosme, as food, raiment, and the necessary
arts of this life.

Aphor. 46.
There is nothing so much becomes a man as constancy in his words and deeds,
and when the like rejoiceth in his like; there are none more happy than such,
because the holy Angels are conversant about such, and possess the custody of
them: on the contrary, men that are unconstant are lighter than nothing, and
rotten leaves. We choose the 46 Aphorism from these. Even as every one governs
himself, so he allureth unto himself spirits of his nature and condition: but
one very truly advises, that no man should carry himself beyond his own
calling, lest that he draw unto himself some malignant Spirit from the
uttermost parts of the earth, by whom either he shall be infatuated and
deceived, or brought to final destruction. This precept appears most plainly:
for Midas, when he would convert all things into gold, drew up such a Spirit
unto himself, which was able to perform this; and being deceived by him, he had
been brought to death by famine, if his foolishness had not been corrected by
the mercy of God. The same thing happened to a certain woman about Franckford
at Odera, in our times, who would scrape together and devour money of any
thing. Would that men would diligently weigh this precept, and not account the
histories of Midas, and the like for fables; they would be much more diligent
in moderating their thoughts and affections, neither would they be so
perpetually vexed with the spirits of the golden mountains of Utopia. Therefore
we ought most diligently to observe, that such presumption should be cast out
of the mind, by the word, while they are new; neither let them have any habit
in the Idle mind, that is empty of the divine word.

Aphor. 47.
He that is faithfully conversant in his vocation, shall have also the spirits
constant companions of his desires, who will successively supply him in all
things. But if he have any knowledge in Magic, they will not be unwilling to
show him, and familiarly to converse with him, and to serve him in those
several ministeries, unto which they are addicted; the good Spirits in good
things, unto salvation; the evil Spirits in every evil thing, to destruction.
Examples are not wanting in the histories of the whole world; and do daily
happen in the world. Theodosius before the victory of Arbogastus, is an example
of the good; Brute before he was slain, was an example of the evil Spirits,
when he was persecuted of the Spirit of Caesar, and exposed to punishment, that
he slew himself, who had slain his own Father and the Father of his country.

Aphor. 48.
All Magic is a revelation of Spirits of that kind, of which sort the Magic
is; so that the nine Muses are called in Hesiod, the ninth Magic, as he
manifestly testifies of himself in Theogony. In Homer, the genius of Ulysses in
Psigiogagia. Hermes, the Spirits of the more sublime parts of the mind. God
revealed himself to Moses in the bush. The three wise men who came to seek
Christ at Jerusalem, the Angel of the Lord was their leader. The Angels of the
Lord directed Daniel. Therefore there is nothing whereof any one may glory; For
it is not unto him that wills nor unto him that runs; but to whom God will
have mercy, or of some other spiritual fate. From hence springs all Magic,
and thither again it will revolve, whether it be good or evil. In this manner
Tages the first teacher of the Magic of the Romans, gushed out of the earth.
Diana of the Ephesians showed her worship, as if it had been sent from heaven.
So also Apollo. and all the Religon of the Heathens is taken from the same
Spirits; neither are the opinions of the Sadduces, human inventions.

Aphor. 49.
The conclusion therefore of this Isagoge is the same which we have already
spoken of, That even sa their is one God, from whence is all good; and one sin,
to wit, disobedience, against the will of the commanding God, from whence comes
all evil; so that the fear of God is the beginning of all wisdom, and the profit
of all Magic; for obedience to the will of God, follows the fear of God; and
after this, do follow the presence of God and of the holy Spirit, and the
ministry of the holy Angels, and all good things out of the inexhaustable
treasures of God.

But unprofitable and damnable Magic arises from this; where we lose the fear
of God out of our hearts, and suffer sin to reign in us, there the Prince of
this world, the God of this world begineth, and sets up his kingdom instead
of holy things, in such as he finds profitable for his kingdom; there even as
the spider takes the fly which falls into his web, so Satan spreads abroad
his nets, and takes men with the snares of covetousness, until he sucketh him,
and draws him to eternal fire, these he cherishes and advances on high,
that their fall may be the greater.

Courteous Reader apply thy eyes and mind to the sacred and profane Histories,
and to those things which thou see daily to be done in the world, and thou
shall find all things full of Magic, according to a twofold Science, good and
evil; which, that they may be the better discerned, we will put here their
division and subdivision, for the conclusion of these Isagoges; wherein every
one may contemplate, what is to be followed, and which to be avoided, and how
far it is to be labored for by every one, to a competent end of life and
living.

Sciences
Good Theosophy Knowledge of the Word of God, and ruling ones life according to
the word of God. Knowledge of the government of God by Angels, which the
Scripture calls watchmen; and to understand the mystery of Angels.
Anthrosophy given to man Knowledge of natural things. Wisdom in human Things.

Evil Cacosophy Contempt of word of God, and to live after the will of the
devil. Ignorance of the government of God by Angels. To contemn the custody of
the Angels, and that their companions are of the devil. Idolatry. Atheism.
Cacodaemony The knowledge of poisons in nature, and to use them. Wisdom in all
evil arts, to the destruction of mankind, and to use them in contempt of God,
and for the loss and destruction of men.


FINIS.
An INDEX, of all the principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
OF Geomancy. Page. 5 Figures of greater and l^sser Fortune. Page. 7 The four
Matres. Page. 11 The Secondary Matres. Page. 12 Theme of Geomancy. Page. 13 The
Twelve Houses. Page. 16 The first House, Page. ibid. Fortuna Major. Page. 18 --
Minor. Page. 20 Via, in the third Asterism after. Page. ibid. Populus, in the
next Asterism before Page. 21 Acquisitio. Page. 23 Letitia. Page. 25 Puella.
Page. 27 Amissio. Page. 29 Conjunctio. Page. 30 Albus. Page. 32 Puer. Page. 34
Rubeus. Page. 36 Carcer. Page. 38 Tristitia. Page. 40 Magical Ceremonies, the
4th. Asterism after. Page. 40 Celestial Characters. Page. 46 Characters of good
Spirits. Page. 48 Characters of evil Spirits. Page. 49 Shapes familiar to the
Spirits of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. Page. 52 Shapes familiar to the Spirits
of the Sun, and V^nus. Page. 53 The f^miliar forms of the Spirits of Mercury
and the Moon. Page. 54 Observations for the Operator before he begins to work.
from Page 55 to 92 Heptameron or Magical Elements. Page. 93 De^cription of the
Circle. Page. 94 Names o^ the hours and the Angels ruling them. Page. 96 Names
of the Times. Page. 97 Benediction of the Circle. Page. 98 Garment and
Pentacle. Page. 99 Manner of Working. Page. 100 Exorcism of the Spirits of the
Air. Page. 105 A Prayer to be said in the Circle. Page. 108 Visions and
Apparitions. Page. 112 Figure of the Circle. Page. 115 Consideration of the
Lords day. Page. 116 Conjuration of the Lord's day. Page. 117 Consideration of
Monday. Page. 119 Conjuration of Monday. Page. 120 Consideration of Tuesday.
Page. 121 Conjuration of Tuesday. Page. 122 Consideration of Wednesday, 1st.
Ast. after Page. 122 Conjuration of Wednesday, 2d. Aster. after Page. ibid.
Consideration of Thursday. Page. 123 Conjuration of Thu^sday. Page. 125
Consideration of Friday. Page. 126 Conjuration of Friday. Page. 127
Consideration of Saturday. Page. 128 Conjuration of Saturday. Page. 130
Tables of the Angels of the Hours, according to the Course of the Days.
Sunday and Monday, the 1st. Asterism after Page. 130 Tuesday and Wedn^sday,
the 2d. after Page. ibid. Thursday and Friday, the 3d. after Page. ibid.
Saturday, the 4th. Asterism after Page. ibid. Discourse between Castor and
Pollux. Page. 131 Astronomical Geomancy. Page. 185 The Position of the Twelve
Signs. Page. 187 Questions of the First House. Page. 188 -- of the Second
House. Page. 192 -- of the Third House. Page. 193 -- of the Fourth House. Page.
194 -- of the Fifth House. Page. 195 -- of the Sixth House. Page. 199 -- of the
Seventh House. Page. 201 Questions of the Eighth House. Page. 210 -- of the
Ninth House. Page. 211 -- of the Tenth and Eleventh House. Page. 213 -- of the
Twelfth House. Page. 214 Arbatel of Magic, containing 7 Septinaries. Page. 215
The First Septinary. Page. 217 The Second Septin^ry. Page. 220 The Third
Septina^y. Page. 226 The Fourth Septin^^y. Page. 241 The Fifth S^^tin^r^, Page.
246 The Sixth S^pt^n^^^. Page. 250 The Seventh Septinary. Page. 259
FINIS.

