AESOP In Select FABLES.

VIZ. I. At Tunbridge. II. At Bathe. III. At Epsom. IV. At Whitehall. V. From
Tunbridge. VI. At Amsterdam.


WITH A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Bow-Steeple DRAGON, And the Exchange GRASHOPER.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by most Booksellers in London and
Westminster, School.

To the Reader.
RIding, of late, to take a little Are, and crossing by some chance the
Tunbridge-Road, it was my fortune to find a parcel of Papers, which were
doubtless dropped by some unwary Passenger, who had made more Haste than good
Speed; and taking them up, I found they were the following Fables: which, I
imagine, some Young Gentleman of Wit and Leisure, had diverted himself in
composing, whilst he was obliged to drink the Waters. The Entertainment they
gave me and my Friends, made me think of making them Public; and considering
the Nature of them, and that they were very fairly Written, it is not at all
unlikely that the Author had designed them for the Press himself. There are but
two little Reasons to the contrary, which may be also soon answered; First,
That they are too small to make a Book; the Second, That some of the Fables are
too bold, and might expose the Author to some Danger or Displeasure. As to the
first Objection, Whoever would be sure of Pleasing must not be tedious; it
happens but to a few great Books to be read through; and many good Authors have
defeated their own purpose of instructing the World, by frightning the Reader
with Three or four hundred Pages: But besides, the Nature of such a Work as
this, requires that the Reader be never cloyed, but always kept in good Humor
and good Appetite, which a long work could hardly do; and 10 or 12 Morals are
enough to amuse the Mind, and keep it exercised a good while. But, after all, it
may be there were many Fables more intended to follow these and then I have
nothing to say, but that these were all I found, and thought they were too many
to be lost to the Public. To the other Objection, the Author having nothing to
answer; for they are published, if not without his Will, yet without his
Knowledge. But should it be granted that one or two Fables are a little too old
and angry, yet since there is some Foundation for such sort of Mutterings and
Complaints from whence can our Rulers learn these Truths more inoffencively,
than from such little Stories? They will not, perhaps, attend so easily to wise
and good Men as they will to Foxes and Asses; and wise and good Men will not,
it may be, dare to tell those Truths these Beasts deliver, which yet our
Governors should know.

I will not altogether excuse the Exaggeration of Matters in the Twelfth Fable;
for though our Bargain be dear enough; yet I cannot tell what we should have done
without it; and Things, I hope will mend upon our hands, in good time.

AESOP AT TUNBRIDGE.
FAB. I. Fair Warning.
IN Aesop's new-made World of Wit,
Where Beasts could talk, and read, and writ
And say and do as he saw fit:
A certain Fellow thought himself abused,
And represented by an Ass;
And Aesop to the Judge accused
That he defamed was.
Friend, quoth the Judge, how do you know
Whether you are defamed or no?
How can you prove that he must mean
You, rather than another Man?
Sir, quoth the Man, it needs must be,
All Circumstances so agree,
And all the Neighbors say it is Me.
That Is somewhat, quoth the Judge, indeed,
But let this Matter pass;
Since 'twas not Aesop, it is agreed,
But Application made the Ass.
FAB. II. The Cock and Pearl.
A Dunghill Cock was raking in the Ground,
And flirted up a Pearl;
I would, quoth he, thou had been found
By some great Lord or Earl.
My self a single Barly-corn
Would, surely, rather find:
We Creatures that are dull, Earth-born,
Things only useful mind.
Whilst they who are divinely Wise,
And do from Jove proceed,
Thy lovely orient Luster prize.
And for thy Beauty trade.
FAB. III. Of the Horse and Ass.
A Horse and Ass were journying on their way;
The Horse was only harnessed, light, and gay;
The Ass was heavy laden, and lagg'd behind,
And thus, at length, bespake his Friend.
Companion, take some pity on my State,
And case me but of half my Weight.
Half will to you no burden be,
And yet a mighty help to me.
The Horse laughed loud, and shook his Head,
And wantonly curvetting said;
Seignior, we Horses never choose
The Burdens that we can refuse;
And should such Jest upon me pass,
Methinks I should be but an Ass.
The Ass quite spent, and vexed to be denied,
Sunk down beneath his Weight, and died.
The Master coming up, took off the Sack,
And threw it on the Horse's Back:
And having flaid his Ass, he threw
The filthy Hide upon him too.
At which the Horse, thus sadly humbled, cried.
(Letting some Tears for Grief and Anger fall)
Whether 'twere Cruelty, or Pride,
That I so fair Request denied.
I am justly served, and made to carry all.
The Asses of the South and East
Desire the Horses of the North and West,
That, as to Parliament they Trot,
This Fable may not be forgot.
FAB. IV. Of the Judgment of the Ape.
A Wolf complained that he had lost a Lamb,
And strait impleads a Fox of no good Fame,
(Who had a Lamb) that he had stolen the same;
An Ape was to decide the Cause,
Having some knowledge in the Laws.
No Council was by either fee'd,
Each would his Cause, in Person, plead;
And so they did, with mighty heat;
The Judge himself did almost sweat,
To hear the force of their Debate.
How they accuse, and how defend,
How they replied, joined and rejoined.
At length in pity to the Court,
The Judge was fain to cut them short;
And thus determined -- Sirs, in troth,
The Labm belongs to neither of you both.
You, Mr. Wolf, have, doubtless, lost no Lamb;
And, Renard, you as surely stole that same;
But not from him, if Justice might prevail,
You should be both condemned to Fine and Jail.
So two great Lords for an Estate may fight,
Which does to neither appertain, by Right.
FAB. V. Of the Horse and Man.
A Fierce wild Boar, of monstrous size and force,
Did once, in early days, affront a Horse.
Who meditating Vengeance, found his Will
To hurt, much greater than his Power and Skill;
And therefore, chafed and resolute, he ran
To the next House, and thus applied to Man.
I come, Superior Power, whom Jove has made
His Substitute on Earth, to seek thy Aid,
Against a sordid Brute, who injures me,
And likewise speaks contemptibly of Thee.
Jove, whom thou nam'st (said Man) was to thee kind,
And sent thee where thou shall Assistance find.
But this injurious Boar will never meet
Our Arms upon the Plain, but trusts his Feet.
But shall his Feet then his Protection be,
Since Swiftness is the Gift of Jove to thee?
(Mark it, my Friend, this Insolence
Deprives us or our common Sense.)
This doubtless he forgot; so will no we.
You, for Convenience, will a while submit
To be directed with a Bridle and Bit;
And take me on your Back, till we shall see
This your outrageous Enemy.
Up, said the Horse then, let us never rest,
Till we have found this cursed Beast.
Away then to the Woods they flew,
The Horse his Haunts and Coverts knew,
And there his Foe, the dextrous Warrior slew.
This done, they jocund homewards make,
And thus the Horse the Man bespake.
Now, Sir, accept my Thanks for what is past,
I to my wonted Fields, and Friends must: haste.
Hold, quoth the Man, we part non quite so soon:
Your Business is, but Mine is not yet done.
Some Service there remains, due to the Aid.
I lent you, which must be repaid.
This said, he light, and tied him to a Rack;
Where the poor Creature, thus with Sorrow spoke.
Slight was the Injury of the Boar,
And might, perhaps, have been no more:
But now I Am utterly undone,
My Ease and Liberty are gone.
Sweet is Revenge, just in the Taste,
But surely Bitterness at last.
Let other Creatures warning take,
What Bargains they in Passion make.
Let Nations also take good care,
That they with many Hardships bear,
Rather than seek Redress abroad;
Which is but adding to their Load.
FAB. VI. The Bargain.
TWO Welchmen Partners in a Cow
Resolved to sell her dear;
And laid their Heads together, how
To do it at Ludlow Fair.
It was a sultry Summers Day,
When out they drove the Beast;
And having got about half way,
They sat them down to rest.
The Cow, a Creature of no Breeding,
(The place with Grass being stored)
Fed by; and whilst she was a feeding.
Let fall a mighty T --
Roger, quoth Hugh, I tell thee what,
Two Words and I have done;
If thou will fairly Eat up that,
The Cow is all thy own.
It Is done, quoth Roger, it is agreed,
And to it he went a pace;
He seemed so eager set, it is said,
That he forgot his Grace.
He labored with his wooden Spoon,
And up he stopped the stuff;
Till, by the time that half was done,
He felt he had enough.
He felt; but scorning to go back.
Would look as if he wanted more;
And seemed to make a fresh Attack,
With as much Vigor as before,
But stopping short a while, he cried,
How fares it, Neighbor Hugh?
I hope, by this, you're satisfied,
Who Is Master of the Cow.
Ay, ay, quoth Hugh (the Devil choke thee.
For nothing else can do it,)
I Am satisfied that thou have broke me,
Unless thou will give out.
Give out? quoth Roger, that were fine;
Why, what have I been doing?
But yet I tell thee, Friend of mine,
I shall not seek thy Ruin.
My Heart now turns against such Gains;
I know the art piteous Poor.
Eat thou the half that still remains,
And it is as 'twas before.
God's Blessing on thy Heart, quoth Hugh?
That Proffer none can gainsay;
With that, he readily fell to,
And Eat his share of the Tansie.
Well now, quoth Hodge, we are even, no doubt,
And neither side much Winner.
So had we been, quoth Hugh, without
This damned confounded Dinner.
Let this, both to our Wars and Peace
Be honestly applied;
France and the Allies have done no less,
That what these Welch-men did.
FAB. VII. The Frogs Concern.
TWO fierce young Bulls within the Marshes strove,
For the Reward of Empire and of Love;
Which should the fairest Heifer gain,
And which should govern all the Plain.
This, when a Frog hard by perceived,
He sighed, and sob'd, and sorely grieved.
He hung his Head, and made great moan,
As though he had lost his Wife or Son.
At which a neighbor Frog admired,
And kindly of the Cause inquired;
Which when he knew, he said in haste,
And Gossip, is this all at last?
If this and that great Loggerheaded Bull
Will try the Thickness of each others Scull.
Even let them do, as fit they see:
But what is that to You and Me?
If that, replied the other, were all indeed,
We should about this Matter be agreed,
I should not care a single Groat,
To see them tare each others Throat;
But, Friend, the Creatures of such Might,
Can nevet meet in Field to Fight,
But in the Fury of their full Carreer,
Both you and I endangered are;
And all our kindred Tribes below,
In hazard of their Lives must go.
When Bulls rush on, or when retreat for Breath,
They Will tread a hundred of us little Folks to death.
If Kings would fight themselves alone,
Their People still secure,
No mortal Man would part 'em sure,
But let them even fight on.
But when the Suhjects Blood is spilt,
And their Estates are drained,
To justify a Princes Guilt,
Or have his Vanity maintan'd;
When they must pay for all at last,
That Lust, Ambition, or Revenge lay waste;
The poorest Man alive may fear,
And pray against the Miseries of War.
FAB. VIII. Of a Man and his Ass.
A Wretched Churl was traveling with his Ass,
Beneath two Panniers Load oppressed;
And hearing Noise behind, cried to the Beast,
Fly, my Friend Roger, fly apace;
Else I Am undone, and all my Market's naught;
And thou thy self will by the Rogues be caught.
Caught? quoth the Beast, what if I be?
What will it signify to me?
My Panniers are so full, they will hold no more;
I carry Two and cannot carry Four.
'Twixt Rogues and You, I can no difference make,
They are all Rogues to me, who break my Back.
Fly, fly from France, our Statesmen cry,
And Slavery's cursed Yoke;
Whilst with out Ancient Liberty,
Our very Backs are broke.
France is a Thief; but France can do no more,
Than keep the Panniers on me had before.
FAB. IX. Of a Wolf.
A Wolf retiring from Whitehall,
Where he had Statesman been,
Built for himself a Box so small,
That few could be received within.
The Country all admired at this,
And could not at the Reason guess,
Why one so Wealthy and so Great,
Should cage himself at such a rate.
Till at the last a Fox came by,
A Courtier also, sleek and sly.
And thus in earnest and in jest,
His Reason gave amongst the rest.
Perhaps my Lord Commissioner intends.
Here to receive only his honest Friends.
FAB X. The Plaintiff and Defendant.
TWO Travelers an Oyster found,
Dropped from some Pannier down;
Each stoopt, and took it from the Ground,
And claimed it as his own.
Since both cannot have it all, said one,
Even let it parted be.
No, says the other, all or none,
But all belongs to me.
One Sergeant Law, by chance came by,
And he must end the Strife:
Which thing he did immediately,
With his deciding Knife.
He took the Fish, arid cut it up;
(This Cause he opened well)
And fairly did the Oyster sup.
And gave to each a Shell.
And if hereafter Causes rise,
Where People cannot agree,
I know, quoth he, you will be so wise
To refer them still to me.
My Name is Law, my Chambers are
At some of the Inns of Court,
Or Serjeant's, or Westminster,
Where all for Help resort.
Sir, quo, the Men, trust us for that,
We shall not fail to tell,
'Twas Law that did the Oyster ear,
And left to Us the Shell.
FAB. XI. Of the Pigeons.
THE Hawks were once at mortal Jars,
Which came at length to Civil Wars.
The Pigeons they stood looking on,
And, full of Pity, made great moan;
To see how bloodily they fought,
And each the others Ruin sought.
And never would these Creatures cease,
Till they had mediated a Peace.
The Hawks did easily consent,
So Peace was made, and home they went,
Where when they came and wanted Prey,
And how to pass their time away;
They fairly made one general Swoop.
And eat their Mediator up.
Two lucky Pigeons were not there,
And so escaped the Massacre.
Of which the One to the Other said,
How came our Kindred all so mad?
Parting of Hawks! Hawks ever should
Be gorged with one another Blood.
The Wicked have a natural Rage,
(A thirst of Violence to assuage.)
Which if not on the Wicked spent,
Will fall upon the Innocent.
So the poor Hugonots of France.
And Vaudois full as poor.
Prayed loudly, in their Innocence,
That God would Peace restore.
Peace was restored; but Peace to them
No Safety did restore
Their Hawks employed their Power and Time
Much worse than ever before.
And thou, O Church of England Dove,
Dote not upon thy Peace;
That may, than War, more fatal prove,
Both to thy Wealth and Ease.
FAB. XII. The Farmer and the Hare.
A Hare did once into a Garden get
Belonging to a Farm;
Where she began to throw up Earth, and eat,
And do some little Harm.
The Farmer cours'd her round and round,
But got her not away;
Puss took a liking to the Ground,
And there resolved to stay.
Well, quoth the Fellow, in a Fret,
Since you are grown so bold,
I shall some more Assistance get,
And drive you from your Hold.
And strait he sends to a young Squire,
That he, by break of Day,
Would with his Pack of Hounds, repair
And sport himseif that way.
The Squire, as asked, attended came,
With Folks, and Horse, and Hounds,
And in pursuance of the Game,
Rode over all the Grounds.
They leapt the Ditches, broke the Hedges down,
And made most fearful Wast;
They trampled all the Garden round,
And killed poor Puss at last.
At this the Farmer tore his Hair,
And swore most bloodily,
Zounds! What confounded work is here?
And what a Fool am I?
Not fifty Hares, in fifty Days,
Had so much Mischief done,
As this good Squire (whom I must praise
And thank) has wrought in One.
If our Deliverance from the Frights
Of standing Army near,
And silly superstitious Rites,
Worth Forty Millions were;
Then have we wisely broke our Mounds,
That our Defenses were,
Wisely called in our Neighbors Hounds,
And killed the desperate Hare.
But if, with all this vast Expense,
Besides a Sea of Blood
Spilt in the Church and States Defense,
Our Matters stand much as they stood.
Then have we done a World of ill,
With endless Cost and Pains,
A little hurtful Hare to kill;
And well deserve the Brains.
FAB. XIII. Paetry its Cure.
A Youth of pregnant Parts and Wit,
And thirsty after Fame,
Was musing long which way to get
An everlasting Name.
And having heard of Poetry,
And its Immortal Praise;
He thought the way to Fame must lie
By courting of the Bays.
He heard how many a noble Town
Laid Claim to Homer's Birth,
To purchase from it a Renown,
Above the rest of the Earth.
This kindled in his generous Mind
A strong and noble Fire:
He seemed for nothing else designed,
Could nothing else desire.
The Father finding this intent
Ill with his state agreed,
That, living, wanted Six per Cent.
Much more than Fame when dead:
Resolvd to try to cure his Mind,
And change his vain Designs,
And could no fitter Method find,
Than sending him these Lines:
Seven wealthy Towns contend for HOMER Dead,
Through which the Living HOMER begged his Bread.
AESOP AT BATHE.

To the Reader.
AND why not Bathe as good as Tunbridge? and Epsom as either of both? I know
the Virtues of none of our Mineral Waters, yet find that none of 'em all are
sufficient to purge the Heads of the Jacobites: Perhaps you will say, that is no
fault of the Water, but of the Head, having no Brains to work upon. If this be
the case, I cannot help it; could I furnish Brains, I should e're now have made
a better provision for my self. And for the Jacobites want of Brains, that is an
advantage to the Commonwealth, considering the ill use they would put 'em to;
furnished with that Commodity, they would become as mischievous as a Monkey in
a Glass Shop, or a Madman with a Sword in his Hand. Were their wit answerable
to their malice, what an abominable spot of Work would they make? We should
have a fine Kettle of Fish on it I Will warrant you. It Is a wonderful comfort,
good Reader, that cursed Cows have short Horns, otherwise the Government would
be most damnably gored. But really a Jacobite is a most inoffensive Creature,
as harmless as a little. Devil of Two years Old, he will do you no more hurt than
he can; and if he does you any good, he will be extremely sorry for it. He Is very
well read in the noble Histories, Parismus, Reynard the Fox, and Tom Thumb; and
this qualification introduces him inio the worshipful Club at Epsom or
Tunbridge, where they make Plots, and such pretty Plots too as were never
known, hanging being the end of some, and nothing the end of of others; but
their last Plot was the finest thing, a very high Kick, Mr. Reader, a Fable
Plot, where Birds and Beasts speak as much Sense as any Jacobite of 'em all;
and the end of this Plot was Morals. The Jacobites never yet had any Morals in
the beginning, middle, nor end of their Lives; and this hap'ning now is very
extraordinary; I am afraid they are going to wind up their Bottom, and are in
the same condition the Devil was in when he turned Monk. So much for their
Fables; now, Reader go on, and thou wilt find that I write Fables too, only with
this difference, mine are for the Government theirs against it; theirs writ by
a Club, mine by my self: they have bad ever since Perkins and Friend were
hanged to write theirs, I only one Day. Now whether thou likest my Fables or no
I cannot tell, nor do I care; Fables I will write for all thee, or any body
else, and so farewell.

AESOP AT BATHE.
FAB. I. Fair Warning.
A Certain Poet in Lampoon
Abused the Fop, the Beau, Buffoon,
All sorts of great and little Knaves,
Would make Kings Beasts, and People Slaves.
The Court condemned his Lines to Fire,
And with the Offspring would the Sire.
The Poet is in Limbo taken,
And hard it is to save his Bacon.
The Judge does rail, the Courtiers bawl,
And quite alive is grown Whitehall.
The Poet to appease the Storm,
Said he, my Lords, I meant no harm;
Here Is no man named, no scandal mag',
And all the rest not worth a Rag.
Up stood a Lord, looked mighty big,
With Sense scarce half so long as Wig:
And by your leave good Master Poet,
For this wise Board's resolved to know it,
Who it is you mean by Fools and Knaves,
And beastly Kings and abject Slaves?
My Lord, he said none in his Wits.
But thinks, I mean, each Knave it hits.
FAB II. The Fox and the Poultry.
AN aged Fox that ravaged Woods and Plains,
Dread Foe to Cocks and Hens, and Country Swains;
The most Tyrannick Reynard e're was known,
Since Beasts bore rule, and hectored on a Throne.
He neither young nor old, when hungry spared;
Alike the Lambkins and the Hen-roost fared.
But Age retards at last his hasty flight,
He plunders not so much by day, non ravages by night;
Grown weak and Feeble, Wit must now supply
His want of Strength --
No kind good-natured Fox will bring him Food,
He must share the Fortune of the Wood.
One day, as hungry Reynard sat alone,
His empty Guts and Fortune did bemoan;
Said he, I Will try what aged Craft can do.
New Methods find, a new Device pursue:
Hard by a Tarbox lay, some careless Swain
Had left when he kept Sheep upon the Plain.
Projecting Reynard with a diligent care
Bedawbs his Belly, Sides and Back with Tat
Then to a Ditch he goes, where the other day
He did a Hen and all her Chickens slay;
Their Feathers still lay scattered on the Ground,
In which the Fox did wallow, tumble round.
The Feathers sticking still as he did roll,
Made him resemble much a larger Fowl.
And thus transformed into a new disguise,
Unto a neighboring Henroost strait he hies:
And just beneath the Roost his station took,
And looking on the Perch, the Poultry thus bespoke.
Kind gentle Cocks and Hens I am
No more your Foe:
What once I did, is now my shame,
And for the future I the same
No more will do.
I come not as an Enemy
Your Lives to take,
But would with you'in Friendship be,
As you may judge if you but see
The Clothes upon my Back.
Come down, then Friends, a lasting Truce
'Twixt you and I;
I Will neither Cocks nor Hens abuse;
Let us shake hands as Lovers use,
Be Friends until we die.
No, quoth the Cock, you will as much devour
As e're you did, were but it in your power:
Your vain pretense of Kindness we abhor,
And from our Perch we will not downward stir:
You Have changed you Coat, but have not changed your Name;
If that were altered too, your Nature is the same.
In vain do those, who heretofore
Our Liberties betrayed
Unto a wild Despetick Power,
And level all our Fences laid:
In vain they talk of Property,
Or think to be believed;
Their Actions give their Tongue the lie:
Who can be thus deceived;
Their vain pretense of public Good
Is for sinister Ends;
And who the Dee'l, when understood'
Would be such Villains Friends?
They Would feed the Flock, only to steal the Fleece;
When the Fox preaches, then beware the Geese.
FAB. III. The Poor Man and the Devil.
ALab'ring Swain had been at work,
And all his Limbs had tired,
By using Shovel, and the Fork,
To rest at Night retired.
So sweet's the sleep of Country Swains,
Such undisturbed Repose
Accompanies their daily pains,
That Peace about them flows.
No dismal Visions do affright,
No Dreams do e're approach;
Within the Curtains of the Night
They sleep as sound as any Roach,
But now the Swain, in dead of night.
An airy Phantom saw;
A cloven-footed hideous Spright
Him out of Bed did draw:
And led him to an Orchard fair,
Where pointing to a Tree,
Beneath that Stock, he said, is there
A Fund of Gold for thee,
But how, replied the fleepy Swain,
Shall I this Treasure find,
Or know that self-same Tree again
No mark being left behind?
Then quoth the Dee'l, shit near the place,
And thus upon my word,
To morrow when thou view'st the Grass,
Thou't know it by the T --
Thus did the Swain; when he awoke,
And raised his drouzy Head,
He found not as the Devil spoke,
But found a T -- in Bed.
Thus sleeping Jacks do dream and snore,
And please their foolish mind,
In thinking what they were before,
And what henceforth they will find.
But if they would right measures take,
And governed be by Wit;
When once their Reason does awake,
They Will find their Cause beshit.
FAB. IV. The Fox and Grapes.
1.
A Fox espied a bunch of Grapes,
Most beauteous in their Nature;
He grinn'd like any Jackanapes,
And all his Teeth did water.
2.
He strived to reach'em, but in vain;
He leapt and sprang as high
As any Beast of Reynard's strain,
But could not reach them nigh.
3.
He said, it is true, they do look fair,
Yet sour are, I Know;
So let them hang, even as they are,
I Will march, and let 'em grow.
Thus Rebels do by Governments
They cannot undermine;
They let the King, the God alone,
Tho not adore His Shrine.
It Is well their hands are made so short,
That they can reach no higher,
Else we should all be burned for it,
They Would set the World on fire.
FAB. V. The Fool's Concern.
TWO Fools were born, and might live free.
And strugled much for Slavery:
One praised a Goal 'bove an Estate,
And swore no Windows like a Grate.
One liked the Fashions Frenchmen use;
But above all of Wooden Shoes:
Envied the Music of his Betters,
The harmonious noise of jingling Fetters.
Whilst they at one another grumbl'd,
One on a pair of Fetters stumbl'd;
Near which another pair did shine,
Tho not so big, nor half so fine.
The Fools begin a new Contest,
Not which of them should have the best,
But which the biggest Chain should wear.
A Country Fellow being near,
Said he, the thing is quickly done,
Join both the Fetters into one,
And let each Man put in a Foot,
The Devil take it if this don't do it.
If England still is in extremes,
And will not yet be saved,
Call in the French, and late King James,
And your complete enslaved.
FAB. VI. The Farmer and the Badger.
A Badger once did ravage all the Fields
Belonging to a Farm;
Dug up the Earth, and spoiled all that it yields,
And did a wondrous harm.
The Farmer halloo'd on his Dog,
Thinking thereby to quell her;
But being bred to hunt the Hog,
He knew not how to kill her.
The Farmer sends for a young Squire
To come with all his Hounds;
His and their Aid he does require,
To beat her from her Mounds.
The Squire came with all his Hounds,
The Badger did pursue;
He ravaged all the Farmer's Grounds,
And killed the Badger too
Some little mischief true he did,
In beating down the Corn,
And breaking Hedges as he rid:
So small a loss was born.
For, says the Farmer, now my Sheep
May more securely graze;
My Poultry may the Henroost keep,
I Am better than I was.
If our deliverance from our Foes,
And Popish Tyranny,
Ben't worth the Money has been rose,
It Is pity we are free,
It Is certain wisely we have done,
To keep the Nation safe,
In giving part as we have done,
To save the better half.
FAB. VII. The Cure of Malcontents.
A Son unto his Father wrote,
That he would him advise,
How men might be to reason brought,
That never were born wise:
How a tumultuous brood of Fools,
that never are content,
Might once be polished into Tools,
And fit for Government:
How those who for many Years
Have longed for Slavery,
At once might lose their Asses Ears,
And cover to be free.
The Father mildly told the Son,
In the Attempt he would falter:
No Cure upon them could be done,
But by a hempen Halter.
FAB. VIII: The Ravens and Crows.
A Lusty Horse, nor long ago,
Would snuffle, snort and kick,
Curvet and prance, as others do,
Was fallen wondrous sick.
'Twas far from any House or Town,
No Doctor could be got;
So the poor Beast must die alone,
And without burial rot.
He restless lay upon the Ground,
And turned from side to side:
His Groans the neighboring Woods resound,
Where Birds of prey reside.
No sooner did they hear the noise,
But from the Woods they flew,
Whole Troops of Ravens, and the Crows,
And round the Horse they drew.
At length a Raven of renown,
Strutting like Prince of Conde;
As black as any Parson's Gown
He wears upon a Sunday:
Gets on a Molehill, looked around,
And thus bespoke the Crows;
We Are ancient Friends, and without ground
We will not now be Foes.
You know, by Contract, we are to have
The Carrion of this Place;
And you the other side did crave,
Such our Agreement was,
No, quoth the Crows, this very place,
To us is free as Air;
And how dare you with such a face,
Oppose such numbers here?
Ay, quoth the Raven, then we'll try
To whom it does belong;
But first let the poor Creature die,
Then see who is right or wrong.
Both sides resolved to fight so out,
Each does advantage take;
They march, and march and march about,
And each one whets his Beak.
They view the Ground, and mark the Came
And the Approaches form;
Contrive the easiest methods from;
They may the carcass storm.
Mean time the Horse lies dangerouS ill,
Yet shites, and farts, and groans;
Good signs, they say, in Physic skill,
And stretching of the Bones.
The Horse (tho helpless) by degrees,
Began to gather strength;
At first he rises on his Knees,
And on his Legs at length.
The Birds of prey were all surpised,
And all away they flew;
The Battel's thus on both sides lost,
And all the Carrion too.
Thus some, whom neither Peace nor Ware
Can satisfy, still hope for Jars;
That by great Princes falling out,
They may their Business bring about.
And Wonders must be done and said,
When once the King of Spain is dead;
But he, like Horse, prevents the fight,
And is resolved to live in spite.
FAB. III. The Parson and Whig.
A Jolly Whit upon the Road,
As People say, met Man of God;
A First-rate Clergyman was he.
And of Bell-swagger's Family:
Ar School the lash did oft-endure,
And was dragged uo by Dr. Cluer.
So bravely mounted was the Parson,
That better Steed no Man laid Arse on:
Stopping the Whig, he bid him stand,
And give the Church the better hand:
Thou look like some dissenting Prig.
Good morrow, Parson, quoth the Whig.
Pray, why that, Sir, upon my Coat?
Quoth Whig, I value not a Groat
Thy Coat, nor Church, nor Common-pray'r
Nor all Ash Wednesday Curses there:
Yet to the Church I can be civil;
But stopped by Priest, it is the Devil.
Quoth Parson, if thou wilt hold a Parley,
At yonder Town's good Juice of Barley
Thy looks, I Am sure, will never fail.
For by thy Nose thou love good Ale;
And there in a reformed Cup,
This Difference we will make up.
With all my heart, said Whig, I Will do it;
And so away they both did trot.
As Parson near the Road did look,
He found a Common Prayer Book.
Half cried the Whig; no, said the Priest,
This does belong to me at least:
Half, had been thine, had it been Rivo^,
But this is mine, Jure Divino.
The Whig insisted on his half:
The Book was good, and bound in Calf,
Would Money fetch; rather than fail,
He Would have it melted down in Ale,
Quoth Priest, that is profanely spoke;
Nothing's ill said, that is not ill took:
I know not, Sir, but it may be
Against Act of Uniformity,
Which I remember, does declare,
That we should read, not drink the Prayer.
This Book was bought, I must confess,
With Mammon of Unrigteousness.
And if we sell it on this score,
It is but what it was before.
'Twill make us drink, and sing and roar.
No longer now with difference clogged,
The Priest and Whig together jogged:
To Alehouse come, they both alight,
And ere they entered went to shite;
For Guts o'reloaded sometimes burst,
The way to fill's to empty first;
They past the Glass in Bumpers big,
And ^ere's to ye Priest, and bere's tie Whigh.
The Hostess scarce could get a sup,
So fast they drank the Liquor up,
She Is forced to tap another Tub,
The Passive Ale did often venture,
At non-resisting Mouth, did enter;
So quick it past about, that all
The ready Rino's drowned in Ale;
No Juice remained within the Glass,
And eke the Pot full empty was.
Now good reserve of Prayer Book,
From underneath the Gown was took:
To work again in Liquor stout,
They Orthodoxly drink about:
At every tiff is gulpt at once
A learned Collect or Response.
Two Glasses in a hand they seize on,
Which go for first and second Lesson.
The Ale does in right Channel go,
Modo Ecclesiastico.
All Is fairly done, without a Trick,
No man is here a Schismatic.
The drinking Orders all observe;
And not one bit from Canon swerve;
And drinking Articles would sign,
Tho they were more than Thirty nine.
Now, said the Priest, the Book is gone,
I Have a good mind to pawn my Gown.
Ay, do, said Whig, thy Cassock too,
And Cirsingle; if that will not do,
Rather than leave thee in the lurch.
I Will help thee pawn the very Church,
And sell the Bells, Communion Plate,
There is no Sacrilege in that.
Says Hostess now the Tub's on stoop;
If it will afford another Cup,
It shall be mine, since you this day
Have taught me how to brew and pray.
Thus two good Friends were forced to part,
Like Thief from Priest in Tyburn Car^:
'Twas want of Liquor, not of Will,
Or else they had been at it still.
How much Religion is abused;
How little Honesty is used,
By those who do profess the same;
How much the Sacred Name
Is every where profaned,
How deeply stained,
The Parson 's Gown,
A Friend to none,
But to himself alone.
Lord I how we heard'em cant, and pray, and whine,
And preach up Monarchy of Right Divine.
Why did they so?
It was their Interest so to do.
When Right divine new Clergymen did seek,
Seized on the Church, and made the Tithe-pig squeek;
Passive Obedience now was preached no more;
Instead of which the Churches Canons roar,
Reached with Complaints the Belgic Shore,
The Norther Lion over the Seas did pass,
And scared away the Church's Ass;
The Church, by whose advice he ruined was.
They Will make, and govern Kings, but none obey,
But where their Interest leads the way
Interest, for which they would pawn their very God,
Their Church, their Principles: it is very odd,
A King should trust men will be bribed with Gold,
And not be heedful when another's sold.
AESOP AT EPSOM.

To his Excellency Charles Montague, Esquire; one of the Lord's Justices for the
Administration of public Affairs during the King's Absence, first Lord
Commissioner of the Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
Though a Present of Fables to Your Excellency the immitable Author of the
Country-Mouse, and City-Mouse, may at this time seem improper: Yet a Present of
Loyalty to the same Government, which You have been so studious and successful
in the Preservation of, cannot but carry its Acceptance with it. That Liberty
which Your Excellency gave the World so sweet a taste of in Your most
incomparable Fable, and which afterward You was so instrumental in continuing
to us, is in part the Subject of these. And as Aesop at Tunbridge, by feigned
and surreptitious Fables, seems to bewail the change of the late Government, so
Aesop at Epsom with real and genuine resoyceth at the Establishment of this.
Sir, Your Execellency's great Example has such a prevailing influence, as to
make the meanest Subject solicitous for the Public Good, and to see that
Revolution become the subject of Satyr, which has given such opportunities for
Henegyrick, (and whose Royal Author has had such immortal Commendations from
Your Excellency's the best of Pens) could not but add very much to my
Resentments in the following Papers. But, Sir, to give no further interruption
to a Gentleman whose very Leisure is employed for the public Safety, I shall
not encroach upon Your time any further than to beg Your Acceptance of this
poor Entertainment, which, shall make me add to my Endeavors of appoving my
self in a more substantial way,

Sir, Your Excellency's most Obedient Servant.

AESOP AT EPSOM.
FAB. I. Of the Fox and the Stork.
A Subtle Fox, well practiced in design,
Invites a Stork, that He with him will dine
A match, says Stork, Sir Reynard it is agreed,
And home he goes, and much resolved to feed.
Nothing will serve, but that He Is sure the Beast.
Will soon repent He Would brought him for a Guest,
His Stomach was so empty, and so great,
Zounds! He himself should finish all the treat.
Fox smiles, and in his Cubs the Dinner bring,
Soop, and Pottage, a Banquet for a King.
Fall on, my guest, said Fox, and down he pour's
The liquid Feast which He himself devours.
Dear Stork, He cries, 'Slife. Child, why do not Peck,
The Stork he stretches, and extends his neck.
But nothing can get up within his Bill,
Whilst Reynard licks it up, and Eats his fill;
At length perceiving how he had been served,
He homeward Stalks, or he must else have Strav'd,
But Mindful of the Fox his empty Treat,
Sends to Invite Him to a dish of Meat.
The Fox not thinking Storks had had the sense
To mind affronts, or take the least offense.
Took him at's word, and said, Sir Stork content,
I Will see what House you keep, and Home wi'him went.
The Table Spread, and every thing complete,
That might put Fox in mind He was to eat:
Two Servant Storks upon the Table placed
A Narrow long-neck'd Glass which held the Feast;
Lampreys and Eels within it might be seen,
The Glass was so transparant and so clean,
When Stork, Sans ceremony, Sir, begin,
You see your Entertainment here, within,
I Will show the way; and in his Beak he thrust
Whilst Reynard tried in vain, add trying cursed.
Lord, said the Stork, are you a Beast of thought,
And yet no Broth, or Soop, or Pottage brought?
I Would even fetch some, and fill the Vessel up,
You then, although You could not eat, might sup.
MORAL
The Application soon is made
By any that is a Reader,
One in his turn the Fool has played,
And whose turn's now consider:
The Tunbridge Aesop first has given
The Town a Dish of Meat,
And faith, to make the Tallies ever,
Epsom should also treat.
FAB. II. Of the Lamb and the Wolf.
A Wolf as he looked our for prey,
And went in search of food,
Perceived a Lamb and Goat in's way
Come jogging on the Road.
Mutton he loved, but did not dare
Fasten on that he spied,
Whilst Hircus with his Horns was there,
And thus to part them tried.
Home from this Beast for shame, Sir Lamb.
It grieves my very Soul,
To see you leave a Noble Dam,
And walk with Goat so foul.
A Goat! fie on it, the very worst
Of all the Brutal Race;
A stinking Animal and cursed,
The Woods, and Fields disgrace.
Hark you, said Lamb; I plainly know
Whom you your Tricks would put on,
And what you mean by gaping so,
Poor Wolf! he wants some Mutton.
I'thank you for the Advice you lend,
And wonder not you should
Like me much better than my Friend,
Since I am much better Food.
MORAL.
So when the Wars broke out at first,
And France prepared for fighting,
Lord! how her Mighty Monarch cursed
The Dutch and us uniting!
Per Dieu, said he, the British Race
Of Heroes once the Chief
Join with a Land so cursed Base,
And ask of them relief!
But had his Aim succcessful been
And us from them removed,
We then the sad Effects had seen.
And Fables moral proved.
FAB. III. Of the Sun and the North Wind.
BEtwixt the Sun and Wind, arose
A Quarrer, like to end in Blows,
If both of 'em had not rather chose
A fitting Mediator.
It seems that this Contention grew
From which was Strongest of Two.
And down their Wagers strait they threw
Thus to decide the matter.
By chance a Traveller came by,
And both with one united cry,
On him let us our Forces try
To finish the Dispute:
He that the first a Way could find
To make him leave his Cloak behind
Should win; it is dine, agreed, said Wind.
Said Sun, content, I Will do it.
When Boreas summoned every Blast,
And at him all his fury cast,
But flinging round his Cloak, he passed
And forwarded his Journey:
Sol smiles, and gathering all his Rays,
Sure of the Conquest and the Bays,
I Will make you quit your Cloack, he says,
Or else, by God, I Will burn ye.
Straight Passenger began to swear,
Enraged and troubled with the Heat,
And in a most confounded Pett,
At last flung off the Garment
Boreas, said Sol, See yonder Cloak,
The Wagers won and thou art broke,
And up in haste the Stakes he took,
And that was all the harm in it.
MORAL.
Thus blustering Kings like Boreas often fail;
Whilst others like the Conquering Sun prevail;
Numbers may fright and dismal Fancies raise,
But what can Numbers in improper Ways?
Whilst at Campeign extended Armies shine,
And France her infant Printes fight, and dine;
Whilst Boufflers treats the Ladies with a Song,
And Duke de Berry learns the Spanish Tongue,
A Prince at Cell, who Seemingly appears
Thoughtless of Arms since now released from Wars:
Amid'st his Sports, shall-fit Expedients find
To cheat the dangers by their Arms designed:
And one poor Hunting Matcl. perhaps may break:
The Measures which their famed Encampments take.
FAB. IV. Of the Trumpeter.
A Trumpeter in time of War
Was in the Battle taken;
And Dead almost with very fear.
Tried thus to save his Bacon.
Dear Sirs, if guiltless Actions save,
Or Innocence secures,
From you the grant of Life I crave,
Who never, endangered yours.
Nor Sword, nor Musket have I born,
Or any other Weapon worn
Than what is in my hand:
This Trumpet never gave a wound,
Or uttered any thing but empty sound,
And that too by command.
Off with the Dog, and fetch the Rope,
Said Enemy, and tie him up,
A Villain! never spare him.
Zounds! That same Instrument is worse
Than Sword, and Gun, and every Curse;
And we have most cause to fear him,
Since from his blasts, those wounds at first proceed,
By which so many Thousands of us bleed.
MORAL.
So cries an Author who has spent his spleen,
What harm can silly Fables mean?
Or how can Faction takes its birth,
From a few Tales, and unprovoking Mirth?
They may perhaps delight,
But rest assured they will never Fight,
The Beast I-treat of cannot Plot
Or traffic in Sedition: what of that?
When if he railed like O -- ts, like S -- Fought,
Cursed like a Man at Sam's, like M -- thought,
All joined together never was able
To show the malice of one single Fable.
FAB. V. Of the Apple and the Horse-Turd.
AN Apple falling from a Tree
Which near a River stood,
With Horse Turd in his Company
Was sailing down the Flood.
When Turd ambitious to discourse
A thing so much above it,
Would into Conversation force
As down the River drove it,
Lord! Madam, what a pleasant Stream
Is this in which we ride?
Sister! How we Two Apples swim?
The foul Sir-rev'rence cried.
MORAL.
A Threadbare Wriner who perchance
Has not one Farthing paid,
To carry on the War with France,
Toward the Royal Aid.
Cries, Damn this cursed confounded Peace,
It Forty Millions cost,
And we could not procure our Ease
Till All our Wealth was lost.
FAB. VI. of the Covetous and the Envious Man.
TWO men to Jove their Prayers made
For some kind Earthly Blessing,
One never satisfied with what he had,
Though rich beyond Expressing.
The other was envious, nor cared
What mischief e're befell Him,
So that his Comrade was not spared,
And what should kill him, kill him:
Jove Teased with their Petitions, sent
His Son Appolo to 'em,
To try to give'em both content,
And know what service. He could do'em.
Ask, said Appollo, Friends what 'ere
You want th'out further trouble,
And what is asked from either prayer
The Other shall have it double.
With that, the parsimonious Cuff
For Wealth did loudly call,
Which downward fell but never enough
For his desires could fall.
Still as he asked, the Richess came,
And doubled on the other,
Though still his prayer was the same
Which still enriched his Brother,
Next in his turn, Sir Envy kneeled.
And with a bale-ful Eye,
Dear Phoebus to my prayer yield
And barken to my cry,
Now oh! just now thou Power divine
This favor let me find,
Put out this single Eye of mine,
That his may both be blind.
FAB. VII. Of the Beaver, and the Hunters.
A Beaver being close pursued
By Hunters, Horse, and Hounds;
And neither safe, within the Wood,
Nor in the open Grounds,
I know full well (and stepped aside)
The reasons why I Am chased, he cried.
And much lament the, Cause.
My Stones are what they want, and I
Must either part with them, or die,
And glut the Beagles jaws:
With that, though he was loath to part
With things as precious as his heart,
Or with a quiet mind
Surrender up the pride of all his kind,
Yet life was sweet, and utt'ring forth some groans,
Off went his dear beloved Stones,
Which in the Hunters way
The Melancholy Beast did lay.
Call in the Hounds, the fierce Pursuers said,
We Have caught the Game, and have our Markets made;
And taking up the Prize they went
All homeward with content.
Whlist the Enervate Beast returned,
To graze in quiet on the plain:
And never after this Misfortune mourned,
Or fled from Hunters or from Hounds again.
MORAL.
If a certain great Prince had but done as this Beast,
And instead of each Stone gotten rid of each Priest,
He had still been King, whom his People had blessed.
But since He bad rather keep in with Ned Petre
And likes Friars, and Monks for his company fitter:
Let him now keep his Stones, for there is none but has beater.
FAB. VIII. The Lion and the Fox.
A Fox, a Lion's Chaplain, when
The Beasts began to cry,
And gather round their Monarch's Den
For Ancient Liberty;
Said, may it please my Sovereign, Lord,
Your subjects are your Slaves,
And if they dare to speak a word,
Your Throat may be their Graves.
With that the Monarch Wisely smiled
At good Sir Crapes advice,
And said, go fetch your youngest Child,
My Stomach's something nice.
Sir, said the Fox, Your in the wrong,
I must your pardon crave,
Parsons alone to Jove belong,
And no Controulers have.
MORAL.
So in late times the Pulpits rung,
With Passive Non-Resistance,
And all the burden of their Song
Was Duty and Asstance:
Life, Wealth, and every thing was due
To Him, who over us ruled,
And Whilst that Cant they would pursue,
We'd all of's Even been fooled,
Had not their Church's Lands been thought
Belonging to the Throne:
And made 'em change their former note,
And what they said disown.
FAB. IX. Of Jupiter and the Monkey.
JOVE was desirous once to know
What Animal did bear
The handsom'st Offspring, or could show
A little one most fair.
He summoned every living thing
Unto a certain place,
To come before him, and to bring
A Pattern of it is Race.
Forth with each Female creature came,
Which Air, or Sea, or Earth,
Could for its proper Tenant claim,
And each produced a Sample of it is Birth.
When as the Powerful God was just
Deciding the dispute,
Up to the Throne a Monkey thrust,
A most deformed Brute!
And with, her Young one in her hand
(Whilst All the Company smiled)
Vouchsafe great Jove to understand
Mine is the finest Child:
Please you my Liege to view this face,
How regular and sweet!
How well proportioned every grace!
And how exact the features meet?
Surely my Lord can never refuse
My Child and Me the Bays.
When Jove for laughing could not choose:
And all of 'em went their ways.
MORAL.
So Young Aesop from Bath, or Old Aesop from Whitehall,
May amuse Town, and Country with a fab'lous recital,
And in love with themselves think their own things the best,
Whilst the Clergy, they laugh at, escape the dull Jest:
And all the success of each Fable and Story
Is to lay down their own Faults like the Monkey before ye.
FAB. X. Of the Hares and the Frogs.
A Time was fixed when Hares should meet,
And for dispatch of Business fit,
Without the least delays,
To remedy their present State,
Or else anticipate their Fate,
By proper means and ways.
Strait every Puss the Form forsook,
Which He or She for shelter took,
And hastened to the place
Which by appointment was designed,
To heal the mischiefs of their Kind
Or make extinct their Race.
The SPEAKER chose, and Members placed,
The House resolved it self at last
Into a grand Commitee:
But what a pother, Lord! they kept?
One sighed, another trembling wept,
'Twould move us all to pity.
At length a Chief of high Rnown,
And Ranger of some mighty Down,
First asked the Hous's leave:
And then stood up, whilst all the rest
With sorrows, and with grief oppressed
Could nothing else but grieve.
Brethren, said he, a wretched Race,
Whom Men and Dogs, and Eagles chase,
The Sport of the Creation,
In vain we are thinking to redress
Our Grievances, or make 'em less,
While in this living Station.
Hounds will for ever be pursuing,
And Hunters meditating ruin,
Whilst we must still be flying;
We'd better (Friends) if I might give
Advice, this moment cease to live,
Then always be a dying.
Though Death is not a thing which fuits
With constitutions of such Bruits
As Hares are of, it is certain:
Yet they resolved, with much ado,
To bid the Groves, and Hills adieu,
Tho not 'thout tears at parting.
By chance there was a River near
The place, where these Assemblers were
Debating how to die,
Wherefore to put off all delays,
They fixed in that to end their days
The sooner, 'cause so nigh,
But, Lord! how Puss would backward shrink,
When almost at the very brink,
And sigh she was so near!
Then tell her Beads, and wish some Saint
Would help her from this damned restraint,
And ease her of her fear!
At last the leading Hares were come,
Prepared and ready for their Doom,
And at the Flood arriving,
A Frog or two into it skipp'd,
Which made 'em look before they leaped,
And think of longer living.
Hark ye (said Puss who bore the sway)
Fair and softly wins the Day,
There Is no such need to die yet;
I Will Home again, and e'em submit
To what my Destiny thinks fit,
And keep my Form in quiet.
Troth Sirs, the Fate of Frogs is worse
Than ours, which we at present curse,
And are so much afraid at;
For me who fear most things beside
Are feared by them, and that is my Pride
Since these are us dismayed at.
Sirs, it would be a pretty: Jest,
If since our life is not the best
It should be made our loathing.
Faith though I cannot be the Chief,
I have this comfort and relief,
I Am better far than nothing.
MORAL.
Hence let the Male contented mind
Instructive Lessons draw;
Not be uneasy, when confined
Within the bounds of Law.
What though his Purse is something drein'd,
For Peace he ne'ere desired,
And has in pare that Prince maintained
Who might have all required?
A Neighboring King's best Subjects paid
Thrice more than William's worst,
And without Money Laws obeyed,
When his with Money cursed.
If therefore he like Hare should grieve
Since small respect we show Him,
Like Hare in Fable let him live
Since he has Frogs below him.
OLD AESOP At WHITEHAL, etc.

The PREFACE.
IT is now the Mode, it seems, for Brutes to turn Politicians; and if we may
give Credit to some late Authors, their Houses of Parliament assembled at
Tunbridge and Bathe. The Lion who by Prescription has been owned for King,
Nemine Gontradicente, pleads it as his Privilege to summon them to his
Banqueting House at Whitehal; whence all the Three sttaes may by a short and
easy Walk arrive together at Westminster, and there consult for the Common
Good. He carries a bundle of Arrows in his Hand, with this Motto over them,
Concordia resparvae crescunt, discordia maxima dilabuntur.

If there be no Mysteries in Christianity, it seems there are some in Policy;
when Jacobites and Commonwealths men, who have mutually branded one another
with the harshest Names that Malice and Rancour could invent, should now unite
in a Design against the present Government, as a common Center. If it be so,
(which Old AESOP is very unwilling to believe,) he has given Commission to his
Beasts, in the following Fables, to declare the first to be (what they always
were) Knaves, and the latter (which he is sure they will be loath to be
accounted) Fools. If the Reflections seem too Satirical, they may consider that
it comes from Beasts like themselves. And so Aesop bids them Farewell, but to
take Care not to divide the prey till it is caught.

Whitehal, September. 22. School.
THE SUMMONS.
THE, Jackall did the King of Brutes inform
That some designed to mine, and some to storm
His Royal Fort. At which, with generous Rage
The Kingly Beast, their Malice to assuage,
Sends forth his Summons, That they should appear
At Brutes Whitehal, from Quarters far and near,
There to consult; and if they found that any
Better deserved the Sway among the Many
Than Leo did, he would the Crown forswear
And never henceforth any Scepter bear:
But at the same time gives't as his Advice,
It Is better to fill Bag one time than thrice,
Or Three times three. It Is better under one,
Than many Masters, to lament and groan.
Old AESOP AT WHITEHAL, GIVING Advice to the Young AESOPS AT Tunbridge and
Bathe.
FAB. I. The Tortoise and Frogs.
A Heavy Tortoise seeing Frogs
Nimbly leap in Pools and Boggs,
Blessed their limber Hams, that they
Could so bravely frisk and play;
Cursed the hard and heavy Pack
That Nature laid on his own Back:
He could neither Skip nor Dance,
Nor caper A-la-mode de France.
But as soon's he saw the Stork
Could the Frogs from Puddle fork,
And that for all their nimble Heels
They became a Prey to Eels;
Then he quickly changed his Note,
And for's own Coat of Mail gave Vote;
Thanked his Stars that he was free
From Storks and suchlike Tyranny,
By being armed Cap-a-pee.
MORAL.
Did but see through Gallick Sway
How feeble Subjects are a Prey
To the Sovereign's arbitrary Will,
Who can at's Pleasure save and kill;
Did we feel the Effects of's Sword and Flames
Saw Virgins ravished, heard the Cries of Dames;
When Soldiers sack their Towns, destroy their Men,
Cut off their Children, scarce spare One in Ten;
Could we but see Rome's Priests converting France
With Arguments from Gun, Sword, Spear, and Lance;
And then reflect that this had been our Doom,
Could James the Just have paid his Von's to Rome,
We would not grumble at the Tax we pay
To keep such Monstrous Tyranny away,
But should, that William might live ever pray.
FAB. II. Of the other Members conspiring against the Belly.
ONce on a Time the Hands and Feet,
With Back, and Loins, and Bum did meet
In a Rebellious Consult, where
The B -- ch as Speaker took the Chair,
And with an uncouth-hollow sound
The following Treason did propound:
Brethren, quoth he, you know the Head
Makes us toil and sweat for Bread,
Yet nothing to our Lot does fall,
But idle Gut consumes it all.
My Friends, if you will be ruled by me,
We will shake off this Tyranny.
If Head and Belly will have Meat,
Let them toil for it with Hands and Feet.
Agreed, says Back, I vow and swear,
For them I Will no more Burdens bear.
Content, says Bum, if it be your Will;
Fot I love dearly to sit still.
Says Feet, I Will no more Errands run.
The Loins say, Brethren, it is done.
The Hands vow they would work no more,
And wish they would been as wise before.
The Members thus in Holy League
Did bless themselves for this Intrigue.
But suddenly the Hands grew weak,
The Feet grew numb, the Loins did shake,
The Back was feeble, the Bum grew poor:
And Breech the Chairman loud did roar,
Pray cram the Gut, and we'll rebel no more.
MORAL.
It Is hoped this will not be forgot
By those who formed the Tunbridge Plot;
Old Aesop was a Man of Sense,
Such Doctrines never did dispense,
That People should refuse Support,
And pine themselves to starve the Court.
FAB. III. The Hermit and the Soldier.
A Pious Hermit seeing a Man of Blood
Come strutting through his solitary Wood,
Accosts him thus: Dear Brother, why do you
In Human Blood and Gore your Hands imbrue?
Leave off that Trade, be 'Partner in my Cell,
Read, pray, and think, and save your Soul from Hell.
The Soldier looked stern,
But at last did reply,
I am wiling to learn,
And G -- zds I Will comply.
We Men of the Sword
Are not worth a T -- d,
But are basely kept under,
Nor have Pay, nor have Plunder.
A plague on the Peace
Which makes our Gain cease:
And seeing it is so,
With the Hermit I Will go,
Till the Drums beat again, and the Trumpets do blow.
MORAL.
Just so the Jacks their desperate Cause forsake,
And to the side of the Commonwealth betake;
Since their own King has played the Foot, and's gone,
Ours to molest they turn up every Stone.
The Church, the Church, is ready to fire,
Is all their Outcry: Brethren, save the Quire,
Take care a'th' Steeple, Chancel, Surplice, Crape,
The Church of England Dov's in danger of a Rape,
No thanks to them she did from Father Peter's escape:
Yet when their Prince, and's Priests shall venture over,
Theyll swear she is no Chaste nor Turtle Lover,
But did to others her fair Breasts discover;
Then they will be for Commonwealth no more,
But screw Prerogative high as before,
Huff like N -- S -- r, crackle like B -- S -- were.
FAB. IV. The Ass in the Lion's Skin.
A Certain Ass being struck with Shame
Of's native Slavery, and his Name,
Made shift to steal a Lion's Skin,
And boldly stalked about therein;
Shook off his innate sluggish Pace,
And did assume an awful Face,
As if h' had been of Lybian Bree'd,
And from the Bastinado freed.
But's cursed Ears, and Cathedral Note,
To his great Grief, revealed the Plot;
For when he did attempt to roar,
He could not do it, but brayed just as before.
MORAL.
Thus Non-resistance thinks't no Sin
To put on a true Patriot's Skin,
And plead for Liberty and Laws,
And easy Tax. But mark, the Cause;
He would the Government disable,
And lose the Ship for want, of Cable,
And by this means it comes to pass,
We know the old Passive Obedience Ass.
FAB. V. The Wolf and Hedgehog.
A Greedy Wolf that ravaged Hills and Plains,
Devoured the Flocks, and beggared all the Swains,
Triumphed and skipp'd. But Plenty, causing waste,
At length he knew not where, to break his Fast;
But in his Range meets with a Porcupine,
A curious Bit to make, Lycaon dine:
His eager Chaps would fain been at the Prey,
But the armed Hedgehog held him at a Bay.
Hungry Lycaon seeing this, cries out,
My little Brother, how comes this about?
Have you forgot the late concluded Peace,
That you do still your Armor wear,
As if there were new Cause of Fear?
Lay by your Darts, and let War cease,
You cannot think that I will break the League.
And Brother-Brutes surprise by false Intrigue.
Nay, Hay, says Hedgehog, Brother, I don't say
That you will me or other Brutes betray;
But ne'ertheless it does appear,
While you have Tusks, there is Cause of Fear:
Let me first draw your Teeth, and Sans Delay,
I Will throw my Quiver, and my Darts away.
MORAL.
Thus crafty Jacks do plead our Cause,
Armed Troops in Time of Peace, subvert our Laws:
Lay down your Arms and then we swear,
That our brave Prince will soon appear;
La Hogue you know is very near.
But since Van Trump, and bold De Rutter,
With Ball and Powder made such splutter,
He Is as much afraid of Sword and Bomb,
As was his Grandsire in his Grandame's Womb.
Disband your Troops therefore we pray,
The Nation cannot bear your Pay.
Then come the Wolves over from Campeigne,
And carry all, the Sheep away;
Then will our Prince, like Mars in warlike Guise,
Encamp at Hounslow to shoot Butterflies.
No Man can say that he will break the Law,
Or us by Standing-Armies overawe;
Since it is clear, as ever was Light of Sun,
His Army never stood but always run.
Let no foul Tongue our Valorious Prince disgrace,
For he in Person always won the Race:
The Boyn's fair Flood, and Sarum's spacious Plain,
Will this great Truth far evermore maintain.
FAB. VI. The Fox caught in a Trap.
A Certain Fox being caught in Trap,
Did lose his Tail by the Mishap.
And cried Alas!
For, his Disgrace,
He could not show Face,
Nor follow the Chase:
But yet, says he, though Reynards do beguile
The other Brutes by some fly Trick and Wile;
I do not know that Foxes are exempted
From being fooled too, if they are fitly tempted.
Then let me go try,
And briskly apply
My Wits, to deceive,
And make Foxes believe,
That the Burden of their Tail,
In Rain, Snow or Hail,
Is intolerably grievous,
And in Hunting Mischievous.
If by this Means I can but prevail,
To have every Fox cut off his own Tail,
Then none of 'em at me will mock, scoff or rail.
Away Reynard goes,
His design to propose.
Says Fathers and Mothers,
Dear Sisters and Brothers,
Don't flout, jeer and mock,
At my mangled Dock:
You know that your Tails,
But little avails,
When you leap over Pales,
To catch Sheep and Fowls;
Then do not like Owls,
Thus burden your Back,
By a thing you might lack.
How brisk and how fine
Am I without mine?
The rest perceiving what his Motive was;
Told him good Brother this will never pass.
When we are hunted by Dogs,
Over Hills, and through Bogs.
On our Tails we do Piss,
And their Chops do not miss.
And this was the cause made the Proverb prevail,
He has got a flap with the Fox's Tail,
Then cease Brother Fox,
If we mangle our Docks.
As you do propose,
We Are exposed to our Foes.
MORAL.
Thus the cursed Crew who have themselves undone,
And from their Reason, Sense, and Interest run,
Would gladly have us caught in that same Trap;
I Will Men would fain have Brethren in mishap.
FAB. VII. The Fox Preaching to the Sheep.
A Ravening Wolf the Sheep-Cotes did invade,
And there set up his Butcher's Shambles;
Where without trouble of Preambles,
He killed whatever came to hand.
A sturdy Mastiff by the Farmer laid
In the same Fold, preserved the Sheep,
So that in Safety they could sleep,
And feed, with quite in their Masters Land.
The Fox who used with Wolf to diet,
And on the tender Lambs to riot;
Perceiving this,
Says Monsieur Wolf, I am not able
To live at such an ill-spread Table.
Were it amiss,
That I should go and tell the Sheep,
The Mastiff Dog that does them keep
Lives on their Blood;
That he and's Master every Day,
With joint consent divide the Prey,
And make the Sheep their Food.
Wolf answers, Reynard, that is good,
Go tell the Sheep that they should cease
To cloth their Master with their Fleece;
Except he will his Dog remove,
For such a Guard they do not love
In time of Peace.
The Fox gets in amongst the Flock,
And with sly Oratry thus spoke.
Good Men of Mutton.
What do ye with this Mastiff Dog,
He is a mercenary Rogue
Not worth a Button?
For on pretnce of keeping guard,
Your Flesh and Bones are his Reward:
Get him cashiered.
The Wolf and I have sworn the Peace,
And our Hostilities must cease,
Noughts to be feared
By him, his Master in disguise
Means over the Flocks to Tyrannize
On my Salvation.
As I Am a true Son of the Church,
I would not leave you in the Lurch,
Of such Damnation.
The bleating Herd began to grumble,
For Raynard's Logic, made them stumble,
And thus they said:
In Faith the Wolf and Fox we see
Are Enemies to Tyranny;
Their Council ought to be obeyed.
Since Ned the Wolf, and Batt the Fox,
Are our good Friends, than what a Pox
Should we be plagued with Curs.
We will no more our Fleeces yield,
Nor have our Lambs tore from the Field,
Let Us to our Zeal add Spurs:
And for our Spokesman choose a Ram,
Or sturdy Goat to Swear and Damn.
And 'curse Dissenters.
Our greatest Dangers from the Whigs,
And cause they will not pay Tithe Pigs,
The Wolf and Fox on them shall have Debentures.
Content says Fox, and there is my Hand,
I Will publish this in Woolfish-land;
Farewell dear Sheep.
The Wolf and I will guard your Cotes,
And pull out the Dissenters Throats;
But unto you our promise keep.
The Flock by Renyard thus persuaded,
That Dog and Farmer them invaded,
Straight left the Fido.
Did through the Hills and Valleys stray,
And from their Guard did run away;
Left him to starve for want of pay:
But mark the end.
The Wolf and Fox, having prevailed
The scattered Flocks straight they assailed,
And did them all in pieces rend.
MORAL.
It Is hoped the Sheep of North and West,
Who to the Parliament make haste,
The Moral will teach;
Which is no more
Then the Proverb of Yore.
Let the Geese look to it when the Fox does preach.
FAB. VII. The Fable of the Sponge.
A Certain Brewer whose Liquor of Life,
Did frequently amongst his Servants raise strife,
Resolved to abridge them, giving each Man his share,
Enough to suffice but nothing to spare:
But the Servants resolving they would not be stinted,
Put their Wits on the Rack, and this Device minted.
They got Gloves of Sponge which they thrust in the Liquor,
And squeezing them often spent their Nasters Stock quicker:
Which the Brewer understanding, he seized on the Spunges;
Made his Servants repay him, and with Actions them swinges:
Till he had squeezed back his own, and taught them to be true,
To leave off their sly Cheats, and be content with their Due.
MORAL.
Those that misapply the Treasure of the Nation,
Ought thus to be squeezed till they make reparation:
We may Tax, and pay on, and the King still be poor.
If the Hands of his Servants be pitched as before.
It Is the Interest of the Nation, our Senate understands,
That those who touch Cash should have clean washen hands.
FAB. IX. The Trumpeter.
A Trumpeter, who by his Fatal Sounds,
Provoked Mankind to mutual Blood and Wounds;
Being taken in Field did for his Life implore:
I sound the Charge said he, but do no more.
The Conqueror grew enraged at this Defense;
Replies, base Villain, I Will Dispatch thee hence,
Down to the Stygian Shades; do thou not know
That he who counsels Murder, gives the blow.
MORAL.
The Fable hits those who in former Reigns,
For love of Faction, or for love of Gains,
Did teach our Monarchs a Despotick Sway,
And damm'd the People that would not obey:
These were the Firebrands of the Church and State,
And did more Mischief than Jack Straw or Kett:
They caused the Wa^, and that brought on the Tax,
Then let the weight often fall on their own Backs;
Why should the Peoples Blood and Treasure pay
To rescue that which Priesecraft did betray,
The Priests advanced the Popeling to the Throne;
The Priests again did force him to be gone;
And now the Priests, like Turn-coats, as before,
Choose Jacks for Senate with Canonick Roar:
And Churches danger slily would infer,
From our great King who bravely rescued her.
FAB. X. The Lion and the Ass.
IT once came to pass,
That the Lion and the Ass,
Did meet in a great Consultation;
When the King of the Brutes,
To the dullest of Mutes,
Did seriously make Application.
True Roger, quoth he,
Do but hearken to me,
And I swear I will highten thy Fortune.
Thou art now a dull Beast,
But I Will make the High Priest,
And the rest shall no more dare thee sport on.
Good Sovereign say on,
Quoth Roger anon,
For I am quite weary of Slavery:
I swear by St. Peter
If you will give me a Mitre
I Will serve you, be it Roguery or Knavery.
I thank you, says Lion,
Thy word I Will rely on;
The Service that I then command thee,
Is to teach that I must govern,
Like an Absolute Sovereign,
And that those will be damned that withstand me.
Agreed, says the Ass,
I will bring it to pass,
And have passive Obedience in fashion;
They shall all be called Traitors,
And Monarchy-haters,
From the Pulpits and Desks of the Nation.
But it happened that the King,
Harp'd on another String,
And invaded the Rights of the Asses.
Then Roger turned tail,
Against his Sovereign did rail,
In his Preachments, his Prayers and Glasses.
MORAL.
Thus Tyrant Princes did make use of Priests,
Their Subjects to transform from Men to Beasts.
The time's well known, you need not ask me when,
But e're from Beasts they turn to Men again,
The Priests must be reformed; such Reformation
Is the only Remedy can save the Nation.
AESOP Returned from TUNBRIDGE.

THE PREFACE.
AESOP, it seems, has been a little disturbed of late, and it has been argued
Pro and Con, amongst the Virtuosi, whether his Indisposition was the effect of
Tunbridge Waters, or Company. He himself has absolved the Waters, and condemned
the Company, which has obliged 'em in their own Justification to send him to
Bedlam to have his own Brains set right, for endeavoring to rectify theirs.

Since his Retirement two more have started up from Bathe and Whitehal, that,
like the two Demerrius's in Muscovy, need only be seen to discover the
Imposture. But to avoid the Fate of their Predecessors of Tunbridge, they have
taken Measures very different from his, and to save Dr. Ty -- n the trouble of
Purging their Brains, have agreed to carry none about 'em.

Upon these comes yet another; whether with better Title than the former, is a
question, Reader, we leave thee to decide. Only I shall take the liberty to
give thee some Hints, for the better Information of thy Judgment. First then as
to his Person, it has resemblance enough to Old Aesop's (or the Pisture of him,
at least, at Planudes, and others, have drawn it) that had he left any
Legitimate Issue behind him, Ours might very well plead his Figure in evidence
of his Descent from the Old Beau of Samos; and the Posture and Condition of
their Intellects, make out the Relation betwixt him and the Bully of Tunbridge.
For this confesses himself out of his Wits when he writ, and the other, by
universal Consent, mad to Write what he writ.

But let me whisper one thing in thy Ear, upon condition of secresy, if thou will give me thy Word and Honor not to disclose it to any Body, I Will assure
thee they were both Mad, and so much the fitter for the Task they have
undertaken. For who the De -- l but a Madman would venture to write Truth at
this time of Day? To deal frankly, the Old Fellow before 'em was much such
another sort of Spark. He either had, or thought he had Wit, which is much at
one to an Author, and could never leave showing his Brains, till a parcel of
Blockheads knocked 'em out. He took his Hint from the Women of his Time, who did
as they do now, every one that could be convinced by her Glass, that she was no
Beauty, set up for a Wit; and if she could not please People with her Face,
could vex 'em with her Tongue, which was equivalent as to point of
Self-satisfaction. For let either Vanity or Malice be gratified, and we are
well enough. But as I was saying, Aesop imitated the Women in that Piece of
Cunning; for it is apparent he could not the Men, for they have n't learnt that
Craft yet to Piece out the Defects of their Persons with a Superfluity of
Understanding. But every Humpback't, Hard-fac'd Scarecrow is dressed up in a
Lac'd-Coat and a Long Wig, to set off it is Deformity, and make it more
gloriously Ridiculous; and the fine empty Thing, that Nature made, as the
Chinese do their Bawbles, for the Ornament of a Drawing Room, is perpetually
endeavoring to squeeze it self into the Press, and laboring in Dull Madrigal,
or Scurvy Lampoon, to expose it is own want of Wit, and it is Friend's, and not
content with the Reputation of a Fool amongst its Acquaintance, must publish it
in Print to the World.

But what is all this, Reader, to thee and I, that be sure have more Wit? These
Aesop's are Perilous Bold Fellows, and have Plaguey Tongues: But what of that?
Let the Beast that is galled, wince; and let thee and I laugh to see 'em kick
and sling like Ralpho's Ass with a Thistle under his Tail, it is nothing to us,
that have (as I said before) Wit, then to come within the reach of one's
Tongue, or to others Heels: And so I take my leave of thee.

AESOP Returned from TUNBRIDGE.
FAB. I. Aesop sent to Bedlam.
AESOP overcome with Wind and Spleen,
At Tunbridge sought relief;
In hopes that change of Air, and Scene,
Might ease him of his Grief.
But there such Shoals of Fools he met,
And Knaves twice dipped in Grain;
Not the famed Waters they were at,
Could e're take out the Stain.
In vain a Friend among the Youth
He sought all Tunbridge round;
Till sneaking Solitary Truth
He in a Corner found.
Thus met, they readily agree,
And did strange Tales devise,
Laboring to make those Coxcombs see,
That would put out their Eyes.
Till netled at their just Reproof,
The Knaves and Fools combine;
And him, and his Companion both
To a dark Room confine.
Next Stage, they knew not why nor how,
For London they were bound:
Where both of 'em together now,
In Bedlam may be found.
In vain we strive Men's Error to correct,
Or point out Follies, which themselves neglect.
Fools are a stubborn Race, and hard to break
Wisdom's the only Gift they scorn to take;
And he that shows his Brains to such a Rout,
Takes a fair way to have 'em beaten out.
Wise Men in them alone mistake their Tools,
Knaves only have the skill to manage Fools.
Let empty Fops be proud of their Mishaps,
For he that takes it off, deserves the Cap.
FAB. II. The Wolf and Porcupine.
A Hungry Wolf, that longed to Dine
Upon a well fed Porcupine,
Found he had need of all his Skill.
To taste the Flesh, and escape the Quill:
And therefore slily thus addressed,
In Fawning Terms, the wary Beast.
What is it Neighbor that you fear?
What Enemy? what danger's near?
What means this Magazine of Arms,
When Treaties signed secure from Harms?
When all Hostilities must cease,
Why such a Guard in Times of Peace?
Why will you now in Safety beat
The Burden, and Expense of War?
To whom the crafty Beast replied,
These are not for Defense but Pride.
For truly, Neighbor, as you say,
They Are useless at this time of Day,
And I should be of your belief,
Could I but see you draw your Teeth.
Fr -- ce is the wheedling Wolf, it is plain,
That gapes for lucious Bit;
And we know who is the Porcupine,
But that she wants the Wit.
What need of Fleets, or Armies now,
That once were E -- d's B^ast?
Fr -- ce to our Articles will bow,
And guard the Spanish Coast.
Let us disarm our Men of War,
Since she such store equips;
She Will save us that Expense and Care,
And Convoy home our Ships.
The Preparations at Campeign,
And Breast, secure our Ports,
They Will spare us Fifty Thousand Men,
To Garrison our Forts.
FAB. III. The Fox and Grapes.
UPON a lusty Bunch of Grapes,
A liquorish Fox had fixed his Eyes,
Who licking of his wat'ring Chaps,
A thousand Tricks to reach it tries.
But all his Wiles in vain assayed,
Out of all hopes of getting nigh,
What Fool for Unripe Trash, he said,
Would risque his Neek to clime so high?
That charming Fruit, (I dare allege)
That looks so tempting and so fair,
Will set some Coxcomb's Teeth on edge,
Or draw some Fool into a Snare.
Ambitious Men that miss their Aim,
At least affect to be thought Wise,
And court the Popular Esteem,
By seeming honors to despise.
Those whom the Mob their Patriots call,
Factions and Jealousies foment;
Masking with Common Good their Gall,
And Public Zeal their Discontent,
To busy Courts at first they throng,
Till vexed, and hopeless to prevail,
Or share in doing of the Wrong,
In Senates th'at Corruption rail,
Courtier or Patriot by turns,
The Hypocrite our Patience tries;
Disgraced, our Grievances he mourns,
Or laughs in place at Jealousies.
FAB. IV. The Priest and Pears.
A Wanton Sloven of a Priest,
Invited to a Bridal Feast,
Under a Hedge upon the Ground,
A Hoard of Mellow Pears had found.
These were, quoth he, to hungry Sinner,
That had no hopes of Wedding-Dinner,
Brave tempting Morsels, a rich Prize,
Which at this juncture I despise,
Now to more Rarities engaged,
Than e're in Noah's Ark were cag'd;
Fish, Fowl, Fruit, Sweetmeats to excite,
And rouse a Foundered Appetite;
Therefore sweet Pears this time, adieu,
My Stomach will not stoop to you.
Yet e're we part we'll have a Jest,
Then scornfully he on 'em Pist,
And cried, who e're these Pears shall eat,
He shall have Sauce as well as Meat.
This done, impatient of delay,
He jocundly persu'd his Way,
Most happy in Imagination,
Chewing the Cud of Expectation.
Till to a Brook approaching nigh,
By Rains late fallen swelled so high,
That 'twas impossible to pass;
His rumbling Stomach called him Ass.
And bid him Ford, or Swim the Flood,
And make his vapring Promise good,
Or, spite of all his Scoffs and Jeers,
He, Sauce and all, should eat the Pears.
The Priest, who Belly dearly loved,
At this Reproach was strangely moved;
Yet his unhappy case was such,
He hated Danger full as much.
At Disappointment sore dejected,
He sadly on the Pears reflected:
He was by Word and Honor bound
To stand to it, and maintain his ground.
And now the Pears so lovely grew,
That Water from both ends they drew.
He therefore all his cunning Bent,
To find out some Expedient,
To prove himself this once mistaken,
And save his Credit and his Bacon.
Inward he turned his sullen Looks,
And romaging over all his Books,
He met an ancient Convocation,
That funish'd him with an Evasion.
Quoth he, they could not be my due,
Nor might I seize 'em till I knew,
And Providence had time to prove,
This heap of Pears was Treasure trouve;
But now I plainly understand,
They truly are a Deodand;
And he that Abdicates 'em here,
Has lost all Title to one Pear.
And I should be a Fool no doubt,
Should I stand any longer out.
As for the Stain I cast on these,
My self can wipe it off with ease.
FAB. V. The Ass and Spaniel.
A Weary Ass under his Pack,
Stood tied up to an empty Rack,
And spied a Spaniel brisk, and gay,
As in his Master's lap he lay,
That frisk'd about, and had the grace
To climb his Shoulders, lick his Face,
was always plentifully fed,
And from his hand received his Bread.
Hard difference betwixt, quoth he.
That happy, idle Cur, and Me.
He daily is with Dainties served,
While I, that drudge for all, am starved.
But since he thrives so well by Play,
I Will try my Fortune the same way.
Thus having formed his Resolution,
He waits a time for Execution.
Which found, erecting Tail, and Ears,
On Hinder-Feet himself he rears,
His Fore-Feet on his Master lays,
And with his Tongue besmears his Face.
The Man, who guessed not his intent.
Nor dreamt of such a Compliment,
Surpised, and vexed, and half afraid,
To Servants calls aloud for aid,
To help him to correct the Offense,
And sore chastise this Insolence.
And since Ass was so rampant grown
He bids 'em take his Commons down;
And henceforth bare Subsistence pay
Of half Allowance e're day.
The Ass thus mortified, and sore,
Vexed for his Bones, but Belly more,
Cried, What a stupid Sor am I,
My Talent thus to misapply?
Who only for a Drudge am fit,
And yet must set up for a Wit.
Art may refine, and finish Nature's Fool,
But no Buffoon succeeds, that goes by Rule;
For Fooling prettily's a Gift of Nature's,
That sits but aukwardly on Imitators.
The lively, airy Marmouset, as soon
May be out-frolickt by the grave Baboon,
As Nature by dull Mimicks of the Town.
If Squirrel D -- y frisk on his Beholders,
Must the Ass Gild -- n ramp upon their Shoulders,
If Congreve flattered M -- nt -- gue before,
Must be by Gild -- n too be slaver'd over?
No wonder Sots, when we this Clod caress,
Presume to claim the Dues of neat Address.
Such Poets should at Westminster untruss,
And there receive the meed of Chaerilus;
Yet I could spare the Sot, whoever repines.
Could he like him produce but seven good Lines.
But he expects Rewards, to blaze our Shame,
For daring to buffoon a mighty Name.
Let others judge, if he deserves the Rod,
Who treats his Patron worse eve'n than his God.
What other Names will this vile Wretch blaspheme?
For it is a Libel to be praised by him.
But he now feels the Fate he does deserve,
And knows already what it is to starve.
Henceforth, ye Great, tender your Reputations,
Your Honors suffer by such Dedications
With Justice we may pay for Kneller 's hand,
But who at Charges would on Sign-posts stand?
If then the Author's dull to such degree,
How stupid must the Sol that pays him be?
FAB. VI. The Grasshopper and the Ant.
A Grasshopper once thus accosted an Ant.
You know, Sir, what we Men of Quality want,
It Is the Favor to lend me some Grains of your Store,
For, Faith, at this minute, I am very poor.
This Summer's Expenses have drawn me so low,
I can scarce in the Park make my Figure, I vow.
This comes on it, replied the frugal grave Citt,
When Extravagance only's the measure of Wit.
Had your Parents but bred you to Business, your Parts
Might have got an Estate, now you have your Deserts.
Says the Grasshopper, what would you have me to do,
I Am not made for Work, besides I Am a Bean;
I Sing, and I Dance, and all the fine Weather.
I Am at Epsom or Tunbridge, or Bath, choose you whether
Ask all the Be^u Monde, and the Ladies if e're
They had Music, or Ball, if I was not there.
Every Evening I my Compliment made.
And treated with many a fine Serenade.
It Is pity the Ladies, quoth Ant, not to rally,
Don't commiserate one, Sir, of your belle taille,
Your Youth, nor Estate neither of 'em can tarry,
Look Sharp, Sir, about for a Fortune, and Marry,
For Trading's so dead, and our Taxes so hard,
Not a Farthing can out of our Business be spared
But comfort! The Fleet, or King's Bench, if you ask it,
Will find you a Lodging, and Meat from the Basket.
MORAL.
Fops that would starve far want of Sense,
Petticoat Refugees,
Ought much to thank that Providence,
Which made 'em Women please.
Swarms that had Rotted in Jayl.
Yet want Sense to pay
Thanks to that Smock that was their Bail,
But throw't like a Rag away.
Yet luckless thousands still contrive
To spread like Butterflies,
That like Beau Atkinson must live,
Or like Beau Norton die,
FAB. VII. The Ass and Jupiter.
A Gardener had a lazy Ass
That hated a hard working place,
And offered his Petition
To Jove, with many a Sigh, and Groan,
Which moved him by continued moan
To pity his Condition,
Jove, when his unjust prayer had heard,
Next to a Potter him preferred;
At which in Consternation,
The Ass once more in doleful Dumps,
Falling again upon his Stumps,
Renews his Supplication.
Grant me my Suit once more, Great Jove
Says he, I Will ask no third remove,
From any third Disaster;
What e're you order, I Am content
To undergo the Punishment
Of any other Master.
Oh! could You but this Grace afford!
The God straight took him at his word,
And placed him with a Tanner;
The Ass grown wise, when 'twas too late,
Bewails his Folly, and his Fate,
In lamentable manner.
What with the Gardener did I lack,
My Belly-full, at ease my Back?
The Potter gave me: quarter.
But this third Service I am in,
Will strip me of my very Skin,
And make me Folly's Martyr.
A murmuring Mind is never content,
With any sort of Government;
And Princes strive in vain to please,
Such restless Spirits as know no ease.
When Taxes make Malecontent,
Whom Wealth, and Power, made Insolent;
What Measures must a Ruler take,
To spare his Back, and save his Neck?
In vain they kick at Slavery,
Who grudge the charge of being free.
FAB. VIII. The Owl and Bat.
A Fierce dispute 'twixt Birds of Night
Arose about their Gifts, and Light;
The Owl and Bat aloud contended,
Which was by Nature best befriended,
Wrangling with clamorous Contest
Which saw the clearest, and the best;
Till from high Words, and angry Speeches,
They came to Personal Reproaches.
Quoth Madge, insulting over the Bat.
What would this Flitter-Mouse be at?
Thou Mungrel Vermin art at most,
And but half Bird thy self can boast.
The Bat replied with indignation,
Make to your self the Application;
You're some Beast's Bastard it appears,
As I Will demonstrate by your Ears.
But what is this to our Dispute,
If I am Vermin, you're a Brute.
Then let us agree, the Owl replied,
And by the Sun our Cause betry'd.
A Nightingale that hard by sat,
Thus undertook to Arbitrate:
How shall the Sun decide your Case,
When neither can endure his Face?
You Have said enough of Bats and Owls,
To prove both purblind Knaves and Fools.
The Bats, and Owls, of Pinner's-Hall,
This Fable may apply;
These Night-Birds representing all
The Pastors, and their Fry.
If any would know, whom they fit,
Their Contraversies read;
And see how often the Sticks are split,
To break each other's Head,
But let 'em not the Truth come near,
Nor venture into Light;
For He that does barefaced appear,
Will show a Hypocrite.
While they against each other bawl,
They the whole World convince.
And plainly show their want to all
Of Faith, as well as Sense.
FAB. IX. Sharpers and Cullies.
TWo Sharpers once to Gameing fell,
In a large Company;
And managed their Intrigue so well,
They drew in Standers by.
They wrangl'd, quarreled, and called names,
And played with so much heat;
That no one jealous of a sham,
Suspected 'twas a Cheat,
But when the Gamesters numerous grew,
And store of Cullies came;
Each from the other took his cue,
To manage right his Game.
A long time doubtful was the Scale,
The odds uncertain were;
For they do all by turns prevail.
And none great losers are.
Till every one at length was dipped,
And mighty sums were laid;
The wink, one of the Jugglers tipped,
And so the Cheat betrayed.
But this discovery came to late,
For now the Game was wone;
An empty Pocket was their Fate,
And all the Fools undone.
Ex -- B-nk, and the Exchange,
East-Indians Old and New,
And all the World this very Game,
Too busily pursue.
Notes, Bills and Stock, and Actions fall,
Or without Reason rise;
Just as the Jugglers at Wh -- hal,
Or M -- cer's Chapel please.
The great One's have Sham fallings out,
To draw the Lesser in;
But the true Quarrel is, not who,
But how much each shall win.
And when the small One's give their Voice,
Who shall be most Empowr'd;
They have but Liberty of Choice,
By whom they will be devoured.
FAB. X. The Wolf and Dog.
A Half famisht Wolf met a jolly fat Dog,
That was let out for Air, and freed from the Clog.
Quoth Isgrim, Friend Towzer, thou have what I lack,
How come thou by all this good Flesh on thy back?
Says Towzer, I lodge, and am fed at Wh -- hal,
I live like a Prince, and do nothing but bawl.
You live like a Felon, by paltry Sheep-stealing,
But if you will be ruled, and use double-dealing,
I Will help you to mighty Preferment at C -- rt.
And you shall pay nothing, but Flattery for it.
Quoth Isgrim, I like the Conditions so well,
I long till I Am there, for I soon should excel;
I can cringe like a Beau, and humor My Lord,
And praise every foppish Nonsensical word.
It Is enough, says the Cur; so onward they jogged.
Till Towzer, who often was collar'd and clogged,
Like a Cur of good Manners in bowing betrayed
The Ring on his Neck, which the Collar had made.
Says the crafty fly Wolf, in that Circle some Spell
I suppose is contained, by which you live well.
It Is only, says Towzer, never mind it I pray,
Some loose hair my Collar has fretted away.
Says Isgrim, I owe you, Sir, thanks for this gra^e,
But if there is a Collar, that alters the case.
I Will purchase my Place by by no such submission,
But forage the Woods, and not alter Condition.
The Wealth, and the Power of great Places please all,
Who would shun the Fatigue, they are encumbered withal.
They would have the Profit without the Attendance,
And shift of the burden of slavish dependence.
But here they may see by the Wolf, and the Dog,
They that will have the Fat, must submit to the Clog.
FAB. XI. False Piety.
A Sick Man lay at point of Death,
Just ready to resign his Breath.
Hard by the Bed his tender Wife
Stood, weeping, with Outrageous Grief;
Waiting the Moment that should six,
And make her his Executrix.
She wrung her Hands, and tore her Hair,
And put up many a fervent Prayer.
Will Cruel Death, she raving cried,
No other Way be satisfied?
Oh! will ye on no Terms relent?
Will he take no Equivalent?
So far below thee Life I prize,
I Will be thy willing Sacrifice.
Remorsless Death, attend my Call,
Who thy devoted Victim fall.
All this, Death was at hand, and heard;
Obeyed the Summons, and appeared.
The Wife, who thought of nothing less,
Confounded at his Readiness.
Surpised, amazed, and Terrified,
Straight snatched the Candle up, and cried;
Pray, let me light you, Sir; I know
Your Errand, and will wait on you.
My Husband's Time; alas! is come,
And he lies ready in the Room:
His Doctors too have done you Wrong,
To keep him from you, here, thus long.
MORAL.
Where Interest rules, and Profit lies at Stake,
All sorts of People large Professions make.
But, as in Trade, when Men on Credit buy,
The Wise sispect their Pay that bid too high:
So in all Obligations that include
More than a Favour's worth in Gratitude,
False we conclude, or rash the Vows they make;
And only upon Force their Words we take.
So have we known, not many Ages since,
By Sham-Caresses, a deluded Prince
Indulge his Foes; and to their Measures yield,
Woe did his Ruin on his Favor build.
We know, when Words were wanting to express
The Timpany of Zeal in each Address,
The Trifles Blood and Treasure, to a Drop,
Devoted were, and daily offered up:
The crowded Gazettes did a loud proclaim
The hollow Promises, that thronging came
But when his Wants their real Aid required,
And he their boasted Services desired,
The Ungrateful Vipers lusty grown, and strong,
The Bosom, in Return, that warmed 'em, stung;
Happy was he that first could get away,
And him, they promised to support, betray.
FAB. XII. The Wolf turned Preacher.
A Wolf, whom Health and Strength had left,
Was fallen into Want;
Unable to subsist on Theft,
Resolved to be a Saint.
In a short Cloak, and little Band,
The New-converted Preacher,
By Means of Formal Tone, and Cant,
Was grown a famous Teacher.
Shoals of the Mob he daily caught,
With Sin-confounding Texts, Sirs:
No precious, painful Brother taught
More Edifying Lectures.
At length a Rake-Hell of the Wood,
That had found out his Haunt,
Cried, Thou will make, Old Never be Good,
The Devil of a Saint.
Come, lay the Masquerade aside,
And let your Comrade know
What Roguery you hide,
That Is worth Transforming so.
Oh! quoth the Old Apostate Wolf,
Thy lewd Dicentious Ear
Is scarce yet sanctified enough,
These precious Truths to hear.
Like you I ranged at large; and none
More rampant was, while young:
But now my Teeth and heels are gone,
I For age with my Tongue.
I wheedle, flatter, cant, and pray;
Dessemble, fawn, and lie:
The sily Rout think all I say
Mere Gospel-Verity.
To me all trust; both Young, and Old;
Smooth Kids, and tender Lambs:
I have the Culling of the Fold,
And milking of the Dams.
You may perchance a Lamb surprise;
But if you should be seen,
The parish, with their Curs, would rise,
And strip you of your Skin.
MORAL.
Let empty Fops of Playhouse Conquest vaunt,
And toast the Lass that did the Favor grant:
Beau's may by vain, and feigned Intrigues recite;
But the true Letcher, is, the Hypocrite.
And B -- g-ss, in his Tub, debauches more
Than ever Meggs did on that Spot before.
The godly have the Gifts, the Wicked want;
For Scandal only's sinful in a Saint.
Thy Maids their brawny Pastour's Silence trust;
And make them Heroes in Records of Lust.
For this Moor-Feilds and Tunbridge must be prized;
But Cr -- o, B -- ll and Wallis Canonized.
FAB. XIII. The Satyr and the Traveller.
I.
TO his poor Cell a Satyr led
A Traveller, with Cold half dead;
And with great Kindness treated:
A Fire, Nose-high, he made him straight;
Showed him his Elbow-Chair of State,
And near the Chimney seated.
II.
His tingling Hands the Stranger blows;
At which the Satyr wondering, rose,
And humbly asked the Reason.
Sir, quoth the Man, I mean no Harm;
I only do it, my Hands to warm,
In this Cold, Frosty Season.
III.
The Satyr gave him, from the Pot,
A mess of Porridge, piping hot:
The Man blowed over his Grewel.
What Is that for, Friend? the Satyr cried.
To cool my Broth, his Guest replied:
And Truth, Sir, is a Jewel.
IV.
How! quoth his Host; Then is it so?
And can you Contradictions blow?
Turn out, and leave my Cottage.
This honest Mansion never shall hold
Such Rascals as blow Hot and Cold:
The De'il must find you Pottage.
MORAL.
The C -- 's desired, that in their next Choice.
They Would be pleased, from this Fable, to take good Advice:
For a man that two Churches at once has in view,
Shams both in their turns, and to neither is true.
AESOP AT AMSTERDAM.

Epistle Dedicatory, TO Old AESOP at Whitehal, etc.
FATHER,
WHERE the Devil have you been all this while? It is now ever since the fifty
fourth Olympiad you died at Delphos, and to arise again at Whitehal is very
remarkable. I am now apt to believe the Doctrine of Transmigration, and that
your Soul having past the Habitations of the Bodies of the Horse, the Ass, and
other Beasts, you are now informing the Body of a Courtier. Good Dad! don't come
too near me, you stink most damnably of Sulphur, I Am almost suffocated. You
have been lamentably paid off in the other Country; your Clothes are horridly
bedawb'd with liquid Bitumen, Links, Flambeaux and Card-matches; you make a
very indifferent Figure indeed Father. What Country you have been in I cannot
tell, but by your new Fables I find you have lived under a Monarchical
Government, and are mightily in love with it, as are my Two elder Brothers of
Tunbridge and Bathe; but you youngest Son, my Right Worshipful self, begs your
Pardon if he don't jump with you and the rest of his Brethren in their Notions
of Government. You cannot tell, Father, what a lamentable spot of work you have
made with the Fables you wrote the first time you lived; the sower Pedagogues
have made the blind Cheeks of many a Boy as raw as a piece of Beef, because
they could not understand 'em; nay I have been persecuted my self upon the same
account. Besides, Sir, your Fables have been the foundation of abundance of
Lies; your Book serves instead of a Charter to the Mythologists of all Ages;
you stand in competition even with the Devil himself, which shall be the
reputed Father of Liars. And one would think after you had slept so many Years,
your Consultation with your Pillow might have afforded you better Thoughts.
It Is pity, Father, you and I should fall out after so long absence; but you
ought to allow us that live upon the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, to see
farther than you, who have been so many Years embowel'd in the Caverns of the
Earth: Indeed, Father, I would advise you to return home again unless you had
brought better Notions with you from the other Country; for those possessed with
your Notions here, we esteem either Stupid or Mad. Now being in this place,
Father, and breathing in a free Air, I can talk of nothing but Freedom, Liberty
and Property, I hope, if it does offend the Assertors of Tyranny, they will
consider I am in a common Asylum, and out of their reach.

AMSTERDAM
AESOP AT AMSTERDAM.
FAB. I. The Summons.
THE mighty Puss, not long since ruled the State,
Beneath a lonesom Furzbush purring sat;
Stroak'd her long Smellers, and rejoiced to see
Her awful Picture in her Progeny:
Mean while her Kitlings dance before her face,
And toss, like trembling Mice, the Roots of Grass.
Not one amongst 'em but a Claw does wear,
Fit a Monarchic Tyrant Rat to tear.
The Good old Cause informed the Mother's Breast,
Darts through their Eyes, is by their mein expressed.
Such, such the ancient Race of Heroes were,
Who did their Rights before their Lives prefer.
She calls one to her, of the eldest brood;
Do know, said she, how drowned in native Blood
My Country lies? how the wild Boars invade
The Land, and desert have my Country laid?
It Is true, I once did ease 'em of their Pain;
But they, like Fools, embraced again the Chain;
Wear those dull Fetters I so kindly broke,
And halt, like Slaves, beneath the servile Yoke.
Once more I Will try, if my Advice may prove
Successful, once exert my ancient Love;
Summon the Slaves to meet at Whitehal Gate,
Beneath the Scaffold where I whilom sat,
And punish Tyranny, the worst of Crimes;
A just example unto future Times.
Young Puss the Message takes, and bids fair warning
To all the Slaves t'appear the next Morning.
FAB. II. The Interview.
THE Morning come, the Slaves await,
And flock like Bees 'bout Whitehal Gate.
Some yoked, like Country Hogs appear;
Others confounded Fetters wear,
And some most horrid Burdens bear.
Thus loaded, thus enslaved, oppressed;
Nature, it is strange, don't call for rest:
Tho legs are galled, and shouldiers sore,
The bulky Slaves still crave for more:
And not an Idiot of the Town
Has sense to lay his Burden down.
Strait Puss in majesty appears,
Mounting the Scaffold, pricks her Ears,
Shakes her Majestic Head, aloud
She thus bespoke the numerous Crowd.
I have deserted long the nauseous Town,
Mourning my Country's Ruin, and my own
Exposed to Tyranny, whilst Beasts of prey
Ravage my Fields, and steal my Lambs away.
My Freeborn Subjects now are forced to bear
Loads, which more fit for backs of Camels are;
You well deserve the Fetters you do wear.
You under heavy iron Shakels pine,
Whose Fathers did in glorious Armor shine,
Through fields of Blood to Freedom cut their way,
And taught the proudest Tyrants to obey;
By me supported, potent Tyrants fell
A Sacrifice to their just Cause and Hell;
No more, no more their sacred Lineage stain,
No more their Name in your cursed Race profane.
Let not their Offspring such Alliance have,
Shakles were never the Trophies of the Brave;
They could wide Conquests, and just Honors boast,
But you, dull Slaves! have all your Freedom lost.
Where e're a Tyrant raised his impious Head,
Strait their bold Hands struck the damned Monst'r dead
Had you a spark of ancient Honor left,
You should not long be of thy Aid bereft;
My Claws are hard and sharp as e're they were,
As fit a Tyrant and his Rats to tear.
The Villains that support a Tyrant Crown,
This angry Tail will horridly sweep down;
Shake off your Fetters once, and you shall see,
I Will once more save you from cursed Slavery.
She said, and away galloped amain,
But in hopes they their Sense would recover again;
For a Doctor will never the Fatigue endure.
To heal such dull Blockheads, that don't love the Cure.
FAB. III. The Frogs Concern.
A Generous Race of croaking Frogs,
Which lay entrench't betwixt two Bogs.
Who as the morning Sun did shine,
Daily encreast their stock divine;
Just as the Solar Influence burned,
Prolifick spawn to Life was turned,
Until the young ones had at length
An equal Vigor, equal Strength.
So numerous at length they prove,
They supplicate mighty Jove;
A King and Governor they crave,
As other Beasts and Insects have:
But Jove allowed all Mortal Elves,
To choose a Monarch for themselves.
The Croaking Elders now consult
About a King, and the Result
Was, that a neighboring Log should be
Executor of Monarchy.
About the Log their Heads they raise,
In sounds uncouth they croak his Praise:
At length some crawl upon his Top,
And frisk about, and croak and hop:
Says one Frog, Here Is fine business done,
Was e're a King thus trampled one?
'Troth, says another ancient Frog,
We'll never be governed by a Log;
The heat at length so far arose,
They did the Loggerhead depose.
To new Election they proceed,
And to their Hearts content succeed;
A neighboring Stork at length they chose,
Which should their Heats and Feuds compose:
He took upon him the Command
Of all the People in Frogland;
But he as the other before had done,
Made it an Arbitrary Throne;
Up from the Mud the Frogs would pick,
And squeeze their Corpse within his Beak,
One Frog much wiser than the rest,
To these about him thus addressed:
Good Friends, this is confounded work;
Shall we be governed by a Stork;
To have our Bones in pieces torn,
Our young ones eat just as they are born?
As if Kings only had a Power
To ruin Subjects and devour;
I think it is just to choose again:
The brood of Frogs all croak'd, Amen.
The next they chose was a dull Ass,
Which proved as bad as the other was;
For though he was not so malicious,
His folly made him as pernicious;
Stumbling on Empire, often he stood
Upon his Subjects choak's in Mud:
Whole beds of Spawn he did destroy,
At every flounce did Frogs annoy.
The Devil's in it, said one, for we
In choosing Kings still wretched be.
Thus often we have chose a King,
And still have found it the same thing.
FAB. IV. The Kees and the Hornet.
A Hive of Bees had plundered every Field,
And every Herb dees Wax or Honey yield:
Large Troops of Winged force they daily arm,
Large as the Flocks that about Hybla swarm;
From distant Fields did every Evening come,
Laden with Sweets and wholesome Honey home:
Blessed with abundant Wealth the Sworm does thrive
Beneath the Blessings of a well-stock't Hive.
But Wealth and Luxury together go,
And Bees, when rich, do vain and wanton grow;
Pampered with Food, they loath their happy Face,
And Changlings like, attempt to change their State.
Large Herds they saw, as they abroad did rove,
Governed by Monarchs, by the leave of Jove.
They Jupiter invoke, that also he
Would please to favor them with Monarchy.
Jove from Olympus nodding gave consent,
And strait the Bees to an Election went.
An o'regrown Hornet in an Oaken-Tree,
Was what they choose, and must their Sovereign be:
For Bulk and Valor was elected King,
The greatest Warrior ever drew a Sting.
His Paunch more Honey still did bear away
Then ten strong Bees could gather in a Day.
But what was worse, he often would invite
His Family to dine and sup at Night:
His numerous Favorites did devour more
Than his small Regions ever saw before;
His lazy Drones did more Provision spoil,
Than is the product of a Summers toil.
The Bees thus robbed of all their Honey, grieve;
It Is Winter too, they know not how to live.
Their Monarch goes to rob another Swarm,
And there remain till Summer's heat shall warm.
The Bees bereaved of all their Nourishment,
Their Wax decayed, and all their Honey spent;
Around their Hive their Obsequies they sing,
Lament their Fortune, and they curse their King.
FAB. V. The Lion and Fox.
A Youthful Lion in the Wood,
Of Bulk and Nature strong;
Still used to rav'ning and to blood,
And came to Empire young:
He too, as other Monarchs use,
New Methods did pursue:
His Father's Favorites did refuse;
And chose a set of new.
He having loved, and used to gore;
An arbitrary sway,
A base, a wild Despotick Power
His Subjects must obey.
But want of Brains do still attend
Unlimited Command:
And therefore he would have some Friend
Might Business understand.
There was a cunning Fox lived near,
For many years had killed
The neighboring Lambs and Poultry there,
With Bones his Kennel filled.
He summoned Reynard to appear,
Next Night, at Council Board.
Which Reynard did, and when was there,
Looked grave as any Lord.
The Lion told him he must be
The chief Support of State.
At which kind Reynard bowed his Knee,
And wished him better Fate.
O, says the Lion, thou art skilled
In Arbitrary Sway:
Thou many Beasts and Fowls have killed,
To govern know the way.
Ask and I Will give thee any thing,
Is in my Power to give:
Thou shall be next unto the King
As long as I do live.
Quoth Reynard, make me then the Priest,
I Will make all Beasts your Slaves:
The Body You, I Soul at least,
Wi'll tyrannize by halves.
Thus Fate did Men to thraldom bring,
Oppressed just like a Beast;
Rod, spurred, and whipped by such a King,
And ^ke so lewd a Priest.
FAB. VI. The Weesil, Rats and Mice.
A Mighty Weesil of Renown,
Well verst in things of State,
Was chosen King all over the Town,
Of all the Mice and Rats.
His Coronation Day was come,
And all the Grandees meet
The Weesil in a gaudy Room,
And bow beneath his Feet.
His Chair of State was Rind of Cheese,
And over his Royal Head
Some Bacon swer'd in goodly guise,
Like Canopy was spread.
At length he walks and struts about,
Like any Lord or Duke;
Sometimes he does one Subject flout,
And sometimes one rebuke.
He calls an aged Rat aside,
And asked him his advice,
Whether a Project may not be tried
To eat up all the Mice.
Ay, quoth the Rat, your Majesty
May be well satisfied.
Mice haters are of Monarchy,
And Regal State deride.
The Rats and Weesils now devour
The Mice in pitious sort,
They dye the Cellers with their Gore,
And with their Bones they sport.
At length the Mice are all destroyed,
The Weesils and the Rats
Would other Food find out abroad,
But that they feared the Cats.
The Weesils now together plot,
How they the Rats may eat;
Provision must be daily got,
Kings must have sumptuous Meat.
The Rats now all do go to pot:
Some Baked, some Boiled, some Roasted;
It Is hoped they had not then forgot
How they the Mice accosted.
Thus some Men often by Tyrant Power.
Their Kindred, Subject Slaves devour,
Do all the Villainies are done
To prop a beastly Tyrant Throne;
Though others Blood the Tyrant filled,
They must at length to's Fury yield;
Naught stops a Tyrant's Course but Decollation,
Or else a modern Abdication.
FAB. VII. Lubberland.
A Land there is, as Maps do tell,
(Though they describe it not right well)
Nor near the Hot nor Frigid Zone,
But Latitude of fifty one;
In Nature's plenty does abound,
With Fruits and Flocks is amply crowned:
The Natives never are content
But with tyrannick Government;
They Men resemble by their Faces,
But by their Backs resemble Asses
For each is born with a great pack,
A warlike Saddle on his Back,
Which does adorn the parts are upper.
On neither parts they wear a Crupper.
Their Kings, as it is decreed by Jove,
Do always jump down from above.
Armed Cap-a-pee with Boots and Spurs,
Just fit to mount such servile Curs:
With Hunting-Whips they daily maul'em
And with long rolled Spurs do gall 'em.
He only is the great Bravado,
Has most the Regal Bastinado.
They leap and jump, and frisk and skip,
And sing the Praises of the Whip:
They bear the Lash without bogging,
Extol the Royal Art of flogging.
With Blanket-Coat and wooden-Shoes,
The Man the Camel scarce out does.
Whilst Freemen feed on Dainties fine,
These do on Bread and Garlic dine;
And if they spend a Sous in Wine,
The Health drank round must always be;
Their Kings applauded Tyranny;
Still let 'em be cursed Slaves for me.
FAB. VIII. Hawk and Birds.
I.
A Hawk, that of Yore
Had long weltred in Gore,
And many a Sparrow had killed;
By the Birds she was told,
Now he was grown old,
He his number of Sins had fullfil'd.
II.
No, said the old Hawk
My Actions to balk
If you shall but once thus combino,
The Gods will avenge,
My Cause will revenge,
I may murder ye Jure Divino.
III.
The Gods, said the Birds,
We'll not take their words;
If they have 'gin you an Absolute Power,
They Have 'gin us a part,
Is not worth a Fart,
While you have a Right to devour.
IV.
The Birds all agreed,
And thus 'twas decreed,
That Slaves they no longer would be;
They throttl'd their King,
Then sweetly did sing
The Praises of free Liberty.
FAB. IX. The Owl and the Mice.
THE harmless Mice by Tyranny oppressed,
And by the Owls vast insolence distressed,
Came to a consult, where they did debate
Of Means to save their yet declining State.
Up stands a Mouse of generous noble Blood,
Free from the Fears of the more slavish Brood;
Says he, my Project, Sirs, I hope will take,
We'll tie a Bell about the Owls damned Neck:
Thus when the Tyrant's Bell does ever toll
Each Mouse secures himself within his hole.
At which a Mouse for Courage famed, arose,
And did as follows to the rest propose;
Brethren, says he, this Enterprise is vain,
There is no end of this Tyrannick Reign,
As long as Owl, or any of his kind,
Shall here Dominion and an Empire find:
You may hang Bells about his Neck, but then
He pecks it off, and turns an Owl again.
Let Us try for once, since our Condition's so,
What bold Micean Potentates can do.
The only way to guard our Empire well,
Is both to rid out selves of Owl and Bell.
Thus we our State and Freedom shall repair,
And live as our Forefathers were.
FAB. X. Neptune and the Fishes.
NEptune the God of the Tempestuous Deep,
When Is Brother Boreas hush't the Storms asleep;
Upon a Rock erected had his Throne,
His Chair of State was carved out of the Stone;
On either hand the lovely Mermaids sat,
The glittering Pageants of the Monarch's State;
The golden Tresses which their Heads adorn.
Died with the yellow glittering of the Morn.
He shook his Trident when both far and near
His Guard du Corpse of Tritons shook for fear;
One he commanded strait to go and tell.
All Clans of Fish beneath the Surface dwell,
That to his Court they presently repair,
Away the Triton flounc'd as swift as Air,
The scaly Tribes in endless numbers flock
And rendevouz before the Royal Rock;
Neptune in State unto the brink did go,
An viewed the numerous Shoals of Fish below:
Then pointing to the Mermaids, thus he said,
See there the lovely work the Gods have made,
By them and Nature destined for my own,
The just Supporters of my virtuous Throne.
My Pleasure is, that every sort of Fish,
For them do every Day provide a Dish.
The best and wholesom'st Fish of every sort,
And bring them every Day unto the Court.
Each Fish beneath the Surface downward darts,
But glide along with very heavy Hearts;
In vain, says one, the heavenly Sun does burn,
Warm the vast Deep, and Spawn to Fishes turn:
The Gods its seem thus Neptune has empowered,
And we are born only to be devoured;
Our Offspring still must pay their Parents Scores,
Made for a Tyrant's Food, and Bawds and's Whores
When vast lascivious Paunches spend always,
More than the numerous Shoals of Fish can raise.
No more, said he, by my consent, we'll own
A Tyrant's Empire, but abjure his Throne;
The watery Tribes the Motion did approve,
And to his Station every one did move.
FAB. XI. The Asylum.
THE Princes once did all combine,
The Peoples Liberty to mine;
Would make 'em right or wrong obey
An absolute Despotick Sway:
One Method, was to make us poor,
By loading Taxes more and more;
For when to Poverty Men fall,
They easily are brought to thrall:
And when their Spirit's sunk and gone,
Tyrants may lay vast Burdens on.
This did in some, in all it could
Not do: Some Men had better Blood,
And though they could not mend their Fate
They murmured at the Tyrant's hate;
Which so incenc'd the Tyrant's Ire,
Some they condemned to ravenous fire;
Some were to slavish Galleys sent,
Others in Fetters did lament.
Some Men were strangled in their Beds,
Others were hanged, some lost their Heads;
Some whipped till bleeding Backs were killed,
The Lands with Tyranny were filled;
But those whom better luck and hap
Did favor with a wished escape,
A City on Batavian Shore,
Did shelter from the Ills before;
Where native Liberty does thrive,
And no cursed Tyranny can live.
Long live great City, Favorite of Heaven,
And never want those Blessings thou have given.
A Dialogue between Bow-Steeple DRAGON, AND THE Exchange GRASHOPER.

Ecclesia and Factio. A DIALOGUE, etc.
Dragon. TEll me, proud Insect, since thou can not Fly,
By what assistance thou art Hopp'd so high:
The busy swarms of Gnats and Wasps around
With Hum, and Buz, thy Revelations sound,
And cry in thee (alone) their happiness is found.
Me they Despise, and thee they Praise aloud,
Admire thee, and Adore thee as a God:
Misled by false Enthusiastic Light,
They Have raised thee now to a Destructive hight,
Who restless striv'st, by thy accustomed ways,
To stain those Glories, which thou never could raise;
And like your Dam (the Babylonian Beast)
Cry down those Truths (by which Mankind are Blessed)
Which Reason, well as Faith, makes manifest.

Grashoper. Thy Scaly Body, and Aspiring Wings,
Thy furious Tallons, and thy frightful Stings,
Makes thee seem Monstrous to our milder Flock,
Who Dreaded once, but now Disdains thy Yoke:
You Would bind our Souls, b'Omnipotence made free,
And Rob us of that Heaven-born Liberty,
To which we have a Right, as clear as thee
My Sons thou would unreasonably confine
To worship God, within no Walls but thine,
As if the Prayers, from other Temples sent,
Of sighing Souls, who faithfully Repent,
Were Scorned, and by repulsion backward driven,
Vanished in Air, and reached no Ear of Heaven.
Where is its Goodness? What avails its Grace,
If our sincere Repentance wants access,
Through Heavens respect to either Time, or Place?
Those measures but our own Projections be,
Unminded of the Great Eternity,
Whose Love Divine moves round the Sinful Ball,
To Bless each wretch, who on his Mercies call,
Without regard to Place, no matter where,
If the Heart's Contrit, and the Mind Sincere.
Our Humble Guide the great Example yields,
Who Prayed and Preached in Gardens, Mounts, and Fields.
Temples but Sacred from their use became,
Our Piety makes any House the same:
Where ever we in the Almighty's Name repair,
Omnipotence has promised to be there.
Besides --
Our Prayers (by which all-pity'ng Heaven we move,
To grant us His estimable Love,
When with true Zeal our Pious Souls are warmed)
Makes the Place Holy, wheresoe'er performed.

Dragon. Thou know I Am founded on a fateless Rock,
Freed from the danger of an envious shock,
Scripture's my Bass, Immovable I stand,
Guarded by Lawful Power, on every hand.
Established by a National Consent,
Preach Faith, and Charity, do Ills prevent;
And for the Truths I Teach am made Predominant.
Steadfast and Pure, from Innovations free,
Preserved entire from Mutability;
Safe from your Pride, and Envy, Armed with Law,
To humble stiff, Precisians, who withdraw
From my Communion, Conscious to agree
With Heads uncovered, or a bended Knee,
And think a Bow a rank Idolatry.
Religion, like a Prince, though never so Pure,
By Power to Punish, must be made secure,
Or else your Saints, to Reformation given,
Would quickly cut Ten Thousand Paths to Heaven.
Could I from Factious Insolence be free,
And live unstained, without an Enemy,
(But that, till thou art crushed, can never be)
Then Church, and State might happily Unite,
To Mankinds Safety, and to Heaven's Delight;
But you, by Pride, are swelled to such a Rage,
(Fed by Vice of a Corrupted Age)
That now you strike, with Envy, at my Power,
And aim'st above my Sacred Head to tower:
But all in vain --
For that Blessed Edifice can never drop,
Which, when assailed, good Heaven is still the prop.
You urge a Barn, or Stable, where you Meet,
A Field, a Coffee-House, Dancing-School, or Street,
Are fit for Heavenly Worship, and for Prayer
Sacred, as unpoluted Temples are
Rare Arrogance indeed, so vilely prone,
To justify Irreverence to a Godhead done.
A Room where Men their common Lusts pursue,
Drink Swear, Lie, Cheat, all Worldly-business do,
In Christian Reason, is a hopeful Place
To beg God's Presence, or exprect His Grace;
Whilst His own House, for Holy use ordained,
To Him Erected, by our Sins unstained,
Shall be Despised, and Unregarded stand,
A useless Fabric, in an Impious Land:
Yet do thou grumble in oppressive Tones,
And rail at me for Persecutions.
If you, through studied Prejudice, retire
From what the Laws of God, and Man require,
A Legal Force may justly then be used;
Such Factious Serpents may in time be bruised:
My Pow'r's from God, and in his Word declare,
To those who to my Laws bear no regard,
Heavens Punishments are just, as to the Good Reward
The Scriptures whatsoever I Teach contain,
What Is Easy I Recite, and what is Hard Explain:
Virtue commend to Practice, Sin reprove,
Excite to Faith, Hope, Charity, and Love:
Obedience, Loyalty, Repentance, Prayer,
The use of what we Spend, or what we Spare.
Truth I advance, and what is False suppress,
You can no more than these I do no less.
Then tell me what strange Fever in the Head,
At first those Superstitious Frenzys bred?
From whence you raise the causeless Discontent,
Which makes you from my Temples thus Dissent?

Grashoper. Superfluous Rites there are, which you maintain,
And hold as Decencies, which I think Vain.
Look back upon your boasted Pedigree,
One part derived of Rome's Idolatry,
From whose fantastic Customs you have drawn,
Square Caps, low Bows, your Surpliss, and your Lawn.
Proud Lazy Prelates; with Pluralities,
Who speak but by their hair-brained Deputies,
Whose Junior Years no Truths obscure can reach;
And seldom are so Wise,, as those they Teach.
Your Mass-like Service, with your noisie Toots,
Of hum drum Organs, Fiddle Faddles and Flutes,
Your high flown Doctrines to advance a State
And please it, till Unlawfully made Great,
Then turn your Holy Flat'ries to its Fate.
These I dislike, from these (in chief) Dissent,
As quite repugnant to the Lord's intent.
These are the sumptuous Trappings of the Whore,
The Marks and Patches which she always wore.
These are her studied, and prevailing Charms,
Which but the loser part of Fancy warms,
And draws unwary Youth to her Adult'rous Arms.

Dragon. External Order first informs our Sense,
And raises in us a due Reverence,
Either toward Place, or Person, where we see
Concurrent parts, in Noble Form, agree,
And tend to a peculiar Harmony.
Or why did the Creator shape the World
From a dark Mass, together rudely hurled?
But that in ev'y part, Mankind should see,
The strokes of an All-pow'rful Deity.
From whence the light of Faith does first arise,
And makes our Reason subject to our Eyes,
For every wondrous work of Heaven we see,
Gives fresh Assurance of Eternity;
And by it is Graceful Order strikes an Awe,
Humbles our Souls, and does Obedience draw,
By Natural means, to Heaven, and Nature's Law:
Therefore, such decent Rites do I dispense,
As best shall Humble, and Affect the Sense;
And in my Sons beget a Graceful Reverence.
How Insolent it looks? How Evil bred,
TO approach God's Presence with a covered Head;
Yet to a Great-man Couch, with Hat in Hand,
And bare, before the Wealthy Idol, stand.
Or at Devotion so neglectful be,
As quite abandon all Humility;
And rather than to bended Knees submit,
In disrespectful Postures, Lolling sit.
Next, with Church Government you disagree,
And causlesly condemn our Hierarchy:
Rail at my Bishops, angry at their State,
And Envy them; whose Merit made them Great;
The Learned and Pious Characters they wear,
Has raised them to the Dignities they bear.
Unstained their Lives, they are as Guardians chose,
To save the Church from Error, and from Foes:
Without whose Conduct, and Authority,
Religions Pristine state can never be
Kept from Erroneous Innovations free,
But stand exposed to every abuse.
That each Fanatic whimsie shall produce.
Then sure such Men, who by a painful Life,
(Through Grace) to Knowledge more sublimed arrive;
And with the piercing Eyes of Reason, see
Through all the Mysteries of Divinity,
Justly deserve a Spiritual advance,
Above an unlearned or a half-learn'd Dunce;
Whose rolling Eyes, feigned Looks, and yawning Jaws,
Can nothing utter, but with Hums, and Haughs;
Inspired with Ignorance, than roars aloud
Audacious Nonsense, to a Brainless Crowd
It Is these, who from their Cradle are misled,
And backward taught, to Factious Pulpits bred,
Who, with impetious vi'lence, headlong run,
Pursuing Ills, their Rebel Sires begun.
Thus in their Frahers Faults they persevere,
And, by Instinct of Nature, envious Dunces are;
These, through their barren Ignorance, exclaim
Against all Order, and the Church defame.
Pelting with Factious, and Calumnious Lies,
That Sacred Power to which they cannot rise:
Spurning at all Ecclesiastic Pomp,
True Zealous Sons of the detested Rump,
Waiting the lucky Minute to be turned up Trump.

Grashoper. These bad Aspersions from afar you fetch,
Serve, but as Bullets, to enlarge the Breach.
Why so Disturbed, so Scornful, and so High?
You re but a Weather cock as well as I.
Boast of fixed Fundamenrals, yet I find.
For Interest, you can Turn with every Wind.
Where Is Right Divine, your Passive, and your Non,
The Bubble's once blown up, now, poh, they are gone,
Where is your Loyalty, so subt'ly shown,
Sometimes to the Prince and sometimes to the Throne,
Sometimes to both, sometimes to never a one,
Thus is it Logically placed behind
So many School boys Querks, it is hard to find,
When the great Change (by Heavens permition tried)
Your Churches Doctrine, and her Clergies Pride.
Some Conscientious Fools, it is true, turned out,
But all the Wiser Shepherds faced about;
And, like good Men, could blacken and upbraid
That sinking Power, for which before they Prayed.

Dragon. Scandal (as you are wont) I know you choose,
As the best Weapon, of Offense to use,
Whether, on search, it True, or False be found,
No matter which, if you can make it wound.
But know my Armour's tempered against Fate;
And much to hard, for you to penetrate:
The Iron Walls, my treasured Truths defend,
Reverb'rate all the poisonous Balls you send.
You charge me with the want of Loyalty,
That am the chief support of Monarchy:
By my High Priest the Holy Oyl's applied
By me Kings Reign, are Crowned, and Sanctified;
I am on Earth their Safety a^^ to Heaven their Guide.
By me the Factious Falsehoods are suppressed,
Scattered by restless Rebels, to molest.
The happy quiet of a Peaceful Reign,
Which Traitors Envy, and blind Fools Disdain.
Duty to Kings I to the Public teach,
To Loyalty Excite, Persuade, Beseech,
That all things to the Throne be easy made,
And him thereon be Rev'renc'd, and Obeyed.
What are all these, but Marks of Loyalty,
Religious Graces, manifest in me,
Virtues, I find, too bright for thy dull Eyes to see.
But pray your Reasons to the World impart,
Why now you from your old Opinion start.
In happy days, when Charles the Scepter swayed,
When base Designs, by you know who, were laid,
Then all your Awkard, Canting Brood professed
'Twas Damnable, the Bread of Life to Taste,
Within my Sacred Temple-Walls, but now,
What then you held so Dangerous, you Allow.
If Once 'twas an Offense so great, we know
(As you maintained, full Twenty Years ago)
It Is now the same, and Ever will be so.
Why do the Grandees of your Leering Tribe,
(Who from rank Dugs their prejudice imbibe)
So curb their Malice, as conform of late,
And with my Flocks they Envy, Congregate.
Often on a Sabbath's Morning have I seen
Rich Awful Zealots of a bulkey Mein,
Cheat Heaven, and dissemble with the State,
To be by Flattery, and Deceit made Great;
Visit my Temples, seem devout as Saints;
And for their Interest, turn base Sycophants;
Thus with my Worship, through design, agree,
And only Mimick, what they hate to be,
To climb unfairly to Authority.
Then, by their own Corrupted Whimsies led,
Where the Frape meet, and common Ills are bred;
There hear the Church, from whence they came Lampoon'd.
And true Religion, by an Ape Buffoon'd;
Who over his Cushion, full of Yawn, and Hum,
Stands Gaping like the Bear that beats the Drum.
Thus is the Afternoon at Meeting spent,
The Morning in the Church, at Sacrament:
Rare pious Christians, full of Faith and Grace,
To thus with Heaven, dissemble for a Place;
And pawn their Souls to purchase Sword or Mace.
If I am Right, and from Mistakes most free,
Why do they not Conform entire to me;
If your dark System, they believe most true,
Why not alone Communicate with you?
Those who for Interest, carry fair with both,
Are just to neither, by their Faith and Troth:
But plunged between two Crimes, to Greatness bent,
Err with the Wrong, and from the Right Dissent.

Grashoper. If you make Laws to eclipse my purer light.
And rob my Sons, of what is their native Right,
The fault's not theirs, it is you incur the blame,
The Cunning's on their side, on yours the shame.
Why not by Birth, and Christian Knowledge free
To Riches, Honor, and Authority?
Why must these Worldly Comforts rest in you;
Or your Sons count all Power and Place their due?
Why may not mine as well assist the State,
And in as great Attempts prove fortunate?
If you such Laws procure such Power possess,
As prove a hindrance to our happiness,
How can you justly blame us to evade,
And leap over all the Stumbling Blocks you have laid?
If you such bats to our Preferments make,
As Oaths, and Sacraments, for your own Interest sake,
It is no crime in us, the same to break or take.
If you, attempt, through Pride, to keep us low,
And we through Cunning, your designs o'erthrow
Call it not Cozening Heaven, but out-witting you.

Dragon. No Laws can such loose Principles restrain,
No force can bind you, but a Golden Chain.
Interest I find is the prevailing tie,
Makes you Approve, Conform, Dissent, Deny,
Oppose the Right, or the Wrong Justify.
Interest, from me first made you Separate,
And become Rival to the Church and State
Interest disposed you to Intestine Jars,
Improved to Bloody, and Domestic Wars;
Wherein being flattered with unjust success,
Trampled on Merit, spit in Virtues Face;
Riffled the Throne, and stained the Judgment seat.
With Crimes too black, and dreadful to repeat;
As if to you, Omnipotence had given,
A Sanguine not a Milky way to Heaven.
Still are your Thoughts by a wild Ambition tossed,
Aiming to gain that Power, you justly lost:
At all Elections, busy are your Brood,
Heaving and shoving against the Public Good.
On all Promotions, Zealously intent,
Squeese, Bawl, and Jostle, till their Breaths are spent;
Kick, Cuff, and Scandal (heedless of the Laws)
Tongues, Feet, and Arms, all working for the Cause;
To raise some Meager Darlings of their own,
Faction in whose penurious looks is shown:
Rich by mere Chance, or Fraud, not Great by merit grown.
Who can Lie, Cant, Dissemble, or Forswear,
Declaim against, or hear the Common Prayer;
Through all Opinions halt, to Lamely reach the Chair.
Who can his Conscience, to his Interest mould,
Run with the Court, or with the City hold.
And without shame, can true Reflections Face,
Or bear all Scandal, with a comely Grace.
And will his Power beyond just bounds extend,
To injure Foes, or to advance a Friend;
Or any thing will do to serve a Factious End.
These are the worthy Dolts, your Sons advance,
By their false Poles, and double Diligence.
These are the Men of merit, they provide,
To Row, and Toe, against the Wind and Tide;
Who in Tempestious Discords, they create,
Sail quite repugnant to the Church and State:
Yet to such outward Godliness seem bent,
To Church they will come, though in their Hearts Dissent
But for no Faith, will either Hang or Starve,
Both God and Mammon, for advancement serve;
Thus seasonably comply, or in fit times can swerve.
If such unsteddy Rovers bear Command,
Whilst Men of worth, shall unregarded stand,
By Law, and Nature Qualified for Trust,
To something fixed, and known in all things Just.
If Men like these, shall be by Fraud put by,
And yield their Rights to the Pedantick Fry;
England must soon from all her Greatness fall,
And mourn her Ancient Glories Funeral.
Which Heaven prevent --
And (that she may once more her Grandeur boast)
Retrieve her Virtues, now so nearly lost;
And from all Factious Quarrels, and Despights,
Preserve the King, Church, Nation, and our Rights:
That in one Faith, we may United be,
And accord sweetly, in just Harmony.

FINIS.

