A PARAPHRASE ON THE CANTICLES, OR, SONG of SOLOMON.

By the late LEARNED, and Pious PROTESTANT, THOMAS AGER.

LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford, and are to be sold by Samuel
Sprint, at the Bell, near the Grate in Little-Britain, 1680.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
ALthough many profane persons, as much as in them lay, have debased the
Authority of the Song of Solomon, and not only excluded it from being
Canonical, but ranked it amongst those profane Writings, which Heathen Poets
were too much guilty of, as if the wisest of Kings had meant nothing else by
this but to serenade his Mistress; yet certainly, those that have a more deep
Judgment, and pious Consideration, look upon it as the most exact piece of
Poetry (next to the Biblia bibliorum, as the Psalms are particularly called)
that ever came forth into the World, and it is being received as Canonical for
so many Hundred of years, commented on by so many Worthy and Famous Men, the
several Parts and Members being so often treated on in Pulpits, must needs be a
great Argument that the Subject was something more than ordinary. Had it been
nothing else but a wanton Poem, Posterity would never have so much admired it,
learned and curious Judgments never have Composed so many Paraphrases upon it.
A Song of Love indeed it is, but of so great, so good, so glorious a Love, as
is reciprocal, between Christ, and his Spouse the Church; wonderful, and
passing the Love of Women. But I suppose, the intricacy and difficulty of
understanding it, has been no small reason why some persons, either out of
laziness, or impiety, have so much disrespected it; yet lest the Poison should
spread it self any farther, in these following Sheets is laid down a sufficient
discovery of the whole Mystery; every Verse, nay, almost every Word, being
dissected and laid open in all their Significations proper and figurative, and
delineated so to the Life, that he that runs may read, in a style as humble as
the Author, as pious and passionate as the Subject of the Book, and with all
possible Care and Industry that Human Learning, sanctified by the especial
Grace of God, could show or endeavor. And certainly, nothing can more need a
Commentary, than that which is altogether a Parable, a form of speaking that
Christ himself so much delighted in, and sometimes condescended to interpret,
and the Doctrine of it being so useful and comfortable to to Mankind. The
Author of this ensuing Treatise, as his Learning and Piety, were very eminent,
so his Modesty was exemplary, in so much that in all his life time he could not
be induced by the entreaty and importunity of his Friends to Publish it; yet
least so precious a Jewel should lie in darkness, first, for the good of Souls
and benefit of Human kind; and next, to perpetuate the Memory of this good and
pious Man; I have, with the advice of his Friends and Relations, thought fit to
make known to the World the knowledge and goodness of the Author by the
sufficiency of the Work. Not at all doubting (Christian Reader) but that it
will be acceptable to all pious and devout Spirits, especially at this time
when the Church of God is under Afflictions, and the Enemies thereof are
continually undermining and disturbing the Peace of it. Yet (God be praised)
though she be Black, under Sorrows and Temptations, yet she is Comely, and the
Knot of Love between Christ and his Spouse no mortal Hand will be able to
untie; which is, and ought to be, a Comfort to all Christians. God give thee
Grace to make a right use of the things herein contained, and it shall be the
greatest satisfaction that can happen to,

Thine in the Lord, J. H.

AN ENTRANCE Into the most Excellent SONG of SONGS, WHICH IS SOLOMON'S.
COncerning the time when SOLOMON wrote this Book, whether before his Fall, or
after his Repentance, it skills not much to know, neither will any wise Man
much contend about it, as being a thing tending to Strife and Debate, rather
than to any godly Edifying in the knowledge of the Truth. And to speak much for
the Authority of it, seeing it has been received by the Church of God for so
many Hundred years past, both before Christ's coming, and since, and kept (as
it were) in the Ark and Sanctuary of God, with the rest of the holy Scripture,
when all the rest of his Songs were cast aside, may seem to be ridiculous; yet
because that some in former times have endeavored to blemish it, counting it
but a wanton Toy or Ballad about the gestures of Lovers; it may not be amiss to
speak a few words briefly, in Answer to their Objections.

First then let it be considered, that the matter herein contained must either
pertain to Solomon: and some Queen of his; or else to the Lord Jesus Christ,
and his Queen. Not to Solomon; for the King that is here spoken of is set out
as one keeping Sheep, as in Chap. 1. which was not a thing proper for Solomon's
Royalty. And also to be without, shut from his Wife, as in Chap. 5. until the
Dew fell upon his head; which agrees not to Solomon's Princely State. For what
Queen of his would offer him so much disgrace?

And for what is said of the Bride in this Song, can never agree to any Queen
of Solomon's; for it is said, that she was without spot, and that her
Bridegroom was gone, she had lost him, and that she was fain to seek him up and
down the City, and that she was taken of the Watchmen and beaten: And who durst
do this to any Queen of Solomon's? Therefore seeing it cannot agree to Solomon,
nor to any Queen of his; it can agree to none but the Lord Jesus Christ, and
his glorious Bride, which is the Church.

But it is objected,

For Answer: So the 45th Psalm, Behold I come as a Thief. Now as Christ
compares himself to a Thief, not because he deals unrighteously, but to show
the suddenness of his coming: So he also compares himself to a Lover, not
because he delights in wanton gestures, but because the Love between Man and
Wife, is a worthy and most excellent representation of the Love between Christ
and his Church.

But they Object farther,

This proves nothing: For it does not follow, 2 Samuel ^.
David made an excellent Funeral Song at the burial of Saul, and yet the Name
of God is not mentioned in it, and shall it not therefore be Canonical? If this
Argument were good, then many Chapters in the Bible must be accounted not
Canonical, for want of the Name of God being used in them.

Again they say,

So there are diverse Books in the Old Testament that are not mentioned in the
New besides this;

Now then it must follow, that if this Book must be rejected, because none of
it is expressed in the Writings of the New Testament; then all other Books in
the Old Testament, that are not set down in part in the New, must be accounted
not Canonical. And also, that whatsoever Christ spoke and alleged, that was
not written, must be accounted not to be agreeable to the Writings of the New
Testament. All that Christ spoke was not written, but only the Abridgment of
things. And although the sentences of this Song are not set down in the New
Testament, yet the Doctrine herein contained, is therein expressed.

Therefore abiding by the Authority of it, it being a matter from Heaven, let
us bring Faith along in reading of the Ditty, that our Hearts may be ravished
with the Spiritual excellency herein contained. And so I come to the Title.

CHAP. I.
VERSE I. The Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.
THE Holy Ghost gives this Title to the Book to draw our Hearts and Affections
unto it, that being thoroughly affected with the Title of it, we might learn the
more perfectly to sing it.

Two things here are commended in the Title; First, the Comparison between this
and other Songs; Secondly, the Author of it.

The Comparison is in these words, A Song of Songs.

The Author of it in these words, Deuteronomy. 10. Rev. 19.
Which is Solomon's.

Some say, it is said to be a Song of Songs, because it was the manner of the
Hebrews, in extolling or abasing of things, to double their Words; as when they
say, The God of Gods, it is, God above all Gods. And, The Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings; it signifies an excellency above all Lords, and an Authority
above all Kings. And so also in abasing of things, as when Noah curses Cham, A
Servant of Servants shall thou be; that is, a most vile Servant. But I suppose
there is something more to be considered in the words: For it must be noted,
that Psalms and Songs are Arguments of joy and gladness; and singing is a token
of joy and deliverance, out of some great Affliction and Misery. When Deborah
and Barack had gotten the victory over King Jabin, King of Canaan, they sung a
Song unto the Lord. And when the Lord saved Moses, and the Children of Israel,
out of the hands of the Egyptians, they also sung a Song. And so it was also
when David returned from the slaughter of the Philistines; the Women came out
of all the Cities of Israel, singing and dancing with Tabrets of joy, and
Instruments of Music.

Now in that the Holy Ghost calls this Book a Song, he shows that there is
matter of great joy in it. And seeing it is a Song of Songs, it far surpasses
all other Songs that Solomon made; as also all other Songs in holy Scripture:
so that no Song can be matched with it.

For as to the matter of it, and thing it handles, it is the Scriptural
Communion between Christ and his Church, when she is in the lowest and saddest
condition, by reason of her Sin and Misery; even then this Song sets out
unto her the Love and tender Compassion of Christ her Bridegroom.

And as for the manner of setting of it forth, it is in a Dialogue or borrowed
Speech, taken from Lovers that are betrothed together in the Marriage knot,
wherein the Bridegroom and the Bride declare their Affections one to another
with great rejoicing; the Bridegroom praising and commending his Bride, in that
in her misery she looked upon him; and the Bride her Bridegroom, in that he
shows pity and compassion upon her. So that this Song goes beyond all other
Songs, in regard of the subject Matter of it, and thing it handles; the very
burden of it being to instruct us in this, That Christ is ours, and we are his,
when Flesh and Reason says the contrary.

-- Which is Solomon's. The next commendation of the Song is from the Author,
which is Solomon.

Solomon was a Man besotted in his Life, 1 Kin. 11.4.
and stained with many foul blemishes, was not so upright in Heart as David his
Father, being drawn away by his Wives to the horrible Sin of Idolatry; yet the
Lord passed by his great and foul stains, and made choice of Solomon to be the
Penman of his holy Spirit, and an Instrument where his Glory should shine. The
Lord did not cast off Solomon for his stains and blemishes, but had an Eye
still to that good which was in him, whereby he would make him a worthy
Instrument to set forth his Praise. How much the practice of Men differs from
this Example of God, is easy to be seen, who will presently cast off all that
is good in a Man, if he be but any way stained or polluted in his life, if it
be a Man of ever so excellent Parts and Gifts, able to set forth Heavenly
mysteries, and do good to the Church of God; yet if he be but any way blemished
or defamed, they presently set him aside as altogether useless, and make no
more account of him, than of a broken Pitcher. The Lord did not do this when he
saw Solomon in his filthiness, but had an Eye to that good which was in him,
which made him useful for the good of his Church.

If God should have followed the Example of Men, how should this excellent Song
of Songs have been had? Or how should the Epistles of Paul have been had, if
Paul had been wholly set aside for his persecuting the Church? These make
themselves more pure than their Maker; else they would not go about to teach
the Lord what Instruments to choose, to set forth his Glory by. They cannot be
content that the Lord shall choose such Instruments as best please him, but must
needs have such as best please them, or none at all. Like mad Men, that will
rather starve for hunger, than receive any Food, unless it be presented in a
silver Dish; and dye for Thirst, if you bring them not Drink in a golden
Goblet. All Men therefore must humble themselves, must stoop, and give Honor
and Glory to the Lord; and suffer him to make choice of such Instruments as
best please himself to make his Glory shine, and to raise up his Church with
Divine Contemplations. For Solomon, although he was unworthy and unfit to be
chosen for such an Instrument, by reason of his foul stains; yet in regard of
his wonderful Wisdom, and great Reach, that the Lord had given him, whereby he
was able to borrow Speeches from the nature of Earthly things; to set forth the
Lord's mind in Heavenly things, he was a Man excellently fitted.

For God gave Solomon Wisdom, and largeness of Heart, above all Men, his Wisdom
excelled all the Children of the East; for he was wiser than Ethan, Henan,
Calcol, and Darda. And he spoke of Trees from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the
Hysop that grows out of the Wall. He was able also to show the nature of
Fowls, and of Fishes. There was none like Solomon before him, neither after him
shall there arise any like him. Solomon was also a Figure of Christ, in regard
of his Wisdom, Kingdom, and Glory, and also being a Man of rest; for so the
Lord said of him, Solomon shall be his Name, for I will give Peace to Israel in
his days.

Now Christ is our Peace, who is also called Solomon.

The Penman therefore of this Book being the wisest of all the Prophets, and
Christ, whom it concerns, being the very Wisdom of the Father, and greater
than Solomon, therefore is this Song commended unto us by the holy Ghost, in
the highest degree of Excellency.

Seeing therefore it is a Song, we must learn with all skilfulness to sing it;
and seeing singing is an argument of joy, we must look for nothing in this
Song, but matter of exceeding joy: So that when we are in the lowest condition,
by reason of Sin and the Cross, yet then the understanding of this Song will
raise us up beyond our selves. For it is not only a Song, but the Song of all
Songs, composed by Solomon, a Person wiser than all Persons, who figureth out
Christ unto us, who is the very Wisdom of the Father, and therefore greater
than Solomon: And his carriage to be most gentle and loving to us, when we are
in the deepest misery, and greatest extremity.

Therefore we must endeavor to learn the Tune and Time of this Heavenly Song,
and it will fill our Hearts with joy and gladness.

VERSE II. Let him kiss me --
WE must understand, that the chief part of this Song is drawn from the
similitude of Lovers espoused in Marriage; or else those that have fully
finished the Marriage knot. And Solomon being moved by the Holy Ghost, made
choice of this Similitude above all other things, to set forth the most
excellent Mystery between Christ and his Church, no resemblance being greater
to manifest the same; not only in regard of the oneness that comes by
Marriage, and also the firmness of the Bond (between Man and Wife) that cannot
be broken; but also in regard of the Issue and Posterity that comes by
Marriage; for even as by reason of Marriage, many Children are born into the
World, so by reason of the Soul's uniting unto Christ, Romans 7.
are many Children brought to Life and Immortality.

The Church is here represented to come in a pang of Love, but what Church?

Not the Church of the Jews only, Gentiles: For the Church is to be considered,
either generally, or distinctly; either as the Church of the Jews and Gentiles
united into one Body, or else the Church of the Jews apart, before Christ's
Incarnation.

Now as the Church distinctly considered, desired after Christ that was then to
come; so the Church generally considered, desires after Christ that is come.
Therefore the Church expressing her self here by the desire of a Lover, Let him
kiss me; it shows the desire of the Bride in all Ages of the World.

But why does the Bride desire to be kissed?

Kissing amongst Men is a sign of favor and reconciliation. David kissed
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.23.
and thereby showed, that he was reconciled unto him. Moses and Aaron kissed
each other when they met, as a token of Friendship. And when Laban departed
from Jacob, Genesis 3^.55.
as a token that all strife was ended between them, he kissed his Sons, and his
Daughters, and so departed. So that the Church desiring to be kissed, desires
she may be assured by his word of his Love and Reconciliation to her. Now there
is a two fold kissing mentioned in Scripture; there is a kissing on Christ's
part, and a kissing on the Bride's part. Christ kisseth the Bride, when he
assures her by his word that he is reconciled to her, and in Love with her
Person, although she be a most miserable Sinner. The Bride kisseth Christ, when
she by Faith is reconciled to him, in believing that Christ is in Love with her
Person.

Christ offers the kiss first, in these words, I have loved thee with an
everlasting Love. The Bride again meets him with the kiss, as soon as ever
she perceives, and is drawn to believe, that her very Person is intended in
these words, This is the first kiss of Christ, which begets Faith, and all
Heavenly Qualities within us. There are also other kisses that follow where the
first is embraced, when he loves our Obedience, Heb. 11.5.
although imperfect, because we please him by Faith; but this is his antecedent
kiss, which respects not the Work, but the Person, a most miserable Sinner;
and this we ought to believe. And in this sense it is said, Kiss the Son lest
he be angry, Psalm. 2.12.
that is, see that thou thankfully embrace the first kiss, which assures thee
of the acceptance of thy sinful Person, before thy works are regarded, which
truth of God works in thee Faith, and Love to God, and all good works. In
this sense also it is said, 2 Cor. 13.12. 1 These. 5.26.
Salute ye one another with an holy kiss, and, Greet ye one another with an
holy kiss; by which holy Kiss is meant the Administering on Christ's part, and
the embracing on our part the first kiss. And by greeting and saluting one
another, is set forth the highest degree of Love among the Brethren, which is a
mutual forwardness in drawing each other by the Gospel to receive the first
kiss; therefore the Bride says here, Let him kiss me, let him assure me in
this one point that my Person is in his Favor; which is the first ground and
beginning of our Faith in Christ.

But why does the Bride here desire to be kissed with more kisses besides the
first kiss?

Because by the first kiss she is so wonderfully taken up with the Love of her
Beloved,

And she adds farther, -- With the kisses of his Mouth -- Because all the
Comforts that she finds in the day of Adversity, do proceed from the Mouth of
Christ her Beloved. For when Satan rages, the Law threatens, and her
Conscience accuses, yet then the Mouth of her Beloved is most sweet and
Lovely. His Lips are like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh The kisses of
an Enemy are deceitful, Prove. 27.6. Can. 5.16.
therefore she desires her Friend. The Law cannot comfort her in the day of
distress, therefore she desires after her Lord. She forsakes the Servant, and
desires to be kissed with the kisses of Christ's mouth. Now the reason why she
desires the kisses of Christ above all others, is set down in the next words.

-- For thy Love is better than Wine. In which words, she sets out the
excellency of his Love far beyond all his Gifts. Wine is an excellent gift of
God, having many excellent Properties in it; 1 Timothy 5.
it helps the infirmity of Man's Body; it is delightful to the Eye; pleasant
to the Taste; but above all this, the Psalmist says, Psalm. 104.15.
It makes glad the Heart of Man. These things she denies not, but that they
are very delightful; but yet she esteems them as nothing, in comparison of
his Love. Wine also was in much esteem at Marriages, as we see by the Wedding
Christ was at, when he turned Water into Wine; yet notwithstanding all these,
the Bride is more imflamed with the Love of his Person, than with the Love of
Wine; and the reason she gives is, because his Love is better than Wine.

Which shows us the right way how to have a light esteem of all things under
the Sun, which is, to fasten our Eyes upon something that is better. And also,
that when we are in the greatest Misery, by reason of Sin and the Cross, it
shows us what to do, even then to desire the apprehension of Christ's Love;
and to assure our selves by Faith, that he speaks good and comfortable words
unto us, and not as the Law and our own evil Consciences does; these things
thou have done, and therefore thy Misery is just. I say, Christ does not thus
speak to the humbled Soul, but cease then from Rigor, parts with his
Right, and speaks the words of Grace and Consolation to us. Therefore must we
embrace his Heavenly kiss with thankful Hearts, and then shall we find by
experience that to be true which the Bride here sings, Thy Love is better
than Wine.

VERSE III. Because of the savor of thine Ointments --
HEre it is farther showed by the holy Ghost, why the Bride does so much esteem
of his Love, and why her Affection is so much drawn to him; it is because of
the savor of his Ointments; his Person is most excellent and sweet; for being
anointed with the Godhead, all his Actions became meritorious for her in the
sight of the Father.

For it must be noted, that when the nature of Man was taken by the Godhead in
Unity of Person, it was filled with notable and excellent Graces; both with all
created and uncreated Perfections, with Wisdom in the Understanding, Holiness
in the Will, Purity in the Affections, in all points, whereby the Body it self
became a worthy Instrument, for the great Work of Man's Redemption. And these
the Bride calls his Ointments, by which he became a Person, whose sacrifice
was a sweet smelling savor, not only in the sight of God; but also in the
Consciences of all the Elect.

And this anointing of Christ was shadowed in the Law, Exodus 20.30.
when God did appoint that there should be an anointing Oil made of the Oil of
Olives, and other notable Perfumes, for the anointing of Aaron and his Sons,
and the Vessels of the Sanctuary; which holy Oil was to be as a Sacrament of
that most excellent sweetness that should be found in Christ, the high Priest
of his Church. That even as Aaron and his Sons, being anointed therewith, were
made to smell sweet in the Nostrils of the People; so the Godhead did persume
the Humanity of Christ, with such most excellent sweetness, whereby the smell
of his Actions did make a most pleasant Persume for us in the fight of God the
Father.

But besides these Ointments of the Sanctuary, there were other Ointments also
that Kings did use, who had (as it seems) the fairest and sweetest things
that could be invented, for themselves and their Queens, to perfume their
Clothes withal; as appears by Queen Esther, Esth. 2.12.
who for certain days before she came to the King, perfumed her self with Oil
of Myrrh and sweet Odours, and other things which were appointed for the
purification of Women.

And Solomon also being a Type of Christ, Psalm. 45.
is said to have his Garments perfumed with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, out of
the Ivory Palaces. Now, either of these Ointments, whether those that were made
for Priests, or the Perfume that was made for Kings, do serve to set forth the
most excellent sweetness that is in Christ, whereby distressed Consciences
(when once perfumed therewith) do become an Odor of a sweet smelling Sacrifice
in the sight of God. And therefore Christ (under the Figure of Solomon) is said
to be anointed with the Oil of Gladness, Psalm. 45.
because when the Merits of his Actions are given to the distressed Conscience,
it is delivered from the guilt of Sin, and wrath of God: And therefore it is,
that the Bride here speaks of the savor of his Ointments. She looks not
upon any thing of worth in her self, but smells the savor of the good
Ointments of her Beloved, which are as a Sovereign Balm to heal her of all her
wounds, and of infinite sweetness, to drive away the stinking and loathsome
smell of all her Sins from the presence of God; whereby she comes to be filled
with sweet and Heavenly delight.

Which teaches us the true nature and use of Faith, which is, that when we
feel the stink of our Sins, the grievousness of our Wounds, and the
loathsomness of our filthy Nature; not then to look after any worthiness in our
selves, but only to smell to the sweet and precious Ointments of our Beloved;
which being presented before the Justice Seat, do send forth such a smell, that
causes the Father to forget the stink of all our Sins, and will also fill our
Minds and Consciences with Heavenly delight: For to this purpose was the Lord
Jesus Christ anointed, that our Minds and Consciences might be filled with the
savor thereof.

-- Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth -- In which words the Bride farther
amplifieth, why she does so much esteem of his Love; it is from his Name: For
it was promised concerning Christ, That a Virgin should Conceive, and bring
forth a Son, and his Name shall be called Emanuel; which is God with us. The
understanding of this Name (she says) is as precious Ointment, because through
this Name, she has her Mind perfumed, and her Conscience discharged from the
wrath of God; for if God be present, the scar of his wrath must needs be
absent; If God be with us, who can be against us? There is nothing in Heaven,
Earth, or Hell, can possibly dismay us, where God is present, being apprehended
by Faith.

But there is another thing here which makes her esteem his Name; not only
because his Name is as Ointment, but also as Ointment poured forth.

His Name is not as Ointment kept in a Box, but as Ointment poured out. If
Ointment were kept in a Box always, and not poured out, then no Man could smell
it; but being poured out, it will make an excellent Persume; as may be seen by
that Ointment which Mary brought in an Alabaster Box to anoint Christ withal:
She breaks the Box, and pours it out; and it is noted, John 12.
the whole House did smell of the Odor of it: Before the Box was broken, it
did not smell so much; but after the Box was broken, and the Ointment poured
out, it did smell exceedingly. So although the Humanity of Christ be filled
with all Grace, that a Creature can be capable of, yet if no Man knew it, what
were it the better? But when he is declared and manifested to Man, then he is
as an Ointment poured out; and this is done by the preaching of the Gospel.

There is a double consideration to be had, about the pouring out of Christ's
Ointments; the one is the pouring them out upon his own doings; the other is,
when the Ointment is poured out upon the Virgins.

The one of these pourings out respects himself; but the other respects
fainting distressed Minds. The one is the pouring forth of his Ointments upon
the Actions of the Redeemer; the other is the pouring them forth into the
Consciences of the Redeemed. For the case stands thus: If the Actions that
were Christ's own, had not been perfumed with the excellent savor of his
Ointments, they had not been fit, nor of sufficient worth for a Redemption; but
seeing they were all perfumed with the Infinite Odor of the Godhead, therefore
they became a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, acceptable to the Father.
And as the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, did make him shine and glitter in the
sight of the Father; so when his Ointments are poured out in the preaching of
the Gospel, it makes him shine and glitter in the Consciences of the Elect.
And this is that which the Bride here has an Eye unto, even to that which is
poured upon the Virgins, whereby they came to love him, which could never be,
if it were only poured upon his own doings, and no man knew it; therefore that
the Virgins may love him, they must smell the sweetness of the Ointments
themselves. And this is done when it is poured out in the preaching of the
Gospel.

This shows us, that without we are persum'd by these Ointmenes, we are no
better in the sight of God than stinking Carrion; and that until the Gospel
has poured out the Ointments, we can never be perfumed thereby: Therefore when
thou feel the stink of thy Sins, make have to the Box of Perfume, that the
sweet Ointments may be poured upon thee. Pitiful it is, if thou know not the
stink of thy Sins; and worse, not to know of this Heavenly Box of Perfume; but
worst of all to those that cannot abide this Heavenly Ointment, but stop their
Nostrils at the breaking of the Box; what will become of such? But that the
word to them will become a savor of Death unto Death. Learn thou therefore to
smell this sweet and heavenly Perfume, then shall thou find in thy self the
same Effects that were wrought in the Virgins, as here follows.

-- Therefore the Virgins love thee. The Church in general, and all the Members
thereof in particular, are called Virgins, in respect of the purity of their
Faith, being formed without the works of the Law. In this sense, the Church is
called a Virgin by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2.
I have presented you a pure Virgin to Christ. So that she is a Virgin, in
regard she is delivered from the Law, and married to Christ by Faith alone. She
is ignorant of the Law, knowing nothing of the Law, and her own Righteousness,
in the matter of her justification before God. She has a single Eye, beholds
not a double object in distress of Mind, but fixes her Eye upon Christ alone.
If thou formest thy Faith only by the promise, then thou art delivered from the
Law and Curse of God; but if thou countest thine own Works to be Essential to
Faith, then the Virginity of Faith is lost; then thou do Adulterate from the
Promise, and art overwhelmed with the Curse.

This Virginity is preserved where there is a right distinction taught between
Faith and the Law; man's Reason when it hears the promises to be annexed to
the Law, it presently concludes, as the Israelites did at Mount Sinai. All
that the Lord commands us, we will do; thinking it self sufficiently able to
perform the Law: Which opinion in Man causes, not only the loss of true
Virginity, but also of true and everlasting Happiness. Now there being so wide
a difference between Faith, and Man's opinion of the Law, it will not be amiss
to consider, what true obedience to the Law is.

There is a double Consideration to be had about Obedience to the Law, Active
and Passive. Active Obedience is, when thou put forth all thy Abilities to
perform the Law: Passive Obedience is, when thou submit test thy self to the
condemning Power of the Law, and utterly renouncing the Law, flye^ to Christ by
Faith. This Passive Obedience goes before Justification, forgiveness of Sins,
and imputation of Righteousness, being promised to it; and Active Obedience
follows after. This Passive Obedience I call Obedience to the Law, because it
is required in the first Command meant; which forbids thee to depend upon
thine own Righteousness, which is by the Law; and requires thee to lay hold on
the Righteousness of God, Romans 3.21.
which is manifefested without the Law. So that all those Scriptures that
require a necessity of the Law, as the doers of the Law shall be justified; and
bless those only that are the doers of the Commandments, intend this Active and
Passive Obedience in order, as has been said: And therefore must be understood
according to the first Commandment, which first teaches us to hear the word of
the Curse, and to justify God; and next it drives us to the promise which
justifies us. And this is the true obedience of Faith, which I here call the
Passive Obedience; which, as soon as thou enterest into, thou becomest a pure
Virgin to Christ, and yieldest thy self in Marriage to the Son of God; which,
as soon as thou apprehendest by Faith, thy Conscience is made joyful and glad
by the Righteousness of thy Redeemer, which also breeds in thee Active
Obedience, whereby thou joyfully do good works unto thy Neighbor. Faith then
separateth between Active and Passive Obedience, and so preserves pure
Virginity in the Church, for it places the one before, and the other after
justification.

Where this Virginity of Faith is, the Conscience rests, hops, and
rejoices, in Christ his Savior; and the outward Man joyfully does good works
unto his Neighbor.

-- Love thee. The holy Ghost here shows the reason why the Virgins fall in
Love with Christ, which is (as was said before) drawn from the savor of his
Ointments. The first Commandment is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine Heart. But now the Question is, how this Love of God shall be wrought in
the Soul, that what is commanded in the Law may be attained to? That which is
here set down, resolves this Question, Therefore the Virgins love thee: Not
because of the Law, but because of the Gospel. So that the Gospel teaches thee
how to attain to all those things which are required in the Law, namely, To
love God, and thy Neighbor; otherwise, thy Obedience is nothing worth. This
had need be well understood by those in the Ministry, lest, instead of teaching
Men to love God, they drive them from God, and cause them to hate and abhor
him more than they did before. Lest instead of teaching the Passive Obedience,
which breeds Love to God, they press nothing but the Active Obedience, which
drives all Men from God, for it breeds in Men an opinion of Righteousness by
the Law; which is a Sin directly against the first Commandment.

Therefore Christ calls this manner of Teaching, a teaching Men to break the
Law: He that breaks the least Commandment, Mat. 5.19.
and teaches Men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. This
teaches Men to break the Law, because it establishes in Men a false opinion
of the Law, which binds all Men under the Curse of God.
Now to teach Men to break the Law, is, when no other Righteousness is
required, to make Men Holy and Righteous in the sight of God and Conscience,
but only the Righteousness of the Law. These are the least, least of all
accounted in the sight of God, and least of all accounted on in the Church of
God, because they forsake the true, and lay another Foundation of Faith and
Holiness, which is contrary to the testimony of the holy Ghost here; and also
contrary to the Doctrine of the first Commandment, as has been showed before.

VERSE IV. Draw me --
IT is not here said, Command me, or Compel me, and we will run, but, draw me.
This shows what Doctrine it is, by which the Soul is united to Christ; it is
not done by pressing or requiring the works of the Law, but by giving or
infusing into the Soul the Righteousness of the Gospel. For the Church is here
in heaviness and weariness, being not able of her self to go nor stand, by
reason of her Sin, and the greatness of her Affliction, by which she is filled
with so many fears and perplexities, that the Heart is even ready to sink into
despair, and to conclude, that God has cast it off for ever. Now what shall be
said to this miserable Woman in this condition, that may be suitable in order to
her Peace and Comfort? Shall it be said, go thy way, amend thy Life, keep the
Commandments of God, and then thou shall have full deliverance? This is even as
for a Malefactor that is condemned by the Law, and nothing can help him but
Mercy, to be sent to his Accuser for help and deliverance. This is not to draw
the Soul to Christ, but to wrap it up in Guilt and Bondage. Therefore when thy
Conscience is in distress, thou must then hear no Law, but harken only to the
voice of the blessed Son of God, which draws thee to himself, not by the Law,
but by the Gospel, which delivers thee from all thy fears and distresses, and
settleth thee in a Kingdom of Peace and Joy. Christ does not put the Conscience
in fear, as the Law does, but speaks comfortable words to the trembling
afflicted Conscience. John 8.
The poor Woman that was taken in Adultery, no doubt was in a trembling and
very sad condition, when she was so vehemently accused by the Pharisees, when
they brought her before Christ; Master (say they) this Woman was taken in the
very act, must she not be stoned? For so Moses wrote, what say thou? But
Christ makes no answer to them, only writes with his Finger on the ground,
and bids them, He that is without Sin cast the first Stone at her; and they
being all convicted, went out one by one: But the Woman stayed, and heard
Christ. No doubt the poor Woman could not choose but fall in Love with Christ
greatly, which appeared by her staying until the Pharisees were all gone, and
none left but only Christ and her self: For Christ did not put her in fear,
(neither was she afraid of him) but he asked her this Question, Woman, where
are thine Accusers? Has no Man condemned thee? She said, No Man, Lord. And
Jesus said, Neither do I Condemn thee. This was comfortable to the poor Woman
that had broken the Seventh Commandment; for it is thus much in effect, in as
much as thou hidest not thy Sin, nor flyest away, but abidest with me, and
expect mercy and forgiveness from me, therefore behold, I will not Condemn
thee, but forgive thy Sin, Go, and Sin no more. And by this means was this poor
distressed Woman drawn to Christ, even by the loving and gentle carriage of
Christ her Lord: For she regards not the Accusation of the Pharisees, nor yet
the Accusations of her own Conscience, but listeneth and harkeneth very
diligently to the comfortable News that the Gospel brings. And this is the
request of the Bride in this place, when she says, Draw me, and this must we
all do when we are in misery and distress, even desire to hear and rest upon
the blessed voice of the Son of God.

-- And we will run after thee -- That is to say, in all times of Misery and
Affliction we will make have after thee. Having once found how, and after what
manner, Christ does draw, which is by presenting himself and his merits unto
the Conscience in distress, against the Accusations of the Law, and the fear of
God's wrath; she finding him to be a Person so gentle and amiable, one that
will not upbraid her, and discomfort her, adding Affliction to the Afflicted,
but that speaks kindly and friendly to her; says here, We will run after
thee. This running is nothing but, with readiness of Affection, and speediness
of Action, to make application of the Promises in time of distress; and
therefore it is said, After thee; that is, after thee for Succor and Comfort,
in the time of great Affliction and Misery.

-- The KING has brought me into his Chambers -- The Church desires to be
drawn before, after Christ began to pull her once, she ran speedily after him.
Now here she shows whither she was pulled or drawn, it was into his Chambers;
and also by whom she was drawn, even by the King, the Lord Jesus Christ, her
Beloved. He that might disdain her as a Beggar, brought her into a place of
wonderful joy and delight. Chambers are places where Secrets are used to be
revealed. 2 Kin. 6.12.
Elisha the Prophet told the King of Israel the words that he spoke in his
Bed-Chambers: So that to be brought into the King's Chambers, is to understand
his Secrets. Isa, 26.
Also Chambers are places of Safety, wherein the Godly are Commanded to hide
themselves in, in time of distress, and the Lord's indignation. Now the Spouse
being brought into the King's Chambers, she knows the Secrets of the Most
High, and abides under the shadow of the Almighty; and of this she here
speaks.

There is a double Consideration to be had about the King's Chambers; there are
Chambers of Grace, and Chambers of Glory: There is the House of God in this
Life, and the great Mansion place of his Glory in the Life to come. According
to the words of Christ, John. 14.2.
In my Father's House are many Mansions; I go to prepare a place for you. In
his Chambers in this Life, we see him but as in a Glass darkly; but when we
come into the great Mansion place of his Glory, We shall then behold the King
in his Beauty, Isa. 33.17.
and all the delights of his Love for evermore. Into these Chambers (she says)
the King [hath] brought me, because she having received in his lower House a
taste of his Grace, she is sure she shall be exalted into his upper House, where
she shall be satisfied with his Glory. And this also must be noted, that she is
brought into the Chambers by the King, not by her own doings, but by Christ;
for the Law reveals no Secrets, unless it be opened by the Gospel; neither
can it procure us Safety, work in us Grace, or bring us to Glory; it being the
voice of the Father, Mat. 11.27.
which no Man knows but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him:
Therefore she rejoices only in the King, that is to say, the Gospel. Now she
farther shows in the next words, what her Affection should be most on, when
she is brought into the Chambers.

-- We will rejoice and be glad in thee -- In which words, she shows what is
the object of her joy, both in this Life; and the Life to come, even in the
great Mansion place of his Glory, it is [thee], meaning Christ her Beloved. It
is his Person only wherein she rejoices. And in that she speaks of
rejoicing, it shows what the proper Effect of the Gospel is, namely to
rejoice. All other Doctrines, besides the Gospel, do fill the Consciences of
Men full of fearfulness and terror; but the Effect of the Gospel is
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, in the holy Ghost: Whereby is taught how the
true Pastors (also) of the Church may be known. He, who by his principles,
works not Peace and Gladness in the Conscience, preaches not the Gospel; but
he by whose Principles the Conscience is made joyful, being discharged from the
guilt of Sin, and the fear of God's wrath; he it is that rightly preaches the
Gospel. Deuteronomy. 17.
Now in that she says [we will] rejoice, it teaches all the Sons and Daughters
of Zion to put on a holy resolution of rejoicing; and also to endeavor to
behold such an Excellency in Christ, that may cause rejoicing, that so the
Effects of the Gospel may appear. Therefore as it is our Duty, so it must be
our Care, to put on this holy Resolution, with the Bride in this place, We will
be glad and rejoice in thee.

-- We will remember thy Love more than Wine -- In these words it is showed,
how the Bride does continue in this holy posture of rejoicing, it is by a
continual remembrance of his Love, We will remember thy Love. And on the
contrary, when there is fainting in the day of Adversity, Heb. 12.
it is because the Consolation is forgotten. And when she says [more than Wine]
she means, more than the having or wanting of any outward thing whatsoever.
Reason is affected with things that are profitable and pleasant, and much
dejected in the want of them; but Faith infuseth more joy into the Heart than
Corn and Wine, and all outward things.

-- The Upright love thee. Whereby is meant, those that are upright in their
Principles, that walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel; and also
that are upright toward Men, in all their Carriage and Conversation; that
attribute to Christ the Dominion and Government over the Conscience, to save it
from the guilt of Sin, and wrath of God; and attribute to the Law the Dominion
over the Flesh. These are they that love God. And on the contrary, those that
are Lame and Halting, in respect of their Principles, that are partly for
Christ, and partly for Works, to make them Righteous in the sight of God, are
not the Upright here spoken of, but come far short in settling and establishing
the love of God in the Soul.

VERSE V. I am Black --
THis Speech is directed to the Daughters of Jerusalem: Blackness was the habit
of Mourners, Jer. 8.21.
as appears by the Prophet Jeremiah. The Bride therefore in saying she is
Black, says, she is a Mourner; which is meant, in respect of her outward
condition here in this World, which comes by reason of her Sin and the Cross.
Job 30.30.
Of this Job complains when he was in his great Affliction, My Skin (says
he) is Black upon me. Now because the Daughters of Jerusalem do oftentimes
despise the Gospel, when they behold the People that profess it to be in so
great Affliction and Misery, therefore the Bride directs her Speech to them,
to take away the scandal of the Cross and Offenses that might arise, and says
as follows in the next words: -- But comely --

That is, although I am black by reason of my Sin and Affliction, yet I am
comely in the Person of my Beloved, who does not for this cause reject me, but
joyneth himself unto me, and clothes me with the Garments of Righteousness;
which teaches us the right use of Faith: Which is, That when a Man is as black
as Hair-Cloth, by reason of his Sin, and the greatness of the Cross; yet at
that very time, to behold the Lord Jesus Christ, to be holding forth his
promise of Grace and Favor to him. And also this is farther to be noted, that
nothing comes between this Blackness and Comeliness, but only Faith in her
Redeemer. For she beholds nothing in her self, but that she is covered all
over with blackness and deformity; and yet she rests upon the promise of her
Beloved. And thus must we also do in time of great distress of Mind, when we
are utterly void of all hope in our selves and all Creatures; yet then to lift
up our Eyes and Hearts to our Redeemer, who looks upon us, and joyneth
himself unto us, to take away from us our present Miseries.

-- O ye Daughters of Jerusalem -- By the Daughters of Jerusalem in this place,
I understand, all that party in the visible Church that are yet unconverted,
being contrary in their Principles and Practice to the Bride.

For Jerusalem is not only to be understood of the Free-Mother and Spiritual
City, which brings forth Children free in Spirit, free from the Bondage and
Curse of the Law; but also of that Mother which gendereth all her Children unto
Bondage. Gal. 4.25.


In my judgment they define not aright, that understand by the Daughters of
Jerusalem in this Song, the Elect of God. And by the Queens and Virgins,
mentioned in some part of this Song, Regenerate Persons; and to be all waiters
on, and well-wishers to the Bride; setting forth the Bride to be (as it were) a
stately Queen, and all the rest in the visible Church to be (as it were) Ladies
of Honor, that do attend and wait on the Bride.

True it is, that in the sight of God she is a thing much set by, she has the
holy Ghost for her Comforter, the Angels to be her Ministering Spirits; and
there is joy in Heaven at her Conversion: But in this World she is reproached,
and lightly esteemed, even by those that seem to carry great esteem in the
visible Church.

I understand then by the Daughters of Jerusalem, when they are spoken to by
the Bride, as in this place, to mean the Children of the Bondwoman, that build
upon Principles that do exclude them from the Inheritance of God; but when they
are spoken of jointly, as in Song 3. then to mean all the Children of the
Church visible, united into Church Fellowship by the Signs and Seals of God's
Covenant.

For the holy Ghost sets down the two Covenants under the similitude of two
Mothers, Gal. 4.
Agar and Sarah, which brought forth two sorts of Children in Abraham's Family.
Now, as in Abraham's Family, (which was the visible Church of God) two sorts of
Children were born, the Children of the Bondwoman, and the Children of the
Free; so likewise are there two sorts of People brought forth in the visible
Church throughout all the World, the People of the Law, and the People of
Grace. Also as Agar the Bondwoman brought forth a Son to Abraham, mocking and
persecuting Isaac; so likewise Mount Agar, or Sina, brings forth unto God a
Son, which is an Enemy to the Faith of Christ,

This Enmity arises for want of a right understanding of the promises annexed
to the Law; therefore the Bondwoman requires the works of the Law to be done,
for the obtaining of the promise, and about this point she quarrelleth and
contendeth with the Free Mother, who teaches a contrary Doctrine, namely, that
the Righteousness of the Gospel is to be obtained by Faith without the Law; and
this point she teaches, and herein lies the Controversy.

These two Mothers are often in this Song brought in speaking one to another,
chiefly in the Fifth and Sixth Chapters, where each side commends and
boasts her own Beloved. The right understanding of this one thing (I humbly
conceive) is the principal Key to unlock the Mystery of the whole Song.

Now in this place the Children of the Free-Mother are brought in speaking, and
the sum of the Speech is, to justify her Doctrine against the Daughters, who
conclude, that therefore she is laden with so many and heavy Afflictions, in
regard she holds so wicked a Doctrine; to which she makes this Answer: O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem, ye judge my Principles to be false because of my
outward color, which proceeds (as she shows afterward) from an outward
Cause, to wit, the Sun, and not from any inward Principle I hold and teach: And
this I tell you farther, that although I am black and deformed in your sight,
yet am I a comely Person in the sight of my Beloved; for being covered with his
white Raiment, his own Righteousness, my blackness is taken away, and I am
comely in his sight.

She confesses that she is black, in regard of her own Righteousness, yet she
holds this fast notwithstanding, that she is comely in Christ's sight, which
teaches us the true Rule of Faith; which is first to confess our blackness
before God, before we apply unto our selves, that we are made comely through
Christ. For as he that presents his own Righteousness before God, excludes
himself from Christ, so he that by Faith presents himself a Sinner before
him, joyneth himself to Christ. And this Rule must we all learn, which is,
First, by Faith to present our selves before God confessing our Sins, that so
by the same Faith we may be joined to the Righteousness of Christ our Lord;
then although we are of an evil color in respect of our outward hiew, yet
shall we appear of a comely color in the sight of Christ our Beloved.

And also then may we easily overcome the Daughters, who all stick upon this
Proposition, and conclude, thou want the Righteousness of the Law, therefore
thou art condemned. To which we must answer, I grant the premises, but deny the
Conclusion. I confess I want the Righteousness of the Law; but I have another
Righteousness, even the Righteousness of Christ, by which I am justified and
saved.

-- As the Tents of Kedar -- Now here she sets out her deformity by a
comparison, The Tents of Kedar. The Kedarims dwelt in black and hairy Tents,
were a Warlike People, and never built Houses; but being keepers of Cattle, had
their Tents in open Fields; such as Gentlemen have at Court, or Men of War
lying open to the Air.

These Tents of theirs were deformed, partly by the Sun, and partly by Storms
and Weather, and were not of any outward beauty; therefore the Bride is
compared to these Tents. Yet some think the comparison is of the Kedarims that
dwelt in those Tents, who were of the Posterity of Ishmael, Genesis 25.13.
(for Kedar was the second Son of Ishmael, whose Posterity lived in Tents)
these living so near the Sun, were even as Black Mores; but which way so ever
it be taken, the comparison serves to set out the deformity of the Church,
which yet notwithstanding her blackness outwardly, she will not lose the
Righteousness of Christ her Lord; and therefore she adds, -- As the Curtains
of Solomon.

King Solomon had a very rich and sumptuous Bed, as is to be seen in Song 3.
for the entertainment of Pharaoh's Daughter, and other of his Queens. And as he
made himself a Bed, so he had Curtains also pertaining to the Bed, which
Curtains were not only for Ornament to adorn the Bed, but also for use to
preserve it from defilement. And Solomon being a King excelling in Riches and
Wisdom, no doubt his Curtains were very rich and glorious.

Now as King Solomon had a Bed for the entertainment of his Queen, so the Lord
Jesus Christ has a Bed, wherein he entertaineth his Queen; and the Bed of
Christ is his Church, in which Company he delights himself. And the Curtains
about this Bed are the Saints, which do adorn the Bed, in keeping the Doctrine
of Christ pure, from being defiled. Song 3.
These are said (by an indefinite Speech) to be sixty valiant Men, of the
valiant of Israel; these are the choice ones in the Church, Men that are expert
in the Faith, that are able to make War against all Heretics and Seducers:
These are like Solomon's Curtains, being always round about the Bed in all Ages
of the Church, to preserve the Doctrine of Christ from false Glosses. These are
knit unto Christ by Faith, and one to another by Love and Unity in Doctrine.
Exodus 26.
So that even as the Curtains of the Tabernacle were coupled together with
Taches of Gold, to make one Tabernacle; so by these golden Taches of Faith and
Love, the Saints are knit to Christ, and one to another.

And in this sense the Bride says here, she is comely, not only in respect of
her Faith toward God, but also in that she is an Ornament to the Bed, being
instrumental to preserve the Church of God from being defiled, by reason of
corrupt Doctrine.

This teaches us what the Life of the Saints is, and must be in this World,
even to keep the Church of God (as much as in us lies) from being polluted by
false Doctrine, for they are set round about the Bed for this purpose, to fight
against Satan and his Ministry; and the reason and wisdom of the Flesh, (which
always opposes and fights against the Gospel) and also to walk in Unity one
toward another, and toward all Men.

VERSE VI. Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked
upon me; my Mother's Children were angry with me, they made me the Keeper of
the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept.
IT is as much as to say this, Look not upon me with contempt, to despise the
Doctrine I profess, nor yet upon my stains and blemishes, as if I were cast off
and rejected of my Beloved; for although my Skin be of an evil color, this
does not proceed from any evil there is in the Gospel, but from an outward
cause, to wit, the Sun; the Sun has looked upon me, therefore I would not be
despised, and counted a Cast away, for it is not my natural hew, I am comely in
the sight of my Beloved. True it is, I have some troubles upon me, my Mother's
Children do afflict me. There be many of the same Lineage I am of, in respect of
the outward state of the Church, we have all one Mother; but they have not the
Spirit of Adoption, to become the Children of my heavenly Father. My Mother's
Sons have not true Faith in Christ, nor Hearts to live, as Brethren and Sisters
ought to do: For although we were born in one House, and brought up in one
Family, did all eat the same Spiritual Meat, and drink the same Spiritual
Drink; Yet they are fallen away by evil Principles, and into an evil course of
Life; and because I am not willing to follow their evil ways in Life and
Doctrine, therefore they are angry with me. They have cankered Minds, full of
malice, and very much enflamed against me; for when I was about mine own
business in the Lord's Vineyard, to do good to every Vine, according to my
power and skill, they made me (through my own frailty and weakness) to look to
other Vines; not only to do such Orders, observe such Ceremonies, and preach
such Doctrines, as I was never appointed to do; but also sought to draw me
quite away from the Lord's Vineyard, to other Vineyards: And to persuade me
hereunto, they would make me a Keeper; they would set me in an Office to keep
out the defiled and unclean, lest their Vineyard should be spoiled by evil
Beasts: And while I was thus employed, yielding my self too much this way, they
brought me quite out of Love with my own Vineyard, mine own Vineyard have I not
kept; and in forsaking mine own Vineyard, which I too much consented to, I had
even lost the benefits of Christ my Lord and Savior.

The Bride here shows, that although she be black and stained, and out of
countenance, yet she would not be looked upon proudly, with disdain and
contempt, but as an object of Pity and Mercy; yet this she shows to be the
practice of the Daughters of Jerusalem in all Ages of the Church, to cover all
things that is comely in the Bride, to bury that in Oblivion, but to fasten
their Eyes very heedfully upon that which is her blackness and deformity. Such
is the infirmity of Man's nature, that if there be any blemishes and stains in
others, that we curiously observe, and suffer our Affections to be even quite
abated from them therefore; but if there be any thing worthy of Praise, that we
skip over and take little notice thereof. That which is good in us, we would
have all Men look upon, and have us in high estimation for; but in dealing with
other Men, we behold every spot, blemish, and stain. All Men are willing to
have their own deformities skipped over, and their virtues highly praised and
honored; but are loath to take any notice of the virtues in others, although
they be ever so excellent and worthy of praise. But why do we look upon that
which desameth the Person in some things? And do not as well behold that which
will set him out in other things. If there be some blemish in an House, we take
not much notice of it, but, most of all, behold that which will make it
saleable: Or, if a ground be infected with Herbs and Roots, that in some
respects may be unprofitable; yet, if in other respects they are useful, we
account of them, and cherish them. Now, if in Herbs and Roots we respect the
virtues, as well as the baseness, why do not we the like by the Church of God?
Why do not we mark the best things to help to inflame Charity, and to nourish
true Christian Love, as well as to fasten our Eyes upon the deformities of the
Church, which is the ready way to separate our Affections from it.

She also complains farther, than in leaning too much to her Mother's Sons,
she forsook (as it were) the fruit of her own Vineyard, even the Righteousness
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Of this sort of People the Church of God has ever
been pestered withal, such that fall away themselves, and then seek to draw
Disciples after them; some to follow Rules and Orders which are not commanded,
that live within the Church, and to draw Men into an evil course of Life, and
others which seek to draw Men from the Lord's Vineyard, unto other Vineyards,
whereby they come to lose the Fruits of Christ's Death and Resurrection. For it
must well be noted, that although in separation from Churches, a great show of
Holiness, may be pretended; yet under that show of Holiness, the greatest Sin
lies hid, which is a departing from the Gospel.

And the reason is, because the ground of separating from one Church to
another, is not because the gifts of God are wanting, in the Church separated
from, which are the Word and Sacraments, but because of Men's corruptions;
neither is the ground of their uniting into another Church fellowship, because
of the word of God, but the works of Men. Now because they make another ground
of Church fellowship, which is not the Gospel, preferring the abominable works
of Men, before and beyond the Word and Righteousness of God, having nothing to
glory in, but only in the Act of Separation; therefore by the very Act of
Separation, the Fruits of the Vineyard are lost. And this is that which the
Bride here touches upon, and confesses she did yield too much this way; (and
about this point most that are godly, first or last are tottering) yet she
recovered her self, and confesses, that she had rather forsake her Mother's
Sons, although they be angry with her, than by following their Doctrine and way
to lose the Fruits of her own Vineyard, and purchase the displeasure of her
Beloved.

Therefore let every Man in the Church of God keep to his own Vineyard, and do
the Lord's work; first in looking to himself, then in planting the young Vines:
Also in nourishing those that are planted, there is work for every Man to do,
and God will give a liberal Reward in the end; every Man at the last shall have
his Penny.

VERSE VII. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou
make thy Flocks to rest at Noon, for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the Flocks of thy Companions?
IN this temptation the Bride shows what she did, she made her request to her
Beloved, and to win him to hear and grant her request, she calls him, not by
such Titles as are usually given to him in Scripture, as the Messiah, or the
Anointed of the Lord, or the wonderful Counselor, but by that Title she felt
(to be due to him) in her own Affections: Oh thou whom my Soul loves! Tell me
(O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest; I know that where thou
feedest, there is thy Presence; and where thy Presence is, there is thy Flock;
and therefore I pray thee tell me: For I am a poor silly Woman thy Spouse, and
have some Troubles upon me by reason of my Mother's Sons, and am many times
troubled in Conscience, because I do things contrary to my Conscience, and
cannot tell where to have Peace but in thee; therefore, I pray thee, tell me
where thou usest to feed, and also make thy Flocks to rest at Noon. What that
Doctrine is, that is thy People's rest; and in what Company of People, the
Principles of that Doctrine are taught; that so even as Shepherds in Countries
near the Sun, do not only feed their Sheep in fit Pastures, but also drive them
to shade at Noon. So also in the time of Persecution from my Mother's Sons, I
may know in the heat of the day whither to run, to be safe under thy Couch. For
if thou do it not, I may very much hurt my self, by degenerating into a
strange Vine; for others feed Flocks, and make shows to be thy Companions,
which are but Seducers and Deceivers; and why should I be as one that turns
aside, following after those Flocks, for want of understanding the place where
thou art always resident?

But what is the cause the Church so loves Christ whom she never saw?

The cause is, she loves him with her Soul; and this knowledge she has by
Faith alone, and not from her Works: for although by Works she manifests her
Faith before Men, yet nothing can evidence Faith to her own Conscience, but
only Faith it self. The last Resolution of Faith is, when the Evidence of Works
is lost, and nothing is left to assure us but the Word alone.
For nothing can evidence Faith in the last Resolution of it to be Faith, but
the infusing of Grace into the Soul, without precedent preparation; but in all
Works there must be some precedent Preparative to make them good. Now what ever
that precedent Preparative is that makes them good Works, the same is the Light
and Evidence of Faith it self; and nothing can evidence Works (to us) to be
good but Faith; therefore Faith alone must evidence it self in the last
Resolution of Faith, it alone being infused into the Soul, without any
precedent preparation. Now Faith is an Evidence, because it being a rational
Faculty, knows what is given us of God, and also knows what is by us received.

And one thing more (amongst many) is chiefly to be noted. The Bride here
loves Christ with her Soul, and yet she is ignorant in many things which are
also of concernment; she knows not where he feeds, but scruples she has
about the place; nor where to rest her self in the heat of the day; nor how to
answer something objected against her by Seducers; yet she is not dismayed, and
driven out of her Faith, notwithstanding all this, but loves Christ with her
Soul: Which must comfort those poor wretches that are ignorant in many points,
that cannot tell how to discourse of high Matters, nor to answer many
Objections that are made against them by Seducers; yet if they know but this
one thing, that Christ has given them freely that which they have lost in
Adam, in this may they rejoice, and by this they may certainly know, that they
are of the number of Christ's Flock, that do pertain to the Bride-bed.

VERSE VIII. If thou know not, (O thou fairest among Women) go thy way forth by
the Footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids besides the Shepherds Tents.
THese words are the Answer of Christ to the Churches request, wherein he
shows his Compassion to her, although she was ignorant in some things, and
therefore he answers her thus: If thou know not aright the place where I
feed, yet I account of thee, therefore be not dismayed, thy Person is in
favor, for thou art to me the fairest amongst Women; therefore hearken to me,
and follow my direction: Go thy way forth by the Footsteps of the Flock. Mark
the track of all the Flock that went before thee, Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, and other holy Men of God, that both knew my voice, and followed me;
and see where they did feed, and what they rested on in the heat of the day,
and when thou have found the track, there feed thy Kids by the Shepherds Tents.

Christ here terms his Bride, The fairest amongst Women, although she has
many imperfections in her; and the reason is, because he covers all her
deformities with his own Righteousness and Merits; therefore he takes pleasure
in her, hides all her stains and blemishes, and mentions nothing but her
fairness and beauty.

This is contrary to the practice of the World, who walk after another Rule;
who, if they see a Man that professes Religion to be filled with many
excellent Virtues that be worthy of praise, yet if they can (with their curious
Eyes) but see any imperfection in him, they quickly set him upon the Stage, to
make him a spectacle to all the World. They are willing to behold his stains
and blemishes, and to cover him with Infamy and Reproach; but they bury all
things that are comely in him in the Grave of Oblivion. These, by their
despising others, do highly magnify themselves; but if they follow the Rules
of Christ in other things, (as they suppose they do) why do they not also
follow the Example of Christ in this, which of all others is so worthy of
imitation? Why do they walk so directly contrary to Christ, and to that which
is the principal Duty in practical new Obedience? Christ by his Righteousness
covers the deformities of the humbled Sinner, and calls him the fairest;
these, by their Righteousness, cover all things that are worthy of praise, and
upon the sight of some imperfections, count him the filthiest of all others.
This is a shame to all that account themselves Christians, especially to those
that esteem themselves great in the Church, being Teachers of others, who talk
much of the Gospel in their Doctrine; but why do they throw it down by their
practice? Does not the Gospel principally teach Pity and Compassion toward
Men, even as God has showed Pity and Compassion toward us? If these Men were
so Righteous indeed, as they seem to be in their own Eyes, would they not then
do to others, as they would be done unto themselves? They themselves are
willing to have their own Virtues praised, and their Deformities buried, and
this they greedily gape after; but in dealing with others, they make them as
the filth of the World, and the offscouring amongst Men. Now who shall cover
the Deformities of these Men before God, when they will show no Pity nor
Compassion to their Brethren before Men? How far these Men are besides the
Mark, it is easy for all Men to judge.

Let every poor humbled Sinner therefore receive the Consolation of Christ
here, and not be too much dismayed at his own deformity, nor yet too much
dejected with the Reproaches of Men. Christ says, If thou know not, yet thou
art to me the fairest amongst Women. Knowledge is the Eye of the Soul, which
ought to be the guide of all Men's Actions, and the Eye being blemished, a
great part of the Churches beauty is stained and defaced, yet then if we seek
unto him (as the Church does here) and humble our selves before him, he will
speak loving and comfortable words unto us.

The Church is also directed in this Verse to feed her Kids by the Shepherds
Tents.

It must be noted, that the Shepherds Tents were always where the Ark was,
which was the visible Sign of God's Presence. When the Ark of God was in
Shiloh, 1 Samuel 1.
the Shepherds Tents were there. And when the Ark was brought into the Temple
at Jerusalem, then the Shepherds Tents were there. And in Number. 2.17. we read,
that the Children of Israel were to pitch their Tents about the Tabernacle, (of
which the Levites had the charge) because the Ark was there. And as the Camp of
the Levites was set forwards with the Tabernacle, so every Man in his place was
to set forwards by his Standard. But with us the Ark of God is Baptism, Mat. 28.
because Baptism is the visible Sign to which the promise of Christ's Presence
is made.

Now in that it is said, There feed thy Kids, it shows where the true Church
is, even where the Ark is. Baptism and the Lord's Supper then are the Shepherds
Tents. Not a resting in the work done; but where the right reason of their
Institution is preserved and taught, there are the true Shepherds, and there is
good feeding.

Now in that it is said, Feed thy [Kids], it shows, that the Flock of Christ
consists of little Kids, as well as of greater and stronger Cattle; Isa. 40.
so Christ is said, to gather the Lambs in his Arms: Which shows, he has not
only Sheep, but also Lambs in his Flock.

And also it being said, [there] feed thy Kids, it teaches us this; that the
Mother cannot have any feeding for her little Kids, unless she bring them first
under the promise of God: So that even as the natural Mother cannot feed her
Babe, unless she give it the Teat; no more can the Spiritual Mother feed her
little Kids, unless she first bring them to the Ark. Learn therefore the true
knowledge of the Ark, then thou have found the Shepherds Tents; thither bring
thy Kids, and feed them with Heavenly nourishment.

VERSE IX. I have compared thee (O my Love) to a company of Horses in Pharaoh
's Chariot.
THis sentence seems to hang upon the former, and shows how well Christ is
pleased with the request of the Bride in the former Verse, and declares his
loving Affection to her: And therefore he begins with a Note of Admiration, O
my Love, I have compared thee! I am loath to set thee out by thy self alone, I
will do it by a similitude; and many things there are I might compare thee to,
but of them all, I will set thee out by Horses; and not by Horses of the
meanest sort, but by Horses in Pharaoh's Chariot.

Egyptian Horses were the chiefest in all the World, both for Battle and
Courage, 1 Kin. 28.
and also highest in Account. And the Horse is a Warlike Creature, that
rejoices in his strength, Job 39.
and goes on to meet the Armed Men. Zac. 10.3.
And the Lord did make the House of Judah as his goodly Horse in the day of
Battle, which treads down the Enemy as mire in the Streets; and therefore the
Bride is here compared to Horses, in regard of her Faith and Doctrine, by which
she treads down, and spoileth, all her Spiritual Enemies. And also to Horses
in Pharaoh's Chariot; that as a company of Pharaoh's goodly Horses, well
harnessed together, running with courage and swiftness, made much for the
Honor of the King; so the Church, in shouldering together courageously for the
destruction of Antichrist and his Kingdom, makes much for the Honor of Christ
her Beloved.

Which shows, that the Lord's delight is in exercising his Church with
Enemies and Seducers; not only for the trial of her Faith and Patience, but
also that the Kingdom of Satan may thereby be overthrown, and totally
destroyed. Therefore no man must take offense, if he be exercised in this kind;
but set forth himself manfully to defend the Gospel, and patiently to continue
in the Exercise thereof.

VERSE X. Thy Cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, and thy Neck with Chains
of Gold.
IN the former Verse the Church is commended for her Courage and Skill, in
making War against her Spiritual Enemies; here she is commended for her Beauty.
Some say, the modesty of the Church is here praised, which appears in her
Cheeks when she blusheth for shame, having sinned against God. But the words
are an Allegory, wherein one thing is expressed, and another thing is meant;
therefore we are not to understand by the Cheeks and Neck the Complexion of the
Face, but what ever may make the Bride beautiful and comely to behold. That
which gives light for the opening of this place, is in Prove. 20.15. The Lips of
Knowledge are a precious Jewel. And Prove. 1.8, 9. The Law is said to be an
Ornament to the Head, and as Chains about the Neck. By which Scriptures it
appears, that as the fine Women in Solomon's time did use to adorn their
Cheeks and Necks with Jewels, set in rows, and Chains of Gold, for an addition
of their Beauty; so also the Church is adorned with Jewels, Chains of Gold, and
Ornaments about her Head and Neck, which is a right knowledge and understanding
of the Law of Grace, which makes her to appear beautiful and glorious. Also it
is noted by some, that the word Tor, which signifies a Row (having Affinity
with the Hebrew word Torah, which has the name of the Law, which is as Chains)
is used also for a Turtle Dove, and then the words may be read thus; Thy Cheeks
are comely with rows of Jewels, wherein are Figures of Turtles. And the Turtle
Doves were to be used in offering Sacrifice, which Offerings and Sacrifices
were Types and Figures of Christ's sufferings in the Flesh.

Now this teaches us, First, what it is that does bespangle the Church (as it
were) with Chains and Jewels, even the right understanding and opening of God's
Law; 1 Cor. 3.12. Isa. 54.12.
therefore the Doctrine of the Gospel is compared to Gold, Silver, and precious
Stones. And the Windows or Lights of the Church to Agates, and the laying of
her Foundation is said to be with Saphirs, Rev. 21.19.
and all manner of precious Stones; which things, as they do wonderfully shine
and glitter in the Eyes of Men, so the right understanding and opening of the
Mystery of the Gospel, does make the Church to shine and glitter in the Eyes of
all those that relish the same.

Next (in that the Cheeks are comely with Figures of Turtles) it teaches us,
that as soon as the Church is adorned with Jewels and Chains as aforesaid, as
soon as once her Doctrine comes to make a glittering in the Church, it brings
upon her the Image or Figure of the Turtle, that is to say, Persecution and the
Cross: She is brought into a suffering condition for Christ's sake, and here
she is commended and said to be beautiful and very comely, in that she
patiently bears the Image or Figure of the Turtle, in suffering Calamities
for Christ's sake; which Calamities will come wheresoever the Gospel is truly
preached; and therefore the Cheeks of the Church are here commended.

And thus when the sufferings of Christ were spoken of by the Prophet, it is
said, Isa. 50.
I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them that plucked off the
Hair; where the Cheeks and the Back only are named, for all Christ's
sufferings, in regard of his Humanity. And thus it is with the Church here. So
Jeremiah endured smitings, and Paul buffettings; but every buffetting that
comes upon the Face for Christ's sake and the Gospel, although it mar the
Visage in the sight of Men; yet it is (as it were) the planting of a Jewel in
the sight of God.

He then that desires to be spangled with rows of Jewels, and Chains of Gold,
must be sure to learn, in the first place, the right understanding of the Law
of Grace, that his Doctrine may make a glittering in the Church, Eze. 16.10.
that the Heavenly City may be clothed with broidered work, and (as it were)
decked with Ornaments; and the Consciences of poor distressed Sinners may be
garnished with all manner of precious Stones, whereby they may be secured from
the wrath of God.

Next, he must arm himself quietly and patiently to suffer for the Gospel. Then
are the Cheeks comely with rows of Jewels; then thou do rightly bear the
Image and Figure of the Turtle Dove, even of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has
loved thee, and suffered for thee.

VERSE XI. We will make thee Borders of Gold, with Studs of Silver.
THese words are a promise of the Church's farther enlargement. By Borders are
here meant Salvation, begun in this Life, but perfected in the Life to come,
which the Prophet calls Walls and Bulwarks; Isa. 26.
because, when the knowledge of Salvation comes into the Conscience, it is a
most sure and certain Defense. Now here is an increase of the knowledge of
Salvation promised, that she may live in abundance of peace and quietness of
Heart, according to the words of the Prophet, Violence shall no more be heard
within thy Walls, wasting, nor Destruction within thy Borders; which must be
understood of the inward Man here in this Life, when the fear of God's wrath is
banished out of the Conscience through Faith in Christ, but as it concerns
the Life to come; it means that eternal and everlasting Felicity, which is
prepared for us in the Kingdom of Heaven.

And it being said, [We] will make thee, it shows, that the preparation of
Salvation for us is a work of the whole Deity; and also, how both Grace and
Glory comes unto us, not because of our works, but from the promise of God
alone.

And in that the Borders are promised to be made of Gold, it means, 1 Cor. 3.
the preaching of the Gospel, which is compared to Gold, Silver, and precious
Stones; and therefore the Streets of the City (wherein the Bride lives,
walks, Rev. 21.
and rejoices) are said to be all of pure Gold. And the Borders being made
with Silver Studs, it means the Righteousness of Christ, inherent in himself,
and imputed to us, which is as refined Silver, free from all the dross of Man's
original and actual Corruptions, and is of sufficient value to defend our
sinful Souls from the fears of the Law, and malice of Satan; and also to
purchase for us that most excellent and eternal weight of Glory, which we shall
one day enjoy with the blessed Deity, and all the Saints and Angels for
evermore.

VERSE XII. While the King sits at his Repast, my Spikenard sends forth
the smell thereof.
THese words are the speech of the Church, and do set forth the benefit she
receives from her Beloved, when she sits at Repast with him. To sit at
Repast, as some say, is to sit round in a Circle, round about compassing a
thing; like as when Men sit at a round Table to refresh themselves at Dinner,
or at Breakfast. So that Christ's sitting at Repast, is his sitting in
Compass. And the Compass or Circle that he sits in is the Earth, with his
Chosen on Earth; so that in all places where his Chosen are, there sits
Christ at Repast. And when the Bride meets the King at Repast, she says, My
Spikenard gave the smell thereof.

The Spikenard is a Flower growing in Syria, bitter of taste, but wonderful
sweet of smell; and that which comes out of the Flower, gives also a most
excellent scent to a Man's Nose.

Now, as at Banquets, Kings, and other great Persons, did use to come with
their sweet Perfumes to make a most fragrant scent to their Queens, and others;
so does the Bride here when she meets the King at Repast, she is perfumed
with the King's Spikenard.

Now by the King here, is meant the Lord Jesus Christ; and by his Repast, the
Gospel; and by his Sitting, that wonderful rest and content he takes, in
feeding his People with Knowledge and Understanding; and by the Spikenard, the
joyful scent of his own Righteousness and Merits; and the word [while], notes
the time when she receives this Heavenly Oil, even when the King sits at
Repast, that is, when the Gospel is preaching. And she calls it my Spikenard,
because the Righteousness of Christ is hers by imputation; and by sending forth
the smell thereof, she means the perfuming of all those humbled Sinners that
come to the Kings Repast.

First then we must diligently observe where the King sits at Repast, and
also when he sits to feed, and what the true scent of the Spikenard is; that
we may be in readiness to receive it our selves, and then to open the Box, and
pour it out to others, that the whole House may be filled with the Odor
thereof.

VERSE XIII. A bundle of Myrrh is my Beloved unto me --
IN this Verse is showed the reason why she smells so sweet; it is not from
her self, but from her Beloved, from whom she has this excellent Perfume; My
Beloved is a bundle of Myrrh unto me. Exodus 30.23.
Myrrh was used in making the anointing Oil, which made Persons holy. Some
say, the Myrrh grows in Eastern Countries, and that it is a certain shrub
like unto a prickly Thorn, and bearing Flowers, having Seeds in them; out of
which Seeds, there comes a certain Gum which is notable for smell; and also
that the Flowers (the prickles being taken out) are excellent for smell, being
made in a Posey, or bound up in a bundle* But whether it be a Bag, Bundle, or
made in a Posey, or the Gum of Myrrh, it serves to set forth the excellent
sweetness of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now it must be noted here, that she speaks of the Righteousness of his
Person, inherent in himself, and imputed through Faith, which Righteousness she
has in singular estimation; for she sings not here of his Righteousness
imparted, (although that she has also) but of his Righteousness imputed, which
is as sweet to the broken hearted, afflicted, and humbled Soul, as the sweetest
Gum of Myrrh, or as the Flowers of Myrrh made into a Posey. This bundle of
Myrrh (she says) my Beloved is unto me; so that when I am afflicted, in
heaviness, and great distress, the smelling to this Bag, Bundle, or Posey of
Myrrh, yields unto me a most fragrant scent.

-- He shall lie all Night between my Breasts. In these words is showed the use
of this Bundle, or Posey of Myrrh, it is to lie between her Breasts, which
words we must understand, otherwise the sweetness of the Bundle will be utterly
lost.

Understand that by Night she means all times of Affliction, and fears of the
Law, whether it be fear of wrath, of guilt, of want, of reproach and contempt
of the World, or whatsoever else may make the Heart heavy and sad; in which
condition are we, for whom this posey is provided, commonly cast into, not
because our Heavenly Father does delight to afflict us, but because without it
we can never understand nor smell the sweetness of the gum. Now what course
does she take for the banishing of all fears and perplexities, out of her mind
and conscience in this night of distress? It is here answered, she lodges
Christ between her breasts, she holds him fast by faith; and makes
application of his gracious promises, against all fears and discomforts
whatsoever. And this is the true use of the gospel. Therefore we must learn
with the bride here, to be provided with this bag or bundle of Myrrh, against
the night of affliction comes, that so when all things that make for our
discomfort, will seem to be present, and those things which should comfort us
will seem to be absent, and nothing will appear before our eyes, but the
remembrance of what we have done: yet then, by having this Heavenly posey in a
readiness to smell to, the sweetness of the gum may drive away all noisome fumes
out of our minds and consciences. So wonderful a thing is faith, that when once
it lays hold on Christ, and lodges him within the Soul; all fears and doubts
must vanish before it, even as the mist before the Sun.

VERSE XIV. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of
Engedi.
IN these words the Church uses another similitude to set forth the sweetness
of her beloved, which is by a cluster of Camphire. The Camphire or Cypress
Tree, is, (as some write) a Tree that grows most commonly near to the Indian
Country, that bears very sweet and pleasant fruit: But here the Cipress Tree
is commended, Jos. 15.
that grows in the Vineyards of Engedi; which was a City in the Land of Jury
very fruitful, and in their Orchards they planted this Tree of Cypress or
Camphire, which being in so fruitful a place, it was the notablest fruit they
had: So that as in our Land some fruit is more proveable then other fruit, so
was this Camphire or Cypress Tree most fruitful of all others, in the Vineyards
of Engedi. And to this fruit she likeneth her beloved, which may also serve for
a reason why he shall lie all night between her Breasts, because of the
sweetness of the fruit, that comes by his death and Resurrection.

Which fruit she likeneth to a cluster, because it brings all blessings to
her for this life, and the life to come. And which grows in the Vineyards of
Engedi, to show, that she delights in that fruit which grows in the most
fruitful Soil. She does not boast of that righteousness which is inherent in
her self, (although that she has also) but of that which is inherent in her
beloved, as he is the subject of inherency.

Now it cannot be denied, but that the righteousness of Christ inherent in
himself, and imputed to us, is infinitely of more worth, then that
righteousness which he does impart, or communicate unto us, because in all the
works that Christ did, there was something in them which was incommunicable to
any Creature, which only made his own righteousness of infinite worth in the
sight of his Father. Therefore she likeneth her beloved to the fruit that
grows in Engedi, because by his fruit alone, she has deliverance from sin
and the wrath of God.

VERSE XV. Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair --
THis is the speech of Christ, who beholding his spouse, declaring the use of
her faith in the time of tribulation, commends her for the same, which
shows that he is well pleased. And the word [behold] shows his willingness
she should know it. And when he pronounces her [fair] he means free from the
guilt of sin. And when he says [my love] he shows that her person is
accepted. And by the word [thou] he means to exclude all those that are not
of faith, from shareing in the benefits of his Death and Resurrection. Now the
doubling of the words shows, how hard it is for us, in the hour of
Temptation, to apply our selves to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ: and also
how willing the Lord Christ is, that then we should not forget, but remember
his loving and comfortable words. All these things are written that we might
believe; and that when the hour of Temptation comes, we should put them into
use and practice, otherwise we cannot possible please our head and Husband: who
came into the world on purpose, and is ascended into Heaven on purpose, that we
might receive his benefits, and rejoice in the same.

-- Thou have doves eyes. Now that which he chiefly praises the bride for, is
the eye, as a thing which tends most of all to the setting out of her
fairness, other parts draw not the affection, as does the eye; therefore Christ
chooses the eye to set forth the praise of his Church, which stands in a
comparison, thou have doves eyes. The doves eye is simple, harmless, is not
crafty, seeks not greedily after a prey, does not peck with the Bill, nor
hurt any thing as other Birds do; but here it is chiefly used to set forth the
chastity of the Bride, toward her Husband the Lord Jesus Christ; who
notwithstanding all her afflictions, and temptations, chooses no other refuge
to fly unto, but with the Dove, she cleaves fast to her mate. And also the
eyes are here commended, because through faith the kills the Law, and lives
in the service and freedom of her beloved, and does good works freely and of
choice.

VERSE XVI. Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, --
THese are the words of the Church, wherein she returns the praise of all her
beauty to her beloved, (who is fairer then the Sons of Men) from whom all her
fairness is derived. She dares not to appear before him in her self, therefore
prays him to behold his own fairness, as being the only cause of her
acceptance in his sight, which is a rule, and pattern for every man to imitate.

-- yea, pleasant -- Thou art not only fair, but also pleasant in thy self, in
the enjoyment of me, and pleasant to me, in that thou speak so kindly to me,
and acceptest of me. Which words do show us what manner of person Christ is,
and what his carriage is to us, altogether pleasant and lovely: So that as soon
as ever we look upon him by faith, Esa. 62.2.
and humble our selves before him, he rejoices in us and over us, as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride.

Therefore when we are overwhelmed with heaviness and sadness of heart, this
does not come from Christ; but from the Law and our evil conscience, being not
well purged and cleansed of unbelief; for to those that are humbled before him
Christ is pleasant.

-- Also our bed is green. This is likely to be the joint speech of Christ and
his Church, rejoyceing together in the place of meeting, for the bed is the
place either in public or private, where Christ and his people meet together.
And by the greens of the bed is meant the fruitfulness that comes by reason of
the meeting of Christ and his Church, Romans 7.
according to Saint Paul, being married to Christ, ye bring forth fruit unto
God; that is, many Children unto glory. The Gospel is the Doctrine that
converts the Soul, and the reason why so few are converted is, because the
Gospel is seldom Preached; therefore the labors of the Ministry are not blessed,
but men are smiten with barrenness, become dead and withered Trees, bringing
forth no fruit at all unto God, because they want the company of the Lord Jesus
Christ in the bed; therefore it being said [our bed] Agar the bondwoman is
excluded from the priveledge of the bed, as one, who although she has many
Children before men, yet she has none at all before God, and the reason is,
because she entertaineth not Christ in the bed; she imbraceth the servant, and
forsakes her Lord: therefore that heavy judgment spoken of by the Prophet Esaias
follows in its time, Esa. 47.19.
the loss of Children, and Widdowhood shall come upon thee in one day in their
perfection. This is the heavy doom that will one day fall upon the bondwoman
and all her Children; her bed being too short, and the covering too narrow, to
hide her from her sin, and the wrath of God Almighty.

Learn we therefore, that Doctrine which makes the fruitful bed, and shows
the fruitful Mother, that is, so to understand the Law, as it may further us to
faith in Christ, and so to understand the Gospel, that it may further us in the
duties of the Law.

This is a most rare and Heavenly Art, which none can teach but the Holy Ghost,
let us therefore pray unto him without ceaseing to bestow this gift upon us;
who has promised to bestow upon us all things that we shall ask which are
according to his will. Then shall the bed become fruitful, then shall we
rejoice in the meeting place, and say with the bride here, our bed is also
green.

VERSE XVII. The beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of Fir.
NOw here is showed the reason why the bed comes to be so fruitful, and how the
family of God comes to be so much enlarged, it is by reason of the beams and
rafters; which are the strong supporters of all the building. 1 Timothy 3.15.
Where first note, that by the house is meant the Church of God. And by the
beams and rafters, the builders of the Church of God. And the beams being of
Cedar, Isa. 44.40. Isa. 20.
it signifies strength, and also such timber that will not rot, but is dureable
and sweet. Now the godly are often said to be Cedars, and the chief in the
Church are said to be pillars. Also the house having rafters, it shows it
has a covering or defense, and they being of Fir (which some think is another
Tree called the Brutine Tree, which is of pleasant smell) signifies purity of
Doctrine. Such beams and pillars, that are well versed in pure Doctrine are
always used in building the house of God in every age: therefore the bed is
always fruitful, and the Church can never decay, because the builders thereof
are always lasting. And as it is a house very sweet and pleasant for a man to
live in: So it is infinite in strength, and for safety. It is therefore a vain
thing for any man to think to undermine the Church of God, seeing it is a house
built upon a Rock, and although men think to race it, and down with it even to
the ground; yet he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, Psalm. 2.
the Lord shall have them in derision. There may be some breaches made
concerning the outward face, and prosperity of the Church, but her inward peace
and glory can never be taken away.

And also seeing the house of God is for safety, it having a roof or covering,
it is wisdom for every man to get into it; that he may be safe from the Wind
and stormy Tempests of the wrath of God.

Blessed is that man whose hope the Lord is, that sets his confidence upon
the gracious protection of the Almighty, he shall be guarded with Angels, and
kept as the apple of his eye; the Lord will be a sufficient defense unto him in
life and death.

CHAP. II.
VERSE I. I am the rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the Valleys.
THESE words are the voice of the bride, as appears by the Prophet Esaias, Esa.
35.1.
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose; which words being spoken of
the Church, it shows the Church to be the Rose.

And she terms her self to be the Rose of Sharon, not only because Sharon of
all places was most excellent for Roses; but also because it was prophesied
that Sharon should be a sheepfold, Esa. 65.10.
that the Gospel should come to Sharon, and that Christ should have his flock
there.

And in that she says, I am the Lilly, it accords with the words of the
Prophet; I will be as the dew unto Israel, Hos. 14.5.
he shall grow as the Lilly.

Now the Rose is the Queen of flowers, surpassing all in beauty and smell; and
the Lilly is next in Nobility to the Rose, surmounting all in respect of her
clothing, insomuch that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like the
Lilly. And she terms her self therefore to be the Rose and the Lilly, in
regard she is most excellently perfumed, with the scent of her beloved; and
also clothed with his righteousness from the wrath of God.

She is also compared to the Lilly, Mat. 6.28.
in respect of the manner of her growth: for the Lillies labor not, neither do
they spin, but only stand still and receive the virtue of the ground from
whence they grow. So the bride she labors not, she travaileth not in the
works of the Law, to the end she may attain true and eternal righteousness
thereby, but becomes a Lilly by sitting still by hearing and receiving the
comfortable dew of the Gospel. And in that she is said to be the Lilly of the
valleys, it shows from whence the Church springs, even from a low opinion
of her self; in that the Mountains of her own imaginations are become a valley:
So that as the choicest Lillies are found in the lowest valleys, so the Lilly
of Christ becomes decked with such excellent ornaments, being first made low by
sitting in the desert and solitary place.

Now it being said, I am the Rose of Sharon, and I am the Lilly; it must lead
us into a further consideration: for it is as much as to say, I am the fairest
flower in Sharon, I am the choicest Lilly there. Others there are in Sharon,
that count themselves the Rose, and reckon themselves the Lilly, but they
spring not out of the valley, are not perfumed with the scent of the Rose, nor
clothed with the ornaments of my beloved.

For it must be noted, that Sharon is a sheepfold, Esa. 65.10.
in which fold there are two sorts of people, a two fold Ministry or Mother;
the free Mother which brings forth Children before God, free in Spirit,
justified without the Law; and the servant or bondwoman, which brings forth
no Children before God, but gendereth all her Children unto bondage. Against
this Mother the bondwoman, the bride appropriates these Titles to her self, I
am the Rose, I am the Lilly, and this I conceive to be the occasion of her
speech. Rev. 18.
The bondwoman boasts her self to be a Queen and no widow, because she
lives (as she supposes) in the works of the Law, Esa. 54.4.
and also reproacheth the free Mother, because she forbids justification by
the Law; now because she boasts her self in the Law, the bride here takes
away from her, all right and interest in Christ her Bridegroom, and although
she challenges to her self the Title; as to be the only Rose, and Lilly of
Christ, yet she blossometh not, she brings by her Doctrine no Children unto
glory; therefore the bride says, [I] (notwithstanding the boasting of the
bondwoman) am the glory of Sharon, I that am the free and fruitful Mother am
the Lilly, for I only blossom and bring forth Children unto glory.

And by thus saying she boasts not in her self; but gloryeth only in the
righteousness of Christ her Redeemer.

Now the reason why she blossoms, and comes to be so fruitful is, because she
is married unto Christ. Esa. 35, 2.
This is the reason given by the Prophet Esaias, (when he says, the wilderness
shall rejoice, and the desert shall blossom as the Rose) the glory of Lebanon
shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon; meaning Christ,
who is the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, and the glory of all the Cedars in
Lebanon, shall be given in Marriage to the desert and solitary, to she that is
barren and fruitless in her own eyes. Carmel was a fruitful place where Nabal
had possessions, and Sharon also was a fruitful field, and in Lebanon were many
goodly Cedars; (figuring the Godly people in all ages of the Church) but take
away the glory of Lebanon, and the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, that is to
say, the righteousness of Christ imputed, and their glory departs like a
Bird, and their fruit withers and comes to nothing.

After the same manner must we with the Bride, learn to hold fast our Title
against the bondwoman and her Children, who by their Doctrine bring forth all
manner of Sects; and every Sect do claim unto themselves the Title, as to be
the only Rose and Lilly of Christ: and condemn all others as Antichristian,
that are not of their own way, and yet they boast of nothing but of their own
works. Now when this comes to pass, we must learn with the Bride, to strip them
of their glory by the word of God. Because she boasts her self in the Law,
therefore we must show unto her, her condemnation by the Law; and because we
are barren, and fruitless in our own eyes, and condemned by the Law, therefore
must we lay fast hold on the righteousness of Christ our Lord, which is freely
given unto us without the Law. If thou walk according to this rule, then
shall thou become the fairest flower in Sharon, perfumed with the excellent
scent of thy beloved, and the Lilly of the Valleys, clothed and decked with
his Ornaments; and also the scent of the Rose, shall cast forth an excellent
savor in every place; and the smell of thy garments shall be as the smell of a
field which the Lord has blessed.

VERSE II. As the Lilly among thorns, so is my love among the Daughters.
THese are the words of Christ, who first shows the Church the danger she is
like to fall into by reason of her Doctrine, she is like the Lilly among the
thorns, in danger to be scrat, and torn in pieces: this acceptance she finds
amongst the daughters, meaning the Preachers of the Law, that draw on works
into the Doctrine of justification, these in all ages have been the only
enemies to the Bride of Christ: which did not fear to set upon Christ himself,
but crucified the Lord of life; let any man but stick fast to the righteousness
of Faith, and hold it forth against them in this one point concerning
righteousness by the Law, and they will show themselves; First or last, to be
as thorns in his side. And thus the Gospel sends fire on the earth, but
without the Gospel all things are at quiet.

Also Christ in these words prefers the Children of the freewoman which he
calls his love: far above the Children of the bondwoman which he calls the
Daughters. For thus he says in effect, that as the Lilly far surpasses the
thorns, both in Nobility and Beauty. So does my love far surpass the Daughters,
that is, is higher in my esteem then those that earnestly require the works of
the Law.

Next as it were an answer to this, follow the words of the Bride.

VERSE III. As the Apple Tree among the trees of the Forest, So is my beloved
among the Sons --
IN which words even as the Bridegroom before, did set forth the Bride beyond
the Daughters of the bondwoman, under the similitude of the Lilly: So here the
bride does set forth the excellency of her beloved, beyond the Sons of Agar
under the similitude of an Apple Tree. Now the Apple Tree far surpasses the
trees of the wood (which are by nature wild) in regard of the goodness of the
fruit, and also the variety thereof: So does the fruit (she says) of my beloved
far surpass the Sons, that is, the fruit of all those that first require the
works of the Law to be done, before a man can be interested in the Gospel; this
the spouse of Christ cannot relish, because it is not the voice of her beloved,
and therefore she has the Sons in small account, and betaketh her self to her
own Apple Tree, and feeds on his fruit, the fruit of which tree does heal the
Nations.

-- I sat under his shadow with great delight -- By the shadow of the
Apple Tree, understand the shadows and figures of Christ in all ages of the
Church, which being rightly understood are full of heavenly delight. A shadow
(in Divinity) represents something to faith, which is absent to sense and
reason; confirming that to the eye, which the word does to the ear. For God
has always made a double Declaration of his bounty, for the comfort of sinful
man; the one is by his word wherein he instructs us by hearing, the other by
figures and shadows, wherein he instructs us by seeing. And this comes to
pass by reason of our wonderful necessity and weakness, being not able to
comprehend so excellent a mystery as the Gospel, without the use of visible
helps.

Therefore Christ instructing Nicodemus in the Doctrine of regeneration, Joh. 3.
teaches him by figures to understand the Mystery. If I have told you of
earthly things, and ye believe not, how can ye believe if I tell you of
Heavenly things? As much as to say, unless you learn to believe by the knowledge
of earthly things, ye cannot believe if I tell you of Heavenly things.

Now by earthly things he means the figures and shadows of Christ in all ages
of the Church; and begins with Baptism, the thing in question then between
Christ and Nicodemus. So also Circumcision, the Passover, the Sacrifices, the
Temple, the Tabernacle, the Ark, and the mercy Seat, were all earthly things by
which the Jew was to be instructed in his faith.

These were the patterns of things in the Heavens, to lead the Jew to the
knowledge of Heavenly things themselves. Now therefore, as shadows were
necessary to instruct the Jew in his Faith, in a Christ that was to come: So
also were some shadows necessary to instruct the gentile in his faith, in the
Christ that is come. Esa. 4.
And therefore it was promised, that in the days of Christ's Kingdom there
should be a Tabernacle for a shadow, which promise was fulfilled in the coming
of John the Baptist.

For all the Law and the Prophets prophesied until John the Baptist, that is
till Baptism. Now all the Law and Prophets prophesied of a Christ to come: Joh.
1.31.
But Baptism manifests unto us the Christ that is come. Now seeing Baptism
ends that faith and Religion which rests in a Christ to come; therefore it
begins that Faith and Religion which rests in the Christ that is come.

And therefore it is said by the Evangelist, Mar. 1.
that Baptism is the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God:
Because it ends the former Prophecy of a Christ to come, and begins that
Faith and Religion, which rests in Christ that is come. And even as no man
could visibly profess the true Religion amongst the Jews, unless he were first
united to the Jew by Circumcision: So no man can so much as profess the true
Religion now, unless he be first united to the Church through Baptism.

And as it is the beginning of our entrance into the way of Christianity: So it
is the beginning of our comfort in the day of distress, for even as Christ was
present with the Fathers of old, as soon as by faith they rightly understood
the shadows; so Baptism as often as we fly unto it by faith, has Christ present
with all that he is, and all that he has prepared for poor sinners. Which
spiritual coming of Christ into the Soul; causes the absence of all
discomforts whatsoever. The right understanding of this Mystery, causes the
bride to sing here, I sat down under his shadow with great delight.

Also this Doctrine opens a light for the conviction of all false Prophets
whatsoever; all Sects and Heresies that now be, or ever will be having their
first rise, from the contempt of Baptism, or some false opinion concerning the
same.

And with this proposition they all begin, that Baptism is nothing unless the
person first believe. By which proposition they wholly deny the true Christ, and
rest upon a false Christ. For Baptism not only manifests the true Christ to
become, (as has been proved) but also shows us, that until Baptism, all
people are under the Prophecy of a Christ to come.

Now that Doctrine which requires faith before Baptism, requires faith not in
the true Christ that is come, but in a false Christ which is yet to come, which
Christ in Scripture is no where to be found.

And if there be no such Christ to be found, which is yet to come; then there
is no object to be found for such a faith to rest upon.

By which one argument, (if thou manage it skilfully) thou may easily send
the former proposition to Satan from whence it came, and sit down and rest thy
self in peace, and joy.

For one of these propositions must needs be granted, that either our faith
must be in a Christ that is come, or else in a Christ that is to come; if in a
Christ that is come, then Baptism is necessary which manifests the same, Job.
1.31.
if in a Christ to come, then is our faith and Religion ended, ever since the
days of John the Baptist.

Learn thou therefore to be very cunning in the right use of the figure, that
as Satan has built up his Kingdom, by bringing Baptism into contempt; So thou
may break his head, and batter his Kingdom in pieces, by teaching a right
knowledge and understanding of the same; then shall thou be a right Soldier for
thy beloved, and also with the bride here, shall sit down under his shadow with
great delight.

-- His fruit was pleasant to my taste. That is, the fruit of his shadow,
because the shadow represents to us, the benefits of Christ's death and
Resurrection; which must needs be pleasant where the benefit is felt. But where
there is no faith to understand and receive the mystery in the shadow, to them
they are of no use at all; but otherwise they are very pleasant: for as much as
they make the benefits of Christ which are represented, to be as certain to
faith, as the figure representing, is certain to sense and reason.

VERSE IV. He brought me to the banqueting house --
HEre she shows the great provision that Christ made for her, when once she
grew to have a Sacramental faith, he entertaineth her with a Banquet. As Kings
when they entertain their Queens do use to lead them into the Wine Cellar: So
does the Lord Jesus Christ by his Queen, he brings her into his banqueting
house, or house of Wine.

By the banqueting house, understand the place where the Church of God do use
to meet together, whether in public or in private; for the hearing and
receiving of the Gospel. Pro. 9.
Which is said to be wisdoms feast, where the table is furnished with all
manner of varieties, and nothing is wanting for this life or the life to come:
there is comfort in all crosses, deliverance in all distresses, provision for
all wants and necessities, pardon for all sins, healing for all iniquities,
there is nothing that the heart of man can possibly stand in need of; but in
this banqueting house it is to be found.

And when she says, has brought [me] she means not idle and profane
persons, that scorn and contemn the word and Sacraments; the banquet is not
provided for such, but I that feel my transgressions, and am wearied with the
burden of the same, that am continually oppressed with heaviness and sadness of
heart: I that do highly esteem and prize the Heavenly banquet, above all things
under the sun, it is I for whom the delicates are provided. But by whom is she
thus brought? She answers, my beloved has brought me, she did not come her
self, but he out of his tender pity and merciful compassion brought her. Into
this banqueting house he brings all those that earnestly and heartily desire
the same, and that prize the provision that there is made above all earthly
things, those he feeds with rich and Heavenly dainties, even with such things
as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to
conceive: but those that are scorners and contemners of the same, he sends
empty away, and none of those shall ever taste of his supper.

-- And his banner over me was love. The banner or standard, signifies the
Kings presence in the field, and also it being a warlike sign signifies
fighting with joy and victory. Psalm. 20 6.
The use of the banner is when the Standard Bearer holds it up, to draw the
Soldiers to march to it, that they may keep order, and attend upon their
Colors: that the Battle be not disordered. Now as the use of the Ensign is to
draw Soldiers together, that they may march accordingly: So is Christ banner
to draw all his Soldiers to himself, that they may joyfully fight against the
world, the flesh, and the Devil. And as in all ages the Churches banners were
the signs of Gods presence: so have we also the signs of his presence in the
Sacraments, and by gathering to those Ensigns, the love of God comes to be shed
abroad in the heart, by which we joyfully fight against all our Spiritual
enemies. Therefore those that come not to their Colors, but forsake their
Ensigns are blind and senseless, and not only remain without the feeling of
Gods love: but also when they should set themselves in rank and order, to fight
against the temptations of Satan, the wrath of God and Eternal death; they lose
their strength with Sampson, and fall down before the enemy. Therefore seeing
our beloved has placed us under his banner, we must March to it and attend
upon our Colors; that so when the wrath of God, and the fear of Eternal
damnation begins to ceize upon us, when the enemy comes in upon us like a
flood, we may through faith behold; the spirit of the Lord to lift up a
standard against him.

Then shall we feel by experience, that within us, which the bride here
rejoices in, his banner over us to be love.

VERSE V. Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of
love.
THe bride having been in the banqueting house, and there met with the fruit
of her Apple tree, which did so wonderfully comfort her in her afflictions,
desires for more. She speaks to those that bear the flagons; and carry the
Apples to help her to some more, those that often use the Wine Cellar, and have
the banqueting cheer in a readiness; to them she says stay me for I am even
ready to sink: The bride is even overcome because she has been in the Cellar:
Others have no mind to the banqueting house because they never tasted of the
Wine. The Church is not satisfied with one banquet, or one cup of Wine, but she
must have a flagon or two more, stay me with flagons. She finds a continual
need of the fruit of her Apple Tree, therefore she must be continually
comforted with Apples: others that see not their need care not a rush for the
Wine-cellar, but seek for comfort in other things; but she cries out stay me
with flagons, and comfort me with Apples. Now she shows the reason why she
desires after the flagon so much, it is because she is sick of love. To be
sick of love is to be restless till one hear good news from the Lover. Now
Christ is her Lover, and she having heard from him before, is even sick till
she hear from her beloved again. It is as if she had said thus, I have been in
my beloved's banqueting house, where I have tasted of his dainties, and am
even overcome with love, and can never be satisfied unless I taste again and
again.

And this effect the Gospel works where ever it is received, it makes all
people sick of love: And the reason why people have so little spiritual life
and joy in them, it is for want of the Gospel. Those that know not the Gospel
wonder to see men run after Christ; but the reason is because they are sick of
love, and can no more be without the Wine-cellar, then a hungry man can endure
to be without meat. Next of all she shows the cause why she is so much in
love.

VERSE VI. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.
Which words do show the reason why she is so sick after her Lover, because of
his embraces. When ever she meets him his left hand is under her head, and
(after the manner of a Lover) his right hand does embrace her.

By his right hand she means his Divinity, Psalm. 45.
as may be gathered from the 45 Psalm. And by his left hand his humanity. By
his humanity he bears all her sins, sorrows, and calamities, both of her head
and whole man: and by his Divinity he works for her a full deliverance. By
his left hand he takes from her all things that make her miserable; and by his
right hand he gives unto her all things whatsoever, that may make her joyful
and happy. When she hears of this in the banqueting house, and begins to
find and feel within her self, that his heart is upon her, she is sick after
him, and cannot choose but discover it. And thus it is with every man that has
once been in the Wine-cellar, and has felt the sweet embraces of the Lord
Jesus Christ in himself; he cannot but fall in love with him as the bride here
does.

Now next follow the words of Christ.

VERSE VII. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the
Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love until he please.
CHrist having heard his spouse declare her faith before, and her Heavenly
delight and rest, that she takes in himself; charge the Daughters of
Jerusalem, (meaning those that something descent from the bride, concerning the
way and manner of planting Christ in the Soul) not to molest her, or go about
to unsetle her, in her Heavenly peace and security, until he himself please
which is never. Also this charge implies a penalty if the charge be not
observed. And here he mentions the example of the Roes and Hindes, which
creatures do dearly love one another; and are a similitude between Man and
Wife, and between Christ and his Church. And when he says that ye stir not up
nor awake my love, it means, by driving her from the Gospel by constraint; or
by infusing evil principles into her, by a false interpretation of the
Scripture.

Which is comfortable to us that belong to the Marriage Bed, when those that
exact the Law and works do accuse and condemn us, for holding and maintaining
justification by faith alone; against them all we must set this charge of our
beloved: who commands their silence under the penalty of everlasting woe.
This to do is to make Jesus Christ on our side, and if God be with us, who can
be against us.

VERSE VIII. The voice of my beloved! behold! he comes leaping upon the
Mountains, skipping upon the Hills.
AS soon as ever the bride had heard this charge against the Daughters, uttered
by Christ, she presently breaks forth into these words, the voice of my
beloved. This voice of Christ no man knows, but he that pertains to the
spiritual little flock; therefore Christ says, my sheep hear my voice; Job. 10.
others cannot discern it from the voice of Moses, but the bride is well
acquainted with him; and therefore as lovers have their ears listening after the
voice of him whom they set their affections upon, so does the bride here, she
listneth to the voice of her beloved. And thus it behooves all that desire to
become the spouse of Christ, to learn rightly to understand the voice of
Christ: otherwise when the conscience is in distress there is no comfort nor
succor to be found. For if thou make no difference between Christ and the
Law, when thy Conscience wrastleth with the Law, and the judgment of God, then
thou art utterly undone for evermore; for then shall thine evil life appear
before thine eyes, and (without this rule of distinction be learned) nothing
shall be seen how thy sinful conscience shall be delivered, from the
malediction of the Law, and the wrath of God. But Christ teaches thee far
otherwise, for after the Conscience is humbled by the Law: he raises it up
again by faith without the Law. So that Christ makes use of the Law to humble
the sinner: but totally lays aside the Law, in comforting the broken heart.

But what is meant here by his leaping upon the Mountains, and skipping upon
the Hills?

By the Mountains are meant those lets and hindrances, her in the Doctrine of
justification by faith alone, to which Doctrine because she will not yield,
persecution follows in all ages of the Church, therefore Cain kills Abel,
Ishmael persecuteth Isaac, the Prophets are slain, and also Christ himself. Now
Christ comes with great have, and also with great joy unto his bride, to throw
down all those stumbling blocks, that the way may be plain before her, and the
paths made straight: therefore he is said to come leaping and skipping, and
this being a thing of such excellent use, as soon as she preceiveth the
hindrances removed, she declares it with joy, the very first sight of his
appearance in this thing, causes her to burst out the voice of my beloved,
yonder he comes, behold it is he. Now next of all she sets out this leaping
and skipping by a similitude.

VERSE IX. My beloved is like a Roe, or a young heart: behold, he stands
behind our wall --
THe Roe is a beast that delights to leap over bushes, and skip over hills:
and also the Heart is a nimble creature that skippeth over Mountains with a
swift foot. Thus she says, is my beloved: He makes have to remove all
stumbling blocks, that Salvation may come into my Soul, but there is something
in me that hinders the coming in of Christ and Salvation, and that is a wall:
So that when Christ comes to the Soul to make it his Habitation, he finds
the door shut, and a wall to keep him out.

The wall here imports something of weight, as appears by the word [behold]
I conceive that by the wall is meant, man's natural imagination, reason, or
understanding, that he has of the Scriptures, and of him self which stands
as a wall in man; in direct opposition to faith in Christ. For all men
naturally are of this opinion, that God will justify those that keep the Law
morally, and reject the rest: and to strengthen this opinion many Scriptures
are alleged, with being not understood, this opinion is increased. Now until
this wall be thrown down there is no entrance for Christ, therefore when the
bride says, he stands behind our wall; she means to throw down the wall.
Christ is as a lover that will come in, although the opposition be ever so
great the walls must go down, and the house must be pulled in pieces, and a new
foundation laid; So that a man would judge when Christ comes that all were
going to ruin, even then when he is about to lay a new foundation.

This opposition Christ finds more or less, even in his own people while they
are in this world, and therefore he stands behind the wall; and the first
thing he does by his Ministry is to throw down the wall: that is, those
imaginations in man, that are the roots and grounds of unbelief.

He does not as (some other) builders do, prop up the old foundation, or piece
up the old wall; but makes all things new. And this was prophesied of him in
Number. Number. 24.
24. he shall smite the corners of Moab, and cast down the walls of all the
sons of Seth.

-- Looking forth at the windows, showing himself through the Lattice. These
words do expound the former, and show the reason why the imaginations in man
must be thrown down, it is that light may be in the Soul; For the windows and
lattices are instruments to convey light into the house; and when there is any
obstruction between the light and the window it must be took away, otherwise
the house will be dark.

Now Christ is our light and the understanding is the window of the Soul, and
the first light that Christ brings, is by teaching a right understanding of
the Law; and by throwing down man's natural opinion of the Law, by discovering
of our original and actual sin, by which we sencibly feel that we are lost;
this is the first light and a matter of great weight, because it teaches man a
true knowledge of himself; therefore it behooves all people rightly to study the
same, otherwise the windows will remain shut, and nothing but darkness will
appear in the house.

VERSE X. My beloved spoke and said unto me, rise up my love, my fair one, and
come away.
AFter the windows are opened by a right understanding of the Law, she says,
my beloved spoke, that is, of the promises of the Gospel; saying come away, by
which she means to receive his own righteousness and merits. Nothing is here
placed between the revealing of sin, and giving of righteousness but only faith
in Christ. And when it is said rise up, it shows, that the Law casts all men
down, and that Christ is not delighted to see us too long in sorrow and
heaviness. And seeing he says my love, it shows he owneth us in our sorrows,
and sets his heart upon us. And in that he says my fair one, he takes from
us the guilt of all our sins: and imputes to us his own righteousness and
merits. These are the true footsteps of faith, and are written on purpose,
that we might upon the true sight and confession of our sin, after the same
manner, apply unto our selves the comfortable words in the Gospel.

VERSE XI. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over.
HEre it is shown that so long as the Conscience is under the Law, the feeling
of Sin and the wrath of God, it is as the time of winter; wherein flowers and
fruits do seem to be consumed, by reason of Storms, and Tempests, and frosty
nights. And as in the time of rainy weather, when little benefit of the Sun
appears; for it is for the present as if there were no Christ or Savior, when
all former experiences of Gods love and favor are forgotten and lost. Which
condition no man can speak effectually of, unless he have in some measure found
it in himself. But as soon as the Conscience is humbled, confesses sin and
lifts up through faith, his eyes and heart to the voice of his Redeemer, the
winter is past, and the rain is over. All fears and doubts do then begin to
vanish away. According to the saying of the Prophet, Isa. 35.10.
they shall hear of joy and gladness, and sorrow, and mourning shall flee away.
So that the Gospel puts an end to the Law in respect of the Conscience; that
Christ alone may there rule and govern. I say in respect of the Conscience,
(not in respect of the conversation, but) in removing the guilt of sin and
filling of it with peace and joy; for in saying the winter is past, it shows
us also, that Summer is come. All a man's life may be said to be winter in
respect of the flesh, and the manifold sins, vexations, cares, and daily
calamities, it is subject to in this mortal life; but in respect of the
Conscience it is sometimes winter, and sometimes Summer. Therefore no man must
be too much cast down with discouragement, when he feels his sin and the
wrath of God, as though the winter would never be past; nor yet be too much
overcome with rejoicing, when the Gospel shines within him as though the rain
would never come again.

VERSE XII. The flowers appear on the earth --
THese are tokens of the spring, which causes all people to rejoice when they
behold the buds and blossoms of the herbs, trees, and flowers, when there is
(as it were) a new face upon the Earth, when all things appear like a new
Creation: which makes all Creatures to rejoice and sing. Which shows the
proper effects of the Gospel, which is tidings of greater joy and gladness to
all those that by faith receive it. And therefore whatsoever Doctrine it be,
that by the nature of its principles makes the heart of man sad, and cannot
truly comfort it again; but leaves it in sadness is not the Doctrine of the
Gospel. By this then we may know when the Gospel is taught, Deu. 18.
when a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord; that is that says the
Doctrine which he delivers is the Gospel, yet if the principles of his
Doctrine do not nor cannot, produce that effect which the Gospel works, which
is righteousness peace and joy in the holy Ghost; the Prophet speaks
presumptuously, his Doctrine is not the Doctrine of the Gospel.

-- The time of the singing of Birds is come -- Another mark that the spring is
come. Now as the pleasantness of the spring is seen, by the cheerfulness of the
Birds in their pleasant notes: so the joyful and pleasant news of the Gospel is
seen, and manifested in the voices and harmonies of men. Who even as Birds in
time of spring; So in their nests do sit and sing. Now in that it is here said
the time of the singing of Birds is come, we must note that a Christian man
lives under a double time in this world; the time of the Law and the time of
grace. A time when the voice of sorrow and mourning must be heard; and a time
when the voice of joy and gladness must only be heard, and sorrow and mourning
must fly away.

And Solomon being inspired by the holy Ghost, treats of both these times
which every Christian must apply himself diligently to learn. No man must think
the Gospel to be such a Doctrine, that brings with it nothing but pleasure;
for it being contrary to the Doctrine and Religion of the World, it brings
the cross and many tribulations where the true Gospel is taught. And when the
fear of any judgment, guilt, or calamity; begins to seize on the mind and to
overwhelm it, then does the time of the Law begin, and holds us in captivity,
which time does not always last to the Godly, but only till Christ, for as soon
as we confess our sin, and make application of the promises of God, then does
the Law begin to vanish from the Conscience; and then the time of the singing
of Birds is come, as the holy Ghost here writes.

-- The voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. The Turtle uses (as some
say) to depart out of the Land of Jury in winter by reason of the cold; and to
return again in spring for to make an abode, in which time her voice is only
heard calling to her mate. So that the voice of the Turtle is a certain sign
that the spring is come. So when we hear the Nittingale, the Thrush, the
Blackbird, and other harmonical voices and pleasant notes; we know the spring
is come. Now as the voice of the Turtle, and the chirping of other Birds; do
show unto us that Summer is come: So also we know that the Gospel is come when
the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ is heard amongst the Saints. For as the
warmness of the spring, causes a cheerfulness amongst the Brids: So does the
truth of the Gospel (being rightly understood) cause a cheerfulness amongst the
Saints, which causes all the Heavenly host to break out in singing, lauding,
and praising the Lord. When once they begin to shake off the winter, and the
frost begins to melt, and their hearts begin to be warmed with the spirit of
God: then they begin to set their voices in Tune, and with sweet and Heavenly
descant to make melody to the Lord in their hearts. When this comes to pass
then is the voice of the Turtle heard, and then the Summer is come. Then the
Nightingale sings and all the Birds of Heaven begin to chirp.

They that have nothing in their mouths but ribaldry and filthiness, that can
talk of nothing but couetousness and greediness; show no tokens at all of the
spring, neither can such make any Music at all to the Lord. Therefore let us
learn rightly to understand the voice of the Turtle; that we may have this heat
of affection within us, and so lively a feeling of the Lords mercies, that we
may sing forth the praises of the Lord, and show the Turtle to be amongst us,
and that the spring is come: that so by our spiritual and Heavenly joy begun in
this life, we may give a glymps of that everlasting joy, which one day we shall
have with the Lord in glory.

VERSE XIII. The fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the
tender grape give a good smell --
THe vine and the fig tree do also note the spring, especially in Jury where
the Country is hot, and the spring comes sooner (then with us) to make the
earth fruitful, Both these Trees bear pleasant fruit, especially (as some say)
those about Libanus. And as their fruit is pleasant to the taste, so the tender
grapes when they first shoot out and blossom; give a good smell, chiefly in hot
Countries where the Sun has greater force then else where, in causing nature to
thrust forth her sweetness.

This shows that where the Gospel comes it makes men fruitful: for the
godly are not compared to Trees that bring forth no fruit, (when once God
pardons the imperfections and blemishes of his Church) but to Trees that
bring forth most sweet and pleasant fruit. Those that bring forth no fruit in
their conversation, but sower grapes are not the Lords plants: but are
degenerated from the true vine. And they whose Doctrine, (by reason of the
nature of its principles) brings no Children unto glory, are not the Lords
fig trees: but are like brambles, thorns and thistles, that scratch and prick
the Church, but bring forth nothing that is sweet and pleasant, these serve for
nothing but to be cut down and cast into the fire.

Therefore we must learn to taste of the sweetness of the fig tree and the vine,
and to show forth the fruits thereof, that we may give a testimony that the
Gospel is come; which when once we have well tasted of, we will not lose the
sweetness of it for a world.

When the Trees went out to choose them a King, Judge. 9.
the fig tree would not lose his sweetness for a Kingdom. Nor would the vine
lose his pleasant wine that cheared God and man for a Kingdom. If once we had
but tasted the fruit of the vine and of the fig tree; and did rightly know the
use thereof, we would not part with it for all the pleasures under the Sun.

Although the grapes be not fully ripe, we must not be dismayed, and the figs
but green and small, yet the Lord takes pleasure in them; and counts our
poor beginnings to be tokens of the spring. If we humble our selves before him
for our frailties and weaknesses, and ask him forgiveness for the same, he
looks upon us with gracious eyes and tells us that Summer is come. When we
are ashamed of our fruit, and begin to be dismayed and hang down our heads like
a bullrush; yet then does he speak friendly and comfortable words unto us, as
appears in the words next following.

-- Arise my love my fair one and come away. Which words are the conclusion of
what was spoken to the bride by her beloved, and it is the second time by which
she is called upon to come away.

Now in that he calls again, it shows how untractable the Soul is to come
out of her missery and affliction, so wicked a thing is unbelief, which sets
nothing before our eyes in the time of tribulation, but only this that God has
no respect unto us; but that he is about wholly to cast us of. Now because
there is no cure for unbelief but only faith, and faith can have no footing but
only from truth; therefore our beloved in these words opens his good heart
unto us, and tells us the very truth that we are his love, his fair one.

He that can make use of these words in time of Temptation, and can persuade
himself that they are spoken unto him, setting himself to prayer in good
earnest; for the establishing of this very truth in his Soul, shall easily
overcome his unbelief, and experimentally feel the benefit of faith.

And also Christ here declares unto us, how willing he is that we should
receive him. He speaks not one word of discomfort to the afflicted
Conscience, as Satan by his instruments does, as the Law does or as the
accusing Conscience it self does; but bids us arise and come away; that is,
not to hearken to those discomforts; but to set our faith and affections upon
his words; whereby he does only and wholly appropriate us to himself.

For when he faith my love, he does it to assure us of the contrary to that
which in time of distress we most of all fear, which is, that we are not
beloved. And when he says my fair one, he takes that away from us which
causes us to question his love (that is to say) the guilt of all our sins. And
what can discomfort us in Heaven, Earth, or Hell, when God which is greater
then all things does assure us that he loves us and has forgiven us all our
sins.

VERSE XIV. O my dove! thou art in the clefts of the Rock --
THe Church having made rehearsal of the sweet and comfortable words of her
beloved, Christ here speaks again and commends her in that she is in the
clefts of the rock. And first he calls her his dove, which has many
excellent properties to which the bride is refembled; which are not so much
respected in this place as this one thing is, in that she delights to make
her nest in the Rock, that she may be safe from the prey of the Hawk and other
devouring Birds. Now as the dove delights to be in the clefts of the Rock,
that she may be safe from devouring fowls when they make wings after her: So
the dove of Christ delights also to hide her self in a place of safety, when
she is hunted after by an accusing Conscience, the wrath of God: the malice of
Satan, or any of his instruments. And this hiding place is in the clefts of the
Rock, and for this she is commended.

Some say that God is the Rock, and that the Eternal Council and Decree of God
is the cleft, wherein the dove of Christ is in safety, and that is one hole.

And then there is the providence of God, by which many times he makes way for
the dove to escape, that they make to be another cleft.

But that I most think on is this. Cer. 10.4.
The Rock is Christ. But then the Rock must open and divide, else how can there
be a cleft for the dove to get in? Understand then by the cleft a right
division betwixt Christ and the Law, when the Conscience is in distress; which
distinction thou must learn to make by faith. For when the Law puts thee in
fear justly by reason of thy sin, if thou humblest thy self by faith thou
killest the voice of the Law, and make the cleft: but if thou look upon
the Law (in that time after thou have humbled thy self and asked forgiveness)
to be the voice of Christ, thou make no cleft, thou can have no hiding
place, to keep thee safe from fear. Make this account therefore with thy self,
that the Law is crucified, dead, and condemned unto thee, (in respect of the
Conscience) as soon as thou humbless thy self, and by faith layest hold upon
Christ; then thou make a right division betwixt Christ and the Law, and
hidest thy self in the cleft of the Rock so that if the Hawk, or other
devouring fowls do wing after thee, to hanch upon thee; thou sit in safety
from fear of evil, and it is but lost labor for Satan, or any of his
instruments to endeavor thy ruin.

For want of this knowledge many peoples hearts do shake, when they are like to
be made a prey by ravenous Birds, and the Law and fear of Gods wrath begins to
seize on the Conscience, they are even at their wits end, being wholly
dismayed. These are not in the cleft. But the bride of Christ that rightly
understands these things, as she presumes not upon her own worthiness; So
neither is she dismayed at her unworthyness, but sits in the cleft of the
Rock with Moses, Ex. 33.22.
where by faith she beholds the back parts of God, condemning her for sin:
and by the same faith she hears proclaimed to her, his merciful and gracious
name.

-- In the secret places of the stairs -- There are certain craggy places in
Rocks that stand out like stairs, by which the dove geteth up into her hole.
After the same manner the Church of Christ ascends by certain footsteps of
faith, to a communion with Christ in this life; and to a perfect communion with
him in the life to come.

These are said to be secret places, because the righteousness of faith by
which we ascend to this communion, is secret and unknown to man's reason: for
it consists in the destroying of the grounds of unbelief, which is the mother
and root of all sin, and the bane of all Christian and holy duties. It shows
a man (from the nature of its principles, how to love God and keep his
Commandments) how to behold succor and help to be near in time of tribulation,
when no help nor succor is seen or perceived.

All which things are foolishness to reason, yet are the footsteps and track
of all the flock of Christ gone before.

-- Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet,
and thy countenance is comely. That is, I would have thee to countenance my
Doctrine and manner of teaching against all opposers; without being abashed or
discouraged, for the destruction of Antichrist, and the whole Kindom of Satan:
this countenance we ought to show to our friend.

And when he says, let me hear thy voice, it means, that the true Gospel be
Preached to poor sinners; and that we call upon the name of God (by prayer in
Christ's name in the day of trouble) in faith with fervency; that we may receive
help and deliverance from him, which is very sweet and delightful to Christ
Jesus, and is that joyful voice and comely countenance, which is here commended
by him.

VERSE XV. Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines, for our
vines have tender grapes.
NOw here it is showed that one special, and principal means for the preserving
of this kind of righteousness in the Church, is to take the foxes: for they
spoil the vines. Some write of the foxes, that they make holes in the roots of
the vines, and that by undermining the root; the root withers and the vine
starves. Others say that the fox having venomous teeth, fastneth his teeth in
the rind of the vine, and so spoils the vines. And that sometimes also by
bruising the young sprigs and shuts, they spoil the vines. But they that have
vines, and are much troubled with foxes know best the truth of this. But this
is certainly known that the fox loves grapes, and when they are ripe makes
great spoil of them; and by spoiling the grapes does much hurt to the vines.

By the foxes are principally meant false Prophets. Here O Israel thy Prophets
are like the foxes in the deserts. Exodus 34.
And the injunction here is to take them. And the reason why they must be taken
is, because they spoil the vines, meaning the fruit of the vines, the
righteousness of both Tables. And also because the vines have tender grapes,
meaning the young vines whose fruit is tender; and the fox being famous for
subtilty, will endeavor to spoil those first, chiefly if he grow to be a
Reynald an old Fox, therefore the injunction here is to take the little foxes
the young cubs, for they also spoil the vines. This charge is given by Christ,
the persons to whom, is to the Magistrate and Minister. The Minister is to
discover the foxes; and the Magistrate to punish them with the sword.

Now that the foxes may be taken, their holes must be known, for the foxes have
holes and in their holes they hide themselves; and the first work the fox does
when he comes into the vineyard, is to make his hole, now the foxes hole is the
righteousness of the Law; he extolleth the righteousness of works far beyond
the righteousness of faith; this he makes a great show of, presses very
earnestly and seems to walk in very strictly, that so if any fault be found
with his Doctrine, he may cover it and hide it under the character of an honest
man. So that his first and principal work in spoiling the vines, is to destroy
the righteousness of both Tables; under a pretense of requiring strictness and
holiness of life Therefore mark it, By the first principle in Doctrine
understand the first ground, that is, laid to encourage thee to be lieve in
Christ.
that when ever the fox comes whether it be an old Reynald or a young Cub, by
the first principles of his Doctrine, he magnifieth and extolleth a supposed
righteousness in man; far beyond the righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed, and
by so doing he strengthens in man a more honorable opinion of himself; then
of the works and righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ: and so he takes away
and spoileth the righteousness of the first Table, which is faith in Christ.

Next he also spoils the righteousness of the second Table, which is true love
toward men, for the root and foundation of love toward men; is Gods love
toward us apprehended by faith, for no man can exercise himself in showing
true love toward men, until his own heart be first warmed with the
apprehension of Gods love toward himself, which the fox by his subtilty wholly
destroys, for where the root and foundation of charity is plucked up; there
charity which is the fruit must needs be blasted and wither away. And thus the
foxes spoil the vines. And this is the meaning of Christ when he says, Mat: 7.
by their fruits ye shall know them, meaning such fruits as spring from the
principles of their Doctrine.

Now when the foxes hole is known, the fox is taken, for then he is discovered
to all to be the fox. Therefore if thou will hunt the fox, so as to take him,
be sure to drive him into his hole; for there he lurketh, and there thou shall
be sure of him. All people that pertain to the vineyard ought to be careful in
this thing: especially those that watch for Souls; for the fox comes not in
jest, but to spoil vines, to eat and consume the tender grapes: to destroy the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, that no man may have Salvation by him.
And is it not time then for every man to look about him? It is not for nothing
that so strict a charge (as punishment by death) is given in Deuteronomy. 18. and
Deuteronomy. 13. against those that speak in the name of other Gods.

Therefore when the wild boar comes with his tusk and snout, as if he did think
to pull down God out of his Throne; or the fox by subtilty, let every man put
to his shoulder, that they may be taken and destroyed. The lamentable misery
that is fallen upon us for want of care herein, is found by woeful experience.

VERSE XVI. My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the Lillies.
THe Church perceiving the care of her beloved in taking the foxes, that her
righteousness might be preserved, and that she might have Salvation: makes this
conclusion to her self, my beloved is mine.

By which she makes a right use of the Gospel, which is to assure and make us
bold of our faith. This bond or conjunction being so near as the head and
members, or the vine and branches, causes her to rejoice; my beloved is mine,
and I am his.

This right and propriety in Christ as Mediator, wicked men have not, Angels
need not, therefore she claims the Title wholly to her self. And this she
makes more account of then of all the world. She esteems more of him, then
of all things besides in Heaven and Earth. In him she finds a sufficient
reconciliation made with the mighty God, for all her sins: in him she is made
the heir of Eternal glory.

And she is also comforted in this, in that her beloved does not only preserve
her from unwholesome pastures; but also feeds her in good pastures. He feeds
among the Lillies. My beloved (she says) is a Shepherd, and has a flock, and
feeds his flock like a Shepherd in sweet pasture; which is good feeding being
among Lillies, for the Lillies show not that the Sheep eat Lillies: but the
goodness of the ground where the Lillies grow. So that where Christ feeds
nothing can be wanting. The Lord is my Shepherd (says David) therefore I shall
want nothing. Psalm. 23.
He provideth fatlings, wine and all delicate things: So that all that love his
pasture shall be well fed, and prove well. The reason why men prove so little
is because they distaste the pasture where Christ feeds. When sheep feed in
good pasture, settle in it and like it well, they feed and come forwards apace:
but when the pasture is bad or they distaste it they hunger, bane, and starve.

Some feed upon their own imaginations, and man's inventions, and such as their
food is; So they be themselves, they never come amongst the Lillies, therefore
never taste of the sweetness of the pasture. Therefore let all those that desire
to be proveable, frequent the place where Christ feeds; and then shall their
life favor of his wisdom. Seeing Christ has provided such excellent pastures
for us, as to feed among Lillies, let us feed there and so feed; that we may be
fit for himself, and to receive Eternal glory.

VERSE XVII. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away; turn my beloved,
and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.
THe words are a prayer of the Church, wherein she desires Christ to turn to
her all night, even till the break of day. 2 Pet. 1.19.
By the break of day is meant the arising of the day star in the heart, or
coming of Christ into the Conscience; and also his last coming in the morning
of the Resurrection. And by shadows understand sin, and all manner of
tribulation, which are called shadows of death, Psalm. 23.
by which the comforts of a man's life are oftentimes eclipsed. By the flying
away of the shadows is meant, the removeing of all fears out of the mind, by
the spiritual coming of Christ: and the total vanishing of all shadows by the
morning of the Resurrection. Then comes the joyful Summers morning, when all
the Birds of Heaven shall rejoice and sing for evermore. Here the Church siteth
in misery and darkness, but then comes the breaking of the day of all
consolation, and the expelling of all misery and darkness for evermore.
Therefore she prays her beloved to turn to her with his sweet embraces, and
to feed her among Lillies until that time come; and prays him to be like a
Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether, to come speedily to her
(upon all occasions) like those nimbler creatures.

Bether signifies division, 2 Samuel 2.29.
and is (as some say) the place called Bithron which was divided from the plain
of Jericho, and the land of Gilead (where the battle was fought between the
house of David, and the house of Saul) by the River Jordan. Now sins,
reproaches, and calamities are like Mountains, which seem to make division
between Christ and the Soul until they are removed; therefore in regard the
Church is oftentimes oppressed with such calamities, insomuch that she is
scarcely able to bear up her head and heart, therefore she prays Christ to
make have, and to be like the nimble Roe, or the skipping Heart in coming to her
upon all occasions, for the removing of them; lest for want thereof, there
should seem to be (in regard of her own feeling and apprehension) an
Everlasting division between them.

CHAP. III.
VERSE I. By night on my bed, I sought him whom my Soul loves: I sought him
but I found him not.
THIS is the continued speech of the Church, who after she was well instructed
in the use and practice of faith; She lost on a sudden, through her own
negligence, the sense and feeling of her beloved, and fell into most grievous
and bitter afflictions. And not to reject but omitting other interpretations of
this place, I understand it principally to be meant of outward crosses and
calamities of all sorts; especially when she could not see, nor by any means
understand which way the promises of God should be fulfilled unto her in
respect of outward things. A condition which many of those that are truly
Godly, are (for the trial of their faith) subject to fall into, in this
miserable World. This is very probable, as I humbly conceive, to be the meaning
of this place, as will better appear by the words in the following Verses. And
therefore understand it thus. By night on my bed. When I was in great
affliction and misery, and when I had most leisure to meditate on my own
condition. I sought him whom my Soul loves. I diligently looked about to see
whether I could find the way, by which my beloved would provide for me and
mine: for he has made me many great and precious promises of all good things,
not only for my spiritual, but also for my temporal condition; and I earnestly
and diligently sought, how or by what means those promises were likely to be
accomplished: this I earnestly sought for, but I found it not. So that my
beloved seemed to have forgotten to be gracious, and to have cast of all care
and love of me.

This is a great and wonderful trial of faith, when all things are promised,
and nothing seems to be performed: when the things that discomfort us are
present, but all things that should comfort us are absent; in this condition
are we full heavy and sad. This gives a wonderful blow to faith, when we
behold those that have no fear of God before their eyes, to live in wealth and
prosperity; and those that truly fear him to live in penury and want; This has
bred a wonderful temptation in the Godly in all ages, and in this condition
must we be content to live in, and not despair of help when it is so; for the
bride here sought him still, although for the present she found him not. But
mark what course she resolves on next.

VERSE II. I will rise now, and go about the City in the streets and broad
ways, I will seek him whom my Soul loves; I sought him but I found him not.
THe Church sits not still in this condition expecting to be fed of Angels,
or to have bread rain down from Heaven: but rises and goes about the City:
She goes amongst those people that pertain to the visible Church that have
some show of godliness in them, such as are most likely to help her in the day
of her extremity.

And also into the streets and broad ways; that is, into such places where such
men usually meet together, 2 Chro. 32.6. Neb. 8.1.3.
there she was driven to open her case, and make her condition known: there she
also sought her beloved, she sought him but she found him not. This then being
marked out to be the condition of the Church, no man must take offense at his
beloved, if he please to exercise his faith this way: if he drive him into
necessity, cast him into a condition of penury, and want of outward
necessaries, wherein of necessity he must make known his case in the streets,
yet no man must be offended in this condition: although he stand in need of
help, and no man helps, but in stead of receiving succor, he undergo
reproach, yet I say no man must be discouraged; for Christ himself made himself
poor, that he might know by experience, how to succor us in a poor condition,
and sometimes also will make his members poor, that they also by experience may
learn to pity those that are poor.

He does not send his spouse into the streets because he wants love or power
to help her, but to make her comformable to his own condition; and that she may
taste in part of that cup, which he himself has perfectly tasted of, and be
Baptized with the Baptism that he was Baptized with: that so she being made
pertaker of his afflictions here, she may rejoice with him, with joy
unspeakable and full of glory hereafter.

Neither does he cast her down, because he does not mean to lift her up again;
but that she may see him creating all things out of nothing, providing help and
deliverance for her by ways and means, contrary to man's reason and imagination.
But mark what befell the Church in this condition.

VERSE III. The watchmen that go about the City found me --
BY watchmen here we are not to understand the Ministers of the Gospel,
although they are frequently called watchmen in Scripture. But those watchers
that do continually watch to see the people of God in misery; and to declare
the same in in the streets of the City with great rejoicing. These are Satan's
watchmen, Isa. 21.
who in managing the affairs of his Kingdom, does imitate our Lord Jesus
Christ; for even as when judgments were threatened against the enemies of Gods
Church, it was in a vision declared unto the Prophet, under the similitude of a
watchman, standing whole days and nights on the watch Tower, to descry the
coming in of the enemy upon those that had afflicted the people of God, Ver. 6.
and to declare what he saw for the comfort of the Godly: So Satan by way of
imitation, has also watchmen that stand continually upon their watch, on
purpose to epsy the calamities that are coming upon the people of God, and to
declare it in the streets of the City, and in the broad ways (where men usually
meet together) with great rejoicing, for the discomfort of the Godly. These are
the watchmen here spoken of, which Satan has in every corner, these are like
the spies that were sent into the Land of Canaan, Number. 13.22.
that brought an evil report upon the Land; that sit in the lurking places of
the villages to murder the inocent, Psalm. 10.8.9.
that lie in wait secretly as a Lion in his Den, to catch the poor, of such
David complains of when he says, they watch for my halting, and of those that
gathered themselves together, Psalm. 35.
and rejoiced in his adversity: and in another Psalm, they take council
together, they whisper and devise my hurt. These are the watchmen that Satan
sends into the streets, to declare what they see, to the discomfort of the
Bride, and to cast her (as much as in them lies) into everlasting reproach.

This breeds a wonderful temptation in the godly, and is the greatest trial
of faith that may be, when in stead of showing pity and compassion, the enemy
shall laugh and cry aha, this is the day that we looked for, lo we have seen
it. These be the watchmen that found the poor Church in this condition; which
in stead of ministering any comfort to her in her distress, did add affliction
to the afflicted.

These watchmen must we expect to meet with, who in stead of comforting, will
use all means to hinder us from help and succor; by casting us into reproach
and covering us with contempt, yet we must not be one jot dismayed, but pray
with David, Lord rescue my Soul from their destructions. For although they hold
a Council together, whisper, and make bold to propose the time of our downfall
and utter ruin, yet shall the promise of God prevent them all: for it was but a
little that the Bride passed from these, but she found him whom her Soul loved.
But mark here what she said to these watchmen.

-- To whom I said, saw ye him whom my Soul loves? It (...) not said here,
that the watchmen said any thing to the Bride, yet in Song 5.7. It Is said, they
smote her and wounded her, that is, behind her back, with reproachful words,
and disgraceful terms.

This shows what manner of people the watchmen here spoken of were, such as
could belch out with their mouths; and had swords in their lips to slay the
upright in heart: but this their mischief was not open, but privily and
secretly done? But what does the Bride say to these watchmen? To whom she said,
saw ye him whom my Soul loves? Which is not to be understood so much of any
private conference, as by her speaking to them in the Ministry when she came
into the sanctuary of God. For the watchmen reproach the Church because of her
sins and afflictions, and will scarcely afford her the title of bride; because
of her stains and blemishes: therefore the bride tells them here they sin
against the Gospel, and she deals very plainly, ye never saw him whom my Soul
loves. The Gospel breeds in men pity and compassion, a willingness to think
the best, to speak the best of all men, to cover and hide transgressions to
help those that are in distress and misery: these things the watchmen never
learned, and being in prosperity themselves they speak loftily, and their
tongues walk through the earth. Therefore she tells them this. Ye have no
knowledge of Christ, ye never saw him whom my Soul loves.

So that although these watchmen of Satan are high and lofty in their own eyes,
and having more then heart can wish, do Lord it (outwardly) over the bride, yet
in the sanctuary of God she declares their end, she casts them down into
desolation and utter destruction. After the same manner must we also learn to
overcome the watchmen, even by making a right application of the word of God
against them, before which they cannot stand: and also by comforting our selves
through faith in Christ, against what they published of us in the streets, then
although they may seem to carry it over us outwardly before men, yet shall we
inwardly reign over them through faith in Christ, who must reign in his
members, till he has put all his enemies under his feet.

VERSE IV. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
Soul loves --
THis passing from the watchmen is the overcoming of that temptation, which the
bride fell into, by reason of their smitings with the tongue, in respect of her
name and reputation. This seems to be the last temptation in her sad
condition, which fell upon her immediately before deliverance came; for it was
but a little time after she passed from them, but she found him whom her Soul
loved.

She was not dismayed at that bitter and heavy cross, but still continued
seeking for help and deliverance: and at length she found him whom her Soul
loved, that is, she found him createing help and deliverance, by such ways and
means, as she never thought on, nor expected. And thus shall it assuredly come
to pass, for all those that put their trust in Christ, all things shall come to
pass where nothing is seen. And when Satan and all his instruments have done
what they can, then shall the power of Christ appear above them all.

Therefore faith is a most victorious thing, that has all the attributes of
God knit fast unto it, that it is as possible for God to become no God, as it
is for any thing to be wanting, where faith is used. But first we must suffer a
trial, not being offended but rejoicing in the cross: then shall we find by
experience, that faith is no idle quality in the Soul, but a certain kind of
Divinity within us, which cleaves fast unto God; and obtains help and
succor from him.

Moreover this is to be noted, that in the midst of this bitter and heavy
temptation, she calls Christ still, he whom her Soul loves; which comes
from a persuasion of Christ's love to her, otherwise it could not be. This
assurance arises from faith, learn we therefore that Doctrine, which breeds
and feeds faith, then shall we also love God, and be filled with all Divine
and Heavenly qualities. Now the bride having found her beloved, mark what she
did.

-- I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me. First, she held
him, she laid up those experiences of his merciful deliverances fast in her
mind and memory, and would not lose them, nor yet declare them before scoffers
and scorners, (that contemn the word and ways of God) but to those of her
Mothers house, (meaning the Church of God) by whose Doctrine she was
regenerated and brought up in the faith of Christ: to her brethren and sisters
there, thither she brought her beloved, and not only into her mothers house,
but also into the Chamber where she was conceived, meaning the Conscience, to
which Christ must be made known, where ever the knowledge of him comes to be
effectual. She is not contented that the knowledge of him should be settled only
in the head, but also in the hearts of others, therefore she brings Christ
into the very Chamber, and cannot be satisfied until he be there.

Which shows us the true nature of faith where ever it is, which is never to
rest satissied, until Christ be brought into the Conscience, it is not at quiet
but in performing the same office for others (after a certain manner) that
Christ has done for us, that even as Christ is become bountiful and beneficial
to us, so also it studieth which way to be bountiful and beneficial to all men,
first to the Soul, and then to the body. First, by teaching the Doctrine of
Christ aright, next by teaching the Doctrine of good works, (and this is
rightly to bring Christ into our mothers house) works cannot breed faith: faith
cannot but breed good works. Therefore when good works are required, the Gospel
must go before, which must deliver and free the Conscience from the guilt of
sin and wrath of God; and work in it (with the bride here) a certain sense of
faith, that it may by a sure and certain light, perceive the reason why it
bursteth forth into all good works, and from what fountain they spring, and
whither they are directed.

VERSE V. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the
Hindes of the field: that ye stir not up, nor awake my love until he please.
THe voice of Christ who being delighted in the faith and practice of his
Church, when she consulteth not with the flesh and reason, but being (as it
were) in an holy sleep with himself, charge the daughters of Jerusalem the
second time (who are always disturbers of the peace and security of the Church)
from the example of those loving creatures that will not part: that trouble not
nor seek to make any separation between him and his spouse, until he himself
please, which is never.

VERSE VI. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness, like pillars of smoke
--
BY the wilderness is meant a dark, solitary, Esa. 35.1.
and sad condition, which the Church meets with in this world; which is a
very wilderness, barren, and empty of all things which concerns the happiness
and comfort of the bride of Christ. Into this wilderness the Church is brought,
where she finds nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit: therefore Christ
here sets her out by way of admiration, who is this that comes out of the
wilderness? That mounteth up above the world, and pineth not away in a sad
condition? For according to the wisdom of the flesh, there is no man under
Heaven knows which way to get out: but the Church by faith in Christ comes
out, which is a service highly accepted in the sight of God, and which also
preserves the Soul from sinking in the day of adversity, for when a man sees
others in prosperity, and himself in affliction, others to be highly esteemed,
and magnified for their outward pomp, and he himself to be incontempt, man is
ready to judge such persons to be beloved of God, and he himself to be hated;
but faith joineth us to the words of Christ in this place, who does not as the
world do, praise and extol those that are high, honorable, and prosperous
therein, but sets out by words of admiration, those that do not faint in a
sad condition. What wonderful excellent creature is this, that does not
languish and pine away in her affliction? Which words must comfort us in an
evil time, and cause us to rejoice, and sleep merrily in the woods through
faith; although according to the flesh and reason, we see not which way to get
out.

And it is said, she comes out like pillars of smoke. Some write that the
Artificers in Egypt could by their Art make smoke to assend directly upright,
like unto a pillar, and that the spirit of God may here have an allusion to
that similitude. But whether that be so or not we know this to be true, that
smoke is offensive to the eyes: now as smoke is troublesome to the eyes, that
they cannot behold things aright; So is the Churches faith (by which she comes
out of her afflictions) offensive to the wicked, darkneth their sight that they
cannot behold the inward glory of the Church: nor yet how she comes out of her
afflictions. Faith is like the cloudy pillar, which gave light to the Children
of Israel; but was darkness to the Egyptians. The godly stand upright in all
their tribulations, when others hang down their head like a bullrush. The
Church understands well enough how she comes out of her afflictions: but
they that know not what the life and exercise of true faith is, cannot
understand. Therefore the bride comes out like pillars of smoke. Also some
write that there is an Art in some, (with the use of certain powders) to
perfume smoke; but this we are certain of, Rev. 8.3.
that the smoke of the incense in the golden censer, which is offered with the
prayers of all the Saints, ascends up before God, and perfumeth the Church.

Therefore when thou art in the wilderness, and have lost thy way there,
meetest with the wild-beasts; by which thou art in danger to be made a prey, be
not tormented nor disquieted, but remember who brought thee in: the Lord thy
God led thee into the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
he did not hurl or throw thee as having no care of thee, but lovingly took
thee by the hand and led thee, to show thee the great and terrible wilderness,
before thou come to Canaan the promised Land. Be not thou dismayed therefore,
seeing the Lord thy God is with thee, but learn thou to become a smoking
pillar, Psalm. 141.2.
let thy prayers ascend up as incense before God: then although thou art in the
wilderness (for a little while) in respect of the body, yet thou art in Heaven
in respect of thy faith. And shall also come out of the wilderness, not only
dazzling the eyes of the wicked, who know nothing of the use and practice of
faith: but also sweet, being perfumed with heavenly powders as here it follows.

-- Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, and with all powders of the
Merchant? The Merchant that has the powders is the Lord Jesus Christ. As
Merchants bring powders which make excellent perfumes: So the Lord Jesus Christ
with his excellent perfumes, sweetneth all those that come unto him. Exodus
30.32, 37.
Myrrh was used in making the holy anointing oil, to make persons holy. And
frankincense in making the sweet perfume to smell thereto, which oil and sweet
perfume was holiness before the Lord; to all those that were perfumed
therewith. Now as Myrrh and Frankincense, mixed with other excellent spices,
being made a perfume, a confection, after the Art of the Apothecary, made
persons outwardly holy; So does the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ,
where it is received by faith, make persons holy before God, freeing them from
the guilt of sin, and everlasting condemnation. Now mark we the time here when
the bride is thus perfumed, it is when she is in the wilderness: for she comes
out thence perfumed, who is this that comes out of the wilderness perfumed?
Which must teach us what is first to be done, when we are led into the
wilderness; even so to order our selves, that we may receive this Heavenly
perfume. They that take offense at the cross, cannot receive the perfume. But
why should any one be offended; seeing it is for no other end and purpose, but
that by receiving the Heavenly powders; we might be sensible of our holiness in
the sight of God.

Therefore, when we are brought into the wilderness, made to sit in the desert
and solitary place, and all hope fails us (in respect of reason) how or which
way deliverance shall come: then if we can lift up our eyes and heart to our
Redeemer with an assured faith, we shall on a sudden be altogether be censed
with these Heavenly powders, and made to partake of all that the Merchant has
to bestow, the smell of which powders should more refresh and comfort us, then
the fear of any danger should possibly dismay us.

VERSE VII. and VIII. Behold his bed, which is Solomon's: threescore valiant men
are about it, of the valiant of Israel.

They all hold swords being expert in war, every man has his sword upon his
thigh, because of fear in the night.


AFter the Lord Jesus Christ had set forth by way of admiration the behavior
of his Church in the time of her distress, and how she came out of the
wilderness perfumed, he calls others to behold it, (as being a thing of great
excellency and weight) under the similitude of Solomon's bed.

Solomon being a King rich and glorious, and also excellent in wisdom, made
himself many rich and costly things; and amongst other things made himself a
most sumptious bed, for the entertainment of Pharaohs Daughter and others of
his Queens: and as he made himself a bed, so he provided also a guard to keep
the bed, and the guarding of his bed is shown by the manner of his guard that
kept it, they were sixty men, and for their strength they are said to be
valiant men; and to note their faithfulness, they are said to be chosen men in
Israel, not strangers, but his own country men; trusty ones, such as were fit
to guard a Prince: they were also expert men, skilful in handling of their
weapons, wherefore it is added, they all hold Swords, and their swords are in a
readiness, every man has his Sword upon his thigh: and the reason of his guard
was because of fear in the night.

All which notes, the defense that Solomon had for himself about his bed, to
preserve him from danger in the night by the strong men of Israel. Now to apply
this to the similitude.

King Solomon is the Lord Jesus Christ, his bed is the place of meeting, where
Christ and his Church meet together in public, or in private, and the bed
being said to be his; it notes, that it is a delight to the Lord Jesus Christ
to be in the bed with his Church; to behold her in the right use and exercise
of her faith, which by the word, behold, he calls all people diligently to
take notice of, that they may know what service above all things, is most
acceptable to him.

But what is signified by the sixty valiant men that are about the bed to guard
it?

Some have thought that by these sixty valiant men are meant the Angels,

But I conceive that although the Angels are wonderful in power, and also do
pitch their Tents round about them that fear the Lord: being all ministering
Spirits sent forth for their sakes which shall be heirs of glory, yet that the
Ministry of Angels is not here meant, because the outward safety of the Church
is not so much intended here; as her inward purity, in respect of Doctrine and
faith, which inward purity is preserved in the Church, by the Ministry of men,
and not by the Ministry of Angels.

These threescore valiant men I therefore understand to be the Church of the
first born, whose names are written in Heaven, principal men in the Church, who
do all with one consent endeavor to keep the marriage bed pure and undefiled,
teaching the Doctrine of faith truly, and the Doctrine of good works aright:
these be the valiant men that are about the bed, that are mighty through their
Doctrine to throw down the Kingdom of Satan, to confute and overthrow all
Heretics and Seducers, that even as David's worthies did strengthen him in his
Kingdom, by smiting the Jebusites that David alone might reign, so do these
valiant ones of Israel throw down by their Doctrine the old Foundations,
setting up Christ to be the Head of the corner.

Besides, they are not only valiant men, but men that are armed, they all hold
Swords; they do not run foolishly into the field, but before they enter into
the combat, are sure of their weapons, and also how to use them, for they are
men expert in War, they know the bottom and foundation of all controversy in
the Church, and wherein the strength of all arguments lie: these are fast
fellows that will not be bafled, but will stand their ground: every man has
his Sword upon his thigh, the word of God in a readiness, they are ready to
strike, and they draw not the Sword in vain, but manfully set about the work;
to destroy the wisdom of the wise, and to bring to nothing the understanding of
the prudent, and this is their principal work.

For there is no enmity in all the world (the case being rightly understood)
but about the Gospel, neither is there any enmity betwixt God and us but about
the Gospel. Destroy by the Gospel but the wisdom and righteousness in man: and
we have peace in Heaven, and peace on earth. For go into what Nation, City,
Family or Tribe, so ever thou will, and wisely enquire into this matter, and
thou shall find that the cause of all divisions whatsoever, both in matters of
Religion, and civil differences lies in this one thing, because man's (opinion
of his own) wisdom and righteousness reigns.

Therefore men are filled with complaints one against another, but no man
complains against himself: which makes it manifest that all men have an high
conceit of their own wisdom, and goodness, prizing of themselves at an higher
rate then all the world. For their opinion of themselves is so great, that all
men must stoop unto it, worship and adore it.

And so also in matters of Religion, this opinion is so strong and mighty, that
it will not endure to hear; that any man should persuade himself, that the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ is given to him, unless he first find in
himself such qualifications as (in his opinion) make him worthy of the same.
Now because this opinion in man fights directly against the Gospel, (which
forbideth it in the first place) it being the only sin that defiles the bed,
and which banisheth Christ out of the mind and Conscience: therefore against
this opinion (that man has of his wisdom) do every one of these valiant ones
set themselves, and use all their heavenly skill and cunning to destroy the
same, as being the strongest hold of Satan's Kingdom. And this they do for this
reason, because of fear in the night. This is the work of these valiant men, to
banish (by their Doctrine) the fear of Gods wrath and everlasting damnation,
out of the mind and Conscience: and to settle it in peace and joy. That when a
man is in a dark and sad condition (in the night of affliction) by reason of
his sin, the forerunner of fear and fearfulness; he might learn to remove and
overcome his fear, by a right understanding and application of the Gospel. No
man being able to overcome his fear by the righteousness of the Law, and his
own works: but by cleaving to the promise of God by faith without the Law.
Therefore if thou will be one of the number of these valiant men, learn thou
rightly how to guard King Solomon's bed, how to dispossess the Conscience of
fear: that Christ may lodge in the chamber with his bride, otherwise thou art
not fit to be of the guard. Learn thou therefore to be expert in handling thy
weapons to this purpose: for the pulling down of strong holds, and the casting
down of imaginations, that every thought may be brought into captivity to the
obedience of Christ. 2 Chro. 10.4, 5.
If thy Doctrine sets up strong holds in man, and raises up man's
imaginations of himself; then thou sowest in the heart the principles of fear,
but if by thy Doctrine thou pullest them down, then thou banishest fear.

If thou think by an outward reformation to be possessed of Christ, and to
banish fear; in stead of banishing fear, thou will banish Christ, for as much
as that very opinion in thee crucifieth the son of God, that bed being to short
and the covering to narrow, Esa. 28.20.
to wrap thy self in from the wrath of God.

Learn therefore to be skilful and very cunning in this point. If thou
groundest thy faith upon the Law, thou utterly losest Christ; but if thy faith
be formed by the Gospel without the Law, then shall thou have righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Then shall thy faith be undefiled, and the
marriage bed preserved pure. Then shall thou be of the number of the threescore
valiant men spoken of in this place that all hold Swords because of fear in the
night.

VERSE IX. and X. King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon.

He made the pillars thereof of Silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the
covering of it of Purple: the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem.


IN the former Verse is set down wherein the delight of Christ lies, even to
be in the bed with his Church, and also the guard that is set about the bed;
that the Churches Doctrine and faith might be preserved pure. Now here is set
down the Magnificency or stateliness of the place, and how it comes to be
builded, under the similitude of King Solomon's Chariot, Bedchamber, or Coach,
wherein King Solomon and his Queen might rejoice and have communion together.

Where the first thing respected is the builder, which is King Solomon. He
described the fashion of it, and gave his Artificers, or workmen, a plot for
the making of it.

Then here is the matter that Solomon used in building the Chariot, the wood of
Lebanon, Cedars, choice wood which will not rot and consume, but is durable,
and beyond all timber for sweetness.

The pillars being made of Silver, and the bottom of it covered with gold,
signifies the stateliness and the durableness of it, and that it was no
ordinary thing, being not made of corruptible matter.

The covering of it with purple, a most rich and sumptuous kind of hanging: and
of a most Princely color.

And the midst of it paved with love, or (as some will have it) wrought with
needle work in diverse colors, which made it delightful to behold.

And this was done for the daughters of Jerusalem, for those Ladies of Honor
to behold and delight themselves in, that did pertain to the Kings Court.

Now to apply the Similitude.

The Chariot is the Church, or people with whom the Lord Jesus Christ has
communion.

The maker of the Chariot is Christ, by the righteousness of his own person.

The materials Christ makes use of in the building of the Church, or the
Artificers, Ephesians. 4.8 12.
or instruments, be men; Psalm. 9.^
he does it by the Ministry of men, who are oftentimes compared to Cedars in
Lebanon.

The pillars are also men, Gal. 2.9.
so the godly are often said to be.

And the silver and the gold here mentioned, Rev. 3.12.
of which those pillars are made, is the pure Doctrine of the Gospel which is
sweet, 1 Pet. 25.
and said to be immortal, which endures for ever.

The purple covering is the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, covering
the sinful Conscience from the wrath of God, and the fear of everlasting
condemnation.

And the paving of it with love, is the making of the way plain and easy to
come to Christ, that all stumbling blocks being removed, men may run to him
with joy and rejoicing. And all this is done for the daughters of Jerusalem.

All which being well considered,

For it must be built with Silver and Gold, and if you consult with Esai. 54.
with precious stones also, all which signify, the pure Doctrine of the Gospel.
Which building cannot go forward, without a right understanding of the
Scriptures. The Silver pillars can never be made, the golden bottom can never
be laid, the Church can never be covered with the purple covering, the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ: if there be not a right understanding
of the Scriptures taught.

Those that are builders of the Lords Chariot, and understand not the
Scriptures; in stead of making Silver pillars, and laying the golden bottom,
they lay a foundation of wood and trash. In stead of building with Gold and
Silver and precious stones, which will not decay; they build with timber, hay,
and stubble, which will rot and consume. And hence it comes to pass, that in
stead of clothing the distressed Conscience with the righteousness of Christ,
and paving the way for the Soul to come to Christ, and making of those
Scriptures easy to be understood, which seem to stand in direct opposition to
faith: it so falls out that the way to justification and life seems to be
crooked, rough, and unpaved even to the builders themselves, so that in the
midst of their work they are many times at a stand, and in stead of building,
fall at difference amongst themselves; some build for Christ, and others build
for Antichrist; and all this comes to pass for want of a right understanding of
the Scriptures.

Not that there is a necessity of the understanding of all Scripture in
building the Chariot: but of the principal parts of the word, such as are
essential to a man's being, and living in the state of grace.

Such Scriptures as concern the Doctrine of justification and life Eternal,
(without the works and righteousness of man) and of the behavior of the Soul
under the sight and feeling of sin, and the apprehension of mercy, by which
Doctrine only the Church is built. And there are two principal parts in the
Scripture, the Law and the promise both which in respect of their use and
office, are of great concernment. Some when they make use of the Law do so
interpret it, that they take away the glory of man's Salvation from God, and
give it to men; these interpret without a rule, and for want of the rule to
understand the Scripture by, which is the Divine Testimony of the holy Ghost,
their building falls, and all their labor is lost. For all Scripture is given
by Divine inspiration: therefore seeing the holy Ghost is the inditer, he ought
also to be the interpreter. No Scripture being of any private interpretation
from which it follows, that he that will be sure that the sense which he gives
is right; must have his authority from the holy Ghost, to warrant his
exposition to be true. To believe as the Church believes is not the rule to
understand the Scriptures by, for the Church may err, and when she erreth from
the public interpretation of the holy Ghost, her interpretation is private,
and not to be received.

Now as in all Arts and Sciences, the first principles are proving, and not to
be proved, so in the Scriptures. And as the first principle in Divinity is the
Scripture: So the first principle in the Scripture is the first Commandment.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Mar. 12.28. Hos. 13.4. Esa. 43.11. Thou
shall know no God but me, for there is no Savior besides me.
Which if thou understandest according to the Gospel, it is this. Thou shall
know no other, love no other, delight in, nor depend upon any other
righteousness but mine, whereby to become righteous in the sight of God. Which
righteousness of God is not the righteousness of the Law, performed in thine
own person: but the righteousness of faith which is manifested without the Law.
So that the first Commandment drives thee from the Law, Romans 3.21. This
seems to be the meaning also of Paul: I through the Law am dead to the Law.
Gal. 2.19. Genesis 19.17. 1 Samuel 20.38. He that will spiritually perform the Law
must wholly renounce it in the matter of justification. Esa. 40.
to seek for righteousness in Christ. The Gospel calls thee to come; and the
first Commandment bids thee begone. It says to thee as the Angels did unto
Lot, have thee thither, escape for thy life; stay thou not in all the plain.
And as Jonathan said to David when Saul intended evil against him, run, make
speed, have, stay not, the arrows are beyond thee.

By which thou may see, that the Law notwithstanding it requires of thee,
Active obedience before men: yet, it requires thee to become passive, and
wholly to renounce it, in thy obtaining Righteousness before God.

Wherefore if thou will be a builder of King Solomon's Chariot, to make the
Sillver pillars, and to lay the golden bottom: learn thou by the first
Commandment to pave the way, to make the crooked places straight, and the rough
places plain, that poor distressed Consciences may come to Christ: that so when
any stumbling block is cast into the way, about the righteousness of the Law,
to hinder the distressed Conscience from closing with Christ: thou may
easily remove it by the proving principle. Otherwise, if thou drawest the Law
into the matter of justification, thou walk contrary to the first
Commandment and also sinnest against the Gospel, blockest up the way, and
shuttest fast the door of the Kingdom of Heaven. Pro. 25.4.
Learn therefore by thy Doctrine to separate the dross from the Silver: so
shall there proceed a vessel for the finer. 2 Timothy 2.20.
Then shall thou make vessels of Gold and Silver; even vessels of Honor. Some
stones in the building of the Temple were set for glittering stones, 1 Cor.
29.2.
to make a shining, if thou receivest no other interpretation of any Scripture,
but what is agreeable to the first Commandment, then shall thou become a
glittering stone in the Church of God: then shall the house of God be
magnifical, 1 Chro. 22.5.
and full of Fame, and Dignity, then shall thy Doctrine shine and make a great
light.

Hitherto has been showed what the Chariot is, and what is principally needful
for the building of it; now next it is showed for whom the Chariot is made, or
why men are made so skilful by Christ, to work in Gold and Silver and Purple,
and other curious works, to cover the sinful Conscience from the wrath of God;
it is for the daughters of Jerusalem. But why Jerusalem?

In all ages of the Church, the people of God were to seek him where he had
promised to be found. And God made promise that where ever he should place the
Ark: there he would meet his people and bless them. Which Ark of God was
sometimes in Shiloh, Exodus 25.22.
sometimes in Zion the City of David; but when Solomon had builded the Temple,
then it was brought by the Priests and Levites into the Temple at Jerusalem,
and then the promise was there. And as God made promise to Solomon, at the
dedication of the Temple, that his eyes and his heart should be there
perpetually: So the faithful in their prayers, were always to pray toward
Jerusalem. So that who ever he were that sought after God, either to hear any
thing from him, or to receive any thing of him; he must seek him in Jerusalem.

But now the corporal Jerusalem is destroyed, the Ark is to be sought for in
the new Jerusalem. Which Ark is Baptism. For as the promise of Gods presence
then, was where ever the Ark (by Gods appointment) was placed; So the promise
of Christ's presence now, is where Baptism is preserved aright. Mat. 28.
Baptism then is the Ark in the new Jerusalem. Not a resting in the work done,
and corrupting the nature of it; but where the true reason of its institution,
is taught and preserved. Rev. 21.3.
Therefore the Tabernacle of God is said to be with men, and our bodies to be
the visible Temples of the Holy Ghost; Cor. 2.6.
in regard of Baptism our Spiritual Ark.

Wherefore the Chariot being made for the Daughters of Jerusalem; it means
for those that are brought up under the Ark. For Jerusalem is the Mother,
because she abides by the Ark; she sticks fast to the promises of God, and
instructs all her Childeren in the same.

To those, and to all those, that are visible members of the Church, is the
word of God sent: for although the blessing in the word, be received but by a
few, yet the tender on Gods part is universal, and must not be denied, that
those for whom it is prepared may receive it; and they that refuse may be left
without excuse.

Some will allow that all shall hear the word, but deny their free admission to
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

But the Ark being the ground of Church Communion, (as aforesaid) so long as
the Ark remains, right to the Lords Supper does remain. For nothing can cause
the loss of any Church privilege, but the want of that which is Essential to
its being: now Baptism being Essential to all Church priveledges, till Baptism
be renounced, right to all Church privileges must remain.

Besides, Heb. 11.4. Deuteronomy. 14.23. Romans 15.8.
all the Sacraments that ever were, were incitements to faith and piety,
instituted on purpose to teach men to believe; as is easy enough to be seen,
being all preparatives to faith and holiness, and not effects; therefore none
must be debarred, but all admitted. Exodus 12.23.
Else how shall the faith of the Church become Sacramental, which faith was
never wanting to the Church in any age.

And as the word belongs to the Children of the Ark, and to all of them: Joh.
1.31. Luke 22.20.
so it belongs to none, but only them.

None can demonstrate, that ever any people had a visible interest in the
Scriptures, Psalm. 147. Romans 3. Acts 10.17.13, 24.
and to the interpretation thereof, but only those people whom God first
placed, and also preserved, under the external signs of his Covenant.

Jerusalem is the Mother, because she brings forth Children under the Ark,
not in bringing forth Children before she comes to the Ark: So likewise, they
are not daughters of Jerusalem, that count themselves holy and Saints before
they come to the Ark, all that teach that Doctrine pertain to another Mother,
and not to Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all. All those pertain to
Sinai which is in bondage with her Children: and not to the new Jerusalem the
celestial and Heavenly City.

Therefore, let us not despise the Riches of our beloved and lose so great a
Treasure, but seeing he is so bountiful unto us; as to let us hear his word, to
make us his Chariot, that we might have communion with himself, be saved from
an evil Conscience, and from his everlasting wrath: and be brought to live in
glory with him for ever hereafter, let us thank and bless his holy name, and
joyfully embrace his favor. And let us also learn, so to understand his word;
that we may receive the Heavenly gift of God that is sent unto us: and so to
understand the Sacraments that thereby we may be drawn to faith and true
repentance. Which that we may learn, we must diligently mark what here next
follows.

VERSE XI. Go forth, ye Daughters of Zion and behold King Solomon with the
Crown, wherewith his Mother Crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the
day of the gladness of his heart.
IN which words the Holy Ghost directs the Daughter of Zion, to a right
behavior of Soul, in receiving that Doctrine, wherewith the Chariot is made,
which is to go forth and behold.

By which words he rightly teaches, what the righteousness of the Gospel is;
not to rest in our selves, but by faith to behold King Solomon with his Crown.
And also how the righteousness of Christ shall be received and kept: even by
going forth from depending upon our own inherent righteousness. These are the
two most Excellent and most useful points above all others, and ought above all
things to be preferred. Which Doctrine we rightly learn, when we submit our
selves to the comdemnation of the Law; and suffer our selves by faith, to be
divorced from the Law. Else what does it avail us to hear, that the
righteousness of Christ is ever so excellent a thing; if we be not instructed
by the Gospel how to be divorced from our own. Now in this thing Christ
differs from all Teachers, for the wisdom of man Teaches after this sort, if
thou will attain to faith in Christ, and be assured thereof, do the Law, keep
the Commandments of God: but the wisdom of the Holy Ghost says the clean
contrary, go forth and behold King Solomon with his Crown. For this Act of
faith in going forth to behold, is not to do the Law; but wholly to depart from
the Law. So that rightly to behold King Solomon with his Crown; is wholly to
forget and lose the Law.

This place therefore teaches us, how the righteousness of the Ten
Commandments may be attained, not by our doing the works of the Law; but by
faith in Christ without the Law. Even by beholding the Kingdom and victory of
our Lord Jesus Christ to be given to us freely. This matter concerns the
conscience, and therefore it had need be well learned. Therefore when thou
feel thy sin, and fear the wrath to come, confess it to God; and ask
forgiveness for Christ's sake with a believing heart; then have thou spiritually
fulfilled the Law, forasmuch as the righteousness of Christ is given to thee,
as soon as thou feel and confessest thy condemnation by the Law; which thing
thou ought to believe, it being the chief Cornerstone in building the
Kingdom of Christ in thy distressed Conscience. Therefore who ever thou art
that would attain to righteousness before God, and also to true peace and
comfort in thy Conscience, learn thou the way how to attain the same: even by
faith in Christ without the works of the Law, to go forth and behold King
Solomon with his Crown.

Now the Crown betokens the victory that Christ has gotten over the Law,
Gal. 4.5. Romans 8.3. Heb. 2.14. Hos. 13.14 Joh. 3.16.
Satan, sin, and death; which victory is given to thee, as soon as thou
believe.

And it is further added here, the Crown wherewith his Mother Crowned him; by
which is meant the Church. And by Crowning him the right preaching of the
Gospel, and also receiving of the same. Gal. 4.26.
For even as Batsheba the Mother of Solomon, became instrumental for the
setting of King Solomon on his Regal Throne: 1 Kings.
So does the Church which is the Mother of us all become instrumental; in the
Crowning of Christ by the Preaching of the Gospel. Now Christ is Crowned by his
Mother, when she so interprets the Law, that she takes away all glory from
man; and attributes the praise of her Salvation to Christ alone. In the
Crowning of Christ; she afflicts her Children with the feeling of sin by the
Law; and comfort them again with the Crown and victory of the Lord Jesus
Christ without the Law.

The Mother of Harlots, Rev. 18.
Crowns Christ in words, calling him her Lord, King, and Lawgiver: but by
her practice she denies him. For she so interprets all those Scriptures that
are branches of the Law; that she draws the Law into the Doctrine of
justification.

Thus she takes off the Crown, from Christ's head, Heb. 2.
who is Crowned with Glory and Honor; and puts upon his head a Crown of
Thorns.

There is a two fold Crowning of Christ in Scripture by his Father, and by his
Mother. The first was at his Resurrection, 2 Acts 36.
when he was declared to be Lord and Christ, that was by his Father; the
second, when the benefits of his death and Resurrection, are infused into the
Consciences of men by the Preaching of the Gospel, this is done by his Mother.
Therefore we are not only to behold him Crowned by the Father, although that we
must do first; but also to learn the true way of Crowning him as the Mother,
that he alone may reign in the heart and Conscience. This is the day of the
gladness of Christ's heart, it being the day of his espousals: when he marries
us unto himself in an everlasting Covenant; and rejoices in us, and over us as
the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride.

Now when we have learned by faith to be separated from the Law, and to go
forth and behold King Solomon with his Crown; then must we come into the
practice of the Law, which is to go forth and behold him in his afflicted
members, to help those that are in misery; Tit. 3.8.
to comfort all that are in distress. Thus all that have believed in God must
be careful to maintain good works, which are good and profitable unto men.

So that although the Gospel divorceth us from the Law, in the matter of
justification; yet, it joyneth us to the matter of Sanctification; and causes
us to do that freely for others, (according to our power) which our Lord Jesus
Christ out of his abundant kindness has freely done for us.

For who can choose but show kindness joyfully to his brother: that has
apprehended by faith the love of Christ toward himself? All works before the
Gospel is received are naught, because they are not directed toward men, but
drawn into the judgment seat to make us righteous; but faith separateth works
from the judgment seat, and directs them toward our neighbor, and so it
makes our works, good works.

This wisdom the world understands not, therefore it is Condemned for
despising the Gospel, which it will not be subject to. Let us learn therefore,
to lay aside our works when we come before God, that we may be justified by
faith; and live in the practice of all good works before men, that we may want
no qualification which the Gospel requires.

CHAP. IV.
VERSE I. Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair, thou have
doves eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from
Mount Gilead.
CHRIST having (in the former verse) directed the Church how to receive his
righteousness by faith alone, here he commends her for her fairness, and
calls her to behold it; and doubles it again, that she may believe it. In
which commendation he sets her forth by the parts and features of the body,
by which are meant the Spiritual beauty of the Church. First, he commends her
eyes, which are the instruments of sight, whereby she beholds her beloved:
and compares them to the eyes of doves, in regard she continually respects
her mate as the dove. Which shows, that when she is disowned and forsaken of
the Law, yet then she looks up by faith unto her Redeemer. In regard
therefore, that she spieth out by faith, the comforts of her beloved in a sad
condition; she is pronounced to be fair, and called to behold it. And after the
same manner it is also with us, as soon as we humble our selves for our
wretchedness, and do behold his righteousness to be given unto us; it is
pronounced in Heaven, thou art fair my love, thou art fair. Therefore, this
being the decree, that is pronounced in Heaven; we must learn by faith to
behold, and receive it into the Conscience.

The next thing commended is her hair, which seems to mean the whole company
of believers; as may be gathered from the similitude of the Prophets hair;
Ezekiel. 5.1, 12.
which signified the dividing of the people of Israel, and also in regard of
the Original from whence the hair proceeds, which is the head; having its
nourishment from the moisture and strength of the head. And also it being
likened to a flock: it doubtless means, the flock of Christ.

These hairs are likened to the Goats that appear from Mount Gilead, which was
a Mountain beyond Jordan, Number. 32 39.
where the tribe of Manasseh dwelt. Which Mountain being excellent for feeding,
those that dwelt there had many Goats: and also there were Trees of price, and
estimation for the Goats to breuse on, and to rub themselves against, therefore
the Goats were of good liking; and also smooth. Now the hairs being likened to
a flock of these Goats; it shows, that they have rich seeding in green
pastures, because they all hang upon their head the Lord Jesus Christ.

VERSE II. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which came
up from the washing: whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among
them.
THe teeth are the instruments of the stomach, whereby the meat is fitted for
disgesture; by which are signified, the Ministers of the word, and breakers of
the bread of life, whose office is, so to chew the Spiritual meat, that it may
be digested, and become nourishment to the Soul. These are said to be like a
flock of sheep, Esa. 40.9.
because they receive their nourishment from Christ, of whom it is said, he
shall feed his flock like a shepherd. And to go up from the washing: being made
white in the blood of the Lamb. And to be even shorn, which shows, the
goodness of the pasture where they feed; whereby they grow to be in very high
case, even like sheep that are fed in fat ground, that are so rank in wool;
and so high in flesh, that they will shear even. And to bring forth twins,
because they teach a right conceiving, of the use and Office of the Law and
Gospel. These twins every one of these teeth bring forth, and not one is (said
to be) barren among them.

This shows us, that those which so handle the word of God, as to destroy the
use and office of the Law and Gospel thereby, are not the teeth of the Church
here spoken of, because they destroy the twins. They are not the right breakers
of the bread of life, they chew not the Spiritual meat aright, and therefore it
never comes to be nourishment to the Soul: but in stead thereof, the sheep do
hunger-bane and starve away. And from hence it comes to pass, that when
shearing time comes, when the owner of the sheep, should receive the profit of
his flock; there is nothing to be had, neither wool nor Lamb. For instead of
chewing and preparing the word that the Conscience may rightly conceive, and
bring forth twins: they fume into the stomach a false opinion of God, and the
loss of true and Eternal happiness. Hos. 9.11.
For the glory of Israel flies away like a Bird, from the birth, from the
womb, and from the conception: the Conscience (which is the womb of the Church)
never rightly conceiving of the Law, nor of the Gospel. Such teeth are rotten
and must be drawed, being fit for nothing but to be plucked out: because no man
is nourished by them, but every man's mind and Conscience remains defiled.

Therefore, that the word of God may rightly be conceived in the Conscience,
which is the womb of the Church; the Rams of the flock must be of a right kind.
For the twins come not altogether by reason of the fatness of the pasture: but
also from the breed of the Ram.

Therefore it was promised as a great blessing to the Church by the Holy Ghost,
when the Rams of Nebajoth should Minister unto it. Esa. 60.
Nebajoth was the eldest son of Ishmael, so called by his Town, which belonged
to the Isles of the Gentiles. Now the Gentiles had not the Law: yet did pertain
to the promise made to Abraham, in thy seed shall all Nations of the Earth be
blessed.

These Rams then of Nebajoth, were such as should learn by the Gospel, rightly
to understand the Law; and also by the Gospel, to attain to the righteousness
of the Law. Such Rams must be chosen, and drove into the flock, who can teach
by the Gospel, the true understanding of the Law: that Doctrine, and that alone
brings forth twins, and not one is barren among them.

By this we may easily discern, between the teeth of the Church, that have this
commendation of our Lord Jesus Christ; and those teeth that serve for no other
use but to corrupt the word of God. Also from hence we must learn, so to
expound, hear and receive the word, that the right use and Office of the Law
and Gospel may be known and preserved; every one that so Preaches, Expounds
and receives the same, shall bring forth twins, and not one shall remain
barren among them.

VERSE III. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy speech is comely:
thy Temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate within thy locks.
THe lips are the instruments of speech, by which words are uttered. Which
words are like a thread of Scarlet, when they are dyed in the blood of Christ:
and also like a thread, when they are fastened and hanged together, as it were
with a thread or lace, when Arguments are grounded upon a right division, when
one thing is so drawn out of another, that there is no destroying of any one
point, unless the thread be broke, and all be destroyed together, then is the
speech comely. Contrary to this it is, when arguments are not grounded upon a
right division, when the affirming of one thing overthrows another: when both
notwithstanding are strongly holden for truths. Such Doctrine is not laced
together with a thread; neither is there any knot to be undone, because the
Doctrine divides of its own nature.

The Temples are the seat of invention, or finding out of things. And are said
to be like a piece of a Pomegranate; Psalm. 132.5.
because the rind of the Pomegranate being broken of, the kernels make an
excellent show. Therefore the Churches temples are here commended, because she
finds out the mystery of the Gospel; in handling the word of God, she
breaks the rind, and shows the kernels of things, which is very delightful
and pleasant to the Soul.

VERSE IV. Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an armory, whereon
there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.
BY the neck of the Church is meant, strength, Lam. 1.14.
as appears in diverse places in the Lamentations of Jeremiah. Lam. 5.5.
And is said to be like the Tower of David, because when David was anointed
King over Israel, 1 Samuel 5.7.
he took the Fort of Zion, and made himself strong against the Jebusites (by
fortifying the same) and overcame them. 1 Cro. 11.5.
Now the strength of the Church is faith, which being likened to David's Tower
shows us, that even as David by the strength of his Tower fortified himself
against the Jebusites; So is the Church also fortified by her faith, which (as
the neck knitteth the body to the head) knitteth her to Christ, by which she
overcomes all her Spiritual Enemies. But where there is no faith there Christ
and the Church are parted, because there is no neck to join them together. Such
may be joined to the Societies of men: but they cannot be united to Christ,
because they want the neck which couples the Church to Christ. Therefore seeing
faith is our victory, by which we must overcome all the fiery darts of the
Devil: it behooves us to know the proper nature of it, and the right use of it,
and also how to define it rightly in the time of Temptation, lest otherwise in
stead of conquering, we should in the end be overthrown.

Moreover in that it is said, there hang a thousand bucklers thereon, it
further shows us, that faith is a most mighty shield; for even as King David's
Tower, built for an armory, was fortified with Spears, Shields, and Bucklers, 2
Cron. 23.9.
to strengthen him against his corporal enemies: so faith, (wheresoever the use
of it is rightly known) has all things in it to defend us from our spiritual
enemies, because it knitteth us to all the power and protection that is in God.
Therefore these Bucklers are said to be, all shields of Mighty men, because all
that put upon them the shield of faith, are mighty to overcome themselves, the
world, and the Devil.

So that even as David's Worthies, did hold strongly with him, 1 Cron. 11.10.
and with all Israel, to make him King: so do all these mighty men by their
Doctrine and faith, oppose the world, and the whole Kingdom of Satan.

Therefore, seeing faith is so great a Tower, has so many Bucklers and Weapons
of defense in it, and makes such mighty men in the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ: we that dwell in this mighty fort, should wonderfully rejoice, and not
easily be overcome, but set our selves against our selves, the world, and the
whole Kingdom of Antichrist; and learn through the power of this mighty shield,
to make all our adversaries whatsoever to tremble.

VERSE V. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins: which feed
among the Lillies.
AS the Lord is the Father of many Children, so he also provideth a Mother for
them. And she has breasts by which she nourishes them. It is not enough to
have a Child, if there be nothing to feed it: for then, for want of nourishment
the Child must die.

Some say, that by the breasts are meant, the Old and New Testament; others say
no, because in Solomon's time, the New Testament was not written. Others think
the Ministers of the word are the breasts, because they are termed Nurses: but
they cannot understand the number; why they should be said to be but two.

Those that by the breasts understand the Old and New Testament, (or if you
will, the Law and Gospel) seem to be in the right, for the New Testament
although it was not written in Solomon's time, as we have it now; yet the
Covenant of grace was understood then, and also penned by Solomon most sweetly,
as in this Canticle of Solomon does appear.

The milk that comes out of these breasts, is conveyed into the Conscience by
the teats which pertain to the breasts. The teats are the Ministers and
expounders of the Law and Gospel, which are called, the teats of virginity.

Because when they give the sense of the word truly; faith is preserved, Eze.
23.3.
and the Church is presented a Virgin to Christ. But if the teats are
corrupted, then the virginity of the Bride is destroyed: and the purity of
faith is lost. Therefore it is said, in the aforesaid Text, that when Aholah
and Aholiab, ( Jerusalem and Samaria) had committed whoredom in Egypt; there
the breasts were pressed, and the teats of their virginity were bruised.

These breasts are said to be twins, because the knowledge of them are brought
into the Soul both together. And also to be two, to show that they are
distinct: and also that the true Mother feeds her Children with both the
breasts with equal respect. And being likened to Roes feeding among Lillies, it
shows, not that Roes do eat Lillies, for of all things (as some write) they
eat them not; but the goodness of the pasture where they feed. For as in our
Land we know ground to be good for feeding, when we find some certain sort of
grass in it: so in Jury they knew their ground to be good; when there were
store of Lillies growing in it. So that there is rich feeding where the milk of
these breasts is drawn out; which fills all that taste thereof, with heavenly
and Divine consolations.

Which shows us the cause why the Children of the Church prove so little, why
they do not learn knowledge, nor understand Doctrine; but in stead of growing in
grace, they grow in error; the reason is, because they are weaned from the
Breasts, Esa. 28.9.
they never find the teat. The milk of consolation never comes into the
Conscience for the nourishment of the Soul, because there is a stoppage in the
teats, that will not suffer the sense of the word to enter.

Therefore the breasts are pressed, begin to quar, and grow sore; because the
teats are bruised, and do not perform their Office. And hence it comes to pass,
that although the Gospel be infinitely full of comfort and joy, such joy that
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has ever entered into the heart of man to
conceive: yet because the sense is not given, that the Conscience (which is
like a silly Babe) may taste, and make application thereof; the comfort is
gone, the joy is lost.

And as the stoppage in the teat is one cause, so also the waywarness in the
Babe is another; that will not come near the breasts to taste of the milk, that
although the breasts be full, and the teat be put into the mouth of it, yet it
will not suck by any means that can be used. Therefore the breasts being
forsaken, and the teat despised, in stead of proving, it grows to be a Dwarf:
it falls into incurable disseases, runs up and down, from one Physician to
another; and at length falls down into Everlasting death and condemnation.

Therefore seeing the pasture is so good, and the feeding so excellent, as to
feed among Lillies: it is good for every man, so to learn to feed that he may
grow thereby. The Nurse must learn how to give the teat, and also the infant
how to receive the teat: that both may grow to a manly stature in Christianity.

Some that are Nurses will suckle but with one breast, they give the Gospel,
but deny the Law to be of any use at all to a believer: these are not Children
of the true Mother, because they lose one of the Breasts. Others do earnestly
require the works of the Law to be done, and give not the Gospel, but upon
condition of man's obedience to the same: these destroy the use of both the
Breasts. But the true Mother gives both the breasts, and so opens and
defines both the Law and Gospel, that every mean capacity may understand it.

She considers the condition of all her Children, and when she finds any in
heaviness of heart, she suckleth them with the Gospel; but those that are
hardened and presumptuous, and think themselves secure; She follows them with
the Law, to drive them to Christ. Therefore seeing the Breasts are here
commended, because the Church is nourished by them, and the Mother also in that
she gives both the Breasts; let every one in his place, learn so to give the
Breast, and so to receive the milk, in the natural taste of it, that the
Conscience having once caught the teat by faith, it may suck and be satisfied
with Divine consolations.

VERSE VI. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
Mountains of Myrrh, and to the hill of Frankincense.
THese words seem to be the answer of Christ to the Churches Petition, in the
last Verse of the second Chapter. Wherein Christ promises, that which the
Church there desires, even to be with her until the day break, and the shadows
flee away.

There are two great Mountains in man by reason of the fall. The one is the
Mountain of presumption, which stands in a false opinion of the Law: and is,
by reason of the loss of man's Spiritual wisdom and understanding.

The other is the Mountain of despair, which stands in a false opinion of the
Gospel. For even as before a man is humbled, he presumes upon his own wisdom
and power, thinking thereby to accomplish whatsoever he imagines; and to climb
up into the presence of God: So after a man is humbled, he thinks his sins to
be so many and foul, and his afflictions so many and great, that he cannot tell
how to depend upon God for mercy and deliverance.

Now Christ delivers us from these two Mountains by getting into two other
Mountains.

The one is the Mountain of Myrrh, when he destroys in us our false opinion
of the Law; the other is the hill of Frankincense, when he teaches us rightly
to define the Gospel.

These are sweet and pleasant hills, because of the sweet and heavenly Poseys
that are given unto us, in these deliverances; and this is the proper work and
office of the Gospel, and the foundation of love and all good works to men. And
this is that which Christ here promises, and will perform, even till the day
break, and the shadows flee away. From whence also note; That the day will
break, the joyful morning of the Resurrection will come; when all shadows,
sins, crosses and calamities shall totally flee away, and everlasting joy shall
come, and in the mean time Christ is with us, in his sweet and pleasant
Mountains: which Mountains must cause us to rejoice and sing. In these
Mountains the nature of God is seen; and his hearty love and affection toward
poor sinners. Therefore seeing Christ our Bridegroom dwells in these sweet
and pleasant hills, it ought to be our constant prayer, that he will grant us
this gift that we may continually hear his word and submit unto it: that we may
receive the benefit and comfort of the same.

VERSE VII. Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee.
These words are foolishness to reason, which concludes, when it sees the
godly in great misery and affliction, in reproach and contempt of the world;
that they are the fowlest of all people, and those that are in prosperity and
favor with the world: to be the only people that are beloved of God. For it
beholds nothing but the out side; it understands nothing of the Churches
glory.

But Christ here pronounces the Church to be fair and without spot, even then
when she is oppressed with shadows, sins, sorrows and calamities for as soon as
she humbles her self, and by faith lays hold upon his merits: then is it
pronounced in Heaven, thou art all fair my love, and their is no spot in thee.
Therefore faith is the only righteousness of a Christian man; and the highest
service and worship that can be given to God, forasmuch as it attributes truth
and faithfulness to him. Therefore God faith in answer to faith, because thou
judge me faithful and countest me not for a Liar, but to be true and just,
therefore will I stick unto thee, and forgive thee all thy sins; behold, thou
art all fair, and there is no spot in thee. Mark then and behold, that when
ever thou feel the Myrrh to drop into thy understanding, causing thee to
give unto God the glory of his truth, either when he destroys thy natural
opinion and principles concerning righteousness by the Law: or when he teaches
thee to scent the perfume of the heavenly Frankincense given thee without the
Law, then know thou for certain, that the day and hour is come, that thy inward
man is made beautiful with the glory of God. For then is it pronounced in
Heaven, thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee. These things
it behooves us to know; that we may be certain what true Christian
righteousness is, and when we have it, and this benefit we learn to receive,
when Christ gets into the Mountain of Myrrh, and the hill of Frankincense.
In the Doctrine therefore that droppeth from these two Mountains must we
rejoice and sing; thereon must be the Situation of our faith, and the rise of
all our comfort.

Then shall we become beautiful for Situation, and the joy of the whole Earth;
forasmuch as where the Gospel is received, the hearts of all men are filled
with joy and gladness.

VERSE VIII. Come with me from Lebanon (my spouse) with me from Lebanon: look
from the top of Amano, from the top of Shenir and Hermon --
CHrist having pronounced his Church to be fair, calls her from those people
whose Doctrine and Society causes defilement. Therefore he calls her, from
Lebanon, Amana, Shenir and Hermon. Lebanon was a Forest wherein dwelt the
Cananites, Hittites, Jud. 3.3, 5.
Amorites, Perizites, and Jebusites. Which people were left to prove Israel, to
know whither they would hearken to the Commandment of the Lord, which he
Commanded their fathers. 2 King. 1 9.
Which Forest also was haunted of wild beasts. Now both the Nations that were
left there, and also the wild beasts that did haunt there, do signify false
Prophets; as is frequently to be seen in Scripture.

Amana was a Mountain in the Land of Syria, from whence Naaman the Assyrian
came to the Prophet to be cured of his Leprosy, 2 King. 18.
which was also a place of Idolatry.

Shenir and Hermon was a Mountain possessed of old by Og King of Bashan, where
also the Amorites dwelt: which was taken away from the two Kings of the
Amorites, Sihon and Og, Deuteronomy. 3.
by the Children of Israel as Moses shows.

All those were places of Idolatry, wherein lived such people whose principles
were against the Gospel. Therefore the holy Ghost in the last clause of this
Verse, calls them Dens of Lions, and Mountains of Leopards: in regard of
their great enmity to the faith of Christ. And as it was said before, it is
usual with the Holy Ghost, to set forth those that are enemies to the Gospel,
under the Title of Lions and wild beasts, and many other strange kind of
Creatures. Psalm. 57.
David complains, his Soul was among Lions.

And when the Lord threatened to punish the Nations for their Idolatry, Esa. 34.
by giving them up to the Sword, and also to their own imaginations: he calls
the people that after should inhabit there, by a borrowed speech, an habitation
of Dragons. And further says, that the Cormorant (which is a foul flying over
the Sea) and the bittern shall possess it, that the Owl and the Raven shall
dwell in it; Ver. 11.
that it shall be an habitation of Dragons, and a Court for Owls. By these and
such other similatudes the Holy Ghost often sets forth Idoliters: which also
shows us, how little they are esteemed in the sight of God, and also, (as it
follows in the Chapter) how their meetings are looked upon, Esa. 34.14.
and to what they are likened. The wild beasts of the desert, shall meet with
the wild beasts of the Island, they shall come out of one Country to another to
hold up their meetings. And the Satyr shall cry to his fellow; a wild god of
the wood, a creature of diverse shapes. Ver. 14.
And the Shrichowl shall rest there also, whose voice is tuned something like a
woman speaker. Such as these a nation shall be filled with, when God will
punish a people for the contempt of his word. And the great Owl also shall make
her nest there, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow. This is not
meant of the natural Owl (as I conceive) but of some Spiritual Father that is a
gatherer; that lays strange principles, and hatcheth up others in his own
opinions.

These sorts of Creatures, (many of them) come from far, no man knows from
whence; few or none of them use to haunt amongst the Birds of Heaven, but use
unhaunted and unaccustomed places, and by a strange confusion of Language; seek
to undermine the faith of Christ. Therefore the Holy Ghost likeneth them here
to wild beasts, and their meetings to be but like the crying of Satyrs, (a kind
of betwitching of little Children in the cradles) and the noise of Shrichowls,
and their gatherings to be but as the laying and hatching of the Owl, the which
nothing could be spoken of more contemptibly.

Now in that Christ calls his Church to come from Lebanon, from Amana, from
Shenir and Hermon; it shows plainly, that where the Gospel is taught, the
Church must look to be pestered with Sects and Seducers that shall oppose the
same. There the Satyrs shall dance and walk in diverse shapes seeking to bewitch
those that follow them.

Thither the wild beasts shall come, who shall run head long upon all those
that shall oppose them. There the Owls shall hold their Court and think by a
strange and an unaccustomed noise to destroy all at once.

Now in regard Christ says come with me from Lebanon, it shows, that the
victory over these Vermin, is not to be gotten by the Law, but by Christ.
Sectaries and Seducers teach no other way to faith and Justification but by
their own doings; therefore the Holy Ghost calls them and their followers, an
habitations of Dragons. Now in regard (by their principles) they seek
justification by the Law: Rev. 18.2.
therefore they cannot be convicted by the Law; because the Law requires
obedience upon the same terms. Therefore Christ says here, come with me from
Lebanon my spouse, and doubles it again, with me from Lebanon: that is, with my
righteousness and works, wherein righteousness and Salvation alone is to be
found.

The first point of policy in the old Serpent the Devil was to corrupt Eve in
her faith, which thing is also attempted by the whole Ministry of Satan. If
therefore thou hearkenest to that Doctrine, that by the principles of it,
destroys faith in Christ: then thou art an inhabitant with the Dragon, and
settled in the Owls nest. Hearken we therefore to the voice of our beloved,
which teaches the active doing of the Law, in obtaining righteousness before
men: but gathers all his sheep into his fold, not by the Active, but by the
Passive doing of the Law.

Therefore when thou hear from Amana, the active doing of the Law urged to
bring thee to faith and justification: Look thou then from the top of Amana,
and steadfastly believe the Gospel; which teaches no other preparative to faith
and justification, but the Passive doing of the Law. If thou groundest thy
faith there, then thou forsakest all the wild beasts in Lebanon, and art
separated from Amana, Shenir, and Herman: thy being is no longer with Dragons,
but thy Situation is in Mount Sion; and the Lord is become thy habitation.

-- From the Dens of Lions, from the Mountains of Leopards. He calls them
Lions and Leopards because false Prophets are destructive Creatures: all their
Labor is to bring Souls to everlasting ruin. And although they walk under the
Title of Saints amongst themselves: yet the Holy Ghost calls them the
habitation of Devils, and a cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.

The Den of these Lions is, where men prefer their own doings beyond the
Gospel. Not when the Law is truly taught, but when it is stretched beyond its
bounds and limits; when man has an high opinion of his works, an evident sign
whereof is, when the Publican is despised which makes it appear, that the
Pharisee which despises him trusts in his works.

This is the Lions Den, and in regard there are many such people, and also such
Societies that flock together into Mountains and Dens: into obscure places, and
under a pretense of great zeal and holiness do destroy the faith of some, and
danger the Seducing of others; therefore the Holy Ghost terms them, to Dens
of Lions, and Mountains of Leopards; and calls the Church from those Dens and
Mountains, because no man can live there, but first or last he shall be made a
prey.

Moreover Lions and Leopards may signify wicked Rulers, which are fierce,
cruel, and full of rage against the Church of God; and also those of any sort
that plot and contrive, how to get power in their hands to work the ruin of the
people of God.

Of such David speaks, Psalm. 10.9, 10.
that lie in wait secretly as a Lion in his Den to catch the poor: that crouch
and will not stir nor wag (but only cast their eyes about) till they are
certain of their prey, but as soon as the prey comes within their reach, they
clap in their claws, and tear the poor in pieces. These are like the Leopards
also, Jer. 13.23.
which are fierce Creatures and full of spots. And even as the Leopards may be
known by their spots, so also may these be known, having spots that make them
very discernable.

So that a man may easily find where the Leopard has been by his spots, which
spots he cannot change; but shows them wheresoever he makes after his prey,
which is always the utter ruin and destruction of the people of God. Now in
regard Christ says come with me, it shows, that the spouse is safe in his
presence; notwithstanding these Lions and Leopards.

And seeing he says, from the Dens, and from their Mountains; it shows, that
they are utterly disowned by Christ, and left alone in the Kingdom of the
Devil, where God will make use of them for a time for the afflicting of his
Church: and afterward will cast them from their Mountains into Everlasting
destruction.

VERSE IX. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my spouse; thou have
ravished my heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
THe Church being obedient to the call of Christ, in forsaking the Lions Dens,
and the Leopards Mountains: in separating from Amana, Shenir and Hermon, and
resting her self in Mount Sion. Christ here says, thou have ravished my heart.
To be ravished, is to be overcome, and to have the heart and affection, wholly
taken up by the sight of another. This ravishment is said to come from one of
the eyes, or from one look of the eyes, that is, when she looks (after the
manner of a Lover) with indignation upon the Doctrine of false Teachers that do
trample under foot the Gospel, and advances the Gospel from the destruction of
the same.

And also from one chain of the neck, which is a right understanding of the Law
of grace, by which Sectaries and wicked men are overthrown. So that Christ is
ravished when we learn by the Gospel to destroy the Kingdom of the Devil. And
to show us the certainty of it, He doubleth his speech, thou have ravished my
heart, thou have ravished my heart: which words are written on purpose to draw
us into the combat, and that we might not by any means Question his love in so
doing; but steadfastly through faith to embrace the same.

VERSE X. How fair is thy love, my Sister, my spouse! --
THis is a note of admiration, which shows, that Christ's delight is in
nothing, but that we love him, which love we show when we believe his word, and
endeavor by the same to throw down the Kingdom of the Devil. This is the only
thing which makes us beautiful in the sight of Christ.

And when he adds, my sister, my spouse, it comprehends all Divinity;
sets forth the nature of God to us, and the full ground of our faith. For
seeing he says, my sister, he teaches us, that he is really and truly our
loving brother; that is naturally affected to us, cares for us in all
conditions, and pityeth us in all distresses.

And seeing he says my spouse, he teaches us that we are no longer twain but
one. And does thereby assure us, that he is bone of our bones, and flesh of our
flesh: and that whatsoever he has done and suffered, is ours as really and
truly, as if we had done it in our own persons.

These words therefore are full of admirable consolation, because they assure
us, that Christ came into the world on purpose to own us; to take all evils
from us, and to bestow all good things upon us. Which must also draw us into
the use, and practice of our faith. For seeing he is our brother we should not
be afraid of him, but go unto him with boldness and confidence. And seeing he
is our Husband, we must be assured that he takes from us the guilt of all our
sins, and discharges us to his Father.

The consideration of this must also help us in all crosses and calamities:
forasmuch as he cannot suffer us to want any thing we stand in need of; if we
steadfastly believe in him.

But it is cursed unbelief that causes in us a slighting and contemning of the
word, and therefore we lose the good things we stand in need of; which
otherwise we could not want.

-- How much better is thy love then Wine! -- Which is as much as to say, I
love thee far beyond all Creatures. Wine cheereth and rejoiceth the heart of
man, but in that thou love me with hearty affection; it is better to me then
Wine is to any man. And when he says, how much better! he teaches us, that no
Creature is able to set down the several dimensions of his love, which passes
knowledge. Christ uses this passionate speech to draw us to a good opinion of
him, being written for no other purpose but that we might believe, for when he
loves us once, he loves us to the end.

These words therefore are chiefly to be made use of in times of distress, when
the mind is perplexed with hard thoughts of God, when we look upon him as he is
revealed in the Law: but not as he has revealed himself in the Gospel to the
humbled sinner, then are we principally to hear these words. For to this end
Christ makes himself known to us by his word, that he might get himself a name
in our hearts; and that we might get the victory over our unbelief. We must
therefore believe these words, and then it shall be to us according to his
word: but if otherwise we slight and contemn his word, he shall notwithstanding
find an object of his love else where; but we shall be cast off, forsaken and
despised.

-- And the smell of thine ointments beyond all spices. Spices by the Law were
to be used in making the sweet ointments for the Tabernacle; Exodus 30.
and all the vessels thereof. Which ointments had a most excellent smell: and
did signify the righteousness of Christ inherent in himself. Which
righteousness of Christ when it is received by faith, the spouse is anointed
with: and made to smell sweet in the presence of God. These ointments being
said to be beyond all spices, the righteousness of Faith is beyond all
righteousness: because it sends up an excellent perfume into the nostrils of
God.

And the reason why these ointments are so sweet, is, because they are
compounded according to Art, Exodus 30.23.
So that no ointments are like unto them. The ointment of the Tabernacle was
made of principal spices: and also compounded according to the Art of the
Apothecary. The ointment that sweetneth the spouse, is the righteousness of God
and man: no compound so excellent. So the perfuming spice for the Tabernacle,
was a most rare confection, tempered together of most excellent spices pure and
holy, and also was made according to Art; and therefore it is, that it was so
excellent.

Which shows us the reason, why there is so little sweetness in the World,
why men stink like carrion in a ditch, and leave a filthy savor behind them,
in every place whereere they come, the reason is, because they were never
perfumed with these sweet and holy ointments. What profit were it in the
ointments of the Sanctuary (although they were ever so sweet a perfume) if none
were anointed therewith? The righteousness of Christ is a most excellent sweet
perfume, but what avails this at all, to those that are not anointed
therewith? To those that smell it not, the pure Myrrh and the Cinnamon is but
cast away; the sweet Calamus and the Cassia is but trodden under foot.

Therefore we must learn, in time of distress of mind, to smell to these sweet
and heavenly ointments: that when the stink of our sins, do cast an ugly favor
before God, in the Conscience, and in the sight of the World; yet, that then,
the scent of these holy ointments, may make us a pleasant perfume.

Now as there was an Art in compounding these ointments: Exodus 30.33, 37.
so there is also an Art in smelling. And as there was no compound like unto
it: so there was no other perfume that was to be smelt unto. Some there are
that can smell no difference between these ointments, and the perfumes of their
own compounding: these make not a confection after the Art of the Apothecary.
And therefore it comes to pass, that when they go about to anoint, the
spiritual Tabernacle and his vessels, the Candlestick and his vessels, to make
them most holy, that the Lord may delight to dwell amongst them; by anointing
them with perfumes of their own compounding, they leave them in their
filthiness, and under the curse and Everlasting wrath of God. Therefore let us
learn so to smell the heavenly perfume, that we may discern the smell thereof
from all other ointments: then shall our afflicted Consciences find rest in
time of distress; then shall the smell of our ointments be beyond the smell of
all spices.

VERSE XI. Thy lips, O my spouse! drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are
under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
THis is meant in regard of Doctrine, which is the chief and principal
commendation of the Church. Which droppeth from the lips of the spouse, as the
rain upon the tender herb, and distilleth like the dew; inasmuch as sweet and
pleasant Doctrine ministers grace to the hearers, not death and condemnation;
but justification and life. Which Doctrine is like honey from the comb: which
is the best of the honey. And it is added, honey and milk are under thy tongue;
that is, in a readiness to drop as soon as any occasion is offered. And the
smell of thy garments as the smell of Lebanon; that is, the scent of thy
righteousness, the fame and good report of thy Religion is sweet: and spreads
far abroad, like the smell of Lebanon. In which Forest were very many herbs
and spices, very seet and pleasant; and odoriferous trees none the like for
sweetness: whose scent might be smelled very far. This is that which God
promises to Israel, Hos. 14.
his branches shall spread, his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his
smell as Lebanon.

After this manner then must we learn the Doctrine of Christ, that we may be
full of matter, that our belly may be as Wine that has no vent: and like unto
new bottels of Wine that be ready to burst, that our lips may be ready to drop
upon all occasions, as honey from the Comb, as rain upon the grass: that our
speech may distill, and set a new face (as it were) upon the afflicted
Conscience, and be so powdered with the salt of the Covenant, that by our lips
the earth may be salted.

Then shall it come to pass, that those that live under our shadow shall
return, shall revive as the corn; and grow as the vine, the scent thereof shall
be as the Wine of Lebanon.

VERSE XII. A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse: a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed.
THe Church is compared to a garden chiefly and principally, in regard of the
tender care that is taken for it by the owner, according to the Prophet Esaias,
Esa. 27.
he waters it every moment, and keeps it night and day, least any hurt it.
Psalm. 87.2.
And also in regard of the delight he takes, in the flowers, herbs and trees,
that are set and planted in it.

And to a garden enclosed, because she is hedged or senced about with the
promises of God, for the preventing of evil beasts which otherwise would
destroy her. Therefore, when the Bear comes out of the wood, and with his paw
thinks to pull down the fence, and lay the Garden wast: or the wild Boar out
of the Forest with his tusk, thinks to root up the hedge, and the Lions roar
and make a hideous noise against it; we must be sure to see, that we understand
the Gospel and Christian righteousness so well, that the hedge be not broken
down thereby, but that the enclosure may stand firm and sure.

And as we must look to the fence, so also we must see that the garden be well
stored with all manner of precious Flowers, that the scent of the garden may be
smelt: and that if any one should desire after a principal Flower, he may know
where to find it. It were a sad thing if a man should come into a Garden, that
has a name above other Gardens; and should desire the Gardener for a Posey,
and should find little else there but common Flowers, or perhaps dead and
withered Flowers. So that when (for the very name of the Garden) a man has
come very far, has taken pains to search into the Garden, and made him a Posey
of the choicest Flowers he can find: when he smells to his nosegay, the
Flowers have lost their scent.

This brings a kind of contempt upon the Garden, causing it to be of little
esteem: for when he compares his Posey with the Flowers that grow in other
Gardens, he finds them far too short both in beauty and smell.

When the Lord planted the Garden of Eden, a river went out of the garden to
water the garden, and from thence it was parted into four heads, and ran into
diverse Lands: it ran into the Land of Havilah, into the Land of Ethiopia, into
the Land of Assyria, and the river Euphrates. The river that watered the Lords
garden, was to water the whole Earth. The Flowers and herbs that are set and
planted in the Lords garden, are to sweeten the whole World.

Therefore seeing the Lord has made us his garden, and fenced us with his
hedge, let us learn so to store it with rich and precious things: that if any
man come to us and desire a Posey, we may show him such choice and principle
flowers, that common gardens will not yield, even such that will cause him to
leave a scent, and cast forth a perfume, in all places whithersoever he goes.

And when it is added here, my sister, my spouse, it is to draw all that are
within the visible Church to become the Lords garden of delight; Some gardens
are for the kitching, wherein are planted only things for the belly, to feed
the old man: and some are only for beauty and smell. Now Christ in drawing the
Church to union with himself, to become his watered garden, when she is once
humbled for her sins, mentions not one word of her infirmities, but minds
her of the relations between them: that so by setting himself in her stead, he
might draw her mind and cogitations, wholly to himself.

Which must well be noted of all Superiors, that have any Authority over
others, and do desire to win them to faith and obedience, which usually take
another course. Who (in stead of showing any favor and acceptance to their
relations, although they know them to be truly humbled for their faults) do
continually complain of their disobedience, and no wonder if they have cause so
to do. For they seek not to draw them by any cords and bands of love: but to
drive them to obedience by wrath and bitterness. Seldom or never taking any
notice of what is done: but still complain for want of what is not done. They
hardly ever mention the best things that are in them, which are worthy of
praise; but are always uncovering and laying open their frailties and
weaknesses: and at such times, and in such places, as may tend most to their
discomfort and disgrace. And hence it comes to pass, that in stead of winning
their hearts and affections, to love and obedience: their countenance comes to
be cast down, and they are altogether heartless and heedless.

But Christ our Lord here gives us another pattern, who skippeth over the
worst things that are worthy of blame in his Church: covering them all by
giving himself unto her. Christ here speaks after this manner. Behold, thou
art my sister, I am thy loving brother, that do bear natural and hearty
affection to thee. Thou art my spouse, and I am thy loving Husband, I love thee
with real and hearty affection. I take upon me all thy sins and miseries, that
I might free thee from all distress: and do supply all thy wants that thou
might live in peace and joy. And this I do on purpose to draw thy hearty
love and affection to me, that thou might accept of my love, and confess my
kindness, and serve me with a willing and cheerful service.

After this sort must we learn also, to cover the faults of those that are
under our Authority, to hide their weaknesses, to cover their faults, to bury
their frailties, in love and kindness. Then shall we set our selves, not in the
place of Moses, who always chideth us for transgressions: but in the place of
God, who mercifully forgiveth us our sins, hides and heals all things that
may discomfort and dismay us.

By this means shall we unite their hearts to us, to love and obey us, to love
and worship the same God, to be of the same faith, and the same Religion.

But why is the Church a spring shut up,

Not that she is unwilling to bestow or impart the water of life: Joh. 7.
But because the mystery of her Doctrine, Faith, and Religion, is shut up and
sealed from the blind world. For it is the wisdom of God in a mystery which
none of the Princes of the world know. 1 Cro. 2.8.
So that the shutting up or hiding is in respect of those that are lost, that
are enemies to the faith, that are strangers, and will be strangers from the
life of God.

Not because of any unwillingness in the Church to communicate her Doctrine,
nor by reason of any hardness in the Doctrine it self; but by reason of that
mighty opposition that is in man, which hinders the understanding of the same.

This must comfort us to whom God has given so great a treasure, which is hid
from others. And also learn us to use all care and diligence in opening of the
spring, and unsealing of the Fountain; that if it be possible the eyes of the
blind may be enlightened, and the ears of the deaf may be opened, which cannot
be done without the key of the house of David, which is, rightly to understand
and open the Article of justification: the cardinal and critical point, upon
which all true understanding does depend.

Now there is a double use of a key, to lock and to unlock: if the door be
locked no man can see what is in the house; but when the door is unlocked, then
all things may be seen. If the Article of Justification be unlocked, and man's
opinion of righteousness by the Law destroyed, then the spring is opened, and
the fountain is unsealed; then the waters of life do run freely to poor
sinners: but if man be strengthened in his own opinion of works, by a false
understanding of the Law, then the Fountain is sealed, the spring is shut up,
the water of life is not to be had.

Therefore Christ, not Moses, Esa. 22.
is said to have the key of the house of David, which opens and no man
shuts, and shuts, Rev. 3.7.
and no man opens. The meaning is, that when the meaning of the Law is opened
by the Gospel, no disputer can shut and darken it by any other interpretation:
but on the contrary, when the Gospel is opened by the Law, and the New
Testament is taught only according to the Letter, then the spring is shut up,
then the Fountain is sealed. Therefore we must learn the right use of the key,
that we may open the Law by the Gospel, that we may give the right sense and
meaning of all those Scriptures that seem to stand in direct opposition to the
Doctrine of Justification by faith alone. Then shall the blessed Fountain of
life be opened and unsealed, that those for whom it is provided may drink
thereof, and live for ever.

VERSE XIII. and XIV. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant
fruits, Camphire, with spikenard.

And Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all Trees of Frankincense, Myrrh and
Aloes, with all the chief spices.


THe plants here spoken of, are the spiritual people throughout the world.
Compared to an Orchard^ not that they are culled out from others, and none
suffered to have communion with them in Church fellowship, but such as are
truly regenerate; but in regard they bring forth much fruit, and also variety
of fruit. And to Pomegranates, because they are full of kernels as the
Pomegranates be: which are pleasant to the taste, and delightful to behold. In
this Orchard there grows also Camphire which bears fruit in clusters, and
Spikenard, which some think to be the herb called Lavender: and Saffron, all
which are most excellent for sweetness. Then here is Calamus and Cynamon, which
were used in the composition of the holy anointing oil, which made persons
holy. Exodus 30.
The Frankincense was likewise used in making the holy incence which was to be
put into the Tabernacle of the Lord to make the Children of Israel a sweet
perfume. And so likewise Myrrh and Aloes, Psalm. 45.
as all things before-named, did set forth the sweetness of the fruits of
Christ's death and Resurrection being given to the miserable distressed
Conscience. These are the fruits that grow in the Lords Orchard, which are
shown unto us under the similitude of all those sweet and pleasant things.

Now an Orchard does not come to be fruitful, by any thing done by the trees or
plants that are set in it, but by reason of the ground wherein they are
planted; which causes them to grow and blosom, by infusing sap and moisture
into the root. The plant is merely Passive it only stands still, and makes
no opposition, and receives the nourishment that comes to it from the ground.
The holy Ghost by this similitude, shows us, not only the fruitfulness of the
Lords people; Esa. 61.11.
but also the manner of their growth. For even as the earth brings forth her
bud, and as the garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring forth,
So the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before the
Nations. So the Lord will do it, that is, not by requiring the Active
righteousness of the Law first, for that is contrary to the similitude: but by
infusing the Passive righteousness in the first place, which is, not to labor,
not to take pains in doing the works of the Law; but to hear and believe the
voice of the Son of God. The sum of all is this.

That the spiritual plants in the Lords Church, do bring forth variety of
excellent fruits, in regard they grow and blosom, after the similitude of an
Orchard.

And the cause why they grow after this manner is, because the workmen in Gods
Orchard, do plant and graft after the same form. They do not plant and graft
according to their own natural way of grafting: to make men holy by works, but
in a way which is contrary to nature, to make them righteous by faith. Their
business lies in compounding of ointments to make persons Holy. In sprinkling
perfuming spices, made after the Art of the Apothecary: that poor distressed
consciences may become fruitful in faith and all good works.

Another cause is, because the plants themselves are willing to become Passive
after the manner of an Orchard. They are willing (when Gods time is come) to be
cut out of that Olive tree which is wild by nature, and to be grafted contrary
to nature into a right Olive tree. They are willing to be planted in Gods
Orchard, where they must stand against every storm, without fear of being
shaken to pieces. So that although the winds blow, and the floods come, and the
trees are shaken at the very roots, yet they are willing to stand against every
storm, and after the similitude of an Orchard, even then to receive the
moisture and nourishment that flows from the Gospel, which is the ground
wherein they stand. Now because the planters plant after this form, and also
the plants themselves are willing to yield and conform to the same way of
planting and grafting; therefore it is that they are filled with sweet and most
excellent fruit, otherwise it could never be.

This shows us the reason, why there are so many plants in Gods Orchard that
grow not, so as to bring forth any manner of choice fruit suitable to such an
Orchard, the reason is, because they grow not after the same similitude.

They complain that they cannot master their sins, nor perform their duties,
that they have not that understanding in the Scriptures that others have: the
reason is because they are not planted nor grafted according to the right form.
They work and toil, they labor and take pains, both the planters and the
plants themselves, to grow and increase in the opinion of works, but bring
forth none of these sweet and pleasant fruits; because they are not willing to
be cut and hewn down, dug and pruned, and dressed, after the similitude of
an Orchard. Therefore it is, that when storms come they are not able to stand,
when calamities arise they are not able to endure; but one runs one way,
another runs another way, to look for help and succor, because they have not
learned to stand and receive the sap and moisture of the Gospel, (which is the
ground from whence they grow) after the similitude of an Orchard.

And hence it comes to pass that in stead of bringing forth Camphire, Spiknard,
and Saffron, which is sweet and pleasant fruit: they sprout forth roots of
bitterness, gall and wormwood. In stead of bearing the sweet Calamus, and
Cynamon, to make the holy anointing oil, to make the spiritual Tabernacle and
all the vessels thereof holy before the Lord: and the sweet Frankincense Myrrh
and Aloes to make a most holy and sweet perfume; they send forth a noisome fume
of their own compounding, which causes them most horribly to stink in the
presence of God. So that the end of their labor and pains is but this, the
fruit which they think to be the only fruit that heals the Nations, when it
is rightly tasted, and the scent of it truly smelt, and compared with the
fruits that grow in the Orchard of the Lord; it is found to be but of an evil
savor, fruit that withers, and comes to nothing. So long as it is looked
upon by it self, the scent pleases; but when it is compared with the sweet
Frankincense and other sweet and principal spices, which are prepared to
perfume the spiritual Tabernacle of the Lord and every vessel pertaining
thereunto; it is found to be nothing else but meat that perishes, fruit that
withers, and the trees themselves that bear the fruit to be such that are
marked out, to be hewn down and cast into everlasting fire. According to our
Saviors saying, Joh. 15.
if a man abide not in me he is cast forth as a branch; and is withered, and
men cast them into the fire and burn them. And every plant that my heavenly
Father has not planted shall be rooted up.

Therefore, seeing it is the commendation of the Church in this place, in that
she is like unto an Orchard of such sweet and pleasant fruits, in that she
receives her self, and brings forth, and as an instrument conveyeth, the
sweet and pleasant fruits of Christ's death and Resurrection, into the hearts
and Consciences of others, that they may be filled with all the chief spices,
and be so becensed and perfumed therewith, as to become a sweet favor unto God
in every place, let us also endeavor to be filled, with all these chief and
principal spices, that we may know what to do in the time of tribulation and
great distress, when we feel the terrors of the Almighty; and begin to be sore
afraid, when we can see no way nor means of deliverance, but the tree seems to
be blasted, and all hope of fruit to be lost, yet then let us consider, that we
are plants in Gods Orchard, where we must stand against every storm, so that
although the winds blow, and storms come and we are even shaken at the very
roots; yet there must we stand and receive the sap and nourishment of the
Gospel; which speaks comfortable words to the miserable Soul.

And not only so, but also that we may be able to anoint and perfume distressed
minds, that a poor distressed Conscience may be comforted by us in a sad
condition, that the cluster of Camphire may appear in the Conscience: that the
scent of the Calamus and Cynamon may be smelt, and the Spikenard, Myrrh and
Frankincense, may become as a Posey to refresh the spiritual senses, under the
apprehension of Sin and the wrath of God.

Then shall it become apparent, that we are the trees of Frankincense here
spoken of, filled with the kernels of the Pomegranates, and rightly planted in
the Orchard of God.

VERSE XV. A Fountain of Gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from
Lebanon.
IN the twelfth Verse of this Chapter, the Church is said to be a fountain
Sealed, in this Verse she is said to be a Fountain of Gardens, that is, a
fountain opened to water gardens. When the Church is compared to a garden in
the singular Number, understand the universal Church: but when she is compared
to gardens, as here, it means every particular Church, and every particular
member in each Church.

A fountain sealed,

The answer is, Esai.

The vision of all, is become unto you, as the words of a Book that is sealed,
which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, read this, and he says I
cannot because it is sealed. So that although the Doctrine of the Gospel be
plain, and easy in it self, and very sweet and comfortable, yet where man's
wisdom rules, it cannot possibly be understood, but remains a mystery hid and
sealed. Therefore it is no wonder to see great Clerks, men of excellent parts
and learning, that cannot read the Book, that cannot understand any thing of
the mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven: the reason is, because to them the spring
is shut up, and the fountain is sealed, for their horrible despising and
contemning of the same.

And so on the contrary, she is a fountain set open to water gardens, to
refresh and satisfy, every hungry and thirsty Soul. According to that in the
Prophecy of Zachary, in that day there shall be a fountain set open for sin,
and for uncleaness. So that to every one that is weary and heavy laden with the
burden of his sins; she breaks the bread, and pours forth the water of life
freely.

Now seeing the Lord has made us his fountain we must endeavor to be full, to
be of some deepness, that if any man come to draw the water of life, the
fountain may not be empty; understanding is a wellspring of life, and a spring
always runs. The labor of the Church is to break up fountains. Psalm. 84.
As they go through the valley of Baca they make a well. And the promise of God
is to open the spring, Esa. 41.18.
to make fountains in the valleys, and pools in the wilderness. Therefore let
us receive of his fullness, that if any man come with his Bucket, to have a taste
of the living water, he may not have a scantling; but may be sure to have him
filled.

And as we must be full, so also must we be willing to water gardens. The Lord
has passed by wisdom and learning, and men of excellent parts and abilities in
nature, and chosen poor, ignorant, despised, hungry and thirsty sinners, to
break up fountains; but to what end and purpose? Why has the Lord hid the
mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven from the wise and prudent, and revealed it
unto Babes? Even because it so pleases him, and also that the gardens may be
watered.

The Lord has promised to make the wilderness like Eden, Esa. 51.3.
and the desert like the garden of the Lord. And a river ran out of Eden to
water the whole earth. Genesis 2.10.
Therefore let us learn to answer the similitude, to see that the fountain be
full, and always running. If the gardens be not watered, what shall become of
the flowers? And some flowers are more choice and principal then others, that
give a greater scent, and are the very glory of the garden, if those should
die, the beauty of the garden would be lost. Therefore, when the sun begins to
shine hot upon the garden, and the flowers begin to be at a stand: when
afflictions and great distresses, begin to draw on, when the ground begins to
be dry and parched; then let us open the fountain, and pour out the water of
life, Esa. 35.7.
that so the parched ground may become a pool, and the thirsty Land springs of
water.

Next the Church is said to be a well of living waters.

This River or well is said to be pure, Rev. 22.
and clear, and to proceed out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Pure in
respect of the nature of it, it being nothing but the righteousness of Christ
given to the unworthy. Clear in respect of the brightness or the light of it,
it being clearly to be understood. And proceeding (in respect of the Original
of it) out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

There is a double Throne in Heaven, a Throne of Justice, and a Throne of
mercy. The Throne of Justice is the Fathers Throne, and the Throne of mercy, is
the sons Throne. And there is a double Throne to be set in the Conscience by
the Preaching of the Gospel. The Throne of God, and the Throne of the Lamb. The
well of living waters do proceed out of both these Thrones. So that the water
of life can never run into the Conscience; unless it be arraigned, and brought
in order before both these Thrones. For this is the promise of Christ, to him
that overcomes, Rev. 3.21.
will I grant to sit down with me in my Throne: even as I overcame and am set
down with the Father in his Throne.

Now to overcome is to be delivered, discharged, and acquitted, (when the
Conscience is arraigned) from the Fathers Throne. For mark it, Christ entered
combat with the Law, sin, death and Satan, and overcame, but how? Even by
submitting himself to the curse and comdemnation of them all, (which although
unjust in respect of Christ's innocent person, yet were all just in respect of
us) and by his Resurrection from the dead through the power of his Godhead he
overcame, and received a full discharge from all our sins, which he took in our
name and keeps for our use. By reason of which victory Christ is sat down
with the Father in his Throne.

After the same manner also we must overcome, and sit down with Christ in his
Throne, even by submitting to the Office and condemning power of the Law, which
reveals our sin, and condemns our supposed wisdom and righteousness: then
it is granted to us to sit down with Christ in his Throne. This river then (or
well of living waters) brings us, First, before the judgment seat, condemning
us before the fathers Throne: next, it leads us before the mercy seat, and
sets us down in the Sons Throne; giving us the victory which Christ has
purchased for us.

Therefore it is said, Eze. 47.
that every thing that moves wheresoever this River comes shall live. That
is, that moves through faith, first, before the judgment seat, where it is
condemned for sin; next, before the mercy seat; where it is justified through
grace. The benefit of this River runs not to those that are full rich, and
mighty in their own imagination; but to those only that confess their Sin.

Learn we then first by faith, to humble our selves before the Fathers Throne;
then shall it presently be granted unto us, to sit down with Christ in his
Throne.

Lastly, the Church is compared to streams from Lebanon, having some allusion
(as some think) to the streams of Jordan which began at the foot of Mount
Lebanon, and ran along through the holy Land to water the same. And also to the
Sanctuary; which was built of the Cedars of Lebanon. So that the streams of
this River do water the holy Land. The waters issuing out of the Sanctuary, do
run into the desert, and refresh the weary and the solitary place. The water in
this River, runs not to the high and mighty in their own eyes, but to the
poor and miserable that are forsaken of the Law: they only refresh themselves
with these pure and holy streams; when the rich are sent empty away.

VERSE XVI. Awake, thou North Wind and come thou South Wind, and blow upon my
Garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; let my beloved come into his
Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
BY the North and South-winds are meant Doctrine, for so the winds do usually
signify in Scripture. And seeing they are of contrary qualities, they signify
the Doctrine of the Law, and the Doctrine of the Gospel. The North Wind is
usually cold and dry, and makes us sensible when we feel the blast of it,
that is the Doctrine of the Law: which being truly opened and applied, makes us
very cold, reveals unto us our sin, dries up all the wisdom and
righteousness that is within us, blasteth it and brings it to nothing.
Therefore Christ here appoints the North Wind to awake; that is, to awake the
spouse.

Now when the North Wind has done blowing, Christ here Commands the
South Wind to blow, which is of a contrary quality, hot and moist, very sweet
and full of content. This signifies the Doctrine of the Gospel. By which we
understand, that when the Law has done its Office in condemning us, and we are
made sensible of our guiltiness before God, it is the will of Christ; that we
hear and apply our selves to the Gospel. When by the blowing of the North Wind
those fruits that grow naturally are blasted: then we must desire for the
blowing of the South Wind. When ever the winds do blow after this manner, in
order upon the garden, then the spices thereof begin to flow out, then the
light of the Gospel begins to shine in the Conscience, and men are hot or cold
according to the quality of the wind that blows. When the North Wind blows we
are cold in respect of the righteousness of the Law: and when the South Wind
blows hot and comfortable in respect of the righteousness of the Gospel. Both
these winds we must have an equal respect unto, and observe a right distinction
between them, otherwise we may take that for the South Wind which comes to
short of the South by many points: and that for the North Wind which is as many
points to wide of the North, and so fruits of the garden (for want of a right
distinction between the winds, and a right knowledge of the compass) may receive
a blast and be utterly ruined. This I conceive was the sin of the Church of
Laodicea, in that she was neither hot nor cold, she neither understood the Law
nor the Gospel: had she been hot, or cold, she had been well, either would have
served for her commendation because they are never alone. But because she could
not make an exact distinction betwixt the North and South-winds, therefore she
was neither hot nor cold, but luke warm, and for that cause Christ says, I
will spue the out of my mouth.

And therefore it is that Christ also wishes, I would thou were either cold or
hot, for then she had been in a right Condition. As if Christ had said this. If
thou were awakened by the North Wind, then the South Wind should blow in thy
Conscience: and if the South Wind did blow in thy Conscience, then should
thou rightly understand how to follow the Northwind in thy Life. Where these
winds of Heaven do after this manner blow, the use and office of the Law and
Gospel is rightly Taught, and the reason of all good works is perceived, then
the spices of the Garden do flow out: but when the Law is stretched beyond its
limits, or the Gospel turned into the Law, then men are neither hot nor cold,
but luke warm, and under the same dreadful and heavy Sentence of Christ which
can never be revoked; I will spue thee out of my mouth for ever.

This thing is necessary to be understood of all men, especially of the Angels
of the Churches, that are the holders of the winds of Heaven and are to blow
upon the garden of Christ, for if they should not understand the contrary
nature and quality of these winds, in stead of causing the spices to flow out:
they may by a contrary wind cause a blast to come upon the garden to the spoil
and utter ruin of all the fruits. For want of a right distinction between the
nature of these winds, it oftentimes comes to pass, that so many winds of
Doctrine are blown about, that many are thereby blown into Everlasting
destruction.

In the next words here is a prayer of the Church wherein she desires her
beloved to come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.

Two things are hence to be inquired.

In answer, to the first observe,

Our eating is, when we firmly believe, that Christ joineth himself unto us;
feels our present infirmities, and cares for us. Job. 6.
Therefore it is often said when speech is made of our union with Christ, he
that eats me shall live by me.

And except ye eat the flesh of the son of many have no life in you; all which
sets forth our union with Christ by faith alone.

And by fruits here, she means the fruits of his death and Resurrection,
which is freedom and liberty to poor sinners. These are called his fruits,
because freedom from sin, and deliverance from Everlasting Condemnation, are
purchased by him. And his pleasant fruits, because when we believe that Christ
owneth us, Esa. 53.11.
and takes away our sins and miseries from us, Christ rejoices and is
satisfied. So that the meaning of the Churches request here is, this.

That Christ would take from her all her sins and miseries, which she feels
and fears: and give unto her all those blessings and favors that he has
purchased for poor sinners.

In that she calls these his pleasant fruits, acknowledging it to be Christ's
delight to grant her request, this shows her faith in Christ.

And although it be very delightful to Christ to hear her request: yet her
desire is prevented before hand by reason of her faith, as appears by the next
words.

CHAP. V.
VERSE I. I am come into my Garden, my Sister my Spouse --
WHICH words contain the answer of Christ to the faith of his Church, for in
these words he does not say I will come, according to her request: but I am
come, according to her faith going before. Which also shows us the meaning of
the Prophet when he says, before they call I will answer. And yet he wills
us to call upon him, for all things which he promises to bestow: because
Prayer must put in execution the decree of God, concerning what he has
promised to give us; neither can we choose but pray, as soon as we believe.

After the same manner shall it be to us, as with the Church here, when we
believe and confess, that it is Christ's delight to help us, and to our faith do
join Prayer: when we can pray unto God for Christ his sake to show mercy to us,
to bear our burdens, to carry our sorrows, to come down into his garden and own
us: then does Christ speak the same word to us, as he does to the Church in
this place, I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my spouse. By which we see,
that Christ comes to us before we are aware, for as soon as we believe the
benefits of Christ's death and Resurrection to be given to us, that are most
unworthy of the same: our faith incloseth Christ, as a Jewel is enclosed in a
Ring, then does Christ say unto us, I am come my Sister, my Spouse. Neither
could he possibly say otherwise, forasmuch as he has made over himself and all
that he has, to that person that believes.

This is a rare and Heavenly mystery, which whosoever understands; shall
quickly find that of Christ, which he never knew before. Thus Christ was
present to the Patriarchs of old, as soon as they believed, Abraham by faith,
saw his day and rejoiced. He had not only faith, but also a sense of faith,
which was bred in him by a certain knowledge of the righteousness of Christ
imputed. So all the holy Fathers, that rightly understood the figures and
shadows, had Christ present in spirit, as soon as they believed: the use of a
figure being to represent something to faith, which is absent to sense and
reason. So Baptism which is a figure, Heb. 10.1, 9, 19, 20.
has Christ present, as soon as we hear and believe that we are buried with
Christ in Baptism, Romans 6.
and also assures us of our communion with him.

And it is impossible (as was said before) that it should be otherwise,
forasmuch as all things being established in faith: Christ cannot be absent,
where faith is present. No man by his works can possibly obtain this union,
because no work can cleave unto the word of God; but faith attaineth,
possesses and enjoys Christ for ever, because all things in Heaven and Earth
are given to them that believe. Mary took pains in seeking after Christ, she
went to the Sepulcher, she wept because she could not find him: and why could
she not find him? Because she sought him where he was not to be found, she
sought him in the Sepulcher, the living amongst the dead: but as soon as Christ
said Mary, she said unto him Rabboni. Christ enclosed Mary by his word: and
Mary by her faith enclosed him.

After the same manner Christ wrappeth us up in his word, when he gives
himself and all that he has unto us: and we after the same manner, do enclose
and wrap up Christ and all his merits within us by faith. So when we come to
the Lords Supper, Christ is Spiritually present in these words, this cup is the
new Testament in my blood which is shed for you, now he that feeling his own
miserable condition, can give so much credit to the word of God, as to believe,
that under the figure of the cup the New Testament is given, to his own poor
Soul in particular, that is the person to whom Christ is then come.

Therefore, when the Law condemns us of right, and by just desert, and we are
grieved and burdened with our misery; and do feel our wants and would have a
supply, then must we fly to the Gospel for help and succor, and chiefly to our
Baptism; which assures us, (if we learn it well) that Christ by his promises
is present, to rid us of all evils, and to supply us in all our wants. This
consideration freeth us from condemnation, because we are under the sign and
seal of absolution and remission of sins. And thus Baptism is the figure that
saves us. The Law condemns, and the Conscience accuses, but faith brings
into the mind the right use of the sign and seal of absolution and forgiveness.
To seek for Christ in our works, is with Mary to seek him in the Sepulcher,
where he cannot be found, and to look for a Christ yet to come. For holiness of
life is yet to come, cannot be present in this miserable flesh, but is still to
be waited for. Now if we cannot apprehend Christ's spiritual presence to be with
us, until we are better sanctified: then we can never apprehend him to be come
at all. Forasmuch as a better degree of Sanctification is yet to come, and
still will be to come so long as we are on this side Heaven. Learn we then
firmly to believe the word of Christ and to deny our selves, and call up on his
name, then shall we feel to our comfort that Christ is spiritually come to us,
according as Christ says here to his spouse, I am come.

Next here, Christ calls his Church his sister and spouse. Which words are
often used in this Song to draw the Church to this holy faith and confession,
and are also full of faith and consolation. For if Christ does own us for his
sister and spouse, then is he our brother and husband.

Therefore these words my spouse, must teach us to believe, and to claim these
benefits that belong to the spouse. For the wife so long as the husband lives,
is free and out of danger by reason of the Marriage knot. Now Christ lives for
ever for he being raised from the dead dies no more. Romans 6.
Therefore all evils that oppress and trouble us, must die and vanish away. For
either Christ must die and depart the Conscience, Romans 6.9.
or else sin and the curse must die: not Christ, therefore the curse.
Therefore, Christ himself says, I am he that lives, Rev. 1.
and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore. And when he says my sister,
he draws us to believe, that he is our loving brother, and if so, then also
is God our Father. Now if God be our Father then it must needs follow that we
are the Children of God, and after this manner we must learn to receive the
Spirit of adoption, even by hearing of the word of faith. The true effects of
the Spirit of adoption cannot be found, till the spirit be received: which is
not given nor received, by the requiring of works, but by the hearing of faith
Preached.

-- I have gathered my Myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my Honeycomb with my
Honey: I have drunk my Wine with my Milk -- In these words Christ further
amplifies his answer to the faith and request of his Church, and says, I have
gathered, that is, I have reaped the fruits for which I came down from Heaven
for, which was to draw a people to believe in me that they might be saved. From
whence we may see, that as soon as we are willing that Christ should ease us of
all our sins and miseries, and make a gracious supply of all our wants, then do
we prepare a dish of pleasant fruits for Christ: this is that which he here
calls his Myrrh and his Spice, his Wine and his Milk, because as those
things are sweet and do much refresh the senses of men; So also is it sweet to
Christ to take away from us, our sins and burdens, cares, crosses and
calamities.

Moreover when Christ also says here, that he has eaten his honey comb with
his honey; it must well be noted, for he eats his honey comb with his own
honey. The comb is the House of the Be which holds the honey, which honey
although it be sweet for the Be to feed on, yet the comb is respected of the
Be first, before the honey, for the Be by a natural instinct delights in
the comb, having no other house nor resting place, to rejoice it self in, and
set its heart upon but only the comb: which although it has no sweetness in it
of it self, before it be sweetened by the labor of the Be, yet for the natural
pleasure he takes in it, more then in all things in the World besides; he
makes it his habitation and place of abode, so that there is an Antecedent
natural instinct in the Be, First to the comb, and then to feed upon the honey
in the comb.

Now understand by the comb, the person that holds and carries the honey,
and by the honey the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ that sweetneth the
comb, and by eating his honey comb with his own honey, his joining himself to
our sinful person because he loved us, before it was sweetened with any honey of
ours. Christ then loves the person, First, before the work or new quality of
the person, First, he chooses an habitation to dwell in, before he sweetneth
the comb with his honeycomb, and this is our poor distressed person, which he
sets his heart upon from all Eternity, as the only object of his joy and
delight, and therefore we are said to love him because he loved us first, and
this is called his first love, Rev. 2.4.
which was the love of Christ first to the person of the Church of Ephesus
before her works, which apprehension in the falling state of that Church came
at last to be lost.

This is his Antecedent love, and when it is said in the sixteenth of John the
Father himself loves you because ye have loved me, as though the Father had
first respect to the honey and then to the comb, it means his consequent
love; for as soon as we receive our first love, which is to believe that he
loves our sinful person, then does he love our obedience with a consequent
love, and makes promises accordingly to those that love him, fear him, obey
him, and keep his Commandments.

It follows therefore, that all those that are employed in the garden of the
Lord, about the making and sweetning of honey combs must endeavor to imitate
the Be, first in making of the comb, next, in gathering of honey and conveying
it into the comb. If the comb be not first respected there can be no honey,
then must the Bees die for want of food. Nor is there any other way to make
persons holy; first, but by teaching us to believe that Christ loves us from
all Eternity. Where this persuasion is grounded, honey dews will fall, for why
should the Be labor to make the comb, if it were not his purpose to fill it
with honey? Why should the Lord Jesus Christ marry our sinful person to
himself, if it were not to sweeten and perfume it with an Odor fit for himself?

And as the comb must first be made, so must we see that it be well stored with
honey, which must be gathered with the Be out of every flower, and where ever
the honey dew falls, the Bees will find it out, mark we then where the
cowslips, the flowers and the honey suckles grow, for those are the places
where the Bees find honey, and if any dew fall there we shall find it; and when
such dews come the Bees will lade themselves, and when they have their lading
they carry it to their combs: if the Bees should gather ever so much honey and
had not the Art to carry it into the combs, what profit should the owner of the
Bees receive?

If the Ministers of the Gospel should have their full lading of honey, and had
not the Art to convey it into the Consciences of men to make persons holy, who
were the better for it? Some there are that cannot endure the taste of the honey
such can never sweeten the comb: but are like wasps that rob the Bees and make
honey scarce.

Therefore let all those that are laborers for God endeavor so to be filled
with the knowledge of the Gospel, that they may be able to set down the true way
to attain to the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and all grounds of
encouragment to receive it, according to Christ in the next words.

-- Eat O friends, drink yea drink abundantly my well beloved. To eat in
Divinity is to be joined to the Gospel by faith, Joh. 6.54.
and whosoever eats has Everlasting life. Now the Gospel (that we may learn
rightly to eat) teaches us three principal points. Mat. 11.27.


First, Mat. 5.22. Romans 3.10, 11, 12. Romans 3.21, 22.
it teaches the true understanding of the Law, which reveals sin to the
Conscience, whereby all men are convicted: and that man's natural opinion, that
obedience to the Law is the condition of the promises may be destroyed and
requires our faith in this point, and also gives and works in us the same.

Secondly, the Gospel teaches us that the righteousness of Christ is freely
given to them only, Romans 4.2, 3.
where that opinion of righteousness is destroyed, and also requires our faith
in this point, and works in us the same.

Thirdly, it requires us to perform all good works toward men without any
dependence upon them, Phil. 3.3, 8, 9. Phil. 3.4.
and causes us to perform the same with joy and gladness.

These are the principal things taught in the the Gospel, and the principal
Doctrines contained in both Sacraments. And where these three points are
taught, there the Sacraments (or the Gospel) are rightly taught. Therefore when
Christ says eat, he requires that the Gospel be made known, that we may be
joined unto him in these three points.

Eat O friends. Some think that open gross sinners are not invited to eat, let
such consider of the first point before named: and show how they shall be
convicted, and have their sins destroyed, if they must not eat.

Secondly, others think that by friends here, (and in other places of
Scripture) Christ means those that strive much about the Law and works, and
require a necessity of doing to obtain the promises. Let such consider of the
second point before named, and show how the friendship comes in that way, and
see what need they have to eat.

Lastly, some are afraid to eat, because they are unworthy by reason of sinful
works. But the discontent of these in the want of works, shows, that they do
depend upon works, therefore such must examine themselves by the third point,
and they shall find, that they also, have great need to eat for the destroying
of that opinion in them.

We see then that all sorts of people have need to eat. Open gross sinners, and
those that are righteous in their own eyes, and also those that are fearful at
their own unworthiness.

But why does Christ call all that are invited his friends?

I answer, Ephesians. 2.15.
the enmity is on our part. God is reconciled to us through the death of his
Son, but we are not reconciled to God. Now God being reconciled, 2 Cro. 5.19,
20.
sends the Gospel (which is the word of reconciliation) to publish the same:
wherein he calls us friends, on purpose to woo and invite us to himself.

And if we receive the Gospel, then there is no difference between God and us,
but if we despise his bounty, and will not have his merits, then are we his
enemies. Neither does God account any for his enemies, but those that refuse to
have life and salvation by that new and living way which he has appointed.
This news is brought unto us by the Gospel, by which Doctrine the Law is
opened, which shows us, as in a glass our miserable and wretched condition;
and that Christ came to purchase deliverance for us, and to bring it into our
Consciences, that we might serve him with cheerfulness all the days of our
lives. This is the feast he provideth, and bids us eat, which is, to make a
right application of the Law and Gospel in order as aforesaid. And calls us
friends, because the Gospel makes us friends. And bids us drink also,
because he would assure us hereby of his real and hearty good will to us: and
that he gives to us freely of the bread and water of life. And to drink
abundantly, to show that he does not grudge us any thing that he has purchased
for poor sinners: or that might beget in us a good opinion of himself toward
us. And tells us that we are his wel-beloved, as much beloved, as ever were
any upon the face of the earth, that his heart is upon us, and his care for us;
and that he cannot, nor will not, ever be wanting to us.

These things are written on purpose that we might believe, and that we might
have no other opinion of God but according to these words: that we might
acknowledge him to be free and bountiful to us and our God. Such a faith can
never want any help or protection that is in God. Heaven and Earth, yea the
whole Creation shall work together to accomplish what is wanting for the
believing man. Let us see therefore, that we believe the Gospel to be no other
Doctrine, but that which destroys the opinion in us, of all worth in our
selves, and that pours forth unto us of the bounty and loving kindness of God
most freely; that we might serve him with a willing service. Those that define
the Gospel any otherwise, do set forth a strange God; by extolling the
righteousness in man, which is but to bless an Idol of their own brain.

And let us also see that we join our selves to the Gospel, and count it great
riches to behold our spiritual poverty, and to have our filthy rags to be taken
from us, and the best robe to be put upon us: that we may do good works (not in
fear) but with joyfulness, then shall we rightly eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of the Son of God, and have eternal life through his name.

And seeing he calls us friends, being reconciled to us, let us also be
reconciled to him, and not be offended. And whatsoever we want let us ask it
of him, who can deny us nothing because he is our friend. And seeing he bideth
us drink, and drink abundantly, let us be sure that what ever is promised in
the Gospel is certainly ours as if we had it in present possession. And since he
tells us that we are his welbeloved let us believe him, and never question
his love to us any more; and what calamities soever we meet with in this World,
let us be sure (although they are tedious and irksom to the flesh to endure)
they are for nothing but to manifest, his free and everlasting love to us. What
remains then? Seeing Christ is so willing, so free, so full of bounty and
loving kindness to us, but that we store our selves with rich and heavenly
provision against a rainy day. In this world we shall see little appearance of
any thing but Satan, using all Art and skill by his instruments, to take away
our peace, and blast our comforts: and many times has great power given him so
to do, therefore he attempteth to devour us, which he knows he cannot do
unless he can destroy our faith, and deprive us of our Christ: therefore we had
need to eat and drink abundantly of this heavenly provision, that when we feel
our selves oppressed with the tribulations of the world, and malice of Satan;
we may be so strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, that we may be
able to conquer all our spiritual enemies.

VERSE II. I sleep, but my heart waketh --
THese words are the voice of the Church, who when she hears Christ pour out
himself so abundantly to her, falls asleep. Sleep is a rest or ceasing from
the use of the outward senses: and in this place signifies the silencing of
sense and reason in the use and exercise of faith. For when Christ bids her
(in the former verse) eat and drink abundantly, he promises all things, both
for this life, and the life to come: yet notwithstanding she sees not how, nor
which way those promises shall be accomplished, for the word seems to promise
incredible things to reason, as that Abraham shall have a Son in his old age
contrary to nature, that Sarah shall bring forth the promised seed, when she is
past Child bearing. Also it sets forth unto us, that Isaac must be offered;
and yet in him all Nations shall be blessed.

Moreover it promises help to the afflicted, when no means appears, how or
which way deliverance shall come: but in stead of apprehending any help or
deliverance according to sense and reason, there shall nothing appear but utter
ruin and destruction. In this condition the Bride falls asleep, she is
content to have sense and reason silenced, and to be stricken dumb, and she is
not discouraged; but constantly depends upon the promises of God. And
therefore she says here, I sleep, but mine heart waketh. I sleep in regard of
sense and reason; but my heart awaketh in respect of God and his promises. And
this is also the meaning of David when he says, he gives his beloved sleep, or
by sleep. So that when the Bride does thus begin to sleep: then does she begin
to awake, and live by faith in the promises of God.

After the same manner must we with the Bride fall into this holy sleep, and be
contented to live in the use and practice of faith. For every man in his
condition shall find all things fall out contrary to his expectation, in all
estates and conditions of life: and also shall seem to appear directly contrary
to the promises of God.

Who promises, that no good thing shall be wanting to those that fear him: and
yet a man shall seem in likelihood, to be in want of every good thing. That
wealth and riches shall be in his house, and yet a man shall behold nothing but
penury and want. This breeds a wonderful temptation in the godly, so that a
man is ready in this condition to fall into one of these evils; either to
accuse and condemn God of lying, or else to conclude, that he is not the person
to whom the promises are made. What must be done then in this condition? Even
to fall a sleep with the Bride, and to be contented that reason may be slain,
and to lead a new life by faith in promises of God. This slaying of reason is
the awakening of the heart, and then it does begin to hear, and rightly to
understand the words of Christ, according to the next words here following.

-- It is the voice of my beloved that knocks; saying, Open to me my sister,
my love, my dove, my undefiled -- This knocking is, when the Church is cast
into the use and exercise of faith. To knock is to make a noise, and it may be
defined thus.

It is an noise in the Conscience, arising from the sense of sin and
apprehension of danger. It is when the very voice of the curse is felt in the
Conscience: and the miserable effects thereof are feared. This she says is the
voice of her beloved, because the right opening of the Law, that makes the
stroke, and that the stroke of it may be felt, belongs to the Gospel.

And further, when her beloved knocks, he says open, so that as soon as the
knock is heard, the Bride is to open. According to Rev. 3. If any man hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in and sup with him, and he shall sup with
me. I will take from him the hurt of all evils whatsoever, that shall be my
supper; and I will bestow all things upon him to make him comfortable and
happy, that shall be his Supper. So that here is a twofold Supper, Christ
suppeth, and the Bride suppeth. Christ has his delight in taking away her
calamities: the Bride has her delight in receiving all blessings and comforts.
And this comes to pass by opening.

Now to open, is rightly to understand the meaning or end of the knock. Which
in sum is this. To inform the Bride, that all her wants shall be supplied by
the Gospel; which cannot be supplied by her own ways and works. Thus Christ
after the manner of a Lover stands and knocks, waiting to enlighten the Church
in this point. So that whether her wants be spiritual or temporal, for this
life or the life to come, they shall all be supplied (when she is lost by the
Law) by ways and means unknown if she believes. And this is the end of every
knock. But for want of understanding the meaning of the knock, the noise is
many times of long continuance. For many instead of studdying how to believe,
that they may attain all things by the Gospel: do strive to relieve themselves
by their own wisdom and works, and in the end lose their labor, and the Gospel
too.

Therefore, when we begin to hear a noise in the inward man, and to fall into
great fear, either in regard of our sins, and the everlasting judgment of God,
or by reason of some grievous temporal judgment which we apprehend to hang over
our heads: let us be sure then that Christ knocks, not to put us in fear,
(for he affrighteth no man) but to take away our fears from us, so that
although it seem terrible to us upon the first apprehension of the knock; yet
it is but the voice of our beloved, who stands and knocks, not to execute
the Law upon us, but to take all our evils upon himself that we may be made
joyful and happy.

The hearing then of the noise must cause us to open the door, that is to
believe in Christ, and call upon his name, and to suffer him to come in and sup
with us: then shall we be freed from all our fears, and although we have
forfeited all things by the Law, yet, we shall inherit all things by faith in
the Gospel.

Also we must open, that the captivity of the Conscience may first be turned
into liberty and freedom, before we seek for deliverance in respect of the
outward man. (according to Christ saying, seek first the Kingdom of Heaven and
the righteousness thereof, and all things else shall be given unto you) That so
from that liberty and freedom which the Conscience possesses through faith in
Christ; the merciful care and providence of God might flow in upon us, and the
nature of the whole Creation might be changed to us.

Now because in times of distress the Church is apt to be discouraged, Christ
here uses words that show relations between them: as my sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled. Which in brief is this. Thou art my sister, and I am thy
loving brother, and companion in tribulation: and am affected with all thy
afflictions. Thou art my love, my only joy and delight, therefore I cannot
forsake thee: but do stand and knock to join my self unto thee, to take all
evils and miseries from thee, and to settle thee in peace and joy. Thou art my
dove, that forsakest not thy mate in a mournful condition. And because thou
runnest not from me, but yeeldest thy self unto me, therefore thou art mine,
therefore thou art undefiled: thy sins are washed away, and thou art clean. I
came down from Heaven on purpose to Cloth my self with thy flesh; that I might
free thy Conscience from all distress, and fill it with peace and joy.

Open therefore unto me, and receive that by the new and living way, which
according to the Law and works thou have utterly lost. These are the words of
faith which we must have recourse unto in times of distress: being comfortable
to us, and useful for us.

-- For my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the Night.
In these words Christ shows the reason, why the Church shall receive all
things by inheritance, it is, because his head is filled with dew, and his
locks with the drops of the Night.

By the head of Christ is meant his Divinity, 1 Cor. 11.
the head of Christ is God. And by his locks understand his humanity. And by
the drops of the night his sufferings in the flesh. And by the dew that his
head is filled with the fullness of merit in the Godhead, which made all the
actions done in the manhood Meritorius: and also the pouring out of the benefit
thereof by pure and Heavenly Doctrine, which is comfortable to poor sinners;
which Doctrine dropeth as the dew.

So that the obedience of God and man in one person, Deuteronomy. 32.
poured out in the Preaching of the Gospel, and received by faith: is the
ground and foundation of all our comfort and joy.

For Christ by his obedience has taken away the ground of all discomforts,
Col. 2.14.
and nailed it to his Cross: which being made known by the Gospel, and received
by faith, setleth us in true peace and comfort. This must teach us, that when
we are most of all oppressed with the drops of the night, with the feeling of
our sins, or the fear of any cross or calamity; to fly to the humanity of our
Lord Jesus Christ who has suffered for us. And steadfastly to believe, that
seeing the locks of our beloved, were filled with the droppings of our present
condition, that he is not only sensible of our present misery, but also knows
how to succor us and help us.

And has also taken away the curse, from every condition of misery, that
possibly we may meet with in this miserable World, if we believe. Therefore
when we feel the curse of the Law, and the guilt of our sins, and the fearful
effects of Gods wrath, in any kind whatsoever, begin to fasten within us: then
must we learn by faith to behold them all, to be nailed fast to the cross of
Christ, from whence they can never return, if we steadfastly believe.

VERSE III. I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? --
THe Church understanding the benefits that come to her by the Gospel, and the
order in receiving of it, says, I have put off my Coat: by which she means
the righteousness of the Law in point of justification. This is the first thing
taught in the Gospel, Joh. 9.31.
how to put off our old Coat. And the first thing that Christ came to do, was
to put on our Coat upon himself: whereby he became laden with our sins, and
also with our infirmities. The coat being thus put on by Christ: therefore the
Church learneth to put him off by faith. So that this place does not show any
sluggishness in the Church, as if she were in a bed of security with her coat
off, and as though she were loath to rise and go about the works of the Law,
but leads us into an higher matter, how to attain to be righteous before God.
This wisdom must we also learn, which we can never do, unless we remove the
cause for which we keep our coat on, which is our false opinion of the Law.
Some when they treat of the Law and works, do press it with that earnestness,
that they extol the righteousness thereof, far beyond the righteousness of
faith: as if the principal cause of Christ's coming into the world, were to make
us holy by the Law. These with the Pharisee do button on the coat. Others, will
have Christian righteousness to begin in us, and perfected by Christ^ which is
but to put a piece of new cloth in an old garment, and make the rent worse.
Learn we then to put off our coat wholly. But next the Church questioneth here,
how shall I put it on? That is in life and conversation. For the greatest and
most necessary question of all others in matters of Divinity, is rightly to
understand these two things. How to lay aside the Law totally, in teaching the
point of justification: and how to teach the use and practice of the Law
rightly, in the life and conversation. How to handle these two points aright,
that the Gospel may not destroy the use and practice of the Law: 1 Timothy 1.9.
nor the Law the use and practice of the Gospel, is a point of great skill.

Therefore the Church makes question (as if she were something ignorant in
this point) how shall I put it on? How shall I teach this point aright? If the
works of the Law ought not to be required, but totally to be laid aside, in
teaching the way to justification: according as it is written, the Law is not
made for a righteous man, upon what ground then are they to be pressed at all?

All men have cause to complain of their ignorance in this point: therefore it
must be our desire to learn this heavenly skill. Now to cloth our selves with
the Law that the use and practice of it may not be lost: and how to be
unclothed of the Law, that the Gospel may not be lost. This is a point of great
cunning, and ought to be well studied of every Christian, chiefly, because the
strongest hold of Satan's Kingdom consists in the confounding of these two
points one with another. Therefore it is further added here. -- I have washed
my feet how shall I defile them?

Where by feet she means the inward man, and by washing, the cleansing of the
Soul through faith in Christ: Joh. 1^
according to Christ's saying, he that is washed needs not save to wash his
feet; but is clean every whit. But then it is added how shall I defile them?
She had washed her feet by putting of her coat, whereby she was cleansed from
sin, therefore she asks the question, how shall I defile them? As much as to
say, how shall I press the works of the Law, so, as not to defile my feet
again? If I should urge a necessity of the Law, then I should defile my feet,
or if I should totally cast it off, because I am justified without the Law:
then I should also defile my feet again, for then it would come to pass, that
in living without the use and practice of the Law, my Conscience would have no
more the feeling and apprehension of sin, nor any sensible need of a Savior:
So that in casting away of all fear and care of the Law, I should at last
contemn and cast away the Gospel also. And the consequence of all would be
this, I should forsake my beloved, lose my peace and comfort here, and also
everlasting life hereafter.

This shows us the practice of the Bride in all ages of the Church, which is
first to lay aside the Law, next, to live in the use and practice of the Law.
In receiving the Doctrine of justification, she hears no Law: but in the life
and conversation, she abides in the use and practice of the Law.

All men ought to be well learned in this point, chiefly those that are
Teachers of others, that are to enlighten the world; that they may so Preach
the Gospel, that the Churches feet may be washed, and so teach the Law, that no
man's feet may be defiled again. If thou urgest a necessity of the Law, thou
Preachest not the Gospel, but defilest thy mind and Conscience: Forasmuch as
the Gospel first of all destroys that opinion. Or if thou totally lay aside
the Law as useless to a believer, thou also defilest thy feet: because by that
Doctrine thou drivest the sense and feeling of sin out of the world: and also
all sensible need of a Savior. Every man has something yet to learn in this
point, the very best of all are too short in it. How to perform this duty
aright, is a question made by the Church in all ages as in this place we see.

Therefore all must be learners. And all consists in two points, how to be
righteous before God: and how to be righteous before men. Which that it may be
learned, and the way known how to attain it, it is further added.

VERSE IV. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
were moved for him.
MY beloved taught me how to distinguish betwixt faith and the Law, in Teaching
the point of justification; and also how to join them together in Scripture and
Doctrine. This is a rare and wonderful mystery, which none can teach but Christ
alone. In the Preaching of this point all men are at a loss, until they are
Divinely inspired by the Holy Ghost. As for example, St. Paul tells us in one
Text, Romans 3.28.
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law.

And in another Text, that the doers of the Law shall be justified before God.
Romans 2.13.
In both which Scriptures justification is attributed both to faith and also to
the Law.

I question then,

Some will answer, which perfection no man ever had but Christ alone.

Others say, that God gives a power with his Commands to enable those that are
his to perform the Law, so that he accepts of them in Christ, which is no more
then this. That by Christ's merits we have an infusion of grace whereby we
deserve our justification, which comes to no more then the former.

Now if no separation be made between faith and the Law, in the matter of
justification, they cannot be joined together in Doctrine without repugnancy:
Forasmuch as no man can be justified by the Law, wherein he is wanting in many
things, when it pronounces the curse upon all those that continue not therein
in all things. Neither can any man's works be accounted good before men: when
they are drawn up into the judgment seat, and not directed toward men.

Therefore I say as before, that this Cardinal point, is so high and secret a
mystery, that none of the Scribes nor disputers of the World can possibly reach
unto, by any art or humane skill. So that unless the door be opened, the
mystery is hid, and all men remain in darkness: but the door being opened all
things in the house are visible and manifest. Therefore the Church says here,
my beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door: that is, to open all those
Scriptures, that seem to clash against the Doctrine of faith, and to hinder
man's righteousness before God, and also which being not understood, do spoil
him of his righteousness before men.

Now our beloved opens, when we begin to understand what true obedience to
the Law is, Namely, to believe and confess that we do it not.

According to Saint Paul, Romans 3.10. Which is not to be understood of an
outside confession but such as arises from the sight of sin and hope of mercy.
there is none that understands, there is none righteous: there is none that
fears God, but altogether are become unprofitable, and abominable. This to
believe and confess, is the first point in true obedience to the Law. Another
is, when we submit to the curse which the Law pronounces against us, and
confess the sentence of it to be most just. The last is, wholly to renounce the
Law, and to seek after the righteousness of God, Romans 3.21.
manifested without the Law: according as is required in the first Commandment,
as is to be seen more largely in Song third, and Verse ten.

And let us also note this, that as soon as we feel and confess our death and
condemnation by the Law, then are we become dead to the Law, and the Law is
become dead unto us. So that even as death dissolves the compound, and makes a
separation between the Soul and Body: So does this death also, untie the
compound, and make a separation between the Conscience and the Law. And the
reason is, because in renouncing the Law, and flying to Christ for
righteousness, the bargain or Covenant that was made with man at first,
touching righteousness by the Law, is dissolved, or untied. This obedience it
seems good to me, to call the Passive obedience, which is clean contrary to
the Active, for in this obedience thou workest nothing but suffer thy self
to be driven from the carnal bed, to Christ by faith.

In this sense the doers of the Law are justified before God. Romans 2.13.
And in the sense they that do his Commandments have right to the tree of life.
And in this sense, Rev. 22.
understand all the promises of God that are made to man's obedience. This
Doctrine separateth faith and the Law, in the matter of justification, and yet
joineth them together in Scripture and Doctrine. For it shows, that doing the
Law to be justified, is to be understood of faithful and spiritual doing, and
not of the active or moral doing. And also, as it sets before us nothing but
Gods free grace in justifying of us: So it breeds in us that love to God and
man which is required in the first and second Table, which sets us on to
active obedience. For as a false opinion of the Law within us, spoileth us of
our righteousness before God and men: So also, does the destroying of that
opinion within us by the Gospel, work in us a true and right obedience toward
God and men. The sum of all is this; that to believe and confess our own
unrighteousness, is the first point in Evangelical obedience.

With this confession the righteousness of faith begins: and to this confession
the righteousness of Christ belongs. Which every man must learn to believe, and
this is the true doing of the Law in faith, by which means we receive the grace
and favor of God in Christ, and power to do good works before men.

Therefore the Bride says here, my bowels were moved for him. After my beloved
had once opened the door, and discovered unto me this heavenly mystery: my
bowels were moved, I was altogether made new, I was changed, and transformed,
into another manner of Creature, my bowels were moved with love and
thankfulness to God for his Infinite mercy to me: and also filled with love,
mercy, and compassion toward others, which is the sum and substance of both
Tables.

This hole of the door must therefore be rightly known, otherwise the obedience
of faith can never be taught, but all people shall remain in darkness: but the
hole being found, and the door opened, Antichrist is revealed, and the Kingdom
of Heaven is opened. The Conscience is eased, and God is pleased. Then shall
thou easily reconcile all Scriptures, (by the same rule) that seem to be at
variance in this point, and walking in the practice thereof, thou shall find
such a light opened in thy mind: that thou thy self shall say, thou never
knew before.

VERSE V. I rose up to open to my beloved: and my hands dropped with Myrrh,
and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the look.
IN the former Verse the Church shows, that the Bridegroom opens the door,
that the true Gospel may be understood, which is done by the Ministry of the
Gospel.

In this Verse the behavior of the Church is set down in her receiving of the
same. She rose up to open to her beloved. As soon as her beloved put in his
hand by the hole of the door, to open and unlock the mystery of the Kingdom of
Heaven, she set her self with all attentiveness and diligence to hear and
receive the same. She did not fight against the Doctrine of her beloved, nor
judge it before she heard it: but rose up to open and receive the same.

And then she declares the effects that followed, my hands she says, dropped
with Myrrh, and my singers with sweet smelling Myrrh, which means, into the
hearts and Consciences of others.

It is not much material to observe the distinction here betwixt the hands, and
the fingers.

A thing is said to be handled, or taken in hand, according to Saint Luke, Luke
1.
when an orderly Declaration is made to others, of those things that are firmly
believed, by those that make report of the same.

And it may also be said to be touched (as it were with fingers) when it is
more briefly and compendiously drawn up into a short sum or sentence of words.
Now both these do drop the Myrrh, not only when the Doctrine is thoroughly and
perfectly handled, but also when it is more briefly touched: for so the Bride
says here, my fingers dropped with sweet smelling Myrrh, and it was upon the
handles of the Lock.

A Lock is that which fastneth the door, that nothing within the House can be
seen, unless the door be unlocked. Therefore by the Lock we must understand
that bar or hinderance, that hinders the Gospel from entering into the Soul:
which Lock or bar is only unbelief, which sin alone stands in direct
opposition to the Gospel. And the business of the Church is to open the grounds
and reasons of the same. And when she was discovering the mystery of iniquity,
by opening the grounds of unbelief, and laying the foundation of faith, she
says, her hands dropped with Myrrh, and her fingers with sweet smelling
Myrrh. Exodus 30.
That is, she dropped true holiness and righteousness into the Souls of those
that heard it.

For the anointing oil which was made for the Priests, and also for the
Tabernacle and his vessels, which was compounded with Myrrh was holy,
whosoever was anointed with it was holy, and whosoever touched it was holy.
Therefore wheresoever this Myrrh is dropped, it makes the person holy. And
for this reason, she calls her Doctrine, the sweet smelling Myrrh, because
it makes those where it is dropped, sweet in the sight of God; sweet in the
sight of Conscience, and also a sweet Savor in every place.

By this the practice of the Church may be seen in all ages. Which is first to
open and receive the anointing oil from above; next, to touch upon those
points which drop the Myrrh into the Consciences of others.

Now the Myrrh cannot drop, unless the Lock be opened, for it droppeth in
handling of the Lock. Neither can the Lock be opened without the Key which
turns and opens the Lock. Now Christ not Moses, Esa. 22.22.
has the Key of the house of David, by which the mystery of the Kingdom of
Heaven is unlocked. For the Law says, do it and thou shall live: and so it
makes works to be the ground of faith, but the Gospel says, believe and thou
shall live. Believe what? Faith drives us to that righteousness that is
rerequired by the first Commandment. See Song 3d. Verse 10.
Even this very thing that thou do it not. That thou love not God, fear
not God, neither delightest, nor trustest in him as thou ought to do: nor
yet love thy Neighbor in any measure as thou should. (And this all men
will confess in word, but their faith is grounded upon another bottom.
Therefore all men without the knowledge of the Gospel are unbelievers.) When
thou can once begin to rest upon the Gospel, not because of thy works or
duties done, but because thou understandest and believe, that the
righteousness of Christ is given to every poor humbled sinner that trembles
before him, and asks the forgiveness of his sins: then have thou the right
use of David's Key, then shall thou joyfully perform good works unto thy
neighbor, which works although they are not perfect, yet then are accepted,
because the nature of thy faith is changed, touching thy justification, and
remission of sins.

When thou understandest the nature of this Key well, then shall thou easily
perceive how to drop the Myrrh into the hearts of others. According to the
saying of the Bride in this place, my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers
with sweet smelling Myrrh upon the handles of the Lock.

VERSE VI. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and
was gone --
IN the former Verse it is shown how the Church opened and received the
Doctrine of her beloved, and taught it unto others: now here we find the case
and condition she was cast into, after she was well armed and furnished with
the Gospel. She was cast into such a condition that no appearance of her
beloved could be perceived. This (as I conceive) may very well be understood,
in respect of his care and providence concerning outward things, a condition
which many that are godly are often cast into: In this respect she says, my
beloved had with drawn himself, and was gone. This condition she fell into for
the exercise and trial of her faith: after she had opened to her beloved, and
well understood the Gospel. And this complaint she made in Song third.

Where she complains of the very same condition. Which shows, that such
sort of trials do often befall the godly in this miserable and wretched World;
when our beloved Christ will seem to hide himself, and to cast off all care and
regard of us when we are in misery, that we shall have no sense or feeling at
all of his love: but will seem to be as a stranger that has no relation to us,
even as one that has forgotten all his promises. And therefore she complains
further in the next words.

-- My Soul failed when he spoke, I called upon him, and he gave me no answer.
When he spoke to me in his promises, that no good thing should be wanting, but
that all my wants should be supplied, and bid me cast my care upon him, because
he cared for me, my Soul did even fail, and my confidence was even shaken and
gone, because I saw that all things were promised, but nothing seemed to be
performed.

And further she says, I called upon him and he gave me no answer. I prayed,
and humbled my self much before him, and cried aloud unto him in my sad
condition; and yet he gave me no answer. By all which we see, that it is no new
way of excercising the faith of the Church, when the godly are cast into
poverty, reproach and contempt of the world, and when they see no way nor means
appearing which way to get out. In this condition therefore, must we be content
to live in, and not to despair of help, whenever it shall please our
beloved, to exercise us in it. This great and sore affliction fell upon the
Bride, after she had done her duty faithfully and carefully, for she had opened
to her beloved, and her hands had dropped the Myrrh: therefore it was for the
trial of her faith, that she might learn by being exercised, not to faint in a
sad condition, but to believe in the promises of God, although nothing appeared
to reason, why she should believe the same. According as it is said of Abraham,
that he believed in God, who calls things that are not, as though they were.
Therefore I say, this being marked out to be the condition of the Church many
times, no man must take offense at his beloved if he please to exercise his
faith this way: but quietly and patiently to depend upon him, and call upon his
name. But mark we further what she complains of in this condition.

VERSE VII. The watchmen that went about the City found me, they smote me, they
wounded me --
WE are not to understand by the watchmen the Ministers of the Gospel, but
such as continually watch to see the people of God in misery; and to add
affliction to the afflicted. As is opened more at large in Song third.

Of these the Prophets David and Jeremy do often complain. The Church says of
these, they smote her; that is, behind her back, with words of reproach: and
wounded her, in her name, credit and reputation.

And this bitter temptation the godly shall be cast into by reason of the
watchmen, oftentimes: of which sort of people, let all that love God, and their
own peace and comfort, learn in time to beware.

-- The keepers of the walls, took my vail from me. We are not to understand by
the vail in this place, Cor. 2.3.
that which Paul speaks of, which is spread over the heart in the reading of
Moses. Nor yet such a vail as was wont to be worn by the Daughters of Zion for
ornament: Esa. 2.
she being here in the habit of a mourner. But the vail here spoken of, (or
rather the image of a vail) is that reproach and infamy, which was cast upon
her by the watchmen: whereby they thought to spoil her of her Title, the Bride;
and to set her, (as much as in them lay) in the shape and attire of an Harlot.

For even as it was the manner of Harlots to cover their faces with a vail,
Genesis 38.16.
(as is to be seen in Tamar) that they might never afterward be known or
appear to be Harlots: So it was the manner of the watchmen, so to cover the
Church with infamy and reproach, that (as much as in them lay) she should never
afterward appear to be the Bride. And this she calls her vail. And this the
keepers of the walls took from her.

By the keepers, Esa. 62.
understand the watchmen of the walls, that do continually watch for the
preservation of the spiritual City. That do always help to preserve the Church
in her faith and confidence lest she should be dismayed by the afflictions of
the watchmen, these do endeavor to build up the walls of Jerusalem: and to
pray day and night until she be made a praise in the Earth. These keepers took
off the vail of reproach, Psalm. 59.6
that by reason of the watchmen was cast over the Bride. They mentioned her
condition at the Throne of grace, comforted her in all her tribulations, and
endeavored so to still the noise, and smitings of the watchmen, that at length
all her reproach and infamy vanished and came to nothing.

This being the lot of the Church, every one that is godly must expect, that at
some time or other in his life he shall be covered with this vail, although he
carry himself ever so exact and uprightly. The watchmen are in every corner;
they go round about the City, (as David speaks) and make a noise like a Dog:
which barketh sometimes at a very shadow, sometimes because other Dogs bark,
but be it for what cause it will, the least blemish that may be in the Bride,
sets them all a barking. Therefore as we must expect the vail: So we must
beware of giving occasion.

Moreover, as we must look to be in the condition of the Church, so we must
imitate the practice of the keepers, that so when the afflictions of the Bride
do become the music of the wicked, and when she is covered with great
reproach: when the Sons of Zion are esteemed but as earthen pitchers, then we
must begin to set to our Shoulder, and take of the vail. First, by our prayers,
next, by our endeavor to remove all the reproaches that are cast upon her: and
Lastly, by comforts and consolations. Then shall the breaches of the wall be
repaired: and the spiritual City preserved, from those that desire her ruin.

VERSE VIII. I charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved;
that ye tell him, that I am sick of love.
THe Churches vail being taken of by the keepers, she is sick of love. She
finding so wonderful a deliverance out of so bitter a Temptation, is even sick
with joy and thankfulness to God. And thus it is with us, when God turns our
Captivity, by his own mighty hand and grace alone, and lets us see, that he
casts us down into reproach and contempt, for no other end and purpose, but
to exalt us again by ways unknown, and to magnify his grace and mercy in us:
who can choose in this condition but be sick of love? And to have his heart
enlarged with praise and thankfulness to his holy name?

Now she charge the Daughters if they find her beloved to tell him of her
sickness. If they find the true Christ in the Ministry, and also in the way of
his providence, as she has done: that they also become thankful to him, and
praise his name, which is her own condition.

Now although the charge here be, if they find him, yet this does not make it a
matter of indifference, whether they find him or not, but implies, that they
ought to seek him so as to find him.

The Daughters were (no doubt) Ministers, that bare a great sway in the visible
Church, for they dispute much with the bride, and they are often charged by the
Bridegroom not to disturb her: yet they were such as had not the knowledge of
the true Christ, as appears also by the next Verse.

Now in that they are charged so to seek, as to find the true Christ it
shows. That there ought to be a principal care in the Ministers of the
Gospel, to see that the true Christ be Preached. For otherwise all men must of
necessity be everlastingly lost. And how shall God be glorified in his mercy,
or men receive any comfort by Christ merits, if Christ be never known? Besides
if this point be not continually beat upon, no man can possibly ever understand
it, being so contrary to man's natural opinion of God.

Which shows us one reason, why there is so little knowledge of the true
Christ in the World, it is because there is so little care taken in this, that
the true Christ be Preached. Therefore many seek after Christ, but few find
him: because they seek him not aright. With these it comes to pass, even as
Christ said to the Jews, Joh. 8.21.
ye shall seek me and not find me: and shall die in your sins. And why? Because
they sought him not by faith, but in the works of the Law. Rev. 9.32.
They that seek him in the Law can never find him: because the true Christ is
not revealed in the Law. Neither can any man define by the Law what true faith
in Christ is.

The Daughters of Jerusalem, cry out all upon this, thou must do the Law, which
all men will grant ought to be done: but to what end and purpose works are
Commanded, or which way the Law does further us to faith in Christ, this they
can say nothing to. This I conceive to be the scope of this place, which I only
touch: they that have a mind may enlarge it as they please.

Now the Daughters question in the next Verse, what the beloved is, which makes
it apparent they had not the knowledge of the true Christ.

VERSE IX. What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among
women? what is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge
us?
IT is as much as to say, what is the righteousness of faith more then the
righteousness of the Law, or wherein lies the difference? Such is the
abominable ignorance of all men, till God open the eyes of the mind: they see
no difference between Christ and Moses. And in this point the Language of the
whole earth is confounded: as it was at the building of Babel. Thou make a
great do say the Daughters, about thy beloved, and when all comes to all, thy
beloved is no more then another beloved. For thou art justified by faith we
grant, but thy faith must be a working faith; otherwise thy faith is dead, and
not a living faith. Wherein then lies the difference, or what is thy beloved
more then another beloved? So that in a word the Daughters attribute
justification to faith, but when they go to define what justifying faith is:
they can define it no otherwise, but to be a working faith. From whence it must
follow, that he has will find the beloved, must find him first in his own
righteousness or works, which must be the form or essence of his faith.

Also it is to be noted here, that when they call the Church the fairest among
women, they give unto her the same Title that Christ does, but they deny that
she has that righteousness which is essential to that Title; which is faith
alone. For as was said before, they understand no other faith but a working
faith.

Therefore how to define that faith which is alone, and to distinguish it from
a working faith they know not. And how can the Bride be the fairest amonst
women, when she wants that faith, which uniteth her to Christ; without whose
righteousness she cannot be fair? For say they, what is thy beloved more then
another beloved? What does thy faith avail thee if it has not works? Can faith
save thee? Is it not of far less worth then that which brings forth works? So
that although in words they call the Church the fairest: yet in heart and
opinion they own and acknowledge no other righteousness whereby she is purified
from her sin: but the righteousness of the Law, and her own works.

Such confusion the want of understanding in this point breeds, where faith
as it is alone and justifies: is not distinguished, from faith joined to
works, which Sanctifies. And this most horrible confusion is in the Church
amongst many great Doctors at this day, where this point is not rightly
understood. For we are justified by faith say they, without the works of the
Law, but as soon as they come to treat of the Law, they will affirm most
strongly, that without the works of the Law, a man can have no evidence at all
of his faith. As if a man were justified by faith in the sight of God; but by
works in his Conscience. These with the Daughters call the bride the fairest
amongst women by faith, but when they come to define what that faith is, they
mean no other thing then what is bred and nourished in the bride, by her own
works.

So that in a word she is the fairest: but by their Doctrine, she is the
filthiest of all Creatures, despised and condemned of God. These run into a
most deadly evil through a false definition of faith, for many times the
evidence of works is lost: how then shall I be assured of my faith? And so of
Christ, and also of Everlasting life? Or else must I despair, and die in
unbelief? Such confusion destroys the very nature of faith, for faith has an
evidence in it self, and the nature of it is to assure, Heb. 11.1.
from the light and testimony it receives from the word of God: it speaks
persuasion, as well as it works sanctification, to believe, is not only an
act, but sense of faith; So that he that believes, knows that he believes. And
it is impossible for a man to believe any thing firmly, but he must know that
he does believe it: for faith is to receive, and to receive is by an act of the
will, and no man can receive a thing willingly, but he must needs know that he
does receive it.

Now in that the speech is here doubled by the Daughters, it shows that they
were very proud and stiff in their opinion. What is thy beloved, say they, more
then another beloved, that thou do so charge us? What are we blind? Here
although the confusion be so great, that it separateth all men from Christ; yet
they must not be charged with it, nor be thought to err in the least tittle.

Such a most pestilent Heritick is man's opinion, which will not be contented
unless it live in the greatest Heresy, which separateth all men from Christ;
and yet it must go for the greatest virtue.

Now in the next Verse, and so to the end of this Chapter, in answer to the
Daughters; the Church sets down the Excellency of her beloved, beyond any
other beloved.

VERSE X. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.
IN which words we must note, that she looks not upon Christ by way of
reflection, as the Daughters do, but directly by faith. Therefore that
Christian righteousness may be truly known, she speaks of such excellencies
as are proper only to his own person. And first she says, my beloved is white,
by which she means his righteousness imputed, which being of Infinite purity,
Rev. 19.8.
was fit for a Redemption. And also ruddy, because the guilt and punnishment of
man's sin was laid upon him.

Now by this description of her beloved, Esa. 63.1, 2.
she totally overthrows the Religion of the Daughters, and learneth rightly to
teach the Law. For if the white garments of her beloved must cloth her from
the wrath of God: then the Law which says, do this and live, must have a new
signification, which the Daughters understand not. Also, if her beloved be
ruddy, or red, being crucified for her sin, as she confesses: then is she also
white, being clothed with his righteousness.

According to Saint Paul, he was made sin for us, Cor. 5.21.
who knew no sin: that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. But on
the contrary, the Daughters by resting in an opinion of works, by a false
understanding of the Law; do uncloath Christ of his ruddiness, and draw the
guilt of sin upon themselves, and are bound to make an Everlasting satisfaction
to the Justice of God. Therefore the Bride say here, my beloved, is more then
another beloved.

And thus it is with us also, if we so understand the Law, as to make it the
condition of the promises, then do we uncloath Christ (...) his ruddiness: and
by that Principle in (...) suffer only whiteness to remain in his own person,
which person of Christ, being strippe^ of our guilt; his whiteness remains on
himself, and to us can never be imputed. But (...) we so understand and teach
the Law, that (...) may be suitable, or subordinate to the Gospel^ then all our
redness or guiltiness, shall be la^^ upon Christ our beloved, and his
righteousne^^ shall be imputed unto us. To teach this poin^ rightly, and also
to practice it in time (...) distress and misery, is so exceeding pleasant that
no heart can choose, (that rightly understan^ it) but burst out into joy and
singing.

Now she further says, that he is the chiefest among ten thousand. Meaning the
chief Prophet or Teacher, and also the chiefest standard Bearer, alluding to
the heads of the tri^es who were standard Bearers when they were numbered to go
out to War. Number. 2.
In which War of the Children of Isarel against the Canaanites, and also when
they were to go out against the Benjamites, Judah must go first; he must be the
chief standard Bearer. Reuben (according to the Order of the Genealogy) was to
be first, in respect he was the eldest Son of Isarel, yet because our Lord
sprang out of Judah, and because the War against the Canaanites was a type of a
greater matter, therefore Judah must go first. To show us this, that Christ
himself must tread the Wine Press of the wrath of God.

Now seeing Christ has trodden the Winepress alone, has banished the curse,
and overcome death: therefore must he stand in the Conscience alone without the
Law or works. And even as Judah was the first and chiefest in the War against
the enemies of Israel; and not Reuben, although he was the eldest Son: even so
must Christ (and not works) be looked upon first, in receiving comfort into the
afflicted Conscience. And thus the Bride confuteth the Daughters. My beloved
she faith, is more then thy beloved, my beloved standing alone in my
Conscience, separateth me from the Law, and the guilt of sin: But thy beloved
standing not alone in thy Conscience but leaves thee under the Law, and in thy
sin.

VERSE XI. His head is as the most fine Gold, his locks are bushy, and black as
a Raven.
BY the head of Christ is meant his Divinity, by which he went through his
Kingly Office, 1 Cor. 11.3.
and got the victory over the Law, sin, death, and Satan. Which is compared to
fine Gold, Acts 17.29.
not that the Godhead is like unto Gold, but to show that his Kingdom which is
purchased by the merits of his Divinity is like unto Gold: Luke 1.33.
in that it is durable being an Everlasting Kingdom, and the Churches clothing
is said to be of wrought Gold. Psalm. 45.13.
So that in regard of the golden effects that come to us by the deity: his head
is said to be as the fine Gold.

But what is meant by the blackness and bushiness of his Locks?

If you look in to Dan. Rev. 1.14. his hair is said to be white as the pure
wool, but here, to be bushy and black as a raven. Understand then, that the
whiteness of his hairs in Daniel, shows him to be the Ancient of days,
therefore it signifies his Divinity: and that the bushiness, and blackness of
his locks here, shows him to be youthly and strong, therefore it signifies
his Humanity. By this description also the bride overcomes the Daughters, and
shows her beloved, to be more then another beloved: for the righteousness of
my beloved, is the righteousness of God and man in one person, and therefore
accepted for me of the Father: but the righteousness of thy beloved, is but the
righteousness of thine own sinful person, whereby thou art accursed and
condemned.

VERSE XII. His eyes are as the eyes of Doves, by the Rivers of waters, washed
with Milk, and fitly set.
BY his eyes are meant his understanding whereby he knows how to pity us and
help us, Psalm. 33, 13, 18, 34, 15.
having (now in Heaven) a fellow feeling of our extremities. Esa. 63.9.
For although he knew not sin by the Acts of sin, yet he knew sin by the
effects of sin, and therefore in all our afflictions he is afflicted. And are
like the Doves, which never forsake their mate. And which delight to be by the
waters, which shows, that Christ delights to help his people in their
afflictions. And are fitly set, meaning the object that Christ fastneth his
eyes upon. Not he that is rich, full, and thinks he has need of nothing:
Christ looks not upon him, but he that feels his spiritual poverty and
confesses the same. In this respect also, the Bride thus praises her beloved;
my beloved knows how to succor and deliver me in the day of distress, that
am unworthy: but thy beloved succoureth not, nor yet looks upon any but those
that are worthy of the same.

VERSE XIII. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like
Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh.
BY his cheeks are meant, Esa. 50.
his sufferings, of which it is said, I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked of the hair. And this he did when he owed us
nothing.

And therefore when they spit in his face, Mat. 26.
buffetted him and smote him with the palms of their hands, he gave himself
most freely to suffer for us. The Law thus falling upon Christ, Christ by his
Resurrection condemned the Law, and also has delivered us from the condemning
power of the Law.

The true knowledge hereof in time of distress, is to us, as a bed of spices:
wherein we may rest our selves with sweet repose. Which Heavenly spices, do
smell as sweet, to the wounded Conscience; as the sweetest flowers do to the
sense. The scent of which Heavenly posey, will drive away all noisome smells,
and fumes out of the distressed mind, and also fill it with most fragrant
sweetness.

And when she says his lips are like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh,
it means, when the benefits of Christ's death and Resurrection, are dropped
into the Soul by the Preaching of the Gospel.

And this she applies likewise against the daughters after this manner. My
beloved has joined himself to my condition and has most freely suffered for
me, by whose sufferings I am acquitted: but thy beloved never gave himself for
thee, to suffer for thee, but leaves thee to be condemned.

VERSE XIV. His hands are as Gold Rings set with the beryl: his belly is as
bright Ivory overlaid with saphires.
HIs hands and bowels are here commended, being always open and ready to show
compassion to us in all necessities. According to the Psalmist, Psalm. 145.
thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

Therefore in that we have help at every need, and many times by ways we never
thought of: it is from the merciful hands of our beloved Bridegroom. Which is
as welcome to us, as a jewel set in a Ring. And as bright and clear to be seen,
as the shineing of a precious Stone, that nothing but only the good hand of
God, has been our help and succor.

Therefore she also says, my beloved is more then thy beloved, for my beloveds
hands and bowels are ready to succor me, as soon as I feel and confess my sin:
but thy beloved shows no mercy to thee, but calls for ustice against the
offendour.

VERSE XV. His legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine Gold:
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.
HIs legs are commended in regard of their strength, likened to Marble, for
strength and duration: So that Christ by his legs must bear us and carry us,
when we begin to halt, and grow lame, and feeble, in our obedience. They are
set upon sockets of fine Gold, which means his Divinity, whereby he became
able to ease us and help us. His Countenance is like the Cedars; which were
excellent for smell and loftiness, over topped and over shadowed all the trees
of the Forest: So does the countenance of our beloved over shadow the frowns
of all our enemies.

This makes the Bride also to sing against the daughters, my beloved is more
then thy beloved, thy beloved leaves thee under the frowns of Sin, and Satan,
Death, and Hell, but the loving countenance of my beloved delivers me from
them all. But there is one thing more she chiefly commends him for.

VERSE XVI. His mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely. --
THese words are the last part of the description of her beloved, and the
chiefest thing she praises him for. The question is wherein the sweetness of
Christ's mouth lies? I answer, First of all in that he teaches thee by the
Gospel to believe, he shows thee the true ground of faith, So Acts 15. That
the Gentiles might hear the word of the Gospel and believe, Christ does not
infuse faith without the word, but by the word. But how is this done thou will
say? For answer, mark his own words in John 6.45. Every man that has heard and
learned of the Father comes unto me, no man then can believe in Christ, unless
he learn the first principle of his faith from the Father. And what is that
first principle of faith that must be learned of the Father? Look Esai. 9.6.
And thou shall see, unto us a Child is born, unto us a son is given, the first
principle in thy faith is the Fathers will in giving, for if the Son be given,
there must be a giver which is the Father. Not but that the Son also gives
himself, but the Father is first in priority of Order, which order and method
in giving, must be the rule and method of our faith. Joh. 5.19.
No man could believe if the father were not willing, the Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do, but whatsoever things the Father
does, the same also does the Son; the Father therefore being willing to give
his Son, the Son also is willing to give himself, the giving of which gift by
the Father, is the first principle for thy faith to build upon, for how can
thou conclude that Christ (which comes by gift) is thine, unless thou first
understand that he is given unto thee? For faith is grounded upon truth, and
not upon falsehood; First, then thou must hear and learn the truth concerning
the Fathers will in giving thee his Son, as thou art a sinner and dead before
God, 2 These. 2 13.
(and not as a supposed righteous person) if thou will learn to believe, for
faith is defined to be a belief of the truth, Joh. 12 44.
and not to believe a lie, and Christ says, he that believes in me, believes
not on me, but on him that sent me, because Christ by his Doctrine directs us
first to hear the Fathers will that sent him: with this gift of the Father
faith is given us (when the appointed time is come) as the imediate effect of
the Fathers gift.

Now if thou quiblest about the word us, (it being said unto us a Son is given)
and think that thou thy self art not intended in the gift, because thou
find so many promises made to righteous persons, when thou thy self art a
miserable sinner, then do thou totally banish Christ out of thy Conscience,
remainest in thy sins, and must suffer the loss of Eternal life and glory: and
if thou teach that point unto others, thou do not only discover thine
unbelief, but also professest thy self to be an unbeliever, and do by thy
Doctrine establish the world in the grounds of unbelief, directly contrary to
the office of the holy Ghost, which is to convince the world of sin because
they believe not. Joh. 16.
Thou see then first, wherein the sweetness of Christ's mouth lies, in that he
teaches thee to believe, first, by destroying the ground of unbelief, which
nothing can do but only the Fathers gift, next, in showing thee upon what
ground thou must begin to build thy faith, not because he first loves thy
works, but thy sinful person, that thou may love him, bless him, confess thy
sins unto him, and mourn for the depravation of thy sinful nature, not out of
despair, but of love and thankfulness to thy Heavenly Father who has showed
mercy to thee and given thee his Son.

Secondly, His mouth is most sweet in that he teaches thee the new
signification of the terms of the Law, he that sat upon the throne said behold
I make all things new; Rev. 21.5.
So that since the fall of man, the terms of the Law (do this and live) have a
signification which is new, and therefore man's obedience is said to be new.

But what is it to make all things new?

I answer, to make all things new, The Covenant of grace makes the
signification of the terms of the Law to be new.
by the righteousness of faith alone. Understand it thus, the terms laid upon
Adam were do this in thine own person and live, but do this since the fall is,
do it in the person of thy Redeemer and live, so that do this, before and since
the fall have a double signification, the one is old, the other is new, to
receive grace from the Redeemer to do the Law in thine own person does not make
a new signification of the terms, When Moses says, Lev. 18.5. do this and
live, he speaks of the old signification of the terms of the Law do it in
thine own person, according to the Covenant made in Horeb. Exodus 20. But when
Moses speaks of the righteousness of faith. Deuteronomy. 30.14. Which he calls
also also the keeping of the commandments Ver. 10.11. Rev. 22. He speaks of
the new signification of the terms of the Law according to the Covenant made in
the Land of Moab. Deuteronomy. 29. Ver. 1. The first of these pertains to the self
justiciary, the latter to the broken hearted.
nor thy obedience to be new, for that is doing in thine own person, (the same
terms which were laid upon Adam) and not in the person of thy Redeemer, nor
can thou ever believe that God loves thee by that obedience, nor yet be
brought to love God: but to do in the person of the Redeemer is to believe that
he has done it for thee, and given his obedience to thee, before he requires
any of thee, that so by a new and living way thou might learn to love him,
fear him, and obey him.

Therefore when the Law was given, the Gospel is set before, wherein God gives
himself unto us, that we might love him, before he requires any thing from us.
And in the first Commandment he lays this prohibition upon us, (which also
runs through all the ten Commandments) that we seek after no preparative
righteousness to precede the Gospel. So that to do the Law, is to do it
according to the Gospel and the first Commandment, which is not to depend upon
the Law. Therefore when it is said blessed are they that do his Commandments
that their right may be in the tree of Life, thou must understand it according
to the Gospel and the first Commandment, where by doing his Commandments is
meant not depending upon the Law, which opinion in us of self dependence is the
first thing which is taken away by the Gospel, and goes imediately before our
establishing in Christ.

All this hinders not, but that the Law is to be done before men to the utmost
of our power, in the Kingdom of the Law our obedience must be personal, which
not withstanding helps nothing to righteousness, because it is prevented by
faith in Christ. Now herein also the sweetness of Christ's mouth is seen, in
that he teaches by the Gospel a new understanding of the Law.

Thirdly, The sweetness of Christ's mouth is seen in this also, in that he
teaches the true reason of the institution of Sacraments, which in all ages of
the Church were to teach faith in Christ, Sacraments were not instituted to
assure us that we have faith; or to confirm to us that we do believe, but to
assure us by a figure of the visible ground of our faith that we might believe,
that our faith might be Sacramental as well as verbal: that we might learn the
mystery of our faith by and from the figure.

Thus by Circumcision God did establish his Covenant with Abraham to be his
God, Genesis 17.7.
and the God of his seed, and why was this? But only from the figure to teach
him to believe. And when circumcision is said to be a Seal of the righteousness
of faith, it is, Romans 4.
because it confirms by a figure the righteousness which faith lays hold
upon.

And under the figure of the Passover they were taught to believe their
deliverance, Exodus 12.13.
from sin and the wrath of God by the blood of Christ.

So the reason why Baptism was instituted, was to manifest Christ unto Israel,
John 1.31. It looks not upon the worthiness of the person, but teaches to
behold our unworthiness that we may be made worthy in Christ.

So the Lords Supper, Luke 22.
was instituted to fulfill the Passover and show us the Lords death, that we
might have a visible, and Sacramental ground to believe that he is crucified
and risen for us. Now these being the causes why Sacraments were instituted it
is proving and not to be proved: therefore no unworthiness in the Subjects must
be alleged to bar their privilege, that stands in opposition to the reasons of
their institution. So that we see Christ's mouth is sweet in that he opens
these three points, the ground of our faith, the sense of the Law, and the
reason of the institution of Sacraments. Which I conceive are the three gates
spoken of Rev. 21. which pertain to the holy City new Jerusalem, on the East,
West, North, and South side of the Heavenly City, without the opening of which
three gates there is no entrance into the new Jerusalem. For let the ground of
faith be ever so well opened, which is the first gate, if the terms of the Law
be not also opened, and the signification made known, no man can enter, for the
Law will be a stumbling block to his faith and keep him out. But admit this
gate be also opened, if the third be shut, the reason why Sacraments were
instituted, no man can pass into the City. For if the Sacraments belong not to
me before I am worthy, then is the ground of my faith which is the first gate
shut again, then also is the first Commandment, and the sense of the whole Law,
which is the second gate also shut: Nay then are all the gates kept fast locked
up, that no passenger can pass into the holy City new Jerusalem for evermore,
but must remain without, and suffer the loss of Eternal life, and happiness.
Consider of these things with wisdom, and see whether his mouth be not most
sweet, and whether he be not altogether lovely, as the bride here sings.

And when she says, this is my beloved, and my friend; she shows the
Daughters what the true Preaching of the Gospel is, and that where this order
and method is not observed, Christ is very little known, or regarded. Therefore
she says, he that thus Preaches the Gospel is my friend. This is the
beautiful person that brings the glad tidings of peace and good things.

This is the interpreter one of a thousand, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem: and
the chiefest of ten thousand unto me, for although I had ten thousand
instructers, yet this is the Doctrine which begets, and preserves me in
Christ, and in this Doctrine will I rejoice.

CHAP. VI.
VERSE I. Whither is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest among women, whither is
thy beloved turned aside? That we may seek him with thee.
AFTER the Bride had set forth the praises, of her beloved in the former
Chapter, and the benefits that she receives from him through faith alone: the
Daughters, in stead of receiving of him, make this enquiry, whether is thy
beloved gone? When the Kingdom of Heaven is brought near, even to the very
doors, as it is wheresoever Christ is truly Preached, yet the Daughters know
not how to fasten upon him by faith alone, but imagine to find him some other
way.

In stead of embracing the true Christ, which is present to faith: they seek
after an imaginary Christ, which is to be found (as they conceive) in the works
of the Law. So great an enemy is carnal reason to faith, that it cannot endure
to receive any thing from God: but still dreameth to bring something to him
first, thinking thereby to procure acceptance with him.

So that this question, whether is thy beloved gone? Shows their ignorance in
the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God. And this is the misery of all men,
until God opens the eyes of their understanding; that when Christ is
preached, and nothing is wanting but only faith to receive him, then to dream
of a Christ, that we think may be found in the Law. Which is no better, then to
forsake that Doctrine and Religion, which binds us to Christ that is come:
and to cast our selves under the prophecy of a Christ to come, which Christ is
no where to be found.

We must therefore believe, that where the true Gospel is preached, Christ is
not gone but come, there he is present, and no where else to be found; which
must also quicken our understandings, to seek him in the Gospel, and stop our
imaginations from seeking after him in the works of the Law.

Note also here, that the daughters give the Bride the Title, of the fairest
among women, and yet affirm, that she is too seeking of her beloved, which is a
plain contradiction. For if she be the fairest, then it is because the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to her whereby she is made fair: but if she
be yet too seeking of her beloved, then she remains without the righteousness
of Christ imputed, and abides in her filthiness, under the Law and
condemnation.

Therefore the Daughters when they call her the fairest amongst women, affirm,
(nothing less, then that she is made so by faith alone:) the principal cause
thereof to be her own rightousness the works of the Law. It is agreed between
them, that it is the righteousness of Christ alone, that makes righteous
persons in the sight of God: but the difference lies in this, whether it be
the righteousness of Christ, inherent in himself and imputed to faith, or the
righteousness of Christ communicated, whereby good works are wrought to become
righteousness before God? The Bride says, it is by his righteousness imputed,
and therefore in drawing the benefits of Christ into the Conscience, she
teaches faith alone: The Daughters say, it is by his righteousness
communicated, therefore in teaching the Gospel, they always reprove an idle
faith, and require a working faith.

The Daughters do not deny the righteousness of faith, according as they define
faith, which is, to believe the History of Christ's sufferings, and that there
is an all sufficiency in them, to satisfy Divine Justice, if they make them
their own: but say they, thou art yet wanting in this, until thou find some
thing inherent in thy self which must evidence thy faith to be true.

Therefore, thou must further seek after thy beloved, to have an evidence from
thy works, to witness thy faith. So that all they do, upon the matter is but
this, to give her a name to live: but by their principles they judge her to be
dead.

For they tell her that she is not completely justified, because the
righteousness of Christ is but begun in her: She wants the righteousness of
the Law to make it perfect. For whether is thy beloved gone say they? Whether
is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? Thou have lost thy
beloved by thy faith, if thou definest faith after no other manner. Therefore
leave off thy strange definition of faith, that we may seek him with thee, and
let us be unanimous in matters of love and good works, and let such niceties
alone in matters of faith. So that the Daughters in this place, do not only
take away from the Bride, the white raiment, the pure righteousness of Christ,
whereby she is clothed from the wrath of God: and leave her in her own
filthiness as in the day of her Nativity, but also, they take away from Christ,
his name, his office and glory: making of Christ, in stead of a Justifier and
Savior, nothing but a Minister of sin, and condemnation. According to St. Paul
in his allegations against the false Apostles, If while we seek to be made
righteous by Christ, we our selves are yet found sinners, that is, have need of
the righteousness of the Law, to evidence or perfect our faith, without which
evidence, we remain yet sinners and unjustified, then Christ is nothing to us
but a Minister of sin, for then have we no more by Christ, then by the Law,
which is life if we keep it, but death if we break it.

This speech of the Daughters, is the true picture of what manner of Preachers
there shall be in some places of the Church in all ages, even such that shall
speak of the righteousness of Christ, and much extol the same: but nothing in
comparison of the righteousness of the Law. That although they lay down the
righteousness of Christ to a Conscience in distress, upon no other ground but
that it believes, yet they shall with the Daughters, understand faith after no
other manner, nor teach the principles of it any otherwise, but by requiring
the works of the Law: accounting the chief beloved to be wanting until that
righteousness be had. For say they, the business that Christ came into the
world for was to Redeem us from our Sins, and this Redemption is ours by faith,
but when they come to define, what this faith is: they can teach no other
definition of it, but a man's actual conformity to the Law of God. And therefore
by their Doctrine and manner of teaching, they require nothing but only a
strict conformity to Gods Law, that so an evidence may be had of faith in
Christ.

This is with the Daughters, to call the Bride the fairest amongst women by
reason of her faith; and yet to hide the righteousness of Christ from the
Conscience whereby she is made fair.

Besides, if a man must have the righteousness of Christ and of the Law both
before he can be justified before God, and have any assurance of it in his
Conscience: why do they not then prescribe a measure, how far a man must go in
matter of works, before he can be assured that his faith is true, that so a man
may know when his labor is at an end?

That manner of Doctrine reproves not unbelief, but establishes in man an
opinion of his works, and plainly shows: that our inherent righteousness
(contrary to St. Romans 3.5.
Paul) and not our confessed unrighteousness does commend the righteousness of
God.

These are they whose Doctrine ends in contradictions, who confess the Bride in
word to be the fairest amongst women by faith alone, but in deed and in truth,
that even then, she is too seeking of her beloved. For whether say they, is thy
beloved gone that we may seek him with thee? To which it is answered by the
Bride in the next verse as follows.

VERSE II. My beloved is gone down into his Garden, to the beds of spices, to
feed in the Gardens; and to gather Lillies.
IN which words she shows where her beloved is to be found, namely in his
garden, among the spiritual people, that hear and follow his voice. So that
although he be gone, yet he is not gone from her self, but from the Daughters:
whose Doctrine does wholly abrogate the Gospel, and crucify the son of God,
darken and deface all the benefits of his victory and Kingdom. Therefore does
Christ depart, and rest himself where his word is entertained and kept.
According as St. Paul said to the Jews, seeing ye judge your selves unworthy of
Eternal life, Lo we turn to the Gentiles.

And when she says to the beds of spices, she means, to all those in all
places of the world, whose minds and Consciences are persumed with the sweet
smell of his Heavenly Doctrine: there Christ feeds, helps, comfort and
refreshes them, in all times of misery and distress.

And by gathering Lillies, she means, that by that Doctrine which is despised
of men: does Christ gather all his Lillies unto himself.

Which shows us what the the true Office of the Ministry is, namely to feed
those that are already planted in the Church of God: and to gather to the faith
of Christ, those that are ignorant of the same. And so to besprinkle the
Heavedly spice into the minds and Consciences of the hearers: that every one in
the Garden may smell, even as a bed of Spices.

VERSE III. I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine, he feeds among the
Lillies.
BY these words the Bride overcomes the Doctrine of the Daughters totally, who
endeavor by their principles to strip her of the Title of Bride, because she
wants the righteousness of the Law to perfect her faith. To which she
answers. If my beloved has owned me, then am I his Bride: but my beloved
has owned me, therefore am I his Bride. Again, If I am my beloveds, then is my
beloved also mine, by an inseparable union which can never be broken. By this
argument she dasheth in pieces at one blow, the whole Kingdom of Satan. For
grant their arguments might be cunning, yet can they never overcome, so long as
this faith of application remains. And when it is said, he feeds among the
Lillies; she means, with this faith of application, which is rich feeding by
which he feeds all that are his, against the fear of death and all evil, unto
Eternal life.

With this argument also, must we learn to overcome, when the Conscience is in
fear and distress by reason of any adversary. Joh. 15.16.
Then must we lay down this for a certain proposition, that we are the elect
and chosen of God. Now if I am chosen of God, then am I my beloved's: and if I
am my beloved's, then is my beloved also mine. This argument Satan can never
endure, therefore he will muster up his forces against it because hereby we
build our foundation upon Christ alone: upon Gods laying claim unto us first,
and not by way of reflection.

This foundation will never fail us, because we ground our faith from a
principle that is true. Our way is not the true way to life, because we believe
it is the true, (for then Heretics and Seducers were in the right) but we do
and ought to believe a thing because it is true. This is to give honor and
glory to the truth of God; which is the highest and greatest service that can
be given unto him.

Therefore, when thou art in misery and know not what to do, be thy calamity
what it will, begin thy faith, where God begins to thee. But thou will say, how
is that? I answer, fear not Israel thou art mine, Esa. 43.1. Psalm. 50.7.
hear O Israel I am thine. Mark those two places of Scripture, and make thy
application accordingly. From whence also note, that he calls thee by a new
name Israel, a prevailer with God, on purpose that thou might learn thereby
to believe in him and love him. When thou have learned thus to ground thy
faith, and to make application of Gospel: then shall thou easily understand,
and find by thine own experience, the meaning of that Text, I will bring the
blind by a way that they knew not, and lead them in paths that they have not
known. Forasmuch as the common way that is known, is, that first we must please
God, before he will own and accept of us: but the way which is not known, and
that God reveals, is, that he loves and owneth us first, teaches us, to be
displeased with our selves, and so makes us a people for his glory. This is
the way of the Lord, and thus he feeds his Lillies: and they that well taste
hereof, are nourished up in peace and comfort.

With this one argument thou may drive the Devil and all his instruments
into Hell from whence they came.

For those words, I am thine, and thou art mine, are not thy words, but the
words of God thy Heavenly Father: who owneth thee, and has given himself unto
thee.

Rest thou therefore in this conclusion, and if any quarrel thereat, send them
to thy Heavenly Father that made the promise, and bid them ask him, why he
looked upon so vile a person as thou art, and why he made the way to life so
easy as to believe and live. Then shall thou also find, his word to become an
hiding place in all storms, and a Sanctuary in the day of heat.

VERSE IV. Thou art beautiful, my Love, as Tirza, comely as Jerusalem, terrible
as an Army with Banners.
THese are the words of Christ, who beholding the faith of his spouse, can no
longer hold, but breaks out into this commendation of her, thou art beautiful
my love. And the cause is, in regard she sticks to the true principles of
faith: whereby she is imputed fair.

Therefore he tells her, thou art the Royal Diadem, thou bear the renown.

Which shows us clearly, wherein the praise of the Church consists: even in
believing and contending for that faith which was once given to the Saints.

First, he likeneth her beauty to Tirza, a City where the Kings of Israel did
reign, and keep their Courts. The King was present there, which made the City
beautiful. And that which makes the Church so beautiful in Christ's eye, is
because she lives in the Kings Court, she holds Christ by the hand of faith
alone. Others contend for works first: to all those Christ is absent. All such
do want the beauty of Tirza; and may rightly be called Ichabod, because from
them the glory is departed.

Next, she is commended for her comeliness, comely as Jerusalem. Jerusalem was
comely in regard God himself chose to dwell in it. In which City the Temple was
built, wherein the Ark was kept, and also the golden Pot that had Manna, which
was to show the wonderful works of God to posterity. And Aarons rod that
budded, which was kept to still the murmerings of the people against the
Magistracy and Ministry. And the two Tables of the Covenants. For these things
Jerusalem is said to be comely. And also by the Psalmist, Psalm. 48.2.
to be fair in Situation, the joy of the whole Earth.

In these things likewise, the praise of this Heavenly City the New Jerusalem
consists. In that she alone lives in the sight of peace, in the sight of the
Temple and the Ark, has the right use of her Baptism, the true knowledge of the
Tables: feeds upon the hid Manna in the Golden Pot, and has the true
understanding of Aarons Rod that budded, herein lies her happiness, beauty,
and glory, in that she conformeth in all these things. Therefore she is said to
be comely and the joy of the whole Earth, in that she receives and teaches
the free grace of her Redeemer, and cheerfully obeys him in all things.

And in that she is Terrible as an Army with Banners, it means against all
those that are adversaries to her Faith and Doctrine. And so Terrible, that by
this one argument, I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine: all her
adversaries are confounded, and driven down to Hell. This argument therefore is
the Banner of the Church, and also a matter of commendation, with this Banner
must we defend our selves, and under it must we rejoice.

VERSE V. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thine hair
is like a flock of Goats that appear from Gillead.
IT is as if Christ had said this, thou art so beautiful and comely in my
sight, and so Terrible to all mine adversaries, in regard of thy faith and
Doctrine; that thou have even overcome me: which shows us, wherein the
delight of Christ chiefly lies; namely in this, when the word of God is so
understood and stuck unto by faith, that by it the Kingdom of Satan may be
broken in pieces. Now in that Christ says, turn away thine eyes from me, he
means not to another lover: but explaineth his meaning in the next words,
thine hair is like a flock of Goats, by which he means the faithful, who are
likened to hair, because even as hair grows from, and hangs on the head, so
do they all hang upon their head the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore Christ says,
turn about thine eyes to them, and Preach the Gospel to them, that they also
may be strong in the Lord. See Song 4. and 2. As also for the Churches Teeth
and Temples.

VERSE VIII. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins
without number.
BY Queens I understand all those that make separation from the worship of God
in Church assemblies. These are said to be threescore, which is an indefinite
speech: meaning, there are multitudes of them. And they are all Queens, that
is, in their own conceit and imaginations, they all think themselves so to be.
The opinion of them all is set down in Esai. 47. I am and none else. And in
Rev. 18. I sit a Queen, and am no widow. The meaning I conceive is this. I am
the only Bride or Queen of Christ, and there is none else, but only those of my
way, and this is the opinion of every Sect. And their opinion is not only set
down, but also the reason of it, I am no widow. Now to be a widow cannot be
until the Husband be dead: Romans 7.
but when the Husband is dead, the woman is a widow.

And she that calls her self a Queen, They that glory in the Law are
condemned by the Law.
is the Church in her own esteem, and her Husband is the Law. And in that she
glories in her married condition, it shows, she is not dead to the Law, but
under the dominion and power of the Law. So that I am no widow, is as much as
to say, I am not divorced from, nor dead in respect of the Law: but I
dilligently follow the works of the Law, therefore am I the true spouse, or
Queen of Christ. The sum is, she boasts in the righteousness of the Law;
because (as she supposes) she walks according to the Law, which is the
opinion of every Sect.

The Concubines are those that do not make a local separation from the Church,
but live in visible communion with her: yet have no part nor share in the
inheritance of God. For Concubines it seems, were such as were taken into the
Family, as appears by Hagar, Abraham's Concubine, and also by Solomon's
Concubines: yet bare no rule in the Family as Wifes, neither did their Children
partake of the inheritance, as is to be seen by the casting out of Hagar and
her Son.

Nevertheless they had great gifts bestowed upon them, Genesis 25.
for although Abraham as a figure of God gave all his inheritance to Isaac: yet
unto the Sons of the Concubines, Hagar and Keturah, Abraham gave gifts and sent
them away into the East Coutry.

These Concubines jointly considered are nothing else, but the bondwoman, who
although she lives in visible Society with the Bride, yet she gendereth her
Children unto bondage.

These are said to be fourscore, which is also a certain number for an
uncertain, meaning, there are multitudes of these sort of people that keep a
wonderful stir in the Family of God, chiefly, about government and ruling, that
would (if they knew how) fain bear sway in the Family in outward government yet
have no authority as the Wife, who rules all things through faith in Christ.

By the Virgins without number, understand the companions of the Bride, who are
not yet converted, yet not opposers, but well wishers to the Bride: that are
not yet brought, but that shall be brought unto her; Psalm. 45.
according to the Psalmist.

These are called Virgins, because they ought to be undefiled in respect of
their faith: and to look with a single eye upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

VERSE IX. My dove my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her Mother:
the choice one of her that bare her --
THe Queens and Concubines are many, and are also of many opinions in matters
of Religion: but my dove is but one. One in regard of universality, and one in
respect of unity. She endeavors to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace. Ephesians. 4.
And in that she is said to be undefiled, it shows, that the Queens and
Concubines are such as are defiled in heart and Conscience before God; though
outwardly they may seem to appear righteous before men. The cause of their
defilement is, because they all say, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, they all
boast in the Law: therefore says the Holy Ghost, shall her plagues come at one
day, death and mourning and famine; Rev. 18.
for strong is the Lord God that will condemn her. Because she trusts in the
wickedness of her own opinion: therefore her own opinion shall condemn her. By
all which we see, that although the Queens and Concubines are the only
righteous persons in their own eyes: yet she that mourns for her sins, is the
only excellent creature in Christ's sight. And why is she so excellent? Even
because she presents her self before him not a righteous person but a sinner,
by her principles, and asks forgiveness of the same. The Queens and
Concubines are sinners in word, but by their principles they seek justification
in the Law, which shows, that in heart and opinion they are not sinners by
the Law. That they seek justification by the Law appears, in that they teach a
necessity of the Law: from which also flows another evil, which consists, in
destroying the right end of all obedience to the Law: which is, not to become
righteous and just before God, but that I may with a cheerful heart do good
unto my Neighbor.

But the Bride teaches no necessity of the Law, Understand this no necessity
only in the matter of justification.
therefore, by her principles she presents her self a sinner before God by
the Law: now because she separateth the Law from the judgment seat, therefore
she lays down the ground of all good works, and also shows the right end of
the Law. And therefore she is said to be, as it here follows, the only one of
her Mother.

The Mother is Jerusalem which is above the Mother of us all. Gal. 4.26.
By which is meant the universal Church. For Sarah the freewoman ( which Paul
is there treating of) was the Mother of Isaac, and a type of the New Testament:
which Isaac was born by promise. For Abraham had Isaac by Sarah, and he had
also Ishmael by Hagar his Concubine. Both these Sons were born in Abraham's
Family which was the visible Church of God. Isaac was born by promise: but
Ishmael was born without the promise of God.

In Abraham's Family then, there are the two Testaments, and a twofold Mother.
The one is Agar (figuring the Law) which (being without the promise of God)
gendereth all her Children unto bondage. The other is Sarah which is called the
freewoman, being a type of the true Church, which gives the Gospel freely,
without the works of the Law.

She that after this manner gendereth Children unto God, is the only one of her
Mother. The Concubine is without this praise, because she gendereth from Sina:
therefore is she under the curse and wrath of God. Now as Isaac is the heir
because he is born by promise; So the Children of the freewoman, are the only
Sons and heirs of God by Adoption. And as Ishmael was a servant, cast out of
Abraham's Family, and never to have any share in the inheritance with Isaac: So
the Law only makes men servants, subject to the wrath of God, and separateth
them from the glorious inheritance of the Saints for evermore.

Let us learn then so to understand the Gospel that we may become Children of
the freewoman, which thou can not do, unless thou renounce the bondwoman and
her Son. Therefore when thy Conscience is in distress, and thou feel thy
self to be in bondage, under the curse of the Law and wrath of God; and thou
beginnest to humble thy self before him, stop thine ears then from hearing the
Law, either for what thou have done, or what thou ought to have done, and
hearken only to the comfortable voice of the promise: which speaks nothing
but grace and mercy, to a poor Creature that feels his misery, and suffer the
same to make an impression within thee. Then shall thou have a certain feeling
within thy self, that although thou art defiled in thine own eyes, because thou
have broken thy bounds; yet that thou art undefiled in the sight of thy
beloved, in regard thou receivest grace and mercy from him.

-- The Daughters saw her, and blessed her, yea, the Queens and the Concubines,
and they praised her. To bless in Scripture sometimes signifies to justify,
Psalm. 32.1, 2.
so God blesses us when he justifies us. But a man may be said to justify
another, when he follows the practice of another. Thus Jerusalem is said to
justify her Sisters, Samaria, and Sodom, Eze. 16.
by following their abominations. And this I understand in another sense to be
the meaning here by the Daughters blessing, and the Queens and Concubines
praising the Bride. Which is, they followed the practice of the Bride. They do
not condemn, but bless or justify the practice of the Bride. But it may be said
in what? I answer, in seeking after a Christ. All manner of Sects and
Heretics, do seek after a Christ: but not after the true Christ. There is a
great difference in seeking after a Christ, and the Christ: A Savior all
people seek after, (every man makes unto himself some God or other. Exodus 1.32.
Make us Gods to go before us say the people to Aaron) but few there are, that
seek after the Savior. The Isralites sought after a Christ, when they sought
him in the works of the Law, but could never find him: Romans 9.32.
but the Gentiles which sought him by faith without the works of the Law, found
the Christ. And in this sense it is said, I was found of them that sought me
not.

Now if the Queens and Concubines do bless and praise themselves, (as in heart
they do) in seeking after a Christ; then they do also bless and praise the
Bride in seeking after the Christ.

Also if it be good in them, (as in their opinion it is good) to seek for a
Christ: then it is also good and very good in the bride, to seek for the
Christ, which is the true Christ indeed. They all agree in word, It is the duty
of all men to live in obedience to the Law, but to seek for a Christ in the Law
is to deny the Gospel.
that Jesus is the true Christ, but the Question is, how to seek him so as to
find him? The Queens and Concubines say, thou must live in an active conformity
to the Law of God, then shall thou have an evidence of thy faith in Christ: but
the Bride says, in the first place thou must seek him by faith without the
Law, otherwise thou must die in thy sins. For so says Christ to the Jews, ye
shall seek me, and not find me, Joh. 3.
and shall die in your sins.

This shows us the reason why the Daughters, the Queens and Concubines are so
earnest in pressing the works of the Law, why they require it of necessity
under the penalty of Everlasting damnation: and also why they are so rigid, so
severe, and look so loftily upon those poor Creatures, that have grossly broken
the Law, as if they themselves were made of purer metal, the reason is, because
they seek for a Christ in the Law.

And also it shows us, why the godly can submit, give place to all, do not
count themselves for a rule, for all men to conform unto, (in respect of their
outward carriage) but are willing to yield, to obey, not to separate themselves
from sinners, but to equalize themselves with the worst: to show kindness and
respect to all, to friends and foes, good and bad, worthy and unworthy, on
purpose to gain their hearts, and win their affections (if it be possible) to
love and embrace the Gospel, the reason is, because they have found thee
Christ, the true Messiah, without the Law.

Hence it comes to pass, that when the Daughters come to die, (for want of a
right understanding in this point) and sin begins to appear in the Conscience,
they know not how to fasten upon any one promise, nor to pray with any manner
of confidence, but are even forced to cry out with those that had crucified the
Lord of life, Acts 2.37.
men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? All this comes to pass, because
they have spent all their time in seeking for a Christ, a supposed, an
imaginary Christ, but none for the Christ, which is the true Christ indeed:
According to S. Paul, The Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have
attained to righteousness, even the righteousness of faith: but Israel which
followed after righteousness, Romans 9.30.
have not attained to the law of righteousness, because they sought it not by
faith, but in the works of the law.

Therefore seeing Christ says here, That the daughters blessed her; also that
the Queens and Concubines by their practice praised her, in seeking after a
Christ, which they sought only in the works of the law, and therefore they
could not find him: Let us learn rightly to seek after Christ by faith, that so
when we seek him, we may not seek him in vain.

VERSE X. Who is she that looks forth as the Morning? --
BY looking forth as the morning, Christ means the preaching of the Gospel,
which is the light of the World: for even as the Night is a time of darkness,
and while the darkness remains, no man can tell whether he goes: So before the
Gospel comes, there is nothing but abominable darkness, blindness and
blasphemy in the world. And also, as when the Morning comes, it expels
darkness and brings light; so the Gospel is that bright and morning Star,
that sends into the world the light of life. The Gospel does not find men
holy, but makes them holy; for the Morning does not find men light, but
brings the light, therefore the Gospel is not to be so preached to a people
as if they were all Believers before; only showing them how they should walk in
the world, but so taught that it may make Believers. Therefore Christ says, As
long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world: which could not be if
the Gospel did not teach us a certainty of our faith: for how can that be a
light unto me, that only requires certain things to be believed and done, if
it does not also show me a certain way how I may attain the same? This Light we
have by the Gospel, which makes a merry heart, and a joyful conscience.

Let us learn then, so to hear and understand the Gospel, that we may come
under this note of Admiration, and also that by the shining light of that
bright and Morning Star, we may learn to cast off the works of darkness, and to
put on the armor of light.

-- Fair as the Moon. -- The Church is likened to the Moon, because her
brightness is by a borrowed light, even from Christ the Sun of righteousness,
and Fountain of light: And this light she preaches in the World. And also,
because as the Moon she shines in the Night, and is created to rule the Night:
(For God set two great Lights in the Firmament of Heaven to give light upon the
earth, Genesis 1.
the greater light to rule the Day, and the lesser light to rule the night:)
For although the Moon has her defects and risings, sometimes increases, and
is sometimes more obscure, appearing in diverse forms and figures in the
Firmament; yet is she a Planet created to rule the Night. Therefore the Bride
is here likened to the Moon, because she is set to give light upon the Earth;
and because by the light that she gives, she is to rule the Night. She gives
not her own light upon the earth which she has naturally; but a borrowed light
which she receives from the Sun the Fountain of light, which light she
infuseth into the midst of darkness to expel the same: for although for a time
the light of the Moon may be hidden, yet as soon as she appears, the darkness
expels.

Now in that the light of this heavenly Planet is from the Sun the Fountain of
Light, and that the light which she receives is to rule the Night, it shows
us what the proper Office of the Gospel is, even to shine in our hearts, and to
comfort us in a dark condition. This light is the Nativity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who was born at Bethlem, which Nativity is given unto us by our hearing
and receiving the Gospel.

Therefore when thou feel thy self to be in darkness, and mightily oppressed
with the shadows of the Night, make have into thy Closet, and say; Lord, I am
in great affliction and sore distress, and have justly deserved by my sin to
perish in the darkness I am in; but seeing thou have ordained, that I shall
live before thee by a borrowed light, even by my Lord Jesus Christ who was born
at Bethlem, where the glad-tidings of great joy were published by the heavenly
Angel, grant therefore that I may believe the Message of the Angel, that so I
may receive the whole benefit. At the very first time thou beginnest to
practice after this manner, and feel thy heart any whit warmed with the
apprehension of the blessed Babe, that is the very day and hour that Christ is
born in thee: Then art thou become fair as the Moon, and yet thou have the Moon
under thy feet; forasmuch as all thy defects and obscurities, changes and
alterations, which made thee appear like the Moon in her weakest condition; yet
now being clothed with the Sun, thou despisest them all. When once thou
understandest these things aright, then may thou arise and shine by thy
borrowed light, and shall experimentally feel that of Christ, which thou thy
self wilt say, thou knew not before.

-- Clear as the Sun -- This is meant in respect of her Doctrine, which is said
to be clear as Crystal; for as the Sun is the Fountain of Light natural, so is
Christ the Fountain of Light spiritual, and Son of righteousness; which being
made known to the world, makes a great light. By this light every man that
believes, his Conscience is acquitted from the wrath of God, and also is made
to see the vanity of his ways, and is delivered from a vain mind. By this light
he perceives wherein the errors of all men lie, is made a Judge of all
things, yet he himself is judged of no man.

-- Terrible as an Army with Banners. This Doctrine is terrible to the blind
world, and to the whole kingdom of Satan, that it battereth all in pieces, even
as an Army does with Banners: For there is no Sect nor Heresy upon the face of
the earth, that can stand before the Gospel; let the case be rightly stated,
and the true state of the business stuck unto on both sides, and either he that
opposes it must fly, or else he must turn and be converted. Therefore it is
said of the Day of the Lord, that it shall burn as an Oven, Mal. 4.
and shall burn up all the proud of the earth, and leave neither root nor
branch. The Gospel plucketh up the root of all Heresies, and with the root the
branch; forasmuch as the principal matter whereupon all Heretics and Sects
build their confidence, is the very first thing which the Gospel destroys.
Therefore the Gospel is a most terrible Doctrine to all the wicked of the
earth: but most sweet and pleasant to all those that conform unto it. And
therefore Christ says, I came to send fire upon the earth, and what is my
desire but that it be kindled? Therefore no man must be afraid to maintain the
Gospel, for fear of the displeasure of men, (for that is to deny Christ, and
flatter all men into Hell) but every man according to his ability must
endeavor to defend the same.

VERSE XI. I went down into the Nut-garden to see the fruits of the Valley, and
to see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates budded.]
I Conceive these Words to be the Speech of the Church, and the meaning to be
this: By Garden understand, the public assembling together of the Faithful to
preach and hear the Word of God. Called the Nut-garden, Psalm 19.10 Esa. 40.4.
Song 4.13 Joh. 15.1.
because where the Word is rightly taught, there are sweet Kernels found. By
the Valley is meant, he that is made low in his own eyes, through the sense and
feeling of his sin. The Pomegranates are the particular Members of the Church.
The Vine is Christ: The flourishing of the Vine is, when the Righteousness of
Christ alone is taught for the raising up of dejected, afflicted Consciences;
and in that the Church went down to see the fruits of the Valley: The
flourishing of the Vine, and budding of the Pomegranates, it means, to learn
how to be afflicted for her sin, and how to become low in her own eyes, like
the Valley; and also how to be healed and exalted through the righteousness of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that she might rejoice in the fruits of the Ministry.
The sum of the whole Verse I conceive is this: That the main and principal
business that concerns those that are Preachers and Hearers of the Word of God,
in frequenting public Assemblies; is, to teach and to learn how to make and to
heal again tender and afflicted consciences. How to lay men low in their own
eyes, that they may lament in secret for their sins; and how to bind them up,
and heal them with the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ: For this cause
the Bride went down into the Garden to learn this heavenly Art and divine
Skill. Where this learning is not taught, little is said, and where this is not
heard, little is learned. If the conscience should be afflicted and not healed
again, it would fall into despair; or if a Plaster should be provided where
there is no sore, no man would esteem it, therefore the Church learneth both
these points.

And the reason why this is the principal thing, is, because this manner of
learning makes persons new, it makes men righteous before God, and also
righteous before men: It makes the Tree good, and his Fruit good; otherwise,
where it is not taught, it leaves the Tree evil, and his Fruit evil.

This shows us the reason, why (in many places) the labor of the Ministry is
so improfitable, why there is so little good done by Preaching, and so little
benefit received by hearing, but men go away from Church assemblies as cold and
blockish as ever they were, the reason is, because the drift and scope of their
manner of handling the word of God, tends not to the making and healing again
of tender and afflicted Consciences, but bends quite another way.

Hence they all call for doing of the Law, which neither makes the wound, nor
heals the sore. And from this also it comes to pass, that if any man comes
into the Garden and desires for a kernel, he finds but a shell, and in stead
of making valleys, setting up of Mountains: the reason is, because the true way
to life is hid; which to think on aright may cause a Lamentation, in that there
is so little understood in this point, which is the only thing and foundation
whereupon all our happiness does depend.

Let all men therefore learn to humble themselves for their wants in this
thing, and earnestly beg of God that his word may be purely taught. Where this
knowledge is not, little fruit appears in the Valley, the Vine flourishes not
there, but the miserable Conscience is shut up in Prison and darkness; but
where this spiritual skill is learned, there and there only, the Pomegranates
do bud, and a wonderful and sudden change is made, according as it here
follows.

VERSE XII. Or ever I was aware, my Soul made me like the Chariots of
Amminadib.
AMminadib as some think, was the chiefest Chariot driver, either in Solomon's
or in Pharaohs Chariot, and which had the most Famous Horses: which upon a
sudden would be at the place desired. This was the Churches condition as soon
as she came into the Nut Garden, she understood upon a sudden the right way to
her beloved: as soon as ever the nut was cracked she began to taste of the
kernel, and or ever she was aware, she became like the Chariots of Amminadib:
She met with that upon a sudden, which she had long desired for. And thus it
is with us when ever we come into the garden of the Lord where nuts are plenty,
where the vine flourishes aright; or ever we are aware, the Pomegranates begin
to bud, the fruits of the valley begin to appear within us, and we are settled
in peace and joy. And in that she says my Soul made me. It means the
understanding, which being illuminated and sanctified, fills the will and
affections with joy and Heavenly delight.

VERSE XIII. Return, return, O Shulamite, that we may look upon thee, return,
return: --
THese words are also the voice of the Church, and by the Shulamite she means
a party in the Church, which do dissent from her principles in matters of faith
and life: which she notwithstanding calls the Shulamite, (being a general
Title belonging to all in the visible Church) from Shulamith which is
peaceable, so called being under a Covenant of peace, and being the Daughter of
Jerusalem; Heb. 7.
or Shalem which signifies peace, and his Tabernacle is also said to be in
Shalem. To this Shulamite or contrary party in the Church; she says, return,
return, which words being so often doubled do show, that she is not only
confident of her own Doctrine and way, but also that she earnestly desires the
welfare of the Shulamite: and a more near and Spiritual communion with her, for
she says, return that we may look upon thee, that is, with delight and comfort,
for what inward and comfortable fellowship can there be, so long as there
remains a contrariety in points of Faith? Therefore it is the longing desire of
the Bride that they might dwell together in unity. But mark we what follows.

-- What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the Company of two Armies.
These words I conceive to be the voice of Christ, and it is as much as to say,
that which thou would see in the Shulamite, thou can not; for in the
Shulamite there are two Companies of Prophets, are Preachers of the word, and
they band themselves one against the other, like two Armies. And the difference
between them is, (the case being rightly stated) about this one Question. Which
is the proving principle in the Scriptures? Whether the Law must be expounded
by the Gospel, or the Gospel expounded so as it may accord with the Law?

The answering of this Question, The extent of the principles of all Heriticks,
Sects, and Seducers, being rightly examined they will be found to clash against
the Gospel in the Doctrine of justification.
ends all controversies in the Church. Forasmuch as all differences about
Religion do Center in this point. Hence it is, that what is affirmed by the one
overthrows the Law in the matter of justification: and what is affirmed by the
other, overthrows the Gospel in the same point. For when the Bride defines
faith to be a believing in Christ without works, (only because of God the
promiser) totally excluding the Law; the Shulamite (and all others that are
enemies to the Gospel) do define faith, to be a believing in Christ by reason
of works, totally excluding the Gospel.

Now to decide this controversy, it must be noted, that the first principles
(as is showed elsewhere in this Song) are proving, and therefore all other
Scriptures must be expounded by them. Song 3.10.
And that as the first principle in Divinity is the Scriptures, Hos. 13.4.
so the first principle in the Scriptures is the Gospel (or the first
Commandment which drives us to the Gospel, which comes all to one) for the
first word of all is, hear O Israel I am the Lord thy God: Mark. 12.29.
which words are the Gospel.

Wherein God binds himself to us, without any thing of ours: then follows the
first Commandment, This point rightly understood draws us into the practice
of all good works, because it unbindeth us from the rigor of the Law, and
fills the mind and Conscience with the love of God, which is the ground of
all obedience.
which prohibites our dependence upon any other righteousness but the
righteousness of God, set before us in the Gospel. And also forbids all such
definitions of faith, and all such interpretations of the Law, which strengthen
in man an opinion of the Law and works.

Now the Gospel being the first word and proving principle, therefore such a
sense must be found of all those Scriptures, that promise justification to man's
Active doing of the Law, as may be suitable to the Gospel, and mortify man's
opinion of the Law and works. But thou will say, how shall I do that? I answer,
doing in Divinity has (by reason of the Gospel) a new signification, which is
to justify God, and is not to be understood (when justification is promised to
it) of a moral doing, but of such a spiritual passive doing which is
incomprehensible to man's reason, whereby thou submittest to the wrath of the
Law, and flyest from it by faith to Christ, who creates in thee a new opinion
of the Law, which is to walk in the works thereof without dependence upon them:
which obedience Paul teaches thee to call, a serving in newness of Spirit. And
thus may thou easily give an answer to all opposers of the Gospel.

Moreover, this must also comfort us when we are in great tribulations, when we
are in doubt of his care and providence in respect of outward things, or any
way perplexed with the fear of Gods wrath: For then will the Law begin to work
in us after this manner, these things thou have done, and thou can not deny
it, and therefore thy judgment is just, and nothing shall appear before thine
eyes which way thy fears shall be prevented: now in this condition if thou
expoundest the Gospel according to the Law, then shall thy faith be
overwhelmed, and only the Law shall reign, but if thou have learned this Divine
and Heavenly Art to expound the Law by the Gospel, then shall the Law vanish
out of thy Conscience, and Christ alone shall rule and govern.

Therefore in such a condition as this, enter into thy closet and pray after
this manner, Lord, I am in great distress and know not what to do, and the
evils that I fear are justly coming upon me, by reason of my sin: and if I
should now expound the Gospel by the Law which is now upon me, then should I be
totally ruined without all hope of recovery, but seeing thou have taught me to
expound the Law by the Gospel, and not to make construction of things according
to sense and reason: but according to thy holy and gracious promise, teach me
to stick unto it so long as life shall last.

When once thou enterest into this exercise of thy faith thou will quickly
find the sweet of it, and wilt not care a rush for any affliction. Then shall
thou experimently feel in thy self, that although there be in the Shulamite, as
it were, the company of two armies, the flesh warring against the Spirit, and
the Spirit warring against the flesh, inwardly against the accusations and
terrors of the Law, and outwardly against false Prophets and Seducers: yet that
thou may easily overcome them by the Gospel. And also shall find, that this
Battle comes not to pass, from the principles of the Gospel: but from the
natures of men, who by reason of blindness and wilfulness will not understand
the same.

CHAP. VII.
VERSE I. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes Daughter! --
BY reason of the Churches Victory in this Battle, against Satan within, and
Satan without, Christ commends her again. And first her feet and shoes are
commended, she being so well shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace:
for then the feet are said to be beautiful, when they are well furnished with
the glad tidings of peace and good things, then do the feet stand upon holy
ground.

Now when the Gospel is made the standard to try all Doctrines by, and also the
only weapon to drive away the guilt of sin, and all fears out of the
Conscience: then does the Church obtain this Title, to be called the Princes
Daughter. Then is she looked upon no longer as coming from Adam, but as one who
by her new birth, or Nativity is the Daughter of a Prince, even fo the Lord
Jesus Christ. For so Christ is said to be the Everlasting Father and Prince of
peace, because by his word he generateth Children to himself, Psalm. 45.
to make them Princes in all the Earth.

For this cause also must we endeavor to receive the Gospel, that our feet may
be well shod, that our inward man may be made beautiful with the righteousness
of the Son of God: then shall we be looked upon no longer, (in respect of the
Conscience) as Children of Adam, but as Sons and Daughters of the living God.
For being separated from Adam, we are likewise separated from the curse that
lies upon Adam and all his posterity.

Therefore, this must teach us whither to go when we are disturbed either in
our inward, or outward peace: even to him that is the Prince of Peace: And also
what to do in case of wants, even to humble our selves upon our knees before
the Prince, who being the Kings Son, and heir of all things, can deny us
nothing who are become the Princes Daughter. We must not therefore be faithless
but believing, then shall we also perform good works joyfully and thankfully
before men: but if we forget or despise this Heavenly Title, then shall we
remain in our old natural condition under the curse; and the benefits of the
new Nativity shall be utterly lost.

-- The joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of a cunning Artificer.
Next to the feet the joints are here commended, which must be understood as
they are instruments to convey nourishment into the body. Col. 2.
For the body is said to increase by reason of the joints and bands, Ephesians. 4.
which minister nourishment one to another from every part: which causes it to
increase with the increasings of God.

The joints then are here commended in respect of their use and Office: which
is to minister nourishment from the head to the rest of the body. These joints
are the particular Members in the Church: which are like jewels, being
wonderful precious in the estimation of the owner. Where these joints do
rightly perform their Office, the body grows strong: (but where there is a
coldness and benumendness in the joints, the body grows lame, and little
agility will be seen,) and there also are the Bridegrooms jewels. Therefore all
those that live in this Exercise, and do supply the Office of the joints, must
believe that they are in high account in the sight of their beloved: which must
comfort and encourage every one in the body to perform his Office.

Next, these are said to be the work of the hands of a cunning Artificer. By
the Artificer I understand the Preacher of the Gospel, who is skilful in
forming or planting Christ in the Soul. Who is able through the holy Ghost to
teach a right division between the Law and Gospel in use and practice: that
Christ may rule in the Conscience, and the Law may govern the old man, which
cannot be done but by the hand of a cunning workman. This is he that Paul
speaks of, when he says a workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the
word of truth aright; where this skilful Artificer is, the Conscience is kept
pure and undefiled: but where there is daubing with untempered Mortar, the
Conscience is often out of joint. Therefore he that is the Artificer must be a
cunning workman, that knows how to break the stone in the heart by the hammer
of the Law: and also how to bind up the broken hearted by the Gospel without
the Law. Where this Artificer is, nourishment is conveyed from the head into
the body, and every part is supplied, as it were, by joints and bands to the
edifying of it self in love: there is nothing done but the framing and
fashioning of Jewels for the Lord, and the presenting (as it were) of a Royal
Diadem into the hands of God. Therefore it is said of the holy City the new
Jerusalem, that it is all of pure gold, and that it is garnished with all
manner of precious Stones: which is the business of the Jeweller to garnish the
City.

Therefore, seeing he is to work in Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, even
with the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, seeing he must break in pieces stony
hearts, and grind them as it were to powder, and also must set in order poor
distressed Consciences, that are altogether out of joint, that they may be
armed and fortified against so mighty an enemy as the Devil: he had need be a
cunning workman, a wise Master builder, that is able so to build as the
building may stand.

This is the Artificer spoken of here by the Bridegroom, whose Office is so to
Preach the Gospel, that nourishment may be conveyed from the head Christ Jesus,
into the Church which is his body: that so from joint to joint, every member
may be supplied, and the whole body may increase with the increasings of God.

VERSE II. Thy navel is like a round Goblet, which wants not liquor --
THe navel is that whereby she nourishes her Children in the Conscience, which
is the womb of the Church. For she is here set forth under the similitude of a
Childbearing woman, Gal. 5.1.
therefore she is said by Saint Paul to be the Mother of us all, and the
Ministers of the Church to be spiritual Fathers. And in that her navel is like
a round Goblet that is full, it shows her store of Heavenly provision to
nourish her Children in the womb: and that she is able to teach a right
conceaving of Christ in the mind and Conscience. The drift and scope of all her
teaching is, how to unbottom the Soul from it self, and to graft it into the
Lord Jesus Christ by faith: that so being delivered out of Prison, and set in
liberty and freedom, it may joyfully walk in the practice of all good works.
And in this she differs from the Mother-in-Law, or Bondwoman, who although
she teaches also a necessity of Holiness, calling it the one thing needful,
which all must have or else be damned, yet she teaches no other way to attain
unto it, but only by an earnest pressing and requiring of good works, and
thereupon she promises her Children the assurance of justification and
blessedness. She nourishes not her Children in the womb, but destroys the
conception; because she teaches not the true way to attain to that
Righteousness and Holiness which is required. For she endeavors first to
make the fruit good, and then the Tree good: but the true Mother first
endeavors to make the Tree good, and then the fruit good. This shows us
the reason, why there are so few Children in the Church of God that come to
good, why there is so much teaching and little the near: the reason is because
there are so few that are nourished in the womb, there are but few that can
teach a right conceiving of Christ in the mind and Conscience. Hence it comes
to pass, that there are so many that pertain to the Mother-in-Law, that wants
the Heavenly liquor to nourish her young, and so few that pertain to the true
Mother that has her goblet full. Therefore it comes to pass, that in stead of
generating Children unto glory, the glory flies away like a Bird, (that is to
say, the right understanding of the Gospel) from the Birth, Hos. 9.11.
from the Womb, and from the Conception.

Therefore all those that are spiritual Fathers and Mothers in the Church of
God, that would come under the Churches commendation in this place, must
endeavor to learn the true way of propagating the Gospel into the Conscience,
that it may be full of Heavenly liquor, where by it may kill the rigor of the
Law, and quench the fiery darts of the Devil: then shall the Babe be nourished
in the womb, otherwise Moses shall be conceived in stead of Christ. Learn we
therefore this Divine skill, then shall the afflicted Conscience be delivered
from the wrath of God; and shall learn how to kill sin in the habit and root,
and also how to walk before God in newness of Spirit.

-- Thy belly is like an heap of wheat, set about with Lillies. It is as much
as to say, thy belly is big with Child, which is said else where, Rev. 12.
to be a great wonder in Heaven, in that she being with Child cried travailing
in Birth, and pained to be delivered. Now to be in pain, to travail and to cry,
is to be under the apprehension of sin and the Law with all its effects: In
which hour of tribulation, the Church is in much pain, and cries for
deliverance, that is, to God for help and succor, and sticks to him by
faith, persuading her self that Christ has a fellow feeling of all her
miseries, and is nearly touched with the same. When after this manner faith
works against the tribulations which we feel, and our hearts begin to be
warmed with the same: then is our deliverance come, then do we rejoice like a
woman that is delivered of her Child, for joy that a man is born into the
world, that is, for joy that Christ is born in the Conscience.

Now her belly is not only big, but is also likened to an heap of Wheat,
because by the Preaching of the Cross she brings forth Christ into the world,
who is the bread of life, and gives life to the world. And is set about with
Lillies, because all the Lillies of Christ do feed upon Christ, who is the
living bread which came down from Heaven: and also upon that living water which
flows out of the belly of the Spouse, according to Christ's own words, he that
believes in me, Joh. 7.
out of his belly shall flow Rivers of water of life.

This must teach us what to do when we are hungry, even to seek after the
living bread, which being the bread of life, will feed us and fill us, with
Everlasting comfort. Now that we may taste of the bread, we must first find the
heap of Wheat, which lies hid in the Churches belly, which we may easily do,
if we observe where the Lillies be, for there is the heap where the Lillies are
set about. Mark we then where the Lillies grow, and where they are clothed and
arrayed, and made so glorious, for there is the heap of Wheat, there is the
living bread that came down from Heaven, and gives life unto the World, and
also the living water, which whosoever drinks thereof, shall live for ever,
and never be more a thirst.

VERSE IV. Thy neck is as a Tower of Jvory --
THe breasts are spoken of in Song 4. and 5. By the neck understand strength,
as also in Song 4th, which strength of the Church lies in her faith. 2 Cor.
9.17. 1 King. 7.7.
And is likened to a Tower or Throne of Jvory, which is likely to be the Throne
of Jvory which King Solomon made to sit in Judgment to Judge the people. For the
King made a porch for the Throne where he might Judge, which was called the
porch of Judgment. So that Solomon in his Throne did not sit to be Judged, but
to Judge.

Now in that Faith is like the Throne wherein King Solomon sat to Judge, it
shows that a Christian man is in respect of his faith, Charity has no place
in matters of the first Table: but God and his word must only be stuck unto.
a Lord and Judge of all, and servant to none. He ought not to obey or give
place to any, contrary to the rules of his faith: For King Solomon was to Judge
and to determine, and not to give place. Therefore, the judgment of faith must
conclude and determine all things, (it being the judgment of God, Christ, and
the holy Ghost) and not a tittle of it must be diminished. A man must rather
suffer his life to be taken from him than the glory of God to be lost. Saint
Paul in a point of faith when the truth of the Gospel was brought in Question,
would not give place to the false brethren, no not for an hour. Therefore no
man must think, Gal. 2.5.
when he hears the righteousness of the Law to be preferred above the
righteousness of faith, that he may sit still and be silent, as though all were
well: for that is not to Judge, but to suffer the Gospel to be lost.

In matters of the second Table, In matters of the second Table Charity has
the preheminency.
a man is to be a servant to all, there Charity must have the pre-eminence
above faith: there faith must suffer it self to give place to Charity, it must
submit, become pliant and patient toward all, not requiring himself to be
counted for a rule, whereunto all men must submit, but to think modestly of
himself: to permit, to take in good part, to obey, to give place, to do and
suffer all things, as he shall see it profitable for the winning of his
Neighbor to the Gospel. An example hereof see in St. 1 Cor. 11.19. Note from
hence the temper of St. Paul 's Spirit, toward those of whom he had any hopes,
and what his carriage was to win them to Christ.
Paul, who although he was free from all men (being a Lord and Judge in respect
of his faith) yet he made himself a servant to all, in respect of his Charity.
To the Jews he became as a Jew, to them that were under the Law, as under the
Law, that he might gain them to the faith: to them that were without Law, as
without Law, that he might win them to Christ. For this I do (as there he
says) for the Gospels sake. But when the matter in Question is concerning
Everlasting Salvation, or Everlasting Damnation, a man is to be so certain of
his faith, and the foundation upon which he builds, that he is to give place
to none, he is not to be in subjection for an hour. Then is the neck under the
commendation here, of King Solomon's Tower, or Throne of Jvory. The next thing
commended are the Eyes of the Church.

-- Thine eyes are like the Fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gates of Bethrabbim:
-- Heshbon was a City where Sihon King of the Amorites sometime dwelt. The
fish-pools in Heshbon were certain ponds where fish were wont to breed, Number.
21.26.
without which fish-pools the fry could not be preserved. The gates of
Bethrabbim, were in a certain place (as is probable) near unto the Kings
fish-pools, and also the way unto the fish-pools: and frequented by many that
did desire to see the pools, or to have any taste of the Kings fish. So that if
any one did desire to fish there, or to taste of the fish that were bred in
those pools: he must come in by the gates of Bethrabbim.

The meaning of the similitude I conceive to be this. The fish-pools are the
waters of life, the fish that are bred in those pools are men, the Fishers in
those pools are the Ministers of the Gospel, called by our Savior Fishers of
men: Heshbon being a City of the Amorites, where the Law was not given,
signifies the free-mother, which is barren in the account of the world, but
gendereth many Children unto God. The eyes which are like these fish-pools, are
the eyes of the understanding, which being enlightened in the knowledge of the
Gospel, and how to apply it, do breed many a good fish. By the gates of
Bethrabbim, or way to the fishpools, understand the new and living way to the
waters of life: which being rightly opened, the fish-pools are well stored with
many a good fish, but if not, few fish shall come into the Net, and the
fish-pools shall be but of little use.

This matter is plainly expressed in the prophecy of Ezekiel, Eze. 47.8.9.
where the waters of the Sanctuary are said to go down into the desert, and
that every thing that lives, which moves, whithersoever the river shall come,
shall live. And that there shall be a very great multitude of fish because
these waters shall come thither. From whence it is plain, that seeing the
waters of the Sanctuary run down into the desert, that the fish-pool is not
made in the fruitful, but in the barren and Solitary place; which must comfort
every poor dejected Soul that is sensible of his own barrenness, and encourage
him to drink of the living water that he may live for ever. For thither the
River shall run, and there the fish shall breed, and increase to a multitude,
by reason of the coming of the waters. Let every one then that feels his
misery, rejoice and be glad, and clap his hands for joy, and not be an enemy to
himself in stopping up the passage of the River, and in striving to turn it
over the fruitful Land, where it can never run, but let him drink sweetly of
the Heavenly fish-pool, then shall his eyes be like the fish-pools in Heshbon,
where the fry shall be preserved, and the ponds stored.

Also this teaches all those that are fishers, that intend to cast in their
Nets, so as to catch men, to learn rightly to open the gates of Bathrabbim, the
new and living way to life; which cannot be done, unless they go to Christ for
the key, who gives the same, to those whom he intends shall be fishers of
men. Where those gates are not opened, the way to the fish-pools can never be
found.

Some pour the waters of life into the fruitful Soil only, which is, not only
to shut themselves out of the Kingdom of Heaven, but also others. For all their
labor is to make men holy by the Law: which is but to leave them under the
curse and condemnation of the Law. These instead of preserving the full fry of
fish, do dam up the pools, and where there are no fish-pools there can be no
fish, and where there be no fish beed, all the labor in making the ponds is
utterly lost. So that for want of a right bait for the fish to nibble at, those
that in likelihood might have bred good fish, do in the end decay and come to
nothing.

And as the way to the fish-pools must be opened, so the right time must be
observed when to cast in the Net, which must not be until Christ calls: Some
run before they are sent, these fish all night with the disciples, but catch
nothing; Joh. 21.
but when Christ bid them cast in their Nets, they caught a multitude of fish.
When Christ committed the uncircumcision to Paul, and the circumcision to
Peter, a mighty work was wrought by them: but when men run before they are
called, all their labor in fishing is lost.

Others there are that are able fishers, but they forsake their own fish-pools,
where Christ bids them fish, and run to other ponds, and cast in their Nets for
another sort of fish: these are like Jonah, who when God sent him to Nineveh,
ran to Tarshish, and what followed this? Because he refused to fish where God
sent him, therefore God provided a fish at length to catch him and swallow him
up. To conclude all, let all men that are Ministers in the Church of God,
endeavor in the fear of Gods name, to be so well enlightened in the knowledge of
the Gospel: that they may rightly perform their Office, then shall they be
see-ers indeed, and come under this commendation in the Text, thine eyes are
like the fish-pools in Heshbon.

-- Thy nose is as the Tower of Lebanon, looking toward Damascus. The nose is
the instrument of smelling, which by reason of its loftiness against her
spiritual Enemies, (for which cause this expression is often used) is likened
to the Tower of Lebanon which Solomon Built. Which Tower is called the House of
the Forest of Lebanon, 1 Kin. 7.2.
which House he furnished with Targets and Shields to make it strong against
the Enemy: 1 Kin. 1^.17.
and it was set upon Cedar Pillars, and there was light against light, in the
rows of Pillars, which (as it is probable) were to give light toward Damascus:
Esa. 7.
which was the chief City in Syria, as Esai shows, the head of Syria is
Damascus, which people were always Enemies to the Children of Israel.

Now at those lights the watchmen might perceive what Enemies were at any time
coming against the people of Israel.

Now in that the nose of the Church is likened to this goodly Tower, it shows
the courage and also care of the Bride, for the preservation of her self, and
all her Children against her Spiritual Enemies. It smells beforehand the
subtilties of Satan, and armeth her self accordingly.

She is not much daunted by those that live in Damascus, but has a kind of
holy pride against all her adversaries: and when she is at the worst, yet then
she scenteth that mercy and deliverance which is prepared for her by the Gospel.

VERSE V. Thine Head upon thee is like Carmel; and the hair of thine Head like
purple: --
CArmel was a Mountain whither Eliah (by Commandment from the King) sent for
the false Prophets and slew them; 1 Kin. 18.9.
the Prophets of Baal were four Hundred, and the Prophets of the Groves four
Hundred and fifty. And it was to this end and purpose, that the people might be
convicted concerning the knowledge and worship of the true God: where an Altar
was to be Built, and Sacrifices provided, but no Fire put under, and the God
that answered by Fire, was to be acknowledged for the true God, which was
answered by the consuming of Eliahs Sacrifice. Therefore Eliah brought the
false Prophets down to the brook Cishon and slew them there.

Also Carmel was a place where Nabal did inhabit, Sam. 25.2. Esa. 33.9. Esa.
35.
which place was very fruitful, and is oftentimes spoken of in Scripture by way
of excellency for fruitfulness. Now in that the Churches head is likened to
Carmel, it shows that as she is fruitful in faith and all good works: so also
in conceiving the right way for the overthrowing the Doctrine of all false
Prophets, which none can do but only the Bride of Christ. For although many
spend much time about controversies in Religion, yet for want of stating the
case aright, the only matter in difference, (many times) never comes in
Question, and all the work remains to be done. The head of such is not like
unto Carmel the fruitful Mountain: but rather like unto the Mountains of Gilboa
barren and unfruitful. But herein the Churches head is commended, and the way
how she attaineth to this Heavenly skill, is set down in the next words.

-- The King is held in the Galleries. Galleries are certain walks that are
often builded by Princes, and great men, into which Galleries they use to
retire themselves, when then intend to meditate, or discourse about matters of
weight. From which custom I conceive the word Galleries is here borrowed, and
the meaning to be this, to show the way that the spouse of Christ walks in
instating, and handling of controversies: for the confuting of false opinions
which is, She holds fast the King in the Galleries. The meaning is, She
allows of no contention in the Church, unless it be about a matter that
concerns Christ her King: If the point in difference seem to be ere so great,
The Church avoideth vain janglings about the Law and her own supposed works.
and the contention ever so sharp, yet if it touch not against the Gospel, she
medleth not in it: and on the contrary, if it seem to be ever so small a matter
in difference, if it clasheth but in the least title against the Gospel, she
then armeth her self by the Gospel to meet her adversary in the field.

Now herein lies the fruitfulness of the Churches head in discerning this
thing, in that she makes enquiry into the proposition holden by the contrary
party, and the extent of it: whither directly or by consequent, it dasheth
against the Kingdom of Christ, that so she may arm her self accordingly. So
that she enters not in to controversy unless it be to preserve the Gospel:
neither fights she against any false opinion, with any other weapon, but the
Gospel, and thus she holds the King in the Galleries.

The same Galleries must we also walk in, when we meddle with controversies. No
jangling nor quarrelling, (much less separation) must be made about the Law,
Tit. 3.9.
forasmuch as every man is faulty in respect of his works, therefore every man
must bear, submit, and pray for another: and also reprove in love and
gentleness, thereby to win men (if possible) to faith in Christ: but if any man
shall hold any Doctrine which either directly or by consequence, dasheth
against the Gospel, Jude 1.
no man must bear it, but endeavor by the Gospel to overthrow it.

When the Question is not about fundamentals, let every man keep his faith to
himself, that no division be made in the Church: Romans 14.
have thou faith have it to thy self before God, otherwise there will be no end
of disputing in the Church, but if the matter in Question, be any way against
faith in Christ, Every man must be strong to defend the Gospel.
then must every man's mouth be open. This is to hold the King in the Galleries:
which Galleries, if they had been walked in for Twenty years past, we had not
seen the days which now we have seen.

The false Prophetess walks in other Galleries in meddling with controversies.
She raises contentions, and many vain janglings, not about faith in Christ,
but about the Law, That is about an opinion of her supposed works, which
because she priceth so high, therefore they are naught.
which shows, that she has no small opinion of her self, but that she
prizeth her own sinful works, far beyond the righteousness of Christ, else why
does she separate from Church assemblies, accounting all men to be
Antichristian, if they be wanting (only) in the works of the Law? There is a
mixed multitude, the Minister is not rightly called, and many other things are
done, or not done which (as she supposes) are besides the rule, but what of
all this? Somethings were ever wanting in men, and ever will be, so long as the
Church is on this side perfection.

Now because she forsakes the Church only for her blemishes, not because faith
is not Preached, but in that works are wanting: therefore she holds not the
King in the Galleries, but prefers Moses before Christ. And what follows
all, but only this because she prizeth the sinful works of men, far beyond the
gifts of God, and righteousness of Christ: therefore she condemns the Gospel,
and is condemned by the Gospel. According to the saying of our Savior, he that
believes not is condemned already.

This way must we also walk in, in pacifying and quieting the afflicted
Consciences, even to hold the King in the Galleries: For if when the Conscience
is in distress, the Law be then acknowledged to be the Lord, then shall it be
shut up fast in prison and bondage, then shall it be held under the Law,
whereby it is accused and condemned, this is to hold Moses in the Galleries,
not the King.

Therefore Moses the servant, must be cast out of the afflicted Conscience, by
faith in Christ: and not suffered to lodge in the Chamber with his Lord. Let us
learn therefore to behold by faith, Moses with his Sepulcher to be vanished
away in respect of the Conscience: that Christ with his Righteousness may rule
and reign. Thus must we hold fast Christ our King: against all Enemies without
and within.

Now in that the Churches hair is commended, it means believers, (as is
showed elsewhere) and by purple their clothing, showing that all those that are
fruitful in this Divine and Heavenly Art, are clothed in purple, (even with the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ) which is a Princely Robe. For they are
those that do overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of his
Testimony.

VERSE VI. How fair, and pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!
THis is a pashionate speech of Christ, being (as it were) overcome with the
delights of his Church, in excercising her self in the points aforesaid.
Therefore he pronounces her fair and pleasant, with admiration.

VERSE VII. This thy Statute is like unto a Palm Tree, and thy breasts like
clusters.
CHrist having before commended his spouse in respect of the parts and features
of the body, under diverse and sundry similitudes: here he sets forth her
full growth under the similitude of the Palm Tree, concerning which Tree there
are diverse things written by Historians.

As first, that they grow in Couples, Male and Female, and are full of seed,
but the Female is only fruitful, yet not except growing by the Male. And also,
that it is of this nature, that although never so huge and pondrous a weight be
put upon it, yet never to yield to the burden, but still to resist the
Heaviness thereof: and to endeavor the more to lift and raise it self upward.

Now the Stature of the Bride being likened to the Palm Tree, it shows what
the nature of faith is in all the godly; even to lift it self upwards, in the
amidst of the greatest fears and perplexities, and notwithstanding all burdens
and waights yet still to grow through them all. Therefore in Rev. 7.9. Those
that had gotten the victory over Satan and the world by faith in Christ;
appeared in white Robes and Palm-branches in their hands, as tokens of joy and
victory.

And this is also promised in the Psalms, Psalm. 92.12.
that the Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree. There is no doubt but
every Christian shall be put to the trial, by having a heavy weight laid upon
him at some time or other in his life: which weight according to the flesh and
reason, shall seem to press him down to the very ground, so that in appearance
he shall never be able to grow upright again. Therefore we find, that in the
description of the Temple, there were round about the House figures of
Cherubims and Palm Trees, Eze. 41.18.
where a Palm Tree was between a Cherub and a Cherub: and every Cherubim had
two faces, the face of a man, and the face of a Lion, the face of a man was
toward the Palm Tree on the one side, and the face of a Lion toward the
Palm Tree on the other side.

This face of a Lion is doubtless Satan, who has his face always toward the
Palm Tree, using all means to crush it down, by casting heavy weights and
burdens upon it: but the face of a man, is the loving countenance of our Lord
Jesus Christ clothed in our humanity, which always looks upon us to comfort and
strengthen us, against all the assaults and Temptations of the Devil.

Therefore in such conditions we must live by faith, and pray without ceasing,
for as it is sure and certain that the face of our Lord Jesus Christ, is
toward us upon the one side, by whose loving countenance we shall be sure of
the Victory.

So is it also as certain, that the face of the Lion is upon us on the other
side, even Satan the roaring Lion that waits continually to devour us.

Therefore must we continually watch and pray, and look unto Christ by faith,
for (as was said before) the Palm Tree grows not to be fruitful except it
grow by the Male: therefore let us hold fast our head and Husband the Lord
Jesus Christ, that we may be fruitful to Eternal life.

Then shall the breasts of consolation be full, like clusters, which when we
have the true use thereof, shall wonderfully comfort and strengthen us, against
all the heavy weights and burdens that Satan shall cast upon us.

VERSE VIII. I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the
boughs thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the
smell of thy Nose like Apples.
THe Palm Tree as was said before, is the Church, and the boughs are the
Children of the Church.

Now here it is showed how they grow to be so fruitful, it is because Christ
takes hold first, therefore the breasts are full of the Wine of consolation,
and the nose smells variety of fruit in the word of God. The sum of these
words is this.

That the principal means for the Children of the Church to be filled with
variety of excellent fruits, is to suffer the Lord Jesus Christ to take hold of
them first. To suffer him to begin and to perfect his own work, by his own
means, and in his own way.

And the reason is, because God has decreed that all men that shall ever be
made holy and fruitful, shall have it his way. Therefore Christ says here, I
said, I will take hold, and my word shall stand. Therefore the Palm Tree and
all his branches shall be made fruitful his way, or not at all.

Which shows us the reason, why there is so much unfruitfulness amongst the
Children of the Church, why men remain so blind in their understandings, so
perverse in their wills and affections, and grow to so little stature in
Christianity: the reason is, because they will not suffer the Lord Christ Jesus
to begin with them first, to take hold and begin his own work in his own way.
Nothing will serve the turn, unless they themselves begin first, unless they
can bring something of their own whereby to deserve his favor.

Hence it comes to pass, that in stead of being filled with Clusters of the
Vine which yield the Wine of Consolation, and of scenting that variety of
fruit, which grows in the Orchard of the Lord: they bring forth sour grapes,
wild fruits, such as are fit for nothing but to be cast away.

From this ground also it comes to pass, that so many forsake the Church of
God, and run some to one Sect, and some to another until they have quite lost
themselves and run to nothing; the reason is because they will not suffer
Christ to begin, but they themselves must take hold first: therefore they
forsake the way where he begins, the door by which he enters, the gate by which
he opens Everlasting life to Men; and every man chooses, his own way, his
own work, his own rule, hoping thereby to please God, so as to receive
something from him as large as life Eternal.

And from hence also proceeds another evil, which is, that when great crosses
and tribulations come, which is the way by which God does use to govern his
Church: no man will give him so much honor as to confess that it is the Lord
that takes hold upon him, but instead thereof we fall to quarrelling, and
contending, with second causes, with those instruments by which God does
afflict us and govern us; and in so doing we quarrel and contend against the
Lord.

So that when God provides the cross on purpose, to humble us and drive us into
the exercise of our faith, that we might learn experimentally to know him to
be our God, in creating ways and means for our deliverance, which we never
understood: we will by no means suffer him to begin with us, or lay hold on us,
we humble not our selves before him, seek not, nor submit unto him, but rather
seek how to revenge our selves upon him. Therefore it is just with the Lord
(seeing we will not suffer him to take hold upon us, to enter within us, and
open Everlasting life unto us) that when death, judgment, the Law, Conscience,
the Devil, and Hell, do begin to stare in our faces, that we should be forsaken
of him and left, in a most desperate and sad condition.

Therefore let us suffer Christ to go up to the Palm Tree and take hold of the
boughs thereof: which he first does visibly, when we are Baptized in his name.
Secondly, invisibly, when he gives us the Holy Ghost, who teaches us to
understand our Baptism: which leads us to submit to the condemnation of the
Law, which is justly due unto us, and to fly to Christ by faith, and walk in
newness of Spirit. But if we put a false construction upon our Baptism, and
think that Christ does not begin with us, and own us thereby: we then suffer
him not to take hold on the boughs, but forsake the visible foundation of our
faith.

Baptism is like the Pillar of Stone, between Laban and Jacob, which was a
witness between them, that neither of them must pass beyond that pillar toward
the other for hurt.

Therefore it witnesses unto us, that God bears us no grudg, which witness
he cannot deny, if we stick unto it by faith: then shall we love, fear, and
obey him, and flourish like the Palm Tree; but if we forsake his witness, and
break Covenant with him, then will God be constrained to enter into judgment
with us, then shall we never feel the comfort of the breast, the wine of
consolation, neither shall our nose ever smell that variety of excellent fruit,
which otherwise we might have found in the word of God.

VERSE IX. And the roof of thy mouth like the best Wine, for my beloved, that
goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak.
THis is another effect that follows, from the understanding of the former
point, it causes the roof of the mouth or palate to be like the best wine.
There is a twofold use of the palate, which is to taste meat for ones own use,
and it is also the instrument of speech: both which are here meant.

For first of all, as soon as the understanding is rightly enlightened in the
way how the Palmtree grows so strong and tall: the palate can taste, nor relish
no other wine, that is, it cannot endure the prescribing of any other way to
faith and Holiness, but by the righteousness of Christ. Those that prescribe
any other way, never tasted one cup of the best Wine.

This is that which Christ says, goes down sweetly, and that it is for his
beloved: it is not for strangers to taste of, but the family of God, that are
willing to hear and understand the way to the Tree of life.

Such cannot endure to spend money for that which is not bread, to have that
dressed and set upon the Table which will not satisfy; but are only delighted
with the Wine that is provided at wisdoms feast.

This is the first use of the palate. And the next is, it is the instrument of
speech, which causes an utterance of things Divine. For when once the roof of
the mouth has tasted the Wine of consolation for its own use, it communicates
the same also unto others, which goes down sweetly, as soon as the goodness of
it is once known: and also causes the lips of those that are asleep to speak.
That even as Wine makes men Talkative, so does this Heavenly liquor of
consolation, cause those that drink well thereof: to utter forth the secret and
wonderful Mysteries of God.

Now from what has been spoken by the Bridegroom, in this Chapter in the
commendation of the Bride; she learneth to make application of his love, as
appears in the following words.

VERSE X. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
IN which words are set down the Conclusion the Bride makes from the
commendation of her beloved mentioned before. Which conclusion is this. I am my
beloveds. And the cause of her yielding her self thus unto him is, from the
confidence she has of his affection to her, which is set down in the words
next following, his desire is toward me.

But how comes the Church to this confidence?

I answer, by the word of God, for being Baptized in his name, and in learning
the use of her Baptism: She perceives by faith that her person is accepted,
and this confidence must we all learn to have in Christ, even that his desire
is to us, and his heart upon us.

Now this is a wonderful thing, that the desire of the son of God, should be
after a poor miserable sinner that is his Enemy: yet this is the truth she here
believes, and it is also written for us that we might believe.

For mark it, The Church perceiving Christ to peep after her who is despised in
her own eyes: and commend her so much, yields her self wholly unto him, and so
the match is made between Christ and the Soul.
in all the foregoing Verses in this Chapter, Christ sets forth the beauty
of her person, by which she finds his desire is after her: for which very
reason she yields her self to him and says, I am my beloveds, and so the
match is made. From all which we see this clear.

That the main matter, which makes up the match, and knits the knot, between
Christ and the Soul: is when we find by the word of God that Christ is willing
to take us with nothing, and that we are willing to cast our selves upon him on
the same terms.

And the reason is, because nothing else is required in our Marriage with
Christ, but a consent of both parties: which consent there is not until we
agree upon terms.

Which informs us in the Reason, why there are so few that are married to
Christ, and so many to Antichrist, the reason is, because they agree not upon
terms. Christ uses all art and skill, that is possible for a lover to use, to
draw people to himself: and brings the matter so near to ones view, that a
man would imagine the contract were made, yet let the case be but rightly
stated, and the propositions on both sides rightly looked into: and a man shall
find as much difference in the terms, as there is between light and darkness.
The terms upon Christ's side being to take us with nothing, or not at all: but
the terms on the other side, are to bring a sufficient portion, or else not to
marry as yet. This is a despising to marry with Christ who is raised from the
dead to deliver us from our sins: and to live in Captivity under our first
husband the Law, and to die for ever in our sins.

We must therefore learn, to submit our selves to Christ and to yield to his
own terms. Christ will not be brought to our terms. Our terms are to bring a
portion with us, but Christ says all that we have is worth nothing: which
difference is very great.

Therefore he requires nothing of us, but that we steadfastly believe and
confess this one thing, that although we are condemned by the Law, being poor
miserable and wretched Sinners: yet that his desire is toward us. Therefore
must we learn to confess our sins before him with confidence that he will
forgive us; and with the Bride to believe, that his desire is toward me, that
he came down from Heaven for me, and satisfied the wrath of God for me.

Thus must we with the Bride, first endeavor to find, that we are objects of
Christ's desire, and next of all, to confess, by our consenting to his choice,
that we are his: then shall we not only attain, to true Righteousness and
blessedness but also to an assurance of the same.

VERSE XI. Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us lodge in
the Villages.
THe Church being espoused to Christ, through the great affection of her
beloved, and also having found the new and living way how to attain this
Heavenly knowledge, to be assured thereof: desires (after the manner of one
that is espoused or contracted in marriage) to go forth into the Fields, that
her beloved may be known. By which she means Gods Fields, where Gods
Husbandry and his tillage is, and also where the true and living way to life,
is not yet rightly understood: thither she desires to go with her beloved,
therefore she says, let us lodge there, by which she means her Doctrine, that
the Husbandry of God may go forward, and that Christ may come to some more
esteem amongst them.

And by Villages she means, such as where Christ and his Apostles went up and
down Preaching the Gospel. By which we see, that the Churches care is not only
to receive the Gospel, but also to plant the Gospel, and this she cannot do
without her beloved; therefore she takes Christ with her. Those that go forth
into the Vineyard without the Beloved may compel men to labor and toil, to
bear the burden and heat of the day: but they can never gather a sheaf into
Gods barn.

And this must be the care of every one in his place, to go forth with Christ
into the Fields, and help to set forwards the Husbandry of God, that a good
foundation may be laid for harvest: to lodge his Doctrine in the Villages, that
so the seeds of Eternal life being sown in the minds of men, there may be hopes
of a joyful crop.

There must not be only plowing in Gods field, but also sowing. For how can any
man expect a crop at harvest, if he shall only Plow, and break the clods, and
make plain the face of the Earth, if he never sow the seed? Now the sower is
the son of man, not Moses, but Christ. Which ploweth up the fallow ground of
the heart by the condemning power of the Law: and then it sows the immortal
seed of the word into the distressed mind.

Moses neither sows the seed, Moses says do it and live, but break it and
die: which neither ploweth nor sows: therefore without Christ Moses is a
destroyer: because the promise being made to doing, all men naturally think to
obtain it that way; But Christ says thou have sinned and art deprived of the
glory of God: and calls us to believe the same, and to fly to himself by
faith and confession.
nor yet ploweth up the fallow ground: but only commands it to grow, and if
it prosper, promises a goodly Harvest. Those that pertain to the Kingdom of
Moses, do require the works of the Law to be done; and then promise Eternal
life to the doers, but touch it not with the least of their fingers. These
plant nothing in Gods field but ( only that which which was there before they
nourish) an opinion of themselves; which nothing changes the nature of the
ground, which is a most miserable evil, and marreth all good Husbandry in the
Church of God.

Therefore Moses without a Mediator serves not, but only to bridle the outward
man and to keep it in fear: but in the hand of a Mediator, that is to say
Christ, is of rare an Excellent use, First to reveal sin to the Conscience that
it may be driven to Christ: next it opens a light unto us to teach us how to
serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter.

VERSE XII. Let us get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine
flourish, whether the tender grapes appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth:
there will I give thee my loves.
THis Verse sets forth the care and diligence of the Church in looking to
those that were planted in it. Where by Vineyards she means, Esa. 1.
those particular congregations where the word is taught. And by the Vine
Christ. And by the tender grape, Joh. 15.
the Conscience made tender by the word of God. And by the budding of the
Pomegranate, the growth of the Church in Heavenly Doctrine, and in showing
forth all good works before men. And in that she says, let us go up early to
the Vineyards, it means before false Teachers creep in and spoil the fruit.
For as soon as the Fox comes he falls upon the Vine, he endeavors to
spoil Christ of his name and glory.

Therefore to prevent this, she says, let us get up to the Vineyards, meaning
the principal members in the Church, both in the Magistracy and Ministry: whose
care ought to be, that the Church be rightly instructed in sound Doctrine, and
that order be taken with those that are perverters of the Gospel. There she
says, I will give thee my loves, that is, in so doing, I will testify my loves
unto thee; meaning to Christ: She speaks in the plural number, because it is
more then a bare single love, it being not only to Christ, but also to his
Members. The sum of all is this.

That it is a very great Testimony of love to God, and a principal means in
causing the Lords Vineyard to become fruitful, when an early care is taken, by
the principal Members in the Church; that the word be purely taught, and that
the mouths of false Teachers be stopped.

If the word be not rightly taught, no man's Conscience can be edified: if the
mouths of seducers be not shut Satan will quickly pervert the Gospel of Christ.
Either of these wants hinders the fruitsulness of the Vineyard; and in a
manner lays it wast. Such therefore must be charged by Timothy, that they
Preach no other Doctrine: or else by Titus their mouths must be stopped.

Want of care in this thing betimes, spoileth the flourishing of the Vine, the
budding of the Pomegranate: neither does the tender grape hardly every appear.

Care therefore must be taken in this, that no person be suffered in the
Vineyard, that is a Seducer: nor set to work in the Vineyard, unless he be a
cunning Artificer, a man of skill, that is able to succor the tender grape,
and to refresh the Pomegranate, that his buds may shoot forth and appear.

This is a work highly acceptable to the Father, who is the great Husbandman,
and to the son who is the Archbishop of his Church; and therefore I humble
conceive it ought to be the care of every Bishop.

If any man offend in his life, the Magistrate is to punish him, but if any man
go about to pervert the Gospel: Paul and Barnabas must go up to Jerusalem about
the Question, where should always be some that are able to hear and determine
the same.

Whatsoever care is taken, or ought to be taken, about matters of Discipline,
yet, it is most certain, that the main, and principal thing to be cared for,
and looked after, is matter of Doctrine: that men's Consciences be rightly
instructed, otherwise no man can be saved.

What misery is come upon us, for many years past, for want of this care, we
have seen by woeful experience.

VERSE XIII. The Mandrakes give a smell, at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, both new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved!
THese are the words of Christ, which are of the nature of a promise to supply
his Church with the variety of all pleasant fruits.

And first of all, he speaks of the sweetness of the Mandrakes, of which we
read in Genesis 30.14. which were found by Reuben in the time of Wheat Harvest.

All that I gather from it is this. Reuben was the first born son of Jacob:
which first born son was a type of Christ, the first born among many brethren.

Now the Mandrakes being brought by Reuben to his Mother Leah, (which were very
delightful as it appears by Rachel) it shows unto us the Excellency of the
fruits that come to us by Christ who is the first begotten of the dead: which
are the fruits of his Death and Resurrection, manifested by the Preaching of
the Gospel. Which are said to be pleasant Fruits, meaning to the tender
afflicted Conscience.

The time when they appear so pleasant is, when the gates are opened: when the
Gospel of Eternal life is opened and rightly applied to the tender Conscience.
These Fruits are said to be New and Old, not in respect of substance of
Doctrine, but the variety.

And it being said, Note.
which I have laid up for thee my beloved, it shows, that all the secret
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, that have been hid from ages: are laid up
on purpose by Christ himself, to bestow upon those that put an high estimation
upon them. And this I conceive to be the meaning of the words.

And the Reason why they are laid up only for such is, because the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven are of an Infinite value, therefore must not be bestowed
upon those that will despise them: they are of so great a price that no man is
able to put an estimate upon them, they are beyond Silver, Gold, and Rubies,
and all things that can be desired.

Now who can imagine that Jewels of such inestimable worth, Prove. 3.15.
shall be given to such that shall only Trample them under there Feet? Therefore
Christ has laid them up for his beloved: Even for those that esteem of them
most highly, above their appointed food.

Which opens the cause, and shows us the Reason, why there are so few that
are acquainted with the secrets of the word of God, that understand so little
of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, it is not because Christ is not
willing to open the Secrets, and reveal the Mysteries, but the reason is,
because men put no estimation upon them.

Christ has laid up all manner of pleasant Fruits, has abundance in store to
bestow, of things both New and Old, upon all those that are willing to receive
them: but no man cares for the taste of them.

The Mandrakes give a most Excellent smell: but no man cares for the scent. At
wisdoms gates are all manner of pleasants Fruits, even those that heal the
Nations, that save us from the Everlasting wrath of God: but we value them not,
we look not after them, but set an higher estimation upon Transitory things
that perish, then upon those Everlasting things, that shall never decay.

Just like unto Children, that more esteem of a Counter of little or no value
at all; than of a rich Jewel that is of great price.

Therefore no man must blame the Lord Jesus Christ, but only himself, if he
should one day see, many to come from the East and West, and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of the Father; and he himself to be
thrust out.

If he should at the last day, for despising of the Gospel, be separated from
the presence of the Lord (in whose presence there is fullness of joy) and should
be driven to suffer the punishment of loss, and the punishment of sense for
ever: yet I say, no man can complain, or once open his mouth against the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is willing to bestow all blessings upon men, but they do not
value them, nor esteem them.

All men will put a must, and necessity upon themselves in other matters, to
rise early, and to go to bed late, and to eat the bread of carefulness: but
scarce any man counts it a necessity to attend at the gates of wisdom, to seek
after knowledge, to call and cry for understanding, without which every man must
perish for evermore.

Learn we then (before it be too late) to put an high price upon the things of
the Gospel, then shall the Mystery be opened to us, which is locked up and hid
from the wicked despisers thereof. Which thing we can never do, unless we feel
our need of the Gospel, and the Infinite worth that there is in it to serve our
necessities.

Let us therefore learn to behold, the evil scent that our sins do cast into
the nostrils of God, that we may be afflicted with the same: next, we must
smell to the Mandrakes, which are brought unto us by the first born. Then shall
we find the blessedness that is at wisdoms gates, and begin to taste of the
pleasant fruits of Christ death both New and Old: which are for all those, and
only those that do esteem them, according as Christ says here, which I have
laid up for thee, O my beloved.

CHAP. VIII.
VERSE I. O that thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother,
when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee: yet I should not be
despised.
THE Church hearing from Christ the Excellent things that are laid up for her,
and only her which esteems of the same: wishes that all those that live in
the same Society with her, might partake of the same pleasant Fruits. Therefore
she says, O that thou! meaning a visible brother unconverted, or the whole
company of those that do dissent from her, in the true principles of faith and
good works. Were as my brother, that is, my natural brother in the faith. That
sucked the breasts of my Mother: meaning Jerusalem which is above, the Free
mother, and Mother of us all: which the Children of the bondwoman pertain not
unto. These words amount to as much as this, there is a difference between thy
Mother, and my Mother: my Mother freely gives the milk of the Gospel without
the works of the Law: thy Mother gives nothing without, but for the observance
of the Law.

Now because she gendereth Children by the Law, therefore thou art not without,
but under the Law. If I could find thee without, that is to say the Law, or
thine own opinion of Righteousness by the Law, then would I kiss thee; which
means, with the comforts of the Gospel: but because thou dependest upon the
Law, thou therefore excludest thy self from the promises of God, and despisest
me when I offer the kiss: but if I could find thee without the Law, then would
I kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.

This shows us, that there is a wonderful difference, between people that are
born under the same Covenant of promise. The one she says, is my brother that
sucked the breasts of my Mother: the other is but as Abraham said of his Wife,
the Daughter of my Father but not the Daughter of my Mother. For it cannot be
denied, but that they are the people of God visibly, to whom the Oracles of God
are given: yet that does not make them Children of Adoption, unless they suck
the breasts of the true Mother, whereby they learn the true knowledge and sense
of the Scriptures. Therefore she says, O that thou were as my brother that
sucked! Which shows, that they never yet tasted of the Teat.

The same thing must we also desire earnestly and heartily, for our brethren
that live with us in the same visible Society which yet are averse to the faith
of Christ. That if it be possible we might find them without, that so they
being divorced from their opinion of Righteousness by the Law: we might freely
bestow upon them a kiss by the Gospel without being scorned, contemned, or
despised.

This also shows us clearly what the condition of the Gospel is, namely, to
be without the Law, to be found without our own works and righteousness, for
mark it, if I should find thee without, then would I kiss thee: as much as to
say, then would I, upon this only condition, Administer the the comforts of the
Gospel unto thee. Nothing can be more clear to settle us in the ground of our
faith, then what is here written.

Therefore when thou art afflicted for thy sin, and come before God, thou
must learn to believe in Christ, without and against the Law: and fully to
persuade thy self, that the Gospel is thine because thou art without an opinion
of the Law.

Then shall thou be enabled and encouraged when thou come before men: to live
in the use and practice of the Law.

VERSE II. I would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, who would
instruct me, I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my
Pomegranate.
THese words set forth the kindness of the Church toward those that are coming
on in the faith. I would lead thee, that is, if I could find thee without, I
would guide thee, and become instrumental to bring thee, with Honor and
Solemnity. Into my Mothers house, amongst the Spiritual people that belong to
the Family of God, that are filled with Heavenly liquor, and are willing freely
to bestow it: by whose acquaintance thy Conscience should be covered with the
voice of joy and gladness, for my Mother to whom I would bring thee, would
instruct me. She changes the person here to show the unity that faith makes
amongst the Saints. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine. I would cause
thee by Divine reasons and arguments, to receive, not only wine (without any
thing to compound with it, meaning the Righteousness of a man only) but I would
cause thee to drink of spiced Wine. Which is made more Excellent by reason of
art in mixture: even of the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, which being
spiced and perfumed with the Merit of his Godhead, preserves the Conscience
from the wrath of God, and the fear of Eternal death.

This I would cause thee to drink of, even by a holy kind of violence and
compulsion, that thou should not forgo it. Which she calls here the juice
of her Pomegranate, because it being freely bestowed upon the Church by Christ
himself, she also freely gives it, to all that are willing to receive it.

This shows us, what kindness those that are strong in the faith, ought to
show toward those poor wretches that are newly coming on. Even to take them as
it were by the hand, and bring them into their Mothers house, to bring them
acquainted with the Spiritual people, that they may be well instructed in the
Gospel, even to those that are filled with spiced wine, that have store of the
juice of the Pomegranate, that are able by Divine arguments, and by a holy kind
of violence, to fasten the words of Eternal life upon them.

All men must be willing, and no man must think himself too great or too good
to stoop to help poor dejected creatures this way. Most men will be willing to
discourse with those that are able and great in the Church that have least need
of help: but what shall be come of poor silly creatures that are ignorant? Why
should not poor people when they are found without, and much distressed (in
consideration of their own barreness, and by reason of the cross and great
tribulations) be saluted with the kiss of the Gospel, (seeing it has been and
is the practice of the godly) rather then those that are better able to help
themselves?

The want of this thing shows, that there are but a very few that do live in
the right Practice of Piety.

VERSE III. His left hand should be under my head: and his right hand should
embrace me.
THese words seem to prevent an objection that may be made by a Conscience in
distress, for when once a man feels himself under the curse and in great
tribulations, he begins to be afraid, and to cry out for help, What shall I do?

To this the Church answers here after the manner of a Lover, his left hand
shall be under my head, meaning his humanity. And his right hand shall embrace
me, meaning his Divinity. She speaks in the first person, but the whole
company of believers are included: being all one body by faith.

The Church teaches this Divine and Heavenly art, how to unlade the Conscience
of sins, burdens, cares and calamities, upon the humanity of Christ, who
nailed them all to his cross, and burried them in his grave; and how to receive
the embraces of Christ from his Divinity, whereby he conquered all the enemies
of man.

After the same manner must we also learn and teach others, even when the
Conscience is in distress, to unlade it by faith, upon Christ's humanity: and
when we stand in need of any help or succor, then by faith to receive it from
the Divinity. Then shall we by the blessings of his left hand, be eased of our
burdens and sorrows: and by the blessings of his right hand, shall have a
supply of all our wants from him.

VERSE IV. I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up,
nor awake my love, until he please.
THis charge is given by Christ to the Daughters of Jerusalem not to disturb
the Bride, in this her holy faith and confidence, wherein she sweetly sleeps
and rests secure, in the promises contrary to reason: and not to awake her
until himself please, which is never.

VERSE V. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness leaning upon her
beloved? --
THese are the continued words of Christ, and so to the eight Verse. And it is
a Note of admiration at the spouse, in that she leans upon Christ by faith in
all the tribulations that she meets with, in the wilderness of this world: by
which faith she also comes out of them all.

She is not commended, nor admired at, for her Riches, Honor, Prosperity, and
esteem amongst men: For in the wilderness she is commonly without all these
things, being afflicted with Poverty, Reproach, and all manner of Calamities.
Counted as an object, and as the off-scowring of all things.

Yet in that she does not faint and pine away in this Condition, but humbles
and submits her self to the cross, and leans upon her beloved through
faith, she is looked upon with a Note of admiration. Who is this? We see this
then clear.

That at the self same time, that the Church is looked upon as an object of
reproach, and of no esteeem by men of the World; she is looked upon with
admiration by the Lord Jesus Christ.

In that she is in the Wilderness, where she is afflicted: being without the
glory of the World, she is despised of men, but in that she is not offended at
her condition, but leans upon her beloved by Faith, she is looked upon with
admiration by the Lord Jesus Christ. And the reason why she is so much admired
is, because she fights with the word of God, against all enemies at once: she
sets the Gospel against all oppositions; therefore Christ says here, Who is
this? She has not only Enemies without, but also within, she has the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, yet with one weapon she over-comes them all, and that
is Faith in her beloved.

Which consideration must wonderfully comfort all those poor wretches, which
are much afflicted by men, that are despised and rejected of the World: who by
reason of their blemishes and stains, or poverty, or any outward calamity,
(which things are common in the Wilderness) are despised and reproached, and
even utterly rejected of the World; yet, (in that they are willing to submit
unto the Cross without being offended: to humble themselves and cleave to
Christ by Faith) their comfort lies in this, that at the very same time that
they are despised of men, they are looked upon with admiration by the Lord
Jesus Christ. Which must encourage every man to submit himself to his Heavenly
Father, if he please to exercise him in such a condition.

This course must we also take, when the Conscience accuses us, the Law
threatens, and we can apprehend nothing but death Eternal: even then must we
fall down before him confessing our sins, and hearken to the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who at the very self same time that we humble our selves before
him, does speak good and comfortable words unto us, on purpose to draw us to
himself; therefore must we hearken to him and believe his words, then shall we
not only feed upon the hid Manna, that will comfort us in the wilderness: but
also joyfully shall come forth of the wilderness leaning upon our beloved.

-- I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy Mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee. These words show how this faith
and dependence was wrought in the Church. I raised thee up under the
Apple Tree. By the Appletree is meant Christ himself. And it being said under
the Apple Tree, it shows, that no man can be raised to any degree in the
faith, without the fruits of the Tree.

And also that the fruits of Christ's death and resurrection, do naturally and
freely drop upon all those that are willing to sit under the Tree and receive
them. By the Mother is here meant the Church, and by her bringing forth,
regeneration, which new birth is under the Apple Tree: for there she brought
thee forth that bare thee.

Now in that he says, I raised thee up, he distinguishes himself from Moses or
the Law; not but that Christ makes use of the Law in the raising up of the
Church, but in a different respect to those that do not rightly teach the Law.

Christ makes use of the Law to humble the sinner, that it may be driven to
Christ by faith, to be justified without the Law: but the Ministry of Moses,
promises, justification and life to none but those that turn from sin Morally
according to the the Terms of the Law: and herein lies the difference between
the true and the false handling of the Law, and by this mark only, may we
discern the voice of Christ, from the voice of Moses.

Now Moses casts all men down, but raises up no man by his Ministry, because
he sets them not under the Heavenly Appletree, but endeavors to raise
them first by other fruit: therefore he makes the heart of the righteous sad,
whom the Lord has not made sad.

But Christ casts down all men by the Law, but raises them up again by his
own fruits: even the fruits of the Heavenly Apple Tree. And after this manner
does the true Mother exercise all her Children by the Ministry.

First, she casts them down by a right administration of Moses: next she
raises them up again by Christ her Heavenly Apple Tree.

Thus must we also suffer our selves, to be hewn down by the Law, that we may
be stripped of all our glory and boasting principles: and also be willing to
receive the fruit that droppeth from Christ our Heavenly Appletree, that our
Consciences may be healed of the guilt and filth of all our sins.

VERSE VI. Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as a Signet upon thine Arm: for
love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are
coals of fire, which has a most vehement Flame.
THese words are not to be understood of the Churches speech to Christ as some
imagine; but of Christ's words to the Church. Wherein he plainly instructs
her, how her faith and dependence shall be continued and strengthened. Which is
thus, set me as a seal upon thine heart. Me, Meaning the promises of the
Gospel. As a seal, that they may make an impression, and leave the print of it
behind: such an impression that the word may be rooted and grounded in the
Soul. And on thine arm, meaning the visible sign or seal, the Gospel being a
double seal, the word and Sacraments: and all is to arm and prepare us against
the evil day.

Then he gives the reason, for love is strong as death, by which he means his
own love. My love to thee is strong as death, therefore build upon it. For as
death is of most invincible strength which swalloweth up and overcomes all
things, so says Christ is my love to thee. So that the love of Christ,
manifested to us in the Preaching of the Gospel, being received by faith,
swalloweth up Death, Hell, the Grave, the Curse: and briefly, all things else
whatsoever, that may make us any way miserable. But jealousy is cruel as the
Grave, meaning cruel to the spouse, when through the strength of Temptation she
begins to Question the love of Christ to her, and grows jealous of the same:
and can hardly be persuaded to the contrary, this wheresoever it reigns is
even as the Grave, which swalloweth up, and puts an end to all the comforts
of man. The coals of it are coals of fire: Meaning that even as fire where it
once catches, has a most vehement Flame, so that if it be not suddenly
quenched, it burns up and consumes all things: So it is with every dejected
Soul, when once it begins to grow jealous of the love of God, and will not have
the comforts of the Gospel to fasten upon it. So grievous a thing is unbelief,
that where it is lodged: it burns up and consumes, all true opinions of God,
and of his Holy Word.

Therefore, seeing our loving Lord Jesus Christ out of his wonderful care and
love to us, to strengthen us in our faith, and to preserve us from this
dreadful and bitter Temptation: says here, set me as a seal upon thine heart,
let us suffer the Gospel to make an impression within us; and look upon it as
the decree of Heaven that can never be changed. And seeing it must be as a Seal
also upon our arm, let us never leave till we are able to find out the true
Mystery, and meaning in the Sacraments, and to receive it by faith.

And seeing his love is so strong unto us as death, that puts an end to all
our discomforts whatsoever, let us never Question his favor, nor be jealous of
his love any more, but let his word serve for all; So that although our Sins
and Temptations are many, and our afflictions as great as any that are common
to man, yet as soon as we humble our selves before him, and call upon him in
faith and confidence; let us assure our selves, that he can look upon us no
otherwise but as objects of his love, which love he having once set upon us, it
continues for ever, so that no afflictions whatsoever we meet with, must be an
argument sufficient to dissuade us from believing the same. According as here
next follows.

VERSE VII. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if
a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned.
IT is as much as if Christ had said this, the many afflictions that thou
meetest with in this world be they ever so many, and like waters that do
overflow, yet they cannot quench my love to thee. For I do not love thee for
thy prosperity, and hate thee when thou art in in adversity as the world does;
but have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, and came down from Heaven on
purpose, to carry thy sorrows, to bear thy burdens, and to help thee in all thy
distresses. Therefore when afflictions come like floods, that would seem to
drown all upon a sudden: yet they cannot drown my love to thee, which always
remains one and the same.

These words are written on purpose for us to have recourse unto in time of
distress, that when Satan leaves no means unattempted, but uses all his skill
to devour our faith: we might overcome him by these words of our beloved, by
laying them up in our hearts as a most sure and certain creasure.

Now because the nature of man is proud, it is apt to make an Objection, as
thus. If I were better qualified, then I might have more assurance of Christ's
love: to this Christ answers. If a man would give all all the substance of
his House for love, meaning thereby to obtain Christ's love, it would utterly be
contemned; that is, of Christ.

Now by substance of the House, he means, all works done in the flesh, none
of all which can procure the love of God to a Soul: but are all utterly
contemned and despised, the assurance there of being attained unto by faith
alone.

These words therefore, must utterly confound all opinion of works within us,
and destroy all confidence in the flesh: and it being the Gospel, it must teach
us also, so to expound all those Texts of Scripture, that seem to attribute
something to works in attaining to the love of Christ, that the sense may be
agreeable to what is here written.

VERSE VIII. We have a little Sister, and she has (...) breasts. What shall we
do for our Sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
THese are the words of the Church wherein she bemoaneth her little Sister,
when the day comes that she is even ready for marriage: what shall we do for
her in the day when she shall be spoken for? We are not to understand by the
little Sister, only the Gentiles, (as the most do,) which then (when Solomon
wrote this Book) were without the word: for then how shall it be understood now
seeing the Gentiles are called? Therefore seeing this bemoaning of the little
Sister is the voice of the Church in all ages: such a sense must be found as
will agree to all times. Understand then by the little Sister, all those that
are unlearned in the Doctrine of the Gospel, whither they be Jews or Gentiles,
within the Pale of the Church, or without: all that belong to the Election of
grace, and are yet uncalled. All these are comprehended under the Title of the
little Sister, which first or last, shall be spoken for. Little she is, not in
number, but in regard of knowledge of the way to Life and Salvation.

A Sister she is, yet not of whole blood, she is Sister by the Father, but not
by the Mother. For as Abraham had two Sons, which were brethren by the Father,
but not by the Mother: So has God Almighty two sorts of people in the world
(and but two) which are brethren by generation, but not by regenertion. They
are brethern by the Father, as proceeding all from Adam: but not brethren by
the Mother, being not yet new born in the Church.

And therefore she says, she has yet no breasts, that is, she has not breasts
of the true Mother, being not yet born. This little Sister she bewaileth and
bemoaneth, not so much for the time present, as she does in thinking on the day
when she shall be spoken for. What shall we do for our little Sister in that
day? Which bemoaning is always among the Godly in the Church, and will be to
the end of the world. What shall I do for my Husband, my Wife, my Son, my
Daughter, my Friend?

But what is meant here by the day when she shall be spoken for?

I answer, little Sister is spoken for, is when she feels her condemnation by
the Law. They and all they, that feel their condemnation by the Law: they and
all they are spoken for by the Lord Jesus Christ. Now she bemoaneth her little
Sister in this condition, what shall we do for her that she may be married to
Christ? And in that she does so bewail her, and make it her principal care to
help her: it gives us to understand this.

That the principal care of the true Church of God for her little Sister is,
that as soon as she perceives her to be spoken for, or condemned by the Law:
to make dilligent enquiry, how to give her in marriage to the Lord Jesus Christ.

And the Reason is first, because to Solemnize the Marriage between Christ and
the Soul, is a work of the greatest difficulty that ever was, therefore the
Church may well say, what shall we do for our little Sister in that day? And
also it is the most destructive to Satan's Kingdom of all things, and therefore
the marriage is most strongly opposed by the Devil and his Angels. But chiefly
because, unless the Soul be married to Christ, the compound between the
Conscience and the Law can never be dissolved or untied: but the same bargain
or Covenant, that was made with man at first remains in force, which binds
all men to the penalty, which is to endure the wrath of God for ever.

This informs us, that there are but a very few that pertain to the true
Church of God, because there are so few that make it their principal care, to
comfort their little Sister in the day of her distress. When she is afflicted
with her sin, and feels her condemnation by the Law, and is much broken and
distressed by reason of great tribulations, and by these things is spoken for
by the Lord Jesus Christ, that she might be matched to himself: instead of
making it the principal care, to give her in Marriage to the Son of God by
faith alone, they endeavor with great earnestness to present her to Christ by
the works of the Law. Instead of dissolving the compound, and making void the
Covenant, that was made with man at first, and matching the Soul to Christ in
an Everlasting Covenant: that the guilt of her sin might be removed, and that
she might be justified in the sight of God, they endeavor in the first place
(as the only thing needful) to Solemnize the contract between her Conscience
and the Law. Which is according to St. Romans 7.
Paul's Allegory, but to present her an Adultress before God, for which sin,
seeing she is separated thereby from the true God: she is bound in captivity
under the guilt of sin, and is in bondage to Satan and the wrath of God for
evermore.

All people therefore must learn from hence to imitate the true Church of God;
which is to lay down the true grounds of consolation for their little Sister to
rest on in the day of her distress, that as soon as she is spoken for and
feels her condemnation by the Law, and that she has no breasts of her own to
nourish her in her misery; then to become instrumental to marry her to the Lord
Jesus Christ by faith alone.

Now that the match may be made, and that she may be wedded to the Son of God,
she must acknowledge her death by the Law, and ask forgiveness for her sins
with a believing heart, Romans 7.
then is she free (according to St. Paul) from her first Husband the Law, being
dead unto it through faith in the Son of God. For in that she feels and
confesses her death by the Law: the Law is also become dead, having lost its
power and dominion. Then may are assure her, that the compound (made with man
at first) is dissolved, between the Conscience and the Law: and may also
Solemnize the contract between Christ and the Soul.

This is the duty we must all learn, for the helping and comforting of our
little Sister, that she being so settled in the love of her Redeemer she may
burst forth into love and all good works amongst men. To teach this point
aright, has has some difficulty in it, as appears by the moan she makes, what
shall we do for her in that day, which shows, it requires some skill: yet
this was her practice and endeavor, as appears in the next words.

VERSE. IX. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a Palace of Silver: and if
she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.
WHich is as much as to say this, if she be a wall that setleth aright upon the
foundation laid in Sion, in the day that she is spoken for, and does not turn
aside to another foundation: we will then build upon her; that is, upon her
principles a Palace for the King to delight himself in. Which Palace or
Spiritual house, cannot perfectly be finished until the full number of the
Elect be called, Heb. 11.
until which time the true Church and every particular member thereof,
according to his capacity labors in building. And it being said to be
builded of Silver, it shows the matter that builds the Palace, which is the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which elsewhere is compared to Gold, 1 Cor. 3.
Silver, and precious Stones, being pure and lasting, and things of inestimable
worth. And further, if she be a door, which is, that opens to hear and
receive the promise of Everlasting life, which is made to all those that are
spoken for, which feel and confess their death by the Law; we will enclose her
with boards of Cedar, she shall be safe in the Kings Place, where the King is
always present.

VERSE X. I am a wall, and my breasts like Towers: then was I in his eyes as
one that found Favor.
THe little Sister having heard that Christ by the Law bespeaketh her for
himself, that she is not spoken to to be left under wrath and condemnation, but
spoken for that she might be delivered from an opinion of righteousness by the
Law, and might be married to Christ; this being the intent of the Spokesman,
she concludes, I am a Wall. As soon as ever she understands the Office of
the Law truly, it works in her a sense of Faith; (and so it in with all
people;) for it is as much as to say, then am I settled in mind, for as much as
the Office of the Law is not to justify, but to bring me to Christ, that I
might be justified by Faith. And she further says, my Breasts are like Towers;
the one of my Breasts destroys my opinion of righteousness by the Law, the
other of my Breasts gives me Life everlasting without the Law. These she says
are as Towers or Castles of Defense, which are built to preserve the City from
the Enemy. He that lives in both these Towers, is safe from the malice of
Satan, and wrath of God. This knowledge of Christ breaks the head of Satan,
and utterly aboblisheth his Kingdom, therefore she adds, then was I in his
Eyes as one that found favor; then, and not till then. The knowledge of the
Gospel gives us a certain evidence, that we are in God's favor. Mark this
then well, that thou attainest not his favor by the Works of the Law, but only
by Faith in Christ without the Law; which Faith condemns thee by the Law, and
so destroys thine opinion of the Law, and gives thee an assurance, that
Christ is given most freely where that opinion is destroyed.

Learn thou then to believe, that Christ is given to thee, because, Ezekiel. 13.10.
because thou feel and confessest thy just condemnation by the Law: Then
shall thou also become a Wall, Ezekiel. 13.14, 15.
and thy Breasts like Towers. They that require nothing but Works in building
the Wall, do daub but with untempered mortar, which shall be broken down, and
they that daubed it. Learn thou then with Paul, even through the Law to become
dead to the Law, that thou may live unto God without the Law, then shall thou
be in his Eyes, as one that finds favor.

VERSE XI. Solomon had a Vineyard at Baal-hammon, he let out the Vineyard unto
keepers; every one for the fruit thereof, was to bring a thousand pieces of
Silver.
CHrist in these words compares his own Vineyard, the Church, with the Vineyard
of Solomon at Baalhamon, which formerly was his Father David's; who appointed
Officers to look to his Vineyard, and to manure it, and to pay him an yearly
Tribute for the same, 1 Chro. 24.
and to retain part of the profit themselves. Now the Vineyard of our King
Solomon is the House of Israel, Isa. 5.
the universal Church of Jews and Gentiles; and Baalhamon (which signifies the
Owner of a multitude) shows the place where this Vineyard is planted, even
amongst the multitudes of this World. He lets out his Vineyard also to Keepers,
Mat. 21.34.
that is according to the Parable to Husbandmen, to manure it and dress it; and
the reason rendered in the Parable is, that they (meaning the Husbandmen, as
well as himself) might receive the Fruits of the Vineyard, which is Life
everlasting; and also to yield unto himself a continual Tribute, which is to
render everlasting thanks and praises unto God, for his infinite mercies and
loving kindness to us, and to serve him with joyfulness all the days of our
Lives, which is said here to be a thousand pieces of silver. And this is all
that is expected from us by our Lord King Solomon. Now he shows in the next
Words, there is great reason we should return him thanks and praise, for he
says,

VERSE XII. My Vineyard which is mine, is before me; --
I Set mine Eyes upon it continually, and my care is always for it, and
although I sometimes hide mine Eyes from it (seemingly for a time) yet I keep
it night and day lest any hurt it. In answer to this, follows next the words of
the Spouse: -- Thou (O Solomon) must have a Thousand, --

Which is an indefinite Speech, meaning, To thee, O Solomon, be all praise and
thanks for evermore, for it is thy due; for thou art worthy to receive all
glory, honor, and praise, for ever and ever. Where she attributes to Christ
all that he requires of her, which is to sing everlasting praises to the
honor of his name. Next follows the last words of the Bridegroom in this Song:
-- And they that keep the fruit thereof two Hundred.

By which he means also praises, which shows, he is so far from begrudging
any one the Fruits of his Death and Resurrection, that whosoever is but willing
to receive the same, shall have honor and praise for so doing; for they that
keep the Fruit thereof must have two hundred, that is, they shall be crowned
with everlasting praise and honor at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This is a most wonderful comfort to all poor wretches, that almost all their
Lives long are are oppressed with sins, sorrows, cares, crosses and calamities,
which through manifold temptation, are continually in heaviness of heart: who
if they are but willing to receive the fruits of the Vineyard, they shall have
two hundred. They shall have honor and praise and glory at the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Next follow the words of the spouse which close up the
whole Song.

VERSE XIII, and XIIII. Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the companions
hearken to thy voice: cause me to hear it.

Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or a young Heart upon the
Mountains of Spices.


Which words are a Prayer, wherein the Church calls upon her beloved, not as
the high and lofty one that does inhabit Eternity: but she looks upon him as
one whose dwelling is in Sion, and whose delight is with the Sons of Men. O
thou that dwell in the Gardens! that are constant and resident with thy poor
afflicted people. Thy companions hearken to thy voice, meaning those that are
in Church fellowship, they hearken, but they do not understand. cause me to
hear it, meaning the whole company of the Elect, who must all be united through
faith into one body and spiritual communion. Make haste my beloved, my earnest
desire is that this thing be speedily accomplished: that even as the Roe or
young heart does speedily skip over the Mountains where spices grow, So do thou
speedily destroy all those Mountains in man that produce fruitlesness and
barrenness, that the spices of the Gospel may enter into the hearts of all
thine Elect: that the guilt of sin may be removed, the reign of sin subdued,
that all afflictions may be sanctified, and the whole universal Church may be
armed and fortified against all the assaults of Satan in this life, and may
receive Eternal glory in the life to come.

FINIS.

