AESOP FROM Islington.

-- Secretum divitis ullum
Esse putas? Servi ut taceant, Jumenta loquentur
Et Canis, and posts, and marmora. --
Juven. -- de te Fabula narratur.
Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AESOP it seems is in fashion, and because it is a kind of Custom to date him
from some Waters, (like his Predecessors) I had as good make use of Islington,
since it is not very far from thence to Westminster, which I believe is the end
of his Journey. The Fables were written to please one of Judgment; and whether
they will please any Body else is more than the Author knows, and whom they
will not please he cares not. There is a mode in Prefaces too, and jocond one
to these loose Papers in the Modern Tripping Style, would perhaps pass them off
better; but there are few in these days have reason to laugh, (except those
that win) unless it be after the rate of Mark Coleman, the Oxford Madman, who
in his description of Bedlam said they there made one Sing, and Laugh, till
ones Heart aches.

It may be another account of Aesop than what we have had from Plaundes
Camerarius, etc. would help to piece out a Leaf; and because one may be given
of him, that the less studious part of the Town is not well acquainted with,
there shall be a hint of him, which is, that he is not the man we take him to
be, but in stead of the Samian Slave, we must seek him in the Arabian or Indian
Lohkman, which is of an Ancienter Date than any Greek Imitator of him. For it
is no news to the Learned World, that those Grecians we so much admire, (for
what reasons let Schoolmasters tell you, for I cannot) were but wretched
Filchers, and worse disguisers of the Eastern Wisdom, and patched up their
Aesop from an Eastern Sage as they did their Fabulous Theban Hercules, from the
Nobler and much older discovering Tyrian Merchant, as the name [Herakol]
implies, and better Accounts than theirs inform us. This might be illustrated
and explained, by some curious, and useful Arabian and Persian Quotations;
which no doubt would be called Scrawls, and Pothooks; and therefore Aesop or
Sad-coloured Monsieur Lohkman, with the Princes he was Councellor to, and the
Occasion of his Fables for the present is omitted; it may suffice in general to
know, that Fables and Parables were much more in use among the Beaux Esprits of
the East, than they are with ours (though it be a Fabling Age) and were the
proper means among them, of conveying Truths to those, who had a Symetar and
Bowstring (without the help of Speech-makers and Evidences) at the Service of
Wiser and Honester Men than themselves; who aimed at Mercy, Truth, Honor, and
the Public Good. This may serve for an Excuse for this digression, and for the
design of the Fables too; and if they are stopped or inquired after, it may
serve also for as good a Justification of our boasting English Liberties, by
way of a Trifle, as the suspensions of the Hab -- Corp -- Act were in good
earnest. --

AESOP FROM Islington.
FABLE I. Of the Countryman and Snake.
A Pitying Yoeman found a frozen Snake,
Which almost starved with killing cold did quake:
('It Was when a Basilisk the Vermin drove
Forth from his Grott, and shelter of the Grove;)
When home he took the wretched Refugie;
Daily renewed his Charity;
And made the Crawling Thing one of his Family
Who with the plenty of the place
Soon changed his sallow meager Look:
Erects his Crest, hist with a Grace,
Gentile and haughtier Airs he took;
Casts off his ragged Skin, the Household Rules,
Despises all the honest Hinds, and counts them bubled Fools.
Long with the Insolence they bore
of this same Wrigling Worm,
They never were so used before,
So snap't at every turn:
It bit their faithful useful Dogs,
Gnawed things with Weesils, Rats and Mice
Joined with the poysnous Toads and Frogs
Spawned in unwholsom neighboring Bogs,
In every base Device.
But when the Childrens Milk is soaked,
The Buttery cleared, the Dairy robbed,
They Would be no longer so provoked,
Nor by their Masters Favorite fob'd:
But showed themselves like Men:
For out they drove with many a thwack,
The Saucy interloping Snake,
To starve abroad again.
MORAL.
Beware fond Britains how you Favorites choose,
No more the Scum of other Lands maintain:
To foster Foreign Things forbear;
For all you will by the Sharpers gain
Will be their old Scorned Wooden Shoes,
And a Fools Cap to wear.
FABLE II. Of the Steward and his Dogs.
A Steward of a very large Estate,
Set up for living splendedly and great,
Dogs of all Countries and all sorts
For mischief most, and some for sports,
In order to it this Nimrod Spark provides,
And more in such a rout of Currs he prides,
Then all his Squirish Equipage besides,
The Tenants sore were vexed and grieved,
And often begged to be relieved:
They swarmed with Tykes of several Nations
And different qualities, and fashions;
English Bull-Dogs that wink and bite,
No matter whither wrong or right;
Who when set on with loud Halloo's
Distinguish not 'twixt Friends and Foes.
French Spaniels who can fawn when starved,
But snarl when full, and turn is served,
Dutch Dogs with Warlike Looks and Miens,
Who still in Danger save their Skins,
Greedy and ready to devour,
But on the Wolf's approach would scour.
With such each Country Farm is filled
Their Cattle worried, Poultry killed,
And all their store consumed and spoiled,
The Clowns in dread of Life and Limb,
Petitioned many a doleful time
For ease, from dangerous, useless, Beasts,
By whom they were so much oppressed,
The Steward grave, as often replied,
You know we are on the Forest side:
Outlaws and Wolves, may ruin all,
And then too late for help you will call.
We know the danger cried the men,
And that from Otters of the Neighboring Fen;
But yet though routs of Wolves and Thieves should come
They Are not so dangerous as these Curs at home
By sad Experience we the difference know
Between a Foreign and Domestic woe;
These Dogs undo us, and we pay for it too.
MORAL.
May those by whom keeping such Dogs is encouraged,
Have their Seats made free Quarters, and their Land bravely forag'd
FABLE III. The Pump.
A Welch-man (from his Hill's came down)
Saw a strange Engine near a Town;
A high erected Post there stood,
Crowned with a Janus head of Wood;
One of whose Faces looked to the Country,
The Other Phyz over the Town was Centry,
A Clown close by gave it many a thump,
And told admiring Taffy 'Twas a Pump.
With this side I my Cellar drain and dry
With the other I my Waters want supply,
Here Is all I have which in this bowl stands by.
Sot, quoth the Briton, why do toil?
Here Is not a drop comes all this while.
The Other strait pours the dish of Water
Into the Pump: thou mendst the matter,
Cried Taffy Laughing, why do wast
The Water thou already have:
Vexed with his Ignorance, the Clown
Replied if ever thou had known
How wiser men can use a Tool,
Thou would not prate so like a Fool:
I threw this dishful in, thou silly Lout
Because I Am sure to get a Tubfull out.
MORAL.
No wonder some profusely give their C --
It Is easy being liberal on design.
Money well placed at time of need we know
Though sprinkled but by P -- makes M -- flow.
FABLE IV. Of the Bear and the Bees.
COld Moscovy (as story tells)
Is famed for Czars, the Bears:
That it in Honey too excelled,
From the same Books appears.
There Is scarce a hollow-Tree that grows,
When cut, but Honey from it flows.
A Plundering Bear about did roam,
To many a hollow Oak he troop'd,
Greedy he was, often changed his home,
As often the Pillaged Trees he Scoop'd:
The Witless Bees saw him devour,
Their Summers toils, and Winter store
Called it perhaps protecting too,
Lest other Beasts the like should do,
And seemed to be content,
At length when he enlarged his rounds,
(For Rapine scarce knows any bounds.)
To a Farm-house he went.
The Bear his wonted raving drives,
To run a muck at all the Hives.
The Bees who had with patience born,
The rifling of the Forest round;
Enraged, their all was from them torn,
And that their last retreat he found,
With Indignation rose in swarms,
With one consent all flew to arms,
And all assailed the Bear:
In numerous clusters round they hung;
Never was prowling Beast so stung,
As he was every where.
Vast Numbers goard his tender Snout,
Some his two shining Favorite Eyes,
He rages, storms, and cuffs about,
Both mad and blind to shun them trys:
Among the rest there is none attacked him more
Then even those Drones who snack'd with him before.
In vain for aid he roars and bawls
In vain his kindred Cubs he calls;
The Floods and Woods that Interpose,
Keep all things from him but his Foes.
Till torn, and bloody, through the bogs he flys,
And by those insects he could once despise
Raving, and Venomed, for his Rapine dies.
MORAL.
Whoever D' Alva like Essays
To use oppressing means and ways,
Will find the consequence but bad;
Oppression all things over rules
Not only raises swarms of Fools,
But makes a wise Man mad.
FABLE V. Of the Shepherd, Boy, and Clowns.
A Shepherd Boy had often abused
Many an honest Country Fellow,
Though one would guess that folks so used
Were at the best but something shallow,
Yet they had mixtures of good Nature,
Made them believe the unlucky Creature.
To Neighboring Villages he would run,
With frighted looks and dismal tone,
And roar out, Help! or I Am undone?
Sometimes 'twas Thieves would cut his Throat,
Then, O the Wolf! was all his Note;
Thus when he was of danger yelping,
The sturdy Lowts would run to help him.
Together would scour the Associated band,
And each with Life, Fortune, and Dung-fork in hand,
But as soon as they came to the Sheep-cote, and Flock,
All they had from the Jearing young Whelp was a mock:
Or at best he would but show them, hanged up on a Bough
Some poor Whesil or Polcat for a desperate Foe:
And after would boast with his roguish Comrades,
How finely he had bubled the clod-pated Blades,
At last the Swains found out the Trade
And no more hesten to his aid:
But when in earnest Wolves and Thieves
Attack his Flock, there is none believes,
But wounded and plundered he justly is crying
For abusing good Nature, and bantring and lying.
MORAL.
If once I by a Knave am caught,
It Is his, if twice, it is then my fault.
Who on Design will Plots and tricks devise
Though he his bubbles never so much despise,
At length to his cost, finds Blockheads will grow wise.
FABLE VI. Of the Ox and the Leeches.
TO a fed Ox whose overflowing blood,
Ran from his mouth and nostrils like a flood,
Some Leeches from the adjoining Marches came,
And cried to cure him they would divert the stream,
Each fixed himself in a convenient part
And drein'd the Blood and Spirits from his heart.
The panting Beast beheld the Leeches mud,
Enriched and covered with his Purple blood.
But when they talked how much their help did please,
And with what skill they drew off the Disease:
The fainting Ox (finding his Vitals fail)
Cried where is the difference if my Life, Blood flows
By usual maladies through mouth and Nose,
Or against nature through a Leeches Tail.
MORAL.
When story tells how taxed and Bleeding France
Suffered by Favorite Leeches heretofore;
Which of them did her misery most advance
The Unnatural Catamite or natural Whore?
We well may Judge the several Mestresses,
And Bastards, of fourth Harry no Disease,
When once compared with Sodom's Sulphrous Flashes
That flamed and ruined with the third's Bardashes.
FABLE VII. Of a Mother and her Son.
A Knowing Mother in a Country Town,
Found a Rich Widow for her Looby Son:
Her Fellow Gossip liked the Brawny Lad,
The Mother courted, and the Match was made.
When on the Noon of brisk S. Valentine,
Our Lover blubbered, nay he could not Dine:
The Mother wondering why he left his Fodder,
And cried, and cursed, and kept a doleful pother;
The o're-grown Schoolboy strait she took aside,
And asked the whimpring Youngster why he cried
That shortly was to have both Wealth and Bride.
Who quick replied, in Fury mixed with Snivel,
(...) give all Women Wealth, and Brides to the Devil:
I Would rather have the Greyhound-bitch, or Sow,
They Will make the better Spouses of the two.
Why Rogue, quoth She, Marry, or take what follows.
S. Ads-Nines I wont, I Would rather to the Gallows.
M. What Reason? S. Why this Morning I designed
To have my Mistress for my Valentine,
To steal a Kiss, up Stairs I softly tread,
But saw a Sight ready to strike me dead,
She and the hectoring Cornet both a Bed.
M. O wicked Carrion! faith I Will make her known,
'Slife shall a Strumpet think to catch my Son?
Hold, Mother, cries he, home I ran to find
You, and my Sisters both, to ease my mind,
But saw, through the Latch-hole of the Dairy,
Another Motive for Man to Marry,
Dol and the Trooper at the same Figary.
M. O wretched Jade! I Will break her Neck, I Will teach her
To damn her Soul with such a Ruffian Letcher:
She trots a begging strait. S. Good Mother hold
He sobbing cries, the Storys not all told.
Up then I went, and opened Jinnys Curtains,
To tell my Sisters Tricks, and my Misfortunes,
Out my Young Landlord starts, draws, bans and swears
^eel cut my Throat, then tumbles me down Stairs.
The Mother bellows more than he -- M. O Whores,
Would I were dead -- but both shall out of Doors;
Thou shall have both their Portions -- faith I Will rout them,
Not a cracked Groat but what they have about them.
(...) Zounds Mother Peace -- pray let the Girls alone,
Hear my damned Story -- to the Cart I run
and took a Rope, then to the Barn I went
To end my wretched Life with full intent.
^ne always at such times ones self prepares,
(...) crying sung my Psalm, and snob'd my Prayers.
Scarce had I done, while fitting up the Noose,
I saw -- M. Hold Child -- S. I think the Devil broke loose
You and the Thresher climb upon the Mow,
And manage matters there, you best know how.
Purpose to hang my self I strait let fall,
But came my ways, wishing to hang you all.
The Mother cleared her Brow, then winck'd and smiled
It Is general Coupling-time thou silly Child;
Go to thy Mistress Fool, sh'has Money store,
That whitens all things, and heals every Sore.
Wealth, all Defects, and Crimes, away will strik^
Choose where you will, perhaps we are all alike.
MORAL.
^t the fair gentle Sex not look a-skew,
^is a vile Story, and can never be true.
^ay I suspect the Mothers Sex in it, when
^ethinks she talks confounded like a Man
(...) these degenerate, and corrupted days,
Women are fittest subjects of our praise.
Woman no Country sells, nor Land enslaves;
(Unless the cursed Priesthood goes their halves)
Trust, Faith, and Honor, they engross alone;
No baneful Woman evidence is shown.
With them the chiefest Joys on Earth we prove,
They soften Cares, and crown our Toyls with Love.
Of Avarice this Fable bids beware,
^ony to wretched Man's the surest snare,
His chief Vicegerent of the Prince of Air.
Nothing shows more than this the Power of Coin,
Those force even makes such fallen Angels shine.
FABLE VIII. Of the Man and his Idols.
A Superstitious Man had damned ill Fortune,
Losses come daily on, Revenues shorten;
As daily he, that every thing might hap well,
Adored some gilded Idols in his Chapel:
Much time he lost, much Incence smoked in vain
And nothing from the senseless Things could gain
Him did a Friend, pitying his want of sense,
And want of Money, labor to convince:
So Reason foolish Zeal did once over come,
When backed with Rage, and Poverty at home.
Half-witted Men run often to extremes,
To Atheism from Superstitious Dreams.
Which made him knock his gilded Pagods down;
The Family ran gladly to his aid,
Hoping the bigot starving Trade was done,
And they no more should famish while he prayed,
When from their broken Trunks vast Treasures flew,
Enough to make him easy while he lived,
This heap of Pelf, of which he nothing Knew,
Was by some wealthy Ancestor contrived:
Who for his wise Posterity did hoard,
And thought Religious Dread, the Surest Guard.
O'rejoy'd he cries, let others Pray and Bow,
I Have turned you to the fittest purpose now.
MORAL
In times perhaps as hard as Hal the Eighths,
What if a shining Church helped pay our Debts.
What if in State the Expedient now
On some fine Things were tried;
Who their gay outsides daily show,
And mightier Treasures hide.
FINIS.

