

Henry Cornelius Agrippa HIS Fourth BOOK OF Occult Philosophy. Of GEOMANCY.
MAGICAL ELEMENTS of Peter de Abano. ASTRONOMICAL GEOMANCY. The NATURE of
SPIRITS. Arbatel of MAGIC.

Translated into English by Robert Turner, (...).

LONDON Printed by J. C. for John Harrison, at the Lamb at the East End of
Paul's. 1655.

The PREFACE To the unprejudiced Reader.
AS the fall of man made himself and all other creatures subject to vanity;
so, by reason thereof, the most noble and excellent Arts wherewith the Rational
soul was endued, are by the rusty canker of Time brought unto Corruption. For
Magic it self, which the ancients did so divinely contemplate, is scandalized
with bearing the badg of all diabolical sorceries: which Are (says Mirandula)
Pauci intelligum, multi reprehendum, and ficus canes igno^os semper allatrant:
Few understand, many reprehend, and as dogs bark at those they know not: so
do many condemn and hate the things they understand not. Many men there are,
that abhor the very name and word Magus, because of Simon Magus, who being
indeed not Magus, but Goes, that is, familiar with evil Spirits, usurped that
Title. But Magieke and Witchcraft are fat differing Sciences; whereof Pliny
being ignorant, scoffeth thereat: for Nero (says Pliny) Plin. lib. 30. Not.
Hist.
who had the most excellent Magicians of the East sent him by Tyrida^es king of
Armenia, who held that kingdom by him, found the Art after long study and
labor altogether ridiculous. Now Witchcraft and Sorcery, are works done
merely by the devil, which with respect unto some covenant made with man, he
acts by men his instruments, to accomplish his evil ends: of these, the
histories of all ages, people and countries, as also the holy Scriptures,
afford us sundry examples.

But Magus is a Persian word primitively, whereby is expressed such a one as is
altogether conversant in things divine; and as Plato affirms, the art of
Magic is the art of worshipping God: and the Persians called their gods (...)
hence Apollonius says, that Magus is either (...), or (...) that is, that
Magus is a name sometime of him that is a god by nature, and sometimes of him
that is in the service of God: in which latter sense it is taken in Matthew. 2.
1, 2. when the wise men came to worship Jesus, and this is the first and
highest kind, which is called divine Magic; and these the Latins did entitle
sapientes, or wise men: for the fear and worship of God, is the beginning of
knowledge. These wisemen the Greeks call Philosophers; and amongst the
Egyptians they were termed Priests: the Hebrews termed them Cabalistos,
Prophets, Scribes and Pharisees; and amongst the Babylonians they were
differenced by the name of Caldeans; and by the Persians they were called
Magicians: and one speaking of Sosthenes, one of the ancient Magicians, uses
these words: Et verum Deum merita majestate prosequltur, and angelos ministros
Dei, sed very ejus venerationi novit assistore; idem daemonas prodit terrenos,
Vagos; humanitatis inimices; Sosthenes ascribes the due Majesty to the true
God, and acknowledges that his Angels are ministers and messengers which
attend the worship of the true God; he also has delivered, that there are
devils earthly and wandering, and enemies to mankind.

So that the word Magus of it self imports a Contemplator of divine and
heavenly Sciences; but under the name of Magic, are all unlawful Arts
comprehended; as Necromancy and Witchcraft, and such Arts which are effected by
combination with the devil, and whereof he is a party.

These Witches and Necromancers are also called Malefici or venefici sorcerers
or poisoners; of which name witches are rightly called, who without the Art of
Magic do indeed use the help of the devil himself to do mischief;
practicing to mix the powder of dead bodies with other things by the help of
the devil prepared; and at other times to make pictures of wax, clay; or
otherwise (as it were sacr amentaliter) to effect those things which the devil
by other means brings to pass. Such were, and to this day partly, if not
altogether, are the corruptions which have made odious the very name of Magic,
having chiefly sought, as the manner of all impostures is, to counterfeit the
highest and most noble part of it.

A second kind of Magic is Astrology, which judges of the events of things
to come, natural and humane by the motions and influences of the stars upon
these lower elements, by them observed and understood.

Philo Judaeus affirms, that by this part of Magic or Astrology, together
with the motions of the Stars and other heavenly bodies, Abraham found out the
knowledge of the true God while he lived in Caldea, Qui Contemplatione Creatur
arum, cognovit Creatorem (says Damascen) who knew the Creator by the
contemplation of the creature. Josephus reports of Abraham, that he
instructed the Egyptians in Arithmetic and Astronomy; who before Abraham's
coming unto them, knew none of these Sciences.

Abraham sanctitate and sapientia omnium pressed antissimus, primum Cal^^os,
deinde Phoenices, demum Egyptios Sacerdotes, Astrologia and Divina docuerit.
Abraham the holiest and wisest of men, did first teach the Caldeans, then the
Phoenicians, lastly the Egyptian Priests, Astrology and Divine knowledge.

Without doubt, Hermes Trismegistus, that divine Magician and Philosopher, who
(as some say) lived long before Noah, attained to much Divine knowledge of the
Creator through the study of Magic and Astrology; as his Writings, to this
day extant among us, testify.

The third kind of Magic contains the whole Philosophy of Nature; which
brings to light the inmost virtues, and extracteth them out of Natures hidden
bosom to humane use: Virtutes in center centri latentes; Virtues hidden in the
center of the Center, according to the Chemists: of this sort were Albertus,
Arnoldus de villa nova, Raymond, Bacon, and others, etc.

The Magic these men professed, is thus defined. Magia est connexio a viro
sapiente agentium per nature am cum patientibus, sibi, congruenter
respondentibus, ut inde opera prodeant, non sine little admiratione qui causam
ignorant. Magic is the connection of natural agents and patients, answerable
each to other, wrought by a wise man, to the bringing forth of such effects as
are wonderful to those that know not their causes.

In all these, Zoroaster was well learned, especially in the first and the
highest: for in his Oracles he confesses God to be the first and the highest;
he believes of the Trinity, which he would not investigate by any natural
knowledge: he speaks of Angels, and of Paradise; approves the immortality of
the soul; teaches Truth, Faith, Hope, and Love, discoursing of the abstinence
and charity of the Magi.

Of this Zoroaster, Eusebius in the Theology of the Phoenicians, using
Zoroaster's own words: Haec ad verbum scribit (says Eusebius) Deus primus,
incorruptibilium, sempiternus, ingenitus, expers partium, sibiipsi simillimus,
bonorum omnium auriga, munera non expectans, optimus, prudentissimus, pater
juris, sine doctrina just itiam perdoctus, natura perfectus, sapiens, sacrae
naturae unicus inventor, and. Thus says Zoroaster, word for word: God the
first, incorruptible, everlasting, unbegotten, without parts, most like
himself, the guide of all good, expecting no reward, the best, the wisest, the
father of right, having learned justice without teaching, perfect, wise by
nature, the only inventor thereof.

So that a Magician is no other but divinorum cultor and interpres, a studious
observer and expounder of divine things; and the Art it self is none other quam
Naturalis Philosophiae absoluta consummatio, then the absolute perfection of
Natural Philosophy. Nevertheless there is a mixture in all things, of good with
evil, of falsehood with truth, of corruption with purity. The good, the truth,
the purity, in every kind, may well be embraced: As in the ancient worshipping
of God by Sacrifice, there was no man knowing God among the Elders, that did
for bear to worship the God of all power, or condemn that kind of Worship,
because the devil was so adored in the Image of Baal, Dagon, Astaroth, Chemosh,
Jupiter, Apollo, and the like.

Neither did the abuse of Astrology terrify Abraham, (if we believe the most
ancient and religious Writers) from observing the motions and natures of the
heavenly bodies. Neither can it dehort wise and learned men in these days from
attributing those virtues, influences, and inclinations, to the Stars and other
Lights of heaven, which God has given to those his glorious creatures.

I must expect some calumnies and obtrectations against this, from the
malicious prejudiced man, and the lazy affecters of Ignorance, of whom this
age swarms: but the voice and sound of the Snake and the Goose, is all one. But
our stomachs are not now so queazie and tender, after so long time feeding upon
solid Divinity; nor we so umbragious and star^ling, having been so long
enlightened in Gods path, that we should relapse into that childish Age, in
which Aristotle's Metaphysics, in a Council in France, was forbid to be read.

But I incite the Reader to a charitable opinion hereof, with a Christian
Protestation of an innocent purpose therein; and entreat the Reader to follow
this advice of Tabaeus, Qui litigant, sint ambo in conspectu tuo mali and rei.
And if there be any scandal in this enterprise of mine, it is taken, not given.
And this comfort I have in that Axiom of Trismegistus, Qui pius est, sum
philosophatur. And therefore I present it without disguise, and object it to
all of candor and indifferency: and of Readers, of whom there be four sorts,
as one observes: Spunges, which attract all without distinguishing;
Hour-glasses, which receive, and pour out as fast; Bags, which retain only the
dregs of Spices, and let the Wine escape; and Sieves, which retain the best
only. Some there are of the last sort, and to them I present this Occult
Philosophy, knowing that they may reap good thereby. And they who are severe
against it, they shall pardon this my opinion, that such their severity
proceeds from Self-guilriness; and give me leave to apply that of E^^odius that
it is the nature of Self-wickedness, to think that of others, which themselves
deserve. And it is all the comfort which the guilty have, Not to find any
innocent. But that amongst others this may find some acceptance, is the desire
of

London, ult. Aug. 1654. R. Turner.

To his special friend Mr. R. Turner, on his judicious Translation of Corn.
Agrippa.
As one that just out of a Trance appears,
Amazed with stranger sights, whose secret fears
Are scarcely past, but doubtful whether he
May credit's eyes, remains steadfastly
Fixed on those objests; just like him I stand,
Rapt in amazement to behold that can
By art come near the gods, that far excel
The Angels that in those bright spheres do dwell.
Behold Agrippa mounting the lofty skies,
Talking with gods; and then anon be pries
Int' earths deep cabinet, as to Mercury,
All kinds of Spirits willing subjects be,
And more then this his book supplies: but we
Blind mortals, no ways could be led to see
That light without a taper: then thou to me
Must be Agrippa and an Oedipus.
Agrippa once again appears, by thee
Pulled out of the ashes of Antiquity.
Let squint-eyed envy pine away, whilst thou
Wear'st crowns of Praise on thy deserving brew.
I. P. B. Cantabrigiae.

To his ingenious friend Mr. Turner, upon his Translation.
THrice-noble Soul! renowned Epitome
Of Learning and Occult Philosophy;
That unknown Geomancie do impart,
With profound Secrets of that abstruse Art!
TO expound Natural Magic is thy task;
Not hell-born Necromancie to unmask;
Exposing Mysteries to public view,
That heretofore were known to very few.
Thou do not keep thy Knowledge to thy self,
(As base-covetous Misers do their pelf;
Whose numerous bags of rust-eaten gold,
Profits none, till themselves are laid in mold)
But studious of Public good, do make
All of the fruits of thy labors to partake.
Therefore if some captious Critic blame
Thy Writings, surely then his judgement's lame.
Art has no hater but an empty pate,
Which can far better carp, then imitate.
Nay Zoilus or Momus will not dare
Blame thy Translation, without compare
Excellent. So that if an bundred tongues
Dame Nature had bestowed, and brazes lungs;
Yet rightly to chuccinate thy praises,
I should want strength, as well as polite phrases.
But if the gods will grant what I do crave,
Then Enoch's Translation shall thou have.
W. P. S. John's Cambr.

To his friend the Author, on this his Translation.
WHat, not a Sibyl or Cassandra left?
Apollo ceased? Has sharp-fang'd Time bereft
Us of the Oracles? Is Dodan's grove
Cut down? Does never a word proceed from Jove
Into the ears of mortals that inherit
Tiresias soul, or the great Calcha's spirit?
What is become of the Augurs that foretold
Nature's intents? Are the Magi dead, that could
Tell what was done in every sphere? Shall we
Not know what is done in the remot'st Country
Without great travel? Cannot we below descry
The mind of the gods above? All Is done by thee,
Agrippa; all their Arts lie couched in thee.
The Art that before in diverse heads did lie,
Is now collect int' one Monopoly.
But all is in vain; we lacked an Oedipus,
Who should interpret's meaning unto us:
This thou effect'st with such dex^erity,
Adding perhaps what the Author never did see;
That we may say, Thou do the Art renew:
To thee the greater half of the parise is due.
J. B. Cantabrigiae.

To the Author, on his Translation of Cornelius Agrippa.
PAllas of Learning the art, if Goddess named*
Which Prototype thy knowledge has explained;
Which Nature also striving to combine,
Science and Learning, in this Form of thine,
To us not darkly, but does clearly show
Knowledge of Mysteries as the shrine in you.
By thy permission it is, we have access
Into Geomancy; which yet unless
Thou had unmasked, a mystery 't had lain,
A task too hard for mortals to explain.
Which since then have from the Lethaean floods
Preserved, we'll consecrate the Lethaean buds
To thee: (Phoebus dismissed) thine shall be
The Oracle, so which all men shall flee
In time of danger; thy predictions shall,
To whatsoever thou command'st, inthral
Our willing hearts; yea, thou shall be
Sole Prophet, we obedient to thee.
J. R.

To the Author, on his Translation of Cornelius Agrippa.
Does Phoebus cease to answer t^ our demands*
Or will he not accept (...) mortals hands
A sad Bidental? And is Sibyls cave
Inhabitable? Or may Tiresias have
No successor nor rival! How shall we
Then Oedipus to the world direct? If he
Do Incest add to Parricide, the are dumb,
That could predict what things should surely come:
And they are silent that knew when to apply
TO our body Politic Purge and P^le^ ^to^^y.
How will hold thieves our treasures rob, who shall
Lost goods regain, or by his Charm recall
The ^eceut? The Art (...) by thee repriv'd:
In thee the Magi seem to be revi^'d.
Phoebus is not brainsick, Joves davis not dead,
The Oracles not ceased: Agrippa's had
(Like the Arabian birds self builded nest,
Which first her Ur^ proves, the^ her quickening res^
Has thee produced more th^^ his equal su^e,
Else had this Art as yet remained observe,
A miracle to vulgars, will kn^w^ to na^^,
Scarce read by deepest apprehension.
Then I Will conclude, Since thou do him explain.
That the younger brother has the better brain.
John Tomlinson, of St. John' s in Cambridge.

To his good friend the Author, on his Translation of Occult Philosophy and
Geomancie.
MOst noble undertaking*! as if Art
And Prudence should a bargain make, t'impart
Refulgent lustres: you send forth a ray
Which noblest Patrons never could display.
Well may Diana love you and inspire
Your noblest Genius with celestial fire,
Whose sparkling Fancy with more power can quell,
And sooner conquer, then a Magic Spell.
The Author thought not, (when he penned the Book)
To be surmounted by a higher look,
Or be o'ertopt b' a more triumphant strein,
Which should exalt his then-most pleasant vein.
But seeing that a later progeny
Has snatched his honor from obscurity,
Both shall revive and make Spectators know
The best deservers of the Lawrel'bow.
Nature and Are here strive, the victory
To get: and though to yield he does deny,
The have got the start: though he triumph in praise,
Yet may his Ivy wait upon your Bays.
M. S. Cantabrigiae.

To the Author, on this his ingenious Translation of Cornelius Agrippa.
WHat is it I view? Agrippa made to wear
An English habit? Sure it is something vare.
Or are his Roman garments, by thy Wit,
Translated to an English garb so fit
TO illustrate him? for that thou have, we see,
Enlightened his obscure Philosophy;
And that which did so intricate remain,
Thou have exposed to every vulgar brain.
If then thy beams through such dark works shine clear,
How splendent will they in thine own appear!
Then go thou on, brave soul, to spread such rays
Of Learning through the world, may speak thy praise.
And fear no Critics: for thou, by a Spell,
Can force their tongues within their teeth to dwell.
Jo. Tabor,
of St. John' s in Cambridge.
Henry Cornelius Agrippa; of Geomancy:
GEOMANCY is an Art of Divination, whereby the judgment may be rendered by lot,
or destiny, to every question of every thing whatsoever, but the Art hereof
consists especially in certain points whereof certain figures are deducted
according to the reason or rule of equality or inequality, likeness or
unlikenesse; which Figures are also reduced to the Celestial Figures,
assuming their natures and proprieties, according to the course and forms of
the Signs and Planets; notwithstanding this in the first place we are to
consider, that whereas this kind of Art can declare or show forth nothing of
verity, unless it shall be radical in some sublime virtue, and this the
Authors of this Science have demonstrated to be twofold: the one whereof
consists in Religion and Ceremonies; and therefore they will have the
Projectings of the points of this Art to be made with signs in the Earth,
wherefore this Art is appropriated to this Element of Earth, even as Pyromancy
to the fire, and Hydromancy to the Element of Water: Then whereas they judged
the hand of the Projector or Worker to be most powerfully moved, and directed
to the terrestrial spirits; and therefore they first used certain holy
incantations and deprecations, with other rites and observations, provoking and
alluring spirits of this nature hereunto.

Another power there is that does direct and rule this Lot or Fortune, which is
in the very soul it self of the Projector, when he is carried to this work
with some great egresse of his own desire, for this Art has a natural
obedience to the soul it self, and of necessity ^iath efficacy and is moved
to that which the soul it self desires, and this way is by far more true and
pure; neither matters it where or how these points are projected; therefore
this Art has the same Radix with the Art of Astrologicall Questions: which
also can no otherwise be verified, unless with a constant and excessive
affection of the Querent himself: Now then that we may proceed to the Praxis
of this Art; first it is to be known, that all Figures upon which this whole
Art is founded are only sixteen, as in this following Table you shall see
noted, with their names.

The greater Fortune. ^ The lesser Fortune. ^ Solis. Via. ^ Populus. ^ Luna.
Acquisitio. ^ Letitia.^ Jovis. Puella. ^ Amissio. ^ Veneris. Conjunctio. ^
Alous. ^ Mercurii. Puer. ^ Rubeus. ^ Martis. Cancer. ^ Tristitia. ^ Saturni.
Dragons head. ^ Dragons tail. ^

Now we proceed to declare with what Planets these Figures are distributed; for
hereupon all the propriety and nature of Figures and the judgment of the whole
Art depends: Therefore the greater and lesser Fortune are ascribed to the
Sun; but the first or greater Fortune is when the Sun is diurnall, and posited
in his dignities; the other, or lesser Fortune is when the Sun is nocturnall,
or placed in less dignities: Via, and Populus (that is, the Way, and People)
are referred to the Moon; the first from her beginning and increasing, the
second from her full light and quarter decreasing; Acquisitio, and Laetitia
(which is Gain, Profit; Joy and Gladness) are of Jupiter: But the first has
Jupiter the greater Fortune, the second the less, but without detriment:
Puella, and Amissio are of Kenus; the first fortunate, the other (as it were)
rettograde, or combust: Conjunctio and Albus are both Figures of Mercury, and
are both good; but the first the more Fortunate: Puer, and Rubius are Figures
ascribed to Mars; the first whereof has Mars benevolent, the second
malevolent: Carter, and Tristitia are both. Figures of Sataru, and both evil;
but the first of the greater detriment: the Dragons head, and Dragons tail do
follow their own natures.

And these are the infallible comparisons of the Figures, and from these we
may easily discern the equality of their signs; therefore the greater and
lesser Fortunes have the signs of Leo, which is the House of the Sun: Via and
Populus have the sign of Cancer, which is the House of the Moon: Acquisitio
has for his sign Pisces; and Laetitia Sagitary, which are both the Houses of
Jupiter: Puella has the sign of Taurus, and Amissio of Libra, which are the
Houses of Venus: Conjunctio has for its sign Virgo, and Albus the sign
Gemini, the Houses of Mercury: Puella and Rubeus have for their sign Scorpio,
the House of Mars: Carcer has the sign Capricorn, and Tristitia Aquary, the
Houses of Saturn: The Dragons head and tail are thus divided, the head to
Capricorn, and the Dragons tail adhereth to Scorpio; and from hence you may
easily obtain the triplicities of these signs after the manner of the
triplicities of the signs of the Zodiac: Puer therefore, both Fortunes, and
Latitia do govern the fiery triplicity; Puella, Conjunctio, Carcer, and the
Dragons head the earthly triplicity: Albus, Amitia, and Tristitia, do make the
Airy triplicity: and Via, Populus, and Rubeus, with the Dragons tail, and
Acquisitio do rule the watery triplicity, and this order is taken according to
the course or manner of the signs.

But if any one will constitute these triplicities according to the natures of
the Planets, and Figures themselves, let him observe this Rule, that Fortuna
major, Rubeus, Puer, and Amissio do make the fiery triplicity: Fortuna minor,
Puella, Latitia, and Conjunctio triplicity of the Air: Acquisitio, the Dragons
tail, Via, and Populus do govern the watery triplicity; and the earthly
triplicity is ruled by Carcer, Tristitia, Albus, and the Dragons head. And this
way is rather to be observed then the first which we have set forth; because it
is constituted according to the Rule and manner of the signs.

This order is also far more true and rational then that which vulgarly is
used, which is described after this manner: of the Fiery triplicity are, Cauda,
Fortuna minor, Amissio, and Rubeus: of the Airy triplicity are, Acquisitio,
Laetitia, Puer, and Conjunctio: of the watery triplicity are, Populus, Via,
Albus, and Puella: And Caput, Fortuna major, Carcer, and Tristitia are of the
earthly triplicity.

They do likewise distribute these Figures to the twelve signs of the
Zodiac, after this manner, Acquisitio is given to Aries; Fortuna, both major
and minor to Taurus; Latitia to the sign Gemini; Puella and Rubens to Cancer;
Albus is assigned to Leo, Via to Virgo; the Dragons head, and Conjunctio to
Libra; Puer is submitted to Scorpio; Tristitia and Amissio are assigned to
Sagitary; the Dragons tail to Capricorn; Populus to Aquarius; and Carcer is
assigned the sign Pisces.

And now we come to speak of the manner of projecting or setting down these
Figures, which is thus; that we set down the points according to their course
in four lines, from the right hand toward the left, and this in four courses:
There will therefore result unto us four Figures made in four several lines,
according to the even or uneven marking every several line; which four
Figures are wont to be called Matres: which do bring forth the rest, filling
up and completing the whole Figure of Judgment, an example whereof you may
see here following.



Of these four Matres are also produced four other secondary Figures, which
they call Fili^, or Succedents, which are gathered together after this manner;
that is to say, by making the four Matres according to their order, placing
them by course one after another (...); then that which shall result out of
every line, makes the Figure of Fili^, the order whereof is by discending from
the superior points through both (...) to the lowest: as in this example.

Matres.

Filiae produced.



And these 8 Figures do make 8 Houses of Heaven, after this manner, by placing
the Figures from the left hand toward the right: as the four Matres do make
the four first Houses, so the four Filia do make the four following Houses,
which are the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth: and the rest of the Houses are
found after this manner; that is to say, out of the first and second is derived
the ninth; out of the third and fourth the tenth; out of the fifth and sixth
the eleventh; and out of the seventh and eighth the twelfth: By the combination
or joining together of two Figures according to the rule of the even or uneven
number in the remaining points of each Figure. After the same manner there are
produced out of the last four Figures; that is to say, of the ninth, tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth, two Figures which they call Coadjutrices, or Testes; out
of which two is also one constituted, which is called the Index of the whole
Figure, or thing Quesited: as appears in this example following.

A Theme of Geomancy.
Filiae.

Matres.



And this which we have declared is the common manner observed by Geomancers,
which we do not altogether reject neither extol; therefore this is also to be
considered in our judgments: Now therefore I shall give unto you the true
Figure of Geomancy, according to the right constitution of Astrologicall
reason, which is thus.

As the former Matres do make the four Angles of an House, the first makes
the first Angle, the second the second Angle, the third makes the third Angle,
and the fourth the fourth Angle; so the four Filiae arising from the Matres,
do constitute the four succedent Houses; the first makes the second House,
the second the eleventh, the third the eighth, and the fourth makes the first
House: the rest of the Houses, which are Cadents are to be calculated according
to the Rule of their triplicity; that is to say, by making the ninth out of the
fourth and fifth, and the sixth out of the tenth and second, of the seventh,
and eleventh the third, and of the fourth and eighth the twelfth.

And now you have the whole Figure of true judgment constituted according to
true and efficatious reasons, whereby I shall show how you shall complete it:
the Figure which shall be in the first House shall give you the sign
ascending, which the first Figure shows; which being done, you shall
attribute their signs to the rest of their Houses, according to the order of
the signs: then in every House you shall note the Planets according to the
nature of the Figure: then from all these you shall build your judgment
according to the signification of the Planets in the signs and Houses wherein
they shall be found, and according to their aspects among themselves, and to
the place of the querent and thing quesited; and you shall judge according to
the natures of the signs ascending in their Houses, and according to the
natures and proprieties of the Figures which they have placed in the several
Houses, and according to the commisture of other Figures aspecting them: The
Index of the Figure which the Geomancers for the most part have made, how it is
found in the former Figure.

But here we shall give you the secret of the whole Art, to find out the Index
in the subsequent Figure, which is thus: that you number all the points which
are contained in the lines of the projections, and this you shall divide by
twelve: and that which remains project from the Ascendent by the several
Houses, and upon which House there falls a final unity, that Figure gives
you a competent Judgment of the thing quesited; and this together with the
significations of the Judgments aforesaid. But if on either part they shall be
equal, or ambiguous, then the Index alone shall certify you of the thing
quesited. The Example of this Figure is here placed.

There remains out of the division of the projections 6 points; wherefore
Jupiter in the 6 House shows the Index.



It remains now, that we declare, of what thing and to what House a Question
does appertain. Then, what every Figure does show or signify concerning all
Questions in every House.

First therefore we shall handle the significations of the Houses; which are
these.

The first House shows the person of the Querent, as often as a Question
shall be proposed concerning himself of his own matters, or any thing
appertaining to him. And this House declares the Judgment of the life, form,
state, condition, habit, disposition, form and figure, and of the color of
men. The second House contains the Judgment of substance, riches, poverty,
gain and loss, good fortune and evil fortune: and of accidents in substance; as
theft, loss or negligence. The third House signifies brethren, sisters, and
Collaterals in blood: It judges of small journeys, and fidelities of men. The
fourth House signifies fathers and grandfathers, patrimony and inheritance,
possessions, buildings, fields, treasure, and things hidden: It gives also the
description of those who want any thing by theft, losing, or negligence. The
fifth House gives judgment of Legates, Messengers, Rumors, News; of Honor,
and of accidents after death: and of Questions that may be propounded
concernning women with child, or creatures pregnant. The sixth House gives
Judgment of infirmities, and medicines; of familiars and servants; of cattle
and domestic animals. The seventh House signifies wedlock, whoredom, and
fornica ion; renders Judgment of friends, strifes, and controversies; and of
matters acted before Judges. The eighth has signification of death, and of
those things which come by death of Legates, and hereditaments; of the dowry or
portion of a wife. The ninth House shows journeys, faith, and constancy;
dreams, divine Sciences, and Religion. The tenth House has signification of
Honors, and of Magisterial Offices. The eleventh House signifies friends, and
the substance of Princes. The twelfth House signifies enemies, servants,
imprisonment, and misfortune, and whatsoever evil can happen besides death and
sickness, the Judgments whereof are to be required in the sixth House, and in
the eighth.

It rests now, that we show you what every Figure before spoken of signifies
in these places; which we shall now unfold.

Fortuna major being found in the first House, gives long The greater Fortune.
life, and freeth from the molestation of Diseases: it demonstrateth a man to
be noble, magnanimous, of good manners, mean of stature, complexion ruddy, hair
curling, and his superior members greater then his inferior. In the second
House, he signifies manifest riches and manifest gain, good fortune, and the
gaining of any thing lost or mis-laid; the taking of a thief, and recovery of
things stolen. In the third House, he signifies brethren and kinsmen, Nobles,
and persons of good conversation; journeys to be prosperous and gainful with
honor: it demonstrateth men to be faithful, and their friendship to be
unfeigned. In the fourth House, he represents a father to be noble, and of good
reputation, and known by many people: He enlarges possessions in Cities,
increases Patrimonies, and discovers hidden treasures. In this place he
likewise signifies theft, and recovers every thing lost. In the fifth House, he
gives joy by children, and causes them to attain to great Honors: Embassages
he rendereth prosperous; but they are purchased with pains, and prayers: He
notes rumors to be true: he bestows public Honors, and causes a man to
be very famous after death: foresheweth a woman with child to bring forth a
man-child. In the sixth House, he freeth from diseases; shows those that
have infirmities shall in a short time recover; signifies a Physician to be
faithful and honest to administer good Physic, of which there ought to be had
no suspicion; housholdservants and ministers to be faithful: and of animals, he
chiefly signifies Horses. In the seventh House, he gives a wife rich, honest,
and of good manners; loving and pleasant: he overcomes strifes and
contentions. But if the Question be concerning them, he signifies the
adversaries to be very potent, and great favorites. In the eighth House, if a
Question be proposed of the death of any one, it signifies he shall live: the
kind of death he shows to be good and natural; an honest burial, and
honorable Funerals: He foresheweth a wife to have a rich dowry, legacies and
inheritance. In the ninth House, he signifies journeys to be prosperous; and by
land on horseback, rather then on foot, to be long, and not soon accomplished:
He shows the return of those that are absent; signifies men to be of good
faith, and constant in their intentions; and religious; and that never change
or alter their faith: Dreams he presageth to be true; signifies true and
perfect Sciences. In the tenth House, he foresheweth great Honors, bestows
public Offices, Magistracy, and Judgments; and honors in the Courts of
Princes: signifies Judges to be just, and not corrupted with gifts: brings a
Cause to be easily and soon expedited: shows Kings to be potent, fortunate,
and victorious: denotes Victory to be certain: signifies a mother to be
noble, and of long life. In the eleventh house, he signifies true friends, and
profitable; a Prince rich and liberal; makes a man fortunate, and beloved of
his Prince. In the twelfth House, if a Question be proposed of the quality of
enemies, it demonstrateth them to be potent and noble, and hardly to be
resisted: But if a Question shall be concerning any other condition or respect
to the enemies, he will deliver from their treacheries. It signifies faithful
servants; reduces fugitives; has signification of animals, as horses, lions,
and bulls; freeth from imprisonments; and eminent dangers he either mitigateth
or takes away.

Fortuna minor in the first house, gives long life, but encumbered with diverse
molestations and sicknesses: it signifies a The lesser Fortune.
person of short stature, a lean body, having a mold or mark in his forehead or
right eye. In the second House, he signifies substance, and that to be consumed
with too much prodigality: hides a thief; and a thing stolen is scarcely to be
recovered, but with great labor. In the third House, he causes discord
amongst brethren and kinsfolks; threatens danger to be in a journey, but
escapes it: renders men to be of good faith, but of close and hidden minds.
In the fourth House, he prejudiceth Patrimonies and Inheritances; concealeth
treasuries; and things lost cannot be regained, but with great difficulty: He
signifies a father to be honest, but a spender of his estate through
prodigality, leaving small portions to his children. Fortuna minor in the fifth
House, gives few children; a woman with child he signifies shall have a
woman-childe; signifies Embassages to be honorable, but little profitable;
raises to mean honors; gives a good fame after death, but not much divulged;
nor of lasting memory. In the sixth House, he signifies diseases, both Sanguine
and Choleric; shows the sick person to be in great danger, but shall
recover: signifies faithful servants, but slothful and unprofitable: And the
same of other animals. In the seventh House, he gives a wife of a good
progeny descended; but you shall be encumbered with many troubles with her:
causes love to be anxious and unconstant: prolongeth contentions, and makes
ones adversary to circumvent him with many cavillations; but in process of time
he gives victory. In the eighth House, he shows the kind of death to be good
and honest; but obscure, or in a strange place, or pilgrimage: discovers
Legacies and Possessions; but to be obtained with suit and difficulty: denotes
Funerals and Buryings to be obscure; the portion of a wife to be hardly gotten,
but easily spent. In the ninth House, he makes journeys to be dangerous; and a
party absent slowly to return: causes men to be occupied in offices of
Religion: shows Sciences to be unaccomplished; but keeps constancy in faith
and Religion. In the tenth House, he signifies Kings and Princes to be potent;
but to gain their power with war and violence: banished men he shows shall
soon return: it likewise discovers Honors, great Offices and benefits; but
for which you shall continually labor and strive, and wherein you shall have
no stable continuance: A Judge shall not favor you: Suits and contentions he
prolongeth: A father and mother he shows shall soon die, and always to be
affected with many diseases. In the eleventh House, he makes many friends; but
such as are poor and unprofitable, and not able to relieve thy necessities: it
ingratiates you with Princes, and gives great hopes, but small gains; neither
long to continue in any benefice or offices bestowed by a Prince. In the
twelfth House, he shows enemies to be crafty, subtle, and fraudulent, and
studying to circumvent you with many secret factions: signifies one in prison
to be long detained, but at length to be delivered: Animals he shows to be
unfruitful, and servants unprofitable; and the changes of fortune to be
frequent, from good to evil, and from bad to good.

Via in the first House, bestows a long and prosperous Way.
life; gives signification of a stranger; lean of body, and tall of stature;
fair of complexion, having a small beard: a person liberal and pleasant; but
slow, and little addicted to labor. In the second, he increases substance
and riches; recovereth any thing that is stolen or lost; but signifies the
thief to be departed without the City. In the third, he multiplies brethren and
kinsfolks; signifies continual journeys, and prosperous; men that are publicly
known, honest, and of good conversation. Via in the fourth House, signifies the
father to be honest; increases the Patrimony and Inheritance; produces
wealthy fields; shows treasure to be in the place enquired after; recovereth
any thing lost. In the fifth, he increases the company of male-children;
shows a woman with child to bring forth a male-childe; sends Embassages to
strange and remote parts; increases public honors; signifies an honest
kind of death, and to be known through many Provinces In the sixth House, Via
preserves from sickness; signifies the diseased speedily to recover; gives
profitable servants, and animals fruitful and profitable. In the seventh House,
he bestows a wife fair and pleasant, with whom you shall enjoy perpetual
felicity: causes strifes and controversies most speedily to be determined;
adversaries to be easily overcome, and that shall willingly submit their
controversies to the Arbitration of good men. In the eighth House, he shows
the kind of death to proceed from Phlegmatic diseases; to be honest, and of
good report: discovers great Legacies, and rich Inheritances to be obtained
by the dead: And if any one has been reported to be dead, it shows him to be
alive. In the ninth House, Via causes long journeys by water, especially by
Sea, and portendeth very great gains to be acquired thereby: he denotes
Priesthoods, and profits from Ecclesiastical employments; makes men of good
Religion, upright, and constant of faith: shows dreams to be true, whose
signification shall suddenly appear: increases Philosophical and Grammatical
Sciences, and those things which appertain to the instruction and bringing up
of children. In the tenth House if Via be found, he makes Kings and Princes
happy and fortunate, and such as shall maintain continual peace with their
Allies; and that they shall require amity and friendship amongst many Princes
by their several Embassages: promoteth public Honors, Offices, and
Magistracy amongst the vulgar and common people; or about things pertaining to
the water, journeys, or about gathering Taxes and Assesments: shows Judges to
be just and merciful, and that shall quickly dispatch Causes depending before
them: and denotes a mother to be of good repute, healthy, and of long life. In
the eleventh House, he raises many wealthy friends, and acquireth faithful
friends in foreign Provinces and Countries, and that shall willingly relieve
him that requires them, with all help and diligence: It ingratiates persons
with profit and trust amongst Princes, employing him in such Offices, as he
shall be encumbered with continual travels. Via in the twelfth House, causes
many enemies, but such as of whom little hurt or danger is to be feared:
signifies servants and animals to be profitable: whosoever is in prison, to be
escaped, or speedily to be delivered from thence: and preserves a man from the
evil accidents of Fortune.

Populus being found in the first House, if a Question be People.
propounded concerning that House, shows a mean life, of a middle age, but
inconstant, with diverse sicknesses, and various successes of Fortune: signifies
a man of a middle stature, a gross body, well set in his members; perhaps some
mold or mark about his left eye. But if a Question shall be propounded
concerning the figure of a man, and to this figure if there be joined any of
the figures of Saturn or Rubeus, it shows the man to be monstrously deformed;
and that deformity he signifies to proceed from his birth: but if in the fifth
House, if he be encompas^ed with malevolent Aspects, then that monstrousness is
to come. In the second House, Populus shows a mean substance, and that to be
gotten with great difficulty: makes a man also always sensible of laborious
toil: things stolen are never regained: what is lost shall never be wholly
recovered: that which is hidden shall not be found. But if the Question be of a
thief, it declares him not yet to be fled away, but to lie lurking within the
City. In the third House, Populus raises few friends, either of brethren or
kindred: foresheweth journeys, but with labor and trouble; notwithstanding
some profit may accrue by them: denotes a man unstable in his faith, and
causes a man often to be deceived by his companions. In the fourth House, it
signifies a father to be sickly, and of a laborious life, and his earthly
possessions and inheritances to be taken away shows profit to be gained by
water: shows treasure not to be hid; or if there be any hidden, that it shall
not be found: A patrimony to be preserved with great labor. In the fifth
House, he shows no honest Messages, but either makes the messengers to be
Porters, or public Carryers: he di^^lgeth false rumors, which notwithstanding
have the likeness of some truth, and seem to have their original from truth,
which is not reported as it is done: It signifies a woman to be barren, and
causes such as are great with child to be abortives: appoints an inglorious
Funeral, and ill report after death. In the sixth House, Populus shows cold
sicknesses; and chiefly affects the lower parts of the body: A Physician is
declared to be careless and negligent in administering Physic to the sick, and
signifies those that are affected with sickness to be in danger of death, and
scarcely recover at all: it notes the decitfulness of servants, and detriment
of cattle. In the seventh House, it shows a wife to be fair and pleasant, but
one that shall be solicited with the love of many wooers: signifies her loves
to be feigned and dissembling: makes weak and impotent adversaries soon to
desert prosecuting. In the eighth House, it denotes sudden death without any
long sickness or anguish, and oftentimes shows death by the water; gives no
inheritance, possession or legacy from the dead; and if any be, they shall be
lost by some intervening contention, or other discord: he signifies the dowry
of a wife to be little or none. Populus in the ninth House, sneweth false
dreams, personates a man of rude wit, without any learning or science; In
religion he signifies infericur Offices, such as serve either to cleanse the
Church, or ring the bells; and he signifies a man little curious or studious in
religion, neither one that is troubled with much conscience. In the tenth House
he signifies such Kings and Princes, as for the most part are expulsed out of
their Rule and Dominions, or either suffer continual trouble and detriment
about them: he signifies Offices and Magistracy, which appertain to matters
concerning the waters, as about the Navy, bridges, fishings, shores, meadows,
and things of the like sort; makes Judges to be variable and slow in
expediting of Causes before them; declares a Mother to be sickly, and of a
short life. In the eleventh House he gives few friends, and many flatterers;
and with Princes gives neither favor nor fortune. In the twelfth House he
shows weak and ignoble enemies; declares one in prison not to be delivered;
discovers dangers in waters, and watery places.

Acquisitio found in the first House, gives a long life and Gain.
prosperous old age; signifies a man of a middle stature, and a great head, a
countenance very well to be distinguished or known, a long nose, much beard,
hair curling, and fair eyes, free of his meat and drink, but in all things else
sparing and not liberal. In the second House, he signifies very great riches,
apprehends all thieves, and causes whatsoever is lost to be recovered. In
the third House, many brethren, and they to be wealthy; many gainful journies;
signifies a man of good faith. In the fourth is signified a Patrimony of much
riches, many possessions of copious fruits; he signifies that treasure hid in
any place shall be found; and shows a Father to be rich, but covetous. In the
fifth House, Acquisitio signifies many children of both Sexes, but more Males
then Females; shows a woman to be with child, and that she shall be delivered
without danger: and if a question be propounded concerning any Sex, he
signifies it to be Masculine; increases gainful profitable Embassages and
Messages, but extends fame not far after death, yet causes a man to be
inherited of his own, and signifies rumors to be true. In the sixth House he
signifies many and grievous sicknesses, and long to continue, makes the sick
to be in danger of death, and often to die: yet he declares a Physician to be
learned and honest; gives many servants and chattel, and gains to be acquired
from them. In the seventh House he signifies a wife to be rich, but either a
widow, or a woman of a well-grown age; signifies suits and contentions to be
great and durable, and that love and wedlock shall be effected by lot. In the
eighth House, if a man he enquired after, it shows him to be dead, signifies
the kind of death to be short, and sickness to last but a few days;
discovers very profitable legacies and inheritances, and signifies a wife to
have a rich dowry. In the minth House he signifies long and profitable
journeys; shows if any one be absent he shall soon return; causes gain to be
obtained from Religious and Ecclesiastical Persons or Scholars, and signifies a
man of a true and perfect Science. In the tenth House, he makes Princes to
enlarge their Dominions; a Judge favorable, but one that must be continually
presented with gifts; causes Offices and Magistracy to be very gainful;
signifies a Mother rich and happy. In the eleventh House, Acquisitio
multiplieth friends, and brings profit from them, and increases favor with
Princes. In the twelfth House he signifies a man shall have many powerful or
potent enemies; reduces and brings home servants fled away, and cattle
strayed; and signifies he that is in prison shall not be delivered.

Laetitia in the first House signifies long life with prosperity, and much joy
and gladness, and causes a man to outlive and Joy.
be more victorious then all his brethren; signifies a man of a tall stature,
fair members, a broad forehead, having great and broad teeth; and that has a
face comely and well colored. In the second House it signifies riches and many
gains, but great expenses and various mutations of ones state and condition;
theft and any thing lost is recovered and returned: but if the Question be of a
thief, it declares him to be fled away. In the third House Latitia shows
brethren to be of a good conversation, but of short life; journeys pleasant and
comfortable; men of good credit and faith. In the fourth he signifies happy
Patrimonies and possessions, a Father to be noble, and honored with the
dignity of some princely office; shows treasure to be in the place enquired
after, but of less worth and value then is supposed, and causes it to be
found. In the fifth House he gives obedient children, endued with good
manners, and in whom shall be had the greatest joy and comfort of old age;
signifies a woman with child to bring forth a daughter; shows honorable
Embassages, and declares rumors and news to be altogether true, and leaves a
good and ample fame after death. In the sixth House it shows the sick shall
recover, denotes good servants, good and profitable cattle and animals. In the
seventh House Laetitia gives a wife fair, beautiful and young; overcomes
strifes and contentions, and rendereth the success thereof to be love. Laetitia
in the eighth House gives Legacies and possessions, and a commendable portion
with a wife: if a Question be proposed concerning the condition of any man, it
signifies him to be alive, and declares an honest, quiet, and meek kind of
death. In the ninth House Laetitia signifies very few journies, and those that
do apply themselves to travail, their journyes either are about the Messages
and Embassages of Princes, or Pilgrimages to fulfill holy vows; shows a man to
be of a good religion, of indifferent knowledge, and who easily apprehends
all things with natural ingenuity. In the tenth House, it raises Kings and
Princes to honor and great renown; makes them famous by maintaining peace
during their times; signifies Judges to be cruel and severe; honest Offices and
Magistracy; signifies those things which are exercised either about
Ecclesiastical affairs, schools, or the administration of justice; shows a
mother if she be a widow, that she shall be married again. In the eleventh
House Laetitia increases favor with Princes, and multiplies friends. And in
the twelfth House Laetitia gives the victory over enemies; causes good
servants and families, delivers from imprisonment, and preserves from future
evils.

Puella in the first House signifies a person of a short life, weak
constitution of body, middle stature, little fat, but fair, Maid.
effeminate and luxurious, and one who will incur many troubles and dangers in
his ife-time for the love of women. In the second House, it neither increases
riches, nor diminishes poverty; signifies a thief not to be departed from the
City, and a thing stolen to be alienated and made away: if a Question be of
treasure in a place, it is resolved there is none. In the third House Puella
signifies more sisters then brethren, and increases and continues good
friendship and amity amongst them; denotes journies to be pleasant and joyous,
and men of good conversations. In the fourth House Puella signifies a very
small patrimony, and a Father not to live long, but makes the fields fertile
with good fruits. In the fifth House a woman with child is signified to bring
forth a woman-child; denotes no Embassages, causes much commerce with women,
and some office to be obtained from them. Puella in the sixth House signifies
much weakness of the sick, but causes the sick shortly to recover; and shows
a Physician to be both unlearned and unskilful, but one who is much esteemed of
in the opinion of the vulgar people; gives good servants, handmaids, cattle
and animals. In the seventh House Puella gives a wife fair, beautiful and
pleasant, leading a peaceable and quiet conversation with her husband,
notwithstanding one that shall burn much with lust, and be coveted and lusted
after of many men; denotes no suits or controversies, which shall depend
before a Judge, but some jarres and wranglings with the common people one
amongst another, which shall be easily dissolved and ended. In the eighth
House, if a Question be of one reputed to be dead, Puella declares him to be
alive: gives a small portion with a wife, but that which contenteth her
husband. In the ninth House Puella signifies very few journeys, shows a man
of good religion, indifferent skill or knowledge in sciences, unless happily
Music, as well vocal as instrumental. In the tenth House Puella signifies
Princes not to be very potent, but notwithstanding they shall govern peaceably
within their Dominions, and shall be beloved of their Neighbors and Subjects;
it canseth them to be affable, mild and courteous, and that they shall always
exercise themselves with continual mirth, plays, and huntings; makes Judges to
be good, godly and merciful; gives Offices about women, or especially from
noble women. In the eleventh House Puella gives many friends, and increases
favor with women. In the twelfth House Puella signifies few enemies, but
contention with women; and delivers Prisoners out of prison through the
intercession of friends.

Amissio in the first House signifies the sick not to li^e long, Loss.
and shows a short life; signifies a man of disproportioned members of his
body, and one of a wicked life and coversation, and who is marked with some
notorious and remarkable defect in some part of his body, as either lame, or
maimed, or the like. Amissio in the second House consumes all substance, and
makes one to suffer and undergo the burden of miserable poverty; neither
thief, nor the thing stolen shall be found; signifies treasure not to be in
the place sought after, and to be sought for with loss and damage. In the third
House Amissio signifies death of brethren, or the want of them, and of kindred
and friends; signifies no journeys, and causes one to be deceived of many. In
the fourth House Amissio signifies the utter destruction of ones Patrimony,
shows the Father to be poor, and Son to die. Amissio in the fifth House
shows death of children, and afflicts a man with diverse sorrows; signifies a
woman not to be with child, or else to have miscarried; raises no fame or
honors, and disperseth false rumors. In the sixth House Amissio si nifies the
sick to be recovered, or that he shall soon recover; but causes loss and
damage by servants and cattels. In the seventh House Amissio gives an
adulterous wife, and contrarying her husband with continual contention;
nevertheless she shall not live long; and it causes contentions to be ended.
In the eighth House Amissio signifies a man to be dead, consumes the dowry of
a wife; bestows or sends no inheritances or legacies. In the ninth House
Amissio causes no journies, but such as shall be compassed with very great
loss; signifies men to be inconstant in Religion, and often changing their
opinion from one sect to another, and altogether ignorant of learning. In the
tenth House Amissio rendereth Princes to be most unfortunate, and shows that
they shall be compelled to end their lives in exile and banishment; Judges to
be wicked; and signifies Offices and Magistracy to be damageable, and shows
the death of a Mother. In the eleventh House Amissio signifies few friends, and
causes them to be easily lost, and turned to become enemies; and causes a man
to have no favor with his Prince, unless it be hurtful to him. In the twelfth
House Amissio destroys all enemies, detaineth long in prison, but preserves
from dangers.

Conjunctio in the first House makes a prosperous life, and Conjunction.
signifies a man of a middle stature, not lean nor fat, long face, plain hair,
a little beard, long fingers and thighs, liberal, amiable, and a friend to many
people. In the second House Conjunctio does not signify any riches to be
gotten, but preserves a man secure and free from the calamities of poverty;
detecteth both the thief and the thing stolen, and acquireth hidden treasure.
In the third House he gives various journeys with various success, and
signifies good faith and constancy. In the fourth House Conjunctio shows a
mean Patrimony; causes a Father to honest, of good report, and of good
understanding. In the fifth House he gives Children of subtle ingenuity and
wit, shows a woman pregnant to have a male-child, and raises men to honors
by their own mere proper wit and ingenuity, and disperseth their fame and
credit far abroad; and also signifies news and rumors to be true. In the sixth
House Conjunctio signifies sicknesses to be tedious and of long continuance;
but foresheweth the Physician to be learned and well experienced; and shows
servants to be faithful and blameless, and animals pro^table In the seventh
House he gives a wife very obedient, conformable, and dutiful to her husband,
and one of a good wit and ingenuity; causes difficult suits and controversies,
and crafty, subtle and malicious adversaries. In the eighth House, him of whom
a Question is propounded, Conjunctio signifies him to be dead, and pretends
some gain to be acquired by his death; shows a wife shall not be very rich.
In the ninth House he gives a few journeys, but long and tedious, and shows
one that is absent shall after a long season return. Conjunctio in this House
increases diverse Arts, Sciences, and Mysteries of Religion; and gives a
quick, perspicuous, and efficacious wit. In the tenth House Conjunctio makes
Princes liberal, affable and benevolent, and who are much delighted and
affected with diverse Sciences, and secret Arts, and with men learned therein;
causes Judges to be just, and such who with a piercing and subtle speculation,
do easily discern causes in controversy before them; enlarges Offices which
are concerned about Letters, Learning, sound Doctrines and Sciences; and
signifies a Mother to be honest, of good ingenuity and wit, and also one of a
prosperous life. In the eleventh House Conjunctio signifies great increase of
friends; and very much procures the grace and favor of Princes, powerful and
noble Men. In the twelfth House Conjunctio signifies wary and quick-witted
enemies; causes such as are in prison to remain and continue so very long, and
causes a man to eschew very many dangers in his life.

Albus in the first House signifies a life vexed with continual White.
sickness and grievous diseases; signifies a man of a short stature, broad
breast, and gross arms, having curled or crisped hair, one of a broad full
mouth, a great talker and babbler, given much to use vain and unprofitable
discourse, but one that is merry, joyous and jocond, and much pleasing to men.
In the second House Albus enlarges and augmenteth substance gained by sports,
plays, vile and base arts and exercises, but such as are pleasing and
delightful; as by plays, pastimes, dancings and laughters: he discovers both
the thief, and the theft or thing stolen, and hides and concealeth treasure.
In the third House Albus signifies very few brethren; gives not many, but
tedious and wearisome journyes, and signifies all deceivers. In the fourth
House he shows very small or no Patrimony, and the Father to be a man much
known; but declares him to be a man of some base and inferior Office and
Employment. In the fifth House Albus gives no children, or if any, that they
shall soon die; declares a woman to be servile, and causes such as are with
young to miscarry, or else to bring forth Monsters; denotes all rumors to be
false, and raises to no honor. In the sixth House Albus causes very tedious
sicknesses and diseases; discovers the fraud, deceit and wickedness of
servants, and signifies diseases and infirmities of cattle to be mortal, and
makes the Physician to be suspected of the sick Patient. Albus in the seventh
House gives a barren wife, but one that is fair and beautiful; few suits or
controversies, but such as shall be of very long continuance. In the eighth
House if a question be propounded of any one, Albus shows the party to be dead;
gives little portion or dowry with a wife, and causes that to be much strived
and contended for. In the ninth House Albus denotes some journyes to be
accomplished, but with mean profit; hinders him that is absent, and signifies
he shall not return; and declares a man to be superstitious in Religion, and
given to false and deceitful Sciences. In the tenth Albus causes Princes and
Judges to be malevolent; shows vile and base Offices and Magistracies;
signifies a Mother to be a whore, or one much suspected for adultery. In the
eleventh House Albus makes dissembling and false friends; causes love and
favor to be inconstant. Albus in the twelfth House denotes vile, impotent and
rustical enemies; shows such as are in prison shall not escape, and signifies
a great many and various troubles and discommodities of ones life.

Puer in the first House gives an indifferent long life, but Child.
laborious raises men to great fame through military dignity; signifies a
person of a strong body, ruddy complexion, a fair countenance, and black hair.
In the second House Puer increases substance, obtained by other men's goods, by
plunderings, rapines, confiscations, military Laws, and such like; he
concealeth both the thief and the thing stolen, but discovers no treasure. In
the third House Puer raises a man to honor above his brethren, and to be
feared of them; signifies journies to be dangerous, and denotes persons of
good credit. In the fourth House Puer signifies dubious inheritances and
possessions, and signifies a Father to attain to his substance and estate
through violence. In the fifth House Puer shows good children, and such as
shall attain to honors and dignities; he signifies a woman to have a
male-child, and shows honors to be acquitted by military discipline, and great
and full fame. In the sixth House Puer causes violent diseases and
infirmities, as wounds, falls, contusions, bruises, but easily delivers the
sick, and shows the Physician and Surgeon to be good; denotes servants
and animals to be good, strong and profitable. In the seventh House Puer
causes a wife to be a virago, of a stout Spirit, of good fidelity, and one
that loves to bear the Rule and Government of a house; makes cruel strifes
and contentions, and such adversaties, as shall scarcely be restrained by
Justice. Puer in the eighth House shows him that is supposed to be dead to
live, signifies the kind of death not to be painful, or laborious, but to
proceed from some hot humor, or by iron, or the sword, or from some other
cause of the like kind, shows a man to have no legacies or other
inheritance. In the ninth House Puer shows journeys not to be undergone
without peril and danger of life, yet nevertheless declares them to be
accomplished prosperously and safely; shows persons of little Religion, and
using little conscience, notwithstanding gives the knowledge of natural
philosophy and physic, and many other liberal and excellent Arts. Puer in the
tenth House signifies Princes to be powerful, glorious, and famous in warlike
achievements, but they shall be unconstant and unchangeable, by reason of the
mutable and various success of victory. Puer in this House causes Judges to
cruel and unmerciful; increases offices in warlike affairs; signifies
Magistracy to be exercised by fire and sword; hurts a Mother, and endangereth
her life. In the eleventh House Puer shows Noble friends, and Noble men, and
such as shall much frequent the Courts of Princes, and follow after warfare;
and causes many to adhere to cruel men: nevertheless he causes much esteem
with Princes; but their favor is to be suspected. Puer in the twelfth House
causes Enemies to be cruel and pernicious; those that are in Prison shall
escape, and makes them to eschew many dangers.

Rubeus in the first House, signifies a short life, and an evil Red.
end; signifies a man to be filthy, unprofitable, and of an evil, cruel and
malicious countenance, having some remarkable and notable sign or scar in some
part of his body. In the second House Rubeus signifies poverty, and makes
thieves and robbers, and such persons as shall acquire and seek after their
maintenance and livelihoods by using false, wicked, and evil, and unlawful
Arts; preserves thieves, and concealeth theft; and signifies no treasure to be
hid nor found. In the third House Rubeus renders brethren and kinsmen to be
full of hatred, and odious one to another, and shows them to be of evil
manners, and ill disposition: causes journeys to be very dangerous, and
foresheweth false faith and treachery. In the fourth House he destroys and
consumes Patrimonies, and disperseth and wastes inheritances, causes them to
come to nothing; destroys the fruits of the field by tempestuous seasons, and
malignancy of the earth; and brings the Father to a quick and sudden death.
Rubeus in the fifth House gives many children, but either they shall be wicked
and disobedient, or else shall afflict their Parents with grief, disgrace and
infamy. In the sixth House Rubeus causes mortal wounds, sicknesses and
diseases; him that is sick shall die; the Physician shall err, servants prove
false and treacherous, cartel and beasts shall produce hurt and danger. In the
seventh House Rubeus signifies a wife to be infamous, publicly adulterate, and
contentious; deceitful and treacherous adversaries, who shall endeavor to
overcome you, by crafty and subtle wiles and circumventions of the Law. In the
eighth House Rubeus signifies a violent death to be inflicted, by the execution
of public Justice; and signifies, if any one be enquired after, that he is
certainly dead; and a wise to have no portion or dowry. Rubeus in the ninth
House shows journeys to be evil and dangerous, and that a man shall be in
danger either to be spoiled by thieves and robbers, or to be taken by
plunderers and robbers; declares men to be of most wicked opinions in
Religion, and of evil faith, and such as will often easily be induced to deny
and go from their faith for every small occasion; denotes Sciences to be false
and deceitful, and the professors thereof to be ignorant. In the tenth House
Rubeus signifies Princes to be cruel and tyrannical, and that their power shall
come to an evil end, as that either they shall be cruelly murdered and
destroyed by their own Subjects, or that they shall be taken captive by their
conquerers, and put to an ignominious and cruel death, or shall miserably end
their lives in hard imprisonment; signifies Judges and Officers to be false,
theevish, and such as shall be addicted to usury; shows that a mother shall
soon die, and denotes her to be blemished with an evil fame and report. In the
eleventh House Rubeus gives no true, nor any faithful friends; shows men to
be of wicked lives and conversations, and causes a man to be rejected and cast
out from all society and conversation with good and noble persons. Rubeus in
the twelfth House makes enemies to be cruel and traitorous, of whom we ought
circumspectly to beware; signifies such as are in prison shall come to an evil
end; and shows a great many inconveniences and mischiefs to happen in a man's
life.

Carcer in the first House being posited, gives a short life; Prison.
signifies men to be most wicked, of a filthy and cruel unclean figure and
shape, and such as are hated and despised of all men. Carcer in the second
House causes most cruel and miserable poverty; signifies both the thief and
thing stolen to be taken and regained; and shows no treasure to be hid. In
the third House Carcer signifies hatred and dissension amongst brethren; evil
journeys, most wicked faith and conversation. Carcer in the fourth House
signifies a man to have no possessions or inheritances, a Father to be most
wicked, and to die a sudden and evil death. In the fifth House Carcer gives
many children; shows a woman not to be with child, and provokes those that
are with child to miscarry of their own consent, or slays the child;
signifies no honors, and disperseth most false rumors. In the sixth House
Carcer causes the diseased to undergo long sickness; signifies servants to be
wicked, rather unprofitable; Physicians ignorant. In the seventh House Carcer
shows the wife shall be hated of her husband, and signifies suits and
contentions to be ill ended and determined. In the eighth House Carcer
declares the kind of death to be by some fall, mischance, or false
accusation, or that men shall be condemned in prison, or in public judgment,
and shows them to be put to death, or that they shall often lay violent and
deadly hands upon themselves; denies a wife to have any portion and legacies.
Carcer in the ninth House, shows he that is absent shall not return, and
signifies some evil shall happen to him in his journey; it denotes persons of
no Religion, a wicked conscience, and ignorant of learning. In the tenth House
Carcer causes Princes to be very wicked, and wretchedly to perish, because
when they are established in their power, they will wholly addict themselves to
every voluptuous lust, pleasure, and tyranny; causes Judges to be unjust and
false; declares the Mother to be cruel, and infamous, and noted with the badge
of adultery; gives no Offices nor Magistracies, but such as are gotten and
obtained either by lying, or through theft, and base and cruel robbery. In the
eleventh House Carcer causes no friends, nor love, nor favor amongst men. In
the twelfth House it raises enemies, detaineth in prison, and inflicteth many
evils.

Tristitia in the first House does not abbreviate life, but Sorrow
afflicts it with many molestations; signifies a person of good manners and
carriage, but one that is solitary, and slow in all his business and occasions;
one that is solitary, melancholy, seldom laughing, but most covetous after all
things. In the second House it gives much substance and riches, but they that
have them, shall not enjoy them, but shall rather hide them, and shall scarce
afford to themselves food or sustenance therefrom; treasure shall not be found,
neither shall the thief nor the theft. Tristitia in the third House signifies
a man to have few brethren, but shows that he shall outlive them all; causes
unhappy journeys, but gives good faith. In the fourth House Tristitia
consumes and destroys fields, possessions and inheritances; causes a Father
to be old and of long life, and a very covetous hoorder up of money. In the
fifth House it signifies no children, or that they shall soon die; shows a
woman with child to bring forth a woman-child, gives no fame nor honors. In
the sixth House Tristitia shows that the sick shall die; servants shall be
good, but slothful; and signifies cattle shall be of a small price or value. In
the seventh House Tristitia shows that the wife shall soon die; and declares
suits and contentions to be very hurtful, and determining against you. In the
eighth House it signifies the kind of death to be with long and grievous
sickness, and much dolor and pain; gives legacies and an inheritance, and
indoweth a wife with a portion. Tristitia in the ninth House, shows that he
that is absent shall perish in his journey; or signifies that some evil
mischance shall happen unto him; causes journeys to be very unfortunate, but
declares men to be of good Religion, devour, and profound Scholars. In the
tenth House Tristitia signifies Princes to be severe, but very good lovers of
justice; it causes just Judges, but such as are tedious and slow in
determining of causes; brings a Mother to a good old age, with integrity and
honesty of life, but mixed with diverse discommodities and misfortunes; it
raises to great Offices, but they shall not be long enjoyed nor persevered in;
it signifies such Offices as do appertain to the water, or tillage, and
manuring of the Earth, or such as are to be employed about matters of Religion
and wisdom. In the eleventh House Tristitia signifies scarcity of friends, and
the death of friends; and also signifies little love or favor. In the twelfth
House it shows no enemies; wretchedly condemns the imprisoned; and causes
many discommodities and disprofits to happen in ones life.

Caput Draconis in the first House augmenteth life and fortune. Dragons head.
In the second House he increases riches and substance; saves and concealeth
a thief; and signifies treasure to be hid. In the third House Caput Draconis
gives many brethren; causes journeys, kinsmen, and good faith and credit. In
the fourth House he gives wealthy inheritances; causes the Father to attain
to old age. In the fifth House Caput Draconis gives many children; signifies
women with child to bring forth women-children, and oftentimes to have twins;
it shows great honors and fame; and signifies news and rumors to be true.
Caput Draconis in the sixth House increases sicknesses and diseases;
signifies the Physician to be learned; and gives very many servants and
chattel. In the seventh House he signifies a man shall have many wives;
multiplies and stirs up many adversaries and suits. In the eight House he
shows the death to be certain, increases Legacies and inheritances, and
gives a good portion with a wife. In the ninth House Caput Draconis signifies
many journeys, many Sciences, and good Religion; and shows that those that
are absent shall soon return? In the tenth House he signifies glorious Princes,
great and magnificent Judges, great Offices, and gainful Magistracy. In the
eleventh House he causes many friend, and to be beloved of all men. In the
twelfth House Caput Draconis signifies men to have many enemies, and many
women; detaineth the imprisoned, and evilly punishes them.

Cauda Draconis, in all and singular the respective Houses aforesaid, Dragons
tail.
gives the contrary judgment to Caput. And these are the natures of the
figures of Geomancy, and their judgments, in all and singular their Houses,
upon all manner of Questions to be propounded, of or concerning any matter or
thing whatsoever.

But now in the manner of proceeding to judgment, this you are especially to
observe; That whenever any Question shall be proposed to you, which is
contained in any of the Houses, that you shall not only answer thereunto by
the figure contained in such a House; but beholding and diligently respecting
all the figures, and the Index it self in two Houses, you shall ground the face
of judgment. You shall therefore consider the figure of the thing quesited or
enquired after, if he shall multiply himself by the other places of the figure,
that you may cause them also to be partakers in your judgment: as for example,
if a Question shall be propounded of the second House concerning a thief, and
the figure of the second House shall be found in the sixth, it declares the
thief to be some of ones own household or servants: and after this manner shall
you judge and consider of the rest; for this whole Art consists in the
Commixtures of the figures, and the natures thereof; which whosoever does
rightly practice, he shall always declare most true and certain judgments
upon every particular thing whatsoever.

Of OCCULT PHILOSOPHY, OR Of MAGICAL CEREMONIES: The Fourth Book.
Written by Henry Cornelius Agrippa.
IN our Books of Occult Philosophy, we have not so compendiously, as copiously,
declared the principles, grounds, and reasons of Magic it self, and after what
manner the experiments thereof are to be chosen, elected, and compounded, to
produce many wonderful effects; but because in those books they are treated of,
rather Theorically, then Practically; and some also are not handled completely
and fully, and others very figuratively, and as it were Enigmatically and
obscure Riddles, as being those which we have attained unto with great study,
diligence, and very curious searching and exploration, and are heretofore set
forth in a more rude and unfashioned manner. Therefore in this book, which we
have composed and made as it were a Complement and Key of our other books of
Occult Philosophy, and of all Magical Operations, we will give unto thee the
documents of holy and undefiled verity, and Inexpugnable and Unresistable
Magical Discipline, and the most pleasant and delectable experiments of the
sacred Deities. So that as by the reading of our other books of Occult
Philosophy, thou may earnestly covet the knowledge of these things; even so
with reading this book, thou shall truly triumph. Wherefore let silence hide
these things within the secret closets of thy religious breast, and conceal
them with constant Taciturnity.

This therefore is to be known, That the names of the intelligent presidents of
every one of the Planets are constituted after this manner: that is to say, By
collecting together the letters out of the figure of the world, from the rising
of the body of the Planet, according to the succession of the Signs through
the several degrees; and out of the several degrees, from the aspects of the
Planet himself, the calculation being made from the degree of the ascendant. In
the like manner are constituted the names of the Princes of the evil spirits;
they are taken under all the Planets of the presidents in a retrograde order,
the projection being made contrary to the succession of the signs, from the
beginning of these ^^th House. Now the name of the supreme and highest
intelligence; which many do suppose to be the soul of the world; is collected
out of the four Cardinal points of the figure of the world, after the manner
already delivered: and by the opposite and contrary way, is known the name of
the great Demon, or evil spirit, upon the four cadent Angles. In the like
manner shall thou understand the names of the great president in spirits ruling
in the Air, from the four Angles of the succedant Houses: so that as to obtain
the names of the good spirits, the calculation is to be made according to the
succession of the signs, beginning from the degree of the ascendant^ and to
attain to the names of the evil spirits, by working the contrary way.

You must also observe, that the names of the evil spirits are extracted, as well
from the names of the good spirits, as of the evil: so notwithstanding, that if
we enter the table with the name of a good spirit of the second order, the name
of the evil spirit shall be extracted from the order of the Princes and
Governors; but if we enter the table with the name of a good spirit of the
third order, or with the name of an evil spirit a Governor, after what manner
soever they are extracted, whether by this table, o^ from a celestial (...),
the names which do proceed from hence, shall be the names of the evil spirits,
the Ministers of the inferior order.

It is further to be noted, That as often as we enter this table with the good
spirits of the second order, the names extracted are of the second order: and
if under them we extract the name of an evil spirit, he is of the superior
order of the Governors. The same order is, if we enter with the name of an
evil spirit of the superior order. If therefore we enter this table with the
names of the (...) of the third order, or with the names of the (...) spirits,
as well of the good spirits, as of the evil, the names extracted shall be the
names of the ministering spirits of the inferior order.

But many Magicians, men of no small Authority, will have the tables of this
kind to be extended with (...) letters: so that by the same tables also, (...)
of the name of any office or effect, might be found out the name of any spirit,
as well good as evil, by the same manner which is above delivered, by taking the
name of the office or of the effect, in the column of letters, in their own
line, under their (...). And of this practice Trismegistus is a great Author,
who delivered this kind of calculation in Egyptian letters: not unproperly
also may they be referred to other letters of other tongues, for the reasons
assigned to the ^ignes; for truly he only in extant of all men, who have (...)
concerning the attaining to the names of spirits.

Therefore the force, secrecy and power, in what manner the sacred names of
spirits are truly and tightly found out, consists in the disposing of vowels,
which do make the name of a spirit, and wherewith is constituted the true name,
and right word. Now this art is thus perfected and brought to pass: first, we
are to take heed of the placing the vowels of the letters, which are found by
the calculation of the celestial figure, to find the names of the spirits of
the second order, Presidents and Governors. And this in the good spirits, is
thus brought to effect, by considering the stars which do constitute and make
the letters, and by placing them according to their order: first, let the
degree of the eleventh House be subtracted from the degree of that star which
is first in order; and that which remianeth thereof, let it be projected from
the degree of the ascendent, and where that number ends, there is part of the
vowel of the first letter: begin therefore to calculate the vowels of their
letters, according to their number and order; and the vowel which falls in
the place of the star, which is the first in order, the same vowel is
attributed to the first letter. Then afterward thou shall find the part of
the second letter, by substracting the degree of a star which is the second in
order from the first star; and that which remains, cast from the ascendant.
And this is the part from which thou shall begin the calculation of the vowels;
and that vowel which falls upon the second star, the same is the vowel of the
second letter. And so consequently may thou search out the vowels of the
following letters always, by substracting the degree of the following star,
from the degree of the star next preceding and going before. And so also all
calculations and numerations in the names of the good spirits, ought to be made
according to the succession of the signs. And in calculating the names of the
evil spirits, where in the names of the good spirits is taken the degree of the
eleventh House, in these ought to be taken the degree of the twelfth House. And
all numerations and calculations may be made with the succession of the signs,
by taking the beginning from the degree of the tenth House.

But in all extractions by tables, the vowels are placed after another manner.
In the first place therefore is taken the certain number of letters making the
name it self, and is thus numbered from the beginning of the column of the
first letter, or whereupon the name is extracted; and the letter on which this
number falls, is referred to the first letter of the name, extracted by
taking the distance of the one from the other, according to the order of the
Alphabet. But the number of that distance is projected from the beginning of
his column; and where it ends, there is part of the first vowel; from thence
therefore thou shall calculate the vowels themselves, in their own number and
order, in the same column; and the vowel which shall fall upon the first
letter of a name, the same shall be attributed to that name. Now thou shall
find the following vowels, by taking the distance from the precedent vowel to
the following: and so consequently according to the succession of the Alphabet.
And the number of that distance is to be numbered from the beginning of his own
column; and where he shall cease, there is the part of the vowel sought after.
From thence therefore must you calculate the vowels, as we have abovesaid; and
those vowels which shall fall upon their own letters, are to be attributed unto
them: if therefore any vowel shall happen to fall upon a vowel, the former must
give place to the latter: and this you are to understand only of the good
spirits. In the evil also you may proceed in the same way; except only, that
you make the numerations after a contrary and backward order, contrary to the
succession of the Alphabet, and contrary to the order of the columns (that is
to say) in ascending.

The name of good Angels, and of every man, which we have taught how to find
out, in our third book of Occult Philosophy, according to that manner, is of no
little Authority, nor of a mean foundation. But now we will give unto thee some
other ways, illustrated with no vain reasons. One whereof is, by taking in the
figure of the nativity, the five places of Hylech: which being noted, the
characters of the letters are projected in their order and number from the
beginning of Aries; and th^se letters which fall upon the degrees of the said
places, according to their order and dignity disposed and aspected, do make the
name of an Angel. There is also another way, wherein they do take Almutel,
which is the ruling and governing stars over the aforesaid five places; and the
projection is to be made from the degree of the ascendant; which is done by
gathering together the letters falling upon Almutel: which being placed in
order, according to their dignity, do make the name of an Angel. There is
furthermore another way used, and very much had in observation from the
Egyptians, by making their calculation from the degree of the ascendant, and by
gathering together the letters according to the Almutel of the eleventh House;
which House they call a good D^^on: which being placed according to their
dignities, the names of the Angels are constituted. Now the names of the evil
Angels are known after the like manner, except only that the projections must be
performed contrary to the course and order of the succession of the signs, so
that whereas in seeking the names of good spirits, we are to calculate from the
beginning of Aries* contrariwise, in attaining the names of the evil, we ought
to account from the beginning of Libra. And whereas in the good spirits we
number from the degree of the ascendant; contrarily, in the evil, we must
calculate from the degree of the seventh House. But according to the Egyptians,
the name of an Angel is collected according to the Almutel of the twelfth
House, which they call an evil spirit. Now all those rites, which are elsewhere
already by us dilivered in our third book of Occult Philosophy, may be made by
the characters of any language. In all which (as we have abovesaid) there is a
mystical and divine number, order and figure; from whence it comes to pass,
that the same spirit may be called by diverse names. But others are discovered
from the name of the spirit himself, of the good or evil, by tables formed to
this purpose.

Now these celestial characters do consist of lines and heads: the heads are
six, according to the six magnitudes of the stars, whereunto the planets also
are reduced. The first magnitude holds a Star, with the Sun, (...) a Cross.
The second with Jupiter a circular point. The third holds with Saturn, a
semicircle, a triangle, either crooked, round, or acute. The fourth with Mars,
a little stroke penetrating the line, either square, straight, or oblique. The
fifth with Venus and Mercury, a little stroke or point with a tail, ascending
or descending. The sixth with the Moon, a point made black. All which you may
see in the ensuing table. The heads then being posited according to the site of
the Stars in the figure of Heaven, then the lines are to be drawn out,
according to the congruency or agreement of their natures. And this you are to
understand of the fixed Stars. But in the erecting of the Planets, the lines
are drawn out, the heads being posited according to their course and nature
amongst themselves.



When therefore a character is to be found of any celestial Image ascending in
any degree or face of a sign, which do consist of Stars of the same magnitude
and nature; then the number of these Stars being posited according to their
place and order, the sines are drawn after the similitude of the Image
signified, as copiously as the same can be done.

But the Characters which are extracted according to the name of a spirit, are
composed by the table following, by giving to every letter that name which
agrees unto him, out of the table; which although it may appear easy to those
that apprehend it, yet there (...) herein no small difficulty; To wit, when the
letter of a name falls upon the line of letters or figures, that we may know
which figure or which letter is to be taken. And this may be thus known: for if
a letter falls upon the line of letters, consider of what number this letter
may be in the order of the name; as the second, or the third; then how many
letters that name contains; as five or seven; and multiply these numbers one
after another by themselves, and treble the product: then cast the whole (being
added together) from the beginning of the letters, according to the succession
of the Alphabet: and the letter upon which that number shall happen to fall,
ought to be placed for the character of that spirit. But if any letter of a
name fall on the line of figures, it is thus to be wrought. Take the number how
many this letter is in the order of the name, and let it be multiplied by that
number of which this letter is in the order of the Alphabet; and being added
together, divide it by nine, and the remainder shows the figure or number to
be placed in the character: and this may be put either in a Geometrical or
Arithmetical figure of number; which notwithstanding ought no^ (...) (...) the
number of nine, or nine Angles.

The Characters of good Spirits.
A simple point.

Round.

Starry.

Straight standing line.

Lying.

Oblique.

Line crooked like a bow.

Like waves.

Toothed.

Intersection right.

Inherent.

Adhering separate.

Oblique intersection simple.

Mixed.

Manifold.

Perpendicular right dexter.

Sinister.

Neuter.

A whole figure.

Broken.

Half.

A letter inhering.

Adhering.

Separate.



The Characters of evil Spirits.
A right line.

Crooked.

Reflexed.

A simple figure.

Penetrate.

Broken.

A right letter.

Retrograde.

Invers'd.

Flame.

Wind.

Water.

A mass.

Rain.

Clay.

A flying thing.

A creeping thing.

A serpent.

An eye.

A hand.

A foot.

A crown.

A crest.

Horns.

A scepter.

A sword.

A scourge.



But the Characters which are understood by the revelation of Spirits, take
their virtue from thence; because they are, as it were, certain hidden seals,
making the harmony of some divinity: either they are signs of a Covenant
entered into, and of promised and plighted faith, or of obedience. And those
Characters cannot by any other means be searched out.

Moreover, besides these Characters, there are certain familiar Figures and
Images of evil Spirits, under which forms they are wont to appear, and yield
obedience to them that invoke them. And all these Characters or Images may be
seen by the table following, according to the course of the letters
constituting the names of Spirits themselves: so that if in any letter there is
found more then the name of one Spirit, his Image holds the pre-eminence, the
others imparting their own order; so that they which are the first orders, to
them is attributed the head, the upper part of the body, according to their own
figure: those which are the lowest, do possess the thighs and feet; so also the
middle letters do attribute like to themselves the middle parts of the body, or
give the parts that (...). But if there happen any contrariety, that letter
which is the stronger in the number shall bear rule: and if they are equal,
they all impart equal things. Furthermore, if any name shall obtain any notable
Character or Instrument out of the Table, he shall likewise have the same
character in the Image.

We may also attain to the knowledge of the dignities of the evil Spirits, by
the same Tables of Characters and Images: for upon what spirit soever there
falls any excellent sign or instrument out of the Table of Characters, he
possesses that dignity. As if there shall be Crown, it shows a Kingly
dignity; if a Crest or Plume, a Duke dome; if a Horn, a County; if without
these there be a Scepter, Sword, or forked Instrument, it shows Rule and
Authority. Likewise out of the Table of Images you shall find them which bear
the chief Kingly dignity: from the Crown judge dignity; and from the
Instruments, Rule and Authority. Lastly, they which bear an humane shape and
figure, have greater dignity then those which appear under the Forms and Images
of Beasts; they also who ride, do excel them which appear on foot. And thus
according to all their commixtures, you may judge the dignity and excellency of
Spirits, one before another. Moreover, you must understand, that the Spirits of
the inferior order, of what dignity soever they be, are always subject to the
Spirits of the superior order: so also, that it is not incongruent for their
Kings and Dukes to be Subject and Minister to the presidents of the superior
order.

The shapes familiar to the Spirits of Saturn.
THey appear for the most part with a tall, lean, and slender body, with an
angry countenance, having four faces; one in the hinder part of the head, one
on the former part of the head, and on each side nosed or beaked: there
likewise appears a face on each knee, of a black shining color: their motion
is the moving of the wind, with a kind of earthquake: their sign is white
earth, whiter then any Snow.

The particular forms are,
A King having a beard, riding on a Dragon. An Old man with a beard. An Old
woman leaning on a staff. A Hog. A Dragon. An Owl. A black Garment. A Hook or
Sickle. A Juniper-tree.
The familiar forms to the Spirits of Jupiter.
THe Spirits of Jupiter do appear with a body sanguine and choleric, of a
middle stature, with a horrible fearful motion; but with a mild countenance, a
gentle speech, and of the color of Iron. The motion of them is flashings of
Lightning and Thunder; their sign is, there will appear men about the circle,
who shall seem to be devoured of Lions.

Their particular forms are,
A King with a Sword drawn, riding on a Stag. A Man wearing a Mitre in long
raiment. Homo mitratus.
A Maid with a Laurel-Crown adorned with Flowers. A Bull. A Stag. A Peacock. An
azure Garment. Azurino vestis. (...).
A Sword. A Box-tree.
The familiar forms of the Spirits of Mars.
THey appear in a tall body, choleric, a filthy countenance, of color brown,
swarthy or red, having horns like Hearts horns, and Griphins claws, bellowing
like wild Bulls. Their Motion is like fire burning; their sign Thunder and
Lightning about the Circle.

Their particular shapes are,
A King armed riding upon a Wolf. A Man armed. A Woman holding a buckler on her
thigh. A Hee-goat. A Horse. A Stag. A red Garment. Wool. A Cheeslip.
Multiceps.
Shapes familiar to the Spirits of the Sun.
THe Spirits of the Sun do for the most part appear in a large, full and great
body sanguine and gross, in a gold color, with the tincture of blood. Their
motion is as the Lightning of Heaven; their sign is to move the person to
sweat that calls them. But their particular forms are,

A King having a Scepter riding on a Lion. A King crowned. A Queen with a
Scepter. A Bird. A Lion. A Cock. A yellow or golden Garment. A Scepter.
Candatus.
Familiar shapes of the Spirits of Venus.
THey do appear with a fair body, of middle stature, with an amiable and
pleasant countenance, of color white or green, the upper part golden. The
motion of them is as it were a most clear Star. For their sign, there will
seem to be maids playing without the Circle, which will provoke and allure him
that calls them to play. But their particular forms are,

A King with a Scepter riding upon a Camel. A Maid clothed and dressed
beautifully. A Maid naked. A Shee-goat. A Camel. A Dove. A white or green
Garment. Flowers. The herb Savine.
The familiar forms of the Spirits of Mercury.
THe Spirits of Mercury will appear for the most part in a body of a middle
stature, cold, liquid and moist, fair, and with an affable speech; in a humane
shape and form, like unto a Knight armed; of color clear and bright. The
motion of them is as it were silver-coloured clouds. For their sign, they
cause and bring horror and fear unto him that calls them. But their particular
shapes are,

A King riding upon a Bear. A fair Youth. A Woman holding a distaffe. A Dog. A
Shee-bear. A Magpie. A Garment of sundry changeable colors. A Rod. A little
staff.
The forms familiar to the Spirits of the Moon.
THey will for the most part appear in a great and full body, soft and
phlegmatique, of color like a black obscure cloud, having a swelling
countenance, with eyes red and full of water, a bald head, and teeth like a
wild boar. Their motion is as it were an exceeding great tempest of the Sea.
For their sign, there will appear an exceeding great rain about the Circle.
And their particular shapes are,

A King like an Archer riding upon a Do. A little Boy. A Woman-hunter with a
bow and arrows. A Cow. A little Do. A Goose. A Garment green or
silver-coloured. An Arrow. A Creature having many feet.
But we now come to speak of the holy and sacred Pentacles and Sigils. Now
these pentacles, are as it were certain holy signs preserving us from evil
chances and events, and helping and assisting us to bind, exterminate, and
drive away evil spirits, and alluring the good spirits, and reconciling them
unto us. And these pentacles do consist either of Characters of the good
spirits of the superior order, or of sacred pictures of holy letters or
revelations, with apt and fit versicles, which are composed either of
Geometrical figures and holy names of God, according to the course and manner of
many of them; or they are compounded of all of them, or very many of them mixed.
And the Characters which are useful for us to constitute and make the
pentacles, they are the Characters of the good Spirits, especially and chiefly
of the good spirits of the first and second order, and sometimes also of the
third order. And this kind of Characters are especially to be named holy; and
then those Characters which we have above called holy. What Character soever
therefore of this kind is to be instituted, we must draw about him a double
circle, wherein we must write the name of his Angel: and if we will add some
divine name congruent with his Spirit and Office, it will be of the greater
force and efficacy. And if we will draw about him any angular figure, according
to the manner of his numbers, that also shall be lawful to be done. But the holy
pictures which do make the pentacles, are they which everywhere are delivered
unto us in the Prophets and sacred Writings, as well of the old as of the new
Testament. Even as the figure of the Serpent hanging on the cross, and
suchlike; whereof very many may be found out of the ^isions of the Prophets,
as of The brazen serpent set up in the wilderness.
Esaias, Daniel, Esdras and others, and also out of the revelation of the
Apocalypse. And we have spoken of them in our third book of Occult Philosophy,
where we have made mention of holy things. Therefore when any picture is
posited of any of these holy Images, let the circle be drawn round about it on
each side thereof, wherein let there be written some divine name, that is apt
and conformed to the effect of that figure, or else there may be written about
it some versicle taken out of part of the body of holy Scripture, which may
desire to ascertain or deprecate the desired effect. As, if a pentacle were to
be made to gain victory or revenge against ones enemies, as well visible as
invisible, The figure may be taken out of the second book of the Macchabees:
that is to say, a hand holding a golden Sword drawn, about which let there be
written the versicle there Accipe gladium sanctum, munus a Deo, in quo concides
adversarios populi mei Israel.
contained; To wit, Take the holy Sword, the gift of God, wherewith thou shall
stay the adversaries of my people Israel. Or also there may be written about it
a versicle of the fifth Psalm: In this is the strength of thy arm: before thy
face there is death; or some other suchlike versicle. But if you will write
any divine name about the figure, then let some name be taken that signifies
Fear, a Sword, Wrath, the Revenge of God, or some suchlike name congruent and
agreeing with the effect desired. And if there shall be written any Angular
figure, let him be taken according to the reason and rule of the numbers, as we
have taught in our second book of Occult Philosophy, where we have treated of
the numbers, and of the like operations. And of this fort there are two
pentacles of sublime virtue and great power, very useful and necessary to be
used in the consecration of experiments and Spirits: one whereof is that in the
first chapter of Apocalypse; To wit, a figure of the Majesty of God sitting
upon a Throne, having in his mouth a two-edged Sword, as there it is written,
about which let there be written, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning Ego sum
primus and novissimus, vivus and fui mortuus: and ecce sum vivens in secula
seculorum; and babeoclaves mortis and inferni.
and the end, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty I am
the first and the last, who am living, and was dead, and behold I live for ever
and ever; and I have the keys of death and hell. Then there shall be written
about it these three versicles.

Manda Deus virtuti tuae, etc. Give commandment, O God, to thy strength.

Confirm, Oh God, thy work in us.

Let them be as dust before the face of the wind. And let the Angel of the
Lord scatter them. Let all their ways be darkness and uncertain. And let the
Angel of the Lord persecute them.

Moreover, let there be written about it the ten general names, which are, El,
Elohim, Elohe, Zebaoth, Elion, Escerchie, Adonay, Jah, Tetragrammaton, Saday.

There is another pentacle, the figure whereof is like unto a Lamb slain,
having seven eyes, and seven horns, and under his feet a book sealed with seven
seals, as it is in the 5. chap. of the Apocalypse. Whereabout let there be
written this versicle: Behold the Lion has overcome of the Tribe of Judah, the
root of David. I will open the book, and unloose the seven seals thereof. And
one other versicle: I saw Satan like lghtning fall down from heaven. Behold, I
have given you power to tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the
power of your enemies, and nothing shall be able to hurt you. And let there be
also written about it the ten general names, as aforesaid.

But those Pentacles which are thus made of figures and names, let them keep
this order: for when any figure is posited, conformable to any number, to
produce any certain effect or virtue, there must be written thereupon, in all
the several Angles, some Divine name, obtaining the force and efficacy of the
thing desired: yet so nevertheless, that the name which is of this sort do
consist of just so many letters, as the Figure may constitute a number; or of
so many letters of a name, as joined together amongst themselves, may make the
number of a Figure; or by any number which may be divided without any
superfluity or diminution. Now such a name being found, whether it be only one
name or more, or diverse names, it is to be written in all the several Angles in
the Figure: but in the middle of the Figure let the revolution of the name be
whole and totally placed, or at least principally.

Oftentimes also we constitute Pentacles, by making the revolution of some
kind of name, in a square Table, and by drawing about it a single or double
Circle, and by writing therein some holy Versicle competent and befitting this
name, or from which that name is extracted. And this is the way of making the
Pentacles, according to their several distinct forms and fashions, which we may
as we please either multiply or commix together by course among themselves, to
work the greater efficacy, (...) extension and enlargement of force and virtue.

As, if a deprecation should be made for the overthrow and destruction of ones
enemies, then we are to mind and call to remembrance how God destroyed the
whole face of the earth in the deluge of waters; and the destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrha, by raining down fire and brimstone; likewise, how God overthrew
Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: and to call to mind if any other
malediction or curse be found in holy Writ. And thus in things of the like
sort. So likewise in deprecating and praying against perils and dangers of
waters, we ought to call to remembrance the saving of Noah in the deluge of
waters, the passing of the children of Israel through the Red Sea; and also we
are to mind how Christ walked upon the waters, and saved the ship in danger to
be cast away with the tempest; and how he commanded the winds and the waves,
and they obeyed him; and also, that he drew Peter out of the water, being in
danger of drowning: and the like. And lastly, with these we invoke and call
upon some certain holy names of God, God; to wit, such as are significative to
accomplish our desire, and accommodated to the desired effect: as, if it be to
overthrow enemies, we are to invoke and call upon the names of wrath, revenge,
fear, justice, and fortitude of God: and if we would avoid and escape any evil
or danger, we then call upon the names of mercy, defense, salvation, fortitude,
goodness, and suchlike names of God. When also we pray unto God that he would
grant unto us our desires, we are likewise to intermix therewith the name of
some good spirit, whether one only, or more, whose office it is to execute our
desires: and sometimes also we require some evil spirit to restrain or compel,
whose name likewise we intermingle; and that rightly especially, if it be to
execute any evil work; as revenge, punishment, or destruction.

Furthermore, if there be any Versicle in the Psalms, or in any other part of
holy Scripture, that shall seem congruent and agreeable to our desire, the same
is to be mingled with our prayers. Now after Prayer has been made unto God, it
is expedient afterward to make an Oration to that executioner whom in our
precedent prayer unto God we have desired should administer unto us, whether
one or more, or whether he be an Angel, or Star, or Soul, or any of the noble
Angels. But this kind of Oration ought to be composed according to the Rules
which we have delivered in the second book of Occult Philosophy, where we have
treated of the manner of the composition of Enchantments.

You may know further, that these kind of bonds have a threefold difference:
for the first bond is, when we conjure by Natural things: the second is
compounded of Religious mysteries, by Sacraments, Miracles, and things of this
sort: and the third is constituted by Divine names, and holy Sigils. And by
these kind of bonds, we may bind not only spirits, but also all other
creatures whatsoever; as animals, tempests, Incendia; Envy and Malice.
burnings, floods of waters, and the force and power of Arms. Oftentimes also
we use these bonds aforesaid, not only by Conjuration, but sometimes also
using the means of Deprecation and Benediction. Moreover, it conduces much to
this purpose, to join some sentence of holy Scripture, if any shall be found
convenient hereunto: as, in the Conjuration of Serpents, by commemorating the
curse of the Serpent in the earthly Paradise, and the setting up of the Serpent
in the wilderness; and further adding that Versicle, Thou shall walk upon the
Asp and the Basilisk, etc. Superstition Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis,
etc.
also is of much prevalency herein, by the translation of some Sacramental
Rites, to bind that which we intend to hinder; as, the Rites of
Excommunication, of Sepulchers, Funerals, Buryings, and the like.

And now we come to treat of the Consecrations which men ought to make upon all
instruments and things necessary to be used in this Art: and the virtue of this
Consecration most chiefly consists in two things; to wit, in the power of the
person consecrating, and by the virtue of the prayer by which the Consecration
is made. For in the person consecrating, there is required holiness of Life,
and power of sanctifying: both which are acquired by Dignification and
Initiation. And that the person himself should with a firm and undoubted faith
believe the virtue, power, and efficacy hereof. And then in the Prayer it self
by which this Consecration is made, there is required the like holiness; which
either solely consists in the prayer it self, as, if it be by divine
inspiration ordained to this purpose, such as we have in many places of the
holy Bible; or that it be hereunto instituted through the power of the Holy
Spirit, in the ordination of the Church. Otherwise there is in the Prayer a
Sanctimony, which is not only by it self, but by the commemoration of holy
things; as, the commemoration of holy Scriptures, Histories, Works, Miracles,
Effects, Graces, Promises, Sacraments and Sacramental things, and the like.
Which things, by a certain similitude, do seem properly or improperly to
appertain to the thing consecrated.

There is used also the invocation of some Divine names, with the consignation
of holy Seals, and things of the like sort, which do conduce to sanctification
and expiation; such as are the Sprinkling with Holy Water, Unctions with holy
Oil, and odoriferous Suffumigations appertaining to holy Worship. And therefore
in every Consecration there is chiefly used the Benediction and Consecration of
Water, Oil, Fire, and Fumigations, used everywhere with holy Wax-lights or
Lamps burning: for without Lights no Sacrament is rightly performed. This
therefore is to be known, and firmly observed, That if any Consecration be to
be made of things profane, in which there is any pollution or defilement, then
an exorcising and expiation of those things ought to precede the consecration.
Which things being so made pure, are more apt to receive the influences of the
Divine virtues. We are also to observe, that in the end of every Consecration,
after that the prayer is rightly performed, the person consecrating ought to
bless the thing consecrated, by breathing out some words, with divine virtue
and power of the present Consecration, with the commemoration of his virtue and
authority, that it may be the more duly performed, and with an earnest and
intentive mind. And therefore we will here lay down some examples hereof,
whereby the way to the whole perfection hereof may the more easily be made to
appear unto you.

So then, in the consecration of water, we ought to commemorate how that God
has placed the firmament in the midst of the waters, and in what manner that
God placed the fountain of waters in the earthly Paradise, from whence sprang
four holy rivers, which watered the whole earth. Likewise we are to call to
remembrance in what manner God made the water to be the instrument of executing
his justice in the destruction of the Giants in the general deluge over all the
earth, and in the overthrow of the host of Pharaoh in the Red Sea; also, how
God led his own people through the midst of the Sea on dry ground, and through
the midst of the river of Jordan; and likewise how marvelously he drew forth
water out of the stony rock in the wilderness; and how at the prayer of Samson,
he caused a fountain of running water to flow out of the cheek-tooth of the
jaw bone of an ass: and likewise, how God has made waters the instrument of
his mercy, and of salvation, for the expiation of Original sin: also, how
Christ was baptized in Jordan, and has hereby sanctified and cleansed the
waters. Moreo^er, certain divine names are to be invocated, which are
conformable hereunto; as, that God is a living fountain, living water, the
fountain of mercy; and names of the like kind.

And likewise in the consecration of fire, we are to commemorate how that God
has created the fire to be an instrument to execute his justice, for
punishment, vengeance, and for the expiation of sins: also, when God shall come
to judge the world, he will command a conflagration of fire to go before him.
And we are to call to remembrance in what manner God appeared to Moses in the
burning bush; and also, how he went before the children of Israel in a pillar
of fire; and that nothing can be duly offered, sacrificed, or sanctified,
without fire; and how that God instituted fire to be kept continually burning
in the Tabernacle of the Covenant; and how miraculously he re-kindled the same,
being extinct, and preserved it elsewhere from going out, being hidden under
the waters: and things of this sort. Likewise the Names of God are to be called
upon which are consonant hereunto; as, it is read in the Law and the Prophets,
that God is a consuming fire: and if there be any of the Divine names which
signifies fire, or suchlike names; as, the glory of God, the light of God, the
splendour and brightness of God.

And likewise in the consecration of Oil and Perfumes, we are to call to
remembrance such holy things as are pertinent to this purpose, which we read in
Exodus of the holy anointing oil, and divine names significant hereunto, such
as is the name Christ, which signifies anointed: and what mysteries there are
hereof; as that in the Revelation, of the two Olive Trees distilling holy oil
into the lamps that burn before the face of God: and the like.

And the blessing of the lights, wa^, and lamps, is taken from the fire, and
the altar which contains the substance of the flame: and what other such
similitudes as are in mysteries; as that of the seven candlesticks and lamps
burning before the face of God.

These therefore are the Consecrations which first of all are necessary to be
used in every kind of devotion, and ought to precede it, and without which
nothing in holy Rites can be duly performed.

In the next place now we shall show unto you the consecration of Places,
Instruments, and suchlike things.

Therefore when you would consecrate any Place or Circle, you ought to take the
prayer of Solomon used in the dedication of the Temple: and moreover, you must
bless the place with the sprinkling of Holy Water, and with Fumigations; by
commemorating in the benediction holy mysteries; such as these are: The
sanctification of the throne of God, of mount Sinai, of the Tabernacle of the
Covenant, of the Holy of holies, of the temple of Jerusalem. Also, the
sanctification Sanctum sanctorum.
of mount Golgotha, by the crucifying of Christ; the sanctification of the
Temple of Christ; of mount Tabor, by the transfiguration and ascension of
Christ: and the like. And by invocating divine names which are significant
hereunto; such as the Place of God, the Throne of God, the Chayr of God, the
Tabernacle of God, the Altar of God, the Habitation of God, and suchlike
divine names of this sort; which are to be written about the Circle or place to
be consecrated.

And in the consecrations of instruments, and of all other things whatsoever
that are serviceable to this Art, you shall proceed after the same manner, by
sprinkling the same with Holy Water, perfuming the same with holy Fumigations,
anointing it with holy Oil, sealing it with some holy Sigil, and blessing it
with prayer; and by commemorating holy things out of the sacred Scriptures,
Religion, and Divine names which shall be found agreeable to the thing that is
to be consecrated: as for examples sake, in consecrating a sword, we are to
call to remembrance that in the Gospel, He that has Qui habet duas tunicas,
etc.
two coats, etc. and that place in the second of the Macchabees, That a sword
was divinely and miraculously sent to Judas Macchabew. And if there be any
thing of the like in the Prophets; as that place, Take unto you two-edged
Swords, etc. Accipte vobis gladios bis acutos.


In like manner you shall consecrate experiments and books, and whatsoever of
the like nature, as is contained in writings, pictures, and the like, by
sprinkling, perfuming, anointing, sealing, and blessing with holy
commemorations, and calling to remembrance the sanctifications of mysteries;
As, the sanctifying of the Tables of the ten Commandments, which were delivered
to Moses by God in Mount Sinai; The sanctification of the Testaments of God,
the Old and New; The sanctification of the Law, and of the Prophets, and
Scriptures, which are promulgated by the holy Ghost. Moreover, there is to be
commemorated such divine names as are fit and convenient hereunto; as these
are: The Testament of God, The book of God, The book of life, The knowledge of
God, The wisdom of God; and the like. And with such kind of Rites is the
personal consecration performed.

There is furthermore, besides these, another Rite of consecration, of
wonderful power, and much efficacy; And this is out of the kinds of
superstitions: That is to say, when the Rite of consecration or collection of
any Sacrament in the Church is transferred to that thing which we would
consecrate.

It is to be known also, that Vows, Oblations, and Sacrifice, have the power
of consecration, as well real as personal; and they are as it were certain
covenants and conventions between those names with which they are made, and us
who make them, strongly cleaving to our desire and wished effect: As, when we
dedicate, offer, and sacrifice, with certain names or things; as, Fumigations,
Unctions, Rings, Images, Looking-glasses; and things less material, as Deities,
Sigils, Pentacles, Enchantments, Orations, Pictures, and Scriptures: of which
we have largely spoken in our third book of Occult Philosophy.

There is extant amongst those Magicians (who do most use the ministry of evil
spirits) a certain Rite of invocating spirits by a Book to be consecrated
before to that purpose; which is properly called, A book of Spirits; whereof we
Liber Spirituum.
shall now speak a few words. For this book is to be consecrated, a book of
evil spirits, ceremoniously to be composed, in their name and order: whereunto
they bind with a certain holy Oath, the ready and present obedience of the
spirit therein written.

Now this book is to be made of most pure and clean paper, that has never been
used before; which many do call Virgin-paper. And this book must be inscribed
after this manner: that is to say, Let there be placed on the left side the
image of the spirit, and on the right side his character, with the Oath above
it, containing the name of the spirit, and his dignity and place, with his
office and power. Yet very many do compose this book otherwise, omitting the
characters or image: but it is more efficacious not to neglect any thing which
conduces to it.

Moreover, there is to be observed the circumstances of places, times, hours,
according to the Stars which these spirits are under, and are seen to agree
unto, their ^ite, rite, and order being applied.

Which book being so written, and well bound, is to be adorned, garnished, and
kept secure, with Registers and Seals, lest it should happen after the
consecration to open in some place not intented, and endanger the operator.
Furthermore, this book ought to be kept as reverently as may be: for
irreverence of mind causes it to lose its virtue, with pollution and
profanation.

Now this sacred book being thus composed according to the manner already
delivered, we are then to proceed to the consecration thereof after a twofold
way: one whereof is, That all and singular the spirits who are written in the
book, be called to the Circle, according to the Rites and Order which we have
before taught; and the book that is to be consecrated, let it be placed without
the Circle in a triangle. And in the first place, let there be read in the
presence of the spirits all the Oaths which are written in that book; and then
the book to be consecrated being placed without the Circle in a triangle there
drawn, let all the spirits be compelled to impose their hands where their
images and characters are drawn, and to confirm and consecrate the same with a
special and common Oath. Which being done, let the book be taken and shut, and
preserved as we have before spoken, and let the spirits be licensed to depart,
according to due rite and order.

There is another manner of consecrating a book of spirits, which is more easy,
and of much efficacy to produce every effect, except that in opening this book
the spirits do not always come visible. And this way is thus: Let there be made
a book of spirits as we have before before set forth; but in the end thereof
let there be written Invocations and Bonds, and strong Conjurations, wherewith
every spirit may be bound. Then this book must be bound between two Tables or
Lamens, and in the inside thereof let there be drawn the holy Pentacles of the
Divine Majesty, which we have before set forth and described out of the
Apocalypse: then let the first of them be placed in the beginning of the book,
and the second at the end of the same. This book being perfected after this
manner, let it be brought in a clear and fair time, to a Circle prepared in a
cross way, according to the Art which we have before delivered; and there in
the first place the book being opened, let it be consecrated to the rites and
ways which we have before declared concerning Consecration. Which being done,
let all the spirits be called which are written in the book, in their own order
and place, by conjuring them thrice by the bonds described in the book; that
they come unto that place within the space of three days, to assure their
obedience, and confirm the same, to the book so to be consecrated. Then let the
book be wrapped up in clean linen, and buried in the middle of the Circle, and
there fast stopped up: and then the Circle being destroyed, after the spirits
are licensed, depart before the rising of the sun: and on the third day, about
the midd^e of the night, return, and new make the Circle, and with bended knees
make prayer and giving thanks unto God, and let a precious perfume be made, and
open the hole, and take out the book; and so let it be kept, not opening the
same. Then you shall license the spirits in their order, and destroying the
Circle, depart before the sun rise. And this is the last rite and manner of
consecrating, profitable to whatsoever writings and experiments, which do
direct to spirits, placing the same between two holy Lamens or Pentacles, as
before is shown.

But the Operator, when he would work by the book thus consecrated, let him do
it in a fair and clear season, when the spirits are least troubled; and let him
place himself toward the region of the spirits. Then let him open the book
under a due Register; let him invoke the spirits by their Oath there described
and confirmed, and by the name of their character and image, to that purpose
which you desire: and, if there be need, conjure them by the bonds placed in
the end of the book. And having attained your desired effect, then you shall
license the spirits to depart.

And now we shall come to speak concerning the invocation of spirits, as well
of the good spirits as of the bad.

The good spirits may be invocated of us, diverse ways, and in sundry manners do
offer themselves unto us. For they do openly speak to those that watch, and do
offer themselves to oursight, or do inform us in dreams by oracle of those
things which are desired. Whosoever therefore would call any good spirit, to
speak or appear in ^ight, it behooves them especially to observe two things:
one whereof is about the disposition of the invocant; the other about those
things which are outwardly to be adhibited to the invocation, for the
conformity of the spirits to be called. It behooves therefore that the invocant
himself be religiously disposed for many days to such a mystery. In the first
place therefore, he ought to be confessed and contrite, both inwardly and
outwardly, and rightly expiated, by daily washing himself with holy water.
Moreover, the invocant ought to conserve himself all these days, chaste,
abstinent, and to separate himself as much as may be done, from all
perturbation of mind, and from all manner of foreign and secular business.
Also, he shall obser^e fastings all these days, as much as shall seem
convenient to him to be done. Also, let him daily between sunrising and
sunsetting, being clothed with a holy linen garment, seven times call upon
God, and make a deprecation to the Angels to be called according to the rule
which we have before taught. Now the number of days of fasting and preparation,
is commonly the time of a whole Lunation. There is also another number observed
amongst the Caballists, which is forty days.

Now concerning those things which do appertain to this Rite of Invocation, the
first is, That a place be chosen, clean, pure, close, quiet, free from all
manner of noise, and not subject to any strangers sight. This place must first
be exercised and consecrated: and let there be a table or altar placed therein,
covered with clean white linen, and set toward the east: and on each side
thereof, let there be set two consecrated wax-lights burning, the flame whereof
ought not to go out all these days. In the middle of the altar, let there be
placed Lamens, or the holy paper which we have before described, covered with
pure fine linen; which is not to be opened until the end of these days of the
Consecration. You shall also have in readiness a precious perfume, and pure
anointing oil; and let them be both kept consecrated. There must also a Censer
be set on the head of the altar, wherein you shall kindle the holy fire, and
make a perfume every day that you shall pray. You shall also have a long
garment of white linen, close before and behind, which may cover the whole
body and the feet, and girt about you with a girdle. You shall also have a veil
of pure clean linen, and in the forepart thereof let there be fixed golden or
gilded Lamens, with the inscription of the name Tetragrammaton; all which
things are to be sanctified and consecrated in order. But you must not enter
into the holy place, unless it be first washed, and arrayed with a holy garment;
and then you shall enter into it with your feet naked. And when you enter
therein, you shall sprinkle it with holy water: then you shall make a perfume
upon the altar, and afterward with bended knees pray before the altar as we
have directed.

But in the end of these days, on the last day, you shall fast more strictly:
and fasting on the day following, at the rising of the sun, you may enter into
the holy place, using the ceremonies before spoken of, first by sprinkling your
self, then with making a perfume, you shall sign your self with holy oil in
the forehead and anoint your eyes; using prayer in all these Consecrations.
Then you shall open the holy Lamen, and pray before the altar upon your knees,
as abovesaid: and then an invocation being made to the Angels, they will appear
unto you, which you desire; which you shall entertain with a benign and chaste
communication, and license them to depart.

Now the Lamen which is to be used to invoke any good spirit, you shall make
after this manner; either in metal conformable, or in new wax, mixed with species
and colors conformable: or it may be made in clean paper, with convenient
colors: and the outward form or figure thereof may be square, circular, or
triangular, or of the like sort, according to the rule of the numbers: in which
there must be written the divine names, as well the general names as the
special. And in the center of the Lamen, let there be drawn a character of six
corners; in the middle whereof, let there be Hexagonus
written the name and character of the Star, or of the Spirit his governor, to
whom the good spirit that is to be called is subject. And about this character,
let there be placed so many characters of five corners, as the spirits we would
call Pentagonus
together at once. And if we shall call only one spirit, nevertheless there
shall be made four Pentagones, wherein the name of the spirit or spirits, with
their characters, is to be written. Now this table ought to be composed when
the Moon is increasing, on those days and hours which then agree to the Spirit.
And if we take a fortunate star herewith, it will be the better. Which Table
being made in this manner, it is to be consecrated according to the rules above
delivered.

And this is the way of making the general Table, serving for the invocation of
all good spirits whatsoever. Nevertheless we may make special Tables congruent
to every spirit, by the rule which we have abo^e spoken of concerning holy
Pentacles.

And now we will declare unto y^^ another Rite more easy to perform this
thing: that is to say, Let the man that is to receive any Oracle from the good
spirits, be chaste, pure, and confessed. Then a place being prepared pure and
clean, and covered everywhere with white linen, on the Lords day in the new of
the moon let him enter into that place, clothed with clean white garments; and
let him exorcize the place, and bless it, and make a Circle therein with a
sanctified cole; and let there be written in the uttermost part of the Circle
the names of the Angels, and in the inner part thereof let there be written the
mighty names of God: and let him place within the Circle, at the four angles of
the world, the Censers for the persumes. Then let him enter the place fasting,
and washed, and let him begin to pray toward the east this whole Psalm: Beati
immaculati in via, etc. Psalm. 119.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way, etc. by perfuming; and in the end
deprecating the Angels, by the said divine names, that they will daign to
discover and reveal that which he desires: and that let him do six days,
continuing washed and fasting. And on the seventh day, which is the Sabbath,
let him, being washed and fasting, enter the Circle, and perfume it, and anoint
himself with holy anointing oil, by anointing his forehead, and upon both his
eyes, and in the palms of his hands, and upon his feet. Then upon his knees let
him say the Psalm aforesaid, with Divine and Angelical names. Which being said,
let him arise, and let him begin to walk about in a circuit within the said
Circle from the east to the west, until he is wearied with a dizziness of his
brain: let him fall down in the Circle, and there he may rest; and forthwith he
shall be wrapped up in an ecstasie, and a spirit will appear unto him, which will
inform him of all things. We must observe also, that in the Circle there ought
to be four holy candles burning at the four parts of the world, which ought not
to want light for the space of a whole week. And the manner of fasting must be
such, that he abstain from all things having a life of Sense, and from those
things which do proceed from them: and let him only drink pure running water:
neither let him take any food till the going down of the sun. And let the
perfume and the holy anointing oil be made, as is set forth in Exodus and the
other holy books of the Bible. It is also to be observed, that always as often
as he enters into the Circle, he have upon his forehead a golden Lamen, upon
which there must be written the name Tetragrammaton, as we have before spoken.

But natural things, and their commixtures, do also belong unto us, and are
conducing to receive Oracles from any spirit by a dream: which are either
Perfumes, Unctions, and Meats or Drinks: which you may understand in our first
book of Occult Philosophy.

But he that is willing always and readily to receive the Oracles of a Dream,
let him make unto himself a Ring of the Sun or of Saturn for this purpose.
There is also an Image to be made, of excellent efficacy and power to work
this effect; which being put under his head when he goes to sleep, does
effectually give true dreams of what things soever the mind has before
determined or consulted on. The Tables of Numbers do likewise confer to receive
an Oracle, being duly formed under their own Constellations. And these things
thou may know in the third book of Occult Philosophy.

Holy Tables and Papers do also serve to this effect, being specially composed
and consecrated: such as is the Almadel of Solomon, and the Table of the
Revolution of the name Tetragrammaton. And those things which are of this
kind, and written unto these things, out of diverse figures, numbers, holy
pictures, with the inscriptions of the holy names of God and of Angels; the
composition whereof is taken out of diverse places of the holy Scriptures,
Psalms, and Versicles, and other certain promises of the divine Revelation and
Prophecies.

To the same effect do conduce holy prayers and imprecations, as well unto God,
as to the holy Angels and Heroes: the imprecations of which prayers are to be
composed as we have before shown, according to some religious similitude of
Miracles, Graces, and the like, making mention of those things which we intend
to do: as, out of the Old Testament, of the dream of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh,
Daniel, and Nebuchadnezzar: if out of the New Testament, of the dream of Joseph
the husband of the blessed virgin Mary; of the dream of the three Wisemen; of
John the Evangelist sleeping upon the breast of our Lord: and whatsoever of the
like kind can be found in Religion, Miracles, and Revelations; as, the
revelation of the Cross to Helen, the revelation of Constantine and Charles the
Great, therevelations of Brilges, Cyril, Methodius, Mechtild, Joa him, Merhir,
and suchlike. According to which, let the deprecations be composed, if when he
goes to sleep it be with a firm intention: and the rest well disposing
themselves, let them pray devoutly, and without doubt they will afford a
powerful effect.

Now he that knows how to compose those things which we have now spoken of,
he shall receive the most true Oracles of dreams. And this he shall do; observe
those things which in the second book of Occult Philosophy are directed
concerning this thing. He that is desirous therefore to receive an Oracle, let
him abstain from supper and from drink, and be otherwise well disposed, his
brain being free from turbulent vapors; let him also have his bedchamber fair
and clean, exercised and consecrated if he will; then let him perfume the same
with some convenient fumigation; and let him anoint his temples with some
unguent efficacious hereunto, and put a ring upon his finger, of the things
above spoken of: let him take either some image, or holy table, or holy paper,
and place the same under his head: then having made a devout prayer, let him go
unto his bed, and meditating upon that thing which he desires to know, let him
so sleep; for so shall he receive a most certain and undoubted oracle by a
dream, when the Moon goes thought that sign which was in the ninth House of
his nativity, and also when she goes through the sign of the ninth House of
the Revolution of his nativity; and when she is in the ninth sign from the
sign of perfection. And this is the way and means whereby we may obtain all
Sciences and Arts whatsoever, suddenly and perfectly, with a true Illumination
of our understanding; although all inferior familiar Spirits whatsoever do
conduce to this effect; and sometimes also evil Spirits sensibly informing us
Intrinsecally or Extrinsecally.

But if we would call an evil Spirit to the Circle, it first behooves us to
consider, and to know his nature, to which of the Planets it agrees, and what
Offices are distributed to him from that Planet; which being known, let there
be sought out a place fit and proper for his invocation, according to the
nature of the Planet, and the quality of the Offices of the said Spirit, as
near as the same may be done: as, if their power be over the Sea, Rivers or
Floods, then let the place be chosen in the Shore; and so of the rest. Then her
there be chosen a convenient time, both for the quality of the Air, serene,
clean, quiet, and fitting for the Spirits to assume bodies; as also of the
quality and nature of the Planet, and of the Spirit, as to wit, on his day, or
the time wherein he rules: he may be fortunate or unfortunate, sometimes of
the day, and sometimes of the night, as the Scars and Spirits do require. These
things being considered, let there be a Circle in the place elected, as well for
the defense of the (...), as for the confirmation of the Spirit. And in the
Circle it self there are to be written the divine general names, and those
things which do yield defense unto us; and with them, those divine names which
do rule this Planet, and the Offices of the Spirit himself; there shall also be
written therein, the names of the good Spirits which bear rule, and are able to
bind and constrain that Spirit which we intend to call. And if we will any
more fortify and strengthen our Circle, we may add Characters and Pentacles
agreeing to the work; then also if we will, we may either within or without the
Circle, frame an angular figure, with the inscription of such convenient
numbers, as are congruent amongst themselves to our work; which are also to be
known, according to manner of numbers and figures: of which in the second book
of Occult Philosophy it is sufficiently spoken. Further, He is to be provided
of lights, perfumes, unguents and medicines, compounded according to the nature
of the Planet and Spirit; which do partly agree with the Spirit, by reason of
their natural and celestial virtue; and partly are exhibited to the Spirit for
religious and superstitious worship. Then he must be furnished with holy and
consecrated things, necessary as well for the defense of the Invocant, and his
fellows, as also serving for bonds to bind and constrain the Spirits; such as
are either holy Papers, Lamens, Pictures, Pentacles, Sword, Scepters, Garments
of convenient matter and color, and things of the like sort. Then when all
these things are provided; and the Master and his fellows being in the Circle,
in the f^rst place let him consecrate the Circle, and all those things which he
uses; which being performed with a convenient gesture and countenance let him
begin to pr^^wi^h a loud voice, after this manner. First let him make an
Oration unto God, and then let him entreat the good Spirits: and if he will
read any Prayers, Psalms, or Gospels for his defense, the ought to take the
first place. After these Prayers and Orations are said, then let him begin to
invocate the Spirit which he desires, with a gentle and loving Enchantment, to
all the coasts of the World, with the commemoration of his own Authority and
power. And then let him rest a little, looking about him, to see if any Spirit
do appear; which if he delay, then ^et him repeat his invocation, as abovesaid,
unti he has done it threetimes; and if the Spirit be pertinacious, obstinate,
and will not appear, then let him begin to conjure with divine power; so also
that the conjurations and all his commemorations do agree with the Nature and
Offices of the Spirit himself, and reiterate the same three times, from
stronger to stronger, using Objurgations, Contumelies, Cursings, and
Punishments, and suspension from his Office and power, and the like.

And after all the courses are finished, then cease a little; and if any Spirit
shall appear, let the Invocant turn himself toward the Spirit, and courteously
receive him, and earnestly entreating him, let him first require his name, and
if he be called by any other name: and then proceeding further, let him ask him
whatsoever he will: and if in any thing the Spirit shall show himself obstinate
or lying; let him be bound by covenient conjurations: and if you doubt of any
lie, make without the Circle with the consecrated Sword, the figure of a
triangle or A Character with five corners.
Pentagone, and compel the Spirit to enter into it: and if thou receivest any
promise which thou would have to be confirmed with an Oath, let him stretch
the sword out of the Circle, and swear the Spirit, by laying his hand upon the
Sword. Then having obtained of the Spirit that which you desire, or are
otherwise contented, license him to depart with courteous words, giving command
unto him, that he do no hurt: and if he will not depart, compel him by powerful
conjurations; and if need require, expel him by Exorcismes, and by making
contrary fumigations. And when he is departed, go not out of the Circle, but
make a stay, making prayer, and gi^ing of thanks unto God and the good Angels,
and also pra^ing for your defense and conservation: and then all those things
being orderly performed, you may depart.

But if your hope be frustrated, and no Spirits will appear, yet for this do
not despair; but leaving the Circle, return again at other times, doing as
before. And if you shall judge that you have erred in any thing, then that you
shall amend, by adding or diminishing; for the constancy of Reiteration does
often increase your authority and power, and strikes terror into the Spirits,
and humbles them to obey.

And therefore some use to make a Gate in the Circle, whereby they may go in
and out, which they open and shut as they please, and fortify it with holy
Names and Pentacles.

This also we are to take notice of, That when no Spirits will appear, but the
Master being wearied has determined to cease and give over; let him not
therefore depart without licensing the Spirits: for they that do neglect this,
are very greatly in danger, except they are fortified with some sublime defense.

Often^imes also the Spirits do come, although they appear not visible, (for to
cause terror to him that calls them) either in the things which he uses, or in
the operation it self. But this kind of licensing is not given simply, but by
a kind of dispensation with suspension, until in the following terms they
shall render themselves obedient. Also without a Circle these Spirits may be
called to appear, according to the way which is above delivered about the
consecration of a book.

But when we do intend to execute any effect by evil Spirits, where an
Apparition is not needful; then that is to be done, by making and forming that
thing which is to be unto us as an instrument, or subject of the experiment it
self; as, whether it be an Image, or a Ring, or a Writing, or any Character,
Candle, or Sacrifice, or any thing of the like sort; then the name of the
Spirit is to be written therein, with his Character, according to the exigency
of the experiment, either by writing it with some blood, or otherwise using a
perfume agreeable to the Spirit. Oftentimes also making Prayers and Orations to
God and the good Angels before we invocate the evil Spirit, conjuring him by
the divine power.

There is another kind of Spirits, which we have spoken of in our third book
of Occult Philosophy, not so hurtful, and nearest unto men; so also, that they
are effected with humane passions, and do joy in the conversation of men, and
freely do inhabit with them: and others do dwell in the Woods and Deserts; and
others delight in the company of diverse domestique Animals and wild Beasts;
and othersome do inhabit about Fountains and Meadows. Whosoever therefore would
call up these kind of Spirits, in the place where they abide, it ought to be
done with odoriferous perfumes, and with sweet sounds and instruments of
Music, specially composed for the business, with using of Songs, Enchantments
and pleasant Verses, with praises and promises.

But those which are obstinate to yield to these things, are to be compelled
with Threatenings, Comminations, Cursings, Delusions, Contumelies, and
especially by threatening them to expel them from those places where they are
conversant.

Further, if need be, thou may betake thee to use Exorcismes; but the
chiefest thing that ought to be observed, is, constancy of mind, and boldness,
free, and alienated from fear.

Lastly, when you would invocate these kind of Spirits, you ought to prepare a
Table in the place of invocation, covered with clean linen; whereupon you shall
set new bread, and running water or milk in new earthen vessels, and new
knives. And you shall make a fire, whereupon a perfume shall be made. But let
the Invocant go unto the head of the Table, and round about it let there be
seats placed for the Spirits, as you please, and the Spirits being called, you
shall invite them to drink and eat. But if perchance you shall fear any evil
Spirit, then draw a Circle about it, and let that part of the Table at which
the Invocant sits, be within the Circle, and the rest of the Table without the
Circle.

In our third book of Occult Philosophy, we have taught how and by what means
the Soul is joined to the Body; and, what hapeneth to the Soul after death.

Thou may know further, That those Souls do still love their relinquished
Bodies after death, as it were a certain affinity alluring them; such as are
the Souls of noxious men, which have vio^ently relinquished their Bodies, and
Souls wanting a due burial, which do ^ill wander in a liquid and turbuient
Spirit about their dead carcasses; for these Souls by the known means by which
heretofore they were conjo^ned to their Bodies, by the like vapors, liquors,
and savours, are easily drawn unto them.

From hence it is, that the Souls of the dead are not to be called up without
blood, or by the application of some part of their rei^t Body.

In the raising up of these shadows, we are to perfume with new Blood, with the
Bones of the dead, and with Flesh, Eggs, Milk, Honey and Oil, and suchlike
things, which do attribute to the Souls a means apt to receive their Bodies.

It is also to be understood, That those who are desirous to raise up any Souls
of the dead, they ought to do it in those places, wherein these kind of Souls
are most known to be conversant, or for some alliance alluring those souls into
their forsaken Body; or for some kind of affection in times past, impressed in
them in their life, drawing the said Soul to certain places, things, or
persons; or for the forcible nature of some place fitted and prepared for to
purge or punish these Souls. Which places for the most part are to be known by
the experience of visions, mighty incursions, and apparitions, and suchlike
prodigies seen.

Therefore the places most fitting for these things, are Churchyards. And
better then them, are those places wherein there is the execution of criminal
judgments. And better then these, are those places, in which of late years
there have been some public slaughters of men. Furthermore, that place is
better then these, where some dead carcass, that came by a violent death, is
not yet expiated, nor ritely buried, and was lately buried; for the expiation
of those places, is also a holy Rite duly to be adhibited to the burial of the
bodies, and oftentimes prohibiteth the souls to come unto their bodies, and
expels them far off unto the places of judgment.

And from hence it is, That the Souls of the dead are not easily to be raised
up, except it be the Souls of them whom we know to be evil, or to have perished
by a violent death, and whose bodies do want a right and due burial.

Now although we have spoken concerning such places of this kind, it will not
be safe or commodious to go unto them; but it behooves us to take to what place
soever is to be chosen, some principal part of the body that is relict, and
therewith to make a perfume in due manner, and to perform other competent Rites.

It is also to be known, That because the Souls are certain spiritual lights,
therefore artificial lights, especially if they be framed out of certain
competent things, compounded according to a true rule, with congruent
inscriptions of Names and Seals, do very much avail to the raising up of
departed Souls.

Moreover, these things which now are spoken of, are not always sufficient to
raise up Souls, because of an extranatural portion of understanding and reason,
which is above, and known only to the Heaven and Destinies, and their power.

We ought therefore to allure the said Souls, by supernatural and celestial
powers duly administered, even by those things which do move the very harmony
of the Soul, as well imaginative, as rational and intellectual; as are Voices,
Songs, Sound, Enchantments: and Religious things; as Prayers, Conjurations,
Exorcismes, and other holy Rites, which may very commodiously be administered
hereunto.

The end of the fourth book of Agrippa.
Heptameron: OR; MAGICAL ELEMENTS OF PETER de ABANO PHILOSOPHER.
IN the former book, which is the fourth book of Agrippa, it is sufficiently
spoken concerning Magical Ceremonies, and Initiations.

But because he seems to have written to the learned, and well-experienced in
this Art; because he does not specially treat of the Ceremonies, but rather
speaks of them in general, it was therefore thought good to add hereunto the
Magical Elements of Peter de Abano: that those who are hitherto ignorant, and
have not tasted of Magical Superstitions, may have them in readiness, how they
may exercise themselves therein. For we see in this book, as it were a certain
introduction of Magical vanity; and as if they were in present exercise, they
may behold the distinct functions of spirits, how they may be drawn to
discourse and communication; what is to be done every day, and every hour; and
how they shall be read, as if they were described syllable by syllable.

In brief, in this book are kept the principles of Magical conveyances. But
because the greatest power is attributed to the Circles; (For they are certain
fortresses to defend the operators safe from the evil Spirits;) In the first
place we will treat concerning the composition of a Circle.

Of the Circle, and the composition thereof.
THe form of Circles is not always one and the same; but uses to be changed,
according to the order of the Spirits that are to be called, their places,
times, days and hours. For in making a Circle, it ought to be considered in
what time of the year, what day, and what hour, that you make the Circle; what
Spirits you would call, to what Star and Region they do belong, and what
functions they have. Therefore let there be made three Circles of the latitude
of nine foot, and let them be distant one from another a hands breadth; and in
the middle Circle, first, write the name of the hour wherein you do the work.
In the second place, Write the name of the Angel of the hour. In the third
place, The Sigil of the Angel of the hour. Fourthly, The name of the Angel that
rules that day wherein you do the work, and the names of his ministers. In the
fifth place, The name of the present time. Sixthly, The name of the Spirits
ruling in that part of time, and their Presidents, Seventhly, The name of the
head of the Sign ruling in that part of time wherein you work. Eighthly, The
name of the earth, according to that part of time wherein you work. Ninthly,
and for the completing of the middle Circle, Write the name of the Sun and of
the Moon, according to the said rule of time; for as the time is changed, so
the names are to be altered. And in the outermost Circle, let there be drawn in
the four Angles, the names of the presidential Angels of the Air, that day
wherein you would do this work; to wit, the name of the King and his three
Ministers. Without the Circle, in four Angles, let Pentagones be made. In the
inner Circle let there be written four divine names with crosses interposed in
the middle of the Circle; to wit, toward the East let there be written Alpha,
and toward the West let there bewritten Omega; and let a cross divide the
middle of the Circle. When the Circle is thus finished, according to the rule
now before written, you shall proceed.

Of the names of the hours, and the Angels ruling them.
IT is also to be known, that the Angels do rule the hours in a successive
order, according to the course of the heavens, and Planets unto which they are
subject; so that that Spirit which governs the day, rules also the first
hour of the day; the second from this governs the second hour; the third, the
third hour, and so consequently: and when seven Planets and hours have made
their revolution, it returns again to the first which rules the day.
Therefore we shall first speak of the names of the hours.

Hours of the day. Hours of the night. 1. Yayn. 1. Beron. 2. Janor. 2. Barol.
3. Nasnia. 3. Thami. 4. Salla. 4. Athar. 5. Sadedali. 5. Mathon. 6. Thamur. 6.
Rana. 7. Ourer. 7. Netos. 8. Thamic. 8. Tafrac. 9. Neron. 9. Sassur. 10. Jayon.
10. Aglo. 11. Abai. 11. Calerva. 12. Natalon. 12. Salam.

Of the names of the Angels and their Sigils, it shall be spoken in their
proper places. Now let us take a veiw of the names of the times. A year
therefore is fourfold, and is divided into the Spring, Summer, Harvest and
Winter; the names whereof are these.

The Spring. Talvi. The Summer. Casmaran. Autumn. Ardarael. Winter. Farlas.

The Angels of the Spring.
Caratasa. Core. Amatiel. Commisseros.
The head of the Sign of the Spring.
Spugliguel.
The name of the earth in the Spring.
Amadai.
The names of the Sun and Moon in the Spring.
The Sun. Abraym. The Moon. Agusita.
The Angels of the Summer.
Gargatel. Tariel. Gaviel.
The head of the Sign of the Summer.
Tubiel.
The name of the earth in Summer.
Festativi.
The names of the Sun and Moon in Summer.
The Sun. Athemay. The Moon. Armatus.
The Angels of Autumn.
Tarquam. Guabarel.
The head of the sign of Autumn.
Torquaret.
The name of the earth in Autumn.
Rabianara.
The names of the Sun and Moon in Autumn.
The Sun. Abragani. The Moon. Matasignais.
The Angels of the Winter.
Amabael. Ctarari.
The head of the sign of Winter.
Altarib.
The name of the Earth in Winter.
Geremiah.
The names of the Sun and Moon in Winter.
The Sun. Commutaff. The Moon. Affaterim.
The Consecrations and Benedictions: and first of the Benediction of the Circle.
WHen the Circle is ritely perfected, sprinkle the same with holy or purging
water, and say, Thou shall purge me with hysop, O Lord, and I shall be clean:
Thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.

The Benediction of perfumes.
THe God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, blesshere the creatures of
these kinds, that they may fill up the power and virtue of their odours; so
that neither the enemy, nor any false imagination, may be able to enter into
them: through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Then let them be sprinkled with holy
water.

The Exorcisme of the fire upon which the perfumes are to be put.
THe fire which is to be used for suffumigations, is to be in a new vessel of
earth or iron; and let it be exorcised after this manner. I exorcise thee, O
thou creature of fire, by him by whom all things are made, that forthwith thou
cast away every phantasme from thee, that it shall not be able to do any hurt
in any thing. Then say, Bless, O Lord, this creature of fire, and sanctify it,
that it may be blessed to set forth the praise of thy holy name, that no hurt
may come to the Exercisers or Spectators: through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Of the Garment and Pentacle.
LEt it be a Priests Garment, if it can be: but if it cannot be had, let it be
of linen, and clean. Then take this Pentacle made in the day and hour of
Mercury, the Moon increasing, written in parchment made of a kids skin. But
first let there be said over it the Mass of the holy Ghost, and let it be
sprinkled with water of baptism.



An Oration to be said, when the Vesture is put on.
ANcor, Amacor, Amides, Theodonias, Anitor, by the merits of thy Angels, O
Lord, I will put on the Garment of Salvation, that this which I desire I may
bring to effect: through thee the most holy Adonay, whose kingdom endures for
ever and ever. Amen.

Of the manner of working.
LEt the Moon be increasing and equal, if it may then be done, and let her not
be combust.

The Operator ought to be clean and purified by the space of nine days before
the beginning of the work, and to be confessed, and receive the holy Communion.
Let him have ready the perfume appropriated to the day wherein he would perform
the work. He ought also to have holy water from a Priest, and a new earthen
vessel with fire, a Vesture and Pentacle; and let all these things be rightly
and duly consecrated and prepared. Let one of the servants carry the earthen
vessel full of fire, and the perfumes, and let another bear the book, another
the Garment and Pentacle, and let the master carry the Sword; over which there
must be said one mass of the Holy Ghost; and on the middle of the Sword, let
there be written this name Agla, and on the other side thereof, this name On.
And as he goes to the consecrated place, let him continually read Letanies,
the servants answering. And when he comes to the place where he will erect the
Circle, let him draw the lines of the Circle, as we have before taught: and
after he has made it, let him sprinkle the Circle with holy water, saying,
A^^erges me Domine, Wash me O Lord, etc.
etc.

The Master therefore ought to be purified with fasting, chastity, and
abstinency from all luxury the space of three whole days before the day of the
operation. And on the day that he would do the work, being clothed with pure
garments, and furnished with Pentacles, Perfumes, and other things necessary
hereunto, let him enter the Circle, and call the Angels from the four parts of
the world, which do govern the seven Planets the seven days of the week,
Colors and Metals; whose name you shall see in their places. And with bended
knees invocating the said Angels particularly, let him say, O Angeli
supradicti, estote adjutores meae petitioni, and in adjutorium mihi, in meis
rebus and petitionibus.

Then let him call the Angels from the four parts of the world, that rule the
Air the same day wherein he does the work or experiment. And having implored
specially all the Names and Spirits written in the Circle, let him say, O vos
omnes, adjuro atque contestor per sedem Adonay, per Hagios, o Theos, Ischyros,
Athanatos, Paracletos, Alpha and Omega, and per haec tria nomina secreta, Agla,
On, Tetragrammaton, quod hodie debeatis adimplere quod cupio.

These things being performed, let him read the Conjuration assigned for the
day wherein he makes the experiment, as we have before spoken; but if they
shall be partinacious and refractory, and will not yield themselves obedient,
neither to the Conjuration assigned to the day, nor to the prayers before made,
then use the Conjurations and Exorcismes following.

An Exorcisme of the Spirits of the Air.
NOs facti ad imaginem Dei, dotati potentia Dei, and ejus facti voluntate, per
potentissimum and corroboratum nomen Dei El, forte and admirabile vos
exorcizamus (here he shall name the Spirits he would have appear, of what order
soever they be) and imperamus per eum qui dixit, and factum est, and per omnia
nomina Dei, and per nomen Adonay, El, Elohim, Elohe, Zebaoth, Elion, Escerchie,
Jah, Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Dominus Deus, excelsus, exorcizamus vos, atque
potenter imperamus, ut appareatis statim nobis hic juxta Circulum in pulchra
forma, videlicet humana, and sine deformitate and tortuositate aliqua. Venite
vos omnes tales, quia vobis imperamus, per nomen Y and V quod Adam audivit, and
locutus est: and per nomen Dei Agla, quod Loath audivit, and factus salvus cum
sua familia: and per nomen Joth, quod Jacob audivit ab Angelo secum luctantes,
and liberatus est de manu fratris sui Esau: and by the name Anephexeton, quod
Aaron audivit, and loquens, and sapiens factus est: and per nomen Zebaoth, quod
Moses nominavit, and omnia flumina and paludes de terra Aegypti, versae fuerunt
in sanguinem: and per nomen Ecerchie Oriston, quod Moses nominavit, and omnes
flu vii ebullier unt ^anas, and ascenderunt in domos Aegyptiorum, omnia
destruentes: and per nomen Elio^, quod Moses nominavit, and fuit grando talis,
qualis non fuit ab initio mundi: and per nomen Adonay, quod Moses nominavit,
and fuerunt locustae, and apparuerunt super terram Aegyptiorum, and comederunt
quae residua erant grandini: and per nomen Schemes amathia, quod Josua vocavit,
and remoratus est Solcursum: and per nomen Alpha and Omega, quod Daniel
nominavit, and destruxit Beel, and Draconem interfe^it: and in nomine Emmanuel,
quod tres pueri, Sidrach, Misach and Abdenago, in camino ignis ardentis,
cantaverunt, and liberati fuerunt: and per nomen Hagios, and sedem Adonar, and
per (...) Theos, Is^ytos, Athanatos, Paracletus; and per haec tria secreta
nomina, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, adjuro, contestor, and per haec nomina, and
per alia nomina Domini nostri Dei Omnipotentis, vivi and very, vos qui vestra
culpa de Coelis ejecti fuistis usque ad infernum locum, exorcizamus, and
viriliter imper amus, per eum qui dixit, and factum est, cui omnes obediunt
creaturae, and per illud tremendum Dei judicium: and per mare omnibus incertum,
vitreum, quod est ante conspectum divinae majestatis gradiens, and potentiale:
and per quatuor divina animalia T. any sedem divinae majestatis gradientia,
and oculos ante and retro habentia: and per ignem ante ejus thronum
circumstantem: and per sanctos Angelos Coelorum, T. and per ^am quae Ecclesia
Dei nominatur: and per summam sapientiam Omnipotentis Dei viriliter
exorcizamus, ut nobis hic ante Circulum appareatis, ut faciendam nostram
voluntatem, in omnibus prout placuerit nobis: per sedem Baldachiae, and per hoc
nomen Primeumaton, quod Moses nominavit, and in cavernis abyssi fuerunt
profundati vel absorpti, Datan, Corah and Abiron: and in virtute istius nominis
Primeumaton, tota Coeli militia compellente, maledicimus vos, privamus vos omni
officio, loco and gaudio vestro, usque in profundum abyssi, and usque ad
ultimum diem ju licii vos ponimus, and relegamus in ignem aeternum, and in
stagnum ignis and sulphuris, nisi statim appareatis hic coram nobis, ante
Circulum, ad faciendum voluntatem nostram. In omnibus venite per haec nomina,
Adonay Zebaeth, Adonay Amioram, Venite, venite, imperat vobis Adonay, Saday,
Rex regum potentissimus and tremendissinius, eujus vires nulla subterfugere
potest creatura vobis pertinacissimis futuris nisi obedieritis, and appareatis
ante hunc Circulum, affabiles subito, tandem ruina flebilis miserabilisque, and
ignis perpetuum inextinguibilis vos manet. Venite ergo in nomine Adonay
Zebaoth, Adonay Amioram: venite, venite, quid tardatis? festinate imperat vobis
Adonay, Saday, Rex regum, El, Aty, Titeip, Azia, Hyn, Jen, Minosel, Achadan:
Vay, Vaa, Ey, Haa, Eye, Exe, a, El, El, El, a, Hy, Hau, Hau, Hau, Va, Va, Va,
Va.

A Prayer to God, to be said in the four parts of the world, in the Circle.
AMorule, Taneha, Latisten, Rabur, Taneha, Latisten, Escha, Aladia, Alpha and
Omega, Leyste, Oriston, Adonay: O my most merciful heavenly Father, have mercy
upon me, although a sinner; make appear the arm of thy power in me this day
(although thy unworthy child) against these obstinate and pernicious Spirits,
that I by thy will may be made a contemplator of thy divine works, and may be
illustrated with all wisdom, and always worship and glorify thy name. I
humbly implore and beseech thee, that these Spirits which I call by thy
judgment, may be bound and constrained to come, and give true and perfect
answers to those things which I shall ask them, and that they may declare and
show unto us those things which by me or us shall be commanded them, not
hurting any creature, neither injuring nor terrifying me or my fellows, nor
hurting any other creature, and affrighting no man; but let them be obedient to
my requests, in all these things which I command them. Then let him stand in
the middle of the Circle, and hold his hand toward the Pentacle, and say, Per
Pentaculum Salomonis advocavi, dent mihi responsum verum.

Then let him say, Beralanensis, Baldachiensis, Paumachiae and Apologiae seeds,
per Reges potestatesque magnanimas, ac principes praepotentes, genio,
Liachidae, ministri tartareae seeds: Primac, hic princeps sedis Apologia no^^
cohorte: Ego vos invoco, and invocando vos conjuro, atque supernae Majestatis
munitus virtute, potenter impero, per eum qui dixit, and factum est, and cui
obediunt omnes creaturae: and per hoc nomen ineffabile, Tetragrammaton (...)
Jehovah, in quo est plasmatum omne seculum, quo audito elementa corruunt, aer
concutitur, mare retrograditur, ignis extinguitur, terra tremit, omnesque
exercitus Coelestium, Terrestrium, and Infernorum tremunt, turbantur and
corruunt: quatenus cito and sine mora and omni occasion remota, ab universis
mundi partibus veniatis, and rationabiliter de omnibus quaecunque
interrogavero, respondeatis vos, and veniatis pacifice, visibiles, and
affabiles: nunc and sine mora manifestantes quod cupimus: conjurati per nomen
aeterni vivi and very Dei Helioren, and mandata nostra perficientes,
persistentes semper usque ad finem, and intentionem meam, visibiles nobis, and
affabiles, clara voce nobis, intelligibile, and sine omni ambiguitate.

Visions and Apparitions.
QUibus rite peractis, apparebunt infinitae visiones, and phantasmata pulsantia
organa and omnis generis instrumenta musica, idque fit a spiritibus, vt terrore
compulsi socii abeant a Circulo, quia nihil adversus magistrum possunt. Post
haec videbis infinitos sagittarios cum infinita multitudine bestiarum
horribilem: quae ita se componunt, ac si vellent devorare socios: and tamen nil
timeant. Tunc Sacerdos sive Magister, adhibens manum Pentaculo, dicat: Fugiat
hinc iniquitas vestra, virtute vexilli Dei. Et tunc Spiritus obedire magistro
coguntur, and socii nil am lius videbu^t.

Then let the Exorcist say, stretching out his hand to the Pentacle, Ecce
Pentaculum Salomonis, quod ante vestram adduxi praesentiam: ecce personam
exorcizatoris in meaio Exorcismi, qui est optime a Deomunitus, intrepidus,
providus, qui v^ribus potens vos exercizando invocavit and vocat. Venite ergo
cum festinatione in virtute nominum istorum, Aye Saraye, Aye, Saraye, Aye
Saraye, ne differatis venire, per nomina aeterna Dei vivi and very Eloy,
Archima, Rabur: and per hoc praesens Pentaculum, quod super vos potenter
imperat: and per virtutem coelestium Spirituum dominorum vestrorum: and per
personam exorcizatoris, conjurati, festinati venire and obedire praeeeptori
vestro, qui vocatur Octinomos. His peractis, sibiles in quatuor angulis mundi.
Et videbis immediate magnos motus: and cum videris, dicas: Quid tardatis? quid
moramini? qu^d facitis? praeparate vos and obedite praeceptori vestro, in
nomine Domini Bathat, vel Vachat super Abrac ruens, superveniens, Abeor super
Aberer.

Tunc immedia^e venient in sua forma propria. Et quando videbis eos juxta
Circulum, ostende illis Pentaculum coopertum syndone sacro, and discoeperiatur,
and dicat: Ecce conclusionem vestram, nolite fieri inobedientes. Et subito
videbis eos in pacifica forma: and dicent tibi, Pete quid vis, quia nos sumus
parati complere omnia mandata tua, quia dominus ad hoc nos subjugavit. Cum
autem apparuerint Spiritus, tunc dicas, Been veneritis Spiritus, vel reges
nobilissimi, quia vos vocavi per illum cui omne genu flectitur, coelestium,
terrestrium and infernorum: cujus in manu omnia regna regum sunt, nec est qui
suae contrarius esse possit Majestati. Quatenus constringo vos, ut hic ante
circulum visibiles, affabiles permanetis, tamdiu tamque constantes, nec sint
licentia mea recedatis, donec meam sine fallacia aliqua and veredice
perficiatis voluntatem, per potentiae illius virtutem, qui mare posuit terminum
suum, quem praeterire non potest, and lege illius potentiae, non periransit
fines suos, Dei scilicet altissimi, regis, domini, qui cuncta creavit, Amen.
Then command what you will, and it shall be done. Afterward license them thus:
In nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti, ite in pace ad loca vestra: and
pax fit inter nos and vos, parati sitis venire vocati.

These are the things which Peter de Abano has spoken concerning Magical
Elements.

But that you may the better know the manner of composing a Circle, I will set
down one Scheme; so that if any one would make a Circle in Springtime for the
first hour of Lords day, it must be in the same manner as is the figure
following.

The figure of a Circle for the first hour of the Lords day, in Springtime.


It remains now, That we explain the week, the several days thereof: and
first of the Lords day.

Considerations of the Lords day.
THe Angel of the Lords day, his Sigil, Planet, Sign of the Planet, and the
name of the fourth heaven.

Michael.

Machen.



The Angels of the Lords day.
Michael, Dardiel, Huratapal.
The Angels of the Air ruling on the Lords day.
Varcan, King.
His Ministers.
Tus, Andas, Cynabal.
The wind which the Angels of the Air abovesaid are under.
The North-winde.
The Angel of the fourth heaven, ruling on the Lords day, which ought to be
called from the four parts of the world.

At the East.
Samael. Baciel. Atel. Gabriel. Vionatraba.
At the West.
Anael. Pabel. Ustael. Burchat. Suceratos. Capabili.
At the North.
Atel. Aniel, vel Aquiel. Masgabriel. Sapiel. Matuyel.
At the South.
Ha^udiel. Machasiel. Charsiel. Uri^l. Naromiel.
The perfume of the Lords day.
Red Wheat.
The Conjuration of the Lords day.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Angeli fortes Dei, and sancti, in nomine
Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eya, qui est ille, qui fuit, est and erit, Eye, Abraye* and
in nomine Saday, Cados, Cados, Cados, alte sendentis super Cherub^n, and per
nomen magnum ipsius Dei fortis and potentis, exaltatique super omnes coelos,
Eye, Saraye, plasmatoris seculorum, qui creavit mundum, coelum, terram, mar^,
and omnia quae in (...) sun^ in primo die, and sigillavit ea sancto nomine suo
Phaa: and per nomina sanctorum Angelorum, qui dominantur in quarto exercitu,
and serviunt coram potentissimo, Salamia, Angelo magno and honorato: and per
nomen stellae, quae est Sol, and per signum, and per immensum nomen Dei vivi,
and per nomina omnia praedicta, conjuro te Michael angele magne, qu^es
praepositus Diei Dominicae: and per nomen Adona, Dei Israel, qui creavit mundum
and quicquid in eo est, quod pro melabores, and adimpleas omnem me^m
petitionem, juxta meum velle and votum meum, in negotio and causa mea. And here
thou shall declare thy cause and business, and for what thing thou make this
Conjuration.

The Spirits of the Air of the Lords day, are under the North-winde; their
nature is to procure Gold, Gemmes, Carbuncles, Riches; to cause one to obtain
favor and benevolence; to dissolve the enmities of men; to raise men to
honors; to carry or take away infirmities. But in what manner they appear, it is
spoken already in the former book of Magical Ceremonies.

Considerations of Monday.
THe Angel of Monday, his Sigil, Planet, the Sign of the Planet, and name of
the first heaven.

Gabriel.

Shamain.



The Angels of Monday.
Gabriel. Michael. Samael.
The Angels of the Air ruling on Monday.
Arcan, King.
His Minsters.
Bilet. Missabu, Abuza^a.
The wind which the said Angels of the Air are subject to.
The West-winde.
The Angels of the first heaven, ruling on Monday, which ought to be called
from the four parts of the world.

From the East.
Gabriel. Gabrael. Madiel. Deamiel. Janael.
From the West.
Sachiel. Zaniel. Habaiel. Bachanael. Corabael.
From the North.
Mael. Vvael. Valnum. Ballel. Balay. Humastrau.
From the South.
Curaniel. Dabriel. Darquiel. Hanun. A^ayl. Vetuel.
The Perfume of Monday.
Aloes.
The Conjuration of Monday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Angeli fortes and boni, in nomine Adonay,
Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eye, Cados, Cados, Cados, Achim, Achim, Ja, Ja,
Fortis, Ja, qui apparuit mente Sinai, cum glorificatione regu Adonay, Saday,
Zebaoth, Anathay, Ya, Ya, Ya, Marinata, Abim, Jeia, qui maria creavit stagna
and omnes aquas in secundo die, quasdam super coelos, and quasdam in terra.
Sigillavit m^re in al^o nomine suo, and terminum, qu^m sibi posuit, non praeter
bit: and per nomina Angelorum, qui dominantur in primo exercitu, qui serviunt
Orphaniel Angelo magno, precioso and honorato: and per nomen Stellae, quae est
Luna: and per nomina praedicta, super te conjuro, scilicet Gabriel, qui es
praepositus diei. Lunae secundo quod pro me labores and adimpleas, etc. As in
the Conjuration of Sunday.

The Spirits of the Air of Monday, are subject to the Westwinde, which is the
wind of the Moon: their nature is to give silver; to convey things from place
to place; to make horses swift, and to disclose the secrets of persons both
present and future: but in what manner they appear, you may see in the former
book.

Considerations of Tuesday.
THe Angel of Tuesday, his sigil, his Planet, the Sign governing that Planet,
and the name of the fifth heaven.

Samael.

Machon.



The Angels of Tuesday.
Samael. Satael. Amabiel.
The Angels of the Air ruling on Tuesday.
Samax, King.
His Ministers.
Carmax. Ismoli. Paffran.
The wind to which the said Angels are subject.
The East-winde.
The Angels of the fifth heaven ruling on Tuesday, which ought to be called
from the four parts of the world.

At the East.
Friagne. Guael. Dama^l. Calzas. Arragon.
At the West.
Lama. Astagna. Lobquin. Soncas. Jazel Isiael. Irel.
At the North.
Rahumel. Hyniel. Rayel. Seraphiel. Mathiel. Fraciel.
At the South.
Sacriel. Janiel. Galdel. Osael. Vianuel. Zaliel.
The Perfume of Tuesday.
Pepper.
The Conjuration of Tuesday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos, Angeli fortes and sancti, per nomen Ya, Ya,
Ya, He, He, He, Va, Hy, Hy, Ha, Ha, Ha, Va, Va, Va, An, An, An, Aie, Aie, Aie,
El, Ay, Elibra, Eloim, Eloim: and per nomina ipsius alti Dei, qui fecit aquam
aridam apparere, and vocavit terram, and produxit arbores, and herbas de ea,
and sigillavit super eam cum precioso, honorato, metuenda and sancto nomine
suo^ and per nomen angelorum dominantium in quinto exercitu, qui serviunt
Acimoy Angelo magno, forti, potenti, and honorato: and per nomen Stettae, quae
est Mars: and per nomina praedicta conjuro super te Samael, Angele magne, qui
praepositus es diei Martis: and per nomina A^onay, Dei vivi and very, quod pro
me labores, and adimpleas, etc. As in the Conjuration of Sunday.

The Spirits of the Air of Tuesday are under the East-winde: their nature is to
cause wars, mortality, death and combustions; and to give two thousand
Soldiers at a time; to bring death, infirmities or health. The manner of their
appearing you may see in the former book.

Considerations of Wednesday.
THe Angel of Wednesday, via Sigil, Planet, the Sign governing that Planet,
and the name of the second heaven.

Raphael.

Raquie.



The Angels of Wednesday.
Raphael. Miel. Seraphiel.
The Angels of the Air ruling on Wednesday.
Mediat or Modiat, Rex.
Ministers.
Suquinos. Sallales.
The wind to which the said Angels of the Air are subject.
The Southwest-winde.
The Angels of the second heaven governing Wednesday, which ought to be called
from the four parts of the world.

At the East.
Mathlai. Tarmiel. Baraborat.
At the West.
Jerescue. Mitraton.
At the North.
Thiel. Rael. Jariahel. Venahel. Velel. Abuier^. Ucirnuel.
At the South.
Milliel. Nelapa. Babel. Caluel. Vel. Laquel.
The Fumigation of Wednesday.
Mastick.
The Conjuration of Wednesday.
COnjuro and confirmo vos angeli fortes, sancti and potentes, in nomine fortio,
mrtuendissimi and ben dicti Ja, Adonay, Eloim, Saday, Saday, Saday, Eye, Eye,
Eye, Asamie, Asaraie: and in noine Adonay Dei Israel, qui creavit luminari^
magna, ad distinguendum diem a nocte: and per nomen omnium Angelorum
deservientium in exercitu secundo coram Tetra Angelo majori, atqueferi^ and
potenti: and per nomen Stellae, quae est Mercurius: and per nomen Sigilli, quae
sigillatur a Deo fort ssimo and honorato: per omnia praedicta super te Raphael
Angele magne, conjuro, qui es praepositus diei quartae: and per nomen sanctum
quod erat scriptum in front Aaron sacerdoris altissimicreatoris: and per
nomina Angelorum, qui in gratiam Salvatoris confirmati sunt: and per nomen
sedis Anima^ium, habentium senas alas, quod pro me labores, etc. As in the
Conjuration of Sunday.

The Spirits of the Air of Wednesday are subject to the South-west-winde: their
nature is to give all Metals; to reveal all earthly things past, present and to
come; to pacify judges, to give victories in war, to re-edifie, and teach
experiments and all decayed Sciences, and to change bodies mi^^ of Elements
conditionally out of one into another; to give infirmities or health; to raise
the poor, and cast down the high ones; to bind or lose Spirits; to open locks
or bolts: suchkinde of Spirits have the operation of others, but not in their
perfect power, but in virtue or knowledge. In what manner they appear, it is
before spoken.

Considerations of Thursday.
THe Angel of Thursday, his Sigil, Planet, the Sign of the Planet, and the
name of the sixth heaven.

Sachiel.

Zebul.



The Angels of Thursday.
Sachiel, Castiel, Asafiel.
The Angels of the Air governing Thursday.
Suth, Rex.
Ministers.
Maguth, Gutri^.
The wind which the said Angels of the Air are under.
The South-winde.
But because there are no Angels of the Air to be found above the fifth heaven,
therefore on Thursday say the prayers following in the four parts of the world.

At the East. O Deus magne and excelse, and bonorate, por infinita secula. At
the West. O Deus sapiens, and clare, and just, ac divina clementia: ego rogo e
piissime Pater, quod meam potitionem, quod meum opus, and meum laborem hodie
debeam complere, and perfect intelligere. Tn qui vivis and regnas per infinita
secula seculorum, Amen. At the North. O Deus potens, fortis, and sine
principio. At the South. O Deus potents and misericors.
The Perfume of Thursday.
Saffron.
The Conjuration of Thursday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos, Angeli sancti, per nomen, Cados, Cados, Cados,
Eschereie, Eschereie, Eschereie. Hatim ya, fortis firmator seculorum, Cantine,
Jaym, Janic, Anic, Calbat, Sablas, Beni^ay, Alnay^: and per nomen Ad^^y, qui
creavit pis^es reptilia in aquis, and aves super faciem terrae, volantes versus
coelos die quinto: and per nomina Angelorum serventium in sexto exercitu ^o am
pastore Angelo sancto and magno and potenti principe: and per nomen stelle,
quae est Jupiter: and per (...) Sigilli sui: and per nomen Adonay, summi Dei,
omnium creatoris: and per nomen omnium stellarum, and per viui and virtutem
eatum: and per nomina praedicta, conjuro te Sachiel Angele magne, qui es
praepositus diei Jovis, ut pro me labores, etc. As in the Conjuration of the
Lords day.

The Spirits of the Air of Thursday, are subject to the South-winde; their
nature is to procure the love of women; to cause men to be merry and joyful; to
pacify strife and contentions; to appease enemies; to heal the diseased, and
to disease the whole; and procures losses, or takes them away. Their manner
of appearing is spoken of already.

Considerations of Friday.
THe Angel of Friday, his Sigil, his Planet, the Sign governing that Planet,
and name of the third heaven.

Anael.

Sagun.



The Angels of Friday.
Anael. Rachiel. Sachiel.
The Angels of the Air reigning on Friday.
Sarabotes, King.
Ministers.
Amabiel. Aba. Abalidoth. Flaes.
The wind which the said Angels of the Air are under.
The West-winde.
Angels of the third heaven, ruling on Friday, which are to be called from the
four parts of the world.

At the East.
Setchiel. Chedusitaniel. Corat. Tamael. Tenaciel.
At the West.
Turiel. Coniel. Babiel. Kadie. Maltiel. Huphaltiel.
At the North.
Peniel. Penael. Penat. Raphael. Raniel. Doremiel.
At the South.
Porna. Sachiel. Chermiel. Samael. Santanael. Famiel.
The Perfume of Friday.
Pepperwert.
The Conjuration of Friday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Angeli fortes, sancti atque potentes, in nomine
On, Hey, Heya, Ja, Je, Adonay, Saday, and in nomine Saday, qui creavit
quadrupedia and anamalia reptilia, and homines in sexto die, and Adae dedit
potestatem super omnia animalia: unde benedictum sit nomen creatoris in loco
suo: and per nomina Angelorum servie^^ium in tertio exercitu, coram Dagiel
Angelo magno, principe forti atque potenti: and per nomen Stellae quae est
Venus: and per S^gillum ejus, quod quidem est sanctum: and per nomina praedicta
conjuro super te Anael, qui es praepositus diei sextae, ut pro me labores, etc.
As before in the Conjuration of Sunday.

The Spirits of the Air of Friday are subject to the Westwinde; their nature is
to give silver; to excite men, and incline them to luxury; to reconcile enemies
through luxury; and to make marriages; to allure men to love women; to cause,
or take away infirmities; and to do all things which have motion.

Considerations of Saturday, or the Sabbath day.
THe Angel of Saturday, his Seal, his Planet, and the Sign governing the
Planet.

Cassiel.



The Angels of Saturday.
Cassiel. Machatan. Uriel.
The Angels of the Air ruling on Saturday.
Maymon, King.
Ministers.
Abumalith. Assaibi. Balidet.
The wind which the said Angels of the Air aforesaid are under.
The Southwest-winde.
The Fumigation of Saturday.
Sulphur.
It is already declared in the Consideration of Thursday, That there are no
Angels ruling the Air, above the fifth heaven: therefore in the four Angles of
the world, use those Orations which you see applied to that purpose on Thursday.

The Conjuration of Saturday.
COnjuro and confirmo super vos Caphriel vel Cassiel, Machatori, and Seraquiel
Angeli fortes and potentes: and per nomen Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye,
Eye, Acim, Acim, Acim, Cados, Cados, Ina vel Ima, Ima, Saclay, Ja, Sar, Domini
format^ris seculorum, qui in septimo die quievit: and per illum qui in
beneplacito suo filiis Israel in hareditatem observandum dedit, ut eum firm^ter
custodire^t, and sanctificarent, ad habendam^nde bonam in alio seculo
remunerationem: and per nomina Angelorum servientium in exercitu septimo Booel
Angelo magno and potenti principi: and per nomen stellae quae est Soturnus: and
per sanctum Sigillum ejus: and per nomina praedicta conjuro super te Caphriel,
qui praepositus et diei septimae, quae est dies Sabbati, quod pro me labores,
etc. As is set down in the Conjuration of the Lords day.

The Spirits of the Air of Saturday are subject to the Southwest-winde: the
nature of them is to sow discords, hatred, evil thoughts and cogitations; to
give leave freely, to slay and kill every one, and to lame or maim every
member. Their manner of appearing is declared in the former book.

Tables of the Angels of the Hours, according to the course of the days.
SUNDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the day. Angels of the hours.
1. Yayn. Michael. 7. Ourer. Samael. 2. Janor. Anael. 8. Tanic. Michael. 3.
Nasnia. Raphael. 9. Neron. Anael. 4. Salla. Gabriel. 10. Jayon. Raphael. 5.
Sadedali. Cassiel. 11. Abay. Gabriel. 6. Thamur. Sachiel. 12. Natalon. Cassiel.
Hours of the night. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Beron. Sachiel. 7. Netos. Cassiel. 2. Barol. Samael. 8. Tafrac.
Sachiel. 3. Thanu. Michael. 9. Sassur. Samael. 4. Athir. Anael. 10. Aglo.
Michael. 5. Mathun. Raphael. 11. Calerna. Anael. 6. (...). Gabriel. 12. Salam.
Raphael.

MONDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Gabriel. 1. Beron. Anael. 2. Janor. Cassiel. 2. Barol. Raphael.
3. Nasnia. Sachiel. 3. Thaun. Gabriel. 4. Salla. Samael. 4. Athir. Cassiel. 5.
Sadedali. Michael. 5. Mathon. Sachiel. 6. Thamur. Anael. 6. Rana. Samael. 7.
Ourer. Raphael. 7. Netos. Michael. 8. Tanic. Gabriel. 8. Tafrac. Anael. 9.
Neron. Cassiel. 9. Sassur. Raphael. 10. Jayon. Sachiel. 10. Aglo. Gabriel. 11.
Abay. Samael. 11. Calerno. Cassiel. 12. Natalon. Michael. 12. Salam. Sachiel.

TUESDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Samael. 1. Beron. Cassiel. 2. Janor. Michael. 2. Barol.
Sachiel. 3. N^snia. Anael. 3. Thanu. Samael. 4. Salla. Raphael. 4. Athir.
Michael. 5. Sadedal. Gabriel. 5. Mathon. Anael. 6. Thamur. Cassiel. 6. Rana.
Raphael. 7. Ou^er. Sa^hiel. 7. Netos. Gabriel. 8. Tanic. Sam^el. 8. Tafrac.
Cassiel. 9. Neron. Michael. 9. Sussu^. Sachiel. 10. Jaron. Anael. 10. Aglo.
Samael. 11. Abay. Raphael. 11. Calerna. M^chael. 12. Natalon. Gabriel. 12.
Salam. Anael.

WEDNESDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Raphael. 1. Ber^n. Michael. 2. Janor. Gabriel. 2. Bar^l. Anael.
3. Nasnia. Cassiel. 3. Thanu. Raphael. 4. Salla. Sachiel. 4. Athir. Gabriel. 5.
Sadedali. Samael. 5. Mathon. Cassiel. 6. Thanour. Michael. 6. Rana. Sachiel. 7.
Ourer. Anael. 7. Netos. Samael. 8. Tanic. Raphael. 8. Tafrac. Michael. 9.
Neron. Gabriel. 9. Sassur. Anael. 10. Jayon. Cassiel. 10. Aglo. Raphael. 11.
Abay. Sachiel. 11. Calerna. Gabriel. 12. Neron. Samael. 12. Salam. Cassiel.

THURSDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Sachiel. 1. Beron. Gabriel. 2. Janor. Samael. 2. Barol.
Cassiel. 3. Nasnia. Michael. 3. Thanu. Sachiel. 4. Salla. Anael. 4. Athir.
Samael. 5. Sadedali. Raphael. 5. Maton. Michael 6. Thamur. Gabriel. 6. Rana.
Anael. 7. O^^er. Cassiel. 7. Netos. Raphael. 8. Tanic. Sachiel. 8. Tafrac.
Gabriel. 9. N^ron. Samael. 9. Sassur. Cassiel. 10. Jaron. Michael. 10. Aglo.
Sachiel. 11. Abay. Anael. 11. Calerna. Samael. 12. Natalon. Raphael. 12. Salam.
Michael.

FRIDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yayn. Anael. 1. Beron. Samael. 2. Janor. Raphael. 2. Barol. Michael.
3. Nasnia. Gabriel. 3. Thanu. Anael. 4. Salla. Cassiel. 4. Athir. Raphael. 5.
Sadedali. Sachiel. 5. Maton. Gabriel. 6. Thamur. Samael. 6. Rana. Cassiel. 7.
Ourer. Michael. 7. N^tos. Sachiel. 8. Tanic. Anael. 8. Tasrac. Samael. 9.
Neron. Raphael. 9. Sassur. Michael. 10. Jayon. Gabriel. 10. Agl^. Anael. 11.
Abay. Cassiel. 11. Calerna. Raphael. 12. Natalon. Sachiel. 12. Salam. Gabriel.

SATURDAY.
Hours of the day. Angels of the hours. Hours of the night. Angels of the
hours. 1. Yay^. Cassiel. 1. Beron. Raphael. 2. Janor. Sachiel. 2. Barol.
Gabriel. 3. Nasnia. Samael. 3. Thanu. Cassiel. 4. Salla. Michael. 4. Athir.
Sachiel. 5. Sadedali. Anael. 5. Maton. Samael. 6. Thamur. Raphael. 6. Rana.
Michael. 7. Ourer. Gabriel. 7. Neto^. Anael. 8. Tanic. Cassiel. 8. Tafrac.
Raphael. 9. Neron. Sa^hiel. 9. Sussur. Gabriel. 10. Jayon. Samael. 10. Aglo.
Cassiel. 11. Abay. Michael. 11. Calerna. Sachiel. 12. Natalon. Anael. 12.
Salam. Samael.

But this is to be observed by the way, that the first hour of the day, of
every Country, and in every season whatsoever, is to be assigned to the
Sunrising, when he first appears arising in the horizon: and the first hour
of the night is to be the thirteenth hour, from the first hour of the day. But
of these things it is sufficiently spoken.

FINIS.

