Aesop Naturalized AND EXPOSED TO THE PUBLIC VIEW IN HIS Own Shape and Dress.

By way of Essay on a hundred Fables.

Quid rides? mutato Nomine de Te Fabula narratur -- Hor, Sat. I. CAMBRIDGE,
Printed by John Hayes, for Edward Hall Bookseller there. 1697.

PREFACE.
AS Nature framed Aesop like Puppet show Punch,
With Paunch sticking out and a back in a Bunch
And gave his Wit shapes more fit for a Fool,
Splay feet and bow legs all mere ridicule;
That so she might better Spectators surprise,
By making 'em hardly believe their own eyes:
So following Nature, we try to express
The wit of the Author in Scaramouch dress;
That Bruits who pretend to Ratiocination,
The Dull Bruits, and Lewd Bruits, all Bruits in the Nation;
May find some resemblance in this little Century,
Of which turn but over you will see an Inventory.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FABLES.
THE Kingdom of Apes FAB. 8 The Ape and the Fox 41 The Ape, Mole and Ass 83 The
Ass and Frogs 60 The Ass and Man 76 The Ass and Nightingale 64 The Axle-Tree
and Oxen 57 The Be and Bear 5 The Bear and Fox 50 The Bitch big with young 79
The Cat and Cock 14 The Cat Sow and Eagle 35 The Cat and Mice 61 The Clown and
Be 26 The Clown and Flys 52 The Cock and Fox 18 The Cock and Precious Stone 1
The Covetous Man and Orchard 22 The Crab and her Daughter 9 The Crab and
Serpent 46 The Cuckoo and little Birds 16 The Devil and Sinner 66 The Dog and
Sow 7 The Dog and Shadow 20 The Dogs and Jupiter 38 The Dog and Ass 88 The
Dog. Ass and Wolf 58 The Drunkard and his Wife 49 The Dying Eagle 85 The Eagle,
Daw and Tortoise 36 The Farmer and Weasel 30 The Farmer and his Dog 71 The
Farmer and Oxen 96 The Fly and Pot 24 The Fly and Ant 81 The Fowler and
Partridge 86 The Fox and Crow 25 The Fox and Stork 28 The Fox and Crane 31 The
Fox and Eagle 33 The Fox and Cock 89 The Fox, Wolf and Ape 21 The Fox and Wolf
99 The Frogs and Sun 82 The Gardner and Dog 51 The Gnat and Be 63 The Gnat and
Bull 10 The Goose and Goslin 4 The Gnat and Lion 56 The Goat and Fox 37 The
Goats and Jupiter. 84 The Hare and Sparrow 80 The Heart and Fountain 44 The
Hawks and Pigeons 17 The Hawk and Cuckoo 98 The Hound and other Dogs 53 The
Horse and Hog 97 The Partial Judge 46 Jupiter and the Tortoise 91 The Image to
be sold 95 The Sick Kite and her Mother 42 The Mad Lion 19 The Lion and other
Beasts 54 The Sick Lion, Fox and Wolf 74 The Lion grown Old 92 The Lark and her
Young Ones 72 The Mountebank and Bear 11 The Mouse and Lion 13 The Moon and her
Tailor 15 The City Mouse and Country Mouse 39 The Magpy and Eagle 23 The Mole
and her Daughter 59 The Monkey and Cat 73 The Mouse and Frog 90 The Monkey and
Walnuts 94 Momus and Jupiter 100 The Old Man and his Two Wives 34 The Old Man
and Death 62 The Old Man, his Son and Ass 65 The Owl and the Sun 2 The Parrot
and other Birds 77 The Pie and the Pigeon 87 The Pilot and Merchant 27 The
Projector and the Ass 29 The Shepherd and Dog 93 The Dull Schoolboy 55 The
Snake and Hedghog 68 The Disobedient Son and his Child 78 The 'Squire and his
Dogs 48 The Sun and North wind 45 The Town in danger of a Siege 6 The Toad and
Ox 3 The Trumpeter 43 The Viper and File 32 The Widow and Widdower 12 The Wolf
and Porcupine 67 The Woman and Death 70 The Worm and the Fox 69 The Wolf and
Lamb 75
Aesop Naturalized.
FAB. I. The Cock and Precious Stone.
A Cock for his living that scrap't in a dunghill,
Had the fortune to meet with a shining carbunkle,
He turned it, and spurned it, and thought, looking round it
How happy a Jeweller were to have found it;
To me says the Cock it does wonderful seem
How so useless a thing should be had in esteem:
Had I both the Indies, it would be my opinion
A little good barley was worth my dominion.
MORAL.
What Is needful and useful that pleases the wise;
But vain show and glitter allures a fools eyes.
ANOTHER.
Good parts and great virtues are turned to offense,
Where all men are critics, and few men have sense:
A Loose debauchee thinks religion all nonsense,
But pleasure and profit are matters of conscience:
Indeed he must have but a very dull brain,
That cant slight a virtue he were could attain.
FAB. II. The Owl and the Sun.
AN Owl in the Sunshine sat frowning and winking,
And railed at the Sun that occasioned his blinking;
He thought the gay light was on purpose designed
For no other end but to keep an Owl blind:
The Sun soon replied, Must the beauty of nature
Be ruined to gratify one purblind Creature:
Must the day be all shaded and look unbeseeming,
That You may fright children with Whooping and screaming?
MORAL.
SOme men are so proud of their own silly reason,
That what they don't fancy seems all out of season:
But Providence still is Patient and wise,
An Owl may find fault, but the fault's in his eyes.
FAB. III. The Toad and the Ox.
AN old Sullen Toad full of Envy and Poison,
Would rival an Ox that by chance she set ey's on;
Her son that sat by said, Mother he wise,
And aim not to swell to that monstrous size:
For were You as big as the Ox is, or bigger,
The beasts would but stare at your horrible figure:
But the Toad to be taught was too old, and too cursed,
So she tried twice or thrice, and swelled till she burst.
MORAL.
PRetend not to rival conditions above ye,
If you love your own self, or would have others love ye;
For that man is born to an unlucky Fate,
Whose heart is too large for his wit or Estate:
It Is an idle Ambition to Bluster and swagger,
And live like a Lord, tho you die like a beggar.
FAB. IV. The Goose and her Gosling.
SAys a Goose to a Gosling, Child think of my rule,
And don't You go nodding your head like a Fool;
The Gosling to alter her gate strait intended,
But found 'twas in vain to endeavor to mend it:
The Goose to her legs ty's two little sticks,
To wean off her child from such wadling tricks;
But striving to manage the stilts, she wa'nt able
To walk, or to swim, or so much as to dabble:
Nay says the Old Goose, nere let it be said,
But that at the least You could hold up your head;
The Goslin strait perks up her head, and cries, so!
Now how shall I do to see where I go?
Nay then says the old one if this be your answer,
E'ne waddle and noddle and go like your Gransire.
MORAL.
HOW happy 'twoud be if each silly creature,
Did know but the folly of striving with Nature;
But many have got a fantastical wit
That doats on employment for which they are unfit.
FAB. V. A Be and a Bear.
A Be stung a Bear, and for the rash action
The Bear from the Hive would demand satisfaction:
While he rifles the Hive a swarm of Bees flies out,
And stings the Poor Bear till they stung both his eyes out.
MORAL.
PVT up small Affronts; If they wont content ye,
Instead of One slight you will encounter wi' twenty.
FAB. VI. A Town in Danger of a Siege.
A Town feared a Siege, and held Consultation
What was the best method of Fortification;
A Grave skilful Mason declared his opinion
That nothing but stone could secure the dominion:
A Carpenter said tho that was well spoke,
Yet he would rather choose to defend it with Oak:
A Currier wiser than both these together
Cried try what you please, but nothing's like leather.
MORAL.
MOst men will be true to their own private ends,
Tho false to their country, religion, and friends;
One main thing is needful, and that is our own profit;
Let that be secured whatever come of it:
But while this self love is a nations undoing,
Even they who betray it must sink in the ruin.
FAB. VII. The Dog and the Sow.
BE gone says a Sow to a Dog, or by Venus
I Will make you repent that a word past between us;
You fool says the Dog, that Goddess Divine
Hates nothing so much as the flesh of a swine;
Indeed Madam Sow, he that sees You so fair,
Will say you have reason by Venus to swear;
Yet Venus no Votary er'e could endure,
Whom vile filthy Bacon had rendered impure.
For that says the Sow I her kindness admire,
For they that hurt me durst never come nigh her.
MORAL.
A Quick Repartee is of excellent use,
Which can to our credit improve an abuse.
FAB. VIII. The Kingdom of Apes.
T Was the chance of two Travailers once in their way
To light of a Kingdom where Apes bore the sway;
The one was a plain man, the other all riddle
His joints were in tune to obey a court fiddle:
Being taken for spies who to Realms denounce ill,
They must be examined before Privy Council:
Then King of the Apos to try their Civility:
Demanded their thoughts of himself and Nobility;
The Courtier cries, Sir, You govern the Place,
For Majesty seems to be stamped in your Face,
An Emperor you, these are Princes of blood
And wise Politicians that do the world good:
The King strait replies, we wisdom regard,
A Bushel of Apples must be your reward.
But now for your neighbor: Lets hear friend your mind,
Pray how are your thoughts to the Kingdom inclined?
Plain Dealer replies, Sir, you seem by your shape
To be but a dignified kind of an Ape:
And these here about you seem all your Relations,
All Apes, and all fitted for their occupations.
This angered the Monarch, and vexed all his train,
So they tore him to pieces for talking so plain.
MORAL.
HE soon gets Preferment that flatters and lies,
But plain honest men are not likely to rise.
FAB. IX. The Crab and her Daughter.
AN Old Mother Crab thus schooled her young Wench,
Daughter turn out your toes, and walk like the French,
Move hansomely forward, observe the bon grace,
And don't You crawl backward with that awkward pace:
But the Crab met with this reply from her daughter,
Mother lead you the way, and I Will soon follow after.
MORAL.
EXample to Virtue the heart more engages
Than all the fine sayings of Doctors and sages;
Good words are but vain if your actions don't suit,
While You talk like an Angel and live like a brute.
FAB. X. The Gnat and the Bull.
A Mannerly Gnat to the Bull made address,
And thus in Court language himself did express;
Sir, I beg your diversion, and humbly crave pardon,
If the weight of my body your horn presses hard on:
But if I offend You I Will straightway be gone,
Pray go Sir, or stay, says the Bull, it is all one.
MORAL.
AN Ill bred buffoon plagues us less with abuses,
Than a finical fop with harangues and excuses;
Least his Person or dress should 'scape ridicule,
He takes care his language should show he is a fool.
FAB. XI. A Mountebank and a Bear.
A Mountebank who the whole rabble did gravel,
With Greek words, and balsoms, Elixir, and travel,
Stood amazed to behold how that wonder of nature
A Bear, drew the Mob from the learned Operator,
They laughed, and huzza'd, and threw many a flowt
At the Beast and the Squire that ushered his snout:
The Brute would not bear it, but taking of snuff
Soon answered derision wi' moral rebuff:
Says he, Courteous friends don't keep such a pother,
Have patience to see your own faults in another:
You hoot at a Bear, yet he more than supposes
A Glisterpipe Quack leads You all by the noses.
MORAL.
HE that others derides himself should see clearly,
Or else he may lash his own faults most severely.
FAB. XII. A Widow and Widdower.
A Widow and Widdower led a sad life;
She praised her dead husband, the man his dead wife:
At supper the wife gives the leg of a Fowl,
To a beggar to pray for her dead husbands soul:
The rest of the Fowl the Husband imparted,
That the beggar might pray for his Lady departed.
Thus while they both testified love to the dead;
The living went angry and hungry to bed.
MORAL.
A Married condition becomes a mere riot,
Where a man and his wife cannot agree to be quiet.
FAB. XIII. The Mouse and the Lion.
A Mouse saved a Lion in danger of Life;
And then begged his daughter to make him a Wife:
The Generous Lion soon granted the favor;
The day was appointed the Mouse was to have her;
The Marriage was soon huddled up at a venture,
And just as sack posset was ready to enter;
The unfortunate Bride as she stalkt into bed
Set her paw on her husband and left him stone dead.
It was a great pity, a Bridegroom so merry
Should thus call for Oars at the Stygian ferry.
MORAL.
There Is many a Tradesman reduced to great need,
To keep a Proud Wife of a Quality breed:
Yet while he is related to some noble house,
The man nere considers the fate of the mouse.
FAB. XIV. The Cat and the Cock.
A Hungry Cat seized a Cock in her claws,
And thus the poor bird woul'd have pleaded his cause;
Pray what is the offense of which I Am indicted?
If I do any wrong I Will endeavor to right it:
You crow says the Cat with an ugly shrill voice,
And no one can sleep for your Sowgelders noise:
Alas said the Cock I by crowing give warning,
That servants may rise up betimes in the morning:
Moreover says Puss you're incestuous they say,
And Mother, or Sister's, all one in your way:
Says the Cock by this means the house is supplied,
And eggs still remain for the Market beside:
In a word says the Cat no excuse can defend you,
The Claws of Grim Justice are ready to end you.
MORAL.
HE that is by nature revengeful and cruel,
All Passion, and fire, can never want fuel:
For there is no excuse so untoward and senceless,
But does well enough to oppress the defenseless.
FAB. XV. The Moon and her Tailor.
THe Moon wants a gown and her Tailor must make it,
But he Honest man would not dare undertake it:
Your body says he, Madam, looks well to day,
But in a Weeks time 'twill half wear away:
Sometimes your proportion is Jolly and round,
Then as thin as a Candle of Twelve in the pound;
You're crooked, and strait, thick and thin, at your pleasure;
And now, Madam, how can a Tailor take measure?
MORAL.
IN vain is our pains and our labor designed,
To humor a man that don't know his own mind.
FAB. XVI. A Cuckoo and Little Birds.
A Cuckoo much wondered the Birds did so fly her,
And what was the reason they dare not come nigh her?
She never did harm, not a Titmouse could say
That ever she made his Relations a Prey:
It Is true replies one, but our fancies you balk
You are no Bird of Prey, yet you look like a hawk.
MORAL.
A Man that does virtue and goodness approve,
Does never unsuitable Company love:
To hate all that is ill is a happy condition,
And none truly hates it, but hates the suspicion.
FAB. XVII. The Hawks and the Pigeons.
THE Hawks in a long Civil war had contended,
By means of the Pigeons the matter is ended;
The quarrel no sooner among the Hawks ceases,
But they fall on the Pigeons and tear 'em to pieces.
MORAL.
GOod Nature should never indiscreetly be shown;
Many pacify Quarrels and make 'em their own.
FAB. XVIII. The Cock and the Fox.
A Cock on a Tree advantageously posted,
Was seen by a plansible Fox and accosted;
He told him no Bird that e're wore a feather
Could match him for beauty and wisdom together!
And O! that the Cock would afford him the grace,
So great a Philosopher once to embrace!
How blessed should he be, if by his Vicinity
He might as it were but touch his Divinity!
The Cock heard the Fox with very good will,
So tickled wi' praise he could hardly sit still:
At last down he flutters; the Fox takes occasion
To welcome his friend with a rough Salutation:
Says he, worthy Prophet your skill you have shown,
You tell others Fortunes and cannot tell your own:
Now juggle, now conjure, show all your black art:
Without strong enchantment you will certainly smart.
MORAL.
IN Nature it seems an Infallible Rule,
That Flattery always supposes a Fool:
If we love the praise, we the scandal must bear;
If we slight it, it falls to the flatterers share.
FAB. XIX The Mad Lion
THere went a report, and good Authors backed it;
The Lion the King of the woods was distracted.
This put the whole Mob in a sad consternation;
What mischief, say they, will befall the poor nation:
A Lion at best is like absolute Princes;
He Will eat us all up if he is out of his senses.
MORAL.
MEN hardly good Princes with patience endure,
But he that is a Tyrant had need to sit sure.
FAB. XX. The Dog and Shadow.
A Dog who for plunder had been a Pickeering,
With a piece of raw beef cross a river was steering:
The Sun shone, and made a reflection so fresh,
The stream seemed to show him a new piece of flesh:
So he chopped at the shadow, and lost what he had:
Which vexed the Cur so, that they say he ran mad.
MORAL.
PRojectors that with their Estates a'nt contented,
Quite ruin their Fortune by striving to mend it.
FAB. XXI. The Fox, Wolf and Ape.
A Fox was indicted upon an old grudge,
A Wolf was the Plaintiff, an Ape was the Judge;
Then Reynard was asked, Was he guilty or no?
And the witnesses swore to it, con and pro:
The Ape having du'ly considered the case
Pronounces both faulty: You Woll have the face,
Says my Lord, this Fox as a Thief to mdite,
In an Action to prosecute which you want right:
This Indictment the Fox to deny does not doubt,
Tho the matter of fact be plainly made out:
In short You endeavor the whole Court may see,
You're a couple of Rascals but cannot agree.
MORAL.
DIsorder breeds order, Injustice does right;
Men are honest in Envy, and good out o'spight.
FAB XXII. A Covetous Man and his Orchard.
A Man that an Orchard of rare Fruit had gotten,
Spared all that was ripe, and eat all that was rotten;
His Son, my young master, one day got the Key,
And in with a whole gang o'schoolboys comes he:
Now Boys fill your Breeches, and hang him that spares,
So down go the Peaches, the Plums, and the Pears:
Be sure, says Young Master, what is good and ripe gather:
And leave all that is bad for the old fool my Father.
MORAL.
A Poor sordid spirit that doats upon pelf,
Tho hated by all, suffers most from himself:
He scrapes all his life, even till he is a dying;
To leave it a Son that will soon set it flying.
FAB. XXIII. The Magpy and the Eagle.
A Magpie tried many ways how to inveigle
And make her self intimate with a Court Eagle:
She thought her good parts, and quick apprehension,
Might give her deservedly hopes of a Pension:
No bird that could show such an excellent Soul,
So fit to pay Complements, or to Condole;
Her fancy in dressing was airie and pretty,
And then in discourse there was nothing so witty.
The Eagle saw well that the Magpie had parts,
Confessed her great beauty, and worthy deserts;
But yet, would give him no place o'trust, hating
A Bird that was so much addicted to prating.
MORAL.
TO govern his tongue shows a man of more sense
Than they who to witty discourse make pretense;
A friend that is defective in this kind o'wit,
Is for the degree of a Servant unfit.
FAB. XXIV. The Fly and the Pot.
A Liquorish Fly, that would pamper his belly,
Was got very deep in a Pot of good gelly;
And when he would gladly have got out again,
He found upon trial his labor was vain:
His Boots were so liquor'd, his wings were so pasted,
He found he must pay dear for what he had tasted:
Then he pulled up his heart, and with courage heroic,
Tho he lived like an Epicure, died like a Stoic.
MORAL.
IT IS wise in enjoyments to keep a due measure,
And not die effeminate Martyrs of pleasure;
Yet if by our Vices we worthily smart,
There Is nothing looks well but a good Patient heart:
FAB. XXV. The Fox and the Crow.
A Crow who had somewhere been stealing a dinner,
Held Cheese in her mouth till a sly Fox had seen her;
He runs to the Tree where she sat; and says he
Are you the bright Lady I long wished to see?
People say You are black, but where is their sight?
I never saw a bird of so lovely a white!
The Swan's very fair, to give her, her due;
But not of so clear a complexion as You:
If your voice does as much as your beauty excel;
You Will ravish all creatures where ever you dwell:
The Crow, who imagined her voice must needs please,
Went to tune up her Pipes, and down fell the cheese:
The Fox caught it up, and cried, spare your noise,
You quite turn my stomach with that ugly voice:
Lets have a Cessation of those rueful strains;
It Is plain You have neither voice, beauty, nor brains.
MORAL.
HE who has Estate, shall never want friends
To flatter his Vanity for their own ends:
But when the Enchantment of Interest's gone,
A Fool may be sure he shall meet with his own.
FAB. XXVI. A Clown and a Be.
A Clown took it ill to be stung by a Be,
For how could such Venom with honey agree?
The Be told him plain, you're a dull country creature;
Is any thing worse to provoke than good nature?
MORAL.
WHen Men even Mercy and Patience abuse,
Our anger cannot wish for a fairer excuse;
Yet tho our revenge may be hansomely shown,
It Is always more noble to let it alone.
FAB. XXVII. The Pilot and Merchant.
A Merchant that never was before in a Storm,
Was amazed at a Pilot that dreaded no harm;
And therefore he puts in a word by the by,
What death Mr Pilot did your Father die?
What death do you ask says the Pilot? Why he
And my Grandfather too both perished at Sea:
If so, sai's the Merchant, then what is the occasion
That makes You so forward at this Navigation?
Why pray says the Pilot e'nt your Father dead?
Why yes cries the Merchant, but died in his bed:
Say you so quoth the Tar; why then by this rule
If You your selfe're go to bed you're a fool.
MORAL.
SInce Fate is strong, and death is every where;
The Brave are as secure as those that fear.
FAB. XXVIII. The Fox and the Stork.
A Fox that had made quick dispatch of a Pullet,
Felt an untoward bone stick a cross in his gullet;
Which he neither upward nor downward could get,
This put the poor Beast in a wonderful fret:
He thought of a Crane, who by special gift,
Was suited to help him out at a dead lift:
The Bird with fair promises quickly was won,
To put his long bill in and pull out the bone:
This done, the reward was expected wi' passion,
As richly deserved by the rare operation:
Of that says the Fox no more must be s'ed of
It Is enough when I might, I did not bite your head off.
MORAL.
MEN often in distress are submissive and fair,
Who if fortune changes as insolent are;
What favor can sordid Ingratitude charm?
You're pai'd well enough if you meet wi' no harm.
FAB. XXIX. The Projector and the Ass.
IN the space of Ten years, a Projector agreed
To teach an Ass how to chop Logic and read:
The Wager was laid, and the forfeitures named;
But when the odd humor by many was blamed,
Why look ye, says he, it is forty to one
The Ass may be dead e're his Lectures are done;
Or I may drop off peradventure, or he
That lay's me the wager, and then we are free.
MORAL.
SOme Projects at first that improbable seem,
Are managed by methods of which we don't dream;
A crafty Designer, if one way w'ont do,
Has twenty more ready his ends to pursue.
FAB. XXX. The Farmer and Weasel.
A Weasel was taken and cried out for Pity,
O Master consider the good that I did 'ye!
I always defended your Bacon and Cheese,
And killed Rats and Mice of all sorts and degrees:
And after such service, methinks it agrees ill
With Justice, for you to destroy the poor Weasel:
The Farmer replies, You seem to talk sense;
Yet all that you say, is mere sham, and pretense.
It Is true that you eat up the Mice as you say,
And every thing else that comes in your way:
And therefore I must deal so freely to tell ye,
You did not love Me so much as your belly,
MORAL.
TOO many that aim at their own private ends,
Would fain have the fame of obliging their friends.
FAB. XXXI. The Fox and the Crane.
A Fox would needs treat, and invited a Crane
To show how Gentilely he could entertain:
With posset and Cawdle he slabber'd a Table,
And vowed 'twas as good as to make he was able.
Fall to Mr Crane, for now you are come
You must be as free as at your own home:
I Will vow you're to blame, you eat very little,
I fancy you are not well pleased wi' your Victual:
The Crane for his heart could not take up a drop,
Yet civilly bowed and commended the soup:
And begged of the Fox with wondrous humility,
That he would accept of the same civility;
The Fox very kindly vouchsafe him the grace,
The Crane gave a treat in a narrow mouthed glass;
From whence his long bill picked up the good fare,
While the Foxlick't the out side and cried it was rare.
MORAL.
AN Insolent Jester that never gives quarter,
Often meets with his match, and catches a Tartar:
And all men are mightily pleased, when they find
A Knave or Buffoon pai'd home in his kind.
FAB. XXXII. The Viper and File.
A Viper enraged would needs bite a File,
The File at her madness, could not choose but smile;
Leave off Idle Fool, unless you have need
To break all your teeth and make your Gums bleed:
To hurt me, or not hurt your self is a wonder,
For I can bite brass and hard Iron asunder.
MORAL.
THo envy should suffer, in dealing hard measure,
It never feels the smart, but endures it with pleasure:
And who is in so bad a condition as he is,
Who loves his own pain and enjoy's his disease.
FAB. XXXIII. The Fox and the Eagle,
AN Eagle that thought a young Fox pretty victual,
Would carry some home to her birds that were little:
The Old Mother Fox ran after protesting,
And from her claws mercy most humbly requesting;
When all other arguments failed, and were slighted,
She fetches a firebrand that was well lighted:
Says she, for my sake no pity is shown,
Yet now Mrs Eagle, show some for your own:
For if you return not my Cubs at desire,
I Will set both the tree and your nest in a fire:
The Eagle was startled at this proposition,
And gave back the Cubs with an humble submission.
MORAL.
THE Powerful never should their Greatness abuse,
Inferior Persons to vex or abuse:
No Creature so dull its designs to pursue,
But rage makes 'em witty and mischievous too.
FAB. XXXIV. The Old Man and his two Wives.
AN Old sort of Beaux, an unmortifi'd Dunce,
Would hardily venture one two Wives at once;
The one was a Beauty and dazzled his eyes,
The other was old enough but very wise:
The young one dispatched all his hairs that were gray,
Least they should his weakness or dotage betray:
The Matron pulled up the black hairs by the root,
Which did not his age, nor his gravity suit:
Thus worse than Old Time, did the Poor Bully sare
Before, and behind, he was left without hair.
MORAL.
HE that meddles with women, had best look about him,
For tho he be cautious, they are likely to rout him;
The Ugly and Airie, the formal and gay,
The Wits, and the fools, have all tricks in their way.
FAB. XXXV. The Cat, the Sow and the Eagle.
A Cat, Sow, and Eagle, all happened to be
Together Inhabitants of the same Tree:
The Eagle upon the top planted her nest,
The Cat with her Kitlings the middle possessed;
But as for the Pigs, the careful Sow got 'em
All treasured up safe at a hole in the bottom:
The Cat and her claws were very much busied,
To Clamber and pay Neighbor Eagle a visit:
Ah Madam said she, I fear you and I
Shall get little good by the Sow and her Sty:
She lies undermining and grunting below,
I Am sure in a while she will the Tree overthrow:
At This Information, the Eagle sat watching;
And never durst go from the birds she was hatching.
Then down creeps the Cat to the Pigs below stairs,
And there with suspicions she fills the Sows eats;
She bids her beware, or soon she would find
The Eagle to Pigs flesh was strangely inclined:
Her humor says she will be certainly shown,
If e're you go out and leave Piggy's alone.
The Sow hearing this was frighted and awed
And never for Victuals durst travail abroad;
By such informations and diligent labors,
The Cat made a shift to starve both her neighbors:
Which when she had very successfully done,
She claimed both the Nest and the Pigs for her own.
MORAL.
A Man does in friendship exceedingly fail,
Who gives too much ear to a whisperers tale;
To him you suspect of a Story, reveal it:
For it is both unsafe, and unkind, to conceal it.
It Is somewhat, to break all a talebearers measures;
To find a friend true, is the greatest of pleasures.
FAB. XXXVI. The Eagle, Daw and Tortoise.
A Tortoise by Nature was so wrapped in armor,
The Eagle had got her, but could not well harm her:
A mischievous Daw would needs show the way,
On promise her self might have share in the prey;
Says she, let her fall from on high on a rock;
Then all her coat armor will break wi' the shock:
The Eagle the Daws wicked counsel soon hears,
And dashes the Tortoise's house round her ears.
MORAL.
THE greatest, and best are the most unsecure;
Where mischievous counsel rules absolute Power.
FAB. XXXVII. The Goat and the Fox.
A Dull hairy Goat spied a Fox in a Well,
Who told him the water did strangely excel;
That still as he drank his delight did increase:
That liquor must fail, e're his pleasure could cease:
Then down skips the Goat; and the Fox takes occasion
To leap on his horns, and so make an Evasion.
MORAL.
A Man in great danger, so he may get rid,
Considers but little who comes in his stead.
FAB. XXXVIII. The Dogs and Jupiter.
THE Dogs little pleased wi' their slavish condition
Sent Legates and Envoy's to Jove wi' Petition:
These were to inform him of their nasty diet,
And how they were Banged and could never live at quiet.
But while at each dunghill they scrape for a bone,
The Ambassy went very leasurely on:
So that Mercury coming to usher 'em in,
There was not so much as a Whelp to be seen:
At last having found out the Plenipotentiaries,
He dragged them by the ears through Jupiters entries:
The Dogs dreading Jove, and his high Presence chamber,
Left an odd sort of smell, but 'twas not of amber,
Which when Jove perceived, he caused some attacks
To be made with a Cudgel laid over their backs:
And ordered 'em all to be laid up in durance,
For playing such tricks wi' so little Assurance.
The rumor to all other Dogs was conveyed,
What odious work the late Legates had made;
So sending new Envoy's, they took special care
To daub all their tails with odours most rare:
But when the New Legates saw Jove shaking thunder,
They felt other motions beside those of wonder:
And tho they were fortified well wi' persume,
They left no commendable scent in the room:
So that mighty Jove more vexed than before,
E'ne sent 'em to Prison and would hear no more:
From that day to this the Dogs smell in vain
At strangers, expecting their Envoy's again.
MORAL.
THey sorry Improvements are likely to make,
Who will against Nature affairs undertake.
FAB. XXXIX. The Country Mouse and City Mouse.
A Nice City Mouse with a frollick was taken,
To take the fresh air, and eat Beans and Bacon;
And see her old friend, a plain hearty Mouse
That lived in the Country, and kept a Farm House:
The Mice in the Village came crowding together,
When first the gay stranger was newly come thither;
The Farmer wi' Pride not a little did swell
That a fine silken Mouse at a Cottage would dwell;
And so she made ready her Beans and her Pease,
The rin'd of fat Bacon the paring of cheese,
Beside these a dish kept hot with a cover,
A dainty Black Pudding wi' Sugar strow'd over:
The City Mouse smiled, and Neighbor said she
Don't put your self to these expenses for me;
For we in the City are daintily fed,
But I in the Country delight in Rye Bread.
You are free and honest and have a good heart,
But sure your condition's below your desert:
Come go live with me and leave your Vocation,
I Will show you to live in the fat of the Nation:
I speak without complement trust to my word,
It never shall cost You a farthing for board:
You there shall be furnished with what e're you lack
And eat Venizon Pasty, drink Sugar and Sack:
This life was approved more then Carting or Ploughing,
And friend, says the Farmer, when shall we be going?
For I find my fancy a little incline
To drink humming liquor and eat what is fine:
E're night, in a Palace the Mice made their entry,
Yet City Mouse would not go into the Pantry,
Because in the Parlor upon some occasion,
The Table was dressed with a dainty Collation;
Come friend says the Citizen, turn Pioneer
This Pasty you see is full of good cheer;
So to it they fell, and crammed without measure;
Till a noise in the Key hole disturbed all the pleasure;
A Parcel of Bullies that loved to be whoring
Came in with their Dogs and their Mistresses roaring;
The Country Mouse being but clumsey and tardy,
Unused to the place, found life in Jeopardy:
For being well stuffed, from danger she ran ill
And was very near being snap't by a Spaniel;
But being recovered at last from the fright,
Cried she, City Friend I must bid you good night:
I Will never to eat quelque chose, and high rogousts strive,
And live thus in danger of loosing my life.
MORAL.
A Wise man will choose a safe mean condition,
Before the gay life of a Court Politician;
Before the false kindness, that fain would appear
Where Malice and Envy are only sincere.
FAB. XL. The Herdsman and Jupiter.
A Heardsman the loss of his Calf much lamented:
To part with a Kid he was freely contented,
If Jove would afford him the sorry relief
To see but so much as the Phyz of the Thief:
The poor silly swain scarce ended his prayers
When a Lion wi' terrible whiskers appears:
O Jove said the Fellow, I see the Thief plain,
I Will give you a Bull to remove him again.
MORAL.
WE often of Heaven our own mischief require,
An then it is a blessing to loose our desire.
FAB. XLI. The Ape and the Fox,
A Lion had issued out his Proclamation
All Beasts without tails must go out of the Nation,
So the Ape was equipt for Perigrination:
But still she was mightily puzzled to learn
Why the Fox packt his goods up wi' so much concern,
A Fox, says the Ape, has no cause to fear,
For he has a tail large enough and to spare:
But soon she had answer; that, that was all one
If an Absolute Monarch should say he had none:
MORAL.
NO Innocence can be secure from a Flaw,
Where Tyranny rules, and where humor is Law.
FAB. XLII. The Sick Kite and her Mother.
SAi's a Languishing Kite, Mother give over tears
You Will do me more good if you fall to your prayers:
O Child says the Mother if that is the way,
The Gods will mind little what e're I can say:
When e're I would pray, I find my tongue falters,
Alas the Gods know I have robbed all their altars.
MORAL.
BE grateful, and use the kind blessings of heaven
To honor the Power by which they were given,
Deride not Religion when healthy and well,
And then pray and flatter again when you're ill.
FAB. XLIII. The Trumpeter.
A Trumpeter was taken prisoner a stro'lling
And when he was taken he fell a cajoling,
Well Gentlemen this for my self I can say,
I never was the man that engaged in a fray:
There Is no one among You can say I suppose,
I e're broke so much as a shin or a nose:
And therefore I hope you a'n't for inditing
A Person that never was guilty of fighting.
But one of the enemies made this reply,
For that very reason he rather should die,
That being a Coward, and full o'base fears,
He set other people together by the ears.
MORAL.
SOme Villasnous People use all their Invention,
To make others quarrel and fall to contention:
Such pitiful spirits can basely desire,
To burn a man's house, and warm by the fire:
But he that contrives, does a Villainy further
As much as the hands that are di'd in the murder.
FAB. XLIV. The Heart and the Fountain.
A Heart in a Fountain surveying his Figure,
Was vexed at his legs for being no bigger;
Says he, to my Nature I owe little thanks,
That gave a pair of such thin spindle shanks:
They look but unsuitable to my fat haunches,
Or to my large horns with agreeable branches:
While thus he was finding of fault and remarking,
He heard the men hallow, and all the dogs barking:
Away flies the Heart as swift as the wind,
And leaves all the Dogs and the danger behind;
Till hampered at last by the horns in a wood,
His folly too plainly he then understood;
His feet he despised had preserved him from ruin,
The Horns he had honored had been his undoing.
MORAL.
WE in our true interest are so short sighted,
With what hurts us most, we most are delighted.
FAB. XLV. The Sun and the North wind.
THe Sun and North wind who blusters and swaggers
Had quarreled and e'ne come to drawing o'daggers;
For Phoebus imagined he could not seem more an ass
Than by yielding Place to this Bully Boreas:
In short 'twas agreed that each should do something,
To show forth his Power upon a Poor Bumpkin:
And he that could first with his cloak make him part,
Should fairly be owned of the highest desert:
The wind first began, and so managed the matter
That he made the Countrymans grinders to chatter;
The more still he bluster'd the less he could rout him,
The Clown wrapped his cloak the closer about him;
But when the Sun came with his fiery Ordeal,
The man was so faint that he wanted a cordial:
He melted so fast with the splendour Meridian,
That off went the Cloak he was glad to be rid on.
MORAL.
MEN who to all fury and rage bid defiance,
Are melted by soft easy means to compliance.
FAB. XLVI. The Crab and the Serpent.
A Serpent and Crab made a Friendship together,
A Friendship to last in all kind o'weather;
The Crab was downright, but plagued with heartburnings
To find in the serpent such windings and turnings;
This Serpentine dealing so much did provoke him,
That one night the Crab took occasion to choke him:
And viewing his body when life was quite ended,
Which lay now at length in a strait line extended;
Oh had you but lived so direct and upright,
Old Crony, said he, you never should have died,
MORAL.
BY honesty Foes are to friendship invited,
But treachery separates friends when united.
FAB. XLVI. The Partial Judge.
A Farmer once made a Complaint to a Judge,
My Bull and please you Sir, owing a grudg
Belike, to one of Your good worships cattle,
Has slain him out right in a mortal battle:
I Am sorry at heart because of the action,
And want to know how to make satisfaction:
Why you must give me Your Bull, that is plain
Says the Judge, or pay me the price of the slain:
But I have mistaken the Case says the Clown,
The dead Bull I talk of an't please you's my own:
The Judge soon replies with a serious face,
Say you so; this Accident alters the case.
MORAL.
MEN greatly delight to have Justice shown,
In any ones case excepting their own.
FAB. XLVII. The Ape and the Dolphin.
THE Dolphin they say has a singular vanity,
Which is to dote very much on humanity,
It chanced in a Storm a poor frighted Ape,
Was dashed from a ship into Sea by mishap:
The kind hearted Dolphin to succor him ran,
Supposing he had been a small sort of man:
The Monkey bestriding the Fish, made appear
The seat and address of a good Chevalier;
He rode through the surges wi' no less decorum
Then when the Bears follow, and Apes ride before 'em:
At last cries the Dolphin, my Friend how fare 'ye,
And pray let us hear what Countryman are 'ye;
Why I Am an Athenian, the Ape strait replies
For there my Estate and my chief dealing lies;
You know then The name of an Harbor.
Piraeum? Piraeum says John
Why he is my Old friend, we were always all one:
Your friend says the Dolphin? then at his devotion
I leave You; your friend's very great with the Ocean:
So slipping betwixt the Apes legs with facility,
He left the Athenian to show his ability.
MORAL.
DEceivers are oftentimes left in the Briars,
For none are so odious to all men as liars.
FAB. XLVIII. The Squire and his Dogs.
AN Old Country Squire loved Dogs at his heart,
And he and his Kennel could never dwell apart;
But one day his Son by a Villainous hound
Was bit so severely, he died of the wound;
Which put the old Spark in so grievous a passion
That on the whole Pack he past condemnation;
So Ranger, and Jowler, and Rockwood, and Tra,
Tho harmless, were hanged as they came in the way.
MORAL.
TOO often we find that one man's impiety,
Has been the destruction of all the Society.
FAB. XLIX. A Drunkard and his Wife.
A Woman had got such a Sot to her Spouse,
He ne're-cou'd come home on his legs to his house:
'Twas work for the Porters to put him to bed,
In one of these fits it came in her head
To coffin him and put him down in a vault,
In hopes so to frighten him out of his fault:
He lay there a day, at last his wife comes,
And at the Vault door with her knuckles she drums:
Who Is there, says Old Soul? Wife answers, O sinner
Departed, I come to invite you to dinner:
Tell me of no dinner replies the good Fellow,
But have thou a Crag of good liquor that is mellow;
Ah Husband cries she, will nothing prevail
To cure this unquenchable Love of Pot Ale*
MORAL.
IT IS no easy task by reason, or shame,
A man long accustomed to vice to reclaim.
FAB. L. The Bear and the Fox.
Says a Bear to a Fox, it never can be 'se'd
I e're was so base as to prey on the dead;
But yet says the Fox, you deserve no thanksgiving,
You do what is worse, for you murder the living.
MORAL.
A Proud Silly Fellow will tell you a story,
Which turns to his shame, while he aims at his glory.
FAB. LI. The Gardener and his Dog.
A Gardeners Dog by misfortune had fell,
And there he lay ready to drown in the Well;
The Gardner needs would assist the dumb beast,
And the Dog in requital bit through his hard fist:
The Gardner in passion cry's, if you're so stout,
E'ne drown, and for me, let who will take ye out.
MORAL.
HE shows his own Foolishness, and ill conditions;
Who hates a true friend for his good admonitions.
FAB. LII. The Clown and the Flies.
A Clown that was vexed with abundance of Flies,
To drive 'em away with a Firebrand tries;
This while he with wonderful Courage essays,
His thatcht Habitation is set in a blaze.
MORAL.
THE Greatest misfortunes do often befall
While men are impatient to bear with the small.
FAB. LIII. The Hound and other Dogs,
A Hound brought a Hare home which he had outrun,
To show other dogs what a feat he had done;
He Boasted how justly he merited praise,
And that they never saw such a Course in their days;
But while he was bragging and raising of wonder,
The other Dogs all fell aboard of his plunder,
MORAL.
A Boaster no other advantage does gain,
But envy, or pity for being so vain;
It Is wise to be happy without Proclamation,
Unless we would ruin our own expectation.
FAB. LIVE. The Lion and other Beasts.
THE Lion with some other Beasts of his Nation,
One day went a hunting, for mere recreation:
They ran down a Heart, and then they expected
In four equal quarters to see him dissected:
The Lion performed it, and rolling his eyes,
One part as a King I claim for my prize;
Another Division I think is my merit,
'Cause no other Beast has so noble a spirit;
A third part I challenge, and it is but small gains
For one that in hunting has took so much pains:
The Fourth part is mine too, if any bold Prater
Shall question my right I proclaim he is a Traitor:
The Beasts said, they all were his servants most humble,
And made all their honors, not daring to grumble.
MORAL.
DOn't do your self harm, by aiming to right ye,
For it is a great Folly to strive with the mighty.
FAB. LV. The Dull Schoolboy.
A Schoolboy was once so dull in his way,
He could not be taught so much as great A;
His Schoolfellow jested upon his hard skull,
Nay hold says the Youngster, I am not so dull;
But if I learn A which I could soon do,
They Will put me to B, C, and all the Cross row:
Now that will exceedingly trouble my gizard,
For learning of A to be run down to Izard.
MORAL.
IT IS better to enter on no resolution,
Then make it and never venture on Execution.
FAB. LVI. The Gnat and the Lion.
Says a Gnat to a Lion I boldly defy You,
Grim Monarch, whose whiskers fright all that come nigh You,
You may bite like a Woman, and scratch like a Cat,
Yet I Will make you dread the Invincible Gnat:
I give you fair warning my force to oppose,
Before I begin a Carreer at your nose:
This said, he the Lion attackt in the snout
So smartly, the Monarch was fain to roar out;
And striving to succor himself with his paws,
He tore his own Phisnomy with his own claws:
The Gnat having thus the Lion defeated,
Was trapt by a Spider, just as she retreated;
And died with regret, that Fate could devize on
No death but to blast her fresh Laurels with poison.
MORAL.
A Slave can revenge if provoked by a King,
A Spider can poison, a Gnat has a sting;
There Is no one so powerful, no one so brave,
But may be perplex't by a sly little knave.
FAB. LVII. The Axle Tree and Oxen.
A Team of stout Oxen were press't with a load
Of large heavy Timber they drew on the road,
And much they were fretted, that while they were straining
They heard the shrill Axle Tree loudly complaining;
Be silent say they, You long wooden Lubber,
For nothing of Timber can injure your crupper.
MORAL.
NO People complain more of Taxes, than they
Who are most secure having nothing to pay;
Those are not devoutest that use the most whining,
Nor those the most hurt that are always repining.
FAB. LVIII. The Dog, Ass and Wolf.
A Brisk mettled Whelp had a mind to a duel,
He Would needs fight the Wolf for being so cruel;
But fearing he might be to weak for resistance,
He comes to an Ass and desires Asistance;
For he had a Back strong enough for a Combat,
His voice too was warlike and much like a Trumpet:
But at the first Onset the Ass ran away,
And left the Young Mastive to finish the fray.
MORAL.
IT mocks all the power of Physnomy art
By outward proportion to judge of the heart.
There Is many a beautiful Whore, and a Fool
Without any sense in a large Jobber noll.
FAB. LIX. The Mole and her Daughter.
S Ay's a Mole to her dam, I Have cause to thank a sense
That brings through my Nose a smell of frankincence;
A little while after she cries out, alas
What a noise do I hear of hammering brass!
A third time she boasts she could with her dimn eye
Perceive at a very great distance a chimney:
Good Child says the mother e'ne prattle no more,
Two fences You want we never heard of before.
MORAL.
GRent Boasters their palpable follies reveal,
Which they by their silonce might safely conceal.
FAB. LX. The Ass and the Frogs.
'TWas the fate of an Ass that carried a Pack,
To make a false step, and fall in a Quag;
He called Fortune Slut, and said she was fickle,
To leave a poor Ass in so nasty a Pickle:
The Frogs round about were quickly convented,
And told him he need not be so discontented;
For he scarce had suffered one short hours soaking,
But they must live there eternally croaking.
MORAL.
IT IS a comfort to one in Afflictions to see,
That others are much more unhappy than he;
How can we indeed a misfortune deplore
When much better People have suffered much more.
FAB. LXI. The Cat and the Mice.
A Politic Cat that made it her trade,
Picked many a Mouse up in sly Ambuscade;
The Nation was grieved, that so many brave Mice
Should thus loose their lives and estates in a trice:
They call a grave Council whose wit should determine,
Some means for the best Preservation of Vermin.
Says one of the Counsel all things will be well,
If round the Cats neck we could tie but a bell;
Then let the Cat come by night, or by day,
The bell will give warning to scamper away;
That Is true said another, but where shall be found
A Mouse that will venture to tie the bell round.
MORAL.
IT IS easy to frame a good bold resolution,
But hard is the task that concerns execution:
For where life and Fortune must lie at the stake,
No wiseman a desperate counsel will take.
FAB. LXII. The Old Man and Death.
QUite spent with a Burden of Sticks, an Old Clown
To take breath awhile on a bank sat him down;
He called upon Death and said 'twas a hard case,
For him to bear sticks and an old crazy carcass:
While thus he complained who but death should appear,
Which made my Old Gaffers teeth chatter wi' fear:
I called you says he, Mr Death, in a Maggot,
And now you are here help me up wi' my faggot.
MORAL.
MEN easily Death at a distance desie,
But tremble like Cowards when ready to die,
For then the gay spirits and brisk idle flashes
Are sunk, as thorns crackle and fall into ashes.
FAB. LXIII. The Gnat and the Be.
AGnat almost starved in a sorry condition,
Pretended to be a most skilful Musician;
He comes to a Be hive, and there he would stay
To teach the Bees children to sing So la fa:
The Be told him plainly, the way of their nation
Was breeding up. Youth in some honest Vocation:
For fear by their labor they should not be fed,
And then curse their Parents for being high bred.
MORAL.
BAD singers, and dancers, and Scholars are made;
Of those who had better been taught a good trade.
FAB. LXIV. The Ass and the Nightingale.
AN Ass who in Music was wonderful choice,
Would challenge a Nightingale for a fine voice;
A Cuckoo is Judge to make the decision,
The Nightingale warbles a heavenly division:
But soon as the Ass set up his loud bray,
The Cuckoo was ravished and gave him the day.
MORAL.
WHere Fools are the Judges, a Quacks a Physician,
A Cobbler may pass for a shrewd Politician;
To bawl makes a Lawyer, and he that can whine
And poach both his eyes is a heavenly Divine:
Vice triumphs, and Farces affectedly writ
Are clapped by the dull powdered Beaux of the Pit.
FAB LXV. The Old Man and his Son and his Ass.
ONce on a time it by chance came to pass,
That a Man and his Son were leading an Ass:
Cries a Passenger; Neighbor your shrewdly put to it
To lead an Ass empty and trudg it on foot:
Nay quoth the Old fellow, if folk do so mind us
I Will e'ne climb the Ass, and Boy mount behind us:
But as they jogged on they were laughed at and hist,
What two Booby lubbers on one sorry Peast!
This is such a figure as never was known,
It Is a sign that the Ass is none of their own.
Then down gets the Boy and walks by the side,
Till another cry's, what you Old Fool must you ride?
When you see the Poor child that is weakly and young,
Forced through thick and thin to trudg it along:
Then down gets the Father, and up gets the Son,
If this cannot please 'em we never shall have done;
They had not gone far but a woman cries out,
O you young Graceless Imp you will be hanged no doubt;
Must You ride an Ass, and your Father that is gray
E'ne foot it and pick out the best of his way?
So now to please all they but one trick lack,
And that was to carry the Ass a Pickback;
But when that was tried, it appeared such a jest,
It occasioned more laughter by half than the rest.
MORAL.
HE who would please all, and their good liking gain
Shows a deal of good nature but labors in vain.
FAB. LXVI. The Devil and Sinner.
A Poor drudging Devil had made a hard shift,
To help out a Sinner at many dead lift;
At last he came to him wi' very bad news,
He brought at his back a whole bundle of shoes:
All these he wore out in running of stages,
And now says he Master pray pay me my wages.
MORAL.
AN ill man can never be truly secure
For vengeance deferred falls heavy and sure.
FAB. LXVII. A Wolf and a Porcupine.
A Wolf asks a Porcupine why still in armor?
As if she was jealous that some one would harm her;
When e're I come nigh you says he your quills rattle,
As if you were ready to charge in a Battle;
I never would ask if I thought you were vicious,
But now you are honest pray why so suspicious;
Believe me when Beasts bear each other good will,
It Is odd to go fortified all over with quill;
The Porcupine answers, in spite of your reason
Where Wolv's are, my armor is always in season.
MORAL.
WHen a knave is a friend, we then may divine
He surely is hatching some evil design;
But those of all others they soonest deceive,
Who are most by Nature inclined to believe.
FAB. LXVIII. The Snake and the Hedghog.
A Hedghog that was on his journey benighted,
A Snake very kindly to shelter invited;
The Hedghog approved of the Lodging so well,
The Snake could no more get him out of the cell.
MORAL.
TAke heed who it is that you take for your friend,
Least he prove the worst Foe you have in the end.
FAB. LXIX. The Worm and the Fox.
FRom a Bank of Green turf his old habitation,
A Worm put his head out, and made Proclamation:
"Let all the Beasts know, if any one is sick
"I Worm am by Practice a Doctor of Physic;
"I Am none of your Quacks that are circumforaneous:
"But skilled by long Travel in Parts Subterraneous:
"Where nature her chemical Art does display,
"Where all the rich juyces and minerals lay:
"I think without vanity I know the powr's
"And virtues locked up in roots, stones or flowr's.
"I modestly say I can nature restore
"By safe easy methods unheard of before.
"I Have been in some places, where Princes would fain
"Have hindered me from coming hither again:
"But I love the Good of my Country and Friends
"Beyond the mean Principle of private ends:
The Fox, who with patience had listened awhile
Began wi' some scorn on the Doctor to smile;
And pray says he Sir, if your skills so refined
How come You your self to be lame and blind
If your're such a Doctor show some of your rare tricks
And purge your own Nastiness with your Catharticks.
MORAL.
HE that talks well of Virtue in which he is defective,
Against his own self does but make an invective;
Such men may harangue with a bantring Oration,
But few will believe against plain demonstration.
FAB. LXX. The Woman and Death.
GOod Death said a Woman for once be so kind
To take me and leave my dear Husband behind!
But when Death appeared with a sour grimace,
The woman was dashed at his thin hatchet face;
So she made him a Curt'sie, and modestly s'ed
If you come for my Husband he lies thereabed.
MORAL.
SOme needs will oblige You, and take no denial
Unless You're so rude as to go to make trial;
Such friends can never be seen at a distance,
Unless a time comes when You need their Asistance.
FAB. LXXI. The Farmer and his Dog.
A Farmer come home, and his Cradle he found
Turned quite topsie turvey, the clothes on the ground
He frowned at his Dog by the Cradle that stood,
And seeing his mouth smeared over with blood;
He stabbed him in anger, without looking further,
He took it for granted his Dog had done murder:
But turning the Cradle he found his mistake,
The Child was alive, but there lay a dead snake,
Which the poor faithful cur, to stay a disaster,
Had slain in defense of his hard hearted Master.
MORAL.
THo hasty revenge be imagined a pleasure,
A man may have time to repent it at leisure.
FAB. LXXII. The Lark and her Young Ones.
THE Harvest was nigh, and the lark was emploi'd
Some victuals for all her young Birds to provide;
And as she went out, Dear Children said she,
If men talk of Corn be sure you tell me:
Pray mark what I say and take care to learn,
For this does our lives and our fortunes concern:
Ah mother say they when she came home at night,
Our Landlord has put us all in a sad fright:
For he has given orders to send for his friends,
And with them to morrow to reap he intends:
The Old one replies, we the Reapers defy,
As long as our Landlord on friends shall rely:
The next day the Lark went abroad once more,
And left the same charge with her Young as before:
My Landlord perceiving Friends mock expectations,
Son says he, to morrow, go call our Relations,
This story the birds told at night to their mother,
Says she his Relations will do like the Other:
When all People failed him the Farmer said Son,
Let Us do it our selv's if we'd have the work done:
At this the Old Lark cried now there is no tamp'ring
To morrow We all must prepare to be scamp'ring.
MORAL.
IN vain from our friends we assistance expect,
If we our own selv's our own business neglect;
In other men's matters that zeal's never shown,
Which People are used to express in their own.
FAB. LXXIII. The Monkey and Cat.
SOme Chestnuts in embers did roast by the fire,
A Monkey observed 'em wi' longing desire;
But how to come near 'em no method he saw,
Because he was fearful of burning his paw;
At last catching hold of a Cat that sat by him,
He poak't with her paw till the Chestnuts came nigh him.
MORAL.
A Sly Politician to gain his own ends,
Makes bold with his instruments which he calls friends.
FAB. LXXIV. The Sick Lion, Fox and Wolf.
A Lion was very sick and kept his bed,
The Beasts came to see how his Majesty did;
No Beast was away but the Fox: the Wolf cried
The Fox was a Beast of singular Pride,
He highly presumed on his parts and his sense,
And thought it beneath him to wait on his Prince:
The Fox heard the close of the Wolf's fine oration,
And coming in saw that the King was in passion,
And therefore said He -- I see many here
Who full o'concern and condoling appear,
But I have allowed my self no kind of ease
To find out a cure for your Highness disease;
And now I may say I Have a secret of nature
That soon will restore the most languishing creature;
The medicine in short which You die if you lack,
Is a Wolfs-skin laid hot to your Majesty's back:
The Cure was probatum, the Wolf he was fated
To be superficially Excoriated;
You see said the Fox while he skinned him, what labor
I take here to teach you to slander your neighbor.
MORAL.
THey who to do mischief their business have made,
Have by their own stratagems often been betrayed.
FAB. LXXV. The Wolf and the Lamb.
A Butcherly Wolf that lived upon slaughter,
For want o'warm blood, was drinking o'water:
But spying a Lamb at a distance a drinking,
He runs to her and falls a damning and sinking;
You mean to affront me said he I suppose,
By troubling the stream wi' your rascally nose,
The Lamb answered modestly, strange it did seem
How he at such distance could trouble the stream;
'Twas next to impossible to have offended,
But if he had done it he never did intend it;
Grant that says the Wolf which I need not do,
Yet you did abuse me some six month's ago:
Alas says the Lamb that cannot be, seeing
That Six months ago I was not in being;
Why then 'twas your Father and that is all one,
For You ought to suffer for what he has done.
MORAL.
A Mischievous man that loves to break unity,
To pick quarrels never need want opportunity.
FAB. LXXVI. The Man and his Ass.
SAys a man to his Ass come let us fly away,
The enemy's coming to plunder they say,
Fly you says the Ass, I no enemies fear,
My shoulders can carry no more then they will bear;
My life is so servile it makes my heart steady,
I cannot live worse than I live here already.
MORAL.
THE changes of Kingdoms affect not the Poor,
They lie on the ground and can tumble no lower.
FAB. LXXVII. The Parrot and other Birds.
THE Cage was of Gold where a Prince kept a Parrot,
A Fortunate Bird, which others did stare at;
One day round about him, a whole Congregation
Were gathered 'twixt envy and admiration;
They Would fain know the reason that did him promote
Who was but a Coward dressed in a gay Coat:
O I, says the Parrot, am witty in Prating,
And what the King talks of I Am strait imitating.
MORAL.
HE in the Court-way is an idle Presumer
Who cannot please the Great and flatter their humor,
A Plain dealing man will never earn his wages
But soft oily Talkers dwell in the fine Cages.
FAB. LXXVIII. The Disobedient Son and his Child.
A Base Son his Father so ill had entreated,
That of his Estate the Old Squire was cheated;
And forced in an Hospital to hide his head,
Where other good people supplied him wi' bread;
One day the Old Father his Son chanced to spy,
And called to him as he past carelessly by;
And one pair of sheets was all his request,
From him that his plentiful Fortune possessed.
The Son when the Father no more did require,
Was ashamed to deny such a modest desire;
And calling his Child, here take the sheets, and Sir,
See that you deliver 'em safe to your Gransire:
The Father soon heard he delivered but one,
And asked the small Varlet why thus he had done?
Young Graceless replied, I kept it for you
When Old you may dwell in the Hospital too.
MORAL.
UNmerciful Children, too commonly find
That Providence pays 'em at last in their kind.
FAB. LXXIX. The Bitch big with Young.
A Big bellied Bitch, in a doleful Condition
To one of her Gossips made humble Petition;
Good neighbor said she let a kindness be done me,
Pray lend me Your Kennel, my pains are upon me;
Yes with all my heart the Gossip replied,
To one in your pickle it cannot be denied:
But danger once past, it was her desire
She Would take up her puppies and homeward retire;
Good neighbor says the other, lets stay somewhat longer
Till Puppies can see, and grow somewhat stronger:
Soon after the Puppies so valiant were grown,
That they and the Bitch made the Kennel their own.
MORAL.
BE prudently kind, some speak fair to please ye
Who soon will abuse you for being so easy.
FAB. LXXX. The Hare and the Sparrow.
AN Eagle had seized in her claws a poor Hare,
Who begged for her life with many a tear;
A Sparrow sat by saying where is the speed,
You Hares do pretend to, of which you had need?
The name of a Racer will little avail you,
If in time of danger your petty toes fail you.
While thus the Impertinent Sparrow did talk,
Her self unawares was seized by the Hawk;
The Hare even dying some pleasure did find,
To see the vain Sparrow served in the same kind.
MORAL.
There Is no one so ready to give his advice
To others, as he who himself is unwise.
FAB. LXXXI. The Fly and the Ant.
SAys a Fly to an Ant I Am a Person of Quality,
And you're a Poltron and full o'Rascallity;
I fly in the Air with a brave Active soul,
You creep on the ground round your ownnasty hole:
To pilfer men's corn your scandalous trade is,
While I live wi' Princes and kiss the great Ladies:
I always am welcome, tho never invited,
With ravishing music my ars are delighted,
Each day I regale with wine and high diet,
While Grains and fair water secure you from riot:
And now a'nt you sorry that stepmother nature
Did ever produce such a poor drudging creature?
To all this the Ant made a modest reply,
I freely confess that my birth is not high;
It Is true you have wings to fly up and down,
And I have got feet to walk on the ground.
Secure in the Earth no dangers I dread,
For Tempests and Meteors fly over my head;
I live upon corn and water, it is true,
But yet am as healthy and happy as You:
But you Mr Fly would not be so thriving,
Were You to take pains like me for your living:
You know you are called by all you come nigh,
Impertinent, Impudent, Troublesome Fly:
You're nauseous confessed where ever you go,
And yet you pretend to the life of a Beaue:
Because what you taste is presently scented,
Was that noble Engine the fly flap invented.
Methinks such a thing universally hated,
To be proud and scornful was never created;
In Summer you're lewd and drink Sack and Claret,
In Winter you will starve like a Whore in a Garret.
MORAL.
IN all Conversation it is prudent to wave your
Fastidious deportment and lofty behavior;
Comparisons odiously often are made,
Which smartly and shamefully may be repaid:
We say what we will; and scorn to repent it;
We hear what we would not, and must be contented.
FAB. LXXXII. The Frogs and the Sun.
A Groundless report was round the Fens carried,
The Sun was in love and would soon be married;
The Frogs fell a croaking in sad dismal notes,
Jove asked 'em the reason they set up their throats:
Say they if one Sun so scorch our complexion
If more should be born we should have no protection
So your Majesty's dutiful Subjects the Frogs
Would boil in the Fens and bake in the Bogs.
MORAL.
THE world has so many bad people, we need
Desire to have but few more of the breed.
FAB. LXXXIII. The Ass, the Ape and the Mole.
Woes me cries an Ass that e're I was born,
With a brain without wit, and a skull without horn!
But then says the Ape a'n't I a poor wretch,
Without e're a tail to cover my breech!
A Mole peeping out, declared it was hateful
To hear the complaints of people ungrateful;
You both for a trifle make foolish objections,
Tho heaven freely give you so many perfections;
Whereas in a Dungeon I live without sight,
For ever debarred of the glory of Light:
To me all the Beauties in nature are vain,
And yet you never here me repine or complain.
MORAL.
Should heaven make a murmurer truly distressed
He Would know he repined even when he was blessed.
FAB LXXXIV. The He Goats and Jupiter.
THE He Goats were vexed when first it appeared
She Goats had a Patent to wear a long beard,
They muttered at Jove and thought it not fair
That She Goats with He Goats for beard should compare.
I wonder says Jove in so small a matter
You cannot be so civil the Ladies to flatter.
For tho as to beard the case equal stands,
Yet you have the power to raise the trained bands.
And since 'twixt your courage there is no equality
Pray yield to the weakest in dress and formality.
MORAL.
A Man of True worth never greev's to be outvied
By Ignorant People in dressing his outside.
FAB. LXXXV. The Dying Eagle.
AN Hungry Eagle that sat watching Hares
Was with a swift arrow shot through unawares,
It was a great grief just as she departed
To look at the arrow with which she was darted;
It seems that the shaft which the mischief did bring
Was made up wi' feathers took from her own wing.
MORAL.
NO little vexation a Person attends,
Who finds those his foes whom he took for his friends;
Yet those are most wretched whose miseries wholly,
Are owing to nothing else but their own folly.
FAB. LXXXVI. The Fowler and Partridge.
A Partridge ensnared begged hard for some favor,
She Would soon pay the Fowler the life that he gave her;
For she could decoy birds of the same Feather,
And so he might take a whole Covey together;
Nay answers the Fowler, a treacherous spirit
Scarce merits a scandalous life to inherit;
Who Will spare a base bird, that for private ends
Makes not the least scruple to ruin her friends.
MORAL.
There Is nothing so vile or so base as a traitor,
Even they who most need 'em abhor their ill Nature.
FAB. LXXXVII. The Pie and the Pigeon.
SAys a Pie to a Pigeon, I cannot for my soul
Tell a reason you allways breed in the same hole;
Still in the same place your young ones you lay,
From whence 'tother day they were taken away;
The Pigeon replies, it is true Mrs Pie,
But I mean no ill nor suspect it not I.
MORAL.
THE Honestest Natures, are Subject to meet
And lay the most open to lies and deceit;
For which cause the innocent seem to be dull,
But a Knave seems a Wit tho e're such a Fool:
But yet threadbare honesty's best, tho bravery
And high reputation may wait upon Knavery.
FAB. LXXXVIII. The Dog and the Ass,
A Flattring Spaniel, by fawning behavior
Had got very intimate in his Lords favor;
An Ass would make trial of his skill in flattery,
But he was paid home for Assault and Battery.
MORAL.
HE who against Nature his Actions will strain,
Takes care to be laughed at, and labors in vain.
FAB. LXXXIX. The Fox and Cock*
THE Fox in a snare, and in danger of life,
Begged hard of a Cock to procure him a knife,
The Cock made as if he would the favor have done him,
But calling his Master he brought him upon him:
Now when the Fox saw that sentence must pass,
He reckoned himself an Egregious Ass;
To think that the Cock would befriend him in dis^^^^^
Who often had robbed hen roosts and eaten his mistre^^
MORAL.
THat person a great deal of weakness does sho
Who needs will provoke and then trust to a
FAB. XC. The Mouse and the Frog.
A Traveling Mouse would fain pass a moat,
But could not get over for want of a boat,
At last a stout Frog, would needs undertake
To carry her over upon his broad back:
And lest the Mouse perish by stress of bad weather
He ties his own leg and the Mouse's together;
But when they had got in the midst of the water
Then down ducks the Frog and draws the Mouse a
The Mouse very earnestly struggles for life,
Till a Kite in the air observing the strife,
Stoops downward, and seizes the Mouse in her claws,
The string at her foot the Frog likewise draws,
The Kite eat 'em both, so did the Frog find
As little compassion as he had designed.
MORAL.
THe justice of heaven our ill Actions surveys,
And in his own way the Oppressor repays;
He loves mischief well, who ventures to do it,
Tho he ruin's himself and his fortune to boot.
FAB. XCI. Jupiter and the Tortoise.
A Tortoise to Jove a Petition did make,
To carry her house up and down at her back:
To carry your house is a toil said the God,
To think it a favor looks wonderful odd:
Said she, I wi' patience submit to the labor,
To move when I please from a troublesome neighbor.
MORAL.
TO live near a Neighbor that is given to strife,
Is almost as bad as to have an ill Wife.
FAB. XCII. The Lion grown Old.
AN old weakly Lion whose teeth were all gone,
Was pitied by few and was dreaded by none;
The surly wild Boar made bold to defy him,
The Bull gored his sides when e're he came nigh him.
He meets every day new affronts and disgraces,
He Is butted by Rams and kicked at by Asses;
To bear this with patience he was well contented,
From those he had ever misused or offended:
But those sort of enemies troubled his spirit,
Who once were his friends and preferred without merit.
MORAL.
IN prosperous Fortunes be modest and wise,
The greatest may fall and the lowest may rise:
But Insolent People that fall in disgrace,
Are wretched and no body pities their case.
FAB. XCIII. The Shepherd and his Dog.
A Shepherd was kind to his Dog, and would treat
The Cur every day with plenty of meat;
This Dog who the Wolf would never connive at,
Himself now and then eat a Lamb up in private;
At last being found a committing o'murther,
His master would kill him, and trust him no further:
The Dog would fain have his fault to be venial,
And prayed him in Pity to spare an old Menial:
Never hope says the shepherd to 'scape, I Will assure 'ye
I sooner would pardon the Wolf in my sury:
His hate is professed, and he does not pretend
To treachery under the name of a friend.
MORAL.
A Man would more favor to enemies use,
Than those who the title of friendship abuse.
FAB. XCIV. The Monkey and Walnuts.
A Monkey heard Walnuts extremely commended,
And of 'em to make a full meal he intended;
To climb the high Tree no scruple he made,
For robbing of Orchards had been his old Trade;
There sitting in state he pulls off a Nut
And bites it, and finds it as bitter as foot;
He sputters a while, and makes a grimace,
It Is unripe, a fresh trial may alter the case:
He bites at another, and two or three more,
The last still is worse than he tasted before:
They nettle his mouth in the highest degree,
Is this the rare fruit they talk of said he?
The world sure is foolish or else full of knavery,
For I never tasted a thing so unsavory.
So the pains he had taken in clambring, grudging
He slid down the Tree and departed in dudgeon.
MORAL.
MEN blame ill success and fall in a passion,
Whereas the fault lies in the'r ill application;
He that cannot wi' patience some bitterness meet,
Can plead little merit to that which is sweet.
FAB. XCV. The Image to be sold.
A Carver a Mercury made out of wood,
And without a Chapman a long while he stood;
At last out he brings it and there makes a speech,
Here who will buy a god that will make a man rich?
Says one, if You Are god is so free of his pelf,
Never offer to sell him but keep him your self.
The Artist replies, the God's money's sure,
But then it comes slow, which I cannot endure:
If You friend can stay, you will have kindness done 'ye
But I am in haste and want ready money.
MORAL.
HE that doats on money his friend will betray,
His God or his Faith all that comes in his way;
So here he takes pleasure and has his diversion,
He freely resigns all the world in reversion.
FAB. XCVI. The Farmer and his Oxen.
HIS Oxen a Countryman came to look after,
And found 'em all very much tickled wi' laughter;
Demanding the reason, we dreamed, say they, Master
Last night, that You led us to delicate pasture:
The Master replys, but Dreams often vary,
For I dreamed of Ploughing, and that is quite contrary;
Now as to the Consequence, I make no doubt
But your Dream will fail you, and mine will be out.
MORAL.
A Man that relies upon Dreaming and Vision,
Disturbs his own Brain, and occasions Derision.
FAB. XCVII. The Horse and the Hog.
A Hog lived as well as a Hog would desire,
And tumbled about at his ease in the Mire;
But spying a War-horse equip't for the battle,
He called him the Dullest of all sort of Cattle;
For now art thou going thou Fool, said the Hog,
To be shot in a skirmish and die like a Dog:
To which the Horse answers, I Would rather prefer,
To breathe out my soul like a Hero in war,
Than live in the dirt, and eat nasty Victual,
And have my throat cut with a Buttcherly Whittle.
MORAL.
SOme danger for Honor the Brave will endure
And hate a Base life though ere so secure.
FAB. XCVIII. The Hawk and Cuckoo.
A Hawk very sharply the Cuckoo did blame,
That being like Him, and in Color the same,
He eat mice and worms, a Diet unpleasant,
Whereas he might feed upon partridge and pheasant:
Soon after for Pigeons which he had been mangling,
He saw the Hawks carcass hang on a tree dangling:
Which as he past by the Cuckoo derided,
O Hawk you had better have eat worms as I did!
MORAL.
A Little well gotten will do us more good,
Then Sceptres and Lordships by rapine and blood.
FAB. XCIX. The Fox and the Wolf.
A Fox in a Well by misfortune did fall,
And 'twas but in vain for assistance to call;
A Wolf passing by came and looked in his face,
Friend Reynard said he, you're in a fine case;
You need not the Hen, nor the Chicken her daughter,
As far as I see to make your mouth water,
No Friar that starves himself in a Cell,
Can mortify better than you in this Well;
But how feels the water, as cool as you would wish?
And what is your chief diet here Frogs or Fish?
Well you're young and hardy, Nature cannot fail,
Were I there 'twoud make me catch cold in my Tail.
MORAL.
IT IS cruel to jest when a man is in Grief,
And give him hard language that sues for Relief;
Did an Enemy want and never importune,
Yet a Generous heart would relieve his misfortune,
But he is an ill Man; and what if he be?
Show therefore that You a'nt as wicked as he.
FAB. C. Momus and Jupiter.
WHen Momus that always was for Alteration,
Had long been a carping at all the Creation;
To show him his folly, Jove summons the Creatures,
And gave 'em free leave to complain of their Features;
That every Beast throughout his Dominion,
Might have a shape framed to his private Opinion.
When all came before him, he calls to the Ape,
And what fault, says he, find you in your Shape;
Why as to my shape, says he, Great Jupiter,
I modestly say that there are few Better;
To mend the composure as to Elegancy,
Would very much puzzle the power of Fancy;
But then as my Body is outwardly specious
So also my Wit, I may say, is facetious;
If any oppose it I Will plainly prove they lie,
Before this most honorable Assembly:
I wish I could say but as much for the Bear,
But he is so Ugly he makes People stare;
His dirty shag Trouzers hang down to his Toes,
And frighten the Children wherever he goes:
To which the Bear answers, I value no jest,
As long as my Figure's as good as the best:
I thank my kind Stars I am not so stupid,
To envy the Beauty of any Quadruped.
But as for the Elephant, I must confess,
'Twou'd do him a kindness to be somewhat less;
The loss of some loads of his flesh, would suffice
To bring him perhaps to a moderate size;
Methinks he would do well to try to prevail,
To have his Ears less and a hansomer Tail.
The Elephant smiled at the Bears heavy Skull,
And said his Invention was wonderful dull;
But he for his part would not trouble his head,
What e're little malapert Animals sed:
For he had no reason to value their spite,
Excelling in Beauty as much as in Height.
But yet for the Whale, he was moved wi' compassion,
For he had a Bulk that required Alteration;
And therefore to Jove he made his Petition
To set out the Whale in a lesser Edition.
The Whale in a very great passion replies,
I never will part with an Inch of my Size;
To be the Great Whale was ever my wish,
For who'd be a Minnum a Pigmy of Fish:
Whenever, says he, I the Pismire behold,
How little, and yet how industrious and bold;
To blame mighty Jove I justly presume,
To crowd a great Soul in so little a Room.
The Pismire answers, I rail not at Fate
Nor am such a Fool to desire to be Great;
I Am strong in Proportion, and active, and light,
And then I Am a Giant compared to the Mite.
In short, Jove observing no Faults to be mended,
Dismissed the Assembly, and so it was ended.
MORAL.
TO other men's Faults we allow no Protection,
But value our selves on our own Imperfection.
FINIS.

