An ALARM JUDGMENT, Or An assay to rouse up all, of all sorts, (before it be
too late) to prepare to meet the Bridegroom.

Matthew. 25: 6. Behold the Bridegroom comes, Go ye out to meet him.

Heb. 9: 27. It is appointed unto men to die, but after that to Judgment.

Eccles. 11: 9. Rejoice, oh young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for all these things God shall bring
thee to Judgment.

To which is added a Parable, under the Title of the Minories, with a Preface
thereunto.

ANNO 1678.

The PREFACE.
WHat is the chiefest thing that does or can
Make perfect happy, or must ruin man:
A man of reason sure will lay about,
With all his industry to find it out:
With watchful heed least he has been mistaken,
False objects chose, and best of all forsaken:
When truth is found, does use his greatest care
To draw the shortest line to the better share.
Least that which in it self is chiefest good
To him prove poison, death, not life or food.
Heaven, earth, the Scriptures, blessings and the Rod
Do all consent, the only object's God.
By which we plainly see, they miss the cushion
That satisfaction take not in a dosen:
And diverse pitch on each, and some on all,
And some on 10 times more, yet vex and gall
Their hearts; their wits they stretch on tenter hooks;
They tumble over their Authors and their books;
And when they'v lost themselves, and all is don,
Are farther off than when they first begun.
Some, Profits, honors, pleasures, this or that,
Some, humane wisdom, and I know not what,
And Some, their lusts, their dogs, their wills and whores
More than the blessed Deity adores.
And what is the cause? the man is turned beast,
He lives by sense, but manly reason's ceast.
But how comes that? Romans 1: 28.
because the God he knew
He had no mind to know, but quite withdrew:
And therefore God, in righteous recompense,
Does give men over to reprobated sense.
But since the scripture all concludes in sin,
By natures pravity: We must begin
Upon another foot, by grace in Christ,
Who by his suffering is our chief high Priest:
Remit's the sentence of the broken Law,
Upon condition we to him will draw,
And choose him for our Prophet and our King,
As well as Priest, rule, teach, in every thing
Deny our selves, take up our cross and follow
Him when he goes on mountain or in Hollow:
With all our hearts and souls love and obey
Him and his interest: From him do not stray;
But if we falter, will not take upon us
The yoke and burden, on condition shown us;
Or if we seem to do it in open sight,
But yet in heart but play the hypocrite;
Whether we take it well, or tho we grudge,
Of all our carriage he is proper Judge.
And for that purpose there is a day appointed,
For which he is furnished, fitted and anointed.
There Is many Judgments pass: But this by Some
(By emphasis) is called the day of doom.
Pretend I dare not to define this day,
This Judge, or Judgment fully to display,
How Jurys are impaneld, witness called,
How Some set free, and others are enthralled,
But this is greatest of my enterprise,
To stir my self and others up to rise
From all our formal sleepy drowsy yawning,
And, most of all, from all deceitful fawning.
To prove what characters are fixed at heart,
To have Christ's image clearly stamped in part,
To find our interest in him as our chief,
Accounts give up with joy, and not with grief.
To warn the stubborn, call them to their guard,
The Bridegrom comes his Trumpet will be heard:
To be in earnest, cast of jigs and sport,
All these have don for ay in that resort:
To have a mind beforehand wholly framed,
To bear his Image, our corruptions tamed:
To be in readiness when master comes;
And found so doing, when we hear his drums.
This is the chiefest part of my intent,
The greatest substance (to my knowledge) meant.
But it has grown upon me, I confess,
For I propounded (I thought) 10 times less;
And in another form, not to rehearse
Or spin out time, to muse composing verse.
Some grounds, why here I thus have been surprisd,
You Will find within, by what is there surmis'd.
Wherein I Have gone too far, or shot too wide,
Where come too short, or where I Have stepped aside,
I am not conscious, for if I knew,
I durst not do it: and somewhat I withdrew
Wherein I doubted. as for all the rest
I have exposed, my conscience is test;
According to my light I Have don my best.
Yet I Am afraid there is both hay and stubble
Must be consumed; a poor unstable bubble
I feel my self: yet I durst not withdraw;
Although both here and there be found a slaw.
Perfection State, I own, I find not yet;
And if I stay, til I assurance get
That all is right, I durst not once impart
What now and then is set upon my heart.
But where I find an error once detected,
Thereof convinced in what I have neglected,
Or gone beyond the line of Scripture sense,
I know I cannot make full recompense.
Yet to retract I think my self obliged,
Where by just evidence I am besieged.
I leave it in his hand, who truly can
The truth from every error fully scan,
Can heal and pardon what is don amiss,
In all my whole concerns as well as this:
This is my hope he will thoroughly purge his floor,
Leave nothing in his Kingdom less or more
That shall be hurtful (though on fair pretense)
Till he remove all manner of offense.
For which I groan, for which I daily pray,
Oh, to be ready for the judgment day!
Errata.
Page. Line. 23. 31 for tramble read trample 27. 2 find sinned 49. 9 be it be it
54. 3 sense sentence 76. 12 lake lack 86. 15 after alter 98. 30 mondays
noondays 105. 13 stony thorny 111. 19 path pat 113. 2 some same 22 slaverny
slavery 116. 37 mirron mirror 130. 4 Judge Judged 10 that sinned unto death
that sin unto death 131. 3 is an immortal to an immortal 15 (in Gods secrets)
must be read in a parenthesis. 134. 10 for left read lost 143. 24 laid lay:
152. 22 bates bail 154. 21 and were Andiver 156. 32 whithered i, n withered in
158. 32 reviving recieving 159. 34 exception reception 169. 15 mark Mark 26 ons
of men Sons of men 172. 3 godly goodly 25 He He Will 173. 21 may put away may be
put away 175. 24 put out: Ah 176. 16 fear him to fear him too 177. 35 after
other where, put in the margin, In the Minories. 178. 22 for judge read jude
183. 25 jest test 184. 23 serpents Serps 186. 5 he chose steward he chose his
steward 188. 12 he spoke t'her be-spake her 189. 31 But eye But I 191. 10
Serpents things Serpents stings 194. 28 obey Obeyed 196. 19 must most 200 2
course courts 19 sordict sordid 31 arhang-by's are hang-by's 32 what who 206 34
i'th'assistance the assistance 36 in-mediate immediate 209. 19 brins prince 211
5 things hinges 22 host last 212 2 trespass virtually 27 ta^tors traitors 213 9
he stiff be stiff 24 shirks shirkes 27 tho bestial the bestial 31 parth part
214. 8 (contend the lust) (contend who lust) 216. 29 A Tailor A Tyler 219. 3 at
last at least 223. 28 Where Is There Is 224. 37 not begin now begin 229. 30
recover sadder recieve a sadder 231. 8 cleared cleav'd 232. 2 far into human
for into human

Some MEDITATIONS on the last JUDGMENT.
KIngs, Princes, Judges, Preachers, merchants, swains,
Husbands, wives, widow's, young men, maids, orphans,
High, low, rich, poor, old, young, awake, attend:
Thron's set, trump sounds, 7. thunders heavens rend,
Slain lamb revived, sits judge Juda's tribe's Lion
With Vengeance, Zeal and wrath to rescue Zion.
But to cut off all vain and false pretense,
Zion's here taken in a Gospel sense:
Not for that holy mount where temple stood,
That city guilty of Christ's precious blood,
Or that descent from Abraham's fleshly seed,
Or Proselites (to Moses Law agreed)
By circumcision Passover and Rites
By Gods appointment served by Levites:
All these (with all the rest) within the type
Belong not to John's weeping or Christ's Pipe.
If taken singly (for it is not denied
All these by faith have often been purified)
Too low and narrow for that joyful sound
Where wedding garments, lamps with oil, are found.
These are all too remote: there is nearer yet
That can with gospel-Zion nothing fit:
The purest forms o'th gospel in the letter
(Void of the Spirit will be found no better
But must be compted with that very sort
Where Gentiles trample down the outward court.
Where, for example, lukewarm Laodicea
Was poor and wretched in her vain Idea.
This Trumpet mak's all such pretenders falter,
And call for mountains, rocks or Judas halter,
Tho all in vain to save them from his wrath,
Who casts them all into the second death:
Where endless night begins, and no more day.
But Zion's night there ends, (who watch and pray.)
Now comes the change, where tables quite are turned.
They weep who laughed, and now they sing who mourned.
No hopes or fears from hence take place in either;
Those judged to weep: these to rejoice together.
How cursed and blessed in their respective shares
Each state shall be, Eternity declares.
For tongues of men and Angels are too short,
While time shall last, to make a true report.
Me thinks, I hear most sorts of men alarmed;
Some few consent, but greatest part are charmed.
Profits and pleasures, present reputation
Make this unwelcom; It Is quite out of fashion;
T'increases dumps, the way to make men poor,
Abused and scorned, with many mischiefs more:
(If all be true that is said) how ever yet
Is time enough; hereafter they may get
More leisure to attend when they are old,
And have disposed of what is bought and sold;
Their children married; if their wealth increase,
They Will leave their trades and pastimes; live in peace,
When Bags and Barn's are full; they will take no care:
And youthful pleasures, gray hairs off will wear.
They make account, they will then be best at leisure,
When need not work, and quite unfit for pleasure.
To mind their souls without so much distraction
Of riper judgments; to take heed of faction,
That Is incident to hot-spurs in Religion;
Who turn to sects, to this or that misprision:
And seldom carry even, without a fall,
Or turn Apostates (which is worst of all.)
They hear withal, it is better never know
The way of truth, then after turn therefro;
Before they enter: None will be so mad,
To think they will turn from that they never had.
Indeed they often hear they must make have
To turn betime, before all hope be past.
But many ages since, they understand,
It was then said, the time was just at hand:
And if so many ages intervene,
They hope their life time shall not change the scene.
Lo I come quickly, said our great High Priest,
Since when is 16 hundred years at lest.
Then if the time be short, none can deny,
TO must be compared with Eternity.
But what is 7. 10. although to was 20. year
Compared with so long past, to will short appear.
But they have cast it most to three or four,
In which (no doubt) their hindrance will be over:
And then they will put their hand to the sacred plow
And by no means turn back; will once allow,
That they may stand the faster in that station,
They think the wisest course, deliberation:
Thus please themselves, build castles in the air,
Their purpose crossed; and hope turned to despair.
If all succeed, they'v 20. projects more,
That fancies feed; till bolted is the door.
Their day is past; they hardened in their sin,
They change their mind. Too late now to begin;
And since they have no hope of heaven hereafter,
They welter in their sin, like beasts for slaughter.
But others reckon; all is but a Fable,
There Is nothing true in first or second table.
For gospel truths they hold so far from sense:
It Is folly to the Greek: to the Jew offense:
The wisest of them both to carnal eyes
Keep on their course, to Christ turn enemies;
Learn to dispute, such figments to evade
Which curb their youth, and profit in their trade.
Rather believe there is no resurrection;
Such stratagems but merely wits defection.
Philosophers, Spinosa, and Tom Hobb's,
Make nature God. They fear no future Jobbs.
Shall they subsist, when time shall be no more?
Believed who list. To gormandize and whore
They speak against, for health and preservation,
Or do avoid for charge and reputation.
But soul destroying fear long after death
They turn off with a jear and stinking breath.
Lets fearless eat and drink, rise up to play:
There Is after death no more to do or say.
In Policy they close with Machiavel,
To counterfeit religion pleases well:
But Practice is a burden from their schools
Exploded quite, as fit for none but fools;
Too womanish, and no whit masculine,
Unless to superstition men incline.
With Hyp'condraick passions overlaid,
Such Principles in earnest make men mad.
It Is true, they have been of another mind,
And to the strictest sort were once inclined:
Drunk in at first by rigid Education,
Preachers or Parents strong insinuation.
But many learned works come out of late
Have well night put such scruples out of date.
For since they left the heeding of such notions,
They find much freedom from such harsh devotions:
Their consciences at ease, although at first
In striving with it, it pronounced them cursed,
And bore them down, their murthred conscience would
Render them guilty of a Saviors blood:
And more than that the course they did begin
Left no more hope for sacrifice for sin:
All this they can remember and rehearse,
Without regret, their hearts does nothing pierce.
And now they find the Benefit of peace;
Before, could never get a moments ease.
Indeed at first they learned but in part,
To say there was no God; only in heart.
But that is the part of fools they now confess:
And now grow'n wiser they assert no less
Than others think: and therefore by all right
They can be thought to be no hypocrite.
But yet mere Atheists they would not be called;
Have therefore Natures deities enrolled,
And now made friends with Jupiter and Pan,
They hold no more on one that is God and man.
They'v conquered conscience, Scripture, reason well!
They'v made a covenant with death and hell.
Regard no wonders, God and Christ have shown.
There is no God (or one as good as none).
An Pharaoh-like their own names do extol:
Who is the Lord? no Lord shall them control.
Well! since there is no removing their foundation;
Al means prove void; resolved to hold their station;
The case is plain, where lies the seat of war,
Who on Michaels side, who on dragons are.
But if there be a God, the Scriptures true,
Their voice they will hear; and (when too late) shall rue
Their proud rebellion and unkind despite
To him that tendered so much grace and light.
To make it short: If there be no such Judge,
(To whose almighty power, to stoop they grudge)
If all the Scripture be a cunning fable;
They to maintain their bold assertion able,
If Hobs, Spinosa, and their learned Crew
Philosophys'd have nothing but what is true,
The Wo's and Vials in the revelation,
With Trumpets, Seals be mere imagination:
If Jesus Christ search not their hearts and reins,
Nor will reward according to their pains,
And if all power be not in his hand,
Nor their loud boasting built upon the sand,
Then may they stand against his trumpets blast,
And have the praise of conquest at the last.
There Is others summoned of another size,
Who think it worth their pains to win the prize,
T'escape the curse; who do consent in the main
To what is writ: for damage and for gain.
But here is the cut: they sorely are perplexed
About the sense and meaning of the text.
They scruple not, believers shall fare well,
And unbelievers tumbled down to hell.
They make no plea's of longer standing out,
Deny not scripture (with the foresaid rout)
But this is often revolved in their mind,
There Is many seek and yet shall never find;
(Not seeking right) and many have conciev'd
They'v been in the right, and after proved deceived.
The foolish virgins, wanting oil had lamps.
The carnal Jew his saving hope quite damps
By resting on the Law: and many feed,
Themselves with Husks, in being Abram's seed.
Beside, they hear that many are baptized,
Receive the supper; In the Church comprised
According to the form; yet never inherit
The inward grace and baptism of the spirit.
Four sorts of grounds Christ's parable makes good:
Yet 3. came short: the latter only stood,
Which brought forth fruit for measure and for kind,
For masters praise, according to his mind.
And how to know to which they do belong,
And get it helped, (if they yet be wrong)
Least through mistake, they build upon the sand,
And miss the rock whereon their faith should stand;
On these inquiries, who will not confess
There lies the main, if not the only stress?
And in this search are many Enemies,
Satan, the world, and flesh against them rise;
Make such an hurry in the Inward-man,
And such confusion, who withstand them can?
Themselves they cannot help: and when they go
To Soul-Physicians, (who they judge should know,
To search the core so deep it may not fester,
In time and measure to use their healing plaster;
Moses, John Baptist, Christ, how, when, how far
To be improved; not to interfere,
Or justle one another out of place,
But all agree to entertain free grace.)
When such an help, they seek for and expect
He will be faithful, wisely to direct.
Too often they meet with one that does not know,
Or cares not much, how conscience cases go.
It Is rare to find one faithful, and yet tender,
Who will not daub or flatter an offender;
And yet as careful that he may not wound
(Together with the sore) that part that is sound.
But yet another grief amongst the rest
Which frequently falls out among the best
(As men can judge) of greatest gifts and Zeal
Whose Judgments differ, how they ought to heal
Their counsels so far vary from each other,
Yet both imposed upon their wounded brother,
Who stands in doubt whose word he shall believe,
Or whether both do equally deceive:
Their souls (if lost) the Lord will sure require
Of such false shepherds, who do preach for hire,
And have misled them: But will that repair
Their damages, who once condemned are?
For they know well that for iniquity
(Though thus misled) the Soul that sins shall die.
When Pastors quarrel one against another,
Renounce on both sides mutual names of brother;
Pulpits against Pulpits, Tomes against volumes pressed,
What think you? are not wandering sheep distressed?
That travel here and there in heat and cold,
Can neither sind a shepherd nor a fold:
That fain would quench their thirst and fain be fed,
Yet like to die for thirst and want of bread.
They meet with water neither clear nor sweet,
Their pastures trampled by the shepherds feet.
They dare not drink, their food cannot digest,
Can find no place for weary souls to rest.
Oh how they long for Gileads Balm, and where
To find that Doctor that inhabits there!
To such as these, he is nearer than they think
With bread for th'hungrie, for the thirsty drink.
Oh hearken Sirs; and you shall plainly hear
His voice you seek; he cal's you: do not fear:
Come hither, weary souls, come, come to me,
From all your bondage I will set you free.
From Jericho toward Jerusalem
You were set out: I know you'v met with them
Have robbed and wounded you, and you have bled
With festred sores; until you are almost dead:
There was a Priest and Levite passed by
But never moved their heart, or turned their eye,
For pity or assistance: For they mean
You were polluted; by their Law unclean.
Your leprosy was great: but yet they ought
More narrowly to have searched: with leisure sought
What hopes there were, and used lawful means
To cure your souls and from pollution cleanse.
I therefore come (that good Samaritan)
To work that cure, they neither will nor can;
I Will cleanse your souls and pour in oil and wine,
Provide you lodging, (let the cost be mine)
Moreover who befriends you, I will see
Shall be rewarded; as if don to me.
And though your fears be many, scruples great,
Least for a friend you meet another cheat:
And least you should by your own fault miscarrie,
To run too fast; or too long after tarry,
And by your many frailties and your foes,
Your greatest treasure (Precious souls) should lose.
Take but my counsel; follow my direction,
I Will pass my word to keep you from defection:
Commit your Faith, your Hope, your All to me,
To keep it sound from damning errors free.
And though you may mistake once and again;
You have my word, you are safe as to the main:
I Will fit for duty; give you suffering grace,
Pardon transgressions, will not hide my face,
Pour out my Spirit, undertake to teach:
You Will know my voice: when eer you hear me preach,
(Though through a creature) Help you to discern
What is my meaning in your chief concern.
You Will hear a voice behind you: here is the way,
When you are apt to the right or left to stray.
Do not mistake, although I do intend
To keep my word exactly to the end.
Do not expect all in an hour's space
The height of glory; when you first get grace.
First you must suffer and with patience wait,
Slack not your duty, nor for love nor hate:
Yet take heed: trust not there; lay all your weight
Upon my self; my blood; my word: and fight
As for your souls; (not giving any truce)
Against all opposers that would grace abuse
On either hand: because it does abound,
To sin the more. And that you be not found
To quaestion what I say (not when you are
In any strait) admit of no despair.
Be sober always: not to high pretend;
Be confident and hope unto the end.
And when you are wronged, do not fret or grudge;
Do no revenge. Remember I am Judge.
Your selves deny and then take up your cross,
Then follow me through dangers, gain and loss:
And if you be in doubt (as well you may
Of your own strength) lay hold on mine, and stay
Your hopes thereon, before you find the sense
Of full enjoyment and experience.
Mark well what I have suff'red, said and don:
That will direct the race you have to run.
Commands, Example, Promises, and Threats
Which I have left you; (which my word repeats)
Keep conscience tender in what things you know,
By careful practice in departing fro
What I forbid, and do my known command.
And take my word, you will further understand.
Begin and end with me, then ask and have,
Knock, I will open, seek, and what you crave
According to my will, you will surely find
(In my due time) according to your mind:
And far beyond all you can ask or think,
Hid Manna you shall eat, abundance drink
Of living water which in heart shall flow
And to a well of living warer grow.
To this I am engaged by Proclamation,
Made by my selfi'th greatest congregation,
In The holiest place on earth, Joh. 7.37.
Solemnest time
And greatest day o'th feast: yet more sublime
It was at close of that administration,
Not long before the ruin of that Nation.
And hastening thence unto my bitter passion,
It Was then I sealed this spiritual donation
To all my followers then, included you
And all that shall believe: what think you now?
Such circumstances are not Herbingers
To which uncertain empty things refers?
According to that fiction: Mountains throws
With grief and torment bring but forth a mouse;
Which is an Emblem of a Vaunting fool
That Is naught but words: Great cry and little wool.
I have not fob'd you off with air or smoke,
I Have di'd and lived my word, as well as spoke;
And what I said I took upon my death,
And stood to back it while I Would life or breath:
And which is farther, I am full acquit
From death and grave and curse, and all: and get
A full release; that all is discharged and paid;
And nothing false, I ever did or said:
My resurrection gives you perfect scope
To intertain true faith and lively hope.
Demur no longer, me forthwith receive,
And be not faithless, doubtful; but believe.
What can be larger proof, if this be scant?
Speak out if yet you scruple any want.
Me thinks I hear these half revived souls
Reply; what wants? Lord! that in mind still rowls
Ah miserable Creature! woe is me!
If thou do not; who else can set me free?
I want, and have too much, to take away,
As well as give. (as thou see need) I pray:
I have an evil nature; corrupt heart;
Body of death, with members in each part:
All Is as a Chaos, darkness is spread over
This deep Abiss: I can it not discover:
I want the sunshine of thy gospel light:
Upon my heart the motions of thy Spirit,
And acts of grace put forth! The very habit
I Am apt to doubt, is wanting or invalid.
I find nor will, nor Judgment, nor affection
To make a proof of, (but) sincere perfection,
For legal righteousness I cannot reach:
Nor can expect it shall be wrought in each,
(Or any) saint. Then how much less in me,
(For imperfection the epitome.)
Of Evangelicall thou The Author art,
And fountain, whence it comes: Thou must impart,
To whom it is given: Imparted it must be
Inherently to all coheirs with thee.
But legal righteousness is never shed,
Except by imputation from the head,
To any mortal man, since Adams fall:
(From the first covenant) nor ever shall.
But gospel grace is Evangelical:
And must be planted more or less in all,
(That are redeemed) by faith, and self denial;
With fruits according (which must be the trial):
The spirit witnessing with conscience
The work of grace, and pardon of offense.
The wants, or weakness, darkness in all these
Perplex our souls and rob us of our ease.
But Lord! Thou call each distressed Soul
Upon thy self our burdens all to Roll.
We venture (though with trembling heart and hand)
To take thy way; and to thy counsel stand,
Hope only in thy mercy and thy grace:
Oh do not turn away thy pleasing face!
Our souls, our faith, our all we do commit
Into thy hand, to work and perfect it.
Thus have we but in general touched in the gross
How bold and daring, how pervers and cross
Some have and do stand out; and what they plead,
What fear's and doubts poor trembling souls have made;
And yet got over these rubs, and hope to stand
By all sufficient grace, on his right hand
That comes to judge the living and the dead;
Who will divide the goats; and thoroughly shed
The sheep that know his voice, and have been fed
With heavenly Manna, and have overcome
All enemies (struck speechless and quite dumb).
How they will stand that dare persist in sin,
Or by their legal works think heaven to win;
How they will fare, that quite renounce them both,
And trust to Christ alone, the very troth:
(Without debate, or scruple or contest)
When Judgement's past, shall better be confessed.
But yet the Scripture plainly has foretold
The issue of them both in new and old
Viz. Testaments: Wherein they both agree,
Who shall be blessed; who condemned be.
Moses and Christ agree with one consent,
One Verdict's past by either Testament:
A Catalogue of both would be too large,
And would our memory but overcharge:
Some few of both I briefly will recite,
That conscience may thereby it self indite,
And judge it self in time, and so escape
That final sentence of eternal rape:
And find its welcome to the fathers joy,
In perfect peace where nothing shall annoy.
Had Adam stood in his integrity,
We may conclude, he would been from judgment free:
Or if accused in that pure constitution,
His sentence must have been full absolution:
For God is righteous, neither will nor can
Condemn an innocent and righteous man.
But he and we have sinned: hear Moses say, Genesis 6.11. Gal. 3.22. Romans 3.9. cap.
6.23. Genesis 3.19. Heb. 9.27, 28.

Al flesh on earth corrupted have their way.
And Paul (as if he would of his counsel been)
Concludes (by Scripture) al flesh under sin.
God makes sins wages death: Who says, from dust
Thou came: to dust again return thou must.
It is for all appointed once to die,
Author to the Hebrews says (and tell's you why!)
Death reigned from Adam unto Moses time
Over all that had not sinned like Adam's crime,
And thence till now, all flesh for sin have di'd:
(Enoch, Elias only set aside:)
Whose death we prove not, 1 Cor. 15: 52.
yet Paul does imply
They were both changed in the twinkling of an eye
Though Jesus Christ never sinned, yet for sin di'd,
Was under Pontius Pilate crucified,
Whose heel the Serpent bruised: but Christ his head
By suffering broke; and rescued the dead.
As all in Adam die; By Christ all rise;
To stand in Judgment at the great assize.
By which it is clear, Christ came not to exempt
From death man's of spring, for the law's contempt.
But tho we cannot plead (by Christ) exemption; 1 Cor. 1.30.1 Cor. 15: 22.2.
Tim. 1: 10.

Yet he is made of God to us redemption.
Christ's death and resurrection do comprise
The only virtue whereby all shall rise.
By gospel light the scripture does descry
Eternal life and immortality.
According to which gospel he will repay
Both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 2.16. Job. 5.29.1 Tim. 2.4. cap. 4.10.
at the Judgment day.
They that do well, he will raise up to salvation:
They that do ill, shall rise to condemnation.
For Christ's a Savior to all men, but chief
To those, that (through his gospel) shall believe.
To say that Christ redeemed both alike,
Against the former text does plainly strike.
And those who own no Savior to all,
Against the same scripture do as foully fall:
Of great concern it is then to be clear,
How far Christ saves, redeem's, how, who, and where,
Which, if well known and faithfully applied,
Will give great light how all men shall be tried,
At that great day (from which there is no repeal.)
To try our selves beforehand for our weal.
Oh righteous Judge, who searchest hearts and reins,
Give thy assistance to my feeble pains:
Deliver me from rocks on either side,
(I fear to sail too narrow or to wide)
In this vast Ocean, of thy death and merit,
Which none can sound, without thy word and spirit,
To keep good conscience, from shipwreck of faith,
Which (next thy glory)'s all a mortal has,
To be reguarded in this vail of tears,
Amidst our combats, storms, and many fears.
Nor can a creature (much less such as I)
Seeing so darkly, every way-mark spy
To steer aright: but oftentimes mistake,
(Though grace prevent both shipwreck and the lake)
Where Hell and Death is quite cast underneath,
Which is the portion of the second death.
From damning errors Lord deliver me,
Yea from mistakes: (if so thy pleasure be)
Or if I swerve, recover me again:
Let not my frailties others hurt or stain!
Let every soul that look's on what I write,
Me overlook: and stand as in thy sight:
And neither take my word, nor yet reject;
But as thy word shall plainly them direct!
If any light shall in my writing shine,
Help them and me to reckon't, wholly thine,
And give thee praise, and thereof make right use;
In heart and life, avoiding all abuse:
By wresting or mistaking text or sense,
To humor faction, under fair pretense!
But where I fail, oh give them eyes to see!
(And me convince) to neither them nor me
Leave any stumbling-blok that may withdraw
Our hearts from truth, in love or holy aw.
And where we differ in our apprehension,
Direct how far we may by condescension
Agree like brethren, mutually forbear
Each others weakness, till the truth be clear
To one and other: till thou shall impart
To all thy children one pure mind and heart.
That Jacobs travelers no longer may
By heart-repinings fall out by the way;
Each other help, and succor tenderly,
Themselves in holy faith may edify:
The point is weighty, and the moment great;
The dangers many: therefore I entreat,
The two great errors here may be prevented,
That often happen, where saints have dissented
In this main point, some leaning to man's power,
Free Will and works, which they may use each hour,
Where turning point, (if saving) is ascribed
To chance or nature in the Justified.
Others (this rock to escape) do terrify
Poor sinners by a fatal destiny,
And often assert, all God has said and sworn,
(That he would not have sinners die, but turn,
That he has don enough, and mercy shown,
That if men perish now, the faults their own,)
That these are all spoke to our apprehension,
(Improperly) but not in full intention.
But say expressly, God appoint's to wrath,
And to the sin which that condition has:
While to free grace the garland they would win,
They seem to make God, Author of man's sin.
And whether human reason ever can
These reconcile to any mortal man,
And leave no deep unsounded far beyond,
What men or angels yet can understand:
To me's a quaestion: I conclude from hence,
That gospel truth's are high, large and immense;
True consequence from scriptur's always good,
But frequently, by men misunderstood.
The more we do on consequences pile,
Without full scripture-warrant, we beguil
Our selves, and them that do upon us lean:
Although perhaps far other wise we mean.
All this praemis'd (and minded) I assay
My former purpose mentioned to display,
Common salvation, and more special grace.
To touch a little in their proper place.
That so we may the better understand
The nature of that Judgment under hand;
To which the whole discourse is chiefly bent,
And all along appears my main intent.
Common salvation then, is that which all
Do more or less partake of, have, or shall:
Of which the first, I name, is resurrection:
Which has been proved to be without exception.
That all shall rise all Christians do believe:
And for an article of faith recieve.
At lest so many of them as indeed
Consent to what is called the Apostles creed.
If any doubt that purchase wrought by Christ,
Let them re-mind that place before rehearst. 1 Cor. 15.22.

Though many perish in the second death,
Yet that is gospel sin and gospel wrath:
Neglecting means, Heb. 10: 26.
receiving grace in vain,
Till no more sacrifice for sin remain.
But where no actual sin has been committed,
Or mean's of grace has wilfully been slighted;
The scripture seems no Judgment to denounce,
As gospel Vengeance, for such like offense.
And yet death reign's upon the first account:
But as to second death not Tantamount:
Nor in that case so much as once imputed, Romans 5: 13.

By virtue of the offering constituted:
And therefore such as die in infancy,
I hope, do in the ransom-bosom lie:
Though, I confess, there is many do dissent,
Disputing how Infants believe, repent.
And many godly-learned cannot brook
Such large donation as this seems to look.
I Will not contend, but yet I judge it best
To say right out what is in my conscience pressed:
If this be so, poor Infants will not grudge
At last, what many godly of them judge.
The fathers eat sour grapes: the Jews allege
Their childrens teeth thereby are set on edge:
But they are reproved, who do that proverb choose,
For God protest's, that practice he will not use.
That Parents sins on childrens score should lie:
God says, that soul alone that sins shall die.
And let men speak but after scripture rare,
Where stands one word for Infants-reprobate?
Which I confess (tho know it is counted schism)
Is much alike to infants strained baptism.
Some will allege, God love to Jacob had,
To Esau hate, ere they did good or bad:
But some that scan it, find it not in the text:
(If Syntax, grammar, points be not perplexed;
Coherence, antecedent, consequence
Unstraind, with other texts to clear the sense)
Jobb in and out; hail over head and shoulders,
'Ore hill and dale to find some weak upholders,
To stragle far; a word quite out of sense
(Or case in hand) to bring for faiths defense,
Shall not convince, or ever give true rest,
But leav't ith dark, as many have confessed.
I speak but as the case appears to me:
For many goldy men dissenters be.
Indeed what should befall in the outward man,
The elder serve the younger, this we can
Discover in the Prophecy to the mother, Genesis 25.23.

Before the birth of either one or other.
But there is not a word of love and hate,
Till many ages in an after date,
Not to their persons, but posterity, Malach. chap. 1.2, 3.

As plainly may appear by Malachy.
And yet all that expressed in the letter
Is merely outward; neither worse nor better:
And reaches not the everlasting state;
Which is in truth the final love and hate,
Not to be measured by things under sun, Eccl. 8.^14. cap. 9.1.

If we regard some texts of Solomon.
And yet all this in type is for direction,
How God proceeds in hardening and election:
And show's that Flesh, Law, Types, the elder are,
Grace, Gospel, substance, younger do appear.
And yet the first is servant to the last,
And takes advantage of all what is past.
Hagar's Ismael with Sara's Isaac strove,
Jerusalem below with that above,
Sinai with Zion, letter with the spirit:
An Allegor' as the 'Postle does refer it
He may be blessed that is typed out by the law, Gal. 4.24.

As Moses was, which in (the type) never saw
That outward land of Canaan: None dare say it,
That Moses therefore was a reprobate.
Nor was Jerusalem, that is in the letter,
To their eternal state a jot the better:
Unless they mix't their rites with love and faith, Esa. 66.3.

It was provoking, as the scripture says.
Though yet in outward signs of grace and love,
It was the type of Canaan above.
It Is plain that Moses had a gospel spirit,
He might not (tho) that outward land inherit.
And many, that were Abra'ms fleshly seed,
Cut off: and gentiles planted in their stead. 1 Timothy 1.8. Romans 9.32.

The Law was good, if used lawfully,
But proves a snare, when thereon we rely.
This resurrection then is not the least
Common salvation, which by Christ is preached.
And how all infants thereby shall be tried
We leav it to their judge (who for them di'd)
To hold them off, he plainly has forbod; Mark. 10.14.

To such belongs the kingdom of our God:
Tho Infants void of reason cannot take
Such consolation hence, as men may make;
Yet shall the fruit be theirs; and they shall prise
Their Saviors gift hereafter when they rise.
And what their happy souls shall do before,
We can no way express; but must adore
That sovereign grace that took such tender care,
That these poor lambs in him might have a share.
And unto parents, who often lose their young
In tender years; that they may hope among
The ransomed to find them by his grace,
And meet them there, if faith take any place
In parents hearts: both for themselves and seed,
To own that grace by which they both are freed.
What ever become of children; unbelievers
Will to themselves, and seed be found deceivers,
That never regard which way their children go,
To heaven or hell: what in them lies, they throw
Their children souls, together with their own,
Into that lake, where mercie's never shown.
And tho Christ save the child, he will reject
The careless father, for his gross neglect:
And justly may with terror such surprise,
Least child's destruction shall in Judgment rise
Against himself: and both cast down to hell,
(For ought he knows) where both shall ever dwell.
And tho the parent afterward convert;
His child's destruction may arrest his heart;
(For fear it is lost) such anguish he may have;
The grief whereof, may bring him to his grave.
Oh Parents therefore, do not here presume
To be ungodly; or to take more room
to Abuse that grace, that Jesus Christ may show
To your poor of spring: for you cannot know,
So long as you cast grace behind your back,
Whether you children shall of grace partake.
Beside I must confess; Some godly fear,
Dead infants are not likely to appear
Amongst redeemed; if neither parent be
A living stone, in more or less degree.
And many tender hearts dare not baptize
Such grace-less Parents-Infants: Act. 2.39.
In no wise:
Because they judge a Parents covenant
Such grace-less Parents of spring mainly want.
Now whether they, or I mistaken be,
(Or both in part) here in we must agree,
That who partake of the first resurrection,
Shall stand in Judgment, sure of their Election.
But unbelievers, tho they shall arise,
That second (living) death will them surprise.
Another fruit this common grace does bring,
Is a reprieve from death, which is a thing
Which does infold so many belssings more,
That can by mortals never be told over:
And if improved well before we die,
Makes void the sting of death eternally;
Makes that a blessing, which was first a curse
(But if neglected, makes it ten times worse.)
Restoring part o'th image which was lost
By Adams fall: but now anew indorst
In second Covenant, by that mighty hand
Which bear's the pillars where the world does stand. Ps. 75: 3.

There Is not a parcel in the whole creation,
(As now it stands) but is from that donation.
And all the comforts that it does bestow
On Adam's children, from that fountain flow.
And (which is more:) all these are merely lent
(By ordinance) to draw men to repent. Romans 2: 4

Where Jesus Christ with much long suffering wait's
(With sad affronts) at sinners hearts and gates,
For entertainment, as he did for them
For whom he wept over Jerusalem;
And cease not while day of grace does last;
But cries and calls: Oh do but come and taste!
His word, his servants, creatures, Angels, Spirit,
Are all employed; That man might life inherit.
I question not, where means are much vouchsaf't
(For any time) in life and power: Who gave't,
Does usually his blessing send withal,
To testify, there he had sheep to call:
Where Past'ral gifts are plentifully shed;
It argues, he has lambs there to be fed.
Where both together God does much dispense,
There Is greater hope of fruit in either sense.
On the other side: where many are converted,
Saints walk in love; the truth held unperverted;
It does proceed from gifts o'th Holy Ghost,
Shed on the Church, as't was at Pentecost. Act. 2: 1.

Yet sometimes, where the greatest outward means
Of word and institution intervene's
To single person or a congregation;
(Preachers endowed with grace for information)
The means are fruitless; That people, or that man
Fare wors by all, than when they first began:
Gospel becoms to them a stumbling stone;
Folly to some, received by few or none:
Gods Judgment here inflicted with a curse,
Where means abused, men grow from bad to worse.
Isaiahs message; Christ's to Capernaum;
Stephens words at's death, to children of Abraham; Act. 7: 22

With other proofs out of the holy writ,
Show, grace neglected leav's men reprobate.
Cain, Bala'm, Judas, An'nias, and Saphira,
Make all this good; Rev. 2.24. Act. 14.17.
with Some of Thyatira.
But where the means are less, always there is some
Which God does bless, to such as to him come
In singleness of heart, according as they are drawn,
T'own their desert; the evil fruit and spawn,
Which conscience shows, Romans 2.15.
(a light that God has set)
In every man; a witness to beget,
Not only of his power, but his grace,
Which entered in where promise first took place:
Which was revealed after Adam sinned,
And had the curse deserved, before we find
'The sentence of the curses execution,
And interposed before it is full effusion:
Abating much the rigor of its force,
And speedy current of its furious course.
As Jacob at his birth Esau supplanted:
And after got the blessing, (Esau daunted)
Which was a type, this elder brother (Law)
Should serve the younger (gospel,) and give way,
That grace might reign, before, and then, and after
(The Law came in) more strongly; but yet softer:
Taking the scepter out of Moses hand,
To be subservient to Christ's command.
Law cannot work, before it be set on
By grace, i'th'heart and sold of every one.
Because Christ's spirits does convince of sin,
And show the force of Law: thereby begins
To take the rubs out of poor sinners way,
And make him weary on the Law to stay.
Although the Law a schoolmaster is called,
To bring to Christ: yet it has always faild,
When that is supreme; and creatures look not higher,
Provokes to sin, and breaths out naught but fire;
Leads us from Christ, to lean upon our selves,
On our own works, and many other shelvs;
Drives us from grace, by greater separation:
And, last of all, sinks into desperation.
But when the gospel manageth the Law,
The spirit of bondage keeps souls in aw:
As it is usherd, in the hand of Christ,
The soul is waiting, how to be releast
From that hard bondage, how to be set free,
By the other Law of perfect liberty.
The father draw's, by showing us the Law;
The Penalty; and our departing fro:
And utter weakness how to help our selves,
Or get relief from any creature else.
What ever outward means he takes in hand
Applies'tto conscience; by the Laws command.
When conscience spurn's; and will abide no test;
Throws't out o'th'heart; how ever it is pressed:
Keep's on in sin, and runs into more;
Till wrath's incenst and striving given over:
Tho these had drawings, yet would not be drawn,
Fathers corrections, teachings from them thrown,
Debar themselves from hearing what Christ says:
And for their perfect cure thus leave no place.
If you will know my word (says Christ) obey
My fathers will: then you'st know what I say.
If you cast off Gods rod, you are none of his;
If none of Gods, you will his word despise.
You have not learned of him: are not given
Over to me: Then neither his, nor mine.
This seems the substance of that whole discourse, Joh. 8.47, etc.

Which Christ to th'Jews so sharply does enforce.
By all that is said, it seems plain to me,
God does not wreak his vengeance, till he see
His creatures spurn, and tramble on his grace;
Abuse his mercy; and fly in his face.
If this be so; then all his creatures must
Confess he is merciful, as well as just:
Yea Justice then is in the highest throne,
When tender mercies have before been shown.
And if his mercy over all his works
Be spread and circumscribed: there nothing lurk's,
(That I can find) in Scripture, or in reason,
Why against Christ it should be counted treason,
(But rather homage) to own the extent,
And virtue of that precious blood he spent
For every Mothers child, Heb. 2: 9.
without exception,
Wherein at lest there is a large Protection,
Reprieve, direction, caution for each soul,
To leave it speechless, if it these control.
And I appeal to all experience,
What can so stop the mouth with full silence,
As mercy shown and tenderest compassion,
With timely warning to a man or Nation?
When all is neglected, and men's conscience know
Beforehand, whither such a course will grow.
But what need I appeal? th'expostulation
Of God himself, appealing to the Nation
Of judah, and her Sister Israel,
Against them both in the Vineyard Parable,
Is so convincing to the truth in hand, Isa. 5. Ezech 18.25, etc.

I think it needless longer on it to stand.
By what is said before we plainly find,
God gives a double mercy to mankind:
One positive, and one conditional,
And each of these in diverse branches fall.
The first contain such mercies absolute,
Of which all sorts do here enjoy the fruit;
Life, meat, drink, clothes, the Sunshine and the rain,
Health, strength, wit, parts: which serious and vain,
The best and worst promiscuously enjoy,
Freed or exempt from mischiefs that annoy.
To all men some of these; To some men all
Giv's when he pleas'th, and changes therewithal:
Affiction, grief, pain, trouble and correction,
Are often times sent by grace to heal defection.
Precepts, examples, threats, with admonition,
To teach obedience; (when sinned) contrition.
Adam thou shall (that day thou eatest) die,
Said God (relating to the for bidden tree)
The heat, the fury, vengeance in Law's case
Repriev's not four and twenty hours space.
Adam and Eve, (yet) by whose joint transgression
The curse first entered, (with their best succession)
Abel at first, Seth, with Methuselah,
Henoch, Preacher of right' ousness Noah
(Abel except) long lived, before the flood,
By all confessed; reprieved were by Christ's blood.
Because each single (or most of them) has
Obtained good report (we read) by faith. Heb. 11,

But what reprieved so long a cursed Cain,
Not only e're he had his brother slain?
But afterward so many cities built,
Wherein, who knows how many years he dwelt?
Together with the Giants, men of fame,
Who, for renown, had got themselves a name:
For wicked lives had so far overtrod,
They had defiled the very sons of God:
God there fore will destroy all that has breath;
Repents that he created man on earth.
Yet for all this, one hundred twenty years,
While Noah preaches, his long suffering bears.
If four and twenty hours may not run,
E're man his fatal final thread has spun;
Whence comes these 16. hundred years reprieve?
E're the first flood? nor Adam, nor from Eve.
If strictest justice could not that admit,
It Is sure the oracle from mercy-seat.
Not for a hand-full-remnant of the best,
But Tag and Rag the Dregs of all the rest.
This grant read off from 'twixt the cherubs wings,
Like branch new plucked, our dove returning brings,
Declares a treaty upon other terms,
Than pure wrath, which all these gifts confirms,
That God is reconciling to himself
The world through Christ, 2 Cor. 5: 19.
(according to the twelve
Apostles doctrine) not imputing sin;
(While treaty lasts;) If now they will begin
To stop, to turn, to hearken, and obey
Our Saviors voice: and hearts not turn away.
These gifts are absolute; we ask't them not.
To live and move, have means, is naught but what
Our Lord has purchased, promised, and will give
Promiscuously, that men may hear and live.
These two last words, (that men may hear and live)
Show soul's immortal (a gospel contrive.)
On these two words two weighty points depend,
Duty as means: Salvation as the end.
Yea with these two, two more are clear implied;
Neglect the means; salvation's quite denied.
Which also does this general intend
Means, as they are used, will have their proper end.
That means and end, whether to heaven or hell,
Hearers should know, and Preachers prompt to tell.
Scriptures hold out to all men, (last of all)
This end is tendered conditional.
Which was the second point I first proposed,
That in this common grace lies plain enclosed.
But here is a field so large: oh who can enter?
T'extend a line from this established center?
Where shall it go, to reach circumference?
Transcribe the scripture and explain the sense
Yea! that is soon said: but when shall it be don?
Or who shall do it? and if that prize was won,
To what a volumn must it needs amount?
And who shall read it? (much less give account,
Remember, understand, and practice well,
And teach it others) mortals must excel.
What then? Because we cannot reach the heavens,
Cast we of all at sixes and at sevens?
A willing mind's accepted, 1 Cor. 8.12.
(scripture says)
According to the talent each man has,
(If faith fully improved,) for if we hide
Our talent in the ground; it will be spied
By him that searches hearts and tries reins:
Who pitie's weakness, treachery disdains.
For Ananias, and his wife Saphira,
I do believe, find wors than Francis Spira,
(Whose sin was very great, his torment sore:
Yet diverse hope he landed on right shore.)
They said (but ly'd against the holy Spirit)
That all the price laid on the Apostles feet.
Far less (sincerely don, and spoken right,)
Will have acceptance, like the widow's mite:
Which was her all: And all Christ stands upon:
(Without abatement he will have all or none.
In resignation. all that is hid is stealth,
Though (for the bulk) you offer Croesus wealth.
Yet all will serve, and taken in good part,
(Though never so little) if we give our heart.
The greatest countries, and whole univers
Who ever saw together? can rehears
In all their measures, to a just degree?
Yet often drawn it to epitome;
By globes and maps: both large and smaller size,
(Though with defects) some notions do comprise,
For demonstration, some what like proportion:
As smallest drop compared unto the Ocean.
We know the heavens vast circumference
(Compared with th'earthly globe) is so immens,
That as a point (or rather less) by trial,
The earth is counted (proved by each sun-dyal)
Which every knowing Artist does confess,
Is built upon the same Hypothesis.
And yet this earth compared with things much less,
(As globes and maps) extend's to vast excess.
The lest of which, used in its proper place,
Does represent, (as't were) to open face,
As much as our short fancies can contain.
Unpossible, by lanching into th'main
And boundless orbs of depths, height, latitude,
Which those vast bodies round about include;
Those unto these, (although but typical)
Yet give great light, when proved concentrical.
One foot o'th compass in the common center
Rules every Parallel's circumferenter.
Though various orbs over each other swell,
The common center keeps them Parallel.
Each ection of the lest holds some proportion
To like degrees, in the widest scales distortion.
In some such sort we mortal creatures can
Contemplate heaven, by such a narrow span.
And reach eternity, that is so sublime,
That cannot comprehended be in time.
Yet if the center and the standing point
Be fixed in the heart; And Christ with heart conjoynt,
We may be helped to expatiate;
And soar aloft, above mere human rare,
See things invisible; and get a taste
Of What Is to come; when transient things are past.
Which glimps and earnest is of such a kind
T'inflame the appetite; engage the mind;
To further pursuit of that blessed chase,
On sent whereof we may his foot steps trace
That Is our forerunner, guide and our commander,
Example, comforter, constant by-stander.
And if we close with, heartily embrace,
This blessed tender and proposed grace,
Ransom receive, upon Christ's own condition,
Without demur or further intermission:
The knot is tied, that never shall be broke;
Which for his part he never will revoke;
But write his Law so firmly in our heart,
That from himself we never shall depart:
And what before was but conditional,
Becoms now absolute, shall never fall.
But that is a further measure, None receive
Till they the Gospel heartily believe.
We yet upon the former do but enter,
And to do that I durst by no means venture.
Considering what a mite, a drop, a taste
(Compared with treasure, Ocean, and the feast,
That Is typed out by such small point, and line
As I can reach, at most:) Yet more than mine
Must be vouchsafed by an higher hand,
If mite, or drop, or taste we understand:
I know this Prologue, and Apology
Is far too large for that Epitome,
And small diminutive that I can bring:
But this I Am sure; the substance, and the thing
That I would point at; (If I was more able)
It is so vast, so glorious, rich and stable,
That all the pens and tongues that make report
Thereof in highest strains come far too short,
And do but lisp, and use improper notions:
When all is don, there are no true proportions.
A drop has some proportion to the Ocean;
A minute to ten thousand years duration;
A landscape to the largest continent;
The smallest Ball to the outspread firmament.
The Ocean is but multiplied drops;
Ten thousand years small minutes underprops;
The continent into small atoms fall;
The firmament's but an extended ball.
The soul of man's far larger than all these;
A thought can step beyond them, when it please,
This is no fiction or a feigned Romance:
It Is proved daily by experience.
Appeal to any man of contemplation,
He Will give to each apparent demonstration.
But all may be comprised in these two,
What WHEN and WHERE at utmost reach can do.
WHEN has it is time, but WHERE must have it is place:
NEVER and NOWHERE answers neither case.
Think back to times beginning at creation:
Fancy can greaten ten times that duration,
And ten to that; that don, a thousand more:
And who can tell, when fancy will give over?
She is a daring, thin, aspiring elf,
Can put no bounds or limits to her self.
Suppose I walk upon some Rivers banks,
For many miles find footing for my shanks,
And ground to tread upon: may I not say
(Without mistake) l've surely found a way?
A lark that fly's i'th'air, that soars and sings,
Must there have something to support her wings.
Though out of sight, she is heaved very high,
There Is no great fear her wigns will touch the sky.
Now who gives fancy power for such dilation,
If really there be not aduration?
Duration then we cannot choose but know,
Because our fancy still find's room to go.
It must be endless: that is as clear a case,
For fancy finds no period in her chase.
But do you wonder? ask you reason why?
Time's no proportion for Eternity.
But WHERE and WHITHER is an other branch,
An harbor salfe and large, till fancy lanch
From any where, and every where, yet on
Fancy will glide: where shall she come anon?
Who Is pilot on those immaterial waves,
Where giddily and daringly she raves?
A body must a body have: though light,
To be conveyed in its respective fright,
Where it is carried, as the Element
Through which its drawn, as nature can consent.
On earth a body fixed to earth is drawn,
Or moves by vital motion of its own,
As in a coach or walking on its foot,
Still weight's applied to earth, or will not do it:
On water fish, some fowls, and ships can swim,
And carry men, lead, iron, steel and tin,
Which of themselves as soon as touch the brink,
Or surface of the water, straight would sink.
A feath'red wing upholds a bird in the air:
But still some body all these bodies bear.
But thoughts and fancy rides over hedge and ditch,
Sea, shore, or air; cares not, regards not which.
To Zenith, Nadir; any of the Rhombs
At first conceit; she rides, flies, climbs or comes,
Or rather shoots her self: who can tell how?
Tho I appeal to all men! Is It not true?
And it she get through these, she can go farther,
Where bodies cannot come, (if angels guard her)
By mediate assistance: or if God
Immediately that motion does afford.
I Will not contend, but satsfy'd di'th'last.
Where is she then? when elements has past,
Amongst them all, beyond them, touched by none,
Not by that body properly her own,
Though issuing thence in all her emanations,
And touches it in all her respirations.
Tho angels may to actions contribute,
Created power is Gods substitute.
I only put in this for this intent,
Too high a thought of angels to prevent:
For though an angel often the soul assists,
It Is God alone by whom the soul subsists;
And gives it power large expatiated,
In and beyond all time and place created.
Created spirits have a mutual rate,
But less or greater, not commensurate.
An angel far excells an human soul,
(Tho both are spirits) counsel or control
What Is their inferior: as wise men may
Teach or reprove men, not so wise as they;
And as the weak with wise men have congress,
So souls with angels sometimes have convers.
Abram, Lot, Daniel, Peter, also Mary
Show this from scripture does in nothing vary.
But yet the angels somewhat condescend,
When they appear to man as foe or friend.
Balams example (with what is said before)
Makes this assertion good (I say no more)
I speak it for this end: we may not pray
To angels, and them worship: because they
Are but administering spirits, who are sent
By him who is Angel of the covenant:
And when they condescend it is by commission
From his command, who holds them in tuition:
Beside, an Angel in the Revelation
Reproved John for thoughts of adoration. Rev. 19: 10.

If God himself alone must be adored,
Then souls beyond all creatures must be soared.
As beyond time Fancy found large duration,
Though never reached the end: so in relation
To all the confines of created place,
Beyond them all she has found out a space,
Where she can anchor, sail, but nere get over,
Because on the other side there is no shore.
Immensity has every where it is center,
Without diameter, circumferentor.
Or, which amounts to the same account,
They both are infinite, past finding out.
Ten thousand sea's, and so many creations
Put all together with their augmentations
Upon each other, pil'd to the utmost height,
Makes no proportion to what is infinite.
Who in duration can eternity,
And in expansion reach insinity?
(Which to all creatures plainly is forbod)
Oh! he is eternal! he is immens! he is God,
Who does contain each moment and each point
Which have their being in himself conjoynt.
In him therefore we live, move, have our being,
With all our faculties of hearing, seeing, etc.
How should we stoop by faith and reverence,
To him that is so eternal, so immens?
Who gives freely what we have and are
For our Probation: Offers more by far,
Upon condition, we will rely on's words,
And use the means he graciously affords.
The means and the conditions he does please
To lay before us all, are such as these:
Together with the mercies he will give:
That we may serve him cheerfully and live.
We cannot Way how God with Infants deals
As to conditions; or the use of means.
The like of Idiots, who show no reason
In riper years, or any other season.
How ever God deals with such, he shows his grace
Before severity and wrath take place,
As to their souls and everlasting state:
(For outward usage proves nor love nor hate)
But as he talents gives to young or old,
He first or last takes care they shall be told,
Or inwardly admonisht of his will;
With light to know both what is good and ill,
In one or other measure more or less,
As he thinks good, (which shall not want success)
According to the use (thereof) they make
They more or less for future do partake:
Wherein he beats ofttimes with their abuse,
Until, at last, they make a better use,
And by his grace and patience on them shed,
Are happily unto repentance led.
But when first drawings sinners long despise,
God hides repentance justly from their eyes.
It Is not to say, how long free grace will wait:
It Is best to turn, ere mercy turn to hate.
Ofttimes at first, conviction strikes at sin;
Persuades the soul's accursed in the state he is in,
By virtue of the Law, that is offended;
Gods wrath will him consume, if not amended.
I do not think, this all the creature needs
To show its fault by these and other deeds:
That only law unto it should be told,
(And hide the remedy) or to withhold
Sight of our nature; nature of that sin;
With diverse things, which here might be brought in.
It is not all men's lot to have like means,
(Teachers unlike) some on law too much leans:
Others, unfit to deal in conscience-cases,
Have got a trick to cite their common places:
Who know no difference 'twixt the state of souls;
Take little care what mischief on them rowl's.
But th'unrenew'd, and ignorant-profane
Are most pursued, with terror of their vain
Ill practices, that they have walked in;
If thoroughly touched in conscience for their sin:
But have not light to make right application:
Think to repent, and change their conversation:
But take it as't is: the conscience is awake.
God looks much how men with conscience take.
What ever light they want in other matters,
It is despite, when souls shall break those fetters.
Here is a means by which the soul is tried.
The duty is, that it be well applied,
According to the light men have received.
For he that is Judge can never be deceived:
He knows the measure, and can pity show,
Will heal their frailty; if the heart be true.
But will reprove those that conviction fly;
And (it may be) will after grace deny.
The fathers drawings, if they be despised,
May prove the cause they shall not come to Christ.
Let none object: they have no drawings had:
For such will find, Romans 10.
they have not them obeyed.
There Is none can plead, that God does grace restrain:
Until at first men take his grace in vain.
But if the soul sincerely lay to heart,
This first conviction, though it be but part,
Cannot be said to reach to godly sorrow
O'th gospel kind, unless it go more through.
Yet it is a step, that oftentimes preceed's.
Yea many think (always) in some degrees.
And if (I say) the heart be found sincere
In this first step: and cast not of the fear
Which it has wrought, by putting out its light,
(Or daily fighting with it in despite;)
But yielding to the stroke, accepting smart,
Confessing sin, sincerely from he heart:
That God is righteous; though it be undon;
And all this web is but the thread it spun.
If this in truth proceeds from the heart,
God graciously does further steps impart.
And lets him see, the nature of the law
Extends not only to that special flaw
(Be It one or more) that caused the first conviction:
(If actually or by sins of omission)
But that the habit wholly is corrupt,
Which does defile the mind, and interrupt
The words and actions by so great a force,
That naught but sin can come from such a source:
And thence appears, he sins in every thought,
And that his state by nature's wholly naught.
When this is once not stiffled or opposed,
Conscience cries guilty, and to wrath exposed.
It sets upon repentance, reformation,
And thinks thereby to cool the inflammation.
But finds the heart so hard, corruptions strong:
(With more impetuousness upon him throng)
The very way he hoped to find his cure,
He finds that stopped: no healing can procure.
Or if it ease his mind a little while,
New working lusts do all his hopes beguil,
Increase his guilt, do but inrage his sin,
Which now with floods and billows hurry in.
He finds he cannot pray without distraction:
And if he could, that makes no satisfaction
For former guilt: and tho he was made clean,
He presently should be as foul again:
(If left unto himself:) So filled with Woe,
He knows not where to rest, or where to go.
Although this work proceed from Christ by grace,
By's holy Spirit, yet in the present case,
These workings are ascribed to the Father,
As the Creator, Lawgiver; the rather.
That man created was, Law made and broke,
Before one word of Jesus Christ was spoke:
And all that while no knowledge of a Savior,
Because the law admits not the lest favor,
For sin committed in thought, word, or deed,
Renders man cursed; never to be freed.
There Is more ascribed to the father yet,
To souls thus drawn, who see the mouth o'th pit.
Now opens he his name, and does proclaim,
Tho he be just; Exodus 34.6, 7.
he is gracious with the same:
Has found a ransom, that can justice pay,
And mercy to condemned souls convey.
Though condemnation's past to the full intent,
And meaning of the law's first covenant.
(For condemnation past by the second seal,
Against new covenant, never gets repeal.)
The fathers work is to reveal his son, Matthew. 16.17.

And unto Peter in like manner don:
Where Christ himself to Peter makes it good,
It was his fathers work, not flesh and blood.
The father does poor finners reconcile
Unto himself in Jesus Christ: mean while
Their great and many sins does not impute, 2 Cor. 5.19.

While he is striving by his gracious suit:
And this not only in the outward part,
But does reveal his son within the heart:
Which does allure the sinner then to come,
When thus the father has declared there is room.
This Mystery o'th father Paul does cite,
When he unto Collossians does write. cap. 2.

As Thessalonians letters begin,
Either Epistle the fathers church brings in.
Some learned men mark first from that relation,
What first begins from fathers dispensation.
And it is confessed, the working of the son
Is not excluded from creation.
For tho the father calls himself creator,
It is in Christ who works all together. Joh. 1.

The order then distinguis heth the form,
Where either dispensation takes it is room,
And where the Spirit work's in making holy,
Father and Son are not excluded wholly,
But are co-workers with the Holy Ghost,
Even in that work, at day of Pentecost.
Creation and the Law to the father is ascribed,
Redemption to the Son is usually applied,
To sanctify and comfort is commended
Unto the Spirits work; but not intended
Quite to exclude the Father and the Son
In any work that is by the Spirit don.
But as the Father by creation's known
Before by man the Son was thought upon,
And as redemption first the Son brings in
By revelation, to free man from sin,
So was the Spirit sent a comforter,
Father and Son that office both confer.
The mysterie's great the Trinity has trod: Col. 2. 1 Timothy 3.

In sum: it is the mystery of God.
The sum of all that to this point belongs
Shows but the order, neither witness wrongs.
The Father first convincing man of sin,
And next the Son the pardon first brings in.
The Holy Ghost the work does perfect make;
Yet altogether each in all partake.
Though we distinguish, yet may not divide,
Father, Son, Spirit as they are jointly tied
In unity of Essence, operation,
Sanctification, Redemption, creation.
Creation first does unto man appear,
Redemption next, and comfort comes in the rear:
Which to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
Do all co work: yet unto each refer it.
According to the order as it is wrought
By either witness (in the Scripture taught)
Although it is ascribed to the Law
(And by the Father) to keep men in aw;
And sinners see no farther at the first:
Yet it is also don by Jesus Christ.
Without his grace there was no more to treat,
With broken man; tho if but one conceit
In all his life had from his duty swerved,
An everlasting curs had well deserved,
And by that Law could never be releast,
Had not Christ Jesus first become high Priest.
There Is nothing stranger to my deepest thought,
Than to see Christians, who I know are taught
(For th'main concern) by grace and holy Spirit;
And make no question, they do life inherit,
Who yet with indignation do decry
All such as hold, that Christ for all did die,
And many of them brought to such an height,
They seem to show a fierce and zealous spite
To such a tenet: with reproach and spatter,
As inconsistent with the root of the matter.
I little value what such men report,
As by their words and deeds themselves do sort
With carnal, scandalous, and vicious men,
(On either side) who godliness disdain.
But I profess it is some grief of heart,
Sometimes to feel but such a sharp'ned dart,
From such I love, and cannot but respect,
And judge, unfainedly they are upright
And yet all these acknowledge common grace
Upon the worst as well as best take place,
Have means of grace, and many mercies more
Often heaped up, in measure running over.
Whence so much patience from Gods blessed Son
Should day by day unto such men be shown,
If Jesus Christ did no whit interpose,
And intercede, even for such men as those?
I do confess there is different intercession,
And for believers other kind petition.
Yet (though not all alike) each has a share
Both of Christ's sacrifice and of his prayer.
To stand upon long proof, I Will not be urgent; Joh. 17.9. comp. Luke 23.34. Heb.
10.26.

Refer you to two places in the margent.
But there are others, I must needs confess,
That far more moderation do express,
Although they differ in the point in hand,
Yet do not at so great defiance stand:
As if he was an unregenerate,
At lest, if not a sealed reprobate,
That closes with such doctrine, and do reach
The summons farther, if we dare it teach.
But if we look, how Paul to Timothy
Did him instruct, how he should edify,
You Will find when he had preached the living God,
The Savior of all, he never forbod,
But strait commanded, to command and teach
The very doctrine, which he there does preach. 1 Timothy 4.10, 11.

But I return from this too long digression
Toth' former work in gradual progression:
Where we had touched the Fathers dispensation,
(Although co-working with Sons mediation.)
By which poor sinners feel themselves quite lost,
Can find no relics left whereof to boast;
Are by that stinging Law (whereby undon)
Constrained to quit themselves and flee to the Son.
Had never him known, had's Father not proclaimed,
From's bosom came, and him a Savior named.
Commanding him to hear; on's grace rely; Matthew. 17.5. Act. 13.39.

From legal fears would throwly justify;
Perfect the work, by his unstained merit;
Promised withal the assistance of his Spirit.
The sinners touched by Fathers revelation
Confesses Christ, the rock of his salvation. Matthew. 16.17,

As clearly seen in the forequoted place,
Which Christ explained in Simon Peter's case.
What Father says, our Savior does confirm,
Sets hearts at rest; they shall receive no harm:
The Father you believe; believe in me,
Let troubled hearts from anxious thoughts be free. Joh. 14.1.

The soul prepared, by terrors of the Law,
Of Savior heard: Act. 13.48. Romans 10.10.
No other refuge saw,
Do glorify his word: with purpose cleave
Unto his faithfulness: with heart believe,
And with the mouth do make a full confession:
Their conversation answering their profession.
This knot once knit shall never more be broke,
Father and Son engage not to revoke.
The seeming danger lies on sinners side,
Least they should turn away and not abide.
And, to prevent presumption, there are given
Some wholesome warnings, least we should be driven
Or drawn away, in total or in part,
From this our hope, by our backsliding heart.
And thereunto is fixed a strait command,
To let us see the rock whereon we stand.
Least we should sacrifice unto our Nets:
(All which our foolish hearts too often forgets.)
But if indeed the knot be truly knit,
(Without foundation-error to commit,)
The tenor of the word (me thinks) is past,
To undertake to keep our interest fast.
Because he that believ's, receiv's the Son,
Has power given to rely thereon;
Authority (that never was forbod)
Now to become th'adopted sons of God: Joh. 1.12.

If sons of God by spirit of adoption,
I see not (by the Scripture) what corruption
Can intervene; no nor the gates of hell,
To alter that relation founded well
Upon those sure mercies, covenant-rites,
On which believers place their whole delights.
The sheep indeed may stray out of the fold,
And for a time may wander uncontrol'd:
The shepherd notwithstanding does not sleep,
Till he has brought again the wandering sheep; Luke 15.5, 6.

And by correction graciously does teach
Such wandering lambs, they make no further breach.
But who can tell how often (70 times seven)
Our erring brother is to be forgiven?
If such as we (by such a certain number
Put for uncertain) may not souls incumber,
Who do offend us, if they do repent:
We may not judge, but he will more relent;
Whose mercies over all our mercies rise,
Beyond the distance 'twixt the earth and skies:
And has not hid repentance from our eyes,
Until we cast away his sacrifice: Joh. 7.38.

Which once received by true and lively faith
Holds fast for ever; as the scripture says.
And Christ himself has put it out of strife,
That water shall flow to eternal life.
Beside, such souls united to the Son
(As he to the Father) cannot be undon:
Unless we can suppose, (which I abhor)
The Fathers union with the Son so far
May be untied, dissolved, and quite made null:
Which in Divinity is such a Bull,
And such a contradiction to their essence,
That cannot be divided from the presence
Of one and other: were there essence two,
'T would quite the godheads unity undo. 2 Pet. 1.4.

If Saints be well and truly made partaker
Of Jesus Christ's divine and holy nature,
Who can suppose it subject to that fate,
And from it self so far degenerate,
As (with the Devil) to be reprobate?
But if you say, they may that nature lose,
(If thereunto annexed) you do expose
That fast connection, looser than the Devil,
Who may so far corrupt men's minds with evil,
That he may hold them so fast in his chains,
Till no more sacrifice for sin remain's:
And till there be no possibility
To be regained or ever more set free. Heb 6.4.

It Is strange that Saints (though in their Saviors hands)
Should be more loose than men in Satan's bands;
When men are fallen into his condemnation.
How slippery a thing is our Salvation?
If Jesus Christ does not as fast lay hold
Of every sheep that comes into his fold?
By what is said, 3. sorts of men appear
Upon this tiklish earthly theater.
The first are all the progeny of Adam,
Who do not yet the depths of Satan fadom:
Nor yet can numb'red be with such as those,
That with a Savior heartily do close.
While they are under gospel visitation,
And therewithal Satan's insinuation:
It is not yet concluded one or other,
By which they shall be conquered, or given over.
But when to either side they are made fast,
By faith in Christ: Or by Christ overpast,
And left unto the hardness of their heart:
The day of grace is out, they have no part
Nor lot amongst those which are his redeemed,
How high soever in men's eyes esteemed.
But they that heartily make Christ their head,
(And he accepts the close which they have made)
Are kept for ever by his mighty arm,
Shall never wholly fall or suffer harm.
It griev's me often to think how some deride,
Would head and members thus conjoined divide:
And judge it may so come to pass, at lest;
Now Christ's true members; then the limbs of the beast.
So long as we in state of nature are,
(Some Judge) we children are of Lucifer:
And that it is all alike, where Scripture says:
We all by nature children are of wrath.
That their condition is no whit more evil,
Whom Christ pronounces children of the devil.
To which opinion I can no more close
With full agreement, than I can with those,
Who stiffly do maintain (Alas for sorrow)
Gods child to day may Satan's be to morrow.
Indeed by nature we are Satan's slaves,
And he amongst us and within us raves,
And like a strong man armed, keep's in his hands,
And holds us fast, yet tyrant-like commands,
And yet with subtlety, by seeming guise,
Makes us believe we are in Paradise,
Until a stronger come that cast's him out:
In places dry he wanders then about,
But when he is out on's house, he has no rest,
Until again he be admitted guest;
With 7 fold force he comes toth' house he left,
But painted finds it, empty, swept, bereft
Of such a power as cast the tyrant out,
And forced him to wander round about.
But that great power not received to dwell;
This enters: makes that soul the child of hell.
And now this house, become so desolate,
Is given over to be reprobate.
Because the evil sp'rit cast out by Christ,
Now Is entertained: The last end's wors than first.
The sum is this: That what at first was fickle,
And not established, but in doubtful pickle,
Is absolute at last in better or wors state,
Either praedestinate, or reprobate.
And thus we see the difference of the station,
Between the common and select salvation.
The one has means that will produce it is end,
Upon condition we thereto attend.
The Other enters (at least when we first know)
When Christ is entertained, and Satan parted fro.
And I appeal unto experience,
Who ever could say, if special grace commence,
Before he entertain (and cleave to) Christ,
As King and Prophet and alone high Priest.
But though upon believing, souls are fast
For all eternity; yet overcast
With many clouds and fears; with great desertion,
Which may at times make such a deep impression,
That (for their lives) they shall not thoroughly know
Whether to Christ they do belong, or no
And there are more conditions still behind,
That may with fear and love possess the mind,
Least tha refreshing, which sometimes is given
By just displeasure, be not drawn or driven
Quite out of sight; or from our inward sense,
For our backsliding, or too just offense.
And they that know what is meant by broken bones,
What depth of anguish, and what bitter groans
Those who have tasted those refreshing springs,
In midst of which, the soul that feel's them sings,
And finds it self in midst of great delights,
And all oppressed souls thereto invites,
When that is withdrawn and (to appearance) lost,
Who can imagine how that soul is tossed?
I dare not say, that all distress that comes,
Or each desertion to neglect belongs:
When I consider Job and others more,
The Sov'rainty of Christ we must adore;
But that for sin it often falls out,
David and Solomon do clear the doubt.
Beside, the promise runs upon that strain,
That if Gods children shall his word refrain,
He will chastise them with the rods of men,
Although (at length) he will return again.
And if to sense your state's not always clear,
Be not highminded, but obey with fear.
The humble awful heart has clearest sign:
His evidence is current and divine
The more a soul submits it is will to Gods,
Finds greatest peace, and true content by odds.
Presume not then; or carnally be jolly,
When peace is spoke, return not more to folly.
There Is ground of hope: be sober therewithal,
That from your stedfastness you never fall.
And then the promise stands not on chance,
But gives a full abundant entrance.
Such things as these indeed are more than common,
(Except believers) promised to no man.
Though many mercies are dispensed to all,
Yet all (except believers) short shall fall
Of that rich grace, which is peculiar,
Constant, unfading, and without compare
Who ever miss of this eternal prize,
They set not God in Truth before their eves,
And in their hearts, they thoroughly give no place,
To those rich mercies shown in common grace.
Which would have lead, (if heeded) to repent,
And turn to Christ, by faith, incontinent:
Though common grace, withoiut peculiar,
Shall never reach that height and morning star;
Yet special grace no creature may expect,
Who in his heart does common grace reject.
This common grace the wicked do despise,
And thence repentance hid is from their eyes,
And tho they turn it off with vain pretense,
It stands a witness, in their conscience.
Which book shall open stand, and well applied,
Thereby at Judgement-day shall all be tried.
Oh preparation for that dreadful day!
To think how common grace is cast away,
How long Salvation by long suffering has
Stood, knocked, and cried, at every sinners gate!
While yet there is time, oh harden not your heart,
Least common grace (rejected) be your smart;
And shall extort a witness from your mouth,
How often conscience has reproved your sloth;
And told you plainly you must mend your pace,
Or be debarred for ay from special grace.
Yea special grace has warned you to prefer
That common grace that was her herbinger.
That common grace, your consciences shall find,
Has told you, special grace but staid behind,
Until you used well the grace you had,
And made you willing, thirsty, and right glad
To be assisted with that special favor,
To entertain a bleeding gracious savior,
Although it is true; whose heart is ever won,
Must freely own, it is special grace by the Son.
Yet where it fail's no fault is to be laid,
But on the heart, that has the soul betrayed.
Although this mysterie's beyond our reason,
Yet God will make it out in his due season:
Mouths shall be stopped, and every creature must
Confess that God is merciful and just.
And justice then advanced on its throne,
Where mercies (often rejected) had been shown.
Some land or sea-marks set on either hand,
Like blazing beacons on high mountains stand,
I mean Examples, whereby has been shown,
How Judgment past in ages that are gone,
And persons too (though these far less comprise,
Put all together, than the great assize.)
Which in our present work we solemnize,
I here present, and set before your eyes.
And therefore wait for more than man's assistance,
That to the truth there may be no ressistance:
But be applied close and be discerned:
For every soul is more or less concerned.
For when we hear that cloud of witnesses,
Who have by faith beat down strong fortresses,
And when we read that sad and dreadful doom,
Which has on hardened stubborn sinners come,
The scripture has on either side set home
Close application unto all and some.
Too many instances here I will spare,
And set you down but of each sort a pair.
But yet shall only note them by quotation,
As in the margent you shall see citation.
The first decision that we ever find,
After the fall was of a different kind,
Between two brethren by first human breed,
Display the woman's and the serpents seed.
For tho their common parents were our own,
And they and we from self-same stock are grown
Yet serpents craft our common root beguiled,
And our whole nature thoroughly defiled.
But if we search from first original,
'Twill into 3 or 4 divisions fall,
To 3 or 4 said I? nay I Will say nine,
And to be short, I shall them thus define.
Although I say not that all these come in,
In all these cases; or by grace or sin,
Or that our natures do partake of each,
Yet this I say, the blessing or the breach
That to us comes, in some sort have relation
Unto them all: lets try the observation.
The first is Adams pure and holy state,
Tho not to holiness determinate.
More perfect holiness of mediator,
Immutable, conjunct with God and nature.
The third, tho lothsom nature of the devil.
(When fallen) determinate to curse and evil.
The 4th the serpents leaven sown in man,
Before the gospel tidings once began.
The 5th what grace from Christ did intervene
Into our nature in the gospel scene.
The 6th when sinners have that grace outstood,
And trampled on that saving precious blood.
The 7th the state in which believersl stand,
When they have closed with Jesus Christ's command.
The 8th what souls condemned in wrath endure,
Before the Judgement-day (in chains obscure)
The 9th what blessed souls ever resurrection,
Enjoy in Christ; with gracious protection.
Unto these 9 to make it all complete,
I add 2 more, which all does terminate.
The first is that immens eternal glory
Of souls and bodies met (in Scripture story).
The second is that curse and misery
Of souls and bodies to eternity,
With Prince of darkness cast into the lake,
Who endless woes and torments do partake.
Now Jesus Christ does all his members gather,
Delivers up his kingdom to his Father,
To whom and him, Saints, Angels clothed with new-prais,
Cast down their crowns and sing Halleluja's.
Ever begins, but never shall have end.
Why? On eternity it does depend.
And if the center be eternity,
Circumf'rence has no possibility:
For if you can to that circumf'rence climb,
Eternity would be contained in time,
Or something must exceed Eternity,
As far as that does time in each degree.
But where is the compass measuring those degrees,
How long the shanks between the feet and knees?
Where is that rivet that so fastly joints
That angle which subtends th'extended points?
Or where is the hand that shall that compass guide
At such a distance (when stretched out so wide)?
Cease! go no farther! fear, and stand aloof,
Believe eternity, you are far enough.
I do confess that this amazing theme
Does stretch conceit, till't crack: but O to dream!
We Will swagger, scoff, rebel, despise, stand und'r
Eternal wrath (composed), this, this is wond'r.
In some respects (in truth) I Have much a do
To think it not the greatest of the two.
Mistake e not, I do not mean it so,
To vail eternity to what men do:
To wonder at etetnity: (What'tis)
Cannot be helped: is therefore not amiss,
But that there is an eternity, 's a case,
That leaves (in reason) wonderment no place.
If all this while we jingle in our notions,
And naught but fancy terminate devotions,
If we can talk, make faces, weep and cry,
And beat our breasts, (oh what an heart have I!)
With watery eyes we lookers on deceive,
And all this while laugh fleering in our sleev.
Remember he that tries hearts and reins
Will balance justly which is loss, which gains.
Far be it from me, (though 'twas but underhand)
To cast the lest restraint or countermand
To floods of tears: though with such gestures be
I sometimes nauseat, and know not why:
I dare not judge what is in another heart,
By all I see disguised in the outward part.
There Is many customs, modes by education,
Nay some have learned such tricks in declamation,
Like Apes, Baboons to me they often appear,
And yet my conscience says: the man's sincere.
In such a case my ear (and not mine eye)
Will best affect my heart: weigh when you try.
But I propose this short experience
To every soul that would not give offense:
Lord keep my heart from that false affection,
That draws it off from thee by ostentation!
That by no failing signs I judge my brother,
(By truth my self) and tender love not smother!
You see I in and out my thoughts rehears,
And that is the ground I ramble thus in verse.
We have a maxim: much more license go's
To measured lines than my be used in prose.
Method I dearly love, from such as can
Their notions regulate, by rules contain.
But I acknowledge freely for my part,
It Is quite beyond me: I have not that art.
But I confess there is another cause,
Wherefore I chose rather to stand and pause,
To put my lines in measure, than expose
My readers eye to my confused prose.
And that is this, it somewhat underprops
My crazy memory to take it as't drops.
And that is the warmest way it meets my heart,
And therefore think it best so to impart.
For what comes warmest in, go's warmest out;
Before it cool too much, or shed about.
The more strong liquors breath and take the air,
(When once distilled) their spirits do impair
By often pouring into various glasses:
And thus to me dividing into classes,
Dividing, subdividing then again,
It grows too flat, and almost cracks my brain;
And much is spilt: what is left's another thing,
Than when at first it flowed as a spring.
What ever I eat, I value not the dish,
If good, and warm, and wholesome flesh or fish:
Beside cold weather and cold stomachs too,
With meat as cold does seldom ever do.
I caught an ague once: Is It never forget,
It set me shaking with a long cold fit,
And held me long before I could be quit,
(To say the truth) I find the relics yet.
And I Am afraid some part of what I have,
Will bear me company even to my grave,
I speak the truth by sad experience
Upon my body. In another sense,
It Is much more true, whereof I am ashamed,
Was It not too long to tell, it should be named.
If by my fault another might be warned,
Who is or may be in the like concerned,
To give this caveat: I Will be somewhat bold,
In conscience cases: see you catch not cold,
There Is many die of that benumbed disease:
If I escape, rich grace I must confess.
Even as we strive dispatch from spit or pot,
That we may eat our vict'als piping hot,
Let Us take more care for that, that is better meat,
It paul not on our hand; before we eat.
Yet in dishing up, make what have we can,
In nipping frosts some ice will cleave toth'pan:
And if you wonder at so strange a fate,
Know; it is for Freeslands climate calculate,
And I believe, it may for you and me
(In The case in hand) indifferently agree.
I fear this comes too cold; I therefore wish
You Will heat it well upon your chafing dish;
If yet so frozen, 'twill not part asunder,
Renew the heat, and put more fire under.
You Will find more cautions, promises and threats,
(To stir you up) than this small piece entreats.
But once again, I heartily desire,
You will be careful: use not common fire.
A burning-glass to kindle't from the sun
Until it flame: and then your work is don.
Gods gracious spirit may your soul inspire,
Eat it not raw; but roasted at that fire,
I dare presume, it shall not do you harm,
If you nor it be cold, or too lukewarm.
The main concern of the subject now in hand,
How you and I at Judgment day shall stand,
Give up a accounts, which joy and not with grief;
Tell me what is greater? Is not this the chief?
Here lies our hope, to miss is all our fears;
Submit to rouzing; though pulled out by the ears.
There Is invitation too, to win our hearts:
The Lord give you and me respective parts,
With his full blessing and especial grace,
That in his mansions we may find a place!
That Is all the apology for this digression,
The cause whereof you'v had my large confession.
I thought now to ge back, and to review,
And prosecute examples more a few,
But that those sundry heads, before but named,
I hope are not amiss to be explained:
And though it be about; may tend in the main
To helpus out, in what is our loss and gain.
That we may somewhat clear the point in hand,
And search it from original command,
And make some use arising from each branch,
How all is set by order, not by chance.
Man first was holy, every way upright,
But not confirmed in that his happy plight.
I often think, the nature of that state
Call's us to mind, to what it does relate,
And what is peculiar to that alone,
What kind of life depends thereupon.
And that we may the matter better trace,
To set it right, upon its proper Base,
And not too high; or equal it with those
Who by redemption do with Jesus close,
As to their better part, while they live here,
Much more their crown, when glory shall appear:
And if the saints, though yet not glorified,
Have somewhat here, 'bove Adam magnified:
Then much more short was Adam at his best,
Of The second Adam; (where lies all saints rest.)
On the other side, to find out Adams place,
We must allow that in a various case,
His state was better, yea much more sublime
Than any of the saints on earth: In time:
For he had perfect nature: they have not,
He had no sin, they stained with that blot.
No trouble he; the best of them have many:
He had no want: of them not found by any.
His pleasure full: they injured with pain.
He knew not death: they all do death sustain.
He mutable indeed: And much more they:
Should teach us all, against him not to in vey:
As if had we been placed in his room,
We should have shunned the mischief that is come.
And to set home the power of this use:
I Will tell a story of the like abuse.
A certain man they say there was of late
Born or reduced unto a poor estate,
Though weak was forced to work hard for his bread,
Cried out: had I been placed in Adams stead,
I would have kept my self and others free:
Oh Adam! Adam! what have brought on me?
A certain Lord over heard this poor man chide,
Called him from work, and said, he should be tried
With all that plenty, that he could desire:
If he would but forbear once to enquire
Into a covered Mess, on table set,
He should be richly sed with wholesome meat.
Accordingly he did: Some meals had past
To great content and comfort: but at last
The man alone (he thought) within that house,
Peep't into the dish: and out there leapt a mouse.
By this mischance the man might easily fadom,
How little cause he had to chide with Adam.
His Eden's lost, he must to work again,
Renew, redouble former grief and pain.
'Twas bad at first, but this augments his groan,
Excuse is broke; the fault is now his own.
But this is but a story I confess:
And if the word of God does not express
A proof thereof in other circumstances,
Such things as these might seem but like Romances.
For by this deed the poor man had bewrayed,
He was the child of him that us betrayed.
And thus our Saviors check against the Scribes,
Detects their wickedness in all their Tribes,
And generation's past from Abels time,
To Zacharias for the self same crime, Matthew. 23.29, unto 36.

If they had lived in ancient times of old,
They never would so wicked been and bold
To murder Prophets: for they build their tombs,
And make them fine; these stand up in their rooms;
And who but Abel; with the Scribe and Priest?
What are these murderers? Ask Jesus Christ.
It Is not their painting of the Prophets tombs,
But killing him that stepped up in their rooms.
This makes them murderers; that hypocrites:
And for both these our Savior them indites,
Proceeds to sense, foretells execution,
Without a remedy or absolution.
But here is a double knot: no more than so?
Is Christ so hasty? but a word and blow?
I answer first: they had no such pretense,
That great reproach against him to commence.
They were the first to whom our Savior came,
And Some of them believed in his name.
Disciples also had the first command,
Amongst the Jews alone to make a stand,
In all their preaching with a prohibition,
To go no further in their first commission.
Not to the Gentiles, and Barbarians,
Nor to the cities of Samaritans.
'Twas more than once he strove their hearts to soften.
Witness his cry! Jerusalem how often
Would I have gathered thee? but thou would not,
And therefore is thy house now desolate.
This desolation had a double sense,
And also does contain twofold offense,
To each of which he renders a reward,
To each respective fault has strict regard.
The first was temp'ral, slighting outward means:
The last eternal, quenching inward beams
Of light let in, upon their conscience,
Till remedy was past to heal offense.
One legal is: next Evangelical,
To each of which they found respective fall.
Without dispute, in the first there is many fell,
And yet by grace recovered were from hell.
For Some that shed Christ's blood, we find at large,
He pray's: Oh Father! lay't not to their charge!
And for an answer to his intercession, Act. 2.23, 38.

See but what Peter has in that expression,
How first he does that cruel murder tax,
Yet afterward does wholly that relax.
On the other side, Matthew. 6.2, 5, 16.
there is Some have but regard
To outward means alone: have their reward
For all their lamp-profession, never come
Into the marriage-chamber with bridegroom.
To close this head, and what it does comprise,
Our Parents fell, they died, and shall rise;
I pray you tell me, which of all these three
May not be said of their Posterity?
And for as much they sinned against the law,
But are not blamed of any gospel flaw,
We have good grounds to hope, they both are blessed,
And taken up into eternal rest.
And that is my ground I firmly do believe,
For simple law-guilt, either there is reprieve,
Or if not so, remission at the last.
(For diverse infants of the first never taste,
That suffer death, as soon as they are born,)
Shall rise again in the eternal morn,
Were never guilty of a gospel breach.
What scripture says, them second death shall reach?
And if we do but mark this process well,
It gives great light; what is law: and what gospel.
The second head as far exceeds the first,
(I may not say, as best exceeds the worst)
For what is worst superlatively's evil,
Improperly affixt; (except toth' devil)
Nor can I say, as heaven exceeds hell:
For Adam at his best there might not dwell.
But this I Will prove; the difference of their birth
Has as great Odds, as is twixt heaven and earth;
The first man Adam earthy came from thence.
The second Adam by prae-eminence
Was heavenly called; because from thence he came,
From either place each Adam took his name.
The second Adam as he is mediator,
Taking our flesh, appeared somewhat later.
But if we mark his first original;
He was before Adam: yea, was first of all.
Of The mother side, Math. 1. Isa. 53.8. Ps 110.1. Math. 22.44.
we know his propagation:
Of The Fathers, who can tell his generation?
By one he is David's son, set on record:
By the other David's calls him his Lord.
By one he is man; but by the other God,
By both together God and man abode:
By one he is flesh; by the Spirit does excel,
By both together he is Immanuel.
By one debas't, on the other side exalted,
By both together rules; when most assaulted.
This second Adam God-man not divided,
Neither confused; but really united:
The second witness, called the Word and Son,
Assum's our nature: so the work is don.
We may not think the manhood comprehends
The Godhead, which to manhood condescends.
Nor may we judge the Godhead is debas't,
Although the manhood is extremely raised.
God cannot suffer yet Immanuel
Humbled himself into the lowest Hell:
What ridle's this? the Godhead does not suffer,
Manhood advanced above it self quite over?
Yet he that is both together suffers more
Ten thousand times than any did before.
Exceeding power's in the manhood put,
Yet is the Godhead from all suffering shut.
A mystery; the Angels strive to peep,
Yet must submit with admiration deep.
How much less man, who came so far below,
Can fully reach this Mystery to know?
Oh height and depth! oh length and breadth profound!
What wonder's this, the Angels cannot sound?
Made somewhat lower: yet advanced higher
Than Angels utmost glory dare aspire.
To which of the Angels has the Father said,
I have thine enemies thy foor-stool made?
And till completed give thee this command:
Come sit thee down upon my righter hand!
Oh what is man conjoined to such an head,
Amongst or above the Angels numbered!
This second Adam is we know not what
In full extent: Perfection, and what not?
He Is rich and full, with thousand treasures more
Eternity too Little to tell over.
Oh blessed are they, who know of him so far,
That their capacities too narrow are
To know his worth! If inward estimation
Inflame the heart with love and admiration,
Blessed be those souls that ever they were born,
Tho by first Adam lost, undon, forlorn,
Who by this second Adam are repaired,
Reciev'd to grace, and from destruction spared!
It Is he that offers every mothers child,
How ever stubborn, tempted or beguild,
To turn and hearken to his blessed voice,
Renounce themselves, and in his grace rejoice;
Has don enough, and suff'red ten times more
Than will discharge their debts and pay their score;
And is so gracious, he will not disdain
(Though Banckerupt) to set them up again;
And so advance their state'bove what it was,
As Heaven does earth in glory overpass;
Will be their King, their Priest and Prophet too,
Will guide their hearts, their enemits subdue,
Teach them to know, and find the perfect way,
When to the right or left they are apt to stray;
Can pardon frailtys; all iniquities,
Yea Crimson-sins that reach above the skies;
Can ease the Conscience, purge the conversation;
Give grace and glory by his free donation.
Oh do but trust him: Seek to be upright:
Upon his word you may Probatum write.
At great Assize, what think you? will you grudge
That this your Dearest kinsman is your judge?
Who loved you here; and you have loved him;
Has filled your Souls with comforts to the brim:
And knows your longings: wait until you hear
The Bridegroom comes, and in the clouds appear.
But if his wrath be kindled against his foes,
Who have despised his grease, against him rose,
Reject his word, and grieve his holy Spirit,
Will not regard his blood and precious merit,
Regard no warnings till it be too late,
Till given over to be reprobate.
The lamb beforehand slain becomes a lion:
And such will hear him roar out of mount Zion,
Will tear in pieces all his enemies,
Where none to help shall evermore arise,
No lamb so meek; no lion half so fierce,
There Is none so tender; yet none more averse,
Who kills and cures, receiv's and casts away,
As he sees good: and men improve their day,
For different shares he rightly will dispense,
Now love and hate shall have its recompense.
The devil (thirdly) meets our meditation, 3. Jud. 6.

Who from's Original made deviation,
And if we heed not his deceitful wile,
(While we decipher him) will us beguil.
But heed will not deliverance afford,
Unless we have protection from the Lord:
For refuge then let us to him repair,
Against this Prince of power of the air.
By faith in Christ may we resist him so,
That he may fly from us a vanquished foe.
What ever was the devils main offense,
That cast him out to his just recompense,
We do not clearly find: but by his name,
And what he does, and how he play's his game.
With what success, and how he does allure,
And how torments with rage and malice pure:
What cunning tricks he daily does devise,
By seeming slights can paint his foulest lies.
What accusations framed against God and man, 1 Timothy 3.6.

And pride for which his Judgment first began.
His hatred, murder, cursed influence,
Where by his vassals daily does incense
To all ungodliness with great excess, Act. 13.10. Job. 8.44.

An enemy unto all righteousness,
Such as his children are, much more is he,
As in the scripture we may plainly see:
Add hereunto the mark at which he aims,
Utter destruction, bodies, souls and names.
Take notice then how little strength we have,
And that that is given, seeks to deprave,
And has depraved us o'r much already,
Because we are so tottering and unsteady.
With him's no truch: he will never cease to fight,
But at our head he strikes, our heel does bite:
And if we fight not daily we are undon,
Which must be under the Banner of the Son.
Or else our fighting will us not avail,
At smallest onset when he does assail.
This is our adversary; here is our war.
If we be conquerors, or conquered are,
Is not a May Game, nor like Morris-dance,
If we retreat, with courage or advance,
All that we have here, or hope to partake
For all ternity here lies at stake.
And for this war we have but little time,
If we lose all this prize it is our own crime.
We cannot say, but that our Captain's good,
Nor had we lost, if we by him had stood.
He never fail's a soldier that will fight,
How weak soever, if he be upright.
Arm, arm oh Christian soldiers! do not slack,
Your captain does and suffers for your sake,
And you are obliged for his more than your own:
You win or lose a never. fading crown:
And if you fail, you are not only poor,
But wrath toth' height entailed for evermore.
There Is not a soldier at that dreadful day,
(That stands the fight and will not run away)
Was ever conquered, never forced to yield.
No hearty soldier ever lost the field
But treacherous hang-by's, who could not abide,
Or had a greater love to the other side.
A soldier, that is true unto his trust
Shall find the issue far beyond his lust.
There Is no Uriah's letter carried here,
By treachery to leav a man in the rear,
And then wheel off on purpose to betray
The valiant man that would not run away.
Our captain scorn's such baseness at his heart,
And will not suffer such a poisonous dart:
Yea he directs the darts of all his foes,
That none prove mortal unto his in the close.
He has this greatest traitor in his chains,
Has cast him out already; and arraign's
The dragon to be bound unto his stake,
And him and his will cast into the lake.
Without dispute, such war was never known,
To say beforehand, all shall be our own;
And find it true, upon the captains word.
Yet this is so, upon his own record;
Who never yet would eat his word he said,
But to maintain it has most dearly paid.
And that is the issue of the Judgement-day,
To make all good, what ever he did say.
For heaven and earth shall pass, before one jot
Of what he says shall suffer any blot.
But here is a caution answering an objection,
As if we speak too much of this protection.
Do we not know, that many captiv-slaves
The Devil holds in his darksom caves?
Where is the man, how well so-e're he fares,
Who has not been, or is not in his snares?
Who are not his before they be redeemed?
How many left, not minded or esteemed?
Indeed, when stronger casts the strong man out,
All this is true: yet suffers many 'bout.
Is hardly freed, while he draws his breath:
His perfect freedom comes at point of death:
And then sometimes he trembles every joint,
Because he is doubtful of the turning Point.
And when he sifts and tries his conscience well;
Is at a loss: whether for heaven or hell?
We'd need be careful, least our liberty
Do tempt us to licentiousness to fly.
I answer: that the abuse of liberty
So common, catching, specious is and sly,
That all our Zeal is (mixed with discretion)
Littleenough for Christian profession.
But that our zeal may have the larger scope,
With sharper edge, to cut licentious hope,
We must as tenderly and plainly show,
What just encouragement there does accrue
To every faithful soul that is sincere:
Least weak believers sink through slavish fear,
Encouraging to duty (not in sin)
Our captain strives his soldiers hearts to win.
Although the dog will catch at childrens bread;
Shall children suffer hunger? not be fed?
Though special care upon the pastor lies,
To rescue childrens crumbs out of the teeth
Of dogs and swine, that will but vomit up,
Or else abuse each morsel and each drop,
And yet there is somewhat, both for dogs and swine,
That suits their natures: (not such precious wine)
And with each bit must often have a knock:
Commands with threats, and stripes laid on fools backs.
But yet the greatest doubt is left behind:
In what respect, All grace with Christ do find?
And there is another that does thence proceed,
How every soul from Satan's chains is freed:
Of both which points there is relation made,
In former part of this discourse: I add
(As brief result of that) there is common grace,
Takes hold of every person in each place:
That common grace does more or less unlose
What Satan binds: and further does dispose,
And teach the conscience how it may be freed;
Both from the serpent and his cursed seed.
But who so does not listen to that grace,
And where those warnings never do take place,
Till day of grace be out: it is then too late,
And then the man is rendered reprobate,
Goe's on in sin, is wholly sold to evil:
More than a slave: a perfect child o'th'devil.
But till this visitation-day be ceast,
There Is hope for any soul to be releast.
There Is two examples seem to give some light,
How long there is hope against the fiend to fight.
By one there is hope: though in a dangerous case,
The other show's repentance had no place,
They both were sorcerers, who did bewitch
The common people with their devilish tricks.
The first believed (named Simon) was baptized,
Yet clearly showed he had but temporiz'd.
And had not yet a portion with the saints,
In Satan's bonds (by Peter's just complaints)
And yet he leaves him not as quite forlorn,
Exhorts to prayer, repentance, and to mourn.
Whence it is implied that Peter must confess,
He might attain unto forgiveness:
And who can tell the issue at the last?
For Simon sought their prayers for what was past. Act. 8.20, 24.

And so it is left at least twixt hope and fear,
Because no farther is recorded there:
Although in Satan's bonds he still was held,
Yet Peter does not call him Satan's child,
Which gives a glance at least, that what was don,
Made him the devils vassal, not his Son.
Second example called Elymas, Act. 13.8.

Paul roundly proves was another case,
Who strove to turn away the Deputy
Fro'th' faith (withstanding Paul:) Paul mak's reply.
Oh full of subtilty mischief and evil,
(Gods righteous ways perverting) child of the devil!
No word of exhortation to repent,
As little sign he did at all relent.
And thus Christ branded some of the stubborn Jews,
That did his own and fathers word refuse.
Though once believed will by no means own him, Joh. 8.44, 59.

But in rebellion take up stones to stone him.
I cannot say but that a devils child
Coheir inrol'd is, and on record filled: Psalm. 69.28.

Now raced out of the book of common grace:
See what the margent notes, and look the place.
Crossed out of one, and not put into the other,
Does argue that there is two, which often we smother,
Or do confound for want of clear distinction,
Because we do not mark the true precinction.
Each of those books, which by the Scripture's don,
So far as I can see, as clear as sun.
The first does show that each one has a share
By common grace, for what is written there.
And if he do recieve the purchase made, Rev. 3.5.

He Is never blotted out, as Jesus said:
But if he cast it off, he will purchase strife,
For Christ will blot his share from book of life. Rev. 22.

But then there is one, where righteous ones are writ, Rev. 17.8.

Whose names are there shall life and glory get.
What Jesus is, has suff'red, and has don,
Invites us all forthwith to him to run.
But (Satan painted in his proper hew)
Call's loudly him and 's nature to eschew.
Coheirs with one or other we shall be,
In heaven or hell to all eternity.
What diligence becoms us to beware,
With which of these we finally shall share?
Our fourth head shows the state of every soul,
While conscience does the devils works control,
With in vitation to the better part:
Satan's suggestions too withdraw the heart:
Thus fighting, striving, struggling, Pro and con,
Until the soul be either lost or won:
Though strictly looking what we have proposed,
I find this head, in the fifth to be enclosed.
I rather therefore will return a while,
To show how serpents leaven does beguil
Each mothers child; before the news of grace
Does touch the heart, e're conscience gives place,
(Though by constraint) to hear the joyful sound,
From whence (accepted) grace does more abound.
But here I have a Theme so large and full,
To me't appears, somewhat a doubtful pull,
Where to begin, or where to make an end,
Or how to circumscribe this crooked fiend
In all his workings in the heart of man,
Before the gospel tidings first began.
Or till the Spirit somewhat does impart
Of gospel grace within unto the heart.
But that we may correct our methods-growth,
Take notice henceforth, this is but the fourth:
And that we may these steps the better fadom,
We must look back again toth' state of Adam.
Where first the Serpent with his wily tricks
Prevailed with man to kick against the pricks.
When man was innocent, and knew no sin,
Then did the serpent first his craft begin
To vent his poison: feigning that the Lord
Had much deceived man by his threatening word,
To keep precisely to the given law,
And that he needed not to stand in aw.
And if we mark his crafty footsteps well,
It is the method which he uses still.
There Is not a man that lives, (that acts his reason)
But still the serpent tempts him to this treason.
For as the Law before the Gospel came,
There is that order in the very frame
That God has placed in each man's conscience,
That is a witness against the Laws offense.
Nor is there one that ever you heard or saw,
But first has conscience of a righteous law,
According to the means and dispensation
That God does use in every place or nation.
Whether they have the written word or no,
They have a law, by which they ought to go.
And as the means are given and applied,
So have and shall their consciences be tried.
Take up a child; and you shall often hear,
He Will yield, it is bad to cosen, lie and swear.
To do to others, as we would to us
Should be intended: and men living thus
In heart and life; without deceit and guil
Is one great part of duty to fulfill.
There is another part which is the chief:
Duty to God, from whom we have our life,
Can help or hurt us, as it pleases him.
Commands and threats reach consciences betime.
And if there were no false insinuation,
To tempt us from our duty, in relation
To God and man; we should our maker love,
Worship and serve, sincerely and above
All other things: and do our neighbor good
In word and deed; as our own flesh and blood.
Now look what hurt us first, does hurt us still,
This serpent did and does our fancies fill
With great deceit; obtrudes, upon us lies,
Rides over conscience; tempts us to despise
The checks it gives: as if it was a babble,
And told us nothing but some lying fable.
And hence we find, we usually commence
Against the Lord himself our first offense,
(As well as greatest:) Almost every sin
Does with some slighting thoughts of God begin.
Let us but mind, how sin does first deceive.
The case is plain: as Satan cheated Eve.
Had God stood sovereign in the woman's heart,
(Untainted there:) It was not Satan's dart,
Nor his alluring her to hear and see,
That would have touched her with the fruit or tree.
But once cast of that aw, then every thing
Will to this kindled fire fuel bring;
Then what we see, hear, taste, feel, touch, or smell,
Will presently infect; and stink of hell.
Let Us take a trial in a known example,
Where't will appear to sense more clear and ample.
Suppose a servant, thief, or any child
Should by some tempting baits be so beguild,
To covet something that is none of his;
And knows, in taking, he shall do amiss.
What ever stops him (if that do appear)
The case is plain: he dare's not take it for fear.
But if he think there is none who can him see,
And none shall know (when stolen) that it was he.
When fear is conquered, does he care's not what.
As drunkards do; when they have got a pot.
It Is Satan's work fearless to make of sin,
And that he may his purpose better win,
While sin is baited he will hide the rod,
To make the sinner cast off fear of God.
And yet his methods are fear to create,
By sundry fancies cast into man's pate.
Never so senceless, foolish, vain, and odd,
Fear every thing; (and what you will:) but God.
For fear is good; as God did it create:
It Is only bad as it is inordinate.
Most hurtful then and most of all debas't,
When on wrong objects set: not rightly placed.
When man has sinned, and conscience called to trial,
Then Satan tempts to make a flat denial.
In Sarahs case; when God conviction gave,
For laughing: said right out; she did not laugh.
The like did Saul: when Samuel reproved
Neglect of duty; which to him behooved,
With Brazen face, did flatly to it stand,
He had obeyed Gods righteous command.
At other times when conscience should be tried,
Then Satan strives and tempts the man to hide.
Makes him believe, in such a case it is best
By any means to keep himself from test.
When man's reproved: rather than he will hear,
Like the deaf adder, he will stop his ear.
Those wicked men were poisoned with this leaven,
That stopped their ears, just when they stoned Steven.
But when that fails: To cover sins abuses.
There are a thousand shifts and vain excuses,
Thus Adam Eve: and Eve the serpent blaim'd,
Fig-leavs must serve, least naked parts be shamed.
But God is righteous, sinners shall be dumb;
Have no relief, until the gospel come.
And Satan (by man's fault) brought in that flaw.
There Is none upright: if judged by the law:
The Law accuses; but did never quit
A soul from death, in Adams days: nor yet.
And therefore I proceed unto the fifth,
Where man condemned by law may get a lift.
'Ere I proceed, these two heads us advise
To think of Satan in a double guise.
The last declared his nature what he was.
This; what (in all depraved men) he does.
And what he does in man is also double,
I hope to search, it may be worth our trouble.
The first is disobedience to the law,
By which he wounds the conscience, makes it raw:
Which if he cannot wholly cauterize,
Dawb, mince, excuse, extenuate by lies,
He Will follow't close; gall, lash, scourge, chide and tear,
Make conscience feel the fruit it cannot bear.
And for the Law-transgression the Lord
Himself does back it by his holy word,
Yea God and Satan (though in opposition)
Make conscience feel the fruit of sins commission.
But God and Satan have quite different ends:
Satan, destruction, God, humbling intends:
That sinners may prepared be for grace,
Which Satan strives in man may take no place.
And that is the second work by Satan used,
By which his venom (in our hearts infused)
Does operate against the gospel light,
With more enraged subtilty and spite.
But in the present head we that adjourn,
Until we come toth' next, for there is its turn.
Mean-time we see, how Satan seeks the doom
Of out-lawed sinners: e're the gospel come.
And when once cast he gives no space to breath:
Because he knows they have deserved death.
But all this while, so long as it is but law,
It can beyond first covenant terms not go.
As Adams case (before the gospel came)
The law offended, judged by the same.
Look what the law had threatened, he incurred,
His punishment was equal to the word:
And that was death, I freely do confess,
With each appurtenance, and nothing less.
But it is the first, and not the second death,
Which is inflicted on all souls that breath.
The second death is quite another thing,
Which gospel wrath denounces and does bring,
When gospel ties are broke and cast away: Heb. 10.28, 29.

There Is no compare, see what the word does say
Since Adams time: it is another case,
Gospel as well as law now takes it is place.
You hardly can detect a sin that does
In one or more degrees not touch them both.
For every sin does violate the law,
But many sins toth' gospel do not so.
The gospel pard'neth every sin, but one:
Does pass by many: but indulgeth none.
The gospel pard'neth every sin to many,
But unto some it does not pardon any.
But then the sin is come to such an height,
It has to grace don uttermost despite.
Sometimes the sin is dyed so in grain,
That what was pard'ned, impard'ned is again: Mat. 18.27, 34.

Because 'twas pardoned upon condition
Of faith in Jesus Christ and true contrition.
The gospels pardon or severity
Divides 'twixt falls hood and integrity,
Or (which is one) 'twixt faith and unbelief:
Which fits for Judgment, or vouchsafes relief.
Which two i'th'issue does determinate,
Who are elect, and who are reprobate.
But he that writhed man's nature thus awry,
Is judged already to eternity.
Which Jesus Christ in the Gospel does proclaim, Joh. 16.11. ver. 8.

As one main end, why into the world he came.
And to convince of sin and righteousness,
Which in the following head I Will farther press.
And thus at last I come unto the fifth,
Which gives to out-lawed sinners such a lift,
That naught but wilful final unbelief
Shall hinder sinners from the best relief.
And that is what grace from Christ does intervene,
Into our nature, in the gospel scene.
I thought I had an open field before,
But here is such plenty, filled and running over,
That men and angels here are at a loss:
One of a thousand but to touch in the gross.
But for particulars; to mention all,
And to explain each parcel to the full,
Exceeds an angels power, human reach,
Though altogether should both write and preach.
But that will not excuse to leave it so,
We must the scripture search, and take therefro
As grace instructs: depending on the Lord
To pardon faults: and needful light afford.
But if you will ponder what was said before,
We shall not need here to repeat it over.
The general import of the whole discourse
Does here and there this subject reinforce.
We shall a little recapitulate,
And briefly touch, what is largely said of late:
That means of grace, and common resurrection
Reprieve from death, supplies, with free protection,
Do often invite the sinner to recall,
What are the fruits of his rebellious fall,
Of which the sinner has a feeling sense.
(If he regard it) in his conscience.
There had no place been for remorse for sin,
If sudden death had forthwith usherd in.
But that reprieve (That sinners may regret)
Declares, the sentence Christ does mitigate.
And that longsuff'ring leads man to repent,
Confess his sin, and turn incontinent.
But if he yield not, it shall be much wors,
And him involve into a gospel curs: Isa. 30.33. Rev. 20.14.

A lake of fire kindled by the breath
Of God himself: which is the second death.
And if the door of mercy once be shut,
Eternal woe will seiz upon him: but
If they will turn to him; renounce themselves,
And not depend on any creature else;
Let him but rule and pardon, cleanse and teach,
He Will give his spirit, that shall daily preach,
Bless instruments; and institutions too;
Tho sore afflictions may increase their woe,
Yet all shall be for good; in the issue tend
To everlasting glory in the end.
This is the sum of what the gospel treats,
Against which the devil striveth with new cheats,
To circumvent the gospel; as he saw,
He had prevailed, for breaking of the law.
He knows there will not be a sacrifice,
Again renewed to those that this despise.
Yea now he knows conviction by the law
Is wrought by Christ, for humbling and for aw:
Not for man's ruin: But his preparation
For present holiness, endless salvation.
Which way soever grace comes to convince,
By Law, or gospel: this old Airy-Prince
Strives to evade: to make it void and null:
That he may show his malice to the full.
He knows if Christ be heartily embraced,
He shall for ever from the soul be chas't.
A soul restored from sin, from loss to gain,
That is the devils torment: this his pain.
Because I spoke so much of this before,
I shall at present strive to do no more,
To what is said already: But incline
My self toth' Sowers emblem to confine,
As to the highway, stony, thorny ground,
(Which to this head belongs) wherein is found,
How both's at work, to parley with the soul:
How Christ and fiend each other do control:
And where there is plainly laid some signs to know,
In The process how the case at last will go.
The order shows how sinful man's inclined,
When Jesus Christ does first declare his mind,
And how the devil watchful labor shows
To steal the word, as cat does watch a mous.
This parable I rather stand upon,
Because our Savior makes so much thereon;
Although he taught them not in any case,
Without a parable: this in first place,
(And as the chief) he lets them understand,
That all the rest does upon this depend: Mark. 14.13.

For if they knew not this (which here is pressed)
They could not clearly understand the rest.
This seed the sower casts intoth' earth,
Does plainly show the progress of new birth,
And where the danger lies: and who the foes,
That intercept the birth in bearing throws.
Beside he does convince, verse. 11.
that therein lies
The riches of his kingdoms mysteries.
That sloth might not their understanding darken,
He solemnly invites them all to hearken. verse. 3.

As he began this needful parable,
To raise their hearts, they might attend it well.
He shows it first in nature as it is grounded,
And afterward how spirit'ally expounded, Job. 3.12.

That from such earthly things we know we might
(By his direction) see some heavenly light.
Here first of all we see the sowers part,
He takes care the word shall reach the heart, Mark. 4.15.

If it abide; or let be stolen away,
There Is not a soul that shall another day
Make that excuse: (the word reached but the ear,
And never touched the heart with love or fear.)
It Is hearts and reins in Judgment shall be tried,
Which could not be, if this could be denied.
When Moses spoke to Israel from the Lord,
Because they cast behind their back his word, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 14. Ps. 19. Romans 10.
2 Cor. 4.2.

God personates th'accuser and maintains,
'Twas in their language, reached their hearts and reins.
David and Paul with Moses do consent
In Law and gospel, heavens and firmament,
Look every quote, conjunct and then apart,
You Will find them all directed to the heart.
But here is a knot which needs must be untied,
Before the use hereof can be applied.
How many do object in general,
That this cannot be said of each and all,
For tho there is here and there an heart attackt,
There Is 20 thousands, whose hearts never ake't.
Nor were delighted with the joyful sound,
Even where the outward preachings most abound.
How can I say then; it is our Saviors part
To carry home the word unto the heart,
And that no gospel curse shall e're betide,
But what in conscience-court is clearly tried?
I answer here (and hope it may conduce
To rectify a very great abuse)
I must distinguish how the point is meant,
No further than it has the words consent.
Nor you nor I may license take to strain
The word to further breadth than't does contain:
Nor make it shorter than its precincts show
Its Author has commissioned it to go.
For if we knowingly substract or add
To revelation that is already made, Rev. 22, 18, 19.

The Judgement's greater than we can suppose,
As we may find in revelations close.
To come to the purpose, here I do not say,
That every time I hear, or read, or pray,
Do hold discourse public or underhand,
That always in all this I understand,
If any man shall take it in such part,
He cannot say, it always comes toth' heart.
Nor is this outward ordinance alone,
(Nor yet the main) by which the work is don.
When Judgment comes, it comes not in debate,
(So much at least) how under the sound you sat,
Or how you always minded what you saw,
To carry't home, to gospel or to law:
Tho all this well comes in at second hand,
And shall be tried when the heart is scanned.
But here is the resolution of the case,
Christ holds his visitation in each place,
Knocks at our door, convinces when he will,
To know when the heart is touched, has the only skill.
It Is not his will that mortals take the pains
The conscience court to hold: (try hearts and reins)
Except within the compass of our own, Mat. 7.1.

Where we may judge by light which there in's shown.
But (for a close) Christ uses the outward part,
To that intent to carry things toth' heart,
And when it comes at heart, (how ere't comes there)
The heart shall answer when it does appear.
It Is known to God how long men trade in sin,
E're the heart is touched conviction to bring in:
For though God has his day till that appear,
Man cannot listen, understand or fear.
What e're they hear, they cannot once apply,
Until by grace the heart he do untie.
But to convince they are under Satan's claws, Hos. 11.4.

Men cannot eat till he unlose the Jaws.
But when his light shall scatter Satan's mist, Act. 6.10

He speaks with power men cannot resist.
And that is the day man's called to act his part, Heb. 3.15.

To hear his voice, and harden not their heart.
For tho man cannot then gainsay conviction,
Brought by the word some providence-affliction.
The former sample show's men (if they list)
Obedience to that light may yet resist. Act. 7.51.

And here is the case, when Sower first began
To sow his seed within the heart of man:
And that is the first beginning in relation
Toth's working of the day visitation.
Grace that appears to all men shall impart
Both law and gospel (in its time) toth'heart.
A second thing that comes in this first branch,
When the word's in the heart: what is the first mischance,
And that is double too. It open lies
By high-way-side for every fowl that flies:
The seed that lies by the high-way-side
Can take no root; but rot, be parcht and dried,
(Not stolen away) never like to come to good,
To bring increase for either seed or food.
So it is with word, although it were in the heart
Wholly unbroken: whole in every part,
No softness or no moisture can be shown,
The seed but falls upon a rock or stone,
And that is the plague that grace would take away,
If hearts rebel not always, and say nay.
Sometimes it is found that hardness will not yield,
Nor can be plowed up; cannot be tilled;
Breaks all the plow-shares: all the harrow-teeth.
A heart that smarts, hear's Judgments, ruin sees,
Abides no discipline, will bear no yoke,
Wild heifer-like, or colt will never be broke. Jer. 6.29, 30.

Like knotty timber, neither ax nor saw,
Or wedge can enter: so hearts under th'law
Endure threatenings, Judgernents, desperate
Are sold to sin, denounced reprobate. Jer. 6.28, 29, 30.

Bellows are broken, lead consumed in fire,
The founder cannot melt, does striving tire.
Reprobate silver when it is detected
Is given over, of the Lord rejected.
But least the heart should soften, melt or bleed
Satan's at hand to steal away the seed,
And fills the mind with trifles, other things,
That for a time some mitigation brings.
Thus't was with Saul, when with the devil vexed,
Must have an harp, to ease his mind perplexed.
And some have oxen, farms, their wives or whores,
That turn all serious warnings out of doors.
But how much pains this heavenly husbandman
Will take with such course ground, how long wait, when
He meets with such repuls, so scornful, high,
They kick against the pricks that dare but try.
Nor men or angels know, nor enquire may,
It is a secret locked till Judgment day:
But yet in general we may be sure,
Christ is long suffering, and will much endure,
He often waits long, and visits often,
Before he leaves a soul (striving to soften)
And that the sinner may not justly grudge,
'Ere all be don, he will make the conscience judge.
To speak expressly, (after scripture phrase)
He tries all means, he uses all the ways,
That Is possible to use; Yea all he can,
(saving his justice) 'ere he leaves one man.
For patience long, for means he uses store, Ifa. 5.4.

Ask's sinners verdict what he could do more?
He does not only work till men deny;
But bears their manners till they grace defy: 2 Chronicles. 36.6, 15. cap. 24.1.

The means all cast away will not apply,
Until in truth there be no remedy.
And thus by Satan's juggling, and our own,
(Neglecting and despising grace) undon.
Yet some there are, who, after hamm'ring long, Stony ground.

Come to some feeling of their for mer wrong,
Begin to hear his voice; (that does invite)
And hark with joy, contentment and delight:
Never comes to good: like stony ground they prove,
Does show it self, there was not earth enough:
No root in the heart: it lasts but for a time,
While interest go's along; when 't's counted crime
To stand for Christ, our goods and lives forsake,
Then stony ground at bottom finds a lake.
To keep our former method: here are parts
Of sundry kinds, that might employ our hearts,
How Christ and Satan and the creature acts,
What leaning either way, or what compacts
We treat about; with Satan or with Christ.
Before I come to stretch the point toth' highest,
(For when it comes to that; it is a case
Our order makes the sixth and seventh place)
There Is one thing which I minded not before,
Which Christ performs in the emblem of the Sower:
Which has relation unto all 4 grounds,
That must be preached, where e're the gospel sounds.
Which reaches each as well as all the four,
For which we must his faithfullness adore.
Because I mist it first, I take it now,
(Although the method do not well allow)
And that is this, what ever Christ rehearst,
He always lets us know the worst at first.
He tell's us what is the fault of every ground,
That in that error we might not be found.
He tells us also what is the rubs and lets
Which prejudices in our hearts begets,
And plainly too's implied the Author, which
Does all along our hearts and minds bewitch.
In The former ground the hardness of our heart
By the highway ground, he fully did impart;
The devils craft stands ready to assay
To rob our hearts, and steal the word away.
Now in this stony ground he does declare,
What several motives urge us to beware.
The first is this we think we are past the worst,
If we get o'r the mischief of the first,
If hearts be touched, and affections raisd
By law and gospel, we would then be praised.
Recieve the word with gladness and with joy:
We think noughts left that can our fouls destroy.
Nay; says our Savior, all this may be don,
And yet you have not closed with the Son,
You Are not resigned to lie at his foot,
And therefore in your selfs you have no root,
Christ is not fixed in the heart by faith,
No due regard to what he does or says.
If you were through, neither foe nor friend
Could hinder from enduring to the end.
You seek your selves; but make no count of him,
All your profession lasts but for a time.
They that take him must suffer when he call's,
Be well content though loss or death befall's.
Now persecution first or last will rise,
For Jesus sake; the world will you despise;
And if you count not thus, you will him betray,
Rather than suffer; you will fall away;
When Christ rides triumph you will Hosanna cry,
But led toth' highpriests hall, bid crucify.
Just as Samaritans once dealt with Jews,
When under hatches, did them most abuse;
But when they prosper'd, that they might bear sway,
Professed them brethren, Jews as well as they.
That Is no new thing to turn the cat in the pan,
How many since play right Samaritan?
Since Christ was born 'twas Epidemical,
Infecteth still, and I fear ever shall.
The Crown, the Sword, and Mytre bear the bell,
What these establish passes gayly well.
Religion, when it is worn but for a cloak,
Will shun the fire, very shy of smoke.
Hot service suits not with the feigning ape,
That counterfeits both color and his shape,
Will wear men's clothes, and feign deportment so
As they are taught; for persons seem to go.
butthrow but nuts amongst them: then they will scramble,
And quite betray their specious preamble.
There lies an interest will not be forsook,
Though skin betorn (that is nearer than a cloak)
Yet those most dextrous in this wily game,
Have 20 tricks (a while) to hide their shame.
But all too little: he that Christ forsak't
Will lose his change of raiment (shamed and nak't)
If any covering left, 't will be so foul,
He Will shun the daylight, play the bat or owl,
Flutters in twilight, screetches in the night,
But dare not come abroad in open light.
(In for mer like) these fearful birds of prey
Lurk with dark lanthorns, others to betray,
Play under board, like moles work under ground,
Till all their baseness hateful shall be found. Psalm. 36.2.

This fear of suffering many do undo,
To save themselves make others suffer too.
They Are such as these, that forward have appeared
For Christ in show: when threatened and jear'd,
By human power turn apes and fawning spanjels,
To curry favor, ruin their companions
That first they owned, and truest trust pretended.
But it is another whom they have offended,
Who takes all treacheries, don for fear or pelf
Unto his servants, as don to himself.
To clear this point in hand a little more,
Had we but time church-hist'ry to look over,
There is a catalogue from age to age,
That may be found almost in every page,
That shows how fear made some jobb in and out,
And wheel to either hand, and round about;
Go like Antipodes by chance anon,
Seem bolt upright upon our horizon;
Just like the wind, unlike the weathercock:
For though they change as often, you will find their back
To stand in the wind; which is another case,
The weather cock has always wind in's face.
There is a story of the last Queens Jester,
When some hard matter did her musing pester,
And doubting the result or bad event,
No arbitrators found indifferent.
But when the Jester found where the shoe did pinch,
He told her he could fit her to an inch,
She should confess her self those men he meant
In all the world were most indifferent,
No feigned story't was (fable of Esops)
Those he advised, were diverse learned Bishops.
I heard not what her Majesty replied,
(Or have forgot): it is like she said; he lied.
To make it short; the Queen seemed much displeased,
Until the wily Jester some what eased
Her heavy dumps; which was his chief design:
His office lay her grief to undermine;
But never intended to presume so far
From Jesters place; to start up counselor;
To make her merry was his chief intent,
And thus the Bishops proved indifferent:
Remember Madam; in your fathers days,
Your learned Bishops held to Popish ways,
But in your Brothers time were Protestant,
And in your Sisters back toth' Pope they went,
And now you are come toth' crown, (the Pope cast out)
They'v don't so often; they roundly face about.
I beg your gracious suffrage in this matter,
If I belie them, or their names bespatter:
If It be a slander, as the matter shows,
Your Majesty will grant I speak the truth.
I then appeal unto my sov'rain Queen,
Were evermore indifferent persons seen?
Can you not judge these arbitrators safe?
I have my end: I Am sure 'twill make you laugh.
It seems ridiculous, I do confess,
As it is stated in the Jesters dress.
But think of the other side how many sheep
Those Pastors have misled; you will rather weep.
Read Bonner, Gardner in Queen Mary's days,
How they revolted from their former ways;
And yet with fire and faggot fell upon
Those that refused to follow these (foresworn.)
If It was so then; experience may convince,
All is not gold that glisters ever since.
What Laud and Wren and others more have don,
Was not in corners, but in the face of the sun.
Our subject shows, how in the sharpest trial
Unstable minds are tempted to denial
Of what before they boldly did maintain,
In The twinkling of an eye turn back again.
And if with care we take another round,
We'st round about find hard and stony ground.
When Roman Bishops felt the Heathens rage,
No human power could their grief assuage.
How many Martyrs freely lost their lives,
And seldom had releas; but few reprievs.
Thus under the cross the gospel flourished,
Until a christian Emperor was head,
To force religion by an human law.
Take heed, I fear, there is the devils claw,
Where Bishops go in pomp and earthly glory,
Till Godliness was bannisht from memory.
In The Marian days our worthy Latimer,
Crammer and Ridly Bis hops: also Hooper,
Then Christian Bishops carried with some fame,
(Of Godly Pastors still there is the name.)
But when the Bishops got into the saddle,
They crush't the power of godliness in the cradle.
Let Presbyterians, Independents too,
But look about what some have strove to do:
When on the rising hand Smectymnuus,
Compared with Saltmarsh groans, shows still it is thus:
That outward glory and prosperity
Has ever turned to grace an enemy,
It is an omen of a stony ground
To shun affliction; with state to be found.
But here is a foaming gulf must needs be shot,
(To stop a cavil) may not be forgot.
Let be to Zealots,
(Says turn-coat-tyrant Julian the Apostate,
To's forlorn hope; lifeguard, harnest from hell,
Led by field-marshal subtle Machiavel.)
They Will not admit the magistrates defense:
Fiat: content: let them be banished thence;
Kill, break, destroy, make havoc count it laughter,
These men rejoice, they are sheep prepared for slanghter.
It is their glory, triumph, heavenly crown,
They get advantage, while we knock them down.
Although the objection hardly go's skin deep,
(A perfect jear) a child may through it peep:
Yet I Will endeavor by the help of God
To sift it out, and spread it all abroad.
Not that I think such hell-apostate Jearers
Can be reclaimed by sober men (God fearers)
He that is filthy let be filthy still,
Cast pearls'fore swine, we know how't issue will.
Be It known unto them, it is not for their sakes,
That any Christian in their dunghill rakes. 1 Job. 5.16.

Are there a crew, for whom we may not pray?
(Their sin is such) why? doubtless these are they.
But to lend help, assistance, and to arm
The faithful soldier'gainst this cursed charm,
Yea to give warning to such loose companions,
As tread the steps of these devouring carions,
Before they get toth'height of such as these,
That blood and marrow with a jear outsqeez.
I dare not say (what ever does appear)
Who sins so high: though many flout and jear,
And persecute, I know there was a Saul
Did persecute: at last proved preaching Paul.
He conscience made, and thought himself fast bound
Against Jesus Christ, and followers to impound,
And put to death: and so did Steven greet,
While murderers their clothes laid at his feet.
'Twas ignorance, which after he confessed,
That led that dance, while he the saints oppressed.
But Julian was far worse an Apostate,
That fell from Christ by malice, rage and hate,
With through conviction of his dreadful doom
Cried Galileon! methou'st overcome
Much like those Scribes, who knew their conscience crossed,
Their sin which Christ proved was against holy Ghost. Matthew. 12.32. Mar. 3.30.

But I return to answer the objection,
Wherein I must distinguish by direction:
And in what sense we seek not man's defense,
Upon religion: it is not in pretense,
And if we could cast off the magistrate,
As diverse do accuse us, (both of late
And former times) has had sufficient proof,
(What clamors have been raised) more than enough,
We are persuaded that the law of nature
Agrees with scripture wholly in this matter,
That in ur civil dealings toward man
The magistrate should freely us maintain,
So long as we behave our selves upright,
Not doing wrong against their lawful might.
But there are different cases interweav'd,
Jumbled confusedly, imposed, received,
Inverts all order, Romans 13.1.1 Pet. 2.13.
alters too the state.
Lets view commission of the magistrate
By these two places, nothing is more clear,
Than that those magistrates did not adhere
In their religion with the Christians;
And thence their ordinance is called man's.
Now so far as they did not that exceed,
The Christians in subjection were agreed.
But if the heathen would impose their Gods
Upon the Christians, there was too much odds
Between the Christian duty and condition
Of heathen magistrates, by their commission.
And let men stretch commission to the highest,
No Christian magistrates in days of Christ,
Nor his Apostles time: Then their commission
(In case religious) makes no decision,
Although religion differd, there was no man
Durs^ uncondemned beat or scourge a Roman.
The Roman governors once made a pause,
Although provoked to violate those laws.
And told the Jews, commission would not reach
Upon their human laws to make a breach.
We know that Paul did freely make appeal
To Caesar who was judge of the comman-weal.
In fine there is 5 of the ten commandments,
That lie within the magistrates contents
Without dispute. (and somewhat may be said
For some of the other) but I am afraid,
There is such mischief don with the other five,
That magistrates or subjects cannot thrive:
They burn their fingers with what is forbod,
When magistrates usurp, what unto God
Only belongs. For gross Idolatry,
To worship stocks and stones all Christians flee.
Yet such forbidden Idols men advance,
And plead their right by human ordinance,
To worship Images Gods law forbids.
But Popish laws that ordinance derides,
And he that will not fall down to the beast,
Or to his image (prostrate to the east)
Must neither buy, nor sell, nor hardly live,
Except he will worship to these trangams give,
To take the name of God in vain by swearing
Is not a Christians part: yet in our hearing,
How many oaths on Christians are imposed,
And for default to prison are exposed.
How many Christians Sabbath dare not break!
Yet I have known, when Preachers durst not speak,
Or say a word against those vain resorts,
That were allowed by a book of sports;
And read in churches in full audience,
Polluting some, and grieving others conscience.
Yet such as those must judge what is blasphemy,
The only men to punish heresy;
Will muzzle zealous preachers in derision,
And call their faithful witness superstition.
On Sabbath Days men might be drunk and swear,
But if a godly man went out to hear
A mile or two; to prison had away,
Under pretense they break the Sabbath Day.
And thus they bind and lose; as if the keys
Of heaven were at their girdle: whom they please
Let out and in: and after such a rate,
They will absolve and excommunicate.
Thus have we seen how Magistrates are able
At all adventure to expound first table,
Which are the 4 first precepts of the law,
Which God has set to keep proud flesh in aw.
But I confess the fifth, 6th 7th 8th 9th
More properly toth' magistrate inclin'th,
As proper judge: when honesty and parts
Busy their heads, and exercise their hearts.
But when it is otherwise, what shall we say?
Blessed be God: there is a Judgment day.
When children Parents honor and obey,
Or contradict, that Parents should bear sway:
When wrath and anger's up, Proceeds yet further
To blows and wounds, and oftentimes to murder.
For fornication and adultery
Toth' Magistrate belongs: I wonder why
The Priests have got it: and, to make a sport,
How often is it called the bawdy court?
When goods are stolen the thievs might well be banged,
Yet that the magistrate will have them hanged,
Is more than Moses knew: and how't will stand
With him that made the law, we will leave in's hand.
False words and oaths, by which men are forsworn,
Also in case there be falls witness born,
The Judge is bound without partiality,
(For gain or loss or bribes) throughout to try.
But in the last and tenth commandment,
How can the subt'lest magistrate invent,
That he is concernd to try another man,
Unless he heart and conscience rifle can?
For that command relates not to the action,
Or what men speak, or hear in any faction:
But that is alone between the soul and God,
(Prerogative toth' proudest man forbod)
There have not wanted many Commissaries
Imposed heart-searching interrogatories.
Some magistrates, I freely do confess,
Have conscience made for fear they should transgress,
That durst not meddle with those wily tricks,
Where others boldly kick against the Pricks.
I Have known some magistrates that conscinece made
Of hurting any man, in name or trade,
For conscience sake alone, in any sense,
Where he could find, it was pure conscience,
And where he knew not, in such things forbod,
Has rather left the trial unto God:
And yet was zealous in the second table,
(The tenth excepted) as he was but able.
And tho in conscience cases he was shy,
Yet when presumption grew, both hot and high
In conscience case, has often found enough
Within his sphere, to find just cause and proof
To execute the law against offenders,
Mauger the wily craft of such pretenders.
If any man plead conscience to offend,
Or God or man, 'twill have a dreadful end.
To put an end to this so known a point,
I say when earth and heaven shall be conjoynt,
Jumbled together in the former chaos,
Then may we see a scripture to dismay us.
But while they stand distinct in element,
Their globe's distinct in either continent,
While Jesus Christ his members does direct,
And human laws to their foundation kept.
And scriptures may but judge the rules of either,
That so confusion might befall to neither,
But each might move in their respective orb,
Not interfere, and one another curb,
How fully would man's conscience stand in aw,
Both of divine and of an human law!
To neither add, from neither law relax,
We should not make the law a nose of wax.
But tho we change the measure, after weight,
Our standard in the scripture stands upright.
False weights and measures (by the law) betoken,
By clark of the market, they must all be broken:
So shall all laws, tho screwed up to their highest,
Made (or adulterate) by Antichrist,
How broad it spreads; how high so e're it shoots,
What Christ never planted he will pluck up by the roots.
Shall man usurp Christ's crown from's head to tear?
Scare followers? leave none that dare adhere?
Oh God forbid there is no reason why;
If God give strength (though none but you and I)
If any human magistrate shall please
To constitute a law that may give ease
(According to the scripture) that what is don
(Against the same) upon religion.
Which might but vindicate our common right,
Against the lawless fury and despite
Of cruel men (though sometimes ignorant)
Who are against the laws of nature bent,)
Defend our persons, and secure our goods
Against little John's, and brainless Robbin Hoods,
That rise in tumult, full of mutiny
Against the peace and truest sov'raignty
Of human convers, who would not comply
With such a magistrate to live and die?
In such a case the magistrates defense
We may relinquish upon no pretense.
But if the magistrate should seem to favor
One single sect, or order, or behavior,
On that account to that indulged mode,
Though cross to scriptures, conscience, and to God,
In such a case if basely we comply,
We give our conscience and the truth the lie:
On this account, for neither love nor hate.
We may not seek the help of magistrate,
The tender conscience of another man
(Distinct from ours) basely to trappan.
Although we ought to love a Christian best,
Yet we are bound to cherish all the rest:
In common right not bring them into snares,
To save our intrest, how so ever it fares.
But it is objected, had we so much peace,
It Is doubtful we should grow far worse by ease;
It Is better God should keep us under th'cross,
Least life of godliness should suffer loss.
We dare not say a word to this contrary,
And therefore God does our condition vary.
But yet the instrument that does us wrong
Shall not be guiltless; that with hand or tongue
Abused our persons, plundered our estates,
Though God has gracious ends; to what relates
Unto his glory, and our best account,
That shall our present sufferings far surmount.
As far as suffering makes men leave profession,
So far from stony ground is no digression,
But as I intermix the magistrae,
I do digress: but if we mind the state
Of what is our chiefest point we have in hand,
How all mankind shall in the Judgment stand;
Are all concerned, both mean and men of place,
Princes and pesants there: it is all a case.
Shall poor be called? and rich be let alone?
Nay; there is the most complete catholicon:
Shall all be judged? then all should know their duty,
And practice it: each work in 'ts time has beauty.
When sentence once is past, our bravest gallants,
Though they would give an hundred thousand talents,
Shall never purchase half an hours space
(To all eternity) to sue for grace.
To live and die, without a saving faith,
Will usher in an everlasting wrath.
To live in holiness, and die in faith,
Insures glory: secures from fear of wrath.
Moses example, and the stony ground,
Like Artick and Antartick Poles are found:
And makes the difference full as great as those,
'Twixt our Horizon and Antipodes;
And from each other oppositly leans
As lowest Nadir from the highest Zenith.
The stony ground afflictions does refuse,
Which Moses on the other side does choose.
The one prefers their ease; but Moses glory.
The stony ground, things merely transitory,
And what can here be seen, felt, tasted, heard?
What Is Moses choice? unspeakable reward.
How far does stony ground from Moses differ?
As far as number can exceed a cipher:
Nay I Am mistaken (if you mark it well)
It Is more than so, for it is twixt heaven and hell:
Between which two (if you will rightly come)
Cifer from number is a medium.
For twixt the highest integer fabric
And fractions (negative Arithmetic)
As any artist easily can spy,
There is a pure impossibility:
Yet it is common (tho I grant it is lothing)
For spendthrifts great estate to bring to nothing,
And worse than nothing: but yet we can tell,
The difference is more twixt heaven and hell.
Ask you the reason? I Will giv't in a type,
Which to our case I think will givea wipe,
And possib'ly some clearer illustration,
I almost think 't will reach a demonstration.
The earth you know's in compassed between,
And in the midst of heavenly orbs is seen:
The spacious and the highest firmament,
How far exceeds our earthly continent?
What tho you measure from the east toth' west,
From north to south, and cast up all the rest
In calculation; solidly in the cube,
How many inches squareth in our globe,
Oh what an act you would don! (if that could be)
To reach proportion in the lest degree,
To that concentrick orb we highest see,
And justly call the Primum Mobile.
Could that be don, oh how far does excel
Th'analogie twixt highest heaven and hell!
Between the blessed, who have got their crown,
And souls, that is into th'lake in wrath cast down!
Me things l'm forced to take another round
About the confines of this stony ground,
Which chooses sin, but does affliction shun.
We'v seen what in the outward part is don.
But there is affliction deeper and more high
Than what is seen or felt but outwardly,
The stings of conscience, and the rage of lust,
Satan's temptations intermixed, thrust
Arrows from God, for sins just recompense,
And sometimes but for trial, exceed sense;
And do all earthly misery excel,
As far as earthly sorrow's short of hell.
Yet such as these do now and then arrest,
Yea more than seldom exercise the best.
Job, David, Heman, and that chosen pair,
( Luke 22.31, 62.
Peter and 2 Cor. 12.7. cap. 7.5.
Paul) have had abundant share.
And many times, when outward troubles cease,
The faints are vexed with such things as these.
Who ever will not lie at Jesus foot, 12 Matthew. 16.24. Jam. 1.11.

To bear such inward sufferings, wants root.
And here l find fit opportunity,
A little fully for discovery.
Some sad revolts succeeding hopeful shows
Of some that l have known; the joyful news
Of peace and pardon by a Saviors blood
Seemed to relish, both as true and good.
Raised with joy; transported too with zeal,
Yet afterward did all this work repeal.
Though some (such like) l hope, recovered,
Yet it is worth to mark, where the error bred.
For there is examples some have proved vain,
And some backslide prodigiously profane;
Our great apostates, turn-coats, base informers,
Setters, decoys, trappans, pimps, meeting stormers,
That sneak among sincere would never have had the face,
(Nor trusted) had they not had shows of grace,
With grave deportment and due reverence,
They had been punies else in such pretense,
To preach and pray, with great affection weep,
Appearing saints, experience so deep,
That many honest Christians durst impart
The inmost secrets of their very heart.
Thus Judas-like their Savior with a kiss
To the high priest's-hall betray; Matthew. 26 48, 49.
pretending bliss:
Hail master, and a kiss, were marks to see,
Whom he betrayed: Now take him, this is he.
You see sometimes some flowers set in water
Shall hold their color, keep their savor later
Than those that is foiled, crushed with the hand,
Or bundled together in a band:
But all the water and earth added to it,
Will not help long, except there be a root.
Then what is this root? if there it does depend
(Not having which we are lost at latter end)?
This root, Isa. 11.10.
or that which is equivalent
(Where many words are used, the same thing meant)
In Scripture we shall find to come toth'high'st, Romans 5.5.

To be the root is first meant Jesus Christ,
And other scriptures do agree with this,
If we have none of Christ we are none of his. Romans 8.9.

But then again the doubt's redoubled,
How shall we know that Christ in us is bred,
Or formed (to expressed in scripture phrase)
For this will scruples in our conscience raise, Call. 4.19.

To be new creature and regenerate,
Have faith in Christ, elect, praedestinate.
That all these have the root it is confessed,
But what is all this to make it manifest?
Unless we know what each of these words mean,
We act a players part upon the scene,
To be content to hear, and see, and prate
Is no true sign of one regenerate.
I Will undertake who ever does take part
With Christ (as root) his grace must reach the heart,
And that it may: but if Christ do not dwell,
As well as knock, the soul may go to hell,
For the word does reach the heart in the 3 fold ground:
Tho each of them be proved falls, unsound,
I know'tis tedious work; the flesh disdains,
To make such scruples; be at half the pains,
Remove all lets and every stumbling stone,
Yet must be don in earnest; else we are gone.
You know it is a company of fools,
That will be always justing with edged tools.
How much more dreadful; if it be professed,
We are in earnest: yet do all in jest.
I do profess sometimes I am afraid,
Lest paint for substance to my charge be laid.
I hope I hate it, as I do the devil,
Yet feel I Am tainted with that very evil.
I must be debtor to especial grace,
If in my heart it take no further place.
But if it more defile (which God forbid)
Nothing but grace can purge it out indeed,
'T were worth our pains (a blessing added to it)
To find what it is to have and want a root.
It is a greater task in the full extent
Than I can reach to search what here is meant.
For in our case we take not root apart,
But as'tis fixed savingly in the heart,
Which must respect the nature of the soil,
And application of the root toth' moul.
Christ in the word's the root, the moul's the heart,
If not conjoined, but remain a part:
Who thinks a tree can grow that is not planted,
And fixed in the ground? it is sure, that man's enchanted,
Or if he thinks to plant it on a stone,
And have no better soil: the case is one.
Indeed that stone may have its nature changed,
And so far from its hardness be estranged: Ezech. 11.19. cap. 36.26. Genesis 5.2.

By a superior hand it may be wrought
As soft as flesh, and then to earth it is brought.
For Adams flesh, when God first gave him breath,
Is noted (by his name) to be red earth.
Yet that is a metaphor, and does imply
The stubborness of mind to millifie,
And make it fit to listen and give heed
Unto the word of grace, that precious seed.
The plowing up or breaking fallow ground, Jer. 4.4. Hos. 10.12.

Applied toth' heart the same sense does expound.
Two things we must consider in this matter,
How far the heart is changed in this nature.
And next how far we clasp and do embrace
That heavenly seed, the ingrafted word of grace.
Although these two do always go together,
Where one is wanting truly their is neither:
Yet in the present parable we find
That first there is preparation of the mind:
And how far that is wrought, what don unto't,
Before the word can in the heart take root.
Before the word did ever touch the heart,
It shows depraved nature in each part.
What ever outward means we do embrace,
It seems to me, it alters not the case,
If not convinced by word or education,
Or otherwise: the day of visitation
Has yet no place: and is not yet begun,
What ever force toth' outward man is don.
Although I think it is rare to find a man
Indu'd with common reason, but he can
(If he speak truth) in one or other sense
Give testimony from his conscience,
That he has had some checks for doing ill,
And shun his light to please his crooked will.
Although I question not there are too many,
For shame or pride will not acknowledge any.
And such as these, that therein do persist,
May common gracious workings so resist,
That God shall never more to them impart,
But leave them to the hardness of their heart:
And such as these shall evermore be found
With hearts arrested: tho still high-way-ground:
And they shall find it was a visitation:
They would not hear; resolved to keep their station,
Tho may go farther; be convinced of sin,
At lest in part; and further may begin
To entertain the news of gospel grace,
And in his heart with sweetness may embrace
The precious tidings preached unto all,
Upon condition they will embrace the call.
Two other things will certainly be found,
That do not reach beyond the stony ground.
Partial conviction first (or rather, that
They partially but own convictions state)
The other is, they partially embrace
The off'red tenders of renewing grace.
In both of which (if throwly searched) I fear
They Are so far partial; that they are not sincere,
But carry flaws of conscience in them both,
That will betray their treachery and sloth.
If all the nature of the high-way-ground
Had been removed, and so far conscience sound,
It would not stay, when but another step
Removed from the former, it had lep,
There is some Rimmon, Idol, Achans wedge,
That is indulged as reserved pledge,
That was the relics of the high-way-ground
Unbroken up, though as a secret bound,
Like Ananias and Saphira's gift,
Where their Zunechdoche did make a shift,
To serve the turn, yet said it was the whole,
Leaving one hoof (when known) destroys the soul,
Highway and stony grounds do differ here,
One part's with nothing, the other out of fear,
Or other ends will never render all,
That bane does to the stony ground befall.
But in a word, the want of self-denial,
In all 3 grounds that is naught, will be the trial,
Are unresolved to part with every lust,
Tho conscience now and then does give a thrust,
Nor will endure the terrors of the law,
Nor by the gospel to be kept in aw,
Ungroundedly think comfort to apply,
Would have eternal life; but will not die
To sin, and self, and their own righteousness,
On some or all of these, there lies the stress,
Love exaltation: but to bear the cross,
And in themselves to suffer utter loss,
That Christ should pardon wholly, govern, teach
Without reserve; oh here lies all the breach.
Would have their pleasures and their profits here,
And heavenly glory too: but not a jear
Much less these inward conflicts which attend
The best of saints not seldom to the end,
When grace is offered, they will somewhat bid,
But think the price too high, if they be chid,
They Will dodge a little more, and somewhat rise,
But never resolve to come up to the price.
And yet suppose that they have bidden fair,
And think they are wronged: they may not have a share,
And plead it hard; Lord open unto us,
For we have don, and suff'red so and thus.
For all their lamps there wants that precious oil,
That should maintain the lamps; there lies the foil.
They Have light, and gifts, and works, they think o'th'best
On such as these, (but not on Christ) they rest
For all this furniture, (and more than that)
Depart from me (says Christ) I know you not.
One great mistake is further to be found,
That oftentimes befal's this stony ground,
They hear the gospel pow'rfully displaid,
Sometimes with great assistance, (spirits aid)
The grace that Jesus Christ does thereby tender,
(If sinners freely could themselves surrender)
They are convinced, it is the spirits work,
(Tho still they have some hidden Idol lurk)
And thereupon they needs will take it for granted,
They are in Jesus Christ already planted,
Although there want the inward resignation,
That should comply with that divine donation.
And hereupon they think themselves believers,
Decieve themselves, to many prove decievers.
Now that is the use, that every mothers child
(That would at Judgement-day stand undefiled)
Make of these warnings; but to render all,
And part not stakes; but hark to conscience-call,
But then the conscience must to Jesus Christ
Be given up, and from our great high Priest
Recieve its dictates by his holy word,
And wair for cleansing wholly from the Lord.
But yet me thinks there is another caution,
That I persuade my self here fit to motion,
If persecution rise; they fall away,
And leave their first profession: (that is to say)
They turn with time rather than stand toth'test,
And suffer persecution with the best.
But of the outward part I'v spoken large,
But yet me thinks there is a secret charge,
That reaches merely to the inward part,
Relating to back-sliders in their heart, Prove. 14.14.

Who shall be filled full with their own ways,
Who prostitute themselves to such decays,
As eats out all their savor at the last,
Destroys their faculties, their gifts lays wast.
Yet all this while can well enough comply,
In formal ways exactly outwardly,
And are so far from losing their profession,
Or standing to their tackling by concession,
That they will sufferings to themselves create,
And oftentimes persist too obstinate.
The reason why I introduce thus much,
Because the danger of this point is such,
That if it be not warily applied,
The inward work is thoroughly denied.
And if the inward fail (though the outward stand)
It shall recieve a dreadful countermand.
As for the outward part; oh who can tell
How far an hypocrite may truth excel!
The faith of miracles may superadd,
Give all unto the poor that e're he had,
And to all this may suffer martyrdom,
And yet toth' prize, (he aims at) never come,
And make a noise, no more than sounding brass,
Or tinckling cimbal. 1 Cor. 13.
It Is an heavy case,
And yet the Apostle clearly does it prove,
All this may come to pass for want of love.
And if you mind the church of Ephesus,
Christ charges home his threats because 'twas thus.
But Laodicea, Rev. 3.13.
if you look that place,
There Is no defect in any outward case
Look well the context; then try (if you can)
If any outward thing was in the wain.
The great defect laid in the inward part,
They wanted zeal, and were not hot at heart:
Yet were not cold; 'twould now be thought no harm,
Rather a virtue, if we were but warm.
And yet luke-warmness was the great disease,
For which that church so greatly did displease.
Ephesian heed well: and the Laodiceal;
One wented love, the other was not real.
If this be so: oh with how strict an eye
Should we intend, what is christianity!
The gross apostate lost profession first,
The close apostate unto that is accursed.
The gross apostates first do wheel about,
But painted sepulchers are spewed out.
Religion is a mystery, because
It and its opposite has both such laws,
Though very like, yet clearly opposite,
But Christ's competitor does counterfeit,
To be the same on purpose to betray
The truth it self: and lead it out of the way:
Of Godliness there is a mystery,
A mystery also of iniquity.
The former mystery unfolds the other,
The latter strives the former quite to smother:
They Are both so deep, of each we know but part,
But each of the mysteries does reach the heart.
But it is clear, there is no living man,
By all his wisdom, either fathom can.
But there are signs a certain kind of dress,
Whereby a prudent man may shrewdly guess
At ht' outward court (for either has his temple)
For illustration take a plain example:
When Solomon had reigned some certain time,
He was detected for notorious crime, 1 King. 12.26, to the end.

God rent ten tribes away for Jeroboam,
Who feared greatly least he should forgo'em,
Because of worship at Jerusalem.
He therefore wrought a sinful stratagem,
He made two calvs in Bethel and in Dan,
And made a feast in imitation then,
Of that same feast in Juda, and did shape
His offerings and his alters like an ape.
But changed times and place and persons too
Did all Gods worship utterly undo.
In Paradise Eve's tempted by an apple,
Where Christ his church, the devil has his chapel.
the nearer truth what ever is in name
Has some resemblance, but yet not the same,
Is commonly the greatest enemy
Unto the truth, by its conformity
In outward show: but yet the inward part,
At greatest odds with enmity at heart.
But now the inward court on either side
Is that result, Hab. 3.13.
which always will abide,
When all the outward dress is taken off,
And from foundations to the very roof
Is all unbar'd, and thoroughly broken up,
What Is don in secret, Luke 12.3. 2 Timothy 3.9.
published on house top,
When antichrist shall then proceed no farther,
Jannes and Jambres like with all that guard her
Shall be detected cast into the lake,
With all that with her sorceries partake.
Of The other side, when all that are sincere,
And in their hearts to Jesus Christ adhere,
And all their filthy garments taken away,
(They following the lamb in white array)
And vindicated from those calumnies,
That in this present world upon them lies. Matthew. 25 34. Ps. 37.6. Heb. 11.26.
Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 6.23. Ezech. 35 8. Heb. 12.27.

Christ owning what the have suffered and don,
Bring forth their right'ousness as mondays sun,
And state them in that blessed inheritance,
Which Moses called reward or recompense,
Which Christ has pruchas'd: but the Apostles drift
Is to convince: to us it is free gift,
When all those shakings both of earth and heaven
Has filled valleys up, made mountains even.
What can be shaken, quite away is taken,
That what cannot be shaken may remain.
This is the only garland, this the prize,
That will be perfected at great assize.
Beside the highway and the stony ground,
The thorny also is defective found.
Now Christ these thorns sufficiently explains,
By riches, pleasures, cares, in loss and gains,
And though we may his warning well reguard,
He shows these happen after men have heard,
And gives the reason how it comes about,
Becauss we keep not In: too soon go out, Luke 8.14.

Which shows the want of serious meditation,
To dwell upon the word by rumination,
And that the heart was fraught with this before,
Tho to conviction cannot shut the door.
Yet does not like such news to entertain,
That breaks the league with that accursed train.
The former ground shows plainly what deters,
But this discovers what the soul prefers.
The former shows our natures aversation,
But this bewrays its sinful approbation.
The former shows what sinful nature shuns,
This, whither it inordinately runs.
The former casts off that it would not have,
This intertains what vain desires crave.
The former shows what happened unexpected,
This all along how ill the minds affected,
That seemed to love the word, but shrunk for fear,
But this does stiffly to its lusts adheare,
That grew a little while but wanted root,
But this is choakt and hindered to sprout,
Or if it sprout a little absolute,
It Is crushed in the bud, but brings forth no fruit.
And yet this ground is one degree thought higher,
Than that at first I greatly did admire,
How that could be: although me thought the order
Did testify it must go somewhat further,
And nearer to the mark what is to be found
In good and honest hearts; (the better ground)
Me thinks it is thus resolved: these lusts before
Were in the heart: but carelessly looked over.
The sinner knew not how his heart was tainted,
Which by profession was a little painted.
Hazal knew not what was in his heart,
Nor would believe when the Prophet did impart.
Yea partly so with honest Hezechiah,
And David in the matter of Uriah,
And Peter in presumptuous confidence.
No wonder those remain in fuller sense,
In such as at the heart are still unsound,
Which is the farthest of the stony ground.
It further shows those objects which we love
Stick closer than those whence we would remove:
For hearty love extenuates the fear
Of dreadful objects: just thus is it here.
The soul convinced is much afraid of hell;
But yet because it loves it is lusts so well,
This fixed love does strain a point with fear,
And makes it less, and somewhat disappear:
And this I think it teaches by gradation,
That fear gives way, where love will keep duration.
This thorny ground is not accused of fear,
But what affection to its lusts does bear:
Again it shows when the soul has light,
Although its subject much to be afright,
Because of persecution for the word,
And dare not therefore with the same accord;
Or if it do: yet when it corn's toth' nick,
It turns again, and does in terror stick:
Yet by its conflicts fear shall not detain
The sold so long as love to lusts regain.
Where ever love is set if it be intense,
It leaps over hedge and dike and breaks the fence,
And many souls that have out-dared fear
Gone out in the van; by love's turned intoth'rear.
Let Balams case be thoroughly pondred here,
And we shall see it was not Balaks fear
That did restrain his message forth to bear,
Because he had a greater fear of God,
(Though It was but slavish) in what was forbod:
Yet love to wages of unrighteousness
Stated his doom: the text bears full witness. 2 Pet. 2.15.

What fear did ever Sampson captivate,
The Bars of Gaza, and its massy gate,
The troops of Philistines which he mowed down,
Like gras hoppers almost in every town,
And yet how hamp'red with an whorish love,
That lost his strength, and does this doctrine prove.
It Is true, the fear of God (if it be right)
Does far axceed the greatest man's despite,
And makes a Joseph whorish love disdain,
But that is because true love does fear maintain.
As Samsons love unto his Delilah
Did press him so, he could not disobey.
So is the love of God with holy aw,
A conqueror over every sinful law.
We Are never fixed Denizons above,
Till Jesus Christ dwell in our hearts by love.
If in your love you would not be mistaken,
Search narrowly how much you have forsaken,
Why, by what means, and also to what end,
And look about you least you but pretend:
For he that sees all your care and pains,
(Tho you neglect) will try your heart and reins.
Who ever thinks, he always hated sin,
And loved Christ, did never well begin.
The high-way-ground in truth has naught to say,
Yet none so loud and confident as they:
The grossly ignorant most impudent,
To kick against each messinger that is sent,
They'v got a trick to call him hypocrite,
That dares plainly wickedness indite.
To which they add: (and such are all the rest,
Who make such shows, as if they were the best.)
With large encomiums of their good hearts,
Tho they make no such shows for their parts,
Blind Byard-like, that in the mill goes round,
But knows not a foot of other ground.
The wisest charmer faithfullest exhorter
Shall do no more, than bray a fool in the mortar,
They Are far more wise to know their time and season, Prove. 26.16.

Than 7 such zealots who can render reason.
And such as these do too too often grow harder,
Judiciously stak't down, and go no farther.
Never expect a searching will be found
By the heart it self; (while in the high-way-ground.)
But here the stony ground takes up the plea,
It Is not so hard: true! hardness it did see,
When it was high-way-ground it cared not
For sin or Christ, or either this or that,
But since its joy and some reforming fruits,
It makes no question with the gospel suits.
But we have seen before what falacies
On several hands within these limits lies.
And if you would in trial throwly pierce,
You may look back again, and those rehears,
And take advantage of the other two,
For in the third you will have enough to do,
If you will be through: (and through you must be,
Or the face of Christ with comfort never see.)
Well then suppose a thorny hearer past,
What spoken was of the first or in the last.
But who can number all the pleas that is born,
(Like multiplying fruit upon a thorn)
When figs of thorns and grapes of thistles grow,
Then may good fruit from thorny buse hes flow.
The thorny ground will say: it takes not up
Without a sight of the baptism and the cup,
That it must drink, and be baptized with,
And yet mistake the marrow and the pith.
It presupposes to abide some trial.
Of which the stony ground made flat denial.
It may encounter all that is without,
With seeming grace appearing round about,
A conqueror of all apparent sin,
And yet be wanting most of all within.
Suppose it can acquit it self of ends,
That mainly to the present world attends.
(Which is not very likely at the heart)
Or if it be, it shall be but in part.
It cannot be an universal choice,
(What ever may appear in the outward voice.)
For choice is made alone, where love is born,
But that admits not of a will full thorn.
Why does a thorny heart cleave to profession,
And suffer for the truth without digression,
And yet have lusts by no means will forgo,
Although his conscience knows that it is so.
In such a case it may be reputation,
For popular applaus and approbation.
The like did Jehu in his furious zeal,
But what is his end? to scripture I appeal.
Another man, to appease his conscience,
May do and suffer with a fair pretense.
Felix and Herod, also Balaam:
But look their stories, there you will find what is lame.
See by what means they undergo their task,
You Will find it indirect, or under mask.
Came off'red sacrifice, but did not well,
Which made his brothers sacrifice excel.
Balam is forced full sore against his will,
Although of israel he could speak no ill.
Pharisees and Scribes would be seen of men,
The inside foul but made the outside clean.
Again, Agrippa had but half persuasion,
The yongman wanted one thing to salvation.
A thorny heart has not a full intent
To have respect to each commandment.
But either riches, pleasure, reputation
is fixed in his heart to admiration.
The love to one or other thing forbod,
In's heart does quite exceed the love of God:
What eve steps he takes, this is the main,
He Is always fett'red in his fatal chain:
Even as the law by love is best fulfilled,
And in the gospel sweetly is instilled,
So want of love, above offenses all,
Does break the law: and from the Gospel fall.
To close the point in hand; (and so this head)
Omitting other things, what might be said,
Amongst the generals ever there is one chief,
That leads the van, and is the archest thief,
That robb's our hearts, and steals away our love,
Over other lusts do tiranize above.
The master-sin so easily does beset us, Heb. 12.1.

Which, if it be controlled, does chiefly fret us,
In some it is one, in others it does vary,
And sometimes changes to a quite contrary.
There is a sin we call Original,
Which all men have contracted by the fall.
Which does not show it self in all alike,
But does according to our humors strike:
There Is great variety in men's complections,
Which does to various objects turn affections.
The sanguin person hot and passionate,
The melancholy sluggish more sedate,
An airy fancy light and full of vapor,
The earthly minded is a money scraper,
Childhood to toys, the young man unto pleasure,
The middle age for plots, the old for treasure.
In city, country, University,
In court; the gentry, and nobility,
In clergy, laity, soldiery, and swain.
There Is many darts, wherewith are diverse slain,
And some are wounded with a mortal stroke,
Yet here and there the imposthumation's broke,
By blood of Christ applied, which so wrought,
As daily by experience is taught,
That by its influence it has withdrawn
The canckredst poison of the sharpest thorn.
From highway, stony, thorny ground is free
Each that in truth applies that remedy.
And here I thought quite to remit this ground:
But hold! there is somewhat more in the confines found.
Me thinks I spy: and spying I must tell,
Else truth I shall betray, and conscience sell.
I stand the longer here upon this point,
Because I think it is the special joint,
And farthest stratagem of Satan's wiles,
Whereby he hundred thousand souls beguils.
I dare be bold: break through the stony ground,
You Are safe for ever from the devils pound.
It is like natures Primum Mobile,
It is the first that lives, the last will die.
Then it is the heart of all rebellion,
That holds out longest, and the first begun.
Well is it so dangerous if once it sprout,
What symptoms are there left to find it out?
For if you find not this; all other's void:
And when once found; how shall it be destroyed?
Destroy'd't must be: or else you are undon,
It Is not a compliment it stands upon.
Indeed here is no ordinary task,
And would more time and greater talents ask,
Than I am able, while I live to answer;
Yet find the chief, that is the first advancer.
You Are then in the way to rout the regiment;
And further growth of thorns in the heart prevent.
To find the Achan now, there lies our work,
It may be hidden, in excuses lurk:
Then here is work in earnest: you and I
Must seek at home, and send out hue and cry
The eye, the ear, and all the senses may
Be instruments this traitor to bewray;
But let us have a care: they will all assay
TO indulge the traitor, and our hearts betray.
I think it is best by all experience,
To seek at first through heart and conscience,
There lay such watch (imploring special grace)
That if once found in that retired place,
No bribes be taken, and no favor shown,
But instantly be dragged before the throne,
And there arreigned as our mortal foe,
That seeks our precious souls to overthrow.
The word of God by faith's the only broom,
To sweep the corners of that darksom room.
For that alone (when blessed) can give us light
To bring this lurking traitor into sight.
Let Us common with our hearts, and thoroughly mind,
Unto what object they are most inclined.
For Luther did in searching often profess
No inclination to cov'tousness.
(But could not say so for his hasty passion,
For which undoubtedly he made confession.)
The youngman in the gospel there miscarried,
Balam and Judas in that mischief tarried.
Zacheus had been taken in that snare,
Which by confession clearly does appear.
And some think Demas was recovered, 2 Timothy 4.10. Phile. 2, 4.

Out of that snare to which he had been led.
And if the Pharisees had conscience tried.
Would that not witness that their sin was pride?
Why did they stand in corners of the street
To pray? and in the market place to meet?
And lovd to see, when others did them greet,
And fall with reverence prostrate at their feet?
'T was David's snare, 2 Samuel 24.10. 1 King 15.5.
as scriptures truly quote him,
Until he was reproved, and conscience smote him,
Although I can not say 'twas David's chief,
Uriahs case was sure the greatest grief.
For other things he merely was surpised,
That shameful act deliberately devised.
And that is another thing attending pleasure,
(As well as all the rest) it asks leisure.
The heart is plotting hidden out of sight, Job. 24.15.

The adulterer premeditates twylight,
This shows how Samson mainly was betrayed,
And fleshly lusts too clearly was bewrayd,
'Twas too too plain, it was his reigning sin, Judge. 14.17. cap. 16.18.

Which his destruction finally brought in.
Although the story shows plain enough,
yet in the margent see a double proof.
Nothing does more our reigning sin detect,
Than when we meditate, and do project
How to accomplish, also how to hide;
To have its company and not be spied,
Although the conscience knew it is forbod,
And yet convinced it is not hid from God,
And still it is greater when we do devise,
To hide our sin by offering sacrifice,
Although by doing so we make it more, Prove. 7.14.

And brazen face't; like that audacious whore,
But since to every sin we are inclined,
By further characters we yet may find,
Which is the chief, by taking conscience-voice,
To testify of which it makes choice.
And for this cause I make a supposition,
That if we prove't shall often make decision.
If riches, profits, pleasures'fore us lie,
Which would we choose? and which would we deny?
Supposing also, as it may befall,
We can have one, but may not have them all.
Who could not tell (if asked) which he would choose,
And which he would (for the others sake) refuse?
And tho he will not dash'gainst such a shelf,
To tell another let him try himself.
Thus to be rich, but toiling out of measure,
Will utterly destroy my hopes of pleasure.
I can have both by open defamation,
But lose for ever honest reputation.
Which of the 3 now shall I pitch upon,
Knowing before hand I can have but one?
Suppose my name be dearest, (though I Am loath)
To lose the other; yet I Will leave them both,
Because I feel that this is such an one,
That upon choice I set my heart upon.
I Would rather suffer poverty and pain,
Than on my reputation have a stain,
Were this for God; it was a precious choice.
But let me ask again my conscience voice,
If It answer rather than I Will suffer shame,
I Will turn apostate and deny Christ's name.
Conscience thus pressed, (having true witness born)
Where lies the danger, which the chiefest thorn?
Though every sin has rooting in the heart,
Yet in the practice frequently does part,
And somewhat differ sometimes do contest,
As wide as north from south, or east from west.
How can the miser be a prodigal?
The drunckard thirsty; (having bear or ale)?
There is in sins a great antipathy,
In branches, tho in root they all agree.
An other way to find this monster out,
Try what does meet your hearts at every bout,
Will follow, fawn, be mingled, and would close
At church, exchange, at table interpose,
And do but mark in each religious action,
You Will find a thorn in the flesh will cause distraction,
And there is some one will vex you more than all;
Twenty to one it is the principal.
Suppose in youth you harbor wantonness,
And yet convinced religion to profess,
You go to church and set your self to hear,
But watch your heart you will find a minnion there,
Hark but to conscience, you will hear it make a rout,
I cannot hear: oh cast that minnion out!
The same it true of every sinful pleasure,
Ambition, fraud, or any worldly treasure.
Go you to bed? rise up? nay when you dream,
That Idol will be sending up its steam;
And if in secret you but go to prair,
If then it foil you not: account it rare.
If yet your conscience further witness press,
(You cannot be too sure I do confess)
Mark your observers: 't may be you shall find,
There by more thoroughly, how you are inclined,
These are distinguished into two kinds,
Your greatest enemies and chiefest friends.
Your enemies perhaps may do the best,
To start your Idol from its hidden nest,
And let you see where lies your greatest pest,
By driving't home; till't come to conscience test.
From whence no creature can its power wrest.
And till you do submit you will find no rest.
Tho malice may your enemy provoke,
And do you wrong: look further than his stroke,
Look up to God: and then search well within,
See if your foe has lanch't your bosom sin.
I knew a man that had a wen on's cheek,
That many able Doctors could not break
For many years. He went to edge hill fight,
An enemy him met in raging spite,
Wounded him sore: he lay for dead: but when
His wounds were dressed, the man had lost his wen:
Lived many years: I knew him after that,
And (save a scar) his cheek was very flat.
Think well; how Shemei railed; how David took't,
What use he made; how patiently he brook't.
He looked higher than what he had don,
Death and despite of Absalom his son,
Acknowledged that all was sent from God,
And in submission stooped to his rod.
When e're you find a faithful bosom friend,
Which will not flatter friendship to pretend.
But where he finds you subject often to halt,
Will plainly show the danger of your fault.
Remember then you have a precious balm, Psalm. 141.5.

That is applied your stubborn heart to calm;
And not abused may prove as great renown, Job 31.36. 2 King 5.10. to 14.

As if you purchased an earthly crown.
When Naaman went chafing in a rage,
Because the Prophet did slight means presage,
Had not his servants had more wit than he,
He might have gone to's grave with leprosy.
Think you he saw not (after he had tried)
His servants help to show and heal his pride.
Had Ahab kept the counsel that he had,
He had not falln at Ramoth Gilead.
Though it was causless, therefore seem more strange,
Yet Ahab fell to gratify revenge.
The greatest instance in the present case
Was Jewish malice forfeiting that grace,
Which Jesus Christ so often tendered,
Until destruction came upon their head.
They might have seen the case, but they withstood,
Till they incurred the guilt of precious blood.
I knew a man as famous in his time,
As e're I heard of in the Brittish-clime,
Who did the warnings of his friends despise,
And therefore fell by rage of enemies,
Was often told what surely would befall,
'Twas all a case he nothing would recall,
Until his foes did freely over him vant,
And then I heard him shamefully recant.
How hard it is to strike in the master vain,
Let Us prove't once more though in an other strain.
When you have guarded conscience with a fence, Act. 24.16.

Paul's watchword left therein (void of offense)
Then walk the rounds to every outward sense,
To circumvent the appearance of pretense.
It Is very like (with heed) you may epsy,
Egress and regress of the enemy,
At every out-port leave a sentinel,
With strictest charge to mark each motion well,
To every sentinel distinct leave words,
Let nothing pass but what therewith accords.
At either ear-gate. (Take heed how you hear, Luke 8.18. Job. 31.1. Eccl. 10.1.
Matthew. 12.36.
)
Upon eyelids ( Jobs covenant) look it there.
As to the smell. (I take it in moral sense)
Let every stinking breath be bannisht thence,
Before the door of the lips this canon mount,
For every idle word thou'st give account.
The other sense that is left I now should touch,
According to its name: but I avouch,
The subjects and the objects are so many,
In all the Scripture cannot remember any.
That Is so contract to serve a word for the guard,
Which to all touch-ports may be fully heard.
Yet take it in moral sense (for so I mean)
Then that will reached. 2 Cor. 6.17:
(touch nothing that is unclean)
If to insist on all, I should intend,
I know not where to enter, where to end,
Respect to all these pas-ports which occur,
Must be intended, waving all demur.
Examples path for most part you may find,
If in your conscience you precisely mind.
Now all these senses usually bring in,
Corruptive objects, which entice to sin:
Except the tongue (the only outward sluice.)
Which others, (with our selves) does most abuse.
This one (as well as the other) may bewray,
Which is the lust in which our Idol lay, Matthew. 12.34.

And frequently to others does impart
What issues from the abundance of the heart.
The outward sense (defiled) becomes so foul,
That it corrupts the faculties of the soul.
Darkens its light, and does corrupt the will,
The memory with trash (that is sinful) fill,
Alters the course of all innate affection,
The mind and conscience here take their infection, Tit. 1.15. Romans 8.6.

Does carnalize the mind by senses breath,
And if it be not cured, that state is death.
That Is our great work these senses to control
In every case, where they corrupt the soul.
The Apostles word a general rule affords,
Good manners are corrupt by evil words.
What does fro'th' mouth of one corruptly slide, 1 Cor. 15.32, 33. Act. 12.23.
2 Pet. 2.18.

Comes in at ear upon the other side.
And such a blast fomenting Herod's pride
Inflicted present Judgment that he died.
And some Professors do entangled lie,
Allured by words of swelling vanity,
And strongly prompted by such verbal thrusts,
To irritate inflaming fleshly lusts.
When Balam heard what profers Balack made
Of great promotion; forthwith he assayed
Totempt the Lord (though answered before)
The love of riches; ver. 15.
proved his deadly sore,
The same holds true in diverse other cases,
In various persons, and in sundry places.
Now what an eye sore, outward objects are
Of every sort affections to ensnare,
Is every day proved by experience,
And witnessed by frequent scripture sense.
How Achans heart by looking on a wedge,
And David's peeping over Uriahs hedge.
The Pharisees by loving to be seen,
And Hamans pomp invited by the Queen,
Did all discover what they mainly loved,
And by quotations clear enough are proved.
With Hamans rage, because he scorned to see
That Mordicah would bow nor cap nor knee.
These show how riches, honor, carnal pleasure
Detect the heart by the eye, and where is its treasure.
Such fruits as these do grow upon a thorn,
But figs and grapes on better trees are born.
And when our Savior does the Jews confute,
He shows the tree is best known by its fruit.
Tho touch and taste may sinfully be used,
Bad in unlawful in lawful things abused.
And in one parable are put together. Luke 16.

For his last doom; the text shows plainly whither
He was conveid; But there is yet one more,
Which did no less than he halt of the some sore, Ames 6.

Lived in excess without any remors,
Yet were professors: read what was their curs.
There Is yet another case more sad than that,
Which was foretold should be in gospel state,
As to profession, but power deny, 2 Timothy 3.1, to 6.

And did with beastly lusts wholly comply;
With these are mixed smells, costly perfumes,
Which (in both senses) whores proudly assumes. Prove. 7.17. Isa. 3.18, 25. cap.
57.9.

Mistical harlot, and the fleshly whore,
Amongst their gorgious and voluptuous store,
Where touch, and taste, and smell are all united;
For such excess those harlots are indicted,
But shows to others; (rather than themselves)
How they are shipwrackt: and upon what shelvs.
But does not show; (so far as I can see)
What did allure them to this high degree.
The ear and eye much led their heart to this,
And might to them have shown what most displeas,
But slighting warning from the ear and eye
Are now involved into slaverny.
For none of these examples seem to shape
Any direction, how they should escape.
I will not say what God by grace may do,
But sure the case does dreadful danger show,
While Eve did partly hearken to the devil,
And looked upon the fruit; showed the heart was evil.
But when she tasted, ate, and did persuade,
Adam to eat: the sin did more invade,
When come to this: it is not so hard to find,
Where lies the fault from reprobated mind.
It Is now by far the harder task of the two,
(If possible) those fetters to undo.
I would discourage none; but waken all
To rise, but rather to prevent such fall.
Let be the worst: if sinners can repent,
And turn to Christ by faith: he will relent,
If men can be in earnest there is scope
To look to Christ, and to renew their hope,
Tho almost lost, for ought that they can tell.
But truly here is no trifling, (mark that well)
It is no jesting in so sad a state,
It Is mercy to the highst: (if not too late)
But I Will suppose a soul engaged to find,
What is the great corruption of his mind.
And I Am persuaded (if it be so indeed)
He shall be taught as much as God sees need,
For his eternal good and present state,
What ever's truly don, never comes too late,
But if perhaps some lusts are interwoven,
Thou fearst they will never be insunder cloven,
And know not which is greatest of the two,
I think it is best, without much more to do,
Take them together; if can not get them parted,
But seek to Christ thou may not prove falls hearted,
How e're they are mingled, thou must part withal,
And cast thy burden upon Christ withal,
The lest offense without his special grace
Will not be conquered, stare thee in thy face,
That Is not the end, (in finding the greatest sin)
That smaller should be hid, but better win
The conquest: when Goliath first was dead,
His army's easly wounded, scatt'red, fled.
Take here this caution: little sins neglected
Will quickly show the soul is much infected.
Avoid that fond conceit. (the greatest thorn
By Christ is cleansed, and by him is born.
And hope to help thy self in smaller things,
That no such labor no such sorrow brings:)
I hope it is almost needless to invey
Against this monster, at this time of day.
But I should fear thereby the danger most,
As leading to the sin against holy Ghost,
If any think that is but a forged fable,
Yet so to die will be unpardonable,
Or leading to it, for if thou do despise
The grace of Christ, though but in lest degrees,
Who knows but that it may come to that height,
To bring the soul at last to the great'st despite.
All this premised I take it now for granted,
The sinner knows what sin has most enchanted.
And then his care must be how to apply
With most advantage such discovery.
But yet take heed, lean not too much upon
The outward means, by which this work is don.
But own it all to come from Jesus Christ,
It may be yet thou art not come to the highst.
Commit thy self to him, by grace adhere,
And he will show thee yet a great deal more,
And will not leave it in a ungle matter,
Till he convince thee of thy sin by nature,
And by his grace (that is the only way)
To make advantage of thy known decay.
Begin, go on, and only end in him,
And wait for grace, to perfect all in time.
But lean not to thy self (what thou have don)
And so resigned by faith and love go on
To all the duties that thy conscience knows
Without respect to either friends or foes,
And watch against that sin, as for thy life,
That by experience thou have found the chief.
Nor that alone; but that it serves best,
(By using means) to conquer all the rest.
If that together be the course thou take,
It is the use that our Apostle makes,
Upon that word I Have stood so long upon, Heb. 12.1.

And for this head and thorny ground have don.
The sixth head is a case as red as blood,
To all that have the day of grace outstood.
And as to them; it is bootless to insist
On means of help: they have no share in Christ,
For all our pains and care cannot prevent
Their utter ruin, who cannot repent:
But stand in admiration, and adore
Gods just severity, that strives no more
Eternally with those, which hitherto
(Though all in vain) he is had so much to do.
If you object: then lost is all our labor?
I am about to prove it (with your favor)
That Is a mistake: there is many other ends,
That to Gods glory very highly tends,
And to admonish those that have not yet
Their hearts with spite against redemption set.
Why do you see a gibbit, as you ride,
Corpse of offenders, hanging by way side.
Why are assizes (too) in open places,
With greatest concourse in all such known cases,
Whose execution don is at noon day,
Where greatest throngs do and assemble may:
And why must present be a Shrieve at lest,
And in some countries Chief'st of all the rest,
Of magistrates, that take it as no scorn,
By those that have the highest honor born,
To be eyewitnesses of what is don,
Not in a corner but in the face of the sun.
I Have seen my self, (which others is forbod)
The chiefest magistrate holds the black rod,
Till execution's past then by and by
He gives it over again to's deputy?
And why such crowds where prisoners roar and cry,
And wring their hands; when sentenced to die?
When I was very young I found a verse
In English rules; as proverb we rehears,
And such in use of speech is now become,
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
That man is happy who is so aware
Of others loss; that with them does not share.
But if we turn our thoughts to scripture test,
To prove the point, you will always find it best.
There in a mirron we shall clearly see
The great design of such severity.
When God commands to stone the Idolater, Deuteronomy. 13.11.

'T was, that thereby he others might deter,
And keep them from the plagues, which otherwise,
For such like sins would surely them surprise. Rev. 18.4.

Two things herein I think are most of use,
(That of this point we may not make abuse)
To show the sin, that is so desperate,
And what is the plague of every reprobate,
I do not think that I can do it right,
(In every point) but if I might invite
Some gracious heart (to precious souls a friend)
To do it better I shall have my end.
If God afford it I should count it sweet,
To grant me favor that I might but see it.
I bless the Lord, I Have heard and seen already,
That somewhat helps to make my Judgment steady,
Though godly men in many cases vary,
And in their Judgments seem to be contrary
To one another. I dare make no speed
When to conclude, that all shall be agreed.
But as the steel and flint together strike,
Some sparks do issue; which are somewhat like,
(When It falls on tinder, that is thoroughly dry)
To make a flame that no man can deny,
By running to and fro; (we find rehearst)
Knowledge in latter times shall be increast. Dan. 4.12.

Good subjects strive to know their Princes laws,
And what is the penalty in every clause,
To frame their carriage: better to recent
The just extent of each amercement.
Tho every trespasss be against the King,
And not the lest without its suffering;
Yet treason is the greatest crime of all,
The sorest death on traitors ever fall.
Tho heretofore in the present work in hand
I have related what is the great command,
As the condition which the gospel asks
In truth of heart (tho but as smoking flax)
And also shown what is the guilt and pain,
Wilful transgressors shall at last sustain.
And when the day of visitation's past,
The wilful sinner no more grace shall taste;
But sealed up to dreadful expectation
Of utter ruin, final desperation.
Although his life that sentence may survive,
Yet all that while it is merely a reprieve.
His heart mean time resolved is to harden,
But shall not have nor shall expect a pardon,
Because he did the day of grace despise,
And trample under foot the sacrifice.
Yet I Will assay (as in its proper place)
Here to illustrate somewhat more the case,
And take a simile, which does contein,
If not the whole, yet (as I think) the main.
With this proviso there is no shadow may
A full proportion to our minds convey.
Admit there be a famine in the land,
Where not a bit of bread does come to hand,
Nor any food, which may man's life preserve,
But all with hunger are exposed to starve.
The ground of which was total insurrection,
Against their Prince, who held them in protection,
And justly has withdrawn all that supply,
On which before they always did rely,
And had enough to eat, and much to spare,
But now to penury reduced are.
This Prince gives over to his eldest Son
For what he should and had already don,
That famisht land, with all the whole arrere,
Whereof they guilty stood, (and did appear)
The son accepts, by mercy striveth rather,
To reconcile these rebels to his father
And to himself, by offering such grace
And terms of pardon, (if they might take place)
That they might live in favor with the son,
Repenting of the wickedness they would don,
Against his fathers righteous commands,
(Being chief sovereign of all their lands)
And if in truth they will the son obey,
Swear homage to him, not stand out their day,
Their former faults shall all be blotted out,
And far more liberties be brought about:
And though they do not all to this consent,
Yet they that do shall have their full content,
But they that will not close, while terms do last,
Shall pay the forfit for arrer's that is past,
And suffer tentimes more for this despite,
Into perpetual dungeon without light,
(With grievous torments added) shall be thrown,
And never mercy further shall be shown.
How sinners carry while these treaties last,
We have already seen by what is past
In highway, stony, and the thorny grounds,
And what from each of these (as such) redounds,
Our task at present is to find the pitch,
And full extent of that rebellion, which
When men arrive at, there is no more to wait,
But staked down as vessels reprobate.
And then to touch a word of that condition,
(Even in this life) which never finds remission.
It Is God alone who only can decide,
When sinners have withstood their utmost tide,
No creature can determine fast and steady,
That all is past nor further is remedy.
Nor can he say the height and just degree,
In The utmost compass what that sin shall be,
But yet'tis sure, that there is such a sin,
And such a gulf, where multitudes fall in.
Which serves for wholesome warning unto all,
To shun the brink of the pit least in they fall.
And when once in, there is no getting out,
Shall never be helped, how loud so e're they shout.
Yet there are generals to the conscience preached,
Which first or last have every conscience reached:
That in some measure does that sin define,
Although men do not know the utmost line;
Whose conscience is there sometimes does not scar,
Lest he should sell himself to sin so far,
That Christ himself (who is true unto his word)
Cannot in Justice farther grace afford?
We all agree against the holy Ghost,
There is a sin, that none could ever boast
He was set free: Nor shall not while men breath,
The Scripture says, it is a sin to death.
How to distinguish that amaseing crime,
That by that sin is meant, and what is the time,
And how it differs from such other sins,
Which yet at last eternal Judgment wins.
It is too much for me; I know not whether
The Scripture lighteneth any creature thither;
Whether that sin in Hebrews (chapter sixth)
With that in the gospel be so justly fixed, Matthew. 12.31. Mar. 3.28. Luke 12.10.

That this and that are all together one,
Or differ in some cases (or in none)
Or if they differ in some circumstances,
In The sin it self, or in appurtenances;
Yet clear it self, that both do so much harden,
That neither this nor that admits of pardon.
It Is also clear, that they that miss of grace
Never repent: (where pardon takes no place)
It seems probable: all that fall in
To condemnation commits such a sin,
Somewhat for kind (if not in full degree)
Which pardoned cannot be by Christ's decree,
And that decree in Scripture is revealed, Matthew. 12: 31.

(In the forequoted place) never repealed.
Admit that every hardened sinners case
Do not amount to that in the Hebrews place, Heb. 6. Mar. 3.28.

And that it does from that in the gospel differ,
Yet certainly it stands not for a cipher.
But there is some specifical proportion,
Though individuals differ much in notion.
As for example those in the Hebrews case
Had raised gifts: did gospel once embrace,
And more than so, had uncoth gifts of the spirit,
Which for a time they largely did inherit.
But that in the gospel spoken of the Jews,
Who all along the gospel did refuse,
Had never heard, there was an holy Ghost.
It Is very like: (how ever they might boast)
Which Christ on earth (convincing now the Jews)
Had not then promised, that he would infuse
Into disciples, till he was to leav'em,
Of which the devil never shall bereav'em.
And yet some season after his ascension,
To some disciples Paul speaks reprehension.
Of The holy Ghost if you were not advised,
Into whose name then would you be baptized?
If those disciples never heard that name
Of The holy Ghost, no wonder if the fame
Thereof did never come to Jewish ears,
As in quotation by the word appears.
This argument must needs convince you soon.
The Jews, and Hebrews case, midnight and noon
Do represent in form particular,
But as to the kind; they both alike infer,
To make it plain (if possibly we can)
Of either sort let us single out a man.
Caiphas for one, and Judas for the other,
That a chief-Priest: this an Apostle brother.
They both were eminent in either station,
But yet compared to gospel dispensation,
There Is as much odds by true preeminence,
As twixt the earth and firmaments expance.
This praelate bound to the law in the outward letter,
The false Apostle knew things that were better,
And might experience as much as those, Luke 10.18.

By whom the devils were cast out as foes.
The one is held in darkness of the night,
The other turned like angel of the light.
Caiphas denis, Judas does Christ profess,
Yet both are enemies to righteousness.
Caiphas will buy: (and bid's a worthy price)
Judas will sell both Christ and Paradise,
They both did evil to their utmost might,
But Judas had (of the two) far greater light.
Now as in mercy, so it is in wrath,
Tallents of each are judged by what man has
Caiphas cast in his all: (though as two mites)
Judas could do no more by all his slights
In The outward action Judas was the worst,
And in proportion suitably accursed,
And may perhaps a lower place in hell
Be cast into; because he did excel;
For as in heaven, there is difference in glory,
As does appear by pregnant scripture story;
So we do find upon the other side,
That Capernaum should far less abide,
Their dreadful Judgment and abundant sorrow,
Than Tire and Sydon, Sodom and Gomorrah.
We search not yet comparative degree,
Which damned souls (compared) shall taste and see.
Our present work is in the positive,
Who are excluded grace without reprieve.
We do not say, who have despised most,
But who it is blasphemes the holy Ghost.
Some of the Jews did this, our Sav'our says,
And were entailed to everlasting wrath.
And by proportion whether gentiles may
Be guilty of this sin as well as they.
In The positive degree it must be light,
With resolution, hatred and despite,
And may not heathens (think you) come to this,
That neither Christ nor Moses do profess?
And if you doubt of this see what Paul says, Romans 1.21. to end.

(But more at large) of such like men as these,
To search the core of that condemning sin,
What is the lest degree that brings it in,
Which locks the door, and makes the sinner fast,
And writes upon it: The day of grace is past.
Whether the talents be 2, 5, or ten.
But as they are misimprov'd how, where and when.
In this inquiry there are two clear cases,
Which well may serve in the room of common places.
One negative, and one affirmative,
And both to one you may at last contrive,
One what is chosen, the other what forsake't,
Drawn into one by mutual contract,
Which both together evidently prove,
What is the choice and object of our love,
That shall be judged for uttermost despite,
When men reject the measure of their light,
Of which no umpire can be constitute,
But he that knows how cavils to confute.
Now by this scheme let us overlook again
Our two examples, which before were drawn:
Judas and Caiphas each one in their state
See what they love and also what they hate,
And how far light had shined in each breast,
Which by their contract they did both refist,
And we shall find however they were twain,
Yet both agreed together in the main,
And either did with resolution fight
Against the measure of received light,
And both alike did fully constitute
Their conscience to murder and confute.
If Caiphas had obtained as much as Jude,
His fixed hatred might all that elude,
Which point is proved by what our Savior said,
Tho one was sent that is risen from the dead,
To preach to sinners, if they would not hear,
Moses and Prophets which already were,
The means that God appointed for their warnings,
They would not hear for all the raised man's charming
Which he (and mates) when Jesus Christ was raised
Made good to the full by slanders which they blas'd.
Their conscience knew Christ was not stolen away,
That was their shift their conscience to betray.
The case was different twixt Caiphas and Saul,
Tho both alike to prison saints did hale. Mar. 3.30. Joh. 15.24. 1 Timothy 1.14.

For Caiphas and some priests knew well enough,
But Saul was ignorant: (of both there is proof)
They both knew they blashpem'd the Son of man.
The priests did see the Father with disdain,
As well as Christ in flesh, which made the height
Of that great charge, because of known despite.
Now from the former Jesus does redeem us, Mat. 12.32 Joh. 3.

And further proov'd in the case of Nichodemus.
That precious blood which man's redemption cost,
Excepts the sin against the holy Ghost.
Nor is it known according to its kind,
By any outward act, but bent of the mind.
In outward show was Peter's sinful act
More scandalous, than cursed Balams fact.
Peter committed that against his light,
But far surprised; it was not don in spite.
Although the damsel made him change his voice,
Yet certainly he never changed his choice,
Though Peter did in's strength too much rejoice,
Proferd too largely: yet it was his choice.
But Balams choice, when put to the greatest stress,
Went after wages of unrighteousness.
And so did Judas in pretending grief,
Because he kept the bag, and was a thief.
What will you give me? that did lead the way
To work designs, his master to betray:
His love to money made him hate his master,
That was the cause he plied his work the faster.
From thence it came in whole or greatest part,
That Satan made an entrance into's heart.
When choice is fixed in the heart, resolved upon
Twixt Christ and Belial: the castle's won,
One way or other; only Christ can tell
When that is at hight; (or yet is to repel)
It seems to me it is like a market day,
When grace is tendered: if we will close we may,
While to be had, so long as we forbear,
Will neither leave, nor thoroughly adhere,
Is our probation. But at last are pressed,
Either to take it, or set our hearts at rest,
And to conclude; we will have no more to do
With tendered, purchase (solemnly say no)
When It comes to this, the witness then is born,
We Will have our lust; keep our beloved thorn.
This is the issue of the market day,
The margent shortly does it open lay.
And to this pass (I think) it comes wilthall, Jer. 2.25.

That do itno eternal ruin fall.
The highway ground may be so resolute,
When first his sin the gospel does confute,
That he may shut the door against further grace,
And thence be turned away to his own place. Act. 1.25.

Another breaks through that, while grace is preached,
By some awak'nings, (by affliction reached)
And yet resolve against the painful cross,
And there take up; (unto his endless loss)
Yet some go farther; greater things have born,
But pierce themselves with some mischievous thorn,
Although they suffer many things in vain,
Lick up their vomit (by contract) again,
Be It here or there; when Satan is cast out,
If by conviction (or profession to it)
Again returning to that house that is swept,
And intertain'd with all the heart and kept.
The latter end is like to be accursed,
And ten times wors than e're it was at first.
I stand on this the rather to prevent
A sly conceit: in what sense it is meant,
When scripture speaks of sin against holy Ghost,
And what is unpard'nable, as if it was most,
Or only to be found after profession
Admired gifts: (and to the truths concession.)
And so the sixth of the Hebrew's stood upon
That Is short of that; we may suppose there is none,
That can commit that sin, and thereby take
More liberty with sinning to partake,
If you reprove them by the curse therein,
Why? theirs is not the unpardonable sin.
Oh have a care that sin may you undo,
Although you reach not gifts with many mo.
Let Us view the simile we urged before,
How those inhabitants serve and adore
Their gracious landlord, promising releas,
With sweetest terms of everlasting peace.
If you will search it is don unto your hand.
In such a parable none can withstand: Mat. 21. Mar. 12. Luke 20.

A vineyard was let out to husbandmen,
To dress and reap the fruits, and reckon when
The landlord would appoint, or order further
By deputies: whcih (when he sent) they murder.
The landlord could not this unkindness brook,
Sent nobler friends this fault to overlook,
But when they came, were served with same sauce
The husbandmen had broken all his laws,
Well! (says the landlord) I will send my son,
Sure! him they will fear, repent of what they have don.
These miscreants having got a taste of blood,
(There with so flesh't) that now they think it good,
To call a counsel straight to kill all heirs,
That so the vineyard wholly may be theirs,
To kill their landlords son would not refrain:
(Maug'r their malice he is alive again)
Their sin is made appear and brought to light.
Which issues in their uttermost despite,
The steps they took, they would no justice have,
All means of cure they (resolute) outbrave.
And fully show to what their minds addict,
They Will have the vineyard, none shall contradict.
To make all sure: all what they did they backed
By counsel, by their seal and firm contract.
The question is, what is the winding up,
Look to the bottom you will find dregs in the cup.
Read on in the parable, there lies their doom,
And what they are to wait for till it come.
If any will object, these were the Jews,
That did the gospel and their lord refuse.
It is not so with us, we own them both,
Either to reject we should be loath.
It does appear that we are none of those,
That have behaved themselves professed foes,
For we have drunk and eaten at his table,
And many sermons very profitable
In our streets often we have heard him preach
Will you twixt him and us now make a breach?
Let all be true, yet if no more than so, Luke 13.27. Mat. 25.

Let him be judge how things are like to go.
Compare that place with foolish Virgins five,
The want of oil such pleaders do deceive,
To sit at table, or to hear a Sermon,
Will not avail without a wedding garment,
What oil and wedding garment do contain,
In part was said before, and may again,
In the next head to which it does belong,
For thereunto belongs the chiefest song,
That saints can sing, when that is put out of strife.
(Their names are written in the book of life)
Which is the state in which believers stand,
When they have closed with Jesus Christ's command.
But at the present there is another theme,
The state of such as fall in that extreme,
Grace to renounce, hearts wholly obdurate,
Without recovery sealed reprobate.
What may befall to such before they die,
When all together past recovery.
E're we proceed, there is another motion,
I dare not overpass (by way of caution)
I Have said before, there is no creature can
Pass such hard sentence on another man.
Nay may too deep into Gods secrets delve,
To fix it wrongfully upon himself,
Though doubtless unto some; it may be known
That they rejected are: (quite overthrown)
First it is (to judge another reprobate)
More than to judge him unregenerate,
Yet that is too much for Judgment absolute, Mat. 7.1.

(Without clear proof) our Savior does confute,
Gather by context what is meant by Christ's assertion,
You Will find it reaches not doubt of conversion.
He has two arguments; which if you mix,
I think you (fairly) may your Judgment fix.
Keep that in mind: add thereunto this note,
The case in hand concerned but a mote,
And does admit to each the name of brother,
As well unto the warned as the other.
Look if it mean not: Be no rash dispenser
Of private grudge, or publikly church censure
To vex thy self, him, or the church from thence,
For every trifle to pretend offense.
Nay let severity begin at home
By true repentance search and sweep thy room.
Oh that would make thee fit to help thy brother,
This is our duty toward one another.
Petty conceits between the man and wife
Has sometimes kindled much inflamed strife.
There was a quarrel, who should mend the fire,
Who have the tongs! this babble flamed higher,
Disturbed the bed, the house, and church: at last
To reconcile all differrences past,
And to prevent all future jars and wrong,
The church did vote to each a pair of tongs.
Oh what a trisle's this! It is not feigned,
But might be proved, (if it was constreyn'd)
In weighty cases 'twas our Saviors course,
(Which he did constitute to gain remorse)
When there should happen some real offense,
Not strife and censure straight way to commence.
But the offended should privately warn
The offender himself in each such concern;
If he would hear it, then it went no further:
And if that would not do, then comes church order: Mat. 18.15. to 19.

If that would not help: then note such a man
To be like heathen or a publican.
When you are forced to excommunicate,
You must not count him as one reprobate: 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15.

But be so friendly one unto another,
Him to admonish even as a brother.
Two things may be so circumstantiate,
A man may be judged unregenerate,
And in the bondage of iniquity,
But not judged reprobate thence (by and by)
Although the case be doubtful here enough, Act. 8.22, 23.

Yet to admonish such; (there is proof.)
Still to repent, pray for pardon and grace,
Tho it be doubtful if it shall take place.
Some cases here occur, I freely do confess,
Whcih (construed) imports nothing less,
And plainly sometimes in words do express,
No hope is to be found for full forgiveness,
But in such case it is mere revelation.
How few to that can make their true evasion?
Our Savior Christ knew fully each man's heart,
And he sometimes such secrets did impart. Mat. 26.24.

That Judas also wholly was forlorn,
And't had been good, he never had been born.
When Pharisees strove to catch him in gins,
They sought, never found, but dyed in their sins.
This he declared plainly to their faces, Joh. 8.21. Mark, 3.30.

Maug'r their malice and scornful disgraces.
To this effect he did elsewhere pronounce
No less in import to many at once.
I cannot remember, expressed at large,
(Except by Paul once) men made such a charge, Act. 13.10.

Which I have also mentioned elsewhere,
In this present work, and thither refer.
I Have heard and known some that durst undertake,
As from revelation such Judgment to make
But how they will come of in that interprise,
I leave to be Judge at that great assize.
I tremble to think such secrets to seek,
Where God in the scripturs vouchsafes not to speak.
I will not deny such symptoms there may
Be openly-shew'd, that saints dare not pray
For such and such persons, while they have breath,
For fear they have sinned that sinned unto death,
Who cannot have hopes to ground faith upon,
And therefore (in conscience) must let it alone.
Yet least they should miss, what is their own part,
I count it the duty of each tender heart,
In general terms, (with humble submission)
To pray that the worst may come to contrition,
(Who are not rejected) of whom there are none,
Can safely determine, but God alone.
What is more arrogance and pride complete,
Than men to rush into Christ's Judgment seat?
Thus far for others. Now for our selves,
( Sylla, Carybdis like) there are two shelvs,
(Without safe pilot) souls are apt to split,
And shall to harbor never safely get.
The one presumption the other is despair,
(When in their height) of equal danger are,
Who ever split eternally of the first,
Is ever more in the end, of the latter thrust.
But yet there is diverse suffer loss on both,
But are fetched off by grace to say the troth.
It Is rare to find a soul that comes off clear,
And does not dash on both, now here, now there.
Presumption usually does lead the van,
And gives proportion to despair again.
The higher lift up, the lower cast down,
In such vicissitudes, now smile, then from.
But I shall now to the case in hand confine,
How either rock danger does combine.
It is not rare to find a young professor,
Who bears himself in hand he is possessor,
Of through right is an immortal crown,
And afterward to be as much cast down.
Wrongful conclusion upon either hand,
Puts many souls to plunges, at a stand,
Often comes to this (which terrifieth most)
They think they have sinned against the holy Ghost,
With such conclusion so fixed and steady,
As if they were cast into hell already.
Once David thought his mountain was so strong,
Nothing could move him, when he found that wrong
He was as confident that he should fail,
One time or other by the hand of Saul.
In each of these had in Gods secrets pride
Without a word: (and so without a guide)
Oh how unstable; when we act not faith,
Which from the word it is sure foundation has.
To keep fro the first sobrietie's a friend, 1 Pet. 1.13.

And from the last to hope unto the end.
Oh blessed word, that can maintain in both,
And (where it is trusted to) most surely does.
The word's a rock, that clips the wings of pride,
And keeps from sincking on the other side.
Presumption and despair doth' word deny,
And each resuse (with heart) thereon to lie.
In all our partial failings (let us record)
They have their rise fro the disesteem of the word.
And they that leave it wholly are undon
For evermone, to weave the thread they spun.
This is the portion, this the dreadful state
Of final unbelief. It Is reprobate.
There Is but another branch of the present head,
To which our method hitherto has lead,
And that is to show how reprobates survive
The sentence past, while here on earth they live.
For many years God may prolong their days,
Though cursed in their hearts, cursed in their ways,
Ere death remove them from the present stage,
And is to Judgment infallible presage.
Tho sinners live an hundred year he is cursed
In all his' projects, Isa. 65.20.
latter end is worst.
The word is clear by positive expression,
Balam and Cain do prove it in progression. Jud. 11.

There diverse steps the Scripture does relate,
That Is trodden by a cursed reprobate.
Between the time that God has cast him off,
And when death proves he is lived long enough.
He may be rich or miserable poor;
In great esteem, or credited no more;
May live in pleasure, tormented with pain;
May seem a saint, or openly profane,
Friendly and fair: his sales know how to furl,
Dogged and clownish, a canckered churl.
Admired gifts, stupendous for parts,
From all falln off, bereaved of all his arts.
May hap to rise, and fall by turns; none can
Observe much odds'twixt him and better man.
Those things in general Solomon does prove,
Do not determine endless hate or love. Ecl. 9.1.

Look over Isreal's kings: the first of all
What has been said, which was not true of Saul?
Rich, poor, admired, scorned, in pleasure, pain,
Seemed good, proov'd bad, both friendly and cross grane.
But single out the kings of Israel,
Since the ten Tribes from Rehoboam fell,
Where (by the Scripture) may be understood,
There was not one, amongst them all, proved good.
Their bel-wether, that led them all to sin
Ran strange divisions much out and seldom in.
And will you see the angle where he turned?
His heart against the true religion spurned. 1 Kings 12.26.

And all he did from that unhappy time,
Became to him and Israel too acrime.
Oh what advantage Jeroboam once
Had in his hand, when God did that pronounce,
That he should have ten tribes (after his heart)
If from his statutes he would not depart. 1 Kings 41.38.

This prophecy engaged him to rebel.
And had he gone no further had don well.
For hitherto God did him light afford,
To stere his course according to the word.
But see the baseness of his wretched heart,
How far the Prophet pleased him, he took part.
But where his unbelief did truth excel,
He fights against the word, (then fare it well.)
The word should be a stalking horse to gain,
The promised kingdom. but (which was the bane)
When carnal reason looked round about,
He kicks against the word, and turns it out.
Jehu and Ahab should we parallel,
(With all the rest) to what a bulk't would swell.
And some o'th'kings of Juda not much better,
But that they had the privilege of the letter.
The Temple worship, sacrifices, and
Such institutions, as God did command.
And yet all this through sin became far worse,
And did involve them further into th'curse,
Then if they would never known such gracious means,
Which unto none but to themselves partains.
Amongst some others do but cast your eye
Upon the margent, what says Malachy. Mal. 2.2.

For outward riches, subtlety, and craft,
I do not wonder he enjoys that is naught.
But that is the greatest mystery of all,
That such in gifts and grace seem principal,
And that that pestilent infernal sect
Should often deceive the choysest of the elect.
Two cases here, I think, may be of use,
For every sober christian to peruse,
When chance to meet with eminentest gifts,
Least they be snared with some of Satan's shifts.
Impart their secrets too of any nature,
Without due knowledge of the hidden matter.
The first case is a sad experiment,
Of such like wolvs in soft sheeps clothing sent.
With greatest show of zeal displaid their banners,
Some found it to their cost it were trapanners,
Who with their prairs, their gracious shows and tears,
Banished from simple meaning men all fears.
But not so wise with prudence to prevent
The subtle malice of the old serpent,
Were caught by guile, had not God sent relief,
Some scores of persons there had left their life.
It Is like you know the case as well as I,
There Is some alive that will it not deny.
The other case was of another kind,
A single person of aspiring mind,
That loved pre-eminence to be damir'd,
To so much accuracie he acquired,
To preach, to pray resolve the knottiest case,
That in distressed conscience takes place.
Was by the wisest sought too far and nere,
And they that could enjoy him happy were.
And in this luster flourish't many years,
Tho at the last there were some secret fears.
All was not gold that glistred, glow worms bright
Glitter like stars in darkness of the night.
Some roots of rotten wood I Have seen like fire,
Which when I was a child I did admire.
This gilded post after some years were past,
Made some discovery that he was not chaste,
Made some attempts upon a gracious matron,
Which turned her stomach from so vile a patron.
She would not flatly say what was the cause,
But by her hints some few began to pause.
It came to rumor she was much accused,
That such an holy man should be abused.
And by the most the woman overvoted,
They on his glorious gifts so highly doted.
The woman was constrained to recant,
That she had greatly wronged an innocent.
This cloud blown over, many now adore
This painted Idol more than heretofore
But at the last: this man was sick to death,
And then the poison, that lay underneath,
Began to ranckle, and gave such offense,
It boiled up into his conscience.
He needs no witness now to prove his sin.
One (like a thousand) roared out from within.
She, who before he did so much defy,
Now justified more righteouss than he.
Through torment, anguish, horror, (and what not?)
He did confess the core of all the plot.
And that was this: (the depth of all this evil)
His soul he had made over to the devil,
By deed (I will not say of gift) but sale,
That for some certain years he might prevail,
To have assistance from infernal aid,
When he discourst, or preached, or when he praid,
This clause precisely binding and commanding,
He might not kneel, but ever more pray standing,
And diverse yet alive remember weel,
In all his prayers they never knew him kneel.
Lived so far northward (as relaters tell)
That (weel) to them, to us imports (well)
He kept his bond so firmly for his part,
That now it sunk him overwhelmed his heart,
The more to ratify and make it good,
He sealed the bond, subscribed it with his blood,
Much prayr was used and godly exhortation,
Nothing availed he died in desperation.
For ought that man could see, yet who dare say it,
That (for all this) he died a reprobate?
Although no symptoms ever did appear
Of any faith, or hope, but only fear.
Put case we may not judge yet we must fear,
By such examples learn our course to steer.
I question whether any did exceed
(In circumstances) such an heinous deed.
Read ages-records, you will hardly find
So daring sin, with such an hellish mind.
The Scriptures must be owned, the lightest torch,
And after that the History of the church.
And then come down to human and profane,
And try if you find such another strain.
True; Balam, Ahab, Judas, also Cain
Did sell their souls their humors to obtein,
This for revenge, and all the rest for gain,
Our case unparalleld does still remain.
It Is true; there was another socerer,
That gifts of the holy Ghost seemed to prefer,
And would have bought them for a little money:
His name was Simon, hence the sin Symony.
It Is true he showed he had a carnal heart,
But in converting grace had yet no part.
But I suppose the wisest cannot know,
Whether at last he got true grace or no.
I cannot find by all that I can see,
That ever Simon would to that agree,
To sell his soul, but rather purchase grace,
(But money in that bargain takes no place.)
If Symons prair to the saints had any scope,
I cannot find he is quite shut out from hope.
Alas this case does plain enough agree,
To sell the soul for painted peity.
And that is the scene now acting on the stage,
The very Idol of the present age.
But whether yet there is any sunck so deep
In such a bond God does in secret keep.
Although our age does testify enough,
(As far as men can judge) to give a proof.
But let us take heed how rashly we surmise,
But rather leave it to the great assize.
Let every tender heart be circumspect,
And not the search of smallest sin neglect.
The smallest leak sprung in the greatest ship
May sink it (if not stopped) into the deep,
And may enlarge its wideness more and more,
Till pilot shall despair to bring't to the shore.
A great leak if presently be taken
May be repaired, (the vessel not forsaken.)
And for encouragement I shall relate
Another case that seemed desperate,
Of which there might be more examples shown,
For here and there (though rarely) such are known.
Some years ago a person discontent,
The devil did his careful thoughts augment,
In human shape appeared with gravity,
As if he pitied him, demanded why
His thoughts were so perplexed, and why cast down?
He seemed in doubt, but knew't was fortunes frown,
His mind was much too big for's present state,
Looked not to God, and so grew desperate.
This Grave Impostor promised full supply
And present riddance of his misery,
And for so many years without control,
But he must bargain with him for his soul.
The contract's made, the paper signed and sealed,
But by the grace of God in time repealed.
Conscience grew hot, and checked for what was don,
But knew not how to break the thread he would spun.
Some Christian friends by searching much about,
(With wholesome counsel) came to find it out.
To make it short: they chose a day of prair,
And diverse godly preachers gathred there,
This captive in the midst, good part of the day
They prosecute their work without delay.
Toward the close they heard a grievous noise,
(Do not remember if they heard a voice)
The roof was broke, the signed bond thrown in,
The man repented of his grievous sin,
And (as I heard) was after circumspect,
And durst no more the word of God neglect.
He might be one of many that escaped
The jaws of hell, that here so widely pag'd.
You may be tempted, take heed e're you fall.
And for your help, tow cases I Will recall.
The one I heard of, with the other spoke,
To show how God both these two enenies brake.
The man I spoke with told me he was sick
In grievous torment, tried him to the quick.
Some length of time lay in excess of pain,
A shape with voice, articulate and plain
Promised him ease, if he would sell his soul:
His heart and voice did straight that vote control,
And rather chose in Gods hand to expire,
Than purchase ease with everlasting fire.
Within a while the Lord afforded ease,
But breach of the snare did comfort much increase.
What use this person made for after time,
I cannot say, I somewhat feared him.
The other case was told me by a friend,
(Affected much with such a gracious end)
Against so many dangers, (and the devil)
That God afforded from apparent evil.
My author says: there was an honest man
Of good repute, both pious and urban,
To make up reck'nings, and to buy more cloth,
(Which was his trade) provided was for both.
So riding (with his charge) took up at night,
Did clokebag to the host himself commit.
The landlord showed a cup-board in the wall,
With lock and key, that well migth hold it all.
And praid his guest to keep the key, that when
He saw his time, mgiht take it out again.
(They both agreed) he lodged there all night,
And hasted thence in the morning when it was light,
Took up his charge, paid costs, and went his way.
The wicked host did treachery bewray:
Sent after him, prepared with hue and cry,
Laid to his charge no less than felony.
The man (amazed) was to a Justice brought,
The host confessed that was the thief he sought,
And said he robbed him of a sum of coin,
And that by fraud he did the same purloyn.
The guest replied: he took what was his own,
Which by it species might well be known.
The host rejoynd: such species were not his,
For such and such was money he did miss.
The bag was searched, and there the guest did find
His money changed, quite another kind:
The very same the host had mentioned,
Which further danger (unavoided) bred.
The guest was innocent, had don no wrong,
Suspect before, now cast by his own tongue.
The case so plain in prison he was laid,
(until the Assize,) and of his life afraid.
Yet had within a special good defense,
His peace with God and purged conscience.
Before th'assize were many letters sent,
And some returned: Pious men relent,
And did the Judge his special favor crave:
Most knew the host to be an arrant knave.
In the interim there came a lusty fellow,
Clothed in a wast-coat either blew or yellow,
(Which I Have forgot) desired to see
nd speak with prisoner words two or three.
This fellow asked the guest what he would give
To be set free, and without fear to live.
The prisoner said: in any honest case
He would requite, to free him from that place.
This man replied: let me but have thy soul,
Ple fetch thee off without the lest control.
Nay: says the honest prisoner: God forbid
My soul's in safety with my Savior hid.
The fellow went away, came there no more.
The assizes came, the prisoner brought before
The Judgments seat (the Judge himself affected)
That such an honest man should be detected,
Made an oration in the open court,
If any man can truly make report,
To help the prisoner in his just defense,
He shall be freely heard in fullest sense.
A youth stood by, who came to see and hear,
Called out: my Lord! I heard one say or swear,
That he the Prisoner quickly could release,
And say enough to set him free with ease,
Described him by his clothes of blew or yellow.
The prisoner knew it was the devlish fellow,
That had been tamp'ring to betray his soul,
But cast him off, (his language was so foul)
The Judge inquired, if that man could be found,
Another said, as I came by the church ground,
I saw just such a man, is somewhat tall,
And now sits stridling, on the church yard wall.
God call him (said the Judge) he was not far,
But presently appeared at the bar,
And asked what he had for the man's defense,
Let me first hear (said he) the hosts pretense.
Things were related as we heard already.
This fellows answer was as round and speedy;
You host, have you not there a double door
On backside of the wall, and one before,
And by that door, that is on the backside,
Taken out his money, yours in's clokebag tied?
That by that means the man might be betrayed?
After some pause the host cursed, swore, and said,
The devil take my soul and body hence,
If there be truth in this unjust pretense:
I Am therefore come, (says the other) I am he;
Thy time is come, and thou shall go with me,
And presently he takes him in his arms,
Could not be hindered by force or charms.
Away he goes, or rather with him flew,
And with a crack down part of the house he threw.
What is become of the wicked host we wave.
But thus it pleased God the man to save,
From both impostors, who went both together,
We will not take upon us to judge whither;
But if it be true (and true it is said to be)
Relations of this kind to hear and see,
May do more good than comedy or play,
Where wantons throw their souls and time away.
But here me thinks it would be some abuse,
To let this pass without some farther use.
The use is double, that does plain arise
To those that fear the Lord, and him despise.
Clothier and host do each contain a branch,
As representatives of either chance,
To be fullfill'd in each respective kind,
Proved to our face what in the word we find.
Clothier oppressed: the host does domineer:
He at his rest, but this is God knows where.
He in the mouth of greatest danger put,
The host from the reach of human justice shut.
One cannot swear to give his soul to the devil,
The other voluntier, nere scruples at that evil.
One is respected, pittyd, loved by the good,
The other cursed by his own brotherhood.
What brotherhood I mean I think you see,
Are such like mates that is full as had as he.
For love they do not, cannot, tho they flatter,
True love they know not, it is an higher matter.
That eag'r pursuit, which sometimes they bear
To one another, mutually adhere
In one another votes: Is that true love?
Or like that wisdom, which comes from above?
It Is easly tried: throw but a cockle-shell
Between their intrests, (they that love so well)
Achitophel with his admired pate, Dan. 11.27.

Their hidden feuds shall never calculate,
Just like that love spoke of a royal rabble,
Where two or three dissemble at one table.
But (to be short) like means will have like end,
Not to wrong conscience for life, goods, or friend.
On the other side, let truth and conscience pack,
And conscience set by Satan's aid of the rack.
Look but the story over (I Will not repeat)
Whether of the two ddi prove the greater cheat?
Mine host no doubt looked for agolden ball,
Tho lost his life and gold, got devil and all.
The clothier would not list to devils charms
To save his life, yet freed from all harms.
Mark the upright, and well behold the just, Ps. 37.37. ^. 38.

Their end is perfect peace that on him trust.
But wicked men shall be destroyed together,
Both soul and body: no escape for either.
Oh what an emblem's fixed, as on a post
In both concerns, the clothier and mine host?
In those examples hitherto I Have shown
The devils contract, or his aid made known
With human voice and human apparition,
Which he has shown to men by Gods permission.
There is another case, where providence
Did show it self for one poor man's defense,
Which with the former I dare not compare,
Nor can I yet such witnesses declare,
To make it manifest to all the world,
How this poor man was into danger hurld.
Yet was preserved, and from his fears set free:
But vindication from his foes that be,
(If yet alive) could never yet obtain,
But ill the day of Judgment must remain.
But I relate it to this proper end,
That such examples may poor men befriend,
Who are accused by sinister pretense,
And have no other test than conscience,
To bear them up against the scorns and wrongs
Of wicked hands, falls hearts and lying tongues.
It Is true the man was freed and set at ease,
(After full search) by Justice of the peace.
And in this world there is no more to say,
Although his enemy does since invey,
That notwithstanding he was overborn,
And has endured both scath and scorn;
But will maintain unto his dying day,
The man's a thief, and must a reckoning pay,
And says and swears to make good his defense,
He has the witness of his conscience.
And this is more than twenty years ago,
Since first debated whether so or no.
This man was riding once into the west,
His way unknown, and therefore thought it best,
At Basing-stoke where Tawnton carriers lay,
More fully to inform himself of the way.
(And since our subject does of Judgment treat,
(And this refers to that) we will repeat.)
These carriers servants did belong to the Bell
In Tawnton where the carrier did dwell,
And kept an Inn, to which this trav'ler rode,
And for one night to lodge made his abode.
Next morning, tho 'twas somewhat late of the day,
Took horse, and paid his charge, and went away.
About half way, 'twixt that and Wellington
Was set upon by servants and a son,
That from the Bell were sent him to invade,
And charged him with a theevish trick he would played,
And threapt upon him that he basely stole
From chamber where he laid a silver bowl.
For he and friend had drunk in it over night,
Since he went hence it never came in sight:
And to make fast the Justice of the plea,
Of The chamber where he lay he had the key.
The prisoner thus enclosed, had by his side
An hawking-bag, not very deep nor wide,
Who thought in's heart (tho nothing of it said)
Alas! I fear (like Joseph) IN me betrayed,
Although he knew not, who should come to pack,
That drinking bowl into his little sack,
He did his papers and his linen rifle,
There was no bowl: these hunters further stifle,
And (freely let) one of these mates outreaches,
His hand to feel and search into his breeches,
Pockets and knees and further round about,
But all this while they nothing could find out.
The man was glad, courage began to take,
And to these searchers somewhat roundly spoke:
Sirs you beset me here, I know not why,
Without aughority, or hue, and cry:
Where is your warrant why you me oppose?
In truth by law you are but high-way-foes,
Whether I Am guilty, or be proved guiltless,
Your selves as enemies to peace profess,
And make your selves no better (if not worse)
Than high-way-thievs, that hunt to take a purse.
Come, I Will propound a motion that is fair
To keep both you and me from further snare,
And if you will take it, you may then commence
A suit in law to take off all pretense.
Let one of you (who are in number four)
To Wellington (that is my way) ride before,
And take an officer or known constable,
To bring me to a Justice, that is able
To make demand of what you can object,
And you or me (as we deserve) protect.
Thus you and I the law may now fulfill,
And let the issue fall out how it will.
They took this counsel, pleased them very well,
And now you will see what afterward befell.
Just in this talk, there came a magistrate,
That (as they said) to Tawnton did relate,
By accident who was but riding by,
The prisoner hearing that did to him cry.
Sir to preserve our common rights and laws,
Be pleased to stop; consider well my cause.
I Am thus accursed; let these men tell you why;
They Have searched me once, will you be pleased to try,
And search my cloths, or any thing I have,
Be witness for the truth, that is all I crave!
The man was civil, searched, but nothing found,
Demanded questions just, and somewhat round:
And when had don, had nothing more to say,
'Twas not his work, and so he rode away.
The prisoner and his keepers still rode on,
And as they entered into Wellington,
A Constable (with him that rode before)
Came back to meet them, gave the prisoner over
To one, they said was Justice of the peace,
who could detain him, or (if cause) releas.
(If I mistake not) it was Major Covern,
I think was master of Crown or George tavern.
The prisoner does confess a civil man,
And yet at first austere; (but no disdain)
He can vas't over all, that could be said,
Searched, found no fault, releast him well appaid.
The prisoner hope't now all the stir was past.
But e're I tell you how it fell at last,
I will refresh the reader with a story
As nere as can contain it in memory.
This Major Covern, after he had seen
And heard what could be said each side, between
The prisoner and accusors, and believed
The charge was vain, with sympathy relieved
The man oppressed, with such a like relation,
That happened to himself on like occasion,
And to this purpose, "Sir I can take part
"With what you suffer, lay it more to heart,
"Because of late it was my very case,
"Tho somewhat different circumstance and place
"That in Wilts-county (the prisoner thinks he said)
"I was not little of my life afraid
"By accusations, offered to be sworn
"For theft or somewhat like. 'T shall be forborne
To make progression in the Major name,
Lest through mistake his wrong or mine own shame
(Through prisoners forgetfullness) befall,
But this the prisoner does aver withal.
The Majors drift was both to underprop
The drooping spirits, and to raise the hope
Of this poor man, himself to recreate
With comfort of escape he had so late
Said other words of standing at assize
And many witnesses, before whose eyes
He was exposed, (with danger of his sife)
His innocence, and how God sent relief:
But fearing to relate forgotten case
To substance stand, (not circumstance or place)
Though if I knew to the full as well as this,
A full relation had not been amiss,
But there is another cloud that overcast
This sunshine, pleasing, and refreshing blast;
For as this Prisoner was taking horse,
There was another storm, that proved far worse
Than all that went before: the Carrier came,
His horse on foam, the Prisoner loads with shame,
Said: This a Major, not a Justice is,
And Trial cost what will he will not miss.
To Tawnton back again, he must be haild,
Lie till assize unless he could be baild,
But this he took upon his very soul
The Prisoner could not choose but have his bowl;
The Prisoner was a stranger in the place
Not any friend, that there could plead his case,
And Major Covern was not much beloved
By Tawnton Carrier (as the sequel proud)
The Prisoners horse was feeble, weak and small,
Was not in case to tauntle so withal,
He told the Constable if that would do it,
He must go easly as he could on foot,
His horse was not in case now back to ride,
But with the Majors Hostler should abide.
To make it short. Another horse was got,
And up the Prisoner set, thus back to trot
Before him, went at lest one Halberdeer
Half pikes and forks in the flanks and in the rear
The carrier, servants, and his son assist
Least for all this, the Prisner should be mist,
They make a shift to guard with so much care,
They suffered no repulse: but when they were
Now entering Tawnton, Floks of people crow'd
To see the thief, and some cried out aloud:
Oh welcome Sir, your way is somewhat foul,
I Will drink to you out of a siver bowl:
Another said: Why Sir! you ask't the way
To Wellington; how are you gone astray?
Another cried: Look yonder, that's the thief.
What shall the Prisoner do now? die for grief?
I Have heard him say with greatest confidence,
He never felt the peace of conscience
In all his days, more then that very time,
(No creature known, and laden with that crime)
And that the comfort of that present state
Was far more sweet, than sad and desolate:
Oh conscience, conscience, ar't thou such a vial
To make such musik in a petty trial,
Where but a little shame some loss and strife,
Or at the most the loss of human life,
Can make disturbance? What will be thy worth
At great assize, when thou art called forth,
When everlasting glory shall attend,
If thou be kept unspotted to the end?
When by thy test all matters shall be tried
Thy Judge, thy friend, and standing by thy side?
Where Tawnton, Carriers are petty things
To those great foes, which accusations bring,
That strive to rob thee, of thy precious soul,
Amongst the damned, would thy name inroul.
This is the combat, this the greatest strife
To blot thy name out of the book of life.
All those to this, is but a very game,
And not to be insisted on for shame:
But I return to what I said of late
That in this march our Prisoner brought to th'gate,
And entrance into Tawnton, did not cease,
Until they found a Justice of the peace.
The witnesses prepared, the wife and maid
And tapster-tailor who would swear (they said)
The prisoner had the bowl away from thence,
And that it never was seen or heard of since.
The Justice carried sharply, (as became him)
(Although I have forgotten how to name him)
But yet with tenderness, without offense
Unto his office or experience.
The troop, that came the prisoner to defend,
The Justice from his presence out did send,
And heard both parties fairly face to face,
What could be said or answered in the case.
Searched once again, and when he found it not,
Demanded reasons, where fore and for what
This accusation grew: their answers were,
That ever since the prisoner was there,
Which was from night before until that morn,
The key of the chamber had in's pocket born,
And more than that, when just he went away,
He did not tell his hostess of the key.
It Is true he left it in the chamber door,
But should have told or spoken on it before.
And that the bowl was in the chamber used,
And that he drunk in it could not be excused;
And that he drunk in it for his mornings draught,
Since when they never found it, tho they sought.
He was the last that had it in his hand,
If it had not removed there it would stand.
He made his charge for fellonies-suspicion.
The prisoner cast in the Jail without condition
Of any favor, bale or of main prize,
And there to lie until the next assize
In August, now ten days drom March were past,
(Not over twenty since assizes last)
The Justice ask't what prisoner had to say,
To save himself from Jail without delay.
The man replied, that accusation large
Has nothing in it, contains a legal charge,
Tho all were proved what ever they can say,
Unless they prove he took the bowl away.
For he came there to lodge, to drink and eat,
Bed for sleep, bowl for drink, dish for meat,
He did expect, an not to be abused,
While all the three he moderately used,
And he must now appeal, if moderation
Was not the greatest cause of accusation?
Which sometimes in their scoffs they mingled, when
They cast it in his teeth. These are your civil men.
But was it ever heard, to make a plea,
That stranger-guest should keep his chamber-key?
He came no prisoner, though he now so be,
And never dreamt his host should keep his key.
He has that practice in his travels known,
A guest to have his key locked up alone,
Why did he not his key to the host surrender?
But where is the law for that makes guest offender?
There were both serges and some other wares,
Lay in the chamber, who should make repairs?
If any slippery fellow stole away,
(Before or after) what in the chamber lay?
If the host had made a perfect inventory.
When guest came in to satisfy memory,
And called them out in presence of his guest,
And an account thereof at parting pressed.
The guest might choose whether he would or no
Take such a charge upon him e're he go.
Although this guest did keep his key from strangers,
(To keep his own and landlords goods from dangers)
Yet when it was wanted gave in to the maid,
When she fetched out, or any thing in-said.
Who could suppose the master, who was chief.
Would suffe in his house a maiden-thief?
That would not try, before they so far trust,
To search all rooms, which trusty servants must.
Who ever bears the name of chamberlain
Should such a charge wholly on them sustain.
If otherwise, it clear enough infers,
Guests may come free, but there made prisoners,
As to his cost it happned to this stranger,
That never thought to meet with such a danger:
But ever since, where 'ere he comes does toul
The chamber-bel, gives warning of the bowl,
And frequently, this story does repeat
To warn all Travelors of such a cheat,
So much the rather: as you hear him tell,
This danger came upon him, at the bell,
Two things were wanting in their affidavy,
The Justice marked them both with special cavy,
They could not prove, he took the bowl away,
Add that he used it there, he nere said Nay,
Another fault, there words did not agree
As by the following reason, you will see
The two beforehand, both resolved to swear
He had the bowl that very morning there,
And if there had not come, another chance
Might have agreed in every circumstance;
But doubting that a caveat was started
That ere they swore, the witness should be parted,
One said in the chamber, the other in the hall,
Just as it did Susanna, once befall.
The Justice saw't, and put them both in fear,
Nor one or other durst in the issue swear,
And if they had, their oath had been contrary,
And from each other testimony vary,
The Justice found by such apparent view,
That one or both must needs be found untrue:
For if they would known circumstance forswear,
Who could to the substance (by their oaths) adhere?
In one they were agreed, in the the other caught,
And by that means their purpose brought to naught.
Our proverb says, a liar must foresee,
That nothing fail in plotted memory
But truth will never faulter: firmly stand
Against the greatest storm or countermand.
This engine broke: the Prisoner put a side,
He heard the Justice with this bel-man chide;
The carrier loud did peremptory crave
That he mgith Justice in this matter have,
And stoutly did persist, that for that season
The man might be committed to close prison.
The Carrier put out, the prisoner called in,
The Justice very friendly did begin
The case to open, that he clearly saw
That in exactest rigor of the law,
He must be force't to send him to the goal,
And doubted if he might admit of bail;
But yet perhaps; he might bring that about,
And (for the present) from the goal kept out,
Damanded then, from whence the Prisoner came,
And what to do, acquaintance, and his name:
All which were answered: and some letters shown
Whose hands and names were to the Justice known.
The Prisoner farther, showed his commission,
Wherefore he came, and upon what condition;
Which was confirmed by the hand and seal
Of Parliaments committee of appeal:
The Prisoner freely granted his commission
To such injustice gives no permission,
Or wrong to hinder any living soul,
Much less to steal away the silver bowl,
he knew the persons names some of their hands,
What his commission there withal commands
Not to be hindered, but in right assisted,
On which the Prisoner somewhat large insisted.
Well! (said the Justice) you are now half spent,
Go into the town; and take some nourishment
Two hour's hence; come to me without fail,
And for that time my self will stand your bail.
The Prisoner thank't him (as he had good cause)
But as he went, was some what in a pause,
And said, Sir since, I find it is your pleasure,
I am engaged to attend your leisure,
I Will go to Major Rogers, whom I know,
And with your leave inform how matters go.
And if I start, or strive to run away,
Let me be guilty Justice on me lay.
Why! know you Major Rogers (said the other)?
But by one letter (said he) from his brother,
By which I am empowered to receive
Some money, if I need, or do it crave.
Thus, with his leave, he went unto the Major,
(Opend the case) who would have laid a wager,
The carrier durst not be so peremptory
For certain reasons (I omit the story.)
Come, come, (says he) is carrier so carows,
He knows what will him tame (mute as a mouse)
He took his cloak, and went with man again,
And chafed so; he hardly could refrain.
The prisoner does not think it meet to say,
What he related to him by the way.
But when he came to the Justice went alone.
What they two said unto themselves is known.
But in a while they both came out together,
The prisoner discharged, bates or bonds had neither.
But one knot more (though slackst of all the rest,
Rather untied than broken was thought best.)
You heard before; the prisoner rode a horse,
Was either lent, (or hyr'd by carriers purse)
This horse and guard staid waiting in the town,
To know what should be with the prisoner don.
The prisoner durst not ride this horse alone,
Which might be seized; (being not his own)
The Justice undertook, he (without force)
Might freely ride upon the carriers horse.
And thus it pleased God to bring about,
He came bound in, but freely was brought out.
The only use to make in such a sense,
How good it is to trust to providence.
Good conscience will maintain at better rate,
Than any law of parliament or state.
How easy is it censures to endure,
If truth be on our side and conscience pure.
But here we ought to have a special care,
We must in all things honestly beware,
The test of conscience; not in this or that,
In other things make no great matter, what
We do or say, where interrest shall lean,
That Is but a sign we unsincerely mean.
All things, all times, and that before the Lord,
Oh then our conscience comfort will afford.
And for example, Ps. 119.6. Act. 24.16.
Paul's and David's case
Is as a glass. For each you will find a place.
And then is the time to keep us free from shame,
And thence good conscience chiefly takes its name.
But that is a bulwark, firm as any steel.
The votes of creatures we shall lightly feel.
For let the conscience truly be upright,
I may not think to shun all human spite.
With this narration see in this appendix,
Malice and envy is on truth attendrix.
And breaks its heart with grief, when it cannot kill
The witness which convinces it of ill.
Our stranger could now prisoner be no longer,
Blessed God in's heart, his bonds were made no stronger.
At Wellington he took his own fresh nag,
And toward Tiverton did fairly jag,
Lodged there all night, in the morning, when it was day,
Gave warning of their plate, and rode away.
That day to Barum there was to abide:
There told some friends what to him did betide.
Those friends (impatient) stir our trav'ler up,
To seek repairs of the Bel-man for that cup,
For false inprisonment, like high-way-rogues,
No hue and cry, but by their ranting vogues.
This guest unto this Bel-man wrote a letter,
He hoped that he had deserved better,
Than meet with such unkindness without cause,
Quite contrary to Justice or our laws;
And look's that reparation should be sent
For his unjust and wrong imprisonment,
He scorn's the motion, bid's him do his worst,
As like a Bell-man as he was at first.
Some other friends persuade him to be brief,
He swear's the travelor's an arrant thief,
Here Is room enough in law, to bear an action,
And thus provoked, it may be some detraction,
And it is no wonder if some people think
There Is somewhat lies in the bottom or in the brink,
It is no wonder if men be divided
Our Tawnton guest, condemned and derided,
Some say if Justice, on his side, he would had,
He would have thrown, good money after bad,
And thus our travelor to hold his ease,
Runs through all censures as each party please,
Some year's thereafter, ('tmay be three or four)
All this was hush't, and (as forgot) blown'ore,
These two Antagonist's by accident,
As one came back, and as the other went
From, and to London, met near, and were,
From any town, or village somewhat far
In summer heat, there was a drinking tent
Upon the rode, which travelors frequent,
Our stranger, with his friends (some five or six)
To quench their thirst, there half an hour six,
As they were set to drink, within that booth,
This carrier came in, with language smooth,
Next to our stanger was an empty place,
But I suppose he knew him not by face.
Your Servant, Sir, said carrier to our stranger:
No said the other, I Will run no such danger
Your service I have proved to my cost
The Lord deliver me from such an host.
Truly said he, me thinks you are uncivil,
Why! can you say, that' ere I did you evil?
Evil? says the other: I care not for your grudge,
But I Will appeal, let company be Judge.
Friends to relieve in each of your memory,
This is the man of whom I told the story,
This is the Carrier of Tawnton Bell:
I know him and his house, but over-well,
This is the man that took't upon his soul
That I had stolen away his silver bow'l.
Are you the man (says the other) do your worst,
I Will swear and stand to it, as I did at first,
So in a chafe he mounted and put on,
He staid no long debate, up and be gone.
Some of this company were Law Atturnies
Urged to spend money, and make further journies
Some others said, his charge was but suspicion
'Twere betterwait on God in true submission
N'ere vex his mind, spend money, lose his time,
Let God alone to vindicate the crime,
And that our stranger does acknowledge best,
Till great assize shall set his heart at rest.
This liberty he takes, sometimes to knell,
And many times ring out the Tawnton bell.
I can assure you, it has such a sound,
Heard far and near, in compass very round,
And you may hear it plainly if you please,
In some transmarin parts beyond the seas,
But now it is refreshing, no more pain
To make it towl, or ring it out again,
To this our travelor does set his hand,
He dare not wish him hurt, ever to stand
In so much danger by an enemy
So bitter, wrongful, furious as he;
But in his heart is bound to do him good,
If his necessity in's power stood
Should heartily rejoice and be content
To hear the carrier did indeed repent.
For what his conscience know's, for his relief,
Although it put him to some present grief,
And pray's with all his heart this never rise
Against his enemy at great assize.
(It yet alive,) he hopes not so far lost,
As in our former case the clothiers host,
Nor (blessed be God) our stranger never brought
To such a strait, as once the clothier caught.
God saw this strangers weakness could not bear
Such sharp temptation, as appeared there,
And mixed such mercy in this strangers cup,
Might well allure him thus to drink it up,
And that his body, liberty or purse
Suff'red no more, no longer, nor far worse.
The seventh case:
When they have closed with Jesus Christ's command,
Of which we have spoken somewhat here to fore,
Most part of which we now shall pass quite over.
But touch a little what is to be found
In The former parable of the good ground.
We have in order touched all the rest,
And here is the proper place to note the best.
Three things are noted in the explanation
Of every one, that stands in this station,
He hears the word, receiv's it, brings forth fruit,
Where all the three are mixed, none can confute
That ground for bad, according to its kind,
But is accepted to the dressers mind.
Although the measures do not equal hold,
Some 30, 60, some an hundred fold.
But here we must take heed and not divide,
By which the nature of this ground is tried.
For all did hear the stony did receive,
Some kind of fruit brought forth, but did deceive
The expectation, fot it was not sound,
But whithered'i, n a while no more was found.
But here is altogether holding out,
Until the time of harvest came about,
And holds it is standing to that time of year,
When corn is full and ripened in the ear.
Although the tryal's mainly in the last,
Yet there is ods in both the former past,
They neither hear, receive, bring forth alike,
But on some rock one way or other strike.
The first does hear, but never cares to hearken,
Which does the conscience very greatly darken.
The second hearkens to some partial things.
The third attends to all that conscience brings!
This kind of hearing scripture calls an act,
The other forced attention is forsake't.
We justly say that those refuse to hear,
That never reguard, and will not bend an ear,
Although they know the language and the sense, Deuteronomy. 30.11. to 15. Romans 10.6.

And have a witness in their conscience,
That hearing's good, that seriously attends
To conscience voice, to which the scripture bends.
And not the scripture only, but the rod,
Or what to conscience bears the mind of God.
This hearing listens to reproof and blame
What threatens Judgment, or what causes shame
As well as mercies, and more pleasing words,
Which only joy and pleasing things afford.
This hearing sp^ke off (of the better sort)
Even when it hears the pleasantest report,
Attends as well unto prescribed condition,
Upon what terms such preaching has commission.
Attends the duty thereunto an next,
With every circumstance that is in the text.
It dare not pick and choose to please its humor,
But must give heed to every secret rumor.
It opens willingly its naked breast,
When the word goes deepest, ever likes it best.
It speaks like Ely unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.11.17.

Hide not a jot of the word that God does tell.
Although it does such heavy tidings mingle,
That makes the ears of him, that hears it, tingle.
It hearkens to its miserable state,
And thereupon does weigh and ruminate.
It goes to the heart, and there it lets it stick,
Although it is cut unto the very quick.
And if it stick not in the heart, it fears,
It is for want of circumcised ears,
It watches hearing, that it let not slip
And soon recovers, where it find's a trip,
It wrastles in it is hearing with much strife,
It hear's the word: at one that know's it is life.
It does not swallow all that comes to th'ear
Nor soon reject what sometimes it does fear;
But proves and ponder's whether it be right
By balance of the Sanctuaries weight.
It fear's to take, and fears to let go
Til it be sure, Mar. 4.11.
whether so or no,
And when it doubts, it pray's and cries a main
To him that can the parable explain,
It takes reguard to what, Mar. 4.24. Luc. 8.18.
and also how,
It does attend, and only does allow
That which is written with an holy awe,
With due respect to Gospel and to Law
It duty bear's, to god, it self and man
Each strives to understand the best it can;
It hear's the gospel, as its only hope,
It hear's the Law, and seek's to know it is scope,
It hear's the difference there is between
The use of one or other, to be seen:
It hearkens what to the Gospel does belong,
And to the Law: that it may have no wrong,
Such kind of hearing, never yet was found
In high way, stony, or in thorny ground.
Look how it hear's, receiving bears proportion,
(For without that the fruit would be abortion)
It Is not amiss; to see if we can find
What Is meant by this reviving, in its kind.
For I suppose, it is somewhat more than all,
That hitherto we strictly hearing call.
Tho I believe it well may be denied,
That hearing from receiving can divide.
I mean such hearing as we last defined,
(I meddle not with any other kind)
But yet we may distinguish, tho not sever
One from the other, and observe to whether
Such acts of one or other do belong,
And by some Scripture proof's to make it strong.
First, in the general notion of the word
Both hearing and receiving do afford
Action's distinct; the one is by the ear,
The other by the hand; we do adhere,
And sometimes by the mouth, as case does serve
In spirituals: from faith it must not swerve,
And if we hear the word; we must believe,
Or else we never truly can receive.
Although I hear: as for my very life,
And seek to understand with greatest strife,
Although I strive for truth, to hear it all
In all its parts what ever may befall
With greatest care, and duest reverence
With greatest caution to shun offense
Tho such an hearing's with receiving mixed
Yet different acts, tho both together fixed.
Before goes hearing, receiving comes after, Romans 10.14. Joh. 1.12. Heb. 4.2.

One is the mother, the other is the daughter.
Receiving and believing is the same,
(Receiving him, believing on his name)
Tho one with other, savingly are mixed
Yet there is two actions, properly prefixed,
It Is clear in saints, they go in company,
But yet do always different acts imply.
Nay: there is an other action comes between,
And that is Judgment, which is clearly seen
In course of nature, for first I must hear,
And then my Judgment tries (if witness clear:)
After my Judgment past determination,
Then comes exception in it is proper station,
When Jacob knew in Egypt there was corn,
One son a Prisoner, it would not be born
To go for more, without his Benjamin
He heard at first, 't was thus but who know's when
His Judgment cast the scale? till biting need
Did force his Judgment quickly to proceed.
It may be that was past in Jacobs breast,
Before he did declare it to the rest.
And when determined there must be space
To make things ready e're they moved fro'th' place.
Tho acts are quicker in the case in hand,
Yet every step must needs the heart command.
Let Us see then how our Judgment follows hearing,
Where resolution's fixed without fearing.
Then (if determined) when we do close,
Till when there is room for intercepting foes,
Although (in the case) the Judgement's hardly settled,
Until a through closure be outwrastled.
And I believe we cannot judge of those,
Until (point blanck) we come unto a close.
For in this case the matter is so weighty,
All Judgments and resolvs are found too slighty,
Which do admit demur to make a close,
Because delay to danger does expose.
Can one resolved admit delay so foul,
That may perhaps at last destroy the soul?
The end does crown the work, and prove it too,
That (wrong) at last the whole frame will undo.
This is a thing of greatest consequence,
Without this close religion's but pretense;
Though you can close in very many cases,
If It be not right never look for Christ's embraces.
Let Us think a little on the prodigal,
When husks enough would to his shares not fall.
Of The famisht stranger David took and fed,
When Ziglag burnt, and wives were captived.
And then how Joseph tempted by a whore,
And after that in prison two years more.
And then of Abrams hand stretched out with knife,
To give away his dearest Isaacks life.
How Isaac his Rebecca did receive,
And she her fathers house content to leave.
With what a mind Jacob to Egypt went,
When Joseph had him corn and chariots sent.
Was not the Prodigal pleased with the calf,
(Hungry for bread) when famisht more than half?
Was there no difference twixt Joseph's throne,
And straitest bonds in darkest dungeon?
Was It all a case, when Abram bound his son,
And when those cords by Gods command undon?
When Jacob saw the party-coloured-coat,
Came dipped in blood: and heard from Egypt vote
His son had sent? It is no hard presage
To think what odds did each his mind engage
We cannot think the Prodigal had slept,
When Is father fell upon his neck and wept.
Or David's captive dreamd when almost dead,
When David promised, and gave him bread.
And was not Abram (think you) well awake,
When he the cords (that bound his Isaac) brake?
When Joseph sent, Jacob had sooner don
To go himself, than first to send his son.
Did Prodigal ask whether yea or no
His father gave that calf, rings, bracelets too?
Or once demur, and say he would not have them,
Or rather leapt for joy, thankt him that gave them?
Did Joseph (called to the King) say, I Will not go,
For I am doubtful, whether so or no?
Or rather did he not wash hands and face,
And cheerfully with joy the news embrace?
How long stood Jacob, e're he did revive,
When first he heard that Joseph was alive?
Has not thy soul ate husks (which are thy lusts)
And felt the knife, that law and conscience thrusts?
Has brought thee to the sense of utter ruin,
(Thine own spun thread and drank of thine own brewing)
When thou have been thus in this bondage pound,
Have ever heard Christ's voice and joyful sound?
To satisfy thy hungry soul with bread,
And quench thy thirst when thou wast almost dead?
To free the from thee bondage of the Law
To liberty that mortals never saw?
To take the knife of Justice from thy throat,
And save thine Isaac (unto death devote)
And offers marriage terms to Jesus Christ?
Consider well how all this grace thou pris'dst,
And what is thy Judgment, what thy resolution,
And most of all; how put in execution.
I Will put two parts (for speed Zenechdoche)
For all the rest that can related be:
But yet I think these generals do contain,
What can be said to any that remain:
To try the working by the Law in the heart,
And how it carries to the Gospels part
From which you may in special's frame proportion,
Where conscience does comply, or make retortion,
When God does visit conscience by the Law,
He shows man that which he never saw.
And first or last, his miserable state
That by his corrupt natur's desperate,
His conscience tells the man, he is undone,
Until he has an intrest in the son.
At it is first visit, show's the man's unfit,
And has not closed, with Jesus Christ as yet,
It show's the spirit of the Law of God
By in ward lustings in the heart forbod.
It show's the man is poor, and blind, and nake't
Of divine nature, never yet partak't,
It show's the man; he must lay this to heart
Convinces him, it is not his human part,
Or any creature, that can set it home,
But power and strength from Christ alone must come
With these or such like things: and many more
The heart's instructed (as we said before)
I stand not now, to speak of the three first grounds,
But presuppose such hearing has been found
As what before, we mentioned of this,
And now desire to see, it does not miss
In what comes after hearing, (understood)
The next thing conscience does aver. Its good.
Mistake me not: I mean the word not state,
(When conscience says, it is unregenerate)
But says it is good that it should be revealed,
(For that is the way appointed, to be heald)
The conscience is submitted to the smart,
And more or less, is pricked in the heart:
But for the measure (if it be sincere)
I dare not say for limits here or there,
Nor how long time, it labors in the dark,
But in the issue; it does always hark
From whence it is possible to get relief,
And turn's to Christ, which is the All and Chief,
When that is in truth, it has a farther scope,
And more or less it entertaineth hope
Is very fearful, least it be unsound,
Some way defective of the better ground,
And there it find's it has the greatest care
Because so many false impostos are,
And how long there it sticks is not to say,
But if the ground be right; the heart does pray.
In this anxietie, and doubtful fear
I have known some, have been assisted here
From strength that from that very place does flow, 1 Pet. 5.7.

Cast all your cares on him, he cares for you,
And now it enters into gospel lists
For all it seeks to have, or where resists,
It aims to cast it is burden on that rock
Although it suffer many bitter shock.
It Is like the needle by the lodestone touched
Tho shaking up and down it has avouch't
To setle no where else, but on the pole,
And there, in all affairs, commits its soul.
However, there is its heart, and there is it is eye,
Although it finds it often goes awry
It is solicitous to use the means,
And yet as fearful how thereon it leans,
It loves religion in the very form,
But knows the lest temptation will that storm,
If It want the kernel and the saving power,
Which only blessing on the heart can shour.
It strives, to be'rather than to appear,
And to sincerity does most adhere.
It dare not make a bulwark of its works,
Nor plead for liberty where mischief lurks.
It Is very tender in its conversation,
And thinks religion lies in each relation.
It Is most at home, but when it goes abroad,
It fears the snares that is strowed in the road.
I mean it is most within: but when it looks out,
It fears the dangers that are round about,
At home, within, I mean in the in ward part,
It Is chiefest care is what becomes of the heart.
It finds there is snares in all the outward senses,
And offt deceived through various pretenses,
And watches what it can, its trust it keeps
On him that slumbers not, or ever sleeps,
Afraid of choosing sin rather than cross,
To wave its duty on pretense of loss;
Yet dare not run to the cross, till it be called,
If called as doubtful how from thence it is haild,
It feels or seeks the cause of every rod,
And has its greatest eye at hand of God.
Dares not avenge the wrongs don by a creature,
But find his heart too often proves a cheater,
And has pretenses in the lawful ways,
To right it self (when ever it assays.)
It dare not pin it is faith upon man's sleeve,
Or shun the lowest step, that may't relieve.
Respects all Gods commands and seasons, when
To put in use (in private before men)
If diverse seem to clash, he chooses which
Gods word and glory to his duty pitch.
He thinks to hear a sermon: But one sick
Requires his company at present nick;
Although he does the word sincerely prize,
Mercy prefers before this sacrifice.
The preacher, subject, season, be appointed,
Friends and occasions all on purpose jointed.
Tho with reluctance he lose this season,
Yet yields submission to the scripture reason.
He has a special care to shun extremes,
In stormy blasts or in clear suns hine beams.
Faithful to warn, and yet is very tender,
But dare not dawb to flatter an offendour.
Kind, yet speaks home; plain-hearted, not austere,
Unless a scandal in his friends appear.
He longs to conquer all his hasty passion,
But (if surpised) reflects with indignation.
If difference happen with a known professor,
He strives to have christian intercessor.
You Will rarely find a very honest heart
Camp for his will, and not refer his part.
He Is tender of offense togive, or take:
Had rather suffer than offenses make.
Careful on's time, painful in his calling,
Avoids excess, and takes great heed of falling.
He Is very circumspect about his faith,
Nothing concerns him, more he does or has.
The author, object, acts, the rise and fruits,
All which the dead and barren faith confutes.
He knows his faith (if right) comes from above,
Is nothing worth, if it does not work by love
To God and man and holiness at heart,
Aims universal, not content with part,
Glad of a crum: yet presses for a crown.
Shamed for lest fault, at great'st not quite cast down.
There Is nothing vexes half so much as sin,
Yet hopes to the end it shall the conquest win.
The garment spotted with the flesh does fly.
Its most abhorrence is hypocrisy.
Closes with Christ, as Prophet, Priest, and King.
Afraid to take the notion for the thing,
Looks through what is visible, to him unsseen:
Looks forward to the mark (not what has been)
Learns to die daily, e're death come indeed.
Death's not so much as from sin to be freed.
Upon things present dare make no result,
Does with the present most of all consult.
To be unclothed, and for that state made fit,
Does most desire, yet to the Lord submit.
It Is very fearful of a carnal mind,
(Its nature is to sense so much inclined)
It strives to deal in what is pertinent,
To know and do its present duty bent.
In all its duties to believe and watch,
It is convince't, does make the best dispatch.
Although he fall, yet falling cannot rest,
But up again, and strives to do his best.
To hope, endeavor means, (in his probation)
He always longs with earnest expectation.
If God afford a gale of influence,
He Is very careful what he draws from thence.
Some food for faith and hope cannot deny,
But on the hand, that gave it, does rely.
It dare not lay its stress and confidence
Upon his great enlarged in fluence.
Experience shows that calls for self denial,
And to prepare for some approaching trial,
Which frequently he meets with after such,
That does perplex his weary soul as much,
Which makes him search mixed with pride:
His elevation, too much mixed with pride:
And God may leave him for a while in part,
That he may know what yet is in his heart.
He sometimes finds, when influence was fresh,
He has ascribed too too much to flesh.
He finds it certain he shall fall and stumble,
Unless his heart be kept exceeding humble.
Compare himself, by not means dare accord,
Except by Christ's example and his word.
And yet does emulate such as excel,
But shuns the course of them that do not well.
He Is like a be that honey strives to suck,
Where spiders poisonous fruit do daily pluck.
Each thing is changed from its native matter,
By such concoction, as it meets in nature.
Unto the pure all things are well used,
But by the unclean the conscience is abused, Tit 1.15.

And all things are unclean of every kind,
And does defile the spirit of the mind.
Thus figs from thistles, grapes may from a thorn
Well be extracted, (although never born)
Light out of darkness, from the eater meat,
Things bad (divided) thus made good (concrete)
It might be endless to define the frame,
Where this good ground from honest hearts takes name
These various fruits do some what better clear,
That Jesus Christ by faith is fixed there.
But do not think each honest heart shall find
All this, that is said always in the highest kind.
But I believe will freely give consent,
And longs for these and more in full extent.
What ever are its fruits it is right for kind, Joh. 1.12.

When Christ by faith's received in the mind.
Where resolution's fixed to venture all,
Upon himself and word, what e're befall.
If that be right fruits will be the consequence,
(Maugr impediments) issue from thence.
But here is another point that is joynd to this,
Which in the former grounds was all amiss.
First bare no fruit: the latter never ripe.
But here let us be removed, ground plowed so deep,
Here Is fruit and ripe, abides to the harvest,
Neither of which the other did at farthest.
The ripeness of it we have touched a little,
Now we must try whether it be so brittle,
That all it has may vanis quite away,
If some have don so e're the harvest day?
For ought I see in this our parable,
The case in hand is proved very well;
For there is no perfection to be found
In any other, but this only ground:
And that perfection it does never miss.
The case is plain and manifest by this.
It always brings increas, it is also reapt,
Shows the proportion; (the measure heapt)
If 3060 and a hundred fold,
Why then! 'twas thresht, was measured and told.
Now that it may be freed from all abuse,
It Is plain: because 'twas dressed up for use.
The other reached not harvest, if it eared,
For stony scortch't, the thorny chok'd appeard.
Will any say that either brought forth fruit? Math.. 13. Mar. 4.

Which Christ himself expressly does confute?
Or will they say the good grounds fruits declined,
When 30, 60, 100 fold we find?
Because this ground, Heh. 6.7.
which brings forth fruit, is blessed,
As meet forhim by whom it was so dressed.
The field that God has blessed does grow up thither,
Where't shall be reapt. The fig tree cursed does wither,
And there we may severity adore,
When never fruit shall grow upon it more.
Which represents the doom, that is understood
By those, that said: upon us be his blood.
Beside the union, cleared in that matter,
Where saints partakers are of divin nature.
Does make it (if it be lost) to be absurd,
And stands at greatest distance from the word
For by that union they invested are
In his complete and premissery prair. Joh. 17.20. to end. Luke 22.32.

Unless we judge that nothing, when he says:
That he would pray to maintain Peter's faith.
Although objections are by many hurled,
That Jesus Christ never prayed for the world.
Which I cannot receive (he praying so)
Father forgive! Luke 23.34.
they know not what they do.
Some reckon: this and former prair affords
Both one sense, tho differing far in words.
Some godly men I know approve this sense,
Let me dissent, show why, without offense.
The latter prair (Forgive, etc) is universal
Aconfirmation; also a rehearsal
Of positive assertions, which he preached,
All sin except against holy Ghost there reached, Mateh. 12.31.

And by comparing word and parable,
The one explains the other very well.
Without constraint or wresting of the text,
What went before and what there follows next.
In Matthew every sin shall be to man forgiven,
Against the Son of man; when only driven,
And mark explains the subject of forgiveness
Somewhat more fully: yet with clearest evenness.
Children of men shall have all sin forgiven,
Against the Son of man, where they have striven.
If It go no farther: but those men are lost,
That have blasphemed against the holy Ghost.
Put altogether these axioms or these notions,
May be propounded in various motions.
All sin save one is in the pardon-graunt.
Explains how far: (the Son of man may taunt)
And who they are whom Jesus means; when
He speaks of the subject (sons of men)
But if it reach farther, then the Son of man
Asgainst the holy Ghost never pardoned can;
Or if it be the children of the devil,
That do commit the sin, it is the same evil.
The son's of men against the Son of man,
(Although they sin) our Savior pardon can.
Preaches that doctrine, confirms it by his prair,
And both together full agreement bear.
Forgive them Father, for they do not know,
The Princes of this world were in this row.
Who (if they would known) by scripture is confessed
They would not crucified have Jesus Christ.
It Is clear by this: these were the Sons of men,
And not the devils children: were forgiven.
Again what sort forgiveness is this,
To be explained; would not be amiss.
There is forgiveness; but upon condition,
Repealed may be; by future sins commission.
Another parable; Mat. 18.27, 32.2. Cor. 5.19.
does make it good
And this by that; is better understood.
And in this sense god does impute no sin,
When day of Visitation does begin.
I grant all this I know, against the stream,
And to some godly; is a thankless Theme.
But yet I stand as close o'th the other side,
That all regenerate in Christ abide.
And they are more then barely sons of men, Joh. 8.35.

Goe's no more out when thus are taken in.
These are the sons of God, with Christ coheirs.
And with him in his heavenly kingdom shares.
That sons of men may fall to be so evil,
To be inrol'd for children of the devil.
Discharged from life, hall ever more be lost,
Commit the sin against the holy Ghost.
Or what is Tantamount: this is not strange,
Alas? does round this generation range.
Or by believing made the sons of God,
Does with the Scripture not at all sound od. Joh. 1.12

But that a Son, a Saint, should prove so evil,
Fall into condemnation of the devil,
It Is many ways so harsh and sad a sense,
Against which this parable is set a fence.
I must confess I never was so much
Confirmed in mind, against the plea's of such,
Who make account, the true regenerate,
May after ward become a reprobate.
Then when I fastened meditation here,
As firm as any rock it does appear.
I see not yet but from this very place,
May answered be all doubts, in every case.
That does pretend, has any thing to say,
That new born babes may wholly fall away,
I instance not in youn-men nor in fathers,
But choose that state which greatest scruple gathers,
May be as carnal, also walk like men,
But either sense is but comparison.
Like's not the same always in every case,
Nor further means (I think) in the quoted place, 1 Cor. 3.1.

To new born babes that mark does word afford,
That they desire sincere milk of the word,
Which cannot be in strictrest sense a voucht
To those that are in highest measures touched
With heavenly gifts os spiritual fortaste,
That afterward may wholly be laid wast,
Who yet are wanting (for all, that that is don)
Of that which companies salvation. Heb. 6.9.

A grain of corn, sown on a stony banck,
May sprout, and in the blade appear as rank,
And quite o'retop the better ground, whose foot
Is faster fixed, because it takes root.
Thed depth's the trial not appearing height,
Which in profession often shines bright,
And may be good from nature of the seed,
But wanting earth does all the mischief breed, Matthew. 13.5.

And that is the cause how high so e're it shoot,
It wants ground to take a fixed root,
To storm the conscience by some clear conviction, Act. 6.10. Jer. 31.33. Jer.
32.40.

And write the law in the heart (mind the prediction)
Are different cases, brings forth different fruit,
As to the nature of each ground does suit.
But this prediction in explained sense
Does bear such marks surmounting all pretense,
That never can be said of highest work,
Where some defect in the ground does ever lurk.
The law is fastaned in their inward parts,
From people they shall be, and he their God,
Forgive their sins, (no more remembrance had)
To make it sure that they shall never start.
The promise is: they never shall depart.
Where is there such a word, to all that gay,
And godly structure that does fall away,
A man may court a Maid and for probation,
Offer himself in conjugal relation.
And to Invite her give her many things,
As Gloves and Bracelets; Jewels costly Rings.
These please her fancy, bring her some content,
And yet at last: she shows she never meant;
To marriage Union fully to consent,
Yet seems fair, as if she would that intent;
Not for the love of him, but hold's him play,
Because she loves to wear, that clothing gay.
So fob's him off, with this and that excuse,
Regards not her contempt and great abuse.
Perhaps may promise marriage when she gapes,
By that design to cover fouler scapes.
But in her heart she bears greater favor,
To one or more clandestin Paramour.
The man perceiv's, and tel's her it is not words,
Or feigning smiles that true content affords.
He know's her secret haunt's; which loathsome are,
Yet if she will reform, and have a care,
It shall be better yet than she can think,
He pass by former slips and at them wink.
But if she will perfist he has such spies,
That will raise up his former Jealousies.
He Will cast her off, and never own her more,
And nail her up as an audacious whore.
She still proceeds in treachery and guile,
Afraid to lose her trappings all this while.
And that is the best that ever yet was found,
At root of stony or a thorny ground,
She Will cry him up in words unto the skies,
And seem all lovers else quite to despise,
With such appearance and fine complement,
That one would think it was her full intent.
And more than that when filled with slavish fears,
She Will cover many alters with her tears,
Confess her folly show such great contrition,
It was not safe to question her condition,
And in and out, she may such gnawings have
That so much Jealousy she justly gave.
And that her heart so basely is inclined,
She sometimes thinks to alter quite her mind.
And think's she has her resolution set,
Until next on set Paramour does get.
Which entertaind the latter end is worst,
And more accursed then it was at first.
This is the state, when heart does part from voice,
And this is all in which it can rejoice.
The honest heart abhors all these tricks,
Because it dare not kick against the pricks.
But some object: good conscience and true faith,
By shipwreck may be lost (as Scripture says)
I think a fallacy appears'ith front, 1. Tim. 1.19.

Which may the edge of this objection blunt.
For shipwreck is not spoke of conscience,
But faith alone destrictly bears that sense.
For though it is said both may put away,
Yet leaves out one; does of the other say,
With greatest caution, concerning faith,
That that alone such shipwreck suffered has.
It Is not the Scripture that does us inform,
Good conscience was 'ere lost in such a storm,
And as for faith not joined with conscience,
Pray see more plainly in the Apostles sense, 1. Cor. 13.2.

It may sometimes reach faith of Miracles,
And yet want love: see what the Scripture tells.
Is this too short: I Will give you another glance,
Assay to answer each divided branch.
But in the text first both together put,
And out of door's have both alike been shut,
And tho our English word says put away,
First intertainment nothing does bewray,
A beggar comes unto a rich man's door,
He Is put away and dare come there no more,
He got no alms, while begging he remaind,
Can he report he e're was entertaind?
And if he got a bit he gets a knock:
'Twixt him and house there is a bolt or lock.
As Laz'rus chaste away from Dives gate,
And David's men by Nabals churlish prate;
Such entertainment finds good conscience,
When thrust away (some think it the better sense)
And when it gets a bit to stop its mouth, Arias Mont. repel.

It Is not for love unto the naked truth,
But here and there to bribe it, gives it vails,
To keep it quiet, charmed from telling tales.
Good conscience is not bribed, it tells the troth,
Because the man to hear such things is loath,
And will not hearken to what it does say,
The scripture says, he thrusts it quite away.
But if you could examples bring in here,
Where conscience has been owned nor love nor fear^
In any case has stopped conscience vote,
Till practice has proclaimed it audience got,
And this in hearty love to Jesus Christ,
And then rejected when thus come to the highest.
You Are plea was stronger. But who will take the pains
To know all this? (Not searching hearts and reins)
The greatest difference in the ground does lie,
In that which never appears to mortal eye.
To judge an other man for's conscience
Must be in charity or mere pretense.
I dare not think, if conscience witness bear,
That Christ is owned in heart and love sincere;
That ever conscience could thereafter say,
It was thrust out or wholly cast away.
What ever failings and temptations move,
Yet there remains in the heart a seed of love.
Let David, Peter, who you pleas be brought,
As greatest show that former works were naught.
Our parable with explanation sound
Has voted lasting fruit to the better ground.
And yet at harvest if no fruit was born,
It Is either highway, stony, or a thorn.
Now as to faith Simon the Sorcerer
That he believed the scripture does averr, Act. 8.13.21.

And yet appears was unregenerate,
By margent; (which before I did relate)
Tho Judas was amongst disciples chief,
He was no better than an arrant thief.
And conscience will be forced at last to say,
So it has been with all that fall away.
I mean by total and a final fall.
But not of single sins and partial.
A true believers faith I make no doubt,
Yet ever did and shall to the last hold out.
Nor does this doctrine (rightly known) bring in
The least encouragement to live in sin,
But does engage the heart a great deal more,
To prosecute the mark that is set before,
Beside the comfort of a life of faith,
And sweetest peace a tender conscience has,
Which is a spur to any soul, that knows
What intercourse 'twixt souls and Savior goes.
In closely walking separate from sin,
As much as human frailty can attain,
And most of all, where love of Christ constrains,
Ah engaged heart to lay out all its pains,
In love and praise to him that died and rose,
To purchase peace, and pardon for his foes.
Such things as these should be the strongest bands,
To have respect to all that Christ commands.
But there are other motivs to engage
The heart to duty from that sad presage,
Of what will follow, if we be remiss,
And sin the more from such a thought as this.
That now we are admitted to that state,
There is no fear of being reprobate.
For where that use is made, it is a sign
That nature is not wrought, that is divin,
Respect unto his word has greatest place, 1 John 5.2.

In words that evidence the truth of grace.
Tho one regenerate shall never fall,
Yet some are long before they know their call.
The best are called to put their grace in ure,
To make their calling, and election sure.
and when it is the surest of all,
Then to walk worthy of that heavenly call,
Although the good ground have that character,
That it exceeds all the rest by far
Yet great mistakes in the heart sometimes to know
If we belong to such a ground or no,
Who ever gets the clearest sign's that are
Amongst the chief is diligence and care,
And if a soul (in truth) regenerate
Presumes to sin because of his estate,
He may be left to be so desperate,
Not knowing but he is sealed for reprobate,
The wisest christians, may fear him to
And in appearance, all his work undo:
He may with broken bones roar al his days,
And never reach the sense of joy or prays
Unto his last, and they that be about him,
When he goes of the stage may greatly doubt him.
I greatly hope that Francis Spira had
(By some remarks that in his case I made)
Some things appearing, in his lowest state,
That are not found in any reprobate:
But that he had against his conscience sinned
At an high rate, we evidently find,
And such examples should, well used might
Cause souls to shun that sin against their light;
But in such doubtful cases we go wrong
In stead of trying to what ground belong
Such and such riddles, as sometimes befall,
We alter Landmarks and the ground withal.
That true believers shall be blessed is plain,
But who are they? there lies the greatest pain.
If you and I be in that number small,
That is to us the greatest point of all,
As to believers state for outward things,
It Is needless much to say, experience brings
Enough to witness what the Scripture proves
A father chasteneth each child he loves,
Inward and outward trials and temptations,
And from bad men unrighteous vexations,
May well be looked for, for the streight'st thou go
Of enemies expect the greater host,
Tho that be so there is renewed grace
To guide thee in thy trouble and thy place,
But if you will know a true believers state
Whiles in this world, both as to love and hate,
Take his description who has done it best, Joh. 16.33.

Where his afflictions, where his peace and rest,
Who ever in his good ground good seed sow'th,
Shall never faill int's time, to miss of growth, 1 Cor. 13.11.

An honest heart is of a growing nature
That from a child, grow's to a manlike stature,
And this does not to one or two befall; Ephesians. 4.13.

But is the mark at which they shoot at all
Seven cases have we now a little touched,
And what me meet for practice have avoucht.
There yet remains four, of which one pair
To saints: and one to reprobates do share.
What each of these, 'twixt death and resurrection,
Thence to eternity, we want direction
To draw particulars in any sense;
For none alive have had experience,
But as tree fal's, it certainly shall lie,
To meet with Judgment and eternity,
And to the saints; it shall be best of all,
But wicked men shall to the mountains call
To hide them from the vengeance of the Lamb,
But all in vain; they meet eternal flame,
And unto both: that state will pass the sense
Of all that is gone, in past experience:
A little we have touched, other where,
And for its depth, are force't, to leave it here, Se Par.

May we but learn, how to improve our time,
And leave the issue of his depth to him,
Who perfect all things, for his utmost praise,
And at the last will all that trust him raise.
There Is promises commands and exhortation
To save our selves from such a generation,
As show themselves most openly profane,
Or under color hypocrites remain:
Of which from Scripture clearly might be showed,
I Will point to two Apostles Paul and Jude.
Paul shows the sin of wicked Israelites,
To shun such ways Corinthians Invites.
As they were overthrown 'ith wilderness,
Such may befall to those that Christ profess,
It Is not a Christian name will save from wrath
Nor outward forms prevent the second death.
Except we shun such ways as plagued those, 1. Cor. 10.6. etc.

Unto such plagues we do our selves expose,
If we such lusts Idols and fornication,
Do haunt as did that wicked generation.
If we tempt Christ as they murmur like them, 1. cor. 6.10.11.12.

Our plagues may be far worse, if not the same.
These Judgments were to warn both them and us,
That he that stands may heed he fall not thus.
And Judge declares, as god Egyptians smote,
And Israel saved: when they again provoke't.
To Sodoms lusts who ever shall retire,
May wait like vengeance of eternal fire, Jud. 5. to 12.

As Cain and Balam: So shall many more,
Fall in such Judgments, as befell to Core.
But to avoid such sins, escape such wrath,
Let Us edify our selves in holy faith,
Keep in the love of God: for mercy wait,
From Jesus Christ; till life eternal's state,
To some be tender, to others more Austere,
Pluck out of fire saving some with fear.
To him that is able to preserve you all,
And keep you fault-less that you may not fall,
Nor spotted with the garment of the flesh,
But in the blood o'th Lamb, your garments wash.
God only wise; our Savior Majesty,
Rule power, glory, to Eternity,
Be now and evermore ascribed! Oh then,
Who truly love his coming say Amen.
The MINORIES, or an APPENDIX.

Containing a Parable, intended to illustrate the former discourse, touching
the last Judgment: The righteous proceedings of God therein, with the high
engagement upon all sorts, to be solemnly in earnest, before it be too late.

John 3:12. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not: How shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things?

Matthew. 13: 34. And without a parable spoke he not unto them.

ANNO 1679.

The Minories, or An Appendix, containing a Parable, intended to illustrate the
former discourse, touching the last Judgment; and the righteous proceedings of
God therein, with the high engagement incumbent upon all sorts, to be solemnly
in earnest before it be too late.
The preface to the following parable.
COmparisons are used for Illustration
By tipes to show, truth's clearer demonstration,
By things more known, and felt, by common sense
To shadow things beyond experience
By things near hand, where daily we converse
The nature of remote things to express,
By things more easy, gross and done in time,
To point out, heavenly spiritual more sublime.
Sometimes it hides by purposed obscuration
In foreign names and things by adumbration,
That ere men are aware, their gross offense
Is brought so close and home to conscience
From his own mouth that sinned; it does extort
(When vail is taken off) a true report.
When Nathan dealt with David for his sin
He made a parable to bring it in.
David pronounce't the doom; himself was judge
Nathan uncased it: David could not budge.
As soon as Nathan said, thou art the man,
David's conviction, and remors began.
The vineyard husbandmen, were thus surpised
Convinced, that parable for them devised.
Hierogliphick's in writings more profane
Has had another use, (though sometimes vain)
To paint the pride of Tyrants, and what ill
They did commit with a Satyrick quill.
Ovid with others our Sir Thomas Moor
In Metamorphosis Utopia bore
Such tart reflection (as it was understood)
That some have sealed their writings, with their blood.
James Howel tho, in his Dedonian grove
Had more success; where trees like men did move,
Did never yet that Forest scene revoke
But laid his weight, upon his Royal Oak.
To vail, or to declare, persons and matter
Of parables are frequently the nature.
Sometimes it is used; that men may suspend
Their final sentence; till they seek the end
How fitly parables may have their place
To shadow out; the substance of the case,
Which; if it can not be in the tipe denied
It may with more assurance be applied,
For 'xamples sake, Let Us David's case resume,
At Nathans tale; how did he chafe and fume,
That such a wretch should live: who took one Lamb
From him that had no more: When strangers came.
And at that time had many of his own,
Against this was David's zeal and fury shown.
Not only so: but his Authority,
(As sure as god; does live, that man shall die)
Well David you have said well, know you who
By such a sentence you will at once undo.
Take It as thou will, thou art that malefactor
Thy judgement's just, art judge as well as actor.
Had David known at first, what Nathan meant
It Is somewhat doubtful, he would not consent
So roundly, and so warmly to proclaim
Death to the offender; in Jehova's name.
What use then should of parables we make?
Judge things remote; ere we our selves partake
Oh we can Judge right well of A. B. C.
But Judgement's blind when it comes to thee and me,
Look at the members of a parable
And where you see it matches very well
Make the same use; the sense will well afford
But see you limmit all your votes, by 'th word.
The parable, that I present you with
(In future lines) show's marrow and the pith
Of all the shadow's that have gone before
How we shall naked stand at Judgments door.
Me thinks I need not press to be sincere
In such a subject; which does lie so near
And close to conscience gathered into 'th center
Where endless woe; or endless bless shall enter.
Suppose you find this 'xample here and there
(By weakness of the Author) interfeer.
I charge you stick not in the Authors sense
But let the word your Judgment recompense.
And where you find, the Authors Judgment lame
Let Author (not the Scripture) bear the blame.
Where any thing; with Scripture does agree
Reject it not; because it comes from me.
For what is good, comes from an higher hand
And will not bear (from creatures) countermand.
But if you will say the Author had no call.
To meddle with redemption or the fall.
Let, then the Author go; regard him not
But where the Scripture conscience reaches pat:
Makes conscience naked; inward parts mak's bare,
Resist the Jest (thus handed) if you dare.
The Author feel's he is a very worm
Yet God is able by such worm's to storm
The tallest Cedar; and the highest thought
That ever Satan in his Vassals wrought
You know how Rams horns spitle mixed with Clay
Stormed Jericho; born blindness chaste away.
What can the spitle, or the Rams horns boast
That blind does see: destroyed is an host?
As much to spitle and Rams horns belong
As to this Instrument; then Judge not wrong.
Although I think; the term's are somewhat clear
And at first sight; the meaning will appear.
Yet if it darker seem: then 't does to me
To such a slender Lock: Behold the Key.
By (Minories) I mean, this earthly world
When at Creation out from Chaos hurled
Has past the deluge; further shall aspire
Till consummation at the last by fire.
By (Minories) the state of mortal men
From first to last; before the fall and when
Our parent's first, and after them we all,
By their and our transgression came to fall,
And were convinced of a broken law
And what the promise in that state foresaw
And published to them and us from thence
From which the gospel tender does commence
And how we carry, to the term's of both
'Ere we combine with diligence or sloth
Choose or refuse our day of Visitation
In all which time we know no certain station;
But hurried here and there t'wixt hope and fear
Till fixedly to one side we adhere.
By (Caelestis) I mean that blessed state
Where never came (or shall) a reprobate
And by (Caelestian people) I mean those
That with our Savior heartily do close.
By Serpents, I mean the Serpents cursed state
And theirs with him; that gospel tenders hate;
By (Serpentin or Serpian souls) are meant
Who finally reject, new covenant
Or by their praevious sin do quite despise
And trample underfoot the Sacrifice.
By (darksom Prison of the Minorites)
I mean that human death, which law indites
And spares none, tho godly or profane
By (jale-delivery) to rise again.
There Is nothing knotty more, that I foresee
How parable with story does agree.
Read not at all, unless you mean to ponder,
Take heed of that (Dispisers look and wonder)
Reject not hastily: No, nor consent
But by a word: beyond the Instrument.
The MINORIES. Or, An Appendix containing a parable, etc.
A Certain Prince had in his Territories
(Of vast extent) some Isles (I call Minories)
(As London has though of far later date
Their Minories 'twixt All. and Bishopsgate.
A fruitful soil, Clime good for temperament,
Reduced by skill into one continent.
But rude disordred; cluttred, and confused,
Unmannured, unpeopled, void unused
Tho Situate in the midst of that expansion
(Of all his lands) intended for a mansion
For his chief Steward, with his household train,
Who was to hold it, under Hommage main:
Before he would his Steward thus Invest,
With charge and full possession thought it best
With skill and charge; to make it a pleasant plot.
For profit, honor, safety: and what not?
He therefore taking counsel with his Son,
His only heir; how all things should be done.
In six days time, so far therein proceeded:
Left nothing useless wanting, that was needed.
By dreyning, levelling, and casting out,
All noxious things, and moting it about;
Grass ground, set plants, with trees and water courses,
With flowers, fruits, herbs, roots, with beds of roses,
Withal delights that wisdom could devise,
And riches too, a perfect Paradise.
Beside all this, he brought in all those creatures,
(Which might be useful) in their various features,
Beasts, Birds, Fish, Foul, that water, earth and Air,
Might be supplied; with useful things and rare.
When all was furnished, thus in every kind,
In all respects according to his mind,
Exact'ly answering, the intended plot,
Nothing omitted; nothing over shot.
He chose steward; gave him a rich wife,
(For beauty, virtue, honor) natures chief,
Taught him with wisdom, skill and temperance,
To rule, to work, how to prevent mischance.
Before that time, nor then, nor ever since,
Was, is, or shall be such another prince.
Such consorts matched in conjugal relation,
Or such a paradise for situation.
Beauty, and pleasure, honor, riches, peace,
Without anoyance, trouble, or decrease.
This steward set in all these rich demeans,
With full authority to reap the gains,
And comfort of his consort, and the store
Of blessings heaped up and running ore,
Receivs an inventore of what he had,
Enjoined homage to his sovereign Lord,
That he should well and truly keep his charge,
With other things expressed more at large,
And in especial manner have a care,
Upon his utmost peril to beware,
That he entrench not on the royalty,
His Lord reserved specially one tree,
Whose fruit he might behold, but never taste
To eat there of for hunger or repast;
But tender it as the apple of his eye,
As greatest pledge of love and loyalty
To his great Lord, who nothing else detained
Of all that plenty, which therein remained,
Holding this homage forbearing that fruit,
He should be happy Vice Roy absolute.
By tenor of that lease to him and's heirs,
Who should partake in rich abundant shares;
And under him obey their Lord and his,
As substitutes, and under officers.
But if he should offend his sovraign Prince,
And eat that fruit forbod, he does evince
Enact, ordain, and constitute for Law,
He and his heirs shall all to prison go
Without delay, exempt by no device
No benefit of clergy, bail, mainprise.
'Twas said before, these I'les were called Minories,
Because the Prince had larger territories
More glorious servants, natures more sublime,
That could convey themselves at any time
Through, or into a place, or human body
Without man's knowdlege, not descern'd by any;
Because they dwell in more refined air
Can vanish when they please, or else appear,
Of this refined guard, some do remain
Unspotted and their loyalty retain,
Beloved of their Prince and are inrold
As heirs for ever in an higher world,
But yet commissioners sometimes to this,
With special message to the Minories,
But others of that elevated crew,
Their loyalty from their great Lord withdrew,
And plotted treason, against his crown and throne
That all his royalties might be their own,
Were judged, cast out as mortal enemies
Into inferior regions, nasty styes,
Where they are chaind, until a great assize,
And Jail delivery, yet in such wise
They can descend to lower elements,
With bitter spite to him who them torments
(When he will permit,) upon some great design
Their fortress totally to undermine,
Now when they find they are out of favor cast,
And Minorites, their juniors embrace't,
And knew withal; they stood on their allegiance,
And would be judged for their disobedience.
They raged with envy, did with malice fret
To see the Minorites happy estate,
They all combine with crast and forged lies
And treachery, to spoil the Minories.
And one descends into a serpent, where
He was not spied nor known that he was there,
The serpent covering this hidden guest
Could speak, and to the stewards wife addressed,
With suggred words and terms of amity
Debated of the lawful sovraignty,
And of the love and faithfullness of him,
That had denied them such a precious jem,
With other words unpact his mailed truss
With great appearing love he spoke t'her thus
Great Empress of the Minories,
How can you be content with these
Small favors, (for l know they are many)
Behold here is one more rich than any,
Or all conjunct: nay I Will say more:
Than zo times so many score.
She paused: but answered some what hastily,
With discontent (thus drawn to mutiny)
My hus band knows (thou subtle beast)
Thy nature well, but that thou speak
He Will wonder at (and well he may)
What do I hear the serpent say?
We freely eat of all the rest,
They Are all so good, we know no best;
We make no difference, feel no sore,
We have enough, we need no more:
Our Sovereign has forbidden this.
What! him despise? obey a beast?
Thou art our servant; hence! revoke,
Naught was misdon till serpent spoke.
To this the serpent daringly replies,
But under fair and courteous disguise,
Though peremptory now he shows his teeth,
As every one (not blinded) plainly sees.
Thou silly woman, I Will convince
Thee plainly, what a kind of Prince
Thou dote'st upon, and what he means
By this sharp curb, those bridle rains,
That he may freely dominere;
And keep you under dreadful fear,
He knows by eating you may be
As good, as great, as wise as he.
I feared you both, but knew not him,
Before I ate my sight was dim.
Thou (wondering) hearst a serpent speaks;
Cease wondering the serpent eats.
He never spoke a word, until
Thereof he eaten had his fill.
Can serpents eating make him speak,
What may thou find if thou will seek
By the same steps that he has gone?
It Is but profess rebellion
Against your tyrant Prince, defy
His harsh and rigid trranny.
It Is no Romance, no idle fiction,
But for your full and clear conviction
I prove it by my self and you,
If you but reason will allow.
And now I Have eat, if you will compare
Your force with mine, do if you dare:
For I by eating finds a sting,
Which you s hall find another thing;
(If you leave me to follow him,
Who thus has brought you into the clim)
Then all your fears of eating that,
Which would your wealth accelerate.
But eye will prove unto your eye
And other senses presently
If you will but eat, you s hall be wise,
Know what your Prince (through hate) deny's.
And all the wealth unto you s hown
You s hall enjoy, 't s hall be your own;
Without that homage, you s hold pay,
Come eat, and try without delay.
Behold how goodly to the sight
(Which must your appetite invite)
And when you venture but to bite
Will overcome you with delight;
But how much more, if freely eat
(To satisfaction) of this meat.
But if thou say, how did I know
By eating this, it would be so?
As now I find and tell to you,
I will (in s hort) the reason show.
There is a crew, that dwells above
In higher regions can remove,
And come amongst us, when they please
That know's all secrets (such as these)
Who have revolted from your Prince,
Bids him defiance ever since,
By one of these, I have been told
More than I say, an hundred fold,
Which I have proved, and find it true,
And therefore boldly, shewit you,
And you will find, it is he not l
That first made known this mystery;
My speaking power's none of mine
Thou said even now, the clearer sign
All to confirm and make it fast,
What need'st thou more? come take and taste
The Minoress, half overswayd,
With what the Serpent showed and said
It was so pleasing to her eyes
(And most of all to make her wise)
She wondered that the beast so spoke,
And show such reasons, made her shake
She looking, longs, and longing takes,
And taking eat's, her welfare stakes
Upon fond hopes of better things,
And to her husband sweetly sings
Such Syreen tunes, and told him why
She feared not that destiny,
That breach of promise should ensue,
Because those threats, were al untrue,
And whata they thought so foul transgression
Would lead them to a full posession
Of all the riches of the place,
And make them wise, above disgrace
Of those revolters, who had tried
And all those fears had nullfy'd,
And if he slight such precious things,
He should beware of Serpents things,
Who altogether would arise,
And vex and spoil the Minories
Advised him therefore to be quick
And take and eat, in the present nick.
It was no longer to debate,
Least he incur the Serpents hate.
And more than that would turn her foe
That mutual Jar's would always grow,
And pierce them both unto their heart,
And he and she must surely part,
That as he loved her, he would show
The truth of his affection now,
That she had eat, and first did taste,
He might besure, the worst was past:
The proverb's true, that love is blind,
His heart to her was so inclind,
Not once consulting with his reason
What would ensue this horrid treason,
Made no objection, took and ate
(But sure the man was desperate)
Oh! what will blind affection do,
When reason's out? let sequel show.
Let every man as for his life,
Heed, how he is ruled by his wife.
Too many are, too many more
Throw all away upon a whore;
The first scene of his dreadful tragedy
Ends in a woeful, sad, catastrophe.
This scene is drawn, another takes the stage
Which does another tragedy presage
The actors are Prince, steward, wife and beast
Wherein is shwon what came, of what is past,
And further, what insued thereupon
To the Minories, and all that dwell thereon.
No sooner, this (so lately) married pair
Had thus revolted, they ashamed were,
For fear, and grief, and shame, could not abide
To see themselves, be seen: would therefore hide:
They patched up such coverings as they had,
But all too slight, they were but poorly clad;
In stead of that abundance, and their vaunt,
They find themselves reduced to pinching want:
But what is their want? but what they had no need
(Before they ate) to look for, ad a weed.
Indeed they knew what they knew not before,
But that augments their misery the more,
Their eyes were opened, but it was to see
Their own created shame and misery,
To hide from shame, from cold, from what they fear
Are all the clothes, the Minorites since wear.
(As chains imposed on prisoners, to be known)
Should Minorites be proud, of such a gown?
In all this shame, and fear, they heard the voice
Of the offended Prince; but at the noise
Were so astonished durst not appear:
But hid themselves amongst trees that were there,
That were allowed for their sustentation,
But came not near the tree of abstination.
The Prince then called the steward by his name,
And asked where he was, who cried (for shame)
I feared your voice, because I Have nothing on
To cover what, I've'gainst your order done.
The Prince replied, how is it, thou wantst a cloak
For what thou'st done? have thou thy covenant broke?
Have eaten of the late-forbidden tree?
The man replied: the wife thou gave me
Caused me to eat, and I have her obeyed,
And then the Prince unto the woman said:
What have thou done? the woman stood afraid,
Her answer was: the Serpent came with guile
And told me stories in a specious style,
Whereby I was deceived, and have eat,
Tho now I see it was an arrant cheat.
The Prince demands no reasons from the beast,
Because he knew, 't was malice in his breast,
Both unto him and to the Minorites,
Him therefore in the following doom indit's:
Thou cursed beast, thou wast in subtlety
'Bove other beasts, exalted very high,
According to the nature, I thee gave
Which was thy crown, thou might preserved have,
But thou have entertaind a foreign guest
From th'airy camp revolted, to infest
My steward, me withal the whole Allies,
Creatures and Precincts of the Minories,
Thou art the first confed'rate in this deed
To thee therefore and unto all thy seed
Of right belong's the heaviest part of the curs,
(Tho all the beasts for thy sake fare the wors)
Most cursed, on thy belly thou shall kreep,
And eat the dust, while thou thy life do keep:
But thy in mate (with thee incorporate)
I have a just and never dying hate.
Who (with his seed) all pass under thy name
Thou shall bear his, and he shall bear thy shame
But time and justice will the riddle clear
What part of the curs both thou and he shall bear:
For you partake in title more then name,
Thou art the tipe of that mysterious frame
Of dragon, beast and serpent, where is meant
Thy cursed inmate, as the complement,
To him in thee conjunct, I do proclaim
What went before, what follows with the same,
Mysterious beast, in wickedness and woe,
That curse in words cannot be opened so,
As may be understood, or as is meant
To thee and cursed offspring in the extent,
Between thee and the woman I will put,
An enmity, that never shall wear out,
With all that shall from her and thee proceed
By procreation, hers, and thy cursed breed.
Her seed shall break thy head, thou shall infuse
Such venom, as his heell shall only bruise:
Which curse of thine contains a large prediction,
But of mysterious and conjoined mixtion:
Ruin to thee and thine, but she and hers
Have grace obtained, (tho subject to the curse)
The woman, I presume, heard what was said,
Which might much comfort yield (tho much dismayed)
If understood, what more the prince explained,
Upon his records I find not contained.
The Prince next to the woman turns his speech:
I let thee know, Because of this foul breach,
Which thou have made upon my royalty,
I greatly will increase thy misery
In childbearing, with sorrow, smart and woe
Shall be thy portion, and yet more than so,
Thou over husband shall not dominere,
Be in subjection, reverence and fear:
And last of all, the Prince to the man was brief,
'Cause thou have me provoked, obey thy wife,
The ground with painful labor thou shall till,
And get thy bread, with sweat thy belly fill:
The Minories are cursed for thy sake,
All creatures that have breath thereof partake,
And all this curse on thee, thy wife and seed,
You shall endure, until I do proceed,
To cast you all into a narrow pound,
In vaults below, quite closed under ground,
Where you and they, without bail or main prise,
Shall be detained till my great assize;
Where you the serpent and his airie guide,
Shall all impartially be judged and tried.
But hearken well, and you shall see what is don,
Is for your great advantage by my Son,
Who cannot yet exempt you from the curse,
And save my honor: But the doom was worse,
What first was threatened, then I do inflict,
Which I may not in Justice contradict:
But you shall find in tenor of the curse
The serpents share than yours is tentimes wors.
And in that curse pronounced their contains
(If you will hear) abundance for your gains,
Both for the present and for after time,
For your discharge from this unhappy crime.
But if you still reject, will make your sore,
For length and weight a thousand times much more.
And if this second grant you do deface,
You Will never find a third, there is no release.
Ye know if I should narrowly insist
Upon your forfiture how you have mist.
The very day you ate (no more ado)
You should be cast in straitest chains below,
Which to maintain my just prerogative,
I Will take my freedom, and your seed deprive
Of any truce, as soon as they are born,
And clap them up into the foresaid urn:
But you and others, as I shall see cause,
I Will give you respite, and admit a pause,
Allowing time, at large so many years,
As I think good to mitigate your fears:
And if you will use that respite as you ought,
You Will find the fruit of what my Son has bought.
All which indulgence you shall find to be
On covenant terms past'twixt my Son and me.
The airie guest the serpent did inspire,
And your consent incorporates his fire,
Into your hearts with envy has inflamed
That hot rebellion, which cannot be tamed,
Unless a fire more pure and contrary
Shall be infused, shed into each artery.
My son does this by far more sacred power,
To quench that poison on you blessings shower,
And can himself with you incorporate,
And put the serpents force quite out of date;
And by this means becomes one with your nature,
And with the woman's seed a true confrater.
But as the serpent first got your consent,
And by your breach my wrath against you bent.
Embrace my son, and power he shall infuse:
Renounce the serpent, with his wily shows:
Oppose his bates, by which he does defile,
My son will you and me then reconcile.
And tho you suffer much for what is past,
It shall be better every way at last:
And take my word, your gains will more increase,
Than if you would always had plenty and peace.
Although your prison you must strongly fear,
My son's content t'accompany you there,
And for your sakes upon him bondage take,
That of his freedom you may all partake.
And you shall find this brother and your friend
Will of your burden draw the heaviest end,
And never leave you, till he bring about
Your perfect freedom, and then bring you out:
All this and more, I covertly indorse
For your assurance in the serpents curse.
And show before hand (if you will comply)
How by my son you will get the victory,
Who properly is called the woman's seed,
Who by his power breaks the serpents head,
And by his suffering is content to feel
The serpents force in bruising off his heel,
And takes upon himself all wrong that is don
To all his brethren, that will to him run.
The enmity 'twixt serpent and the woman
Is as they are inspired each in common.
For as the woman with her proper seed
By common principles are all agreed;
Even so the serpent with that filthy brood
Are filled with malice in their brotherhood.
The one to virtue, love, and faithfullness,
The other wholly to all this avers,
Are so contrary to each others frames,
No reconciling upon any terms.
By these they are differenced, by these reguarded,
By these they are judged, by these they are rewarded.
From hence proceeds another mystery,
How seeds are reck'ned in their pedigree.
Amongst the Minorites (which is our work)
For serpents seed would under woman's lurk,
If not discerned by an authentic eye,
Which shall their teachery more plain decry.
Consent and compact stablisheth the seed
On either hand, but not the human breed,
Which though with serpents wiles are much infected,
May yet be healed, purged, and detected,
By that more sacred influence from my son,
Which comes to heal what serpents sting has don.
The Minorites considered alone,
Without the seed, that in their nature's sown,
May well partake of both, and so they do
In more or less, before they thoroughly grow,
To make a lasting covenant with either,
And all this while they combat both together,
And are not known to which they do belong,
Till one or other be made firm and strong,
And entertained with knowledge resolution,
Renouncing the other gives it absolution.
Of which my son shall be a perfect Judge,
Reguarding neither favor, friendship, grudge.
To him alone shall be the last appeal,
And will be found by the difference of his seal.
Before they are sealed they are but in probation,
And have not fixed unto which relation
They shall in the issue be determined
And with their fellows truly numbered
The Minorites then, is a middle state
Not yet determined to love or hate
The serpents seed, all over with hatred grown
The woman's seed by hearty love is known
To help the method of our mixed discourse
(Shun repitition) it may be of force
To give each sundry state a sundry name
Respective regions also whence they came,
And whereunto they properly belong
And shall return again from whence they sprung:
By Minories, where Minorites do dwell
I mean the common nature, not t'excell
Beyond condition of this mixed probation
Not fixed yet unto their Sealed station
For while they are Mynorit's, they are Proponents
That live in villages, unwalled tents
Who have no proper gar'son of their own
Are skirmish't by the serpent and the Son
Who beat up one another quarters there
With much vicissitude of hope and fear
To either side, the Minorites are bent
As it was with us, t'wixt king and Parlyament:
And it will contribute no little light
How Royalists, with Roundheads used to fight,
But Newters usualy spewed out with loath
That could be either, neither, and yet both.
By serpentin that whole revolted crew
With spite who bid's, the Prince and Son adieu,
The city serps I faign: the serpentine
Who with revolters, will fully combine,
Renounce their Prince and son spewed out by him,
On waves of mutual keenest hatred swim
Under'th black rod sealed; which does condemn
(By preparation) to the great assise
But (which is best of all, most in my eyes)
They that with Prince, and only Son comply
Receive, obey them both with hearty love,
Freemen are and sealed, in charter house above,
Whose goodly city, I Coelestis call,
Coelestians they, whose pleasant lines do fall
In that pure region, clear and light confines
The Inhabitants are Orthodox divines,
A name too often usurped by a black guard,
Who wear their halter almost half a yard
Below where't should be worn by true desert,
Unless they would got their Neck-Vers well by heart,
Or benifit of clergy for such blades,
Who pulpits make their shops their bibles trades
To buy and sell for money, whores and wine,
With Simon Magus all that is divine.
But ere I leave these vermin to their Judge,
I must beware, I give not too just grudge,
As if an habit made men serpentines,
Or by the contrary, commence divines:
Let men wear what they please, I do profess
Nor love nor hatred to their outward dress,
But as to love or hatred they incline,
Whether't be serpentin or coelestine,
Yet I confess, it makes my stomach loath
To look (cum privilegio) under'th' cloth,
And how the wolf can counterfeit the sheep,
That when he laughs in's sleev he seems to weep.
Three, countries, regions, cities here we see
Minories, serps, coelestis, dwellers three
Minorites, serpentine, coelestians;
The first of which unfenced always stands,
The latter two, are gavishoud with hands,
Each fortified in perfect oppositions
Determined to opposite conditions,
Between which two, do Minorices divide,
And will be found or one or other side:
The Minories, the common seat of war
Where prisoners on both side taken are.
Do neither hang, nor draw, within themselv's
No course of justice there, nor nothing else,
But as reduced unto their proper state
Serps, or coelestis, as they each, relate,
But here is another hidden stratagem
Master's of art, in the serpian Academ
Do much approve of in their commonweal,
(That sharply bites the pure coelestian heel)
And that is this: they were coelestian colors
With such a counterfeit, of serpian fullers
So cleanly washed, and are so neatly died
That from coelestians often cannot be spied.
And more than so have learned how to prate
With so much craft at a coelestian rate,
That there be some informers and trappans
Do travail free amongst coelestians
Too often get their wachword, afterward
They walk their rounds, and come into their guards
By hook or crook, or any sordict way,
With these designs, caelestians to betray
Contrarily the just coelestian Prince
(By counsel with son) will not evince
Assert, insinuate, by word or deed
On any terms of loss, or worldy meed,
The least dissembling, fraud, equivocation,
By truce, compliance, fawning adulation,
Nor will he suffer under his command
Any that shall. If any (underhand)
Be guilty, he will surely understand
Correct it sharply, (if not quite disband)
For all arhang-by's (but a mungrel crew)
What to his orders shall be found untrue
Another mystery of great import,
Is this: the serpians have a great resort,
Their camp is fraught with thousand times for number,
More than coelestian, frequently in cumber
Coelestian march. Tho they do more dismay,
Than hurt the soldjers of the best array.
Indeed to weak and fresh, (tho real) friends
It is some damp awhile, but always ends
With honor, conquest, and full amends
Beside the listed serpian Company,
There Is thousands more that do in heart comply,
Who seem as newters: yet intelligence
They fetch and carry, Traitors to our Prince,
And do more mischief with their double face
Than ten times more, that never change their place,
And they have got such specious pretenses,
That few can charge them with their foul offenses
They plead: they talk indeed with either fide
That they might have the truth of the quarrel tried
And while their judgement's truly in suspense,
They hope it will not pass for an offense,
But if they were resolved, they soon would yield
To'th' better part, and never quite the field.
And while they doubt, at every assault,
It would but tempt them to a base revolt.
And this indeed must pass with common sort,
That dare not judge upon a light report,
Well-meaning men weak judgments but yet tender,
That would not be (in searching) an offender.
The truth is so: our Prince (compassionate)
Would take it ill, that who to him relate
Should be too harsh upon the ignorant,
Who cannot close with judgments full confent,
And some there are, who readily do stagger
At lest sometime, who as with sword and dagger
(When once overcome) stand to it back and edge,
And never flinch: turn back, or leap over hedge,
Beside our soldiers have their limitation
According to their rank, and proper station.
The common honest soldier know's not all
The stratagem's, that in the war befall.
It Is not their honor, when they go to try
In stead of finding make an enemy.
The Minorites are not to be enraged,
But by all tenderness to be engaged,
So long they are not haters of our cause,
Or make a contract against the chiefest clause.
(Revolt and treachery to Prince and Son)
He pitties tenderly what is misdon.
Were you but in our camp to hear his charge,
Least bitterness be used, (wherein he is large)
You would not dare to wrong a Minorite,
But use all mildness without wrath or spite:
And if at any time he be severe,
It is in chiding those that dominere,
Which honest hearts, small knowledge, and great zeal
Sometimes transgress, and think they do for weal.
But ten-times oftener serpians in heart,
That carry fair, yet would our cause subvert,
With violence against the Minorite.
Judge all for serpians (not seen in fight)
Indeed our war should Minorites reduce,
But not by cruelty, force, or abuse.
If once they are proved listed serpians,
Then lay about you tooth, and nail, and hands.
But we have no commission once to fight
Against one soul that is a Minorite.
I do not say but we may go amongst them,
To search for serpians, who too often wrong them.
And foolish Minorites may take their part,
Not knowing what they do, whose very heart
May too far close through serpian deceit,
And all this while be cozened with a cheat.
Yea these are faults our Prince will not excuse,
But plainly chides them, yet will not refuse
To suffer this, though 'twas a great deal more,
Before he will his clemency give over.
Indeed if Minorite turn serpian,
(Of which our Prince and Son (here) only can
Be proper Judges, and declare who are)
The fight with all thy might, and do not spare.
Another Mystery to be unfolded
Of as great weight, as any has been told yet:
What weapons true caelestians must use
Against the serpians (for they may not choose)
There Is not a weapon used in our camp
But it is appointed, proved of what stamp:
Whether in case for present execution
If not defective (by the institution)
We have an excellent Artillery,
As great a charge we must not be unwary
There Is many circumstances hereunto
Of absolute necessity to do
Our diligence, that nothing be misplaced
For then (at best) our work will be defaced.
Our weapons are not guns, pikes, swords, and stavs;
Our Prisons are not castles, holes and caves;
Our Armor is not iron steel and brass;
Our Ammunition, powder shot and Match;
The Punishment our Prince does use t'inflict
Is not by fines, and Mulcts and interdict:
The serpians indeed have all these knacks
Which amongst the Minorites great havockmakes
Our Weapons are commands in Princes name;
Our Prisons, guilty conscience and shame;
Our Armor, confidence in Princes word;
Our Ammunition, Threatenings from our lord,
Our punishment that we inflict on foes
Is, inward horror, future judgment woes
And for our conquest: final desperation
Thrown on the serpians with indignation.
And these so gall and vex the cursed wretches
It robs them of their shifts and cunning fetches
Although they rant, they fret; they fume and swagger,
Yet (lighting on the gall) it makes them stagger:
And tho they quarrel, cavil murmr, grumble
Their wounds at last, will surely make them tumble,
Often I have seen a serpian fall in the fray
He has not had another word to say,
Unless it was to howl, roar, swear, and curse,
Because he knows his torments will be worse,
Will often wish he knew the utmost pain,
But that it is endless that torments again.
But there is another riddle somewhat deeper,
That makes these craggy rocks appear far steeper,
And makes our way ambiguous confuse,
How we should fight against whom, or hold a truce.
And here we want a curious inspection,
Without our prince we cannot find direction;
For it is only his plain institution,
That can preserve from error and confusion.
We do not fight, (designing to destroy)
(Except the serpians) any to annoy.
Now Minorites do often intermix
In serpian crowds, and there the question sticks,
How we shall shoot or strike and never hit,
(At least to hurt) a single Minorite?
For if we hurt not it is properly no fight,
(If not intended) though the stroke may light
On 20 Minorites, it will not kill,
It may indeed prove med'cinal (a pill)
That if he turn not serpian indeed,
Shall never hurt him tho it make him bleed.
Our ammunition is of that rare nature,
It works according to the humors matter.
Coelestian humors will not get a touch,
(Unless for pleasure) I dare well avouch.
A Minorite no doubt may somewhat smart,
And (for his good) 'tmay search his very heart.
Purge inflammations perhaps make him sore,
But (while a Minorite) can do no more.
For (in our sense) if Minorites be killed.
'Twould be a paradox was never held.
To make this plainer in so dark a case,
Natural death in our war tak's no place,
Unless a serpians conscience terrifies,
That for the torment he falls down and dies.
In such a case the Minorite also
May come to suffer by the given blow,
Which in this case the body only tries,
As with the mind does jointly sympathize.
A word is not a sword to kill a man,
And yet by sympathy it may or can:
(Add thoughts thereto) compare then Francis Spira,
With Ananias and his wife Saphira.
The first by lingering torment ends his days,
The latter two had scarce a moments space.
Yet neither swords, nor gins, nor serpians snares,
(As cause) did ever touch them unawares.
This case is deep, the mystery sublime,
To search it further we must take more time.
Seek to our princes son, that he descry
The proper nature of this mystery.
All this you know I make a simile,
Which is a figure to the mind or eye
Of yet some other thing, than the bare sign,
(In Physical acception) out to shine.
And therefore here I shall enclose another,
(Within the first) if darkness do not smother
My thoughts with intricase of such a case,
That must have higher helps than human race,
To shine upon us in a case so high.
What Is all the world? what is man? ah! what am I?
Suppose a King has conquered many scores
Of traitor-subjects on his seas and shores,
Surpised them all, them brought into a fort,
Well walled about, where only one strait port
And entrance makes, with able baracados,
Percullises, Petars and Bastinados,
Halberts and pikes, 'twixt each a musketeer,
Standing on both sides troops of horse in the rear.
Divide and make a lane for almost half a mile,
These marching through with terror all the while,
Astonished to see how strongly they are guarded,
And that they might not flee with forces larded,
So that to make escape they have no hope
No not so much as letting down a rope.
Suppose again; the sold of trumpet cries
A proclamation of the next assize
Of goal delivery; where traitors must
Receive their sentence, suffer pains that is just:
There are in the fort; that hear this proclamation
Of sundry sorts of persons: (for relation)
Some real friends, good subjects to their Prince
These now brought in: their treason can not mince.
some not yet caught tho in the present hearing
Deserv's as much as what these now are fearing:
And some have yet not closed on either side
But stand in quaver: where they shallabide.
This may perhaps a little illustrate
Our case in hand (And of our warlike state)
But oh! here is wonders wrapped and multiplyd
Like hydra's heads: if one you do divide
There start up 7: and each as great as first
The labor's endless: increa't is the thirst
That I had hoped, to have quenched before,
But it is augmented, more then 7 tines over.
For while I thought, each wonder to explain
It brings forth more than twins, and yet again':
Each product is as pregnant, in its kind.
The more I wade, I still it deeper find,
But now I find, that wading will not do
I must content my self to swim, but how?
By help of bladders, with a mighty arm
Put underneath, else I shall suffer harm.
And do as much at least, (it may be more)
To them that follow, hoping to swim over.
I call these bladders instituted means
The mighty arm, in the asistance of our Prince
The formers such, as in his orders lie,
The latter is in mediate suply,
My groungs of hope, I shall not quite miscarry,
One is declared, the other promisory
These two supporters, never failed yet
Those that thereon, their confidence have set.
On which account (though trembling) I now enter,
And on the promise, cast my self; and venture
Hoping for blessing more than I can ask,
In such a pressing, and important task.
The king that has his rebels overcome
Is our great Prince, over this serpiandom.
The Rebels are, the serpian-rebel-seed
Who upon treason, and rebellion feed
His conquest is their conscience-witness
Their torment, that they hope for no redress,
The great assize, when he, in execution
Will put his laws to serpians confusion:
Our war with serpians, witness true to bear
Against the serpians without shame or fear,
According to his orders: declaration
Made known and published in every nation,
Promiscuously, amongst the Minorites
Where all is concernd on eiher side that fights.
And also, if there any newters be
All are concerned, but not in like degree:
At least, in a far different form and case,
Accordingly our warfare will take place
What we do shoot, from our great ordinance
Are mainly laws, commands then we advance
To promises, and threatenings; and prove
Who have rebelled against conscience and reproof.
But that which makes a real serpiandy
Are such as hate, renounce the remedy,
To all the other, we declare and warn
With hopes and fears, all for their best concern
Which is not fighting, but wholesome advise
With indignation, against the last we rise
This put in practice, pouring out the vial
(Respectively applyd) is the main trial:
But as in wars, there is many bullets shot
And he that kill's, or wounds; often know's it not,
So it is here, we often shoot at random,
Kill here and there, but know not who outstand them
As soldiers in a fight let bullets flly.
Make their retreat, and let the issue lie,
Till field be over, then appears who is dead,
Who Is wounded, taken, and how many fled.
But since not bodies, but the mind is struck,
We seldom know the wound, or where it stuck.
There Is diverse wounded deep never descrys,
Until the wounds are searched at great assize.
It Is true ofttimes their are discoveries made
Apparently beforehand, and bewrayd
By several symptoms, sometimes by confession,
But for a final, full, and clear decision.
It is not known till goal delivery,
But then the Judge shall publish openly,
Who knew before, and left his mark in the breast,
But not till then shall all things come to the test,
Of all the skirmishes between the seeds,
Which daily so much hot contention breeds.
Who have been killed, and who escaped with life,
At that great verdict end will all the strife.
Those Minorites, that reconciled were,
Shall with coelestians justified appear,
But all the rest the Judge will undermine,
And doom them altogether serpentine.
But yet more closely to pursue the manner
Of our just war, under our Princes Banner;
We shall endeavor to show how we charge,
With what restriction, where, and how, more large.
Let us review our late fornam'd synopsis,
Traitors fast in the fort, where no place for hops is
For the assize to come, the proclamation
Was issued out in every land or nation,
In this fort to appear with due reguard.
The assize is held in the fort (in the castle yard)
But e're the Judge on life and death shall sit,
To clear the cause (for he determines it)
He calls a day beforehand to examine,
And hear all pleas that may be pro and con,
And lets accusors and informers speak,
Say all they can, else serpians would sneak
Away with vernish, paint and forgeries,
But this prevents their deepest fraud and lies.
This day beforehand by Synechdoche,
(Where part for whole is taken usually)
Does represent the whole coelestian fight,
Against the serpian feud from the first night,
That darkness came upon the Minories,
Until the day coelestian-sun shall rise,
And come to its meridian in the skys,
Which Plaudite determins this assize.
From all that is said we take this day to be
A short abridgement or epitome
Of all that is don and said or fought before
Amongst the Minorites on sea or shore.
From that first hour they quite their gracious brins,
Until the hour before the assize begins,
To issue all upon the turning point,
(Vein next the heart) and stick it in the right joint.
I shall begin as if it were in the morn
Of this great preparation day, his horn
To sound, and with his trumpet to alarm
Coelestians Minorites to prepare'm.
Which also is a figure of that knell
And doleful sound of the serpian passing-peal,
And like that knell at Pulchars, much about
The time that laden Tyburn-carts set out
From New-gate-prison Holborn hill to clime,
To empty them out of the reach of time,
Into eternity there to attend
That solemn state, that never shall have end.
What have I said? that that is but a figure
Of this? intruth I do the case disfigure.
For this is but a dim and glimring type
Of that stupendous trumpet and shrill pipe,
That ushers millians into such a state,
That is and will be ever desperate:
Intolerable, yet must ay be born:
This is the trumpet, this the precious horn,
That truly may be called unicorn.
But yet I have another let, before
I can admit to open this wide door,
To issue out that great artillery
That Is ready charged, and all prepared lie
Within his royal and rich magazeen,
For this whole tragedy and every scene.
We must suppose nothing was don before,
Nor nothing left undon, when we give over.
But all dispatched on all sides first and last,
Of what is to come, what is present, and what is past.
Only the sentence and the execution,
(By the Prince himself) which makes the last conclusion
If this be first premised it will be clear
At the first entrance, there no other were
To whom the Summons came, but Minorites,
And they but two the Summons first indites,
Which Summons called upon them to submit,
Accept the fine, on their transgression set,
Renounce the serpent, who had them betrayed,
Return to him, whom they had disobeyed.
And we have grounds to judge, they did comply,
And listed in coelestian company.
And so did some, who of their offspring came,
Which records testify, (and we could name)
But do of choice men's persons here omit,
Which does a parable (such as this is) befit.
But as they multiplied to numbers grew,
From first infection many of them threw
Off all respect unto their gracious Prince,
(As many now) and have don ever since.
Thus being mixed, there is another press,
Levied against them sons of righteousness.
Made many Summons, and for many years,
That did foretell what was their grounded fears,
If faill they should rebel and not incline
Quite to renounce all that was serpentine.
This summons now on two great things hung,
Which to their weal or woe did much belong.
The first whereof the greatest part most fear
Of what they gain, or lose, or suffer here,
Before into the common prison cast,
Tho that is a trifle in respect of the last,
Which is the state that each must undergo,
When our of prison they are taken fro,
Whether their after state shall be much better,
Or ten-times worse than straitest chain or fetter,
That in the former prison they shall find
For numbers of their sorrows or for kind.
And there is yet one more ingredient,
Which serpentine condition does foment,
Before the man in common prison's cast,
And while he is there: tho when those two are past,
The worst of all is behind, but none can tell
How far this host does both the first excel.
All this premised three things at present are
To be considered cause, state, seat of war.
The proper cause of war, that is now in hand,
Is not alone or mainly to demand.
Arreregies, or compensation rites,
For former failings of the Minorites:
At least if now they hearken to the terms,
Upon the second covenant he confirms,
Which if they will not close with, he is free
To lay upon them first arreregie,
And (which is worse by far) than to proceed
To final sentence for their second deed,
Which is their scorning, all his terms of grace,
Which now he offers (if they take no place)
But if they will return, obey his Son,
And thankfully accept what he has don.
He will (in time) release them from all pains,
Which the first covenant-trespass contains,
And in the intrim, such a mitigation
That they may well rejoice in their relation
T'wixt him and them: and when release shall come,
He will advance them, to such peace and room,
Riches and honor in coelestian bounds,
That thousand times excel all other towns,
More than they think, and more than they can crave
And that forever, they shall surely have
For their consent, with patience he will wait
Until their scorning, put it out of date,
But how long time he will suffer, no man know's
If once he say: No longer: naught but woes
They are to look for: if they dare, to try
He swear's himself, their mortal enemy,
If he conclude them serpian, they are undone,
And no more terms of peace in listed on:
The seat of war. I mean, where warlike trains,
Are set on foot, and for a time remains,
A city overrun by'th'enemie,
Must be besieged, tho many in it be
True friends to him that does the leager lay,
About their walls (and suffer in the fray)
Or unresolved, that is fast to neither side
Do many bickerings of the war abide,
While there are tractors kept, and Lodged within
No peace can be expected, but infine
The way to free the place from seat of war
Is to give up, to'th' lawful governor.
Then tho they suffer for a little space,
They may expect a plentiful release.
True! in all wars it oftimes proves not so
Yet in this war, i't's peace at last: we know,
Because we are sure, our Prince will overcom,
And if we die will crown our Martyrdom,
And raise us to an other kind of life,
Where shall no warlike engines be, or strife:
But in a mistical coelestian sense
We do no die at all, rather commence
As further graduates in coelestisism
More set at liberty then cast in prison,
In our dark, strait, immured vaults sequestered,
From lumber, cumber, rumor (here wee'r pestred)
Amongst the Serpians and Minorites
With weary days, and full as toilsom nights,
Although our joints he stiff sin new's contracted
Worms fill our belly, yet heads undistracted
Lips, tongues, nose, eyes, ear's, eaten off and out
Stinck, filth, foul vermin, crawling round about
Yet head's never ache, we hear no frighting sound,
See nothing ghastly, feel no smarting wound,
Scent naught unsavory, no nauceous taste,
And what we touch offends not in the least,
Tho pressed down we never are oppressed
Crushed together, not at all distressed,
A looker on indeed, meets with infection
Hurried by terror, and sick by inspection.
But all our filth the irksome worms and steam
As sweet to us, as when on beds you dream,
What here we prison's call (other where death)
No surfets have shirks, pox, or stinking breath;
Here are not (want not) what sence-humour pleases
No music Nose-gays, youthful love embraces
These please tho bestial senses at the least,
As these prevail we have too much of the beast,
Wherewith these always mixed, commonly brings
To sweet meat sour sauce, to pleasure stings;
But tho the beastial parth does not enjoy
The objects sensitive there is no annoy,
But there is another part that is correlate,
Here with the sensitive, nere out of date
If in conjunction it was coelestin,
It shall entirely now commence divine,
And with its faculties, rise to that rate
(Wholly incapable, o'th conjunct state)
Bird-like when freed from cage mounteth on high,
Has the whole air for space from earth to sky.
I am not ignorant, it is a dispute,
And diverse have writ much such to confute
Who do deny there is any such a being,
That some call mind (some soul) after it is freeing
From this dark lump of clay (when in the dust)
That Is not my present work (contend the lust)
To me it seems quite out of debate
By certain records we commemorate
Proclaimd, authorized in name of Prince,
Which seems to me sufficient to convince
If any desire to see any store,
See Master Baxter, Of the immortality of the soul.
also Doctor Moor,
It Is true, indeed there is none that yet can say
That by experience, none are gone away,
Who have returned again to let us know
What is the mind, or soul (body let go)
Yet in some part, we have a real taste
Experience double, in what things are past
How many lose a leg, an arm, an eye,
The soul goes out, but is it less thereby?
Indeed by this it plainly does appear
The soul no longer does inhabit there,
And then that member liv's not, th'actors fled,
But who can therefore say that actor's dead?
It kills the member which it parts fro,
But what kills it? what reasonist can show?
When once the soul takes leave of head and heart,
We know its gone from every other part,
But tho it leaves its house how can we tell?
It has not flitted, some where else to dwell?
But what means swounings, ecstasies and trances,
In some continue long, in some frequencies,
They often come, stay long, as some can tell
Within our age a maid called Hannah Trapnel,
And yet another named Sarah Wite,
And others more, I shall not here recite,
Sometimes the body's have been so long dead,
That so appeared, as if the soul was fled
All breathing motion warmness was extinct,
Or so suspended nothing of it blinckt.
Now if the soul was every whit as weak
In that remittance, as the body sick,
Stood as much need of body to revive
As body stood of it to re-inlive,
What virtue should the body thereby get
When t'help it self, was every way unfit,
All that looked on could say in half an hour
To help the soul, the body had no power,
But when they saw the motions wrought by the soul
Upon then body who can that control?
I'ts far more likely that the life o'th'body
Is by the soul upheld then the contrary,
But if they are equal, live and dye together
Which has most virtue? who can answer whether?
The one or other, by the nobler part
(As in the members) all give place to'th'heart.
Why is the heart more noble then the toe?
But that it is longer lived, and why not so
Between the soul and it? or rather more,
Because the facultie's superior
Th'Anatomist can all the heart dissect,
But where is the man who can the soul inspect?
No, not his own, it is a deep abiss
Unfound out yet, to tell you what it is
How know you that it is? by what it does,
How know we that, unless we feel them both?
When feelings gone, and thinking left us too
We are no judges what the soul can do,
But if the soul can tell, and have not means,
Or be debarred by overruling reins.
We speak like babes to enter into that,
Or go by guess to say we know not what,
Or that it is not, because we can not tell,
The way it takes, when it remov's to dwell,
Three I remember, all of my acquaintance
Not only dead (by all beholders sentence)
But all things done, by which 'tmight be inferred,
Within few moments corpse should be interred.
The first dead 19. hours, or there about
The soul knell-towld, then passing-peal rang out,
All things appointed to convey him thence,
His soul return's and gives his body sense;
But this is that I chiefly note it for
The story which he told me (which is more,
Than I can now recall) of what he saw
Heard, did, enjoyd, or dreamed as he lay,
What goodly cities, music ravishing
Solid delights, for state: there is no King
To be compared with that admired frame
His soul was in, 'ere back to'th' body came;
When friends saw him revive, they were right glad,
But when his dream (if dream) was past: oh sad!
How Planet-struck creast fallen, and all a mort,
When crazy body broke off all that sport.
Oh what a game (thought he) his soul had played,
If by the body, 't had not been betrayed?
This young man's name was called Robert Hardy
Aged four and twenty, 'bout 16 hundred thirty,
As I remember, time was justly so,
Which is about forty seven year's ago.
The second man distinctly (not to huddle
Confusedly) was called William Budle,
A tailor lived in Stanford, 8 years after
The former ( Hardy's story) past the slaughter,
(As all men thought) that (butcherdeath) does make
One time or other, for's commissions sake,
Which charter's granted him, none can deny,
It is appointed all men, once to dye,
This Budle as I heard (with diverse others)
Was brought unto the grave by friends and brothers,
As they were busy, him therein t'infold
(As one that is dizy) cried out: oh I Am cold.
The third was called drunken Will the paver
(To say the truth) he was a drunken shaver,
Who had been dead (men thought) sufficient time
No prejudice at all to bury him,
When corp's were at grave's mouth, in had been hurld
Had not (Will) cried: what! no drink in this world?
The people ran, as if they would been stark mad
For fear of the devil (like dead Will now clad.)
But some more bold, him out of grave-clothes freed
Perceived at last, 'twas drunken Will indeed,
Who had the habit still, tho must refrain
To act, rather then roast would drink again,
And after this some years from Will I heard
All this confessed (in Paving one court yard)
In Barnestaple, (if I rightly fix)
The year was 16 hundred sifty six
(Now seventy seven) by all which it appears
From this relation one and twenty year's,
But where his soul had been in all the trance,
I must profess my total ignorance,
Where'ere it was, it is clear, it came again
For ought I saw, both sottish and profane:
By which it is plain (I speak it by permission)
The body's death: changes no souls condition;
But as it was before, so it must lie
In perfect peace, or restless misery,
But there are records, of a better nature,
That may confirm more fully in this matter
Whence I conclude; where ere the bodies lie
Souls are immortal, and do never die,
But do and shall, while body's dead and after
Enjoy or suffer as it lived partaker,
If this be so as I believe it is.
What to the body many pleasures miss.
If soul be coelestin, it has more scope
A thousand times, when freed from the cope,
And narrow pound wherein it is here confined
In most desturbance to its pure mind,
But here is a field, that might a Volume fill,
If we can yield, how bodies curb the will,
And specially in any thing that is good
By sensual appetite, in drink and food,
Or vain delights, which do the soul eclipse
By worldly profits, merchandise or ships,
With sorrows, fears, pains, torments and what not?
Transports the soul, it does, it cares not what.
In such an hurry till the storm be over
(And to a calm it does it self recover)
All this removed on right hand and on left
When soul from body's baits, and fear's bereft
Who can suppose how high the soul may climb,
When so at liberty free and sublime?
I pray you tell me, if you write a letter,
Do you not find you can indite it better,
When you are composed and settled in your mind,
From cumbers free, and no distraction find?
Than when you rage, and in your passion chafe
Must answer Dick and Tom, (it may be Ralph)
You never knew a student who would dare
To choose a place in the market or in the fare,
To make his study, but the silentst place
That can be got or found in any case.
The more a man does exercise his soul,
He will avoid all cumbers that may roll
And tumble up and down with jogs and nois,
Which might divert him by such lets or toys,
Who ever knew to pray or meditate,
But shunned distraction at the highest rate?
The more the soul is in the body out,
What think you? then the man is most devout,
His pleasure greatest, his delight unmixt,
What would he give always to be so fixed?
Which now and then, tho he here get a taste,
He cannot drink his fill, it is soon laid wast,
Jumbled again by bodily concern,
That makes him sigh and say: this is not hea'vn.
Was It not for this, I think he would scarce know,
Whether this state was perfect heaven or no.
Yet (judging so at last) he would not fear
To wish or build his tabernacle here.
This clips his wings, oh this abates his love,
This cuts his locks he cannot dwell above.
While in these shackles oh this makes him groan,
To be unclothed, and then be clothed upon.
But what a piece of doctrine now is this,
That tho unclothed he shall his darling miss?
Or as some say, dis confired by fears,
He still must wait 't may be some thousands years.
I Am sure their comforts more, who antedate
Their hopes to the period of this brittle state
But yet that is short. for none can it conceive,
Why should I then my comfort thus bereave,
The sum of what I would be at is this,
The seat of this our war, the Minories
Does mostly, if not altogether, reach,
But does not in the lowest sort impeach
Those flitted from the land of Minories,
(E're body out of prison shall arise)
And then souls are entirely coelestine,
Or otherwise directly serpentine.
There is no war but in Minories quarters,
No perfect peace but in coelestian harbors,
No condemnation but to serpians.
Tho Minorites become coelestians,
(If ever) it is e're they in prison came,
Or else they never shall obain that name.
If Minorites be changed to serpentine,
It is before this prison them confine.
We fight not with the Minorites, (as such)
But that amongst them there is very much
Of intermixed serpian contagion,
Against which we fight to make a through purgation.
To separate between the two known seeds,
Which 'twixt the woman and the serpent breeds,
In prison state: these two are quite divided
Which leaves no room by war to be decided:
The body caelestine remains in bliss
By virtue of that fre'ed soul of his
The Body serpian; remayns in curse
By virtue of his soul (at present worse)
There is no fighting, with caelestiall
Because there is nothing left to fight withal;
For all the enmity, is thoroughly heald
All former quarrels now by grace repeald.
Nor now no fighting with the serpentine
Becauses there is nothing mixed that is divine
Tho that remain in perfect enmity
It Is left for judgment not for fight to 'trye:
Now as caelestian souls have far more bliss
Then e're they had amongst the Minories
Even so it fares, by contrary proportion
With serpian souls: from Minories remotion
For as the body now can no way vex
Caelestian souls: so what can most perplex
The serpian soul has now it is full commission
Because there is nothing now, in his condition
That can have any mixture of content
From what the body, formerly him lent:
His quaffing fits, and jolly company
Could once his dumps, and torments often put by.
No pastimes there, whores, wine, or delicates.
That stufs the guts, or brain intoxicates:
I read one Rich, imprisoned some what later
For scortching thirst, cried out: one drop of water
But could not get it: for its price in blood,
And if he had, would nere have done him good.
Which story is Authentic: does imply
A farther secret, hidden mystery.
By looking round about, I can not see
But it compriseth two (at least) of three
The first I can by ba means close withal
Who fancy bodies dead, in torments fall
When first in prison cast: because his tongue
Tormented was those raging flames among.
But with the second, I do much agree
Who judge the soul has such a sympathy
With all the good and ill that bodies feell
That it can personate each member well
In all it is best (if good) or worst if evil
By help angelical: or slight o'th devil.
For there is as much said full (upon the matter)
Of lazarus his finger dip't in water
Which strains are Metaphorical, and bend
That they may to our weakness condescend.
But in the third and last consideration
The Rich man's body's taken in that station
Where in it shall, at goal delivery
Be joind with soul, in all it is misery:
Then may it well admit all in the letter
Both what is worse, as also what is better,
According to the state the foul is in,
Whether caelestian, or serpentine.
The third main head, I did before propound
To show the state of war, as well as ground.
Which seems to me so clear by what is said
That it was needless, farther there to wade.
Yet second thoughts, have made some alteration
Chiefly for pressing home the application
Which is the only end I should aim at
From first to last t'examin well our state.
The general summons, ye have heard before
The cause and seat, and state of war read'ore
I now descend as closely as I can
To touch the quick: and say, thou art the man,
Which every conscience, better can desery
(If not deceitful to it self) than I.
Can tell what answer, each shall give toth' Prince
When he (whose work it is) shall them convince.
My self I may not from this charge exempt
Least I be judged, for the like contempt,
Me thinks I hear, this trumpet loud and shrill
Sounding a call, to Minorites that dwell
Within the compass of the Minories
Tarar, tarar, awake stand up, arise
Ye Minorites of high and low degree
Now answer to your names, when you shall see,
You are in special called, by such clear signs
As all your secret cavil's undermines.
It is no trifling, by devised tricks
To shun the charge, or kick against the Pricks,
For know, there is a general inquest
To search for serpian seed in every breast.
I testify to every mothers child,
You are polluted much grossly defiled
In every Minorite there is a flaw
By known rebellion to a right'ous law.
If you have searched your selves, by good direction
If not, now seek you will find unknown defection,
And that you may, from all pretenses fall
I will appeal to your original.
If you review, what here to fore was said
You Will find, at first, you were uprightly made
Had all things given for your chiefest good
With all supplies, for safety and for food.
Nothing your Prince with held, except one tree
Which he preserved for his royalty
To be untouched, of which you might not eat
(That set aside) you had sufficient meat:
He told your father, if he did but taste
He must expect in prison to be cast
With all his children for such gross offense
Which he and you have practiced eversince.
That tree tipes out (in short) a double band
To which you Minorites for ever stand
In obligation, to obey commands
And to eschew, all what forbidden stands
Now what you will answer (without vain pretense
Examine well! what says your conscience.
The first reply, that to this charge was made
Was utterly, the conscience, to evade
For when your parents vent'red first to eat
They were persuaded, all was but a cheat.
That conscience, was a false decietful test
By instigation of serpentine beast,
Who wholly laid the fault upon your Prince
Who had seduced you, and to evince,
That calumny, against your sovereign Lord,
He sought to falsify his faithful word;
And you all know, what followed there upon
And why the curse upon you's justly thrown,
And now through long, and sad experience
Who dare oppose, the test of conscience?
And how you him, and conscience have obeyed
From that time forth, is now the question made,
Although by what each soul finds in it is breast
It can not wholly cast off conscience test
Without some smart, reluctancie, and fear
Because it know's, it is sentence will lie there.
Yet by the craft of serpents subtlety
Which first prevaild against our Ancestry
The same design, by steps is driven on
Which at the first, by the serpent was begun,
And when one snare is broken, frames a new
Or paints the old one in a fairer hew.
In general, we say we are offenders
There Is hardly any left of such pretenders
To such a perfect, legal right'ousness
Who say, they never failed more or less.
In any circumstance thought word, or deed
And stand upon it from all guilt to be freed.
Yet there is such mincing, daubing and restriction
That frequently, confession's but a fiction,
It Is made an artifice, to sin again,
Without remorse to make it a trade for gain,
To often the Minorites do entertain
A great deal of this course and foulest strain
The serpent in that Minorite we fight,
And to the bar of conscience him indite.
And if he wilfully will stop his ear,
And by all farther warnings will not hear
That loud Alarm, which his conscience sounds
Upon that step he certainly confounds,
And lists himself a perfect serpentine,
And so incurs that wrath that is divine,
Which will not longer strive him to refine,
But seals him up for Judgment and confusion:
Who would not part with such a false delusion?
Some others go a little higher step,
Who will confess some faults, and will not keep,
That full carrear of guilt they had before,
But many of their gross misdeeds give over,
But will not part withal in any case,
How ever some to others must give place:
And chiefly that to which they are most inclined,
From that reserve they will not change their mind.
Our war does press these partial sort of men,
To leave reservs, and totally contemn
Each relic of this inbred serpents seed,
In heart and inward man as well as deed,
Or else for ever they shall be shut out,
From what the Princes Son has brought about.
For their advantage and release from prison.
But if they still refuse the Judge is risen,
In wrath and fury to his last decision.
But if they will yield not leave behind an hoof,
They shall of grace have full and pregnant proof.
And then shall hear the terms of lasting peace,
Which shall be showred on them and increase.
If all this will not do there is no pretense
Shall mitigate their final recompense.
Another sort after some long debate
Is overcome to lay by all their hate,
Acknowledge guilt, and fain would not begin
To turn their course, but are so compast in,
And round about with fears and many dangers,
Almost conclude, they will quite cast off as strangers.
Shall never reach the pitch of coelestine,
But sinck and fall amongst the serpentine.
They know not what to do, which way to take,
Yet gladly would the serpent quite forsake.
To such as these (if all this be not feigned)
We are empowered to treat, but e're that is gained
We must be careful, least by false disguise
We let a traitor in, that cheats and lies.
Indeed if this appeal was made to man,
Too subtle it might be, (do what we can)
But if thou think to cover what is within,
And carry smoothly like a coelestine,
That not the strictest of that holy sect
Shall go beyond thy outward to detect,
And yet have naught but rottenness in heart:
Against this sort we point our sharpest dart,
Here Is double cannons greatest ordnance planted,
Here Is guard on guard, no treaty here is granted,
This double faced traitor is the but,
Against which our Prince with highest rage does shoot.
Yet in this vizor are enclosed so many,
Cunning evasions that there are not any,
Although sincerest faithful coelestines
Can well find out the compass or confines
Of those deep stratagems, which here are wrought,
In those deep mines and shops of serpian-toft.
But this we know, when ever we let fly,
And hit the mark, there is at ^^^on high.
Another (thousand-like) in conscience,
That kills or cures, whereof only our Prince,
And his beloved only begotten Son,
Can give an estimate of what is don.
And will (at farthest) at the great assize
(To shame or joy) show what is truth, what lies.
There are too many, only seem repent,
And by their outward show do much relent,
That they offended have their gracious Prince,
And think their carriage does no less evince,
And therefore hope the kindness of his Son
To them belongs, of all that he has don.
Yet too too plainly make it to appear,
They neither love the Son, the Father fear.
What e're they say, their actions are so stout,
By words and deeds rebellion breaks out.
Have you not heard much of a certain father
Into his vineyard sent his son to gather
The fruits thereof: the son strait way replied,
Sir I will go, but in his works denied?
Another sort will wave such outward acts,
As can their conversation justly tax,
But hide their hate and mischief all within,
To save their intrest make a cloak for sin,
Who by their words and deeds do naught but flatter,
Yet cleanse the outside of the cup or platter,
But inwardly their filth and noisome savor
Are quite unlike their outward feigned behavior,
Tho none can witness how they stand affected,
Yet by their consciences they are detected.
(Without repentance) fall into the lake,
Whereof all feigned hypocrites partake.
It Is not to say how far this sort will go,
To what an height of semblance they may grow.
There Is none shall bluster more against offenders,
Than those self guilty, self contemned pretenders,
With strictest sort of zealots they will keep peace,
Observe their times, come to their meeting place,
And sometimes suffer for some vain applause,
And who but they to vindicate the cause,
That Is truly good? and all that can be said
T'appear in the front they will not be afraid.
And such as these you seldom see appear,
To come behind in flanck, or bring up rear.
To be a captain, general, some file leader
Of some strange notions, the only spreader
To be in print, or loudest disputant,
Promote a sect, and bitterly to taunt
Against dissentors, who can not comply
against these they will fight, with those they will live and die
You Will seldom see them patient, when they are crossed,
But often boast of what theyve' done and lost,
For standing to the Prince and love to's Son
And no hard labor for their duty shun,
And Jehu like ride hard and dare appeal
To the most upright to come behold their zeal.
But when they get this honor, win this prise,
Where shall they leave it, at the great assize?
But all this while far let it be from me
To plead against, what in integrity
In highest zeal is done with humble heart,
Who with the sufferers for truth take part,
And this I know that many such are blamed
With pure revenge, that cowards be not shamed;
Nor would I have a zealot that in truth
Promotes a cause, and to his utmost shew'th
His zeal and love shrinck back, tho men indite
Him for a seeming painted hypocrite,
Because his Prince however men despise
Will clear his honor at the great assize.
We fight not to dishearten but maintain
The highest acts to serve our sovereign;
But only press it with a single heart,
Which sets a luster on the outward part,
And makes it acceptable: for he knows
Thereby the difference 'twixt his friends and foes.
And they shall know it to their weal or woe
That act in truth, or do with falsehood go.
Return we now to each of these sad souls,
Who for their guilt in grief and sorrow rowls,
For what they have don, feel what they cannot do,
Without distraction and confusion too,
Sincerely love, and in their measure serve
The Prince and Son, and from them would not swerve.
But are afraid they never shall hold out,
They find so many lets within, without,
Of all our warfare and our greatest pains,
Such souls as these appear our greatest gains,
Brought to this pass, when have some other charms
Them to invite into our Princes-Arms,
That stand wide open freely to embrace
Such penitents, what ever be their case.
Oh now is th'accepted time, now we propound
To all such smarting souls the joyful sound,
And special favor, that to these shall grow
Which from the common grant to them shall flow.
And here we publish in our Princes name
On this account, the tenure of the same,
When Minorites had disobeyd
Incurd the curse, convict dismayed
Renounced homage to their Prince,
And have been Out-lawed eversince
Condemnd to prison by and by
In justice nothing could reply,
The Princes Son does interpose,
And with his right'ous Father close
Confirmed all that he had done
As to the Law, he stood upon,
By which there is none may plead exemption,
Yet by a Prince, he work's redemption
Fulfills the law, endur's the pain
That Minorites may once again
Have other terms to treat upon,
By satisfaction of the Son.
The Articles were thus agreed
That all the prisoners should be freed;
Upon a time the Father set,
But not reveald, to any yet,
To many he would respight give,
And spare a while by his reprieve,
And in that respite give them means
For present good, and future gains,
And if those means be used well
Not willingly against Prince rebel,
But him obey, receive his son,
With thankful hearts, for what he would done
Renounce the serpent and his seed
Without delay, with utmost speed,
They shall be blessed, while they are here,
And at the great assize appear,
With comfort and assurance
They shall in happiness advance,
Receive a kingdom which shall last,
When that assault is gone and past,
But if this grant they do reject,
And to the serpent give respect,
Renounce the Father and his Son,
We must pronounce they are quite undon
Ere they shall be in prison cast
Shall wrath and righteous vengeance taste,
Brimfull with horror and with hate,
Uprising early, lie down late,
And eat the bread of carefulness,
Or (Sodom like) of idleness:
To'th' height lift up, that Pharaoh like,
The keenest darts through heart may strike
Presumption turned into despair
A curse intaild upon the heir,
So thrown in prison with despites
To fire unquencht, and worm that bites
Tho from that prison they shall come,
It Is to recover sadder doom,
Then all what is present or what is past,
But none can say how long 'tshall last,
Unless poor mortals could agree,
A limit for eternity.
You see the tenure of this double state
To weal and woe, life, death, to love and hate,
You see the causes, motivs and conditions
On either side with all their intermissions,
Stay but a while, and you shall see each stand
Before the judge on left or righter hand,
One sort he will cast away, the other keep
The goats for ever parted from the sheep,
There loud and endless cursings, shreeks and cries
Here Hallelujahs, through eternities,
If this be so (and so it is at lest)
Oh where is that man that differs from a beast,
Where is that Phoenix? oh how few there are
Prepared to meet their Princes son in the air.
These are our trumpets, these our drums,
That sounds and beats, the bride-grome comes
A wake, trim lamps, prepare your oil
Knock quickly, cry: prevent your foil,
Time posts away, 'ere ye can think,
Why should we sleep another winck?
And now me thinks I see the end,
For which we thus far prove and fend,
The war is past, the field is won,
Victorious General (Princes son)
Now takes his throne, and Summons all
To stand before his tribunal,
Commands to open prison doors
For now he will fully pay all scores,
And make the balance stated right
Debit and Credit to a mite,
And all that have embraced him
Shall first be called, their Jailor grim
Shall be discharged them to detain,
And never more disturb again.
Their prison doors are open set,
And their redemption now complete,
The Judge will give them a white stone,
And his new name ingrav'd thereon,
Their prisons garments take away,
And cloth them in a white array,
Admit them freely into grace,
And smile on them with pleasant face,
And openly them justify
From all that charge and calumny
That serpentines had on them cast.
All their dishonour's over past,
Now he will pronounce them clear from guilt
By precious blood, that he had spilt,
And also own what they had done
(Though many frailties cleared thereon)
And what they did unto his friends,
As to himself takes them commends,
I was in prison he will say,
You have not turned your face away,
You owned me in all my chains,
And now I free you from your pains,
When I was nak't you have me clad,
In great distress ye made me glad;
When hungry, thirsty, meat and drinck
Ye brought me (tho at dangers brinck)
Those humble souls have so much sense
That they could him not recompense
With wonderment, cry out: Oh Lord!
When ever could we thee afford
Such things as thou ascrib'st to us?
Then he will clear it: It was thus,
Because my brethern and my friends
You have relieved to all those ends,
And comfort and refreshing gave
'Twas unto me, and you shall have
The recompense on every part,
Because I saw your loving heart,
Come blessed souls, under my guard
A kingdom rich for you prepared
Your night is gone, your day is come,
I am your husband, your bridegroom;
I will with you, you shall with me
For ever more keep company.
Such Salutation! such a kiss!
O! what is love, if 't be no this?
But do not ask me what is yet behind
(When come thus far) far into human mind,
It never entered, ear heard, tongue e're spoke
Eye ever saw, what after they partake,
That it is best beyond what any hear
Yet ever had conceived, or could appear,
We have some records, but to say what it is
An Angel is too weak, time does not this
Less than eternity shall surely miss
To give solution unto such a doubt,
And not before eternitie's quite out,
When you can say, eternity shall end,
An answer to this quest you may pretend.
What! not until eternity expire?
Why then dispute no more, lie down, admire!
To close up all, this bless shall last for ever
Have interruption or abatement never;
But oh! the Tragedy of the after scene!
The second part is not to the same tune.
For heaven and earth, east west are not so far
In separation, or so greatly jar
As these two states, and what is said of the first
Does show by contraries how th'other's cursed,
All that was said upon the others bliss
Show's what is this curse by plain Antithesis,
And therefore if you Judge that is not enough,
But still will urge to ask a farther proof,
We must go retrograde in our Parable,
By terms reciprocal (as we are able)
Where there is something can be said of both
By affirmation and negation, does
As truly fix on one, as the other state
Most comfortable or most desperate:
But either distance diametricall
That never met together never shall
Like difference have they in respective doles
To each as the Artick, and Antartick Poles.
Nadir and Zenith can as well embrace
Antipodes at once as well converse,
And meet together in one common point
As think to make these different states conjoint;
They Are both invisible to human eye
Beyond the reach of our capacity;
Both last for ever, never shall have end,
And both to'th' Princes glory shall extend:
Thus far we do confess, they do agree,
But now their nature's wholly contrary
To one an other: we can say no more,
Grace and severitie, mutually adore,
Look how one sings, the other mourns and weeps,
One in full light, the other never peeps;
One had his sorrow, 'ere he came to this,
The other mirth, till thrown in this abiss:
But now the scene is changed, the tables turned,
He Is comforted that heretofore has mourned,
And he now weeps, that heretofore did laugh,
And scortch't for thirst who formerly did quaff,
But go, ye cursed, is his last salute,
That makes the doom, complete and absolute
Now whether to this parable does tend?
And for what cause these umbrages are penned?
I shall not here insert, but you refer
Unto the former part prefixed here,
That one the other somewhat may explain,
That unto this, and this to that again
May be compared, as stool is with the flint,
May strike a spark, and give some little hint
Of that great day, and from that spark a flame,
That may prepare us how to meet the same.
With kindled souls we daily may aspire
To what is worth our while by looking higher
Than the weak embers of our common fire,
To that great love take up there and admire.
Till then we lose our selves, we never find
What thoroughly fills our souls, contents our mind.
There is the proper center, the compleator
Showed by creator to a mortal creature.
Here lies the difference 'twixt rich and poor:
By this is known who is sound and who are sore.
The good and bad here only disagree,
By this we know what is bondage, who are free.
By love and hate at last it is confessed,
It best appears who is cursed, who are blessed.
FINIS.

