A LETTER Written by the Governor of Algiers, TO THE STATES GENERAL OF THE
United Provinces OF THE LOW COUNTRIES, etc. In relation to the Signing the
PEACE concluded between them.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Burrel, at the Sign of the Golden-ball under St.
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1679.

A LETTER Written by the Governor of Algier TO THE STATES GENERAL Of the
UNITED PROVINCES.
WE Aga Mahomet Dey and Baba Hassan, Governor of the City and Kingdom of
Algier, wish on our Behalf, and in the Name of all our Victorious Militia,
after offer of our Service, all Prosperity to the most High and Mighty Lords,
the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and People,
Sons of God; Example of all Christian Princes, Supporters of the Faith of
Jesus, our most dear and great Friend.

If you enquire of our Health, we are well, thanks be to God; as also the
Country whereof We are established Governor, belonging to the Grand Seignior,
and to his Royal Ismael Bassa, is in good Estate.

We have several times understood, with extreme Content, from Thomas Here and
Jacob Deparyeur, Commissioners here, whom we esteem on your behalf, and who by
their Safe Conduct, cause themselves to be loved by us as well as any of this
Place, and rejoice that your Lordships and all your Dominions are in good
condition. Not long since the said Commissioners advised us, that You have made
and concluded an honorable Peace with his Majesty of France, by which your
Countries are Reestablished in repose; desiring now no other thing than a new
Increase of Commerce and Navigation through all Parts of the World, which is
pleasing News to us; for which we Congratulate you as mueh, as if it were a
Good communicated from Heaven to our selves. We know well, that the fruits of a
good Peace a^^ ^^^cessarily Good, and that War brings with it nothing but
sorrowful Desolation: (...) Cause, we have a long time ago desired an Alliance
of Peace with your Lordships, and renew our Ancient Friendship. In this Holy
purpose, we have hitherto, to our great Regret, been hindered by diverse
obstacles, as we have formerly advised you; Peace being in Gods ^^sposal, and
Time, and Means to obtain it, depending also on his Power. In ^^ne, the happy
Moment being come, we have, according to our Promise, in consideration of the
great Honor and Amity you are pleased to manifest to Us, Invited your said
Commissioners, who incessantly, by all ways, have labored with your
Lordships, to confirm the Treaty with Us, which they have done with great
Prudence and Vigilance: So that for the great Esteem we have of them, and
Inclination which we have to our Navigation, by reason of the Sincerity and
Loyalty we find therein above all others; We assure your Lordships, that we
proceed in this Cause in good Faith, and without Fraud.

During these Transactions with your Commissioners, the English arrived in Our
Road, with some Vessels, who, contrary to our expectation, solicited us with
many Instances to make Peace with them; they are a People without Faith, not
observing their Promise; they made War with Us without Cause, and without
Declaring against Us; they have taken Vessels, and made Slaves of our People.
We perceive in our Victorious Militia, as also in all our Inhabitants of this
Place, a great aversion to Peace with that Nation. On the contrary, all the
World avoweth with one Heart and Mouth, that the Flemings are a Good and
Faithful People, who go the right way, hating with horror all Fraud and
Deceit. Finally, the Conference with your Commissioners has had a desired
Issue.

We have together, in full Assembly, in presence of all the World, by
Invocation of the Holy Name of God, Made, Signed, Sealed, and duly Confirmed
the Articles of Peace. We assure our selves that your Lordships will not lose
time, but send us your Approbation and Ratification of what is Treated between
Us and your Commissioners. The Effects of a good Peace will be the Prosperity
of your Government as well as Ours; the Subjects of one another may freely
Navigate and Traffic: We desire nothing else but to Live in good
Correspondence with you, your Word being Ours, and Ours with Yours.

Be pleased then to permit your Subjects to Trade freely, and bring us all
sorts of Merchandise to make their profit of them; what then we shall have need
of, we will Demand for our Money, as we have formerly done with the English.

At the Arrival of the Ambassador, We understood that he had brought an
hundred pieces of Brass Cannon, to present to the Royal House here in case the
Peace should be concluded, which was very acceptable unto Us; for this
Courtesy, which we have not merited, we are very much obliged to you also. It
has been a custom, that our Predecessors, after Peace made with Christian
Potentates, have been courted with some Present or other. We seek not our
particular Profit being obliged to contribute all our Cares to the Public
good; therefore We declare to your Lordships, as we have before done to your
Commissioners, that we desire nothing for Us, nor for any other particular
Person; but if it be your good Will, that after the Ratification of the Treaty
of Peace on your part, you shall please to send us a Present of that sort, as
is abovesaid, and cause us to have some more pieces of Brass Cannon of the
largest Bore; We assure you, that We with our Militia shall account them the
most excellent Present that can be chosen, and our Successors will remain
perpetually obliged to you for the same: and if there be amongst us the power
to serve you, our hands shall be always open, when you shall please to command
our Service: in the mean wh^^^ (...) expect a favorable and speedy Answer to
this.

We ke^^ (...) Commissioners in our Protection, not suffering any Injury to be
done to them: We live with them as with our Brethren.

If this Treaty please you not, which God forbid, We will not for that forbear
to treat them well, and as Friends; knowing well, that they are your Ministers,
and that all is not in their power, but depends on your Will and good pleasu^^.
We will then wait the Accomplishment from your hand. God have you in his H^ly
Protection.

Toward the midst of the Moon Rabia Elouel, in the Year One Thousand and
Ninety, De Hegia.
FINIS.

