MEDVLLA BIBLIORVM, THE Marrow OF THE BIBLE, OR, A Logico-theological Analysis
of every several Book of the Holy Scripture, together with so many English
Poems, Containing the (...), or Contents of every several Chapter in every such
Book.

Whereunto is added a Chronological (Marginal) Annotation of the times and
seasons, wherein diverse acts and occurrences in the Holy Scripture happened.

Partly translated out of an Anonymus Latin Author, and partly amplified and
enlarged, for the benefit of all those that desire a short and plentiful
acquaintance with the Oracles of God, very useful for all Christian Families.

By William Ainsworth, (...), late Lecturer at St. Peter's, Chester.

London, Printed for George Calvert, at the Half Moon in Paul's Churchyard.
1652.

To the Right Worshipful SAMUEL SUNDERLAND, Esquire: W. Ainsworth Dedicates
this Book, Entitled, The Marrow of the BIBLE, And wishes all the Comforts
Contained in it.
WORTHY SIR,
SO much of this small Piece, as was (Originally) in Latin, was dedicated to
no less a Personage then a Queen, viz. Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,
whereupon I am induced and moved to think, that you possibly will not disdain
the same, with its Additions in English. I am the more confident in this
particular, upon these two (very sufficient) grounds. 1. Your bountiful
acceptance of my Triplex Memoriale, which being of as little worth as Bulk, was
not worthy of such acceptance as it found with you. 2. The generous and
cheerful encouragement (in the next place) which you have always given me in
this enterprise, which certainly had not been able to have looked upon the
light, had not you put Spirit into your Servant, to travel of it to the Birth.

Sir, Now that it is by Gods Providence and your favor, so (incompleatly)
finished, as it is: It lays it self at your feet, and acknowledges you for an
eminent, though (poor) me for the next, and immediate cause of it self, and
will willingly bear no name but yours. Only if you please, with as much
cheerfulness to look upon it, as you did to hear of it, when it was but in
the conception and generation, you shall infinitely in the first place deserve
of me, and not a little of many others, who by your means do compass an help
to bring them to a speedy acquaintance with the Scriptures

Sir, He that wrote the short exemplar hereof in Latin, undertook thus much of
it, that it would make a man both bonum Textualem, and bonum Theologum, a good
Text-man and a good Divine, and truly I confess it would do so, to those that
were not confounded with his brevity, but I am much more bold to undertake it
of this, wherein I have endeavored more intelligiblenesse and perspicuity. If
any man that savours the things of God, read this book without abundance of
profit, let me bear the blame for ever, for my (...), my impertinent and
unprofitable labors. But if every such man that sees and reads it be hereby
enriched to Godward, and to eternal life, I am sure you will think you have
encouraged me to good purpose, and rejoice that you are an instrument of
advancing not of darkning Knowledge, which will contract and concentre upon you
the many Prayers of many People, besides

SIR, Your Humble Servant, never unfaithful, though always unfortunate, W.
Ainsworth.
Febr. 17. 1651.
To the READER.
Gentle Reader,
ANgeli discunt Analysi, The Angels (they say) learn by way of Analysis: and
for ought I know, it is the best way too for man to learn; Ergo I have here
presented unto thee these few divine Analyzes for thy edification. If thou
complain of over-brevity in respect of variety of matter; I answer, they are
long enough to acquaint thee with the order of the Scriptures, which is the
most Sovereign means for the attaining of Knowledge. Besides, brevitas est
matter memoriae, etsi intelligentiae noverca, Brevity is the Mother of Memory,
though the Stepmother to Understanding, and so recompenses in one thing what
it wants in another. And indeed it is not to tell how that notions, though but
raw at the first, closely laid up in the Memory, and again drawn out by the
Reminiscentia, or Remembrance, and represented to the Meditation, do
wonderfully multiply and improve themselves. But if thou can not learn so
well by the Analysis, here is a Synthesis too, or a Collection, and putting of
things together in the several Poems I withal present thee; perhaps thou may
learn better by that. If thou can neither learn by Analytical nor Synthetical
order, thy case is a great deal more lamentable, for I suspect thee of a (...),
and a reprobate sense.

If thou object against my Poetry, as too light for divine subjects (as indeed
there is nothing more easy then to find fault) Ex. 15.1
Moses, Judge. 5.1.
Deborah and Barak, 1 Samuel 2.1.
Hanna, Psalm. per totum.
David, Cant. per totum.
Solomon, Isa 26.1.
Isaiah, Luke 1.42, 68.
Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 2.29.
Old Simeon, and the Virgin Luk 1.46.
Mary, and all that ever spoke to God in Songs, Numbers, and Poetical
Gratulations will awarrant and bear me out in that. All souls and Genius-es
are not of a like temper, nor to be wrought upon after the same manner. Some
are so harmoniously and tunably set, A verse may find him who a Sermon flies,
and turn delight into a sacrifice. Herb. in Templ.
that they had rather read one line of a divine Sonet or Poem, then an
hundredth in a dull and an heavy phrase, which though it may edify, yet it does
not ravish, and so has a more imperfect work upon the Reader. Now in these
Cases it is not amiss if a Minister imitate St. Paul in this thing, viz. in
becoming al things to al men, 1 Cor. 9.22.
that by all means he may gain some. This was my real intention in taking these
pains; and I trust (through Gods blessing) my intention will not be frustrate.

If thou object unto me, building upon another man's foundation, (as indeed this
was but a small Enchiridion when I first meddled with it) it is so ordinary and
so lawful, that it is more shame to upbraid it to another, then to be guilty of
it: and thus (Gentle Reader) if thou will trouble me with no more objections, I
shall trouble thee with no more apologies or answers; but humbly crave thy
daily and importunate Prayers for me, that I may be a faithful Minister and
Steward in the Lords house, that at last I may give up my account with joy and
boldness, in that day when all the tribes of the earth shall mourn before the
Lord, to whom I shall also ever pray for thee, and for the Israel of God. Mean
time taking leave of thee with the Apostles (...), 2 Cor. 13.11.
commonly translated, Farewell, I am

The least of all Gods Ministers W. AINSWORTH.
August. 8. 1651.
THE BIBLE OPENED. OR A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of GENESIS,
etc.
THe Book of GENESIS contains the Beginning. 2. Propagation. 3. Corruption. 4.
Reparation of the World.

1. The Beginning, viz. in the first Creation, chapter 1. 2. The Propagation, viz.
by the Marriage of Adam and Eve in Eden, chap. 2. 3. The corruption 1. By the
evil of sin, 1. In our first Parents, chap. 3. 2. In their Posterity, and
those either ungodly, as Cain, his sons and nephews, chap. 4. or godly, as Seth
and his generation. chap. 5. 2. By the evil of punishment, viz in the flood,
whereof we have the Cause, chap. 6. the Effect, chap. 7. the Decrease, chap. 8.
4. Reparation, by Noah and Abraham. By Noah drunk and mocked, chap. 9. his
sons are first collected by their Genealogies and Families, chap. 10. and then
dispersed by the confusion of tongues, chap. 11. By Abraham, of whom are
reported his internal goodness, and external goods. Internal goodness, Toward
God, whom he followed in his peregrination, chap. 12. Toward Lot, whom He
sends away with all his, chap. 13. Redeems out of captivity, chap. 14.

External goods, as Issue and Posterity 1. Promised, chap. 15. 2. Sought by his
Concubine, chap. 16. 3. To be received by his wife, concerning which thing he
is confirmed 1. Word, and Signs from God, chap. 17. 2. The testimony of Angels,
who confirm the revelation of Sodoms burning, wherefore we have, 1. The
prediction and deprecation, chap. 18. 2. The execution by the Angels,
punishing, but delivering incestuous Lot, chap. 19. 3. The effects, as Abraham's
going to Gerar, where his wife was first taken away, and then restored, chap.
20.
4. Actually given in his son Isaac, whose single life and marriage are both
reported. His single life, and therein His Nativity and the consequences
thereof. Sad, as the trobles of Hagar and Ishmael. Joyful, as his foede with
Phicol, chap. 21.
His immolation, and offering commanded first, and then forbidden, chap. 22.
His mourning for his mother dead and buried, chap. 23.
His married life; and therein The things that were prosperous, viz. a wife
sought, prepared, and brought by a servant formerly sworn to that purpose,
chap. 24. The things that were grievous, viz. 1. The death of his father, after
his second marriage and much issue, chap. 25. 2. His fourfold peregrination,
chap. 26. 3. His blind old age, whereupon there followed Jacobs, etc. Jacobs
Incomparable Primogeniture. Supplanting of Esau, which contracted Esaus hate,
chap. 27. Flight to Mesopotamia, to Laban, chap. 28. Where we have, 1. His
Bigamy with two sisters. 2. His Polygamy, posterity and riches, chap. 29, 30.
Return, 1. From whom, viz. Laban pursuing him. 2. By what Country, viz. Seir,
where Esau met him yet unpacified, ch 32. but anon pacified, chapter 33. And
Shechem where we read of the slaughter of the Shechemites, by Simeon and Levi,
chapter 34. 3. To whom, viz. to his father in Hebron, where we have both A
threefold funeral, and mourning. chap. 35. And his comfort From the good
fortune, and posterity of Esau, chap. 36. The birth, and unhappy-happy life of
his son Joseph, chap. 37. A digression concerning Judah Miserable and
Offending, chap. 38.
A regression to Joseph Imprisoned, chap. 39. Delivered by the exposition of
the dreams of Pharaohs servants, chap. 40. And of Pharaoh himself concerning
famine to come, chapter 41. Whence followed the coming of His Brethren and Father.

His brethren Without Benjamin first, chap. 42. With Benjamin next, who is
brought to Egypt, chap. 43. and brought back again, chap. 44.
His father, 1. Called to Egypt, chap. 45. 2. Hastening thither, and welcomed,
chap. 46. 3. Remaining in Goshen, all the rest of the land being oppressed with
famine, chap. 47. 4. Dying, where we have his Blessing Special, chap. 48.
General, chap. 49.
Funeral, and there Joseps mourning, kindesse, to his brethren, and death,
chap. 50.











A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of Genesis.
1 A Chaos first, then light, heaven, earth are framed
Adam's named.
2 God rests, man's inchoation is repeated,
And Paradise described, where man was seated,
3 The Serpents craft, man naked, Christ foreshown,
Eve breeds, both clothed with skins from Eden thrown.
4 Cain kills, flees, builds, and then there spring from Cain,
Lamech, and Jabal, Jubal, Tubal-Cain,
Adam begets Seth for Abel slain.
5 Here Is Adams race, Enoch is one of them,
And so is Bif^o^sque Noachus in undis, sic est in Latino exemplari.
Noah next Methusalem.
6 God grieves he made the world, will drown it now,
Bids Noah make an Ark, and tells him how,
And what to save in it from an overthrow.
7 Noah invades the Ark, all creatures perish,
Save those old Noah did in's bosom cherish:

Discover, Noah brings to God above
A Sacrifice, which he accepts in love,
9 Things licensed, and forbidden see, in the skies
The Rainbowe is Gods sign, Noah drunk lies,
Cham mocks him, is accursed, so Noah dies,
10 Here Is Noah's race, from whence at first did grow
All generations that the world oreflow.
11 Babel's cashiered, Sem born, Abram with his wife
Leave Ur for Canaan, Terah ends his life,
12 Abram believes, and offers, to Egypt goes,
Where he, nor's wife duist well themselves disclose,
The King, till he restored her, 's plagued with woes.
13 Abram with Lot departs, they two contend,
Divide the land, Lot does towered Sodom wend,
But Abram for his part Canaan-ward bend.
14 They two overcome five Kings, he rescues Lot,
Pays Tithes to the Priest, take the Kings gifts he will not,
15 A son's behighted him, Egypts sore yoke
After four hundred years, must sure be broke,
16 's wife gives him Hagar, she conceives with scorn,
She Is banished, and re^all'd, Ishmael is borne,
17 Abram is Abraham, Gods promise here
By Circumcision's sealed Sarah must bear,
18 He welcomes Angels, Sarah laughs and lies,
Abraham presents to God prayers, and cries,
To turn away Sodoms hard destinies
19 Two Angels blind the Sodomites, the place
They burn, Lots wife in slight turns back her face.
20 Abraham owns not his wife, this second time,
The King of Gerar keeps her to his pain,
All in his house are barren for this crime,
Abraham prays for them, gets his wife again.
21 Isaac borne circumcised, a feast, which tends
To Hagars banishment, God comfort sends
Unto the maid, Abimelech.
Abi: and Abraham friends.
22 Isaacs oblation's hindered by the Lord,
Nahors line downward's next upon record,
23 Sarah's dead, Abraham laments her buys
A grave of Ephron, where old Sarah lies.
24 Abraham's true servant brings for's masters son,
Bethuel, Rebecca, when that is done,
25 Abraham espouses Keturah, yet still
Isaac's his darling, give him all he will,
Esau his Birthright sells, and that was ill.
Isaac (as Abraham erst) owns not his wife,
The King's forbidden her, a Well breeds strife,
Esau a Bigamist, his mothers grief.
Jacobs disguise from Esau the blessing gets,
Esau to kill him for this his heart sets,
Rebecca all she can, the project lets.
28 Jacob is warned by Esau not to take
A Canaanitish woman, he must go
To Padan-Aram, and there marriage make,
It is his mothers mind to have it so.

Lea and Rachel, Lea children bears
Apace, but Jacob Rachel more endeares.
30 Both their bond-women now with Jacob lie,
And bring forth, I cah does with Mandrakes gain
From longing Rachel, Jacobs company,
The st^aked rods do all the young ones stain.
Jacob, Laban follows fast,
Warned not to hurt him, talks of stealth, at last
They make a mutual peace, when the anger's past.
32 Returning he bribes Esau for his faults,
Wrestles with God, and overcomes, but halts,
33 Esau endears him, gifts he will not receive,
Jacob pretends for Seir, but does deceive;
He goes another way, Esau takes leave.
Dinahs rape here under fair pretense
Of Circumcision, store of blood is shed,
Simeon and Levi did it, but their sense
Was not old Jacobs, he abhorred the deed.
35 His own house purged, he next to Bethel goes,
To offer, and receive the promise there,
Of Reubens incest he in season knows,
B^ries Nurse-Wife, with his own father dear.
Esaus wives, and of his kind,
Of Anah, that in the desert Mules did find.
37 Joseph his fathers love, and brethrens hate,
Is thought by Jacob to be dead by fate.
38 Judahs sons slain, bad Onan spills his seed,
Tamar cheats Judah, Zarah with th'red thread.
39 Joseph is wooed, 'cause he will not comply,
His Mistress makes him in a Dungeon lie,
40 There he expounds two dreams, Pharaohs great feast,
The Baker hanged, the Butler was releast,
41 He tells the King his dreams, Manasse, and
Ephraim, his sons, a famine in the land.
42 His brethren come for corn, and are sent back,
With each man's money, strangely put in's sack,
Only till Benjamin
Ben: come down, Simeon they lack;
43 Jacob sends down his sons, Simeon's set free,
And Joseph feasts them all most liberally,
44 His Cup's in the youngest's sack, Judah would lie
A pledge for him, Joseph does that deny.
45 His tears disclose him, he forgives them all,
And down to Egypt does his father call,
Who goes with joy, with all his, great, and small,
46 God speeds them, Joseph meets them on the way,
Brings them to Goshen, bade them there to stay,
47 Jacob tells Pharaoh of his seed, and age,
Gets Rameses with all its liberties,
For the Priests land Joseph will not engage,
Swears where to bury Jacob when he dies.
48 Presents his two sons to his dying father,
Who of the two prefers the younger rather,
49 Jacob foretells his sons their destinies,
And after that prediction shortly dies,
50 They bury him with tears, Joseph forgives,
Swears them about his bones, while he yet lives.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Exodus:
THe Book of Exodus speaks of the people of God in a threefold estate, viz. 1.
Before their departure out of Egypt. 2. At their departure out of Egypt. 3. At
their entrance into the Wilderness.

1. Before their departure out of Egypt, Where are observed, 1. Their
servitude, chap. 1. 2. Their deliverance, By Moses, of whom we read his
Nativity, education, banishment marriage, and lastly his Embassy, which is 1.
Commanded, see by whom, where, when, chap. 3. 2. Undertaken, and the
impediments of it removed; chap. 4. 3. Undergone, though with small success,
chap. 5. 4. Repeated again, with the Genealogy and calling of Moses, chap. 6.
By diverse plagues from God, as waters turned to blood, chap. 7. Meat pestered
with frogs, bodies with lice and fleas, chap. 8. Cattle with pestilence and
hail, chap. 9. Fruits with Locusts, the land with three days darkness, chap.
10. And the death of the firstborn, which is First threatened, chap. 11. Then
executed, where we read both of the slain, chap. 12. and the preserved,
whereupon followed, The law of the Passover, and the law of the Consecration
of the firstborn.

2. At their departure out of Egypt, where we have, 1. The manner how they were
brought through the red sea, wherein their enemies were drowned, chap. 14. 2.
The effects they brought forth being so delivered, how they partly sung Praises
to God, and partly murmured because of the bitterness of the waters, chap. 15.
3. At their entrance into the Wilderness, where we find, the impediments and
adjuncts of their peregrination. The Impediments, both General, lying upon all
people, because of the want of meat, chap. 16. and drink, chap. 17. Special,
for Moses in particular was overburdened with the charge of so great a people,
chap. 18. The adjuncts of their peregrination, were two, viz. (...) and (...).
(1) (...), or the promulgation of the Law, and preparation of the people, chap.
19. whereof we have the sum, or substance in the Decalogue. chap. 20. The
special explication thereof, both in respect of Things judicial, concerning
servitude, man slaughter, man-stealing, etc. chap. 21. Things Levitical,
concerning the firstborn, chap. 22. and the feasts of first fruits and
tenths, chap. 23. The confirmation thereof by a Covenant betwixt God and the
people, chap. 23.

(2) (...), or the building of the Tabernacle; where the building thereof is
commanded, hindered, begun, and finished. Commanded, both for Matter; where it
is showed, what, and what kind of things must be provided, and whence, chap 25.
Form; which belongs either to the things of the Tabernacle, as the Sanctum
Sanctorum, and the parts and adjuncts thereof, chap. 26. The Gallery and the
adjuncts thereof, chap. 27. Or the persons of the Priests, their habits and
garments, chap. 28. Their Ordination and Consecration, chap. 29. Their Office,
and the instruments of its execution, chap. 30. The efficient cause, as the
laborers, and the overseers of the work, chap. 31. Hindered by the Idolatry of
the golden Calfe, which is Committed, chap. 32. Reformed by Punishment, chapter 33.
The breaking and renewing of the Tables, chap. 34. Begun, both in respect of
the matter, commanded by Moses, and brought by the people, chap. 35. and in
respect of the form, both for the parts and adjuncts of the Tabernacle, chap.
36, 37. And for the parts and adjuncts of the Gallery, chap. 38. And for the
garments of the Priests, chap. 39. Finished, chap. 40.









A POEM. Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of EXODUS.
1 IN Egypt Jacobs seed did spread amain,
Until another Pharaoh came to the Crown,
That did their growing, and increase restrain,
Bidding t'oppresse the old, the young to drown.
Moses is hid in the flags, taken up, maintained,
Israel audience gained.

Moses confirmed by the fiery bush, not spent,
With promises, and blessings to Egypt 's sent,


To show that Moses must at Gods command,
With Aaron go to work the captives good.
5 Dismission is required, Pharaoh denies,
Doubles their burdens, and the peoples cries
To Moses, his to God, who never lies:
6 But by his name Jehova proves his word,
Though the people still believe not, yet behold
Moses is sent again to Egypts Lord,
in Isreal's case, whose chieftains here are told.
7 The Grandee goes to Pharaoh, at command,
Makes his rod Serpent, water blood of the land,
8 Frogs, Worms and flies are sent, but all in vain,
Pharaoh bids go, but takes his word again.
9 The murrain beasts consumes, boyls men confound,
It hails, it thunders, and fire runs of the ground,
10 The filthy Locusts spoil plants, herbs and fruits,
Thick darkness, with their words of darkness suits.
11 God says Israel shall go, there is one plague more
Threatened, the death of the firstborn, that goes sore,
12 His own untoucht the Pascal blood preserves,
Sprinkled upon their gates, when that is done,
The firstborn die indeed, God none reserves,
Whence Pharaoh bids the Israelites be gone.
13 Of man and beast, the firstborn are Gods right,
Who guides with cloud by day, with fire by night.
14 Pharaoh pursues, but Israel through th'sea goes,
Where Pharaoh life, and all things else does lose,
15 A Song for Pharaoh's drowning as it is meet,
Next Moses makes the bitter waters sweet.
16 The People murmur, Manna and Quails fall,
The Sabbath's fixed, that day no Mann'at all,
17 At Isreal's Cry the rock flows, Moses rod
Does that, Amalek he kills, offers to God:
18 Jethro full glad at Isr'els safe return,
Tells Moses how to rule, does offerings burn.
19 To Sinai Israel comes, God does appear
In fire, and thunder unto Moses there.
20 The law is given, all Israel is amazed.
Moses comes near, by him an altar's raised.
21 Servants must not by Gods law be abus d,
No murder must be done, no cursing used.
22 No thefts, cheats, rapes, witches, false gods must be,
Widows, nor Strangers wronged, to dignity
Honor is due, the first fruits, and firstborn
Are Gods, they may not eat what is rudely torn.
23 Slander, false-witnesse, Justice, Charity,
The year of rest, Sabbath, Idolatry,
Three Feasts i'th'year, a blessing to the good,
Are the scope here, with more that is understood,
24 Moses God singles out, calls up to th'Mount,
He stays there forty days by just account,
25 Here Is gold, silk, goats-hair, brought in at a word,
To build a Tabernacle to the Lord,
The form of th'Ark, the Mercy-seat's here told,
The Table, and the Candlestick of gold.
26 The worke's attempted now, and every thing
Pertaining to it, thither they must bring
The Ark of God, the room where it was placed,
Sanctum Sanctorum called, Gods presence graced,
27 'Bout Altar, Caldron, Court, the Networks, and
All kind of Vessels, God gives strict command.
28 Aaron and's Sons, what garments they shall wear,
The Ephod, Breast Plate, Urim, fall in here;
29 The Consecration, and the daily Vows,
What portion to the Priest the Lord allows.
30 Th'annointing oil of Aaron and his seed,
The Incense, Altar, Laver, Perfume, read.
31 Bezaliel and Aholiab are put
For th'Tabernacles use to carve, and cut,
The Sabbath is commanded, as before,
Moses receives two Tables and no more.
32 Israel will have a Calfe, which Aaron makes,
Excuses it, death follows these mistakes.
33 Moses would see God, God his back does give,
For Moses could not see his face, and live.
34 Moses renews the Tables, his face The Latin Version says, Moses face was
horned, mistaking the word, for of the Hebrew Karan, which is to shine or cast
forth glorious beams, the name Keren or horn is derived, in which sense the
Latin translated it here, and gave occasion to the ignorant to paint Moses
face with two horns like an Ox, whereby this glorious mystery has been
obscured and turned to a fable, for the glory of Moses face signified the glory
of the law which he preached, 2 Cor. 3.7. Ainsw in locum.
shined,
He hides it, lest the peoples eyes it blind.
35 Sabbath and Carvers mentioned here again,
The people bring their Presents in amain,
With the new Tabernacle they are so taken,
36 They contribute with such a bounteous hand,
That Moses does their bounty countermand.
37 Bezaliel makes the Ark, Cherubs, Crown, Table,
Vessels and Incense-Altar, he was able,
38 The Altar, Laver, Court, by him are made,
The Peoples offerings on an heap are laid,
39 Aarons both robes, and Crown Moses approves,
Does all things as God bids, whom his soul loves.
40 The Tabernacle feared, anointed, and
The Priest with his Sons anointed by command.
A cloud from God did shroud it in daylight,
And fire did rest upon it 2454.
all the night.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Leviticus.
LEviticus contains in it two parts, the first whereof treats of the kinds,
laws, Ministers and effects of sacrifice, the second is a Conclusion,
containing matter of exhortation, estimation, redemption, etc

The first part treats of the kinds, laws, Ministers and effects of sacrifice.

The kinds in respect of the matter
whereof they are made, as Animate creatures, as beasts and birds, of whom the
Holocaust and burnt-offering is made, chap. 1. Inanimate, as flower and fruits,
whereof the Minha is made, chap. 2.
About which they are conversant, or used, as Blessings received from God, which
cause the Eucharistical and gratulatory sacrifices, chap. 3. Sins committed by
men, as ignorances, chap. 4. and negligences, chap. 5.
Laws both concerning The burnt-offering, chap. 6. The Eucharistical offerings.
Ministers, viz. the Levitical Priests. See their Consecation, chap. 8.
Oblation, chap. 9. Errors of older Priests. of younger Priests, chap. 10.

Effects, viz. The Purification of uncleanness External, and that either of
one Person only, whether it proceed from the eating or touching of unclean
things, chap. 11. from childbearing, chap. 12. from the leprosy of bodies,
chap. 13. or houses, chap. 14. from ordinary, or extraordinary fluxes, chap.
15. 2. Or of the whole Church, whereof we have the expiation, chap. 16. and
abstinence from blood commanded, chap. 17. Internal, and that either
Oeconomical, where we read of the degrees of consanguinity and affinity, chap.
18. or Political, concerning Subjects, chap. 19. or Magistrates in punishing,
chap. 20. or Ecclesiastical.
Concerning Persons, viz. Priests, their purity, honor and quality, cap. 21.
Things, viz. Sacrifices, who may feed upon, and who not, of what sort they
should be, and how offered, chap. 22. Times, as the Feasts of days Yearly,
chap. 23. Daily, chap. 24.
years The seventh. The fiftieth, chap. 25.


The second part of Leviticus is a Conclusion, containing an exhortation to
observe the preceding Precepts, chapter 26. together with The estimation and
Redemption Of Vows, Firstborn, Tithes. chap. 27.


A POEM. Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of LEVITICUS.
1 Of th'herd, flock, fowls, what Holocausts content,

2 Meat Offerings baked, or fried to God are dear,
If salted, so are first fruits yet i th'care.
3 Peace Offerings out of th herd, or flock must rise,
The law for those is here before our eyes.
4 Next offerings for the sins of ignorance,
Of Priest, Prince, People with each circumstance.
5 The trespasse-offering for the man that swears,
And he that tells not when an Oath he hears,
Is sacrilegious, unclean, ignorant,
In what he sinned, with offerings must recant,
Of Rams, or Lambs, or Doves, or flower refined,
As several sins at several mulcts are fined.
6 By l^w the man that sins of knowledge brings
His trespasse-offering, for meat offerings,
For Consecration-offerings, offerings fired,
Off^rings for sin, see what by God's required.
7 Offerings of tre^passe, peace, thanks, vow, freewill,
O^der d by law, blood is forbidden still.
8 The hallowed Ram, sin offering, burnt-^blation,
The time, and place of Aarons Consecration,
9 Aarons first-offerings for himself, and all
The blessed Camp, on them Gods fire does fall,
10 Nadab, and Abihu made a sad end,
For the strange fire they did to God commend.
Priests to drink wine is grievously to offend:
11 Distinction's here of meats, some are so clean,
They may be eaten, other are unclean.
12 Childe-bearing women purified, but how
And with what offerings, is reported now.
13 The Priest must view in case of leprosy,
The signs are diverse of that malady.
14 The law o'th'leper teaches what to do,
How t'expiate the sin, and sickness too,
15 The rites of cleansing unclean issues next,
Are the apparent subject of this text.
16 The High Priests offering for his sin here note,
And the relation of th'escaping goat,
17 Upon the altar blood may sprinkled be,
Eat it they may not upon pain to die.
18 Unlawful Contracts, and Conjunctions fall
Unto this Chapter, God condemns them all,
19 Here diverse weighty laws repeated are,
To help the memory, and increase the care.
20 Against Moloch's servants, wizzards, those that curse
Their natural Parents, Gods law stands in force.
21 A Priest his beard in mourning may not shave,
A wife that is no Virgin may not have,
A blemished Person may not Priesthood crave.
22 Priests, if polluted, must abstain from holy
Both things and acts, else God will judge their folly.
23 With sundry Feasts here is th'Attonement-day,
Of all these God to Moses much does say.
24 Of lamps, and cakes, Ben-Sh^lomith blasphemes,
Against that, murder, and damage God exclaimes.
25 Each seventh year a Sabbath God does call,
Each fiftieth year a Jubilee does fall.
26 Who keep the law with blessings shall be crowned,
Who break the law God will in wrath confound.
27 Vowed things are Gods, redeem them no man may,
The tithes must not be chang d, them men must pay.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Numbers.
THe book of Numbers contains the numbering and marching of the Armies of Israel.

1. The numbering both of Soldiers and Captains. Soldiers both Lay-Souldiers,
their List is, chap. 1. and their encamping, chap. 2. Ecclesiastical Soldiers;
where we have their vocation, substitution into the place of the firstborn,
Redemption, chap. 3. and Ministry, viz. in cleansing and purifying the Host,
Generally, all the unclean, whether really guilty, or suspected, chap. 5.
Specially, the Nazarites, whose laws are, chap. 6.
Captains both Politic, or Lay-Captains, they offer magnificently, chap. 7.
Ecclesiastical, or Clergy-Captains, their daily office was about the lamps, and
Consecration of the Levites, chap. 8. their solemn and extraordinary office was
about the Pasch, and marchings of the Army, chap. 9.

2. The marching or Progress of the Army, commanded, hindered, furthered,
repeated, and finished. Commanded by whom, how, with what Colors and Captains,
chap. 10. Hindered by diverse impediments, Domestical, as 1. Want of Provision,
whence proceeded the murmuring and punishment of the People, chap. 11. 2. The
opposition of Miriam and Aaron, chap. 12. 3. A sedition, whereof see the
occasion, which was the terrible report of the Spies, chap. 13. the punishment,
chap. 14. the consequences, viz. diverse laws, and the execution of the
Sabbath-breaker, chap. 15. 4. The Conspiracy of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, the
punishment whereof being begun, both against ringleaders, chap. 16. and
followers, was staid by Aaron, see his Election by a rod, chap. 17. his pay and
maintenance, chap. 18. His office to cleanse by the water of separation, chap.
10. Forensical, by the Edomites, amplified by want of water, and Aarons death,
chap. 20. Canaanites, amplified by fiery Serpents, chap. 21. Moabites, who
fought partly by Curses, see their Author and Minister, chap. 22. Vain
attempt, both upon Pisgah and Peor, chap. 23. and 24.
Enticements and lusts, chap. 24.


Furthered by a second Muster, made by Moses and Eleazar; Generally, where we
have the List of the new Army, chap. 26. Specially, in respect of Captain,
Joshua succeeding Moses, chap. 27. And Soldiers, both Clergy-Souldiers, to
whom are given laws for sacrificing in the former and later Feasts of the year,
chap. 28. and 29. and vowing, chap 30 Politic or Lay-Souldiers, their first
service was to subdue the Midianites, chapter 31. and their auxiliary forces were
out of the tribes of Gad and Reuben, chapter 32.
Repeated, and briefly comprehended, chap. 33. Finished, and ended, with the
division of Canaan, which is described, Generally, how and to whom it must be
distributed, chap. 34. Specially, where Habitations are to be assigned to the
Levites, chap. 35. Possessions given to every tribe by lot, are not to be
alienated by marriage, chap. 36.



A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of NVMBERS.
WHile Moses men, and warlike feats here sings,
Levi's exempted, follows holy things.
2 The martial order of their tents here see,
Standards with th'ensignes of their Pedigree;
3 The Pedigree of Levi's here at large,
Th'first-born are quitted, since the Levites charge,
To be Gods lot, which erewhile did so long
To the first born of every house belong,
4 The Levites have their several tasks assigned,
By Moses, but according to Gods mind;
5 Lepers, and others expelled for pollution.
Jealousy tried, for wrongs just restitution.
6 The law of Nazarites, how first they came,
The People must be blessed in Gods name.
7 The Princes offerings, when they saw complete,
The Tabernacle, Arc, and Mercy-seat.
8 How lamps are lighted, Levites have their grace,
When first they enter, when they leave their place,
Fifty from five, and twenty ends their race.
9 The Pasch the Lord commands, a cloud does guide
Israel, whom God does guard on every side.
10 The silver trumpets, and their use, they move
From Sinai, and Hobab they do prove,
Who will not do them now an act of love,
But go his way, next we their words should mark,
When they took up, when they set down the arc.
11 Manna rained, loathed, the seventy Elders, all
T'assist old Moses, Quails from heaven fall.
12 Miriam's a Leper, Moses prays, and she
Is upon that freed from her malady.
13 The Spies search Canaan, all of them dissuade it,
Only one Caleb bids, go and invade it:
14 The people murmur at the spies report,
Jehova in his wrath does plague them for it.
15 Gives order for his offerings, and does say

Corah with his sect, for murmuring the earth does swallow:
The plague kills thousands, Aaron the rest does hallow.
17 Moses does write the tribes names on their rods,
Aarons rod buds, to show that he is Gods.
18 The Priests and Levites portion, and their charge,
With the heave offering, is here spoke at large.
19 The Separation water, heifers red
Are offered, none must touch a man that is dead,
Aaron and Miriam die, the rock flows, and
Edom expells the Israelites his land,
21 Arad cashiered, the stung are healed all,
By the Brazen Serpent, Og and Sihon fall.
22 The way of Balaams Ass, the Angel breaks,
Balaam does beat the Ass, the Ass then speaks.
23 With gifts, and with seven Altars Balack would
Get Balaam curse the people, if he could;
24 But Balaam blesses, (that was thought a crime)
And does foretell Christ's coming in his time.
25 Israel does idolize, and whore, two die
In Copulation, Phineas blessed thereby.
26 Israel is numbered, but of all the rout,
Caleb, and Joshua only God picks out.
27 Zelophehads daughters heard, Moses is dead,
Joshua forthwith succeeds in Moses stead.
28 Offerings are here appointed, whether they
C^ncern Pasch, first fruits, or the Sabbath Day.
29 The feast of Trumpets, and a solemn Fast,
Read here, the Feast of Tabernacles last.
30. Men's, Maids, Wives, Widows vows, what force they bear,
Or theirs that are divorced, is rendered ^ere.
31 Midian spoiled, Balaam dead, Moses does grieve,
That any men their women should relieve.
32 Reuben and Gad, and half- Manasse crave
King Og and Sihons land, and it they have.
33 The many journeys of the Israelites,
That Canaan must be spoiled, Moses recites.
34 The Borders of the Country round about,
Their names that do divide, and set it out.
35 Of eight and forty Levites Cities, three
Twice told, God says must refuge Cities be,
The laws of murder following, Come and see.
36 Zelophehads daughters, and all women kind
Marry to their own tribe, so is Gods mind.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Deuteron:
THe Book of Deuteronomy contains three parts, viz.

A Prologue, a Narration, and an Epilogue.

I. A Prologue to draw the benevolence and attention of the People.
Benevolence, from the benefits conferred upon them by Moses In time Of Peace,
as The Constitution of the Commonwealth. The sending forth of the Spies, chap.
1.
Of War, either In general, as their passing by the Edomites, Moabites,
Ammonites, chap. 2. In special, as their victory over Og, and the distribution
of his Kingdom, chap. 3.


Attention from the Author, Utility, Majesty, and wonderful Promulgation of the
law, chap. 4.
II. A Narration, setting forth a rule of holy life. Universal, as it is
contained in the Decalogue, which is repeated, chap. 5. Particular, which
handles * The Principles of the Decalogue concerning the love of God, whereunto
are opposed, 1. A forgetting of God, through abundance of wealth, where they
are taught an art of memory, chap. 6. 2. A Civil and Conjugal Society with the
wicked, chap. 7. 3. Ingratitude through the Oblivion of Gods merits, chap. 8.
4. High-mindednesse, which he checks with a Commemoration of their rebellions,
chap. 9. and his own benefits, chap. 10. whereupon follows a Conclusion,
exhorting to the service of God, chap. 11. * The things issuing and flowing
from those Principles, which do after a special manner contain the Worship of
God, in respect of The place and manner of worshipping God, where and how,
chap. 12. Persons seducing from sound doctrine, chap. 13. or living according
to legal rites, chap. 14. Time, considered either Politickly, as the seventh
years. Privileges, chap. 15. Or Ecclesiastically, as the solemn Feasts, chap.
16.
They contain also the estate of men, whether Superiors, and those either
Politic, as the chief Magistrate, and the King, chap. 17. Or Ecclesiastical,
as Levites and false Prophets. Or Any Persons whatsoever, for the informing of
the irascible, appetitive, and rational part of the soul. Irascible, hence
murder. By a known Author, either out of time of war, as chance-Medley,
where we read of Refuge-Cities, and their bounds, chap. 19. and of Witnesses.
Or in time of war, as in battles and siedges, chap. 20. By an unknown
Author, see the expiation of it, chap. 21.
Appetitive, whence jealousy, adultery, incest, chap. 22. Rational, in
actions. Public, as what persons are unfit for Magistracy, where read of
Uncleanness, Usury, Vowing, relieving of the poor, chap. 23. Private, and
those either of particular Persons, as the laws of Divorce, Neogamy, Pledges,
chap. 24. Or of many amongst many, and those either Politic, as Judgments,
Polygamy of brethren, Weights, and Wares, chap. 25. Or Ecclesiastical as
first fruits, and tithes, chap. 26.



III. An Epilogue, Partly Hortatory; 1. To the observation of the law, from the
profit of obedience, and the disprofit of disobedience, in respect of blessings
and curses, generally pronounced, and particularly instanced, chap. 28. From
the honesty and justice of obedience, because of the Covenant they made in
Horeb, chap. 29. 2. To repentance, all pretenses being removed, chap. 30.
Historical, concerning the death of Moses; whereof we have the Antecedents,
viz. the deeds of Moses, his Resignation in particular, chap. 21. and his words
consisting of a Swan-like Song, chap. 32. and the Benediction of the tribes,
chap. 33. Consequents, viz. His Burial, Obsequies, and Successor, chapter 34.



A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of DEVTERONOMY.
MOses repeats Gods promise, next does tell
How th'people for their unbelief and lewdness fell.
2 Against Moab, Edom, Ammon; naught is done,
As yet, only King Sihons countrey's won,
3 And so is Ogs, these lands does Moses give
To two tribes and an half, Moses does live
To see, not enter into th'promis'd land,
God has so sworn, his divine oath must stand.
4 On that side Jordan were three Cities named,
For Refuge-Cities, Idols still are damned.
5 The Law's repeated, which when 'twas first said,
The people trembled, and were sore afraid,
To act with God for them Moses they prayed.
6 The end of the laws obedience, that the Nation
Might serve God, that is here urged by exhortation.
7 Gods holy people must by no means mingle
With Idol-Nations, they must keep them single,
8 Another exhortation t'obey's pressed,
From Gods great merits, which are here confessed.
9 Their own good merits Moses does explode,
Relates their many sins against their God.
10 The broken Tables Moses must repair,
To Obey their God must be the Peoples care.
11 Gods great works for them should not make them worse,
On Gerizim they must bless, on Ebal curse.
12 God forbids blood, and idols, holy Vows
The place must suit, Childe-offering disallowes.
13 Persons, or Cities that to idols draw,
Though never so dear, must perished by Gods law.
14 Themselves by shaving they may not disguise,
For lawful meats here is rules that may suffice,
Concerning tithes see how Gods mandate lies.
15 The seventh years release must not prevent
Lending, or giving, that is not its intent.
16 The Feast of Tabernacles, of Pasch, of weeks,
Each man to's power must offer at them all,
The Judge is censured that for lucre seeks,
Against groves and images Gods word does fall.
17 Against Idol-worship, impure offerings, and
What a Kings duty is, God does command,
18 Priests, Levites portion, witches must not be.
The Christ must come, the Pseudo-Prophet die.
19 The Refuge-Cities Privilege, see here
How many must in trials witness bear,
The doom of the false witness each man fear.
20 Militia-rules, who must fight, who forbear.
The bearing trees why spared, the reason here.
21 How t'expiate unknown murder, the firstborn
Private respects must no way disinherit.
An hanged man must not hang till the morn,
A stubborn Son does stoning justly merit.
22 Humanity is urged, mixed garments blamed,
Who slanders his own wife must be reclaimed,
By punishment and fine, adultery, rape,
Nor fornication can Gods law escape.
23 For Persons shut out of the Congregation,
For runnagate servants, see the law o'th'nation.
24 Of Divorce, Pledges, Man-stealth, Leprosy,
Of Servants Pay, Justice, Humanity.
25 Correcting stripes, forty must not exceed.
The Ox must not be muzl'd treading corn,
Seed must be raised unto a brother dead.
Women's immodesty cannot be borne.
God unjust weights abhorres, Amalek is granted,
A prey to Israel, when they once are planted.
26 Who offer tithes, and first fruits. must confess,
And pray, but how the forms do here express.
27 Th'law must be writ on stones, the tribes by count
Must bless, and curse from this, and the other Mount,
The Blessers on Mount Gerizim must stand,
Curse^s on Ebal by divine command.
28 Particular blessings for the good reserved,
And for the bad, the plagues they have deserved.
29 Gods works they have leen should make them do Gods will:
Of secret things God only has the skill.
30 It Is well for th'penitent, the law is clear,
Death and life's in their choice, as may appear.
31 Moses does cheer the people, then does read
Lectures to Joshua, who must next succeed,
Bequeathes the Law-book to the Levites care,
Protests to the Elders, what they and the rest are.
32 Mercy, and Judgment Moses now does sing,
To true repentance that he may them bring,
This done, up to Mount Nebo he must go,
See Canaan, and so die, will he or no.
33 Gods Majesty, the blessing of the tribes,
With Isreal's glory Moses here describes.
Moses sees, dies, is buried, God knows where,
His Age, and Funeral, Mourning, conclude here.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Joshua.
THis Book contains the life and death of Joshua.

I. His life, viz. the things that he did both in War, and in Peace. In
War, where are considerable His Vocation, and calling to the Government,
chap. 1. Preparation, by the sending of the Spies, chap. 2. Passage over
Jordan, chap. 3. and the restoring of Circumcision, chap. 4. and the Passover,
chap. 5. Administration, reported by particulars against Jericho, chap. 6. and
7. Ai, chap. 8. Gibeonites, chap. 9. Amorites, chap. 10. and the rest of the
Canaanites, chap. 11. and again briefly repeated, chap 12.
In Peace, where we have the Peaceful acts of Joshua, viz. His distribution of
the land of Canaan, where is to be considered, What were the limits and bounds
of the Division, chap. 13. Who did divide it, and how he did it, chap. 14. To
whom, viz. to the children of Israel, as Judah, chap. 15. Ephraim, chap. 16.
Manasseh, chap. 17. Benjamin, chap. 18. Six other tribes, as also to Joshua and
his family, chap. 19. Refuge-Cities were appointed to fugitives, chap. 20. and
Cities to the Levites, chap. 21.
His sending away of the Trans-Jordaints, chap. 22. His Assembly or Court
holden in Shechem, chap. 23.
II. His death, chap. 24.
A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of JOSHVA.
1. JOshua installed is promised the good land,
And that before him none of's foes shall stand.
Prepares the People for a Jordan-Passe,
They promise he shall be as Moses was,
And the same loyal fealty they will give
To him, as unto Moses while they live.
2 Two Spies sent forth, Rahab does entertain,
They swear unto her, and return again,
Are in great hopes the country they shall gain.
3 They all to Jordan come, the Ark goes before,
Jordan divides, the Ark stays while all come over.
4 Twelve stones in Jordan, twelve at Gilgal stand,
Monuments of this great act, of Gods own hand.
5 Here Is Circumcision, and the Pasch observed,
But never more with Manna are they served,
Canaan does tremble, as to death reserved.
6 Here Jericho falls down, Rahab is free,
Jericho's Rebuilder must accursed be,
7 At Ai Israel's worsted, Jostua's sorry,
God tells him what to do, hence the sad story
Of Achan's theft, and fall, with all his glory.
8 But Ai now is taken, an Altar's made
By Joshua, and the law on stones displayed,
And published on those Mounts that God had said.
9 Kings band against Israel, Gibeon this does get
By an Imposture, that he shall not die,
Nor does he, but because of this false cheat,
He is condemned to lasting slavery,
10 Against Gibeon five Kings fight, and God does fight
Against them with Hailstones, Sun and Moon in sight
Stand still at Joshua's Prayer, seven Kings more
Are slain, besides the five were slain before.
11 At Meroms waters diverse Kings overcome,
Hazor, and the Anakims have th'self-same doom.
12 Sihon and Og Kings, one and thirty more,
Are spoke of, partly here, partly before,
13 What of the land's unconquered, what is got,
Reuben, and half- Manasse have their lot,
Other then God himself Levi has not.

Caleb by privilege with Hebron's graced;
15 Judah s lot, Othniel's strength, Achsach's demand,
The Jebusites not yet expelled the land.
16 Joseph's and Ephraim's borders, he^e you see,
The Canaanites as yet unconquered be.
17 Manasse's lot, and portion, at last they
Expel, and drive the Canaanites away.
Shiloh is the Tabernacle, and
By lot they do divide the rest o'th'land,
16 Simeon, Dan, Zabulon, Iss^char advance,
Asher with others, Joshua's inheritance.
20 Joshua does with the people now ordain
Six Refuge-Cities, if a man be slain.
21 Of Cities, eight and forty God did give
To the Levites, then in peace Israel did live.
22 Two tribes, and half sent back, no sooner come
But they do build an Altar, at their home,
A question rose about it, by and by
The matter is resolved, the strife does die.
23 Joshua does now his exhortation give,
At's death, to them that after him shall live.
24 At Shechem he assembles all the tribes,
Briefly the benefits of their God describes,
Gods mutual foede with them he calls to mind,
Lastly his Age, ^eath, Burial here you find.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Judges.
THe Book of Judges contains the cause of the calamities of the children of
Israel, which was sin, and that both Universal and Special.

I. Universal, committed by all the Tribes, hereof we read both the kinds and
the effects, The kinds Negligence in expelling the Canaanites, chap, 1.
Injustice toward God and his worship, chap. 2.
The effects which were several oppressions and miseries, By The Syrians,
Othniel being their Deliverer, The Moabites, Ehud being their Deliverer, The
Philistines, Samgar being their Deliverer, chap, 3. The Canaanites (King Jabin)
Deborah being Judge, and Barak Deliverer, their victory is reported, chap. 4.
seconded with a gratulation, or Song of triumph, chap. 5. The Midianites,
Gideon being their Deliverer, see his calling, chap. 6. fighting, chap. 7.
manners, fortune, death, chap. 8. Successor, Abimelech, chap. 9. The
Ammonites, Jephthe being their Deliverer, of this oppression, the cause and
effects were the Apostasy and Repentance of Israel, chap. 10. the remedy was
the war of Jephthe against the Ammonites, chap. 11. and the Ephraimites,
where we have the life of three Judges, chap. 12. The Philistines, Samson being
their Deliverer, see his Parents and Birth, chap. 13. marriage, chap. 14. acts
against the Philistines, chap. 15. manners, fortune and death, chap. 16.

II. Special, for there were twe notable tokens of a depraved Commonwealth,
viz. In Religion, Idolatry Of one family, chap. 17. Of Dan's whole tribe, chap.
18.
In manners, lust and filthiness, committed in the city of Gibeah, punished in
the whole tribe of Benjamin, chap. 19. whereupon followed Warlike Preparations,
uncertain events, chap. 20. and the restoring of the tribe of Benjamin, chap.
21.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of JVDGES.
1. SImeon and Judah's acts this text does sing,
Thumbes and toes mangled of a cruel King,
Jerusalem and Horma, Gaza, three,
With Askelon, and Eckron captived be,
Othniel has Achsah to his wife, this more
The Danites flee the Amorites before.
2. The Angel chides at Bochim, there is a seed
Next Joshua, very bad, God does proceed
Mixtly, with them, in wrath and pity, those
Must b'exercis'd by th'reliques of their foes.
Othniel's one
T'enfranchise them from Chushans hand, anon
Ehud kills Eglon for them, Shamgar then
With an Oxe-goad does kill six hundred men.
Deborah, and Barak, next Israel preserve
Jael for Sisera's death does well deserve.
Deborah and Barak for the Conquest sing
A Song to God, of Kings the highest King.
6 Israel s oppressed, chid by the Prophet, they
By Gideons hand have a triumphant day,
The fleece prefag'd it, try it any way.
7 Here Is Gideons army mustered, and refined,
Three hundred lappers are by God designed

Whereby this noble Conquest Gideon got.
Ephraim Gideon a Peace makes
By fair persuasions heavy vengeance takes
Upon two bloody Kings, for's brethrens sakes.
The Eare-rings of the prey a mighty prize,
For all this Israel falls to idolize.
9 Abimelech made King, Jotham does read
A riddle to them, touching that black deed.
Ga^l conspires, Abimelech is ktll'd
Jotham's curse fulfilled.
Tola is Judge, then Jair he had borne
Israel's fo^lorn,


Jephthe, who their sees does overcome,
Vows, and performs his Vow at coming home.
12 The li^ping Ephraimites by Sib^oleth
Discovered, are all slain, here is Jephthe's death.
Ibzan, and 2773 2782 In the fif^h y^ar of A^dons R^i^ne Troy was taken Ante
C^ristum. 2185.
Elon, Judges, quit them well,
Abdon next them is Judge of Israel.
13 The Philistines again oppress the land,
Till the Angel Manoah gives to understand
Some comfort, he returns a sacrifice,
And Sampson's born anon to victories.
14 Sampson does marry a Philistian maid,
Against them by this match his plot is laid,
He riddles at his Nuptials, Ante Christum.
for his life
None can resolve his riddles, but his wife
With whom they deal, and solve them, but their pay
Cost thirty of their brethrens lives that day.
15 His wife s denied him, he takes that in scorn,
And with fired Foxes does destroy the Corn,
With the Asses Jawbone he does kill outright
A thousand, diverse times he shows his might.
16 Carries the gates of Gaza, had a wife
Called Delilah, and she did seek his life,
Betrayed him, when she could a fit way find,
To the Philistines, whose malice made him blind,
And made a Millne-horse of him, till he died,
Though in his death the Lord his strength supplied.
17 Micah restores stoll'n coin, his mother makes
Images with that coin, Micah then takes
A Levite, for his Priest, gives him by th'year,
Ten shekels, meat, one suit of clothes to wear.
18 The Danites make excursion, take by force
Micah's both Priest, and Gods, hold on their course,
To Laish, which they spoil without remorse.
19 The Levites ravished Concubine lies dead.
He cutts her in twelve pieces, and them sends
All over Israel, that the rumor spread
Might move them to require him some amends,
And punish them that did this wicked deed.
20 The Levite draws his Bill, and Benjamin
Though guilty fight, and twice the Battle win,
At last they suffer for this grievous sin.
21 But Benjamin's falls bewailed, and now they would
Restore the remnant of them, if they could,
Wives they must give them none, they are sworn, but yet
They Will let them take the fairest they can get.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Ruth.
THe Book of Ruth contains her marriage with Boaz, thereof see The Occasion,
Her Widowhood, Her return with Naomi her Mother in law, chap. 1. Her gathering
of Corn-eares, chap. 2.
The Procurement, chap. 3. The Celebration and Fruit, chap. 4.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of RVTH.
ELimelech dies in Moab, his Sons die,
And Ruth returns with Mother Naomi.
2. Ruth gleanes in Boaz-field, he is very kind,
She no small favor at his hands does find.
3. By mother Naomi's teaching, Ruth does lie
At Boaz feet, when he does her epsy,
He does acknowledge her ingenuously.
4. Offers her to th'next Kinsman, he says, Nay,
So Boaz takes her to his wife that day.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the first Book of Samuel.
THis Book speaks of Judge Samuel, and of the King of Israel.

I. Of Judge Samuel, and of His Birth or Nativity, chap. 1. Education in the
Tabernacle, chapter 2. Calling to the office of a Prophet, chap. 3. Prophecies
fulfilled, both in respect of the destruction of Priest, and People, chapter 4. and
the Philistines punished for the Arks sake, which they had taken, chapter 5. as
also the restoring of the Ark, chapter 6. Administration or Government both in
War and Peace, chap. 7.
II. Of the King of Israel, To be Elected, chap. 8. Elected already,
Saul. See concerning him. His Election, where 1. He is called, chap. 9. 2.
Installed, both privately and publicly, chap. 10. 3. Confirmed, both by the
consent and Oath of the People, chap. 11. and the Resignation of Samuel, chap.
12. Rejection for three causes. 1. His Diffidence in fighting against the
Amalekites, chap. 13. 2. Rashness in swearing, chap. 14. 3. Disobedience in
cutting off the Amalekites, chap. 15.
David. See concerning him His Calling, Unction, Inauguration, chap. 16.
Victory over Goliath, chap. 17. whereupon followed The Aemulation and hatred of
Saul, chap. 18. His banishment by Saul In his Country, where we have his
expulsion from the Court, chapter 19. His return to inquire the state of things by
Jonathan, chap. 20. Out of his Country, among the Philistines, chap. 21. and
Moabites, chap. 22.
His Hostile persecution by Saul; whereof see the Grievousnesse, for he follows
him through places inhabited, as Keilah, chap. 23. and uninhabited, as valleys
and deserts, as the desert of Engedi, where he falls upon Saul, chap. 24. Of
Paran, where Nabal and Samuel die, chap. 25. and through mountains, as
Hachilah, chap. 26. Continuance, for he drove him to his enemies; where we have
His flight to Achish, who assigned him the town Zicklag, chap. 27. His
Presidentship or Command first given against Israel, chap. 28. then taken away,
chap. 29. Lastly restored against Amalek, chap. 30.

The Conclusion of all by the death of Saul, chap. 31.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the first
Book of SAMVEL.
ELkanah, his two wives, Hannah does pray,
Scarce moving of her lips, makes Eli say,
She Is drunk, God hears, and she a son does bear,
Whom she does consecrate to Isreal's fear.
Hannah sings praise, Elies two sons offend,
Are chidden for it, Samuel does attend
His Ministry, a man of God foretells,
A plague, on all the house where Eli dwells.
3 It Is seconded, on Samuel God does call
Eli all
The mischief, that upon his house should fall.
4 Israel's overcome, the Arc taken, yea this more,
Elies two sons fall, Eli at 's own door,
His daughter in law in painful travel dies,
Ante Christum.
And Iehabod is my child's name, she cries,
For all the glory now from Israel flies.
Dagon fall,
With Emerods God smites the people all,
The approaching Ark does Eckron much apall.

Carted to Beth-shemesh, where some assay
To look into it, for which sin they die,
To Kiriath-jearim it is sent by and by.
7 Israel repents for joy the Arc is come,
Samuels Prayer the Philistine's overcome,
Samuel a godly Judge has Peace at home,
8 Till they 'gin Cry, a King, Samuel does pray,
God comforts him, and bids him not say Nay,
But make a King, and give them t'understand,
What usage they should have at their Kings and.
9 Saul seeking Asses does to Samuel come,
Is feasted by him, brought on's way towered home, Helvic. ut alii. 2870

10 'Noynted, co^firm'd, heart changed, prophecies,
Chosen by lot, yet Belials him despise.
11 Nahash requires right eyes, Saul is desired
For help, he grants the help that is required.
12 Judge Samuel quits himself to them, and proves
Their thanklessenesse to him, with thunder moves
Passions of fear in them, yet comfort gives,
If they but fear the God that ever lives.
13 Saul's chosen baud, and the Philistines bands,
Saul sacrifices now with his own hands,
Samuel rep^oves him for it, no Smith is left,
By their foes plots they are of Smiths bereft.
14 Young Jonathan orecomes, Saul's rigid fast
Retards the Conquest, Jonathan at last
Is judged to die, for eating ere Sunset,
But that the Camp did th'execuiion let.
15 Samuel sends Saul the Amalekites to foil,
Saul spares King Agag, and the best o'th'spoil,
At Samuels words repents, Samuel does call
King Agag, kills him, and foretells Saul's fall.
16 David's anointed, he does sweetly play,
On's harp, to drive Saul's evil spirit away. Ante Christum.

17 Goliah's challenge David undert^kes,
His brother Eliab chides him, he good makes
Th'adventure, kills Goliath without fear,
As he had killed a Lion, and a Bear.
18 Jonathan and David one, Saul ha^es po^r David
For this good de^d, that he had Israel saved,
Conspires his death, Michal must be the snare,
But all in vain, David's acts still are rare.
19 Jonathan tells Dav d all his fathers mind,
Michal his wife too in a strait proved kind,
To help him through the window, he away
Escapes to Naioth, where Seer Samuel lay.
20 ^a^id and Jonathans league, Jonathan shoots over,
His fathers wrath to David to discover.
Saul ^hafes at David's absence, mean while dear
Da^id^ and Jo^athan part with heavy cheer.
21 Da^id in s hunger gets some hallowed bread,
And great Goliah's sword, which the P^ ^st had,
He comes to Gath, and feigns himself there mad.
22 David grows st^ong, his Parents he commends
To the King of Moab, but Saul discommends
All his own servants, and the Priests suspends.
23 In ^escuing K^ilah David plays the man,
At Ziph he is comforted by Jonathan,
Discovered by the Ziphi^es, angry S^ul
Pursuing, a mischance does back re^al.
24 David cuts ^ff Sau ^ skirt, his life he spares,
And so his own clear innocence declares,
M^kes Saul to bl^me himself, and take an Oath
O David, against whom he had been so wroth.
Samuel, David is enraged
At the churl Nabal, all his men engaged.
To spoil him, but that Abigail the wife
Pe^^wades him, Nabal hears o'th'danger, dies.
26 Saul ^^aces David by the Ziphites means,
Abishai would kill Saul, David says, Nay,
Takes Cruse, and spear only, Abner demeans
Badly in 's place, while they are stoll'n away.
27 Saul hears of David, that he is in Gath,

David begs Zicklag, it is granted, he
M kes the King think, he is Judahs enemy.
28 The King trusts David, Saul t'a witch does go
And fain^s to hear of his own overthrow.
29 The Philistines will not let David move,
Or mar^h with them. Achish does well approve
O^ him for all that, sends him thence in love.
30 Amal^k spoils Ziglag, Da^id follows close,
Recovers all, and justly does dispose
O'th'prey, and to each friend a present goes.
31 Saul and his shield-knave are felo-de-ses,
Philistia triumphs ore their Carkases,
They are regained by Jabesh men, A^te Christum.
their bones
Are burnt, and buri d, Jabesh them bemoans.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the second Book of Samuel.
THis Book contains the Inauguration, Administration and Declination of King
David.

I. David's Inauguration, confirmed by one tribe in the Kingdom of Judah. Of
this Election, see The Antecedents, viz. A Messenger reporting of Saul's death,
and the mourning thereupon, chap. 1. The Concomitants, as his Unction, hindered
by Abner, chap. 2. The Consequents, as David's success after the death of
Abner, chap. 3. and Ishbosheth, chap. 4.
II. David's Administration, or Well-governing of both Kingdoms, where we have
his acts of diverse sorts, viz. Religious, as the honorable fetching and
placing of the Ark, chap. 6. His deliberation about building of a Temple, chap.
7. Warlike, where we have a sum thereof, and an amplification by the
commendation of his Justice, chap. 8. Moral, his gratitude toward the
Posterity of Jonathan, chap. 9. Politic, as his Embassy to the King of the
Ammonites, whence followed war, chap. 10. Sinful and shameful, as the
committing of adultery and murder, chap. 11. whereof the fruit was, his
repentance, chap. 12. and the double punishment of his adultery.
Private, as the incest and death of Amnon, chap. 13. the banishment and return
of Absalom, chap. 14. Public, as both internal and external sedition.
Internal, as that of Absalom, whereof see The beginning, which was the
Conspiracy against David in Hebron, chap. 15. The Progress, as David's flight
and Absaloms entrance into the City, chap. 19. The End, by the death of
Achitophel, occasioned by Chushais counsel, chap. 17. a victory got over the
Rebels, chap. 18. and the restoring of David, chapter 19.
External, raised by Sheba, and suppressed again, chap. 20.
Famine, (beside sedition,) chap. 21.
III. David^ Declination toward his death, whereof some Antecedents were Good,
as his Thangsgiving, chap. 22. Swan-like Song of his faith in the Messiah,
chap. 23.
Evil, as a Pestilence after three years famine, chap. 24.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
second Book of SAMVEL.
1. THe Amalekite for owning Saul's death's slain,
David laments Saul, and dear Jonathan.
2 David made King, the Jabesh men does bless,
For burying Saul, his men he does address,
Against Ish-bosheth, the Anti-king, who buys
Too dear his opposition, Asahel dies.
3 David grows stronger still, has sons twice three,
Abner revolts to David, Joab's mad
At that, and kills him, David bitterly
Curses this Joab, falls extremely sad.

The Bringers die for t, by th'command o the king.
5 The ^ribes 'noynt David now again, the tower
Of Sion, from the Jebusites is taken,
The halt and blind, it seems had little power,
Theirs, and the Philistines brags were all in vain.
David brings the Ark from Kiriath-jearim,
Ante Christum.
Dances before it, Michal laughs at him.
And's barren for 't, Uzzah is slain, and yet
David with offerings great,
Puts it in the Tabernacle its proper Seat.
7 Nathan first likes, and does anon forbid
David to build a Temple, yet his seed

Here you have David praying and confessing.
8 H^^e's Conquest upon Conquest still, King Toi
Is glad to see him thus his foes destroy.
9 All that was Saul's Mephibosheth has got,
By David's gift, David had not forgot
His father Jonathan, Ziba he commands
To serve Mephibosheth, and to till his lands.
M. 2904. Ante Christum
10 At Jericho David's men shaven staid,
Bu^ Hanun for his shaving soundly paid.
11 Joab's in wars. David at home remains,

Nathan makes him cry
^^cca^i, so he is pardoned, must not die
Himself, his Bastard must. Soiomon is born,
And J^didiah is called, Rabba's forlorn.
A^mon commits a rape, on 's sister Tamar,
And now as basely hates, as erewhile shame her,
His broth^r Absalom, to quit him spies
A time, and kills him, for the murder flies.
14 But is revok't anon through the joint plot
Of Joab, and a widow, but must not
For two ye^res, see the King, Joab's required
To bring them face to face, his corn is fired
For his neglect, then does he wh^t s desired.
15 Now Absalom steals men's hearts, raises a rout
O^ Rebels against his father, drives him out. Ante Christum.

Achitoph^l's cursed, and Hushai may do well
To go confute that great Achitophel.
16 Colloguing Z iba gets his Maste^s means,
Shimei against David basely misdemeans,
A^hitophel then does counsel Absalom
TO abuse his fathers wives, the thing is done.
17 Achitophel confuted dies by the halter,
In^elligence goes to David how things ^l^e^.
18 David yet cares for grac^lesse Absal^m.
Bids them spare him, whatever does bec^me
O'th'^est, but wilful Joab strikes him home,
David does sore lament that deadly doom.
19 Yet now so bears, the Israelites redu^e
Him to his Throne, the Priests must go t induce
Judahs compliance, lame Mephi^os^eth
Excused, yet Ziba shares with him till death.
20 Sheba rebels, Amasa makes no good h^ste
Against him, which costs his life, Joab does force
Sheba to Abel, where a woman cast
His head ore th'wall, moved Joab to remorse.
21 The Gibeon-dearth, by th'death of S^^ls seven Sons
Is timely staid, David interres the bones
Of Saul and Jonathan, sometimes does fight
With Philistines, and quel the G^an^s might.
22 Here Is a thanksgiving for all blessings, and
The mighty Conquests God affords ^h^ land.
23 Sense and experience Da^ids faith transcends,
The wicked have none ^uch, the t^xt commen^s
David's stout Worthies, with their number ends.
24 David will count his men, Joab dislikes.
Of three plagues David must, and d^^h choose one,
The Pestilence, which seventy thousand smites
In three days, he repents, the plague is done.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the first Book of Kings.
THis Book contains the increase of the Israelites under Solomon, and their
decrease by the renting of the Kingdom.

I. The Increase of the Israelites under Solomon, where we have his Acquisition
of both Kingdoms by the Election of his father, chap. 1. The Confirmation of
them unto him by the death of the turbulent, chap. 2. and by his godliness,
and wisdom given of God, and declared in Controversies decided, chap. 3. His
Administration or Government, Prosperous, As the 1. Settling of Court and
Kingdom, chap. 4. 2. Building, both of sacred buildings, as the Temple, where
we have the preparing of the matter, chap. 5. the edification, chap. 6. the
dedication, chap. 7. As also of profane buildings, both private, as Solomon's
Palace, chap. 8. and public, as cities and navies, chap. 9. 3. Wealth and
riches, which the Queen of Sheba wondered at, chap. 10. Adverse, by reason of
his idolatry, chap. 11.

II. The Decrease of the Israelites, the Kingdom being divided into Judah and
Israel, whose Kings are described by way of Parallel, Jointly, as we read of
Rehoboam, chap. 12. and Jeroboam, whose idolatry was reproved by the Prophet,
chap. 13. and punished, chap. 14. there is the death of them both. In Judah
reigned Abia and Asa; in Israel, Nadab and Baasa, chap. 15. Severally, as we
read of Isreal's Kings; viz. Baasa, (his end) Ela, Zimri, Omri, chap. 16. The
beginning and progress of Ahab, in his time Elijah prophesied, here we have
his Persecution of Elijah, foretelling drought, chap. 17. and rain, chap. 18.
and fleeing, and anointing another in his stead, chap. 19. Prosperity, by two
victories over Benhadad, chap. 20. and by getting of Naboths Vineyard, chap.
21. Infelicity in the Syrian war, chap. 22.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the first
Book of KINGS.
David's cherished by a fresh young maid,
To the Kingdom Adonijah claim has laid,
But David ordains Solomon, to end the strife,
It Is well that Adonijah scapes with life.
2 David at 's death put Solomon in mind,

To such, and such, for Joab, Shimei,
And such like, it is his mind that they shall die.
Solomon.
Sol: reigns, condemns Adonijah
Adoni: 'cause he would
Have Abishag, Priest Abiathar's told
His doom, no Priesthood any longer t'hold.
3 King Pharaohs daughter Solomon does marry,
Makes choice of wisdom, does most sweetly carry
The matter 'twixt two Harlots, who did strive
About two children, one dead, one alive.
4 See Solomon's Princes, Office^s twice fix,
How his la^ge Kingdoms God with Peace does fix,
For his Philosophy, there was not any

5 Hiram congratulates him, offers him wood

Many for number, for experience good.
6 They build the Temple, see Gods promise to it,
With a Chronology, at what time they do it.
7 Two houses Solomon builds, and for his Spouse,
King Pharaohs daughter, yet another house,
Hiram the Tyrian, for his part, attends
The work of the temple, him the text commends.
8 The Temple built is consecrated here,
Gods glory in a cloud does now appear,
They pray and offer, feast, and make good cheer.
9 Gods foede with Solomon, the King of Tire,
And he, send mutual presents thrice a year.
He offers sacrifice to Isreal's fear.
10 Him Sheba's Queen admires, his order, state,
Gold, Targets, Servants, calls him fortunate.
11 His Wives and Concubines in his old age,
Drew him to idols, which does God inrage.
Rezon and Jeroboam are Gods rods,
To punish him, for owning other gods,
12 Ten tribes revolt, at th'words of Rehoboam,
And give themselves to th'Traitor Jeroboam.
His taking young men's counsel cost so dear,
Nor may he seek his losses to repair.
13 Th'Usurpers hand here withers, God sends one
To damn his Altar, and so to be gone,
But he ensnared by a false Prophet, stays,
Eats, is devoured, God hates th'Usurpers ways.
14 The Usurpers wife, disguised, would know the fate
Of her sick son, the Prophet does relate
What was to her whole house predestinate:
Th'Usurpers death, and Rehoboams read,
And who in either Kingdom did succeed.
15 Abijam^ wicked reign in Judah, next
Good Asa does succeed him, in the text,
And him J^hoshaphat, in Israel reigns
Nadab, who like his father misdemeans,
Till Baasha kills him, and the Kingdom gains.
16 But Jehu curses Baasha from the Lord,
Zimri rebels, kills Elah with the sword,
Jericho's rebuilder finds true Joshua's word.
Elijah threatens drought and famine sore,
Begs of a widow, multiplies her store,
Revives her son whom he had fed before.
18 Elijah's sent to Ahab, whom he chides,
Baals Prophets, and their rites derides,
Commands them all to be in presence slain,
And from the Lord obtains a plenteous rain.
Jezebel threatens, she will have blood for blood.
He flees at this, the Angel brings him food,
Elisha, Jehu, Hazael he ordains,
Elisha'l needs go with him, he restraines.
Samariah's siedge is raised, twice Benhadad
With his proud Syrians falls, extremely sad
They couch to Ahab, Ahab lets them go,
Hereby presaging his own overthrow.
Naboth denies his Vineyard, Ahabs wife
For this does with a Fast betray his life,
He dead, Ahab does of his Vineyard seizin take,
Elijah threatens plagues for Naboth's sake.
22 Jehoshaphat, and Ahab go together
To Ramoth-Gilead, now the Querie's whether
They shall prevail, four hundredth Prophets say
They shall, only Michaiah tells them nay,
They find it so, Ahab is slain that day,

A Logico-theological Analysis, of the second Book of Kings.
THis book contains the increase and decrease of the Kingdoms of Israel and
Judah.

I. The Increase of these two Kingdoms, and that both severally and jointly.
Severally, as Israel was advanced and increased under diverse Kings, Viz.
Ahaziah; see his life and acts, chap. 1. the taking up of Elijah, that had
foretold his end, chap. 2. Jehoram; his fortune is magnified by his wars, and
by his contemporary Elisha, whose miracles were wrought, both for the
Israelites, chap. 3. and 4. and for the Gentile Naaman, chap. 5. whose
prophecies spoke of the ceasing of famine, whereof the cause and occasion was a
siedge, chap. 6. see the event of it, chap. 7. and of the coming of an
after-famine for seven years, chap. 8. Jehu; see his Election, chap. 9.
Administration and Death, chap. 10.
Judah was advanced by Jehoash, whose Inauguration read, chap. 11. Description,
chap. 12.
Jointly as two Kings of Israel are spoken of together, viz. Jehoahaz and
Joash, chap. 13. then of either Kingdom one, as Amaziah King of Judah, and
Jeroboam King of Israel, chap. 14. then afterward they are put more confusedly
and mixtly, As Azariah or Vzziah King of Judah. Azariah, or Zachariah. Shallum.
-- Kings of Israel, chap. 15. Menahem. -- Kings of Israel, chap. 15. Pekahiah.
-- Kings of Israel, chap. 15. Pekah. -- Kings of Israel, chap. 15. Jotham King
of Judah, whose Successor was Ahaz; see his lineage, acts, death, chap. 16.

II. The decrease of the Kingdom of Israel in Samaria, under King Hoshea,
captived by the Assyrians, chap. 17. Judah, whereof see the Decrease,
Reparation and Subversion. Decrease under A good King, viz. Hezekiah; see his
war with the Assyrians begun and ended, chap. 19. his sickness, chap. 20. A
very bad King, viz. Manasseh, and Ammon his son, chap. 21.
Reparation by Josiah, who restored the Temple, chap. 22. and reformed
Religion, chap. 23. Subversion Attempted, in Jehojakims, Iechoniahs and
Zedekiahs times, chap. 24. Perfected under the same Zedekiah, by the Chaldeans
and Babylonians, chap. 25.


A POEM. Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
second Book of KINGS.
1. SIck Ahaziah Beelzebub inquires,
Two Captains with their troops Elijah fires,
The third obtains the favor he desi^es.
2 Jordan twice parts, Eli^ah mounts the sky,
Waters are healed, forty two children die,
For mocking of Elisha foolishly.
3 Jehorams reign, Mesha's conspiracy,
Elisha water gets, and victory.
Moab thinks water blood, and Moabs King
His son and heir does for an offering bring.
Elisha gives
The Shunamite a Son, him dead revives.
Heales deadly pottage, and amongst other deeds
With twenty loaves an hundredth men he feeds.
5 The leper Naaman cured would gratify
Elisha, he his presents does deny,
Gehazi gets them with a leprosy.
Syria's mind
Elisha knows, he makes the Syrians blind,
And see again, he will have them fed, not smitten,
Samaria is with famine hunger-bitten.
7 But plenty's next, so says the Man of God:
The unbeleeving Prince to death is trod.
8 The Shunamites land's restored, Hazael succeeds
Benhadad, Jehoram's wicked reign and deeds.
Jehoram dies by Jehu's hand and power,
In Naboth's field, Jezebel the dogs devour.
Ahab Jehu slayes,
With Baals Worshippers, yet all his days
Tracks Jeroboam in his sin, he dies,
His son Jeoahaz his place supplies.
11 Joash in Judah scapes, his Grandame reigns,

Jehoiada, all his days, kept Joash right,
After his death he is worse, his servants fight,
Kill him, the throne is Amaziah's right.
13 Jehoahaz ^^igns in Israel badly, dies
Joash succeeds, Elisha's obsequies;
Three strokes o'th'ground portend three victories.
Amaziahs reign in Judah s good,
He kills the men that shed his fathers blood.
He dies at last by a Conspiracy,
Then to Azariah falls the Majesty.

For which he 'came a leper, Jotham's King
In Judah, but in Israel Zachary,
He was the fourth of Jehu's Progeny,
That reigned, then fell there competitions store,
Each follower killing him that was before.
16 Ahaz, bad King of Judah, does convert
The brazen altar to's own use, subvert
The Temple, at the last, when he is dead,
Good Hezekiah comes up in his stead.
17 Hoshea's wicked reign in Israel, he
Saw the Samaritan Captivity,
And stranger People planted in that Seat,
Whose mixed Religion made them Lions-meat.
18 Good Hezekiah's reign does take away
Idolatry, and prospers, in his day
Samaria's carried captive, as before,
Into Assyria, to return no more.
The King of Ashur threatens this good King,
Whereof his servants heavy tidings bring.
19 The good King mou^nes, calls Isaiah.
Isai: that he may
Pray for them. Proud Senacherib does say
Blasphemous things, the good King prays again,
Whence the Angel spoils the Camp, Senacherib's slain.
20 The good King's warned of's death, but by his Prayer
Gets fifteen years, Manasseh is his heir.
21 Wicked Manasseh, bad in th'high'st degree,
Yet his Son Ammon is as bad as he,
Slain in s own house by his own family.
22 Josiah's reign is good, Huldah foresees,
Hierusalems fall, and her calamities.
23 Josiah makes the book o'th'law be read,
Covenants with God, idols are banished,
Shallum succeeds, and then Jehojakim,
Both of them wicked Kings, neither like him.
24 Jehojakim rebels, and thereupon
Is carried captive into Babylon,
And next to him Jehojachin his son,
King Zedekiah^ day is coming on.
Jerusalem is taken,
The King is blinded, and his Sons are slain,
The King of Babel, after diverse years,
Himself to Jechoniah kindly bears.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the first Book of Chron.
THis book contains the beginning of the Kingdom of Israel, both in respect of
Genealogy and Monarchy.

I. Of Genealogy, and that is either general from Adam to Joseph, chap. 1. or
particular, of the people of Israel, by the tribes Of Judah, whose Posterity
was either private men, chap. 2. or Kings of Judah, chap. 3. Simeon, chap. 4.
Reuben, Gad, and half- Manasseh, chapter 5. Levi, chap. 6. Issachar, Naphtali,
Manasseh, Ephraim, Benjamin. See his Posterity, chap. 7. and Princes, chap. 8.
II. Of Monarchy, viz. the Monarchy of Saul. See his Ancestors and Posterity,
chap. 9. his destruction, chap. 10. David, and that both In the beginning of
his Kingdom, where we have his obtaining of the Kingdom, by the help of
Captains, chap. 11. and Soldiers, chap. 12. and his bringing home of the Arc,
chap. 13. In the increase of his Kingdom; through his Friends Abroad, as Hiram.
At home, as his wives and children.
Enemies overcome, viz. the Philistines, chap. 14.


In the Administration of his Kingdom; and that either Ecclesiastical, in
respect of Tabernacle and Temple, as placing of the Arc in the Tabernacle,
chap. 15. ordaining Ministers for the Tabernacle, chap. 16. his purpose to
build a Temple, which yet was prevented, chapter 17. Politic, both in respect of
War, and so he governed partly well and rightly, as in his victories against
Philistia, Moab, Zobah, chap. 18. The Ammonites; where we have Warlike
Preparations, chap. 19. And the Conclusion of the war, by the death of three
Giants, chap. 20. partly untowardly, viz. in numbering the people, which was
punished with the pestilence, chap. 21. Peace, in respect both of
Church; where we have the matter and workmen for building of a Temple, chap.
22. the Levites and Ministers, their families, chap. 23. and orders, for some
were Ministers of the Priests, chap. 24. Singers, chap. 25. Porters chap. 26.
Commonwealth, as The settling of the Military, popular, domestical estate,
chap. 27. The appointing of Solomon for his heir. See his Person and Office,
chap. 28. and how he is confirmed by his father exhorting him, and the people
praying and consenting, chap. 29.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the first
Book of CHRONICLES.
1. Here Is Adams line to Noah, Japhets seed
With Hams, and who to Abraham Sem succeed,
Of Ishmael and Keturah, who proceed.
2 The sons of Israel, Judah, Jesse see,
Calebs, Jerahmeels, Hezrons Progeny.
3 The sons of David down to Zedekiah.
With all the Successors of Jechoniah.
4 Jud', Asher, Shelahs lines are here repeated,
Jabez, his Prayer, and how Simeon's seated.
5 Here Is Reubens line to the Captivity,
Their habitation, and their victory
Over the Hagarites, their enemy.
6 Here Levi's line downward as far does pass,
Aarons both charge, and line, to Ahimaaz.
7 Of Issachar and Benjamin, the seed
Who Manass', Ephraim, Naphtali succeed.
8 The chiefest men of Benjamin are told,
The stock of Saul and Jonathan, enrolled.
9 And here again, see at what point do rise
Israel, and Judahs genealogies
10 Saul and 's son fall, (the Philistines are g^ad)
But they 're interred by Jabesh-Gilead.
11 David in Hebron is created King,
Of that, and his stout men, the text does sing.
12 At Zicklag, and at Hebron, Armies came
To do their service in King David's name.
13 He fetches the Ark from Kiriath-jearim,
Uzzah would hold it steady, God kills him:
At Obed-edoms house the Ark does rest
Three Months, and for its sake all the house is blessed.
14 See Hirams love, David's felicities,
In children, people, wives and victories.
15 A place is made for the Ark, it is fetched, the King Dances, and Michal
scoffs him for this thing:
16 But he sings praises, sacrifices, joys,
And officers, to attend the A^k, imployes.
17 David must build no house to God, yet he
Is blessed for his good mind, with his Progeny,
He prays, and thanks the sacred Majesty.
18 The Philistines and Moabites he spoils,
And Hadarezer with the Syrians foiles.
19 Hanun, and the Ammonites, he makes repent
For shaving of the Messengers he sent.
20 Rabbah he spoils, and tortures by his might,
Three Philistine-Giants overcomes in fight.
21 Joab must count the People, he denies,
David prevails, anon he does advise,
Repents, the plague is staid by sacrifice,
It was the devil that moved this enterprise.
22 David, before his death, prepares all
Materials for the Temple, and withal,
Gives order that it be magnifical.
23 David now old, makes Sol^mon the King,
Orders the L^vites for their ministering.
24 The Priests and Levites orders: Come and see
Their number, offices and Progeny.
25 The Singers count, and office, they are no more
Then four and twenty orders, as before,
The Priests and Levites, t'must not be forgot,
That Levites, Singers, Priests, were ranked by lot.
26 The Porters are divided by lot too,
Each one well knows his gate, and what to do.
27 Twelve Captains must each month attend the King,
Of the tribes Princes here is the reckoning.
28 David bids Solomon (lastly) fear the Lord,
And build Gods house, for which he does afford
Paternes to build it right, after his word.
29 He makes the Princes offer freely to it,
Prays, and gives thanks to God to see them do it,
And crown his Son, while he yet lives to know it.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the second Book of Chron.
THis book contains the increase of the Kingdom of Israel under Solomon, and
the many changes and shakings of it afterward.

I. The Increase of it under Solomon. See His Virtues and wisdom, chap 1.
Buildings Sacred. See 1. The Preparation made for them of materials, chapter 2. 2.
The building, both of the Temple, chap. 3 Sundry vessels, chapter 4 the Ark, chap.
5. 3. The Dedication of them by his Prayers, chap. 6. by sacrifices offered and
accepted, chapter 7. Profane, chap. 8.
Riches, glory and death, chap. 9.
II. The many changes and shakings of it, with as many Reparations of it: for
it was 1. Shaken by the sins of Rehoboam. See His Troublesome instalment, with
the loss of ten tribes, chap. 10. Acts, chap. 11. Fortune and death, chap. 12.
Successor Abijah, chap. 13.
Repaired by Asa. See his good acts, both in Commonwealth and Church, chap.
14. and 15. his erroneous acts, chap. 16. and by Jehosaphat. See his
instalment, chap. 17. His acts, both military, chap. 18. and Ecclesiastical,
chap. 19. His fortune and death, chap. 20. 2. Shaken again By Jorams fratricide
and idolatry, chap. 21, Ahaziah his Son, chap. 22.
Repaired by Joash. See his Election, chap. 23. his acts and death, chapter 24. 3.
Shaken again by the hypocrites, Amaziah, chap. 25. and Vzziah, chap. 26.
Repaired by Jotham, chap. 27. 4. Shaken again by Ahaz, chap. 28. Repaired by
Hezekiah. See His Reformation of Religion, chap. 29. Observing of the
Passover, chapter 30. Restitution of the Ministry, chapter 31.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
second Book of CHRONICLES.
1. KIng Solomon offers, makes a good Election
Of wisdom, whence he gains the Lords affection,
Of wealth, and strength, he is blessed with the Perfection.
2 Does many Workmen 'bout Gods house employ,
Sends to King Hiram, has returns of joy.
3 The Temples ornaments, place, time and measure,
The Cherubims, Vail, Pillars, read at leisure.
4 The Brazen Altar, Molten Sea behold,
The Lavers, Tables, Candlesticks of gold.
5 The Ark is brought to th'oracle, a cloud
Does fill the place, the Chorus sings aloud;
6 The King does bless his God, and consecrate
By prayer, the house to prayer destinate.
7 The Lord accepts this Royal Consecration,
By a clear sign, the King brings an oblation.
8 Read of his buildings, of his offerings here,
Which he did offer God from year to year.
9 The Queen of Sheba comes, and does admire
His wisdom, riches, then does back retire,
The King for all this does at last expire.
10 Now Rehoboam King had Israel chose,
But Jeroboam came to interpose
A Suit, which being somewhat harshly taken,
The new King of ten tribes is quite forsaken.
11 By arms he would reduce them, but may not,
Shemajah does forbid him, nothing's got
Against Gods decree, and further you may read
In this place, of his wives and of his seed.
12 This Rehoboam, f^r forsaking God
Is punished by Shishak, Gods sharp rod;
Shemajahs preaching he repents,
And so destruction, though not spoil, prevents,
At last he dies, amidst his discontents.
Abijah does maintain the fight,
Against Jeroboam, and put him to flight,
His numerous offspring grows up with his might.
Asah succeeds him, pulls the idols down,
In Halcion days he fortifies his Crown,
By P^ayer against Zera winnes renown.
15 Asah with God a solemn foede does make,
Puts down his mother for her idols sake.
16 By Syrians art, he Baasha does prevent
From building Ramah, but anon is shent
For seeking to Physicians, ere the Lord,
And dies, as Hanani had said the word.
Jehosaphat reigns well and prosperously,
Sends Levites to teach Judah Piety.
18 Against Ramoth-Gilead, he with Aha^ goes,
Seduced Ahab there his life does lose.
19 Reproved by Jehu, he does give command
To the Levites, Priests, and Judges of the land,
TO attend their places well at any hand.
20 Proclaims a Fast, prays, and his foes he foiles,
The people praising God return with spoils.
21 Jehoram does succeed him in the blood
Of 's brethren, marries into Ahabs brood,
Dying Elijah leaves his Curse behind,
In writing, he the truth thereof does find.
22 Bad Ahaziah reigns, he goes to see
Sick Joram, Israel's King, too ominously,
For Jehu killed him, then the royal seed
His mother slew, a black and horrid deed,
Joash alone escaped, as God decreed.
23 Jehojada the Priest makes Joash King,
Kills Athaliah, does Gods worship bring
To a good state, for joy the people sing.
24 While the Priest lived, Joash ruled very well,
Repaired the Temple, but at last he fell
By Zabad and Jehozabad, for he
Was guilty of the death of Zachary.
25 King Amaziah reigns, and kills the men
That killed his father, hires an army then
Of Israelites against Edom, but God chose
Rather then use them, he his coin should lose.
26 Vzziah reigns, is proud, the Priest he plays,
And so becomes a leper, while his days
Are done, Jotham his son the Scepter swayes,
27 Reigns well, and prospers, Ammon does subdue,
To Ahaz, after him the Kingdome's due.
28 Bad Ahaz suffers by the Syrians power,
Grows more and more idolatrous each hou^e,
Till death does cut him down as 'twere a flower.
29 But Hezekiah reigns in a good way,
The house of God is purged in his day.
30 A Passover h' ordains, for fourteen days,
It Is solemnized with feasting, and with praise.
31 He but commands, and all men do obey,
They banish idols, and tithes freely pay.
32 Sena^herib invades Judah, his great pride
Had the repulse, he went home, and there di'd.
Good Hezekiah s sick, and well again,
Dies, and his son Manasseh comes to reign.
Manasseh's captived, but he prays,
And is restored, Ammon walks in his ways,
And by th'hands of's own servants ends his days.
Josiah's reign is good, idols are fled,
Gods house repaired, he makes the law be read,
Renews a foede with God, Huldah foresees
The sinful nations future miseries.
35 Josiah keeps the Pasch, the Egyptian King
Kills him, all Judah lamentations sing.
Jehoahaz deposed to Egypt s gone,
Babylon.
Zedekiah is the last of them,
Jerusalem,
Orus got The Imperial Diadem.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Ezra.
THe Book of Ezra contains the return of the People from Babylon, and the
causes thereof Efficient, both instrumental, as Cyrus who made the
Proclamation, chap. 1. and principal, as Zorobabel, who led the people out of
Babylon, chap. 2. Final, which was the restoring of Church and Commonwealth,
chap. 3. whereof there were diverse impediments Objected by The Samaritanes, chapter
4. The Governor of the Country, chap. 5.
Removed by Darius, who renewed the Edict of Cyrus, chap. 6. and by Ezra. See
His Travel to Judea, instituted by what Author, chap. 7. undertaken with what
companions, chap. 8. Reformation of unlawful marriage, whereof there is a
description, chap. 9. and abolition by divorce, chap. 10.




A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of EZRA.
1. CYrus stirred up by God, does leave proclaim.
To all that would for the honor of Gods name,
Go rebuild Juries Temple, does restore
The vessels taken away from thence before.
2 The number, names and tribes of them that went,
And what to God they for this grace present.
3 The Altar's reared, the Temples groundwork laid,
Mixed noise of joy, and tears confusion made.
4 But here is a stop, some faithless men combine
To get a Pattent, t'hinder this design,
And do prevail, so that the work does cease,
Until Darius bids them work in peace.
Haggai, Zachary, and other men
Of God, provoke to work again, and then
The work goes on apace, though some would still
Oppose it, but they cannot get their will.
Darius does advance the building so,
That now it is finished, dedicated too,
With sacrifice, they worship in it, take
The Sacrament o'th'Pasch, for the Lords sake.
Ezra to Jury goes, with warrant from
King Artaxe^xes, whither when he come,
He blesses God that thus had brought him home.
8 Ezra's companions see, he does demand
Iddo for Temple-Priests, and then command.
A Fast, and trusts the treasures in the Priests hand.
9 For their affinity with strangers, he
Mournes, prays, confesses to the God on high.
10 The People, at his words, do much deplore
Their marriages, promised to offend no more,
And so divorced the wives they had before.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Nehem.
THe Book of Nehemiah speaks of Jerusalem now restored, in respect of I.
Reparation of Buildings. Undertaken, by what Author, chap. 1. with what
preparation and help, chap. 2. Begun, chap. 3. Hindered by external impediments,
chapter 4. and internal, chap. 5. Perfected, chap. 6.
II. Restoration and Reformation, both Politic, in respect of The
City-watches. The poll or number of the People. The Tribute chap. 7.
Eclesiastical, in respect of Two Feasts. See their description, chap. 8.
Public penance, chapter 9, 10.

Mixed, chap. 11, 12.
III. The relapse of some wicked men in the absence of Nehemiah.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of NEHEMIAH.
1. HAnani's sad news makes Nehemiah fast,
And mourn, and pray, 'cause Salem now lies waste.
2 King Artaxerxes spies it, as he takes
His Cup, and therefore a Commission makes
To him to go, and by all means redress
His dear beloved Salems deep distress.
3 The names and orders of the persons all
That under Nehemiah built the wall.
4 While the enemies scoff, he prays, they all do stand
With sword in the one, trowel i'th'other hand.
5 Of morgage, bondage, debt, the Jews complain,
But he their mutual pressures does restrain.
6 Sanb^llat would affright him with pretense,
His own increase the fears, intelligence
They hold in private with the foe, but he
Goes on, concludes the building perfectly.
7 To Hanani and faithful Hananiah
The charge of all is left by Nehemiah,
Who here reports the Genealogy,
Of all that came up from Captivity.
8 They read, and hear the law of God, they weep,
Are comforted, the Feasts of Boo^hes they keep.
9 A solemn Fast, here they confess and pray;
For God, against themselves they freely say.
10 A Covenant they make, their names are here
That sealed it, and the points contained there.
11 The Rulers, Volunteers, and those by lot
That dwelt in Salem, are not here forgot.
12 The Priests and Levites order, how the wall
Was dedicated to the God of all.
13 Upon the reading of the blessed law,
The People from the strangers do withdraw.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Esther.
THe Book of Esther, contains the History of the deliverance of the Jews from
an imminent danger. Hereof see 1. The efficient cause, which was Esther her
self; of her advancement, See the occasion, chap. 1. and manner, chap. 2. 2.
The manner, where of this Tragicomedy you have the (...), or beginning, which
was Hamans hate against the Jews, chap. 3. (...), or busy part, either
General, as the mourning of all the Jews, chap. 4. Special, the danger of
Mordecai, chap. 5. (...), or Conclusion, by The Advancement of Mordecai, chap.
6. The destruction of their enemies, as Hamans hanging, chap. 7. the slaughter
of all the rest obtained, chap. 8. and executed, chap. 9.

3. The Epilogue, the confirmed tranquillity of the Jews, chap. 10.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of ESTHER.
Assuerus feast, Queen Vashti will not come,
She is divorced, it is the wise men's doom,
That every husband shall bear rule at home.
2 Assuerus half forethinks, but thus 't must be,
Another Queen he must have, Esther's she.
Haman 'cause Mordecai does his knee refuse,
Would for revenge go ruin all the Jews.
4 Mordecai, and the condemned Jews lament,
The sentence for their death, Esther's content
To beg their pardon, fasts before she went.
5 Coming, the golden Scepter 'lures her, she
Invites to a Feast Haman, with his Majesty,
Haman provides a rope for Mordecai.
6 The Chronicles bring Mordecai to th'Kings mind.
He bids go honor him, Haman must find
A way to do it, which makes Hamans wife
Think, that anon 't will happily cost his life,
But he conceales his grief, and goes his way
To th'dinner Esther had prepared that day.
7 Ask Esther, said the King, the half o'th'land,
Thou'st have it, No, she only does demand
Pardon for th'Jews, condemned through Hamans lie
The Jews are pardoned, Haman must now die,
Upon the Gallows made for Mordecai.
8 But Mordecai's in honor, has the ring
That Haman had Esther entreats the King,
To revoke Hamans Writts, he grants this thing.
9 And so the Jews, when they should come to die,
They kill their foes, Hamans posterity
Is hand'd, and lest this thing should be forgot,
They keep the Feast of Purim, that is lot.
14 Assuerus greatness does conclude this text,
And how to him great Mordecai is next.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Job.
THe Book of Job consists of three parts, viz. 1. A Prologue. 2. A Dialogue. Of
Disputers, where there are diverse Acts, and diverse Scenes. The first from chap.
1. to chap. 8. the second from chap. 8. to chap. 11. the third from chap. 11.
to chap. 15. the fourth from chap. 15. to chap. 22. the fifth from chap. 22. to
chap. 31. Of Moderators, As Elihu, from chap. 32. to chap 36. God, from chap.
36. to chap. 41.

3. An Epilogue or Catastrophe, chap. 42.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of JOB.
1. RIch Job, now poor, yet blesses God for all,
And humbly at Gods feet, on's face does fall
An Mundi
2 Satan does vex him, his wives counsel's bad,
His friends with his distress are stricken sad.
3 He curses now his Birth day would feign die,
And so escape present ext emity.
4. Eliphaz ^eproves, tells him, Almighty God
Not on the good, but wicked lays his rod.
5 The end o'th'wicked's bad, God sends affliction,
But blessed is the end of his correction.
6 Job 'plaines not without cause, dead would he be,
He blames his friends for want of charity.
7 Excuses his desire of death, complains
Of Gods great strictness, and his own great pains.
8 Bildad maintains God, from Antiquity
He proves the ruin of hypocrisy.
9 God's just, says Job, with him contend who can?
Afflictions condemn not the godly man.
10 Here Job expostulates with God on high,
Would die, but craves some ease before he die.
11 Zophar condemns Jobs self-justification,
And of Gods wisdom makes a full narration.
12 Job stands it out with his friends, yet the same sense
With them he has of Gods Omnipotence.
13 Jobs friends are partial, Job his faith does show,
Feign would his sins, and Gods intention know.
14 Job entreats favor by life's brevity,
Negation of life lost, death s certainty.
15 Eliphaz reproves Jobs standing on his toes,
The wicked man's unrest he does disclose.
16 Job checks his ruthlesse friends, shows his sad case,
Maintains his innocence face to face.
17 Appeals to God, th'harsh dealing of some fools
May 'stonish, not discourage righteous souls.
18 Presumption and impatience, Bildad lays
To Jobs charge, then the bad man's woes displayes.
19 Jobs sorrows feed the cruelty of's friends,
He pity craves, himself to Christ commends.
20 Zophar lays forth the portion, and the state
Of wicked persons, whom Gods soul does hate.
21 Nay but sometimes they prosper, Job contends
The good and bad differ not in their ends.
22 Man's goodness helps not God, says Eliphaz,
And many charges against Job does pass.
23 Job would feign deal with God, he trusts on's love,
Still ^is own innocence he does approve,
Shows that divine decrees none can remove.
24 Sin may go scotfree for a time, at last
The sleeping vengeance wakes, and comes on fast
25 Bildad in short does this Position clear,
That no man in Gods sight does just appear.
26 Bildad to Job seems too uncharitable,
It Is granted that Gods power's investigable.
27 Job still protests his own sincerity,
Denies that hope attends hypocrisy.
28 A common knowledge of things natural
There is in men, but wisdome's above all.
29 The thought of former glory does but double
Jobs inward sorrows, in this day of trouble.
30 See a strange change in Job, for weal and fame
There Is nothing now but misery and shame.
31 In several distinct cases, Job makes seen
His own integrity, what he has been.
32 Young Elihu's angry, both with Job and's friends:
And though but young, yet he his verdict spends.
33 Holds argument with Job for God, and says
God ought not to give man account of's ways.
34 Elihu checks Job, as calling God unjust,
The Omnipotent cannot be so, man must
Humble before Gods footstool, in the dust.
35 Compare with God? it is odious, people cry
In vain, for want of faith in misery.
36 Gods Justice, and his works Elihu's confessing,
Tells Job his sins do hinder God from blessing.
37 Gods mighty works do man to fear him bind,
The depth of his great wisdom none can find.
38 God challenging Job to answer, does descry
His ignorance, and imbecility.
39 About the Goats, Hindes, Asses, Peacocks, Horse,
God argues Job quite down to move remorse.
40 It is obtained, for Job falls humbly down,
And to Gods attributes gives all renown,
G eat Behemoth his other works does crown.
41 So does the Leviathan, that Sea-wonder,
Show Gods great power, who only keeps him under.
42 Job humbles, God does moderate on his side,
Against his friends, and having thus been tried,
God multiplies him greatly, till he di'd.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Psalms.
Psalms are either Simple, and those either Didiscalical, or Doctrinal.
Oratorical, or Petitionary.
Mixed, or Compounded of, etc.


Simple, and some of those 1. Didascalical, partly concerning acts and deeds,
and those either of Things done already, and those either Past, as the
historical Psalms of the captivity, 44, 89, 137. and the return from Egypt, 78,
81, 105, 106, 114, 135, 136. and Babylon 126. To come, as the Psalms that
prophecy of Christ's marriage, 45. Passion, 22 69. the obedience and office of a
Mediator, 40. His Kingdom, 2, 24, 47, 61, 72, 93, 96, 97, 98, 99, 110.
Things to be done, and those are either Ceremonial, speaking of their
unprofitablenesse, 51. Moral, concerning Gods Word, 19, 119. Voice and Majesty,
18, 29, 68, 114. Power, 89 147. Providence, 33, 104, 127. Presence in
judgments, 82. Every where, 139. Goodness toward man, 8, 65, and the Church,
87, 107, 125, 130, 132. his collation with Idols, 115, 135.
Partly concerning the Good man's Felicity, 1, 15, 32, 92, 112, 127, 128, 144.
Confidence, 11, 23, 27, 46, 49, 62, 77, 91, 121, 42, 43. Humility, 131.
Economy, prudence and piety, 101.
Wicked man's Frailty, 37, 73, 75, 90, 129. Corruption, 14, 53.




2. Oratorical, or petitionary, for Good, and that either To be obtained
Publicly, for the Church Privately, for the King, 20, 72, or our selves', as
remission of sins, 25, 31, 51. returning to the Church, 42, 53, 63, 83.
Obtained already, and that either By others, as where there is gratulation For
the King, 21. For the recovering of the Ark, 122.
By our selves, for which we must give thanks, 9, 18, 30, 31, 32, 34, 36, 48,
66, 41 76, 95, 104, 108, 111, 113, 116, 117, 118 124, 130, 135, 138, 139, 145,
146, 147, 148, 149, 150.

Evil, and that either To be inflicted, that is, imprecation, 52 55, 69, 83,
94, 109. To be removed, that is deprecation, as when we pray for deliverance.
From Sickness and sense of Gods displeasure, 6. Enemies, Tongues, accusing
unjustly, 7. 120. Arms, 3, 4, 5, 12, 17, 26, 28, 35, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60,
64, 70, 71, 86, 123, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144.






Mixed, which consist of Prayer and thanksgiving, 16. Complaint of The enemy
oppressing, 69, 10, 13, 35, 38, 41, 88, 94. God delaying, 44, 74, 79, 80, 85,
102.



A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Psalms in the Book
of PSALMS.
1. GOod men and bad have their contrary ways,
And either sort God, in their kind, repayes.
2 The Gentiles all against Christ in Council sit,
Yet, maugre all their spite, they must submit.
Absalom pursues his father King,
Helvic.
His father shrouds himself under Gods wing.
4 Hear me (says David) why God does not hear,
The cause is sin, let but Gods face appear;
Smiling, and the whole shortly cannot so much cheer
5 He prays and shows Gods great Antipathy,
Against sinners, but his own fidelity.
6 In sickness he complains, as for his foes,
By faith's great power he triumphs over those.
Cush he prays, and's other enemies,
His faith, their fall, and his own weal, descries.
8 The world's a Temple, made by Gods great hand,
For man, who all the creatures does command,
Whereat King David does amazed stand.
9 He magnifies the Lord for treading down
His foes, bids others sing the Lords renown,
He promises the patient poor a Crown.
10 Against the wicked he makes great complaint,
And of their fury begs divine restraint,
But comfort to the poor, that is almost faint.
11 Like a bird to an hill, David now flies,
While all is turned upside down, but the Lords eyes
See well to David, strike his enemies.
12 Oh what a want of godly men's i'th'earth!
God in his time will recompense that dearth.
13 David complains of Gods too long delay,
Prays from impatience that God would him stay,
And not make vain his hope and trust for aye.
14 Ah fool! is there no God? thy very fear
Shows that there is. Oh that the Lord would cheer
By saving from thy hand, his Israel dear!
15 A Citizen of Zion would you know?
His several graces do him clearly show.
16 Against merits and idolatry he cries,
His divine choice, and portion magnifies,
And to eternal life expects to rise.
17 Defense against his foes David does crave,
Puts on the shield of faith himself to save.
18 A Song of triumph for the Conquests given
Against Saul, and them that had with David striven.
19 The Creatures show Gods glory, the holy Word
His grace, here David begs that of the Lord.
20 Here David's People magnify their King,
In his behalf their Prayers to God they bring.
21 They Are heard, the King prevails, they give God praise,
And still expect more mercy in his days.
22 Here he takes sadly on, lamenteth sore,
And yet he prays and praises as before.
23 God is his shepherd, gives him blessings store.
24 All the earth, (even Mount Moriah) is the Lords
The Temples Seat, where God a place affords
Only to the holy, to whom he foretells,
The King Messiah, who all Kings excels.
25 David in faith begs these two things of God,
Pardon of sin, assist^nce under th'rod.
26 Here Is an appeal to God, upon this ground,
That David's heart to God was ever sound.
27 The things that sustain David's faith, are three,
Gods power, his love to God, prayers fervency.
28 He prays against his foes, his God does bless
Petitions for the Peoples happiness.
29 To the highest King Kings praise must be directed,
'Cause only by his power they are protected.
30 David sings praise at's houses Dedication,

Stirs up the Saints to a like Gratulation.
31 David believes, craves, joys, and prays to God,
Whose divine goodness he proclaims abroad.
32 Whose sin is pardoned he is truly blessed,
The Heart is much eased where the sin's confessed,
Only Gods promise causes joy and rest.
33 Praise God for 's goodness, power and providence,
Stay upon him by faith and confidence.
34 David himself praises, bids others praise,
Trust, fear the Lord, and lastly he displayes
The good man's privilege, sin bad men slayes.
35 David prays for himself, and against his foes,
Their injuries he does to God disclose.
36 The bad man's case is fearful, theirs is best
That are the Lords, and under's wing do rest,
Gods love is excellent, David does pray,
That from the Saints it never fly away.
37 Oh the wide distance 'twixt bad men and just,
The thought of this may arm with patient trust.
38 David surrounded now with great distress,
Prays God he would not leave him comfortless.
39 David s afraid, though moved, to speak amiss,
The thought of vain-short-life his bridle is.
40 See the grand profit of true confidence,
The best oblation is obedience,
David prays best inflamed by's evil sense.
41 God cares for th'poor, David's foes treacherous are,
He flees to God experienced of his care.
42 David would fain serve God in's Temple fair,
Checks his own soul for drooping with despair,
As if he never thither should repair.
43 He prays to be restored, to serve God there,
With hopes hereof he his sad soul does cheer.
44 The Church erst comforted, does now complain,
Yet still is firm, craves divine help again.
45 Christ's Kingdom with its majesty and grace,
The Churches duty t'him, fall to this place.
46 The Church in God reposes all her faith,
David exhorts to see what cause she has.
47 The Nations are advised to entertain
Christ's Kingdom, and praise God in the highest strain,
48 For th Prlviledge and gifts the Church does gain.
49 The hope of Resurrection must needs be
Fixed on God, not earths prosperity.
50 God in his Church is a Majestic King,
Behold his Writ, his Saints to foede to bring,
The rest to judgment, to him praises sing.
51 The guilt and filth of sin (Lord) wash away,
Cleanse me, and bless the Church, David does pray, Helvic.

When Nathan checked him, 'cause of Batbsheba.
52 Doegs destruction David prophesies,
Good news, but he himself on God relies.
53 Ah fool! Is there no God? thy very fear
Shows that there is. Oh that the Lord would cheer,
By saving from thy hand his Israel dear.
54 Against the pickthank Ziphims David cries,
Hights God for saving him a sacrifice
55 David his fearful case to God commends,
Tells how he is betrayed of's very friends,
False bloody men do make untimely ends.
56 Here he complains against the Philistim,
Who, but for God, in G^th had surpised him,
Therefore he l trust the word of Elohim.
57 Fleeing from Saul, unto God David flees,
Prays, and when he shall be saved, to praise decrees.
58 Schools wicked Judges, makes their venom known,
Tells them, they shall be judged before Gods throne.
Saul's Scouts beset his house to have him,
After complaint he prays to God to save him,
Sings of Gods power, that then deliverance gave him.

Gods former absence from them, then entreats
They may no more receive the like defeat,
Builds on Gods promise, that he shall be great.
61 David's experience to God makes him flee,
For's promise sake he will serve him constantly.
62 In God he trusts, his foes he cries quite down,
The godly he cries up, no earthly things
Are to be trusted; in the glorious Crown
Gods power, and mercy wear, of them he sings.
63 He thirsts for God, with lifting up of hands,
He blesses God, by whom's foes fall, he stands.
64 To be saved from his foes, he craves again,
Their wickedness will turn to their own pain.
Their fearful fall will make the righteous feign.
65 To God for's grace, he Hallelujahs sings,
Shows th'elects blessedness in diverse things.
66 Praise and bless God, the works of God observe,
David for his part vows the Lord to serve.
67 Thy Kingdom come, and blessings that attend
Thereon, so shall thy praise reach the worlds end.
68 At taking up the Ark, this was the Prayer,
God's to be praised for's mercy, and his care.
O'th'Church, and for his works past all compare.
69 David again is here under a cloud,
Prays, blasts, his foes, and praises God aloud.
70 Remember, is the title of this Ps^lme,
To storm the wicked, send the Saints a calm.
71 Assured of Gods favor, David prays
Against his foe, that at his poor soul plays.
72 David prays for Christ's type, his own sweet Son,
Pointing at Christ the'ectype of Solomon,
Whose Kingdoms truth, and glorie's coming on.
73 The wickeds weal King David half enchanted,
Till at a Sermon he his slip recanted,
Seeing the ungodly's ruin lively painted.
74 The Temples fall he laments bitterly,
Which by the Spirits light he did foresee,
And argues from Gods power, from th'adversary,
From Gods own foede to help the Sanctuary.
75 He praises, and a just Judge vows to be,
Condemns the proud, that lift their horns on high.
76 Gods Majesty's reported in this place,
In's service are required reverence and grace.
77 David declines too much to diffidence,
But a view of Gods works works confidence.
78 O learn Gods law, from which 'cause Israel swerved
They were spu'd out by God, as they deserved.
79 David laments Jerus'lems heavy chance,
And for her begs of God deliverance.
80 The Churches woe is cause of lamentation
To David, he begs hard its restoration.
81 David does first call here to praise the Lord,
Next Isr'els disobedience does record.
82 'Cause Judges do true Justice quite forsake,
David prays God the Province t'undertake
Himself, and now to judge the earth t'awake.
83 Here he tells God how his foul foes conspire
Against him, and prays, God 'stroy them in his ire.
84 How fain would David go to the house of God,
They Are blessed, says he, that there may have abode.
85 David's experience of Gods love of old
Makes him t'expect it for the future, bold.
86 David's clear conscience makes him strong to pray,
Gods love and power still stronger every day.
87 The Church and her true members are set forth,
Their increase, consolation, nature, worth.
88 Here Is a Petition, which withal complains
Of danger, terrors, desolation, pains.
89 David to God a Gratulation sings,
For's Covenant, power, Church-care and other things.
90 Moses to's murmuring people, judged to die,
Teaches a Prayer their God to pacify.
91 The state, the safety, dwelling, servants, friends,
Of godly men, the Psalmist here commends.
92 This Song or Psalm was for the Sabbath Day,
It charges praise to God, who does display
His mighty works, Sinners and Saints repay.
93 The holiness, the power, the Majesty,
See here of the Messiah s Monarchy.
94 No Justice, but Impiety, says David,
Blessed are the afflicted, for by God they are saved.
95 For greatness, and for goodness, praise to God,
Israel did tempt him, and they felt his rod.
96 Again sing Hallelujah t'him on high,
For's greatness and transcendent Monarchy.
97 It is majestic, Atheists dearly buy
Their image worship and idolatry.
98 All Jews, all Gentiles, and all Creatures sing
A new Song, unto God the eternal King.
99 And worship him, who does appear to be
The holy King, that rules with equity.
100 His power, truth, mercy always magnify.
101 David does here enter into a vow,
To purge his House, and Kingdom, and shows how.
102 But here he prays, and cries, until his Cry
Rest on Gods mercy and eternity;
103 Which mercy's wondrous for its steadfastness,
Therefore he cries, Bless God, and bless, and bless:
104 And bless again, for's power and providence,
And glory, which affects deep David's sense.
105 Abraham, and Joseph, Jacob, Moses found
God provident, therefore his praises sound.
106 Hallelu-jah, next he for pardon cries,
Of Fathers and Sons sins, exemplifies
Their wickedness and Gods gratuities.
107 Trav'lers and C^ptives, sick men, Seamen, try
Gods providence in their necessity,
108 David stirs up himself to praise the Lord,
And for's assistance builds upon his word.
109 David against his Judas-foes complains,
Displays their sin, 's own grief, foretells their pains.
110 The Kingdom, Priesthood, Conquest, Suffering
Of Jesus Christ David his type does sing.
111 To Hallelujahs Gods great works invite,
The fear of God leads to true wisdom right.
112 The Saints are promised this world, and the next,
The wicked at their weal are always vexed.
113 Of praising God, two causes here resent,
First he is merciful, then excellent.
114 The very creatures teach us God to fear,
By what they did when God his Israel dear
Did, as on Eagles wings, from Egypt bear.
115 God's glorious, dumb idols are but vain;
Trust him, and for his blessings bless again.
116 David for his deliverance will repay,
Love, duty, thanks to God, now and for aye.
117 All nations to praise God, rise, come away.
118 Still praise, and trust in God, that is a sweet thing,
So will the coming be of the great King.
119 Here is a Storehouse where there s rich direction
For prayers, praises, action and affection.
120 Fie upon Doegs tongue, wo's me that dwell
In Mesech and in Kedar, black as hell.
121 Yet trust in God, and then all will be well.
122 David is ravished with Jerusalem,
Who love and pray for it, he blesses them
123 The Saints in God do here repose their trust,
And pray not to be sold to bad men's lust.
124 The Church lifts up her voice to God on high,
For that he saved her mirac'lously.
125 The f^ithful man, as Sion, firmly stands,
The righteous God will free from wicked hands,
Peace to the good, woe to the crook'd fire brands.
126 The Restoration of Jerusalem,
Sudden and strange, did seem to be a dream.
127 Gods blessing's all, without it all is in vain,
Blessed they that from God sweet children gain.
128 On him that fears God blessings flow amain.
129 Hallelu-jah, for ^aving Israel.
Gods Curse on them that against his Church rebel.
130 David with hope looks up out of the deep,
Bids Israel hopes Anchor surely keep.
131 David is here like to a sucking child,
He is (for all his state) ^o meek and mild.

Unto Jerusalem, and then does pray
To God, who does with blessings him repay.
133 The love of Brethren bears the Bell away.
134 The Levites that i'th'Temple watch by night,
Are called upon to praise the God of might.
135 God's to be praised, but idols are not so,
God's mighty, they are vanity, we know.
136 Particular mercies are recorded here,
And Oh give thanks always apart does bear.
137 Judah is captiv d under Babylon,
But God revengeeh Judahs cause anon.
138 The praises of Gods word David here sings,
Kings hearing it shall sing to the King of Kings.
Trust in the Lord, who though he sit on high,
Sees bad men at a distance, good men nigh.
139 God's Omnipresent and Omniscient,
His praises David sings, his heart is bent
Against the wicked, who their poison vent.
140 From Saul and Doeg, Lord (says David) shield,
He prays against them, and on God does build.
141 That Is prayer may climb to God, that is tongue may be
Guarded and watch't, that is conscience may be free
From sin, and's life from scandal, is the scope
Of this Petition which he makes in hope.
142 David is here praying within a Cave,
Believing that the Lord can only save.
143 Here Is prayer mixed with complaint, his heart he stays,
By the remembrance of the older days.
For grace, deliverance, foes-destruction prays.
144 He blesses God, against his foes does not cease
To pray, and that his Kingdom God increase.
145 The Goodness, Kingdom, Providence and Fame,
The mercy of God, David does proclaim.
146 Here he vows, praises, bids in man not trust,
But God who is mighty, Sovereign, loving, just.
147 To praise the Lord for's power, mercy, care,
Providence o^e Church and State, let no man spare.
148 To praise the Lord he calls the creatures all,
The heavenly, earthly, and the rational.
149 And for his love, which does the Church preserve;
150 Praise on all instruments he does deserve,
Every thing that has breath this charge observe.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Proverbs.
THese three Books of Solomon following, answer to the three Ages of Man,
Youth, Manhood, and Old age, or to the three parts of the Sanctuary.

The Proverbs are either Solomon's, and those either Written by himself, to
chap. 10. Collected by others Partly unknown, from the 10. to the 21. Partly
known, viz. the servants of Hezekiah, to chap. 30.

Others, or at least put under another name then his own, as Agurs, chap. 30.
his mothers, chap. 31.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of PROVERBS.
1. WIsdome's here taught, of sinners lures beware,
Wisdom her proud Contemners will not spare.
2 Wisdom preserves from bad men, and yet more,
It keeps men from the enchantments of a Whore.
3 Here Is wisdoms praise and profit, poor men crave,
But they are owners of what rich men have:
The wicked from Gods Curse can no man save.
4 Here Solomon tells his Parents lessons to him,
To shun bad ways, for they would quite undo him.
5 Exhorts to wisdom, riot and excess,
Condemns, persuades men to contentedness,
And to avoid adult'rous filthiness.
6 Against Suretiship and idleness he cries,
Seven things God hates, blesses him that obeys.
7 A whore, and her tame fool are here in view,
Her hellish ways all men had need t'eschew.
8 See wisdoms nature, same, excellency,
Its power, its riches and eternity.
9 Wisdoms seven pillar'd house, her invitation
Of sinners, see the harlots wanton fashion.
10 Treasures got well or ill, winking with the eye,
Speech, way of Justice, and iniquity.
11 False weights and tales, engrossing corn are naught,
Happy that land, that with good counsel's fraught.
12 The wicked are unstable, a good wife
Is the husbands Crown, justice and truth gain life.
13 It Is life to keep the mouth, t'hate pride and lies,
The company of wise men makes man wise.
14 A bad way often seems good, joy's mixed with grief,
Fools rage, the poore's denied his friends relief,
In the Kings favor a wise servant's chief.
15 Man's tongue, Gods eyes, a fool that will not learn,
'Twixt good and bad men's sacrifice discern,
The face does show th'hearts gladness: Peace and fear
Are precious things, there is no stall'd Ox so dear.
16 Kings must not grossly err, their wrath kills, pride
Precedes a fall, by lots God does decide.
17 A quiet morsel's sweet, God the heart does try:
Mock not the poor man: Princes may not lie:
Judge rightly: he is a friend, nay brother rather,
That loves in adverse times; an hapless father
Is he, that has a graceless Son who is slow
To words, is thought wise though he be not so.
18 Retired men seek wisdom, God s a tower,
Accept not wicked person, it is in the power
O'th'tongue to live or die, the poor does crave,
But th'answers of the rich are stout and brave.
19 Riches get friends, false witness God does hate,
A good wise's more from God then an estate,
Sloth's loathsome, poor men pity, sons chastise,
Spoil not thy Parents, testify no lies.
20 Wine is a mocker, counsel deep, none clear
From sin, God gives the perfect eye, and ear.
Naught, naught, the buyer says, then boasts in haste
Who ere is rich, will pay dear for it at last.
21 The King's heart's in Gods hand, who thrives by lies
Shall die, God loathes the bad man's sacrifice,
Th'poor who hears not, God will not hear, No man
Can dwell in one house with a brawling woman.
22 A good name's greatest riches, rich and poor
Do me^t, as in a way, a wanton whore
Is a deep pit, a lion's in the way,
Cry sluggards, Landmarks no man take away.
23 Moderate thy stom^ch, riches fly away,
Like Eagles, hearken what thy Parents say,
Envy not sinners, look not on the wine,
Lest to excess and riot thou incline
24 One-eat not honey, from the wicked flee,
Fear God first, next Imperial Majesty,
Envy, revenge, false witness, sloth are all
Condemned, rejoice not at an enemies fall.
25 Lessons for Kings, how to appease angry foes,
Vain bo^sters their own folly do disclose.
26 Fools, sluggards, busy bodies are an offense,
To the wise King, false friends make fair pretense.
27 Of self pride, true love, prudence to foresee,
Bray a fool in a mortar, yet he will be
As foolish still, care for thy family
28 Law breake^s praise the wicked, God disdains
The Antinomians Prayer, who so gains
By U ury and bad means, leaves all at last
T'a Son, that will his bread o'th waters cast.
29 Here Magistrates are tutored, Parents told
How t'order Sons, Servants are not controlled
With words alone, wherever Vision fails,
The People perish, ignorance prevails.
30 Nor rich, nor poor, says Agur, a meane's best,
The Catharists to be pure in vain contest,
Four things unsatiable, four not well known,
Four trouble the earth, of four the wisdome's sh^w'n.
31 Lemuels good mother bids him well to look,
To's ways, a good wives praises end this book.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Eccles.
THis Book of Ecclesiastes treats' of two things, viz.

I. The vanity of the world, out of Solomon's own observation, In His own
things, which partly consisted in Knowledge, chap. 1. Use, chap. 2.
Other men's things or affairs, which he shows to be unstable, because of The
Conversion of times, chap. 3. Manners of Persons, as slothful men, covetous
men, foolish Kings, chap. 4. Wicked men, Oppressors, Rich men, chap. 5.
Uncertainty of things, as riches, which are handled simply, chap. 6. and
comparatively, chap. 7. Administration or Government humane, chap. 8. Divine,
chap. 9.

II. The profit and stability of Godliness and Piety, toward Men, either
Superiors, as Modesty, Submission, etc. chap. 10. or Inferiors, as
Beneficence, chap. 11. God, as reverence, which he persuades from The Vanity of
Youth Man's declination in Old age, Death, chapter 12





A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the Book
of ECCLESIASTES. Or the Preacher.
1. ALl things are vain, Man's labor, earth, Sun, wind,

2 Laughter is madness, sometime the wise King
Had all delights, yet still all is vain, does sing.
3 A time there is for all things under th'Sunne,
All Is excellent, that th hand of God has done,
A man dies as a beast, when is thread is spun.
4 It Is good to die soon, better never to be,
Two excel one for their duality.
Fools fold their hands together, but they do not
Work, others overwork for whom they know not.
5 In some respects, even divine worship's vain,
And so are riches, which cost so much pain,
Naked men come, naked they go again.
6 To Have riches, not their use, is vanity:
So it is to have a poor posterity.
7 Three helps against vanity in Solomon's sense,
Are mortifi'dnesse, credit, patience,
Wisdome's not easy, amongst a thousand one
Of men, amongst a thousand women none.
8 Kings must be honored, better sink with the holy,
Then swim with men, that sell themselves to folly.
9 Like chance to good and bad, all men must die,
God orerules all, wisdom does strength outvie.
10 As dead flies oil, so folly wisdom stains,
Princes often walk on foot, and servants ride.
Of childish, riotous Kings the text complains,
Disloyal thoughts against Princes none can hide,
But by the very birds they will be descried.
11 Cast bread o'th'waters, look not at the wind,
Both light, and youth too vain each man may find.
12 Remember God, take time while 't may be had,
God will judge all at last, both good and bad.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Song of Songs.
THe Song of Songs sings of two spiritual lovers, their loves, their fallings
out, the renewings of their loves, where we have war, peace, hope, fear,
parting, returning, all things, as in love. Here then are two things. 1. A
Relation of their betrothing. 2. A demand of marriage.

I. A Relation of their betrothing, where by the Bride the Bridegroom is
Sought, chap. 1. Obtained, chap. 2. Required, chap. 3.
Returning he speaks with her, and is inflamed, chap. 4. Goes angry away, chap.
5. Returns pacified, and commends her, chap. 6.
II. A demand of marriage, the Bride requiring it For Her self, chap. 7. Her
sister, chap. 8.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the SONG
OF SONGS.
1. The Spouse enamored, black, but comedy would
Feign find her love, she is taught t'inquire the fold
Where shepherds their fair flocks together hold,
There one another beauty there be hold.
2 The Spouse does faint for love, but in his arm
The Bridegroom stays her that she catch no harm,
And she again bids Juries maids he still,
'Wake not her love, but the young foxes kill.
3 She seeks, and finds her love, he brings his Spouse,
Into his fortified and Princely house.
4 Describes her beauty, hair, teeth, lips, neck, breast,
And each part else, shows that he loves her best.
5 He 'wakes her, she is coy, he flees away,
She Is lovesick, and his beauty does display.
6 So does he hers, calls her Morn, Sun and Dove,
Yet terrible as an army is his love.
7 amplifies her praises, she again
Desires his sweet Communion to retain.
8 Her love's as strong as death, yet she does crave
Her younger sister may like comfort have.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Prophecy of Isaiah.
THe first part of Isaiahs prophecy is either against the Jews, or against
their Enemies.

I. Against the Jews in the reign of Vzziah, under whom he speaks In an open
and free speech, both Against their sins, chap. 1. Of their Repentance, which
he persuades From Their general Calling, chap. 2. Their own and Preachers
infirmity, chap. 3. Christ's Kingdom, chap. 4.

In a Poetical way, as of the Vineyard rejected, chap. 5.
Jotham, in his reign he speaks, chap. 6. Achaz, in his reign he speaks,
either Particularly and specially concerning his house, chap. 7. Generally
concerning the people, whom he does Terrify, persevering in sin, chap. 8.
Comfort, repenting, chapter 9, 10, 11, 12.


II. Against their enemies, viz. The Babylonians, chapter 13. and 14. Philistines,
chapter 15. Moabites, chapter 16. Syrians and Israelites, chapter 17. Ethiopians, chapter 18.
Egyptians, chap. 19. and 20. Babylonians, and Edomeans, chap. 21. where we have
A Digression concerning the Calamity of the Jews, and Shebna, chap. 22.
Regression, concerning the destruction of the Tyrians and other enemies, chap.
23. the joy of the Jews and their praising of God, chap. 24, 25, 26, 27.


The second part of this Prophecy exhorts to repentance, By Threatening, chap.
28, 29, 30, 31. Promising Christ's Kingdom, ch 32. The destruction of theri
enemies, chapter 33, 34, and chapter 55.
Propounding, etc.


Propounding the Providence of God, Both Special, toward Hezekiah Delivered
from his enemy, whose boasting, chapter 36. and confusion, chapter 37. are reported,
and from his sickness, chapter 38. Reproved, chapter 3 9
General toward his Church, from The Testimony of John Baptist, and the
Apostles, chap. 40. Covenant made with Abraham, etc. chap. 41. Kingdom of
Christ confirmed, chapter 42. of Babylon destroyed, chapter 43. Deliverance Temporal
from Babylon by Cyrus, chap. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Spiritual by Christ. See his
Vocation and Function, chap. 49. Humility and Reproaches, chapter 50. and thereupon
the Consolation of Sion, chap. 51. Exhortation, chap. 52. Reprehension for
their Incredulity, chap. 53. Impiety, which is propounded, chapter 54, 55, 56. and
reproved, chapter 57. 58, 59. They are called back to Christ, now to be preached,
chapter 60 by arguments. From The profits of the Church, chapter 61, 62. The glory of
Christ, chap. 63, 64, 65, The destruction of the Synagogue and settling of the
Church, chap. 66.







A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of ISAIAH.
1 JUdahs both sin and judgment he laments,
Their very service their God discontents,
Only he is happy that in time repents.
2 Christ's reign's foretold, wherein all wars shall cease,
Divine desertion's caused by sins increase.
3 With sin confusion does each where oreflow,
Rulers oppress, men, women shameless grow.
4 When evils in the world shall grow extreme,
Christ's blessed Kingdom will abolish them.
5 The Parable o'th'Vineyard does excuse
Gods judgments on the wanton, covetous Jews,
For all the ungodly practices they use.
6 Isaiah's frighted with a vision, him
The Lord does comfort by a Seraphim,
Who with an Altar-coale did to him fly,
And touching's lips fit him for prophecy.
7 Isaiah comforts Ahaz, Christ foresees,
Ashur spring Ahaz his miseries.
8 By his mysterious Son he does foretell,
Ashur shall conquer Syria, Israel,
And unbelieving Judah too, in vain
Are fond Conspiracies, their end is pain.
9 Christ's Birth and Kingdom does great joy create,
In midst of sorrows Israel's obstinate,
Proud, counterfeit, to judgment destinate.
10 Woe to all Tyrants, this the Lord has spoken,
Proud Ashur, though Gods rod, shall sure be broken.
Of Israel's future weal here is a sure token.
11 Christ's peaceful Kingdom, Jews shall be restored,
And Gentiles called, according to this word.
12 In that day shall the Church together sing
This Song of Praise unto the blessed King.
13 God musters th'Armies of his wrath, the Medes
Babylon, to ruin it, he leads.
14 Israel's restored, insults ore Babylon,
Th'Assyrians yoke too God will break anon.
15 And Moabs present glory will be gone.
16 Moab s exhorted therefore to obey,
And still forewarned of her fatal day.
17 Israel and Syria threatened, some few shall
Leave idols, all the rest must justly fall,
Yet Isreal's foes God to account will call.
18 The Ethiopians burden's great thereby.
Gods Church shall be improved abundantly.
19 Egypt's condemned, her Princes vain, yet she
Israel, and Ashur once a Church shall be,

And undergo a fore captivity.
21 Down Babel, down Arabic, Duma down:
Tema and Kedar, God on you has blow'n.
Persia spoils Judah, Judahs joy is faded,
And Shebna their great Treasu^er's degraded.
23 Tyrus goes next to th'block, how, for what reason?
You're told, yet shall return too in her season.
24 Sore judgments on the land, all is dark and sad,
Yet shall a remnant in the Lord be glad.
25 Isaiah to the Lord, for these three things,
Judgment, refreshment and deliverance sings.
26 This is the Song, it bids trust, wait on God,
They Will travel for him, that have felt his rod,
And he will raise them that under foot are trod.
27 He cares for's vineyard, he does but chastise,
Not judge his People, that his Church shall rise,
Of Jews and Gentiles mixed, he does devise.
28 With Ephraims threat, Christ Jesus is foretold,
Their foede with death and hell will never hold,
Divine truths they will not learn, though often told.
29 A Curse on Ariel for its senselessness,
And counterfeiting, Good men God will bless.
30 Who trust in Egypt, and contemn Gods Word,
Are censured here by warrant from the Lord.
31 And here again, Esaias calls for Conversion,
And adds to that th'Assyrians subversion.
32 O blessed King Christ! he can name men right,
Here Is desolation first foretold, then light.
33 Gods judgments dog the Churches foes, its friends
Great Privilege, and happiness attends.
34 What various judgments God does throw on's foes,
Their certainty the Prophet does disclose.
35 When Christ shall reign there shall be joy indeed,
By th'hope of that the weak are comforted.
36 Senacherib against Judah now appears,
Blasphemes, boasts, puts the people in great fears,
His words are brought to Hezekiah, he
Bids them, they answer not his blasphemy.
37 Isaiah comforts them against this proud foe,
His Camp on heaps th'Angel of God does throw.
38 The King about to die, yet does obtain
By Prayer to God a longer life and reign,
And for that renders thanks in the highest strain.
39 But here he sins, in showing all he had
To th'Babylonian Nuntio, Esay's sad
To hear 't, and this cold comfort gives anon,
All must be carried into B^bylon.
40 John-Baptist's here foretold, who must forerun
To make a strait way for the Rising Sun,
By whose Omnipotence great things are done.
41 God does his mercies to the Church here scan,
Shows he does more for his, then idols can.
42 Christ's office's graced, with meekness he does bring
The Gospel, men for that must praises sing.
43 He cheares his Church, attests them 'bout his power,
Foretells of Babylons destructive hour.
44 The Church is cheered again, idols vain things,
To God for's saving power the Prophet sings.
45 Great Cyrus comes, who strives with 's Maker falls,
God is Almighty, Jews and Gentiles calls.
46 Th'idols of Babel could not ward Gods rod,
There Is no comparison 'twixt them and God.
47 Down Babylon, and all Chaldea down,
ri^e, boldness, want of mercy lost your Crown,
You re weari'd with th'inchantments of your own.
48 Isre'l says well, but yet is iron-hard,
And yet beloved, Peace from the wicked's b^rr'd,
49 Christ sent to th'Jewes complains, to th'Gentiles moves,
Zion laments his loss, Christ Jesus proves
It is not final, his mixed Church he loves.
50 Christ could even now redeem the Jews, as well
As Gentiles, would they not as yet rebel.
51 Saints look at Abraham, trust in God as he,
And fear not man, Christ Jesus sets you free.
52 Christ bids his Church believe so, and be kind
To th'Ministers of his Gospel, and unwinde
Themselves out of sins snares, which too fast bind.
53 Most men believe not, but condemn Christ Jesus,
Though only his sweet Passion does release us.
54 The Gentiles Church is large, and safe, and fair,
God keeps and comforts it with special care.
55 To faith and penitence the promise lures,
That Joy attends on faith, the text assures.
56 Be holy, be all holy, keep Gods day,
Pray in his house, blind watchmen get away.
57 The good man's death is blessed, Israel is blamed
For idols, Gospel comforts are proclaimed,
58 Cry, cry against dissembling Fasts and ways,
They stink, but true Religion has the praise.
59 Sin brings in plagues, but it makes good things seant,
God only saves, see the New Covenant.
60 Th'accesse of the Gentiles adds to the Churches glory
It Is richly blessed, though erst a little sorry.
61 Christ's office see, the forwardness of faith,
And of its blessings, what the Spirit says.
62 Esaias to preach the Gospel will not cease,
Like zeal must be in all that preach Christ's peace.
63 Who Is this with bloody clothes? He that can save,
Mercy his Church does both believe and crave.
64 And here craves a Remonstrance of Gods might,
To cleanse their sins, and put their plagues to flight.
65 The Jews cast out, the Gentiles come in place,
The new Jerusalems glory and grace.
66 Gods throne's in heaven, he will be truly served,
The wicked shall be plagued, as they deserved,
But his dear holy Church shall be preserved.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Prophecy of Jeremiah.
IN the Prophecy of Jeremiah three things are observable, viz. An Exordium,
Prophecy and Epilogue.

An Exordium, touching his own Vocation and Calling, chap. 1.

A double Prophecy, Effective and Consolatory.

1. Effective, as carrying with it the effect and accomplishment of it self,
and that in the reign of diverse Kings.

King Josiah, under whom he Upbraides Gods benefits to the ungrateful and
rebellious people, chap. 2. Persuades them to repentance, chap. 3. and shows
what a kind of People they ought to be, chap. 4. Threatens destruction to
them, if they continue such as they are, thereof he shows the Instruments, the
Assyrians and Caldeans, chap. 5. and ^. Causes, viz. Sins laid down Specially,
as the Peoples superstitious opinion of the Temple, and contempt of the
Prophets chap. 7. The covetousness and flattery of Priests and Prophets, chap.
8. Generally, as in all men Malice and uncircumcisednesse of heart, chapter 9. Vain
confidence in idols, chap. 10. and 11. and present Prosperity, notwithstanding
which, he foretells their destruction, chap. 13. famine, chap. 14. four
plagues, chap. 15.


Confirms the threatening, by A type, chap. 16. A Sermon, arguing from The
Impotency of man in whom they trusted, chap. 17. Power of God, chap. 18. and
the contempt of him, chap. 19. apparent from Pashurs imprisoning Jeremy, chap.
20. though he was consulted in Zedekiahs time, chap. 21.


King Jehojakim, under whom he speaks In an uncertain time, where he threatens
Kings and Kingdom, chap. 22. Princes, Pastors, People, chap. 23. and anon
comforts again, chap. 24. In a certain time, viz. In the fourth year of his
Reign. Now He Foretells to the Jews seventy years Captivity, and to the
Babylonians ruin, chap. 25. Exhorts the Jews, chap. 26.

King Zedekiah, under him he prophecies to the Jews, both at home, and in
Babylon, and Egypt. At home, and to them he foretells as in Jehojakims time the
Babylonish yoke and captivity, chap. 27. and for this is affronted by Hananiah
the Pseudo-Prophet, chap. 28. In Babylon, and here some things are Prophetical,
and some Historical. Prophetical, wherein he Threatens the false Prophets, chapter
29. Comforts the godly, with A Discourse, chap. 30. and 31. Type of a bought
field, chap. 32. Promise of Christ, chap. 33. where there is a Digression to
the fourth year of Jehojakim, against the Jews simply, chap. 34. and
comparatively with the Rechabites, chap. 35.

Historical, concerning Jeremiah, his Book is burnt, chap. 36. Body is
Imprisoned, chapter 37. and chapter 38. Delivered, chapter 39.

Gedaliah, whose slaughter is Foretold, chapter 40. Committed, chap. 41.

In Egypt, where the Prophets counsel concerning their flight into Egypt, is
first sought, chap. 42. then slighted, chap. 43. then affirmed punishable,
chap. 44.

2. Consolatory.

Especially to Baruch, chap. 45. Generally to the Jews, from the destruction
of their enemies, As Egyptians, chapter 46. Philistines. Tyrians, Sidonians,
Syrians, chap 47. Moabites, chap. 48. Ammonites, Edomeans, Arabians, etc. chap.
49. Babylonians, chap. 50.
Epilogue, Historical, concerning the deportation of Zedekiah, chap. 51. and 52
A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of JEREMIAH.
1 WHat time he prophesied, the Almond rod
And seething-pot betoken plagues from God.
The Prophet though a child at first, at last
Like to a brazen wall stands strong and fast.
2 With honoring Baal, not him, God does upbraid,
He could not more forget them, then a maid
Her ornaments, from him had they not strai'd.
3 To Judah God shows mercy, though a whore,
Israel is worse, God bids her do no more,
And she her sins confesses done before.
4 Israel is called, taught rightly how to swear,
Judah's exhorted to repent and fear,
The Judgments thundered out against her here.
5 Not one good man, nor Priest, nor People, all
Whore, and transgress, till they together fall.
6 With Judahs banded foes the Lord takes part,
Because their sins had lost his Royal heart.
7 Repent, or else be captive, vaine's your trust
I'th'Temple, if you after idols lust,
Mourn for your sins, or else you will find God just.
8 They Will not repent, and therefore they must bear
The forest judgments that e're man did hear,
Their crying Peace, Peace, now they l buy too dear.
9 Oh that my head were waters for their sakes,
It Is sin that this great desolation makes,
An heavy death all sorts together takes.
10 Fear not heavens signs, can idols with God vie?
Against foolish Pastors God aloud does cry.
11 Gods Covenant proclaimed, they will needs kill
The Prophet, who pronounces vengeance still,
For wishing to their best friend so much ill.
12 The wicked prosper, but anon shall fall,
The penitent from bondage God will call.
13 The linen girdle ruin does portend,
How to prevent it they are wished t'intend.
14 The Prophet prays in dearth, God will not hear;
In vain false Prophets did the People cheer,
Their flatteries cost the Prophet many a tear.
15 Moses nor Samuel can avert the curse,
Manasses sin's remembered, none was worse,
Only the Prophet's blessed, for his remorse.
16 The Jews falls here in types, yet they must see
A better day then when from Egypt free,
Mean time they are paid home for idolatry.
17 Judahs sinne's written with an iron pen,
She Is captived for it, there is no trust in men,
But in the Lord, whose word's Yea and Amen,
Hallow the Sabbath, God will bless them then.
18 Like to a Potter, so does God dispose
Of's vessels, Judah by her sin must lose.
19 Breaking a Potters vessel is a token,
That Judah for her sin shall so be broken.
20 Now Magor-missabib is Pashurs name,
By smiting of the Prophet that change came,
The Prophet against his own birth does exclaim.
21 King Zede^iah consults Jeremy,
About the wars, hears his sad prophecy
Of desolation and captivity.
22 Ergo Jeremiah
Jer. bids repent, and does enforce
With threats, and promises to move remorse,
Read Shallum, Jehojakim.
J'ojakim, Coniahs Curse.
23 The Royal Pastor, Christ, the flock collects,
Erewhile dispersed, false Prophets God rejects.
24 The Jews, though erewhile captive, yet shall be
Restored again from their captivity,
At least, some part of them God will set free.
25 But first they must be bound, then freed again,
And then their foes shall undergo their pain.
26 The Prophet bids repent, and for that is taken,
Arraigned, speaks for himself, is quit again.
27 The Prophet does foretell by yokes and bands.
Nebuchadnezzars lordship ore most lands.
28 A typical yoke is broke by Hanani,
An iron one is put for it, he must die
That brake it, for in Gods name he did lie.
29 Be still, ye captive Jews, the Lord will judge
Those that against your captive state do grudge,
Two for procuring mischief burnt with fire,
Shemaiah against the Prophet does conspire.
30 God tells the Prophet of the Jews sad fate,
How yet it shall be changed to a glorious state.
31 Israel with Judah too shall fare like fare,
Christ shall rule both, his Church is all his care.
32 The Prophet's laid in prison, does complain,
Says still they shall go out, but come again.
33 Yea they shall come again, and stand for ever,
Christ's Kingdom, and his Priesthood, shall cease never.
34 Mean time the people, with King Zedekiah
Must into bonds, says their Seer Jeremiah.
35 The Rechabites are here compared with Jews,
The One obey cheerfully, the other refuse.
36 Jeremiah
Jerem. bids Baruch write his Prophecy,
And read it, it is fetched by Jehudi,
Burnt by Jehojakim, for which foul crime
He smarts, but Baruch writes the second time.
37 King Zedekiah would have Jerem. pray,
But the Captivity does still gainsay,
The Prophet proves it, is in prison cast,
Yet craves his liberty, and has't at last.
38 He Is put i'th'dungeon, but a Blackamore
Bespeaks his liberty, he comes before
The King, has conf rence with his Majesty,
Conceales it, is assured he shall not die.
39 The City's quito destroyed, the King made blind,
The Blackamore, and Prophet favor find.
40 The Prophet freed, to Gedaliah goes,
So do the Jews dispersed, but one of those
Conspires against Gedaliah, who foretold,
Will not believe that any man's so bold.
41 But Ishmael kills him, and to Ammon goes,
With many of the People, the rest chose
Johanan, this Traitor Ishmael to oppose,
Who fleeing with eight men the day does lose.
42 Johanan inquires of God by Jeremy,
Is answered, he in Judah safe shall be,
In Egypt expect naught but misery.
43 He says, thou li'st, goes to Egypt, takes along
The Prophet, who does sing this heavy Song,
Egypt must stoop to Babylon ere long.
44 The idolatrous Jews remaining there do sink it,
Their falls foretold again, though they scarce think it.
45 Baruch dismayed, is cheered by Jeremy,
46 Who reads the King of Egypts destiny,
But comforts Jacob in his misery.
47 The burden of the Philistines is great,
48 Moab for pride God does with judgment threat,
Yet in his good time he will sound a retreat.
49 The Ammonites God also will pull down
But in good time he will restore their Crown^
50 He has decreed too Babylon shall fall,
At what time, he his Israel will recall.
51 Again he says it, he will perform it well,
On Babylon he will revenge his Israel.
52 King Zedekiah's fall is here repeated,
His sons how slain, his army how defeated,
How Jechoniah sweetly was entreated, Ante Christum.

And at the Kings own Table Princely seated.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Book of Lamentat.
THe Lamentations of Jeremiah, contain Zions Lamentation, chap. 1.
Expostulation, chap. 2.
Jeremiahs Lamentation, For himself, chapter 3. For the City and Kingdom
destroyed, chapter 4.
Prayer, chap. 5.



A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
LAMENTATIONS.
An. Mundi
1 WIdow Jerusalem for her sin's brought low,
Yet says still, God is just, desires him show
His judgments on her foes, that wrought her woe.
2 She does lament, and reason with her God,
About her childrens death, and his sore rod.
3 Jeremiah
Jer. does bemoan himself, Gods justice cleares,
Man's self-destruction shows the force of tears,
4 Jer. laments Zions sin and famine great,
Is comforted, but Edom God does threat.
5 She for her own, and Sires sins pardon craves,
That he would turn to them who only saves.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Prophecy of Ezekiel.
THe Prophecy of Ezekiel consists of two parts.

I, The first part contains A Preface, concerning his own Vocation or Calling,
where is noted Gods Majesty, calling him, chapter 1. The Prophets Fearfulnes, chapter
2. Confirmation, chapter 3.

Prophecy.
General, which contains threatenings against the Israelites. To be carried
away, and these propounded, chapter 4. and 5. and amplified, chapter 6. and 7. Carried
away, of whom he sets forth The Sin, chapter 8. Punishment, sword, chapter 9. and fire,
chapter 10. Consolation, chapter 11.

II. The second part is partly Minacory, against the Jews, whose sins he lays
open, and those either Of altogether, and those he lays open by the type of a
Vine, chapter 15. a Maid, chapter 16. of Eagles, chapter 17. and by the similitude or
metaphor of a sour grape, chapter 18 Of some, as Princes, chapter 19. of hypocritical
elders, chapter 20.
As also he lays open the punishment of their sins by diverse types, as of a
sharp sword, chapter 21. and 22. the women Ahola and Aholiba, chapter 23. the pot. chapter
24. Gentiles, as Ammonites, Moabites, Edomeans, Philistines, chapter 25.
Tire and Zidon, chapter 26, 27, 28. Egypt, chapter 29, 30, 31, 32.
Consolatory, where there is An Exordium, Concerning the Vocation and
Confirmation of the Prophet, chap. 33. A Narration, propounding The Misery of
the People and their wicked Rulers, chapter 34. Mercy of God, In The destruction of
the Edomites, chap. 35. The promise of an eternal inheritance, chapter 36. 37. The
slaughter of Gog and Magog, chapter 38, 39. The restoring of the Temple, chapter 40,
41, 42. the Ministry and Worship of God, chapter 43, 44. the land and Kingdom, chapter
45, 46, 47, 48.




A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of EZEKIEL.
1 WHat time he prophesi'd, what he did see, An Mundi

Four wheels, four cherubs, and their Physnomy.
2 The Seers Commission and Instruction see,
The displaid roll of his sad Prophecy.
3 He eats the roll, that eating gains him skill,
God opes and shuts his mouth, when, where he will.
4 The siege and straitness of great Salem here,
In types of Cowes and Man's dung do appear.
5 The type of hair this mystery does afford,
Of famine, of dispersion and the sword.
6 Idols destroy them, faithful men lament
Their case and sin, ore them God does repent.
7 As erewhile dung and hair, now chains foreshow
Jerusalems sad fate and overthrow.
8 The Prophet in a vision is acquainted
With the foul sins, wherewith all Jury's tainted.
9 Another vision does divide the Nation,
Some to destruction, some to preservation,
A Writer marks the mourning generation.
10 Two visions here together, one of fire,
The Other of cherubs, which we may admire.
11 The Princes sin are judged, glory forsakes
The City, God the Seer to Chaldee takes.
Ezekiels.
12 Ezekiel.'s removing, trembling, tears imply
Captivity, one Proverb proves a lie,
By the quick end of each sad Prophecy.
13 For Pseudo-Prophets, that i'th'arme-pits sow
Pillowes, there is reserved an overthrow.
14 False Prophets flatter, but God truth does say,
That for their idols they shall dearly pay,
Job, Noah, Daniel, could not vengeance stay.
15 Jerusalem is like a Branch of Vine,
It Is for no use, that is sacred or divine,
To fire they are both condemned, ectype and sign.
16 A wretched Infant here does signify,
Jerusalems state, and Gods fidelity,
Her monstrous whoredoms, and sad destiny.
17 Two Eagles with the tops of Cedars fly,
TO Egypt or Babel, speak Captivity,
18 Talk no more of sour grapes, the Lord does clear
His Justice toward all, holds man's life dear.
19 Th'impounded lions whelps here do portend
Princes, the wasted vine their cities end.
20 Rebellious Judah must consult no more
Their God, till he again do them restore.
21 A sword, a sharp sword does the Prophet cry,
Still to presage a sad Captivity.
22 Oh what a cloud of sins is here! Gods ire
Will burn Jerusalems dross as 'twere with fire.
23 Aholah and Aholibah, two whores,
The later's plagued by th'lovers she adores,
Both judged, they are two daughters of one mother,
Samaria's one, Jerusalem the other.
24 The seething pot bodes woe, the Seers dry eyes
For his dead wife, this mystery implies,
That to express Salems grief, no tears suffice.
25 Yet 't Ammon, Moab, and the rest, their dues
The Lord will pay, for vaunting ore the Jews.
26 Against Tyrus too sentence is read, the King
Of Babel must her to destruction bring.
27 Though here the Prophet do her glory sing.
28 The Prince of Tyrus, that with God compares,
With Zidon in the same destruction shares,
By means of their fall Israel better fares.
29 And down must Egypt go to Babylon.
And yet must be restored again anon.
30 Egypt and all her helpers now must fall,
The arm of Babylon must confound them all.
31 As erst Assyria fell from her grear state,
So shall th Egyptians bear the self-same fate.
32 And yet ag^in he says it, that they may
Know there is no scaping from the fatal day.
33 The sleeping watchman's cursed, the faithful blessed,
Returners, not Revolters, see Gods rest,
Gods Song man's slighted, though his Songs be best.
34 The shepherds mercinarinesse is a great crime,
Christ the good shepherd's promised, in his time.
35 Mount Sei^ must smart, for hating Israel,
36 And so must others, then it will be well
With Zion, when Christ's Kingdom bears the Bell.
37 Israel shall live like these dry bones, once more
To Judah joined, like two sticks, as before.
38 Gogs army, malice, judgment, come and see,
39 His death, poor captive Isreal's Jubilee.
40 New Salem in a Vision's measured out,
41 The Temple too described within, without,
42 The Priests, their chambers, th'outer Court are meeted,
43 Thither Gods name returns, where'twas erst seated,
And from whence justly he for sin retreated.
44 The east-gate's the Princes, Priests must not abuse
The Temple, see the rites which they must use.
45 The portion of the land signed to these three,
Prince, City, Temple, in this Scripture see,
46 Rules for their Sabbath-keeping, and the way
That leads into Gods house o'th Sabbath Day.
47 Waters flow out of the Temple, and the land
By lot's distinguished, into each man's hand.
48 The several lots of Prince and People, see,
And Temple, which conclude this Prophecy.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Prophecy of Daniel.
THe Book of Daniel contains an History and a Prophecy.

1. An History of things done, as of his own.

Banishment, chap. 1. and in his banishment

Honor, through the explication of Nebuchadnezzars Dreams, viz.

The first, whereupon followed Daniels Reward, chap. 2. Punishmen^ Intended,
Averted, chapter 3.



The second, chap. 4.

A Writing, whereupon followed his Honor, chapter 5. and upon his honor, envy,
which yet was frustrated, chap. 6.

2. A Prophecy of things to be done, even to the coming of Christ, as
concerning the

Calamity of the Church, set forth By Four Beasts, chap. 7. A Ram and a Goat,
chap. 8.


Deliverance of the Church, where we have the

Means of it, Daniels Prayer, chapter 9.

Manner, Of Its Revelation, chapter 10. The Churches calamities by her enemies,
chap. 11. Her deliverance by Christ, chap. 12.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of DANIEL.
1 JEhojakim's taken captive, Babels King
Bids Ashpenaz, some Jewish young men bring
To live in's Court, Daniel and other three,
With pulse and water fed, the rest outvie,
Both for pure beauty and philosophy.
Daniel straight
Tells both the dream, and its mysterious weight.
3 Daniels three friends are into the furnace thrown,
Because before an idol they will not down,
They Are there unburnt, which makes the King
Both for their Honor and Gods Majesty.
Daniel says, this decree
Foretells the Kings own Metamorphosis.
5 Belshazzar sees a Script upon the wall,
Dan. reads, expounds it of Belshazzars fall.
Dan. though fo^bidden prays, to the lions cast,
He Is saved, his foes do break the lions fast.
Dan. foretells,


In Vision, Ram and Goat, and the horns they wear.
While Daniel cries peccavi, and God seeks,
Gabriel instructs him in the seventy weeks.

The Angel comforts him amidst his fear.
11 The King of Gracia quells the Persian King,
Of leagues and flights, in course the Seer does sing,
By North and Southern Kings; but the last thing
12 In this Book is, that the Prince Michael
Shall certainly deliver Israel,
An Angel does of future times foretell.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Prophecy of Hosea.
HOseah speaks of the depravation of the people of Israel, Partly, in an
Invective, Partly, in a Consolatory way.

I. Invective, and here he speaks, Partly in

Types, whereof the first is of a Whore, which is propounded, chap. 1. and
applied, chap, 2. the second of a woman redeemed, chap. 3.

Words, where we have

The sin of Israel and Judah, chap. 4.

Their punishment in two Sermons, one chap. 5, 6, and 7. the other chap. 8, 9,
10.

II. Consolatory, in two Sermons, whereof The First describes the wickedness
of the People, chap. 11. Second the mercies of God to them, chap. 12, 13, 14.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of HOSEA.

By Gomer has three Sons, yet as before,
Israel and Judah God will once restore.
2 What God gave Israel, she to idols gave,
And therefore's judged, yet God at last will save.
3 The wife redeemed foretells Zions return.
4 Gods indignation does against them burn,
For swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and
Idols and other sins, which drown the land,
By Israel Judah's warned of Gods hand.
5 Prince, People, Priests, all are here threatnedsore,
Except they do repent and sin no more.
6 They Are brought in here repenting, until when,
God does complain, they always sinned like men.
7 Ephraim's an Oven, an half-bak't Cake, at best
A silly Dove, God does their ways detest.
8 Israel sa shameful vessel, sowes the wind,
By building Altars, reapes the whirlwinde,
And so the Lord rewards their sin in kind.
9 And still against their sin, the Prophet cries,
Threatens dry breasts and foreign miseries.
10 As Vines, so Isreal's idols fructify,
Their King is gone, their Covenant's a lie,
They plow and sow and reap iniquity.
11 Israel's unthankful unto God, that drew
Her with man's cords, yet see how God does rue
The Judgments he must send, she l not be true.
12 Here windy Ephraim, Jacob, Judah, all
Are blamed, wished to repent, before they fall.
13 Idols spoil Ephraim, make their God a Bear,
A Lion to them, and their King cashiere.
14 But yet for all this, if they will but repent,
God will cease all the plagues he erewhile sent.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Joel.
THe Prophet Joel in this Prophecy, Does Threaten famine, chap. 1. Exhort to
publlck repentance, chap. 2. Comfort by the ruin of the Churches enemies,
chap. 3.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of JOEL.
An. Mundi
1 JOel foretells dearth, and in Gods great name
A general Fast and mourning does proclaim.
2 He aggravates Gods judgments, bids the Fast
Again, and comforts Zion at the last.
3 In The valley of Jehosaphat, God will
Dispute with them that wished his People ill,
As for his darling Church, he loves that still.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Amos:
THe Prophet Amos treats in this Prophecy of The The neighboring enemies of
the Jews, chap. 1, 2. Sins of the Jews, and that either in a Discourse,


General, concerning their ingratitude, chap. 3. violence and obduration, chap.
4. impiety, pride, inhumanity, chap. 5. luxury, chap. 6. Special, concerning
Amaziah, and his family, chap. 7.
Double type, viz. A Basket of Summer-fruits, chap, 8. The smiting and shaking
of the lintel of the door, chap. 9.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of AMOS.
1 GOd is displeased for three sins, and for four,
With Gaza, Edom, Tire, and diverse more:
2 With Moab, Judah, and with Israel,
Of whose unthankfulness he often does tell.
3 The Lion roares, therefore all People fear,
Why God is so displeased, the cause is clear.
4 Here Bashans kine to slaughter are condemned,
Because Gods many judgments they contemned.
5 Israel's lamented here, wished to repent,
God their dissembling does but ill resent.
6 Israel is wanton, and she is rocky hard,
Sad desolation must be her reward.

Shows Isreal's fate, Bethels Priest does repine
Against Amos, who his ruin does divine.
8 A Basket of ripe Summer fruit foreshowes,
Isreal's end near, and the oppressors woes,
All which a famine of the Word does close.
9 Their ruin is decreed, but in the last days
God David's Tabernacle again will raise.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Obadiah,
THe Prophet Obadiah in this Prophecy, Does Terrify, Dehort, Comfort,
the Edomites.

A POEM. Containing the (...), or Contents of the Prophecy of OBADIAH.
EDom must be destroyed for his pride,
For spoiling Jacob, by affliction tried,
The Lord will surely stand on Jacobs side.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Jonah,
THe Prophet Jonah sets forth his Embassage to the Ninivites,

Imposed upon him when he was running away. See His Punishment, chap. 1.
Deliverance by Prayer, chapter 2.


Undertaken by him, the fruit thereof was The Preservation of the repenting
Ninivites, chap. 3. Refutation of the Prophets anger, chap. 4.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of JONAH.
An. Mundi
1 JOnah declines his charge, to Tarshish flies,
Is storm-fast, cast ore-board, a wh^le does rise,
And catch him, they in the ship do sacrifice.
2 Jonah prays in the whale, God does command
The whale, and she does cast him on the land.
3 Then he to preach against Niniveh's content,
But judgment falls not, they, and God repent.
4 Jonah's not pleased, God makes not good his word,
But God confutes him by the type of the gourd.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Micah,
THe first part of the Prophecy of Micah, Contains Threatenings, chap. 1. chap.
2. and 3. Consolations, chap. 4. and 5.

The second part contains in like manner Threatenings, chap. 6.

Consolations after the complaints of the godly, chap. 7.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of MICAH.
1 Against Jacobs idols Micah prophesies.
Laments their woeful 'case with watery eyes.
2 Oppression cries, causes sad lamentation,
Idols, injustice overthrow the nation,
Of wine and strong drink they would hear relation.
3 The Princes cruel, Prophets false, and both
Secure, for these things it is that God's so wroth.
Because with blood they now do Zion build,
Therefore must Zion be plowed as a field.
4 But for the Church of God, the Spirit says,
That it shall flourish in the latter days:
Its peace and glory God will highly raise;
5 When Bethle'em shall bring forth her mighty King,
Whose power all foes shall to confusion bring.
6 Mean time God's angry that they slight his love,
Use false weights, speak loud lies, and do approve
Omries old laws, which God to anger move.
7 The Church complains of fewness, yet believes,
Bids her foes not insult. God her relieves
With comforts, she orejoy'd no longer grieves.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Nahum,
NAhum in this Prophecy Does Propound destruction to the Assyrians, chap. 1.
Expound the causes thereof,


Organical, their enemies, chapter 2. Principal, their sins, chapter 3.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of NAHVM.
An. Mundi
1 NAhum tells Niniveh, God's a strong tower
To them that trust, the wicked feel his power.
2 If Israel, then sure Niniveh shall fall,
For sin, Gods fearful armies shall sink all.
4 Down, down she falls, for whoredom, witchcraft, lies,
Her glory flees, as shades when Sun does rise.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Habakuk
HAbakkuk has in this Prophecy, an Expostulation with God, chapter 1. chapter 2. A
Petition to God, chapter 3.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of HABAKKVK.
1 Here Is grieved the wicked better men should scourge, An. Mundi

That rugged Chaldees Isreal's dross should purge.
2 He Is answered, that by faith he must still live,
Till God a recompense to Chaldee give,
And visit upon them their cruelty,
Their riot, covetise, voracity.
3 The Prophet prays, and trembles at Gods power,
Yet still confides in him, as his strong tower.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Zephania.
THe Prophet Zephaniah does in this Prophecy, Threaten, chap. 1. Dehort, chap.
2. Comfort, chap. 3.
The Jews.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters of the
Prophecy of ZEPHANIAH.
Baals sake, and diverse other crimes,
God will send upon Judah heavy times.
2 Who do repent shall find a loving God,
But Moab, Ammon diverse feel his rod;
3 Judah is shent, her Princes, Prophets, all,
For sin yet her in time the Lord will call.
A short Analysis of the Prophecy of Haggai,
THe Prophet Haggai in this Prophecy handles The Structure, chap. 1. Glory,
chap. 2.
of the second Temple.

A POEM. Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of HAGGAI.
1 GOd, for the temples sake which stands forlorn,
Blows on their meat and drink, clothes, wages, corn.
2 To set them on the work, he does here tell,
The second Temples glory shall excel,
A Signet he sirnames Zorobabell.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Zacharia.
THe Prophet Zachary delivers himself both in types and discourse. Types,
partly Hortatory, In general, to all the people, chap. 1, 2. In special, to
Joshua and Zorobabel, chapter 3. and 4.


Monitory, concerning false Prophets, chap. 5.

Consolatory, concerning Christ, chapter 6. Discourse, concerning Their Present
state, full of hypocrisy, chap. 7. and 8. Future state under Christ, where we
have,


His Incarnation, chap. 9. and 10 Passion, chap. 11, 12, 13.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of ZACHARIAH.
1 THe Prophet warns them of their fathers ways,
And then three visions in this text displaies.
2 Salem is measured, she is without a wall,
God walls her, and eye-apple does her call.
3 Joshua, the High Priest, is Christ's foregoing sign,
By whom the Church shall flourish, like a vine:
4 The golden Candlesticks, and Olive trees,
Have their profound, and sacred mysteries.
5 The thieves, and swearers curse in a roll flies,
Babel, a woman in the Ephah lies,
Oppressed with Talents of calamities,
6 Four Charets 'twixt two mountains, Joshua's crown
Foretells the Branches Kingdom and renown;
7 The Captives ask why they do fast in vain,
The Prophet says in fasting, they but feign,
It was for sin that God did them restrain:
8 Salem's rebuilded, and repeopled, God
Has into favor now exchanged his rod.
9 God saves his Church, riding upon an Ass
Her King shall come, 'cause this shall come to pass,
Zion is bid rejoice, and sweetly sing,
to him, that will effect this wondrous thing,
10 God must be sought, not Idols, he corrects
For sin, yet still his people he affects.
And does anon repair all their defects:
11 Salem's destroyed but for th elect God cares,
Be^uty, and bands are broke, ^e how it farts
Wi h careless Shepherds, whom a type declares.
12 Salem's a trembling cup, a stumbling stone,
Her joy begins with penitential moan.
13 Salem is purged from Idols, Christ must die,
A third part God with fire will purify,
14 In fine S^lem must fall, anon her smart
Her foes shall undergo, of them some part.
Shall flock to Jesus Christ, with all their heart.
A short Analysis, of the Prophecy of Malachi:
THe Prophet Malachi threatens The Priests, chap. 1. and 2. People, from the
Coming of John-Baptist, chap. 3. Coming of Christ chap. 4.



A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Prophecy of MALACHI.
1 THe people are complained of, for their vice, An. Mundi

For offering blind, and maimed sacrifice,
For compassing the Lord their God with lies:
2 The Priests, for breaking covenant, are checked,
Many foul sins the people do infect.
3 The Messenger, the great refiner's near
Each malefactor shall his sins buy dear,
But blessed shall he be that God does fear.
4 There comes a day of fire, to wicked men,
But light to the just, Elijah shall ere then,
For that great day, prepare the sons of men.
THE Marrow OF THE BIBLE.

Containing The Analysis, Poemes, and Chronological Annotations Of the NEW
TESTAMENT.

Partly Translated out of an Anonymus Latin Author, and partly amplified and
enlarged for the benefit of all those that desire a speedy and plentiful
acquaintance with the Oracles of God.

By William Ainsworth, (...). late Lecturer at St. Peter's, CHESTER.

Osidor. de libris gentil. Quid prodest in mundanis proficere doctrinis, and
marcescere in divinis? Caduca sequi figmenta, and Coelestia fastidire mysteria?

Ignorantia Scripturarum ignorantia Christi est. Hier. in Isa.

A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Gospel according to Saint Matthew
THe Gospel of Saint Matthew contains an History of the life and death of
Christ.

1. Life, and that either Private, where we have his Birth, chap. 1 Educatio^,
c. 2


Public, where we have his Forerunner, John Baptist, chap. 3.

Preceding tentation, chap. 4.

Ministry, which he undertook, and discharged, alone, as his Preaching in the
Mount, concerning The Blessedness of the godly, chap. 5. Experience in
godliness, chap. 6. Impediments, chap. 7.
Working in Capernaum. Before his passing the lake of Genazereth, chap. 8.


Ater his return to the same place, chap. 9.

With other, as disciples, and strangers, disciples, viz. his own, chap. 10.
John's, chap. 11.

Strangers.

Opposing him, chap. 12. Learning of him, chap. 13. Insnaring him, by force, as
Herod, chap. 14. By deceit, as the Pharisees tempting him in his doctrine, chapter
15. and signs, chap. 16.
2. Death, whereof see the Antecedents, both in Galile, as the Confirmation of
some disciples transfiguration, chap. 17. Reproving of the ambitious, chap. 18.
The confines of Galile, where the Pharisees were confuted, chap. 19. Disciples
confuted, chap. 20. The Metropolis, or chief City, See


His Entrance there, chap. 21. Abiding there, where we have his Disputation
with adversaries, chap. 22. Doctrine to the people, c. 23. Prophecy of the
destruction of the Temple and world, chap. 24. Exhortation to watch, chapter 25.



Concomitants, viz. his betraying, and apprehension, chap. 26. his Passion and
Burial, chap. 27.

Consequents, as his resurrection. chapter 28.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Gospel of St. MATTHEW.
1 OF Christ's Descent and Birth, An. Mundi and Christi.
Matthew does tell
Of his two names, Jesus, Emmanuel. M. 3947 chapter 1. M. 3948 chapter 2.

2 How the three Magi came to seek him, and
How Joseph did transport him out of the land,
For fear of Herod, who Christ to surprise,
Slaughters all Bethle'ems children, and so dies.
3 John Baptist preaches, roughly clothed, and fed,
Preferres Christ, does baptize him, on his head
A Dove sat, he is my Son, the fathers seed.
4 Christ fasts, orecomes the devil thrice, preaches, heals
To four Apostles, he himself reveals.
5 See the beatitudes, salt, law and light,
Of killing, oaths, and how to love aright.
6 Give alms, pray, fast, lay up in heaven store,
In God trust, serve one Master, and no more.
7 Give no rash judgment, cast no pearls to swine,
But pray, go the strait way, Sheep-wolves decline
Who hears and does, builds on the rock divine.
M. 2979 chapter 32. They took their several Circuits to preach the Gospel. An.
Mundi 3985. Christi 38. Helvic.
8 Leper and soldier's healed, Satan does drown
The Swine, for that Christ is expelled the town.
9 Calls Matthew, heales the palsy, eats his food
With publicanes, and stays a flux of blood;
Blind see, dumb speak, Christ travels doing good.
10 The twelve Apostles called, are lesson'd here,
What they shall do, and what they shall forbear.
11 John sends to Christ, Christ sings John Baptists praises,
Blames sinful cities, childrens spirits ^alses,
Above Philosophers, cheares in sad cases.
12 M. 3979. chapter 32.
Fault's found wi^h plucking corn ears, a dry hand
Is healed, an house divided cannot stand,
Blasphemy against the Spirit God does brand.
13 Of seed, tares, mustard seed, leaven and treasure.
Of pearls and nets, Christ speaks, he takes no pleasure
To preach at home, although he might have leisure.
M. 3980 chapter 33.
14 Herod's conceit of Christ, John Baptist s slain,
M^raculous loaves and fishes, on t e main
Christ walks, his garments hem make sick men fain.
15 Christ twits the Scribes, shows what defiles a man;
Heales, feeds four thousand, so as none else can,
Extols a woman's faith o^ Canaan.
M. ^980 chapter 33.
16 A sign, a sign, cry Pharisees, their leaven
Christ does forbid, Peter inspired from heaven,
Conf sses Christ, who his own death foretells,
Tells how to save the soul, which all excels.
17 Transformed, a mad man's fury he allayes,
Reads his own destiny, and tribute pays.
18 Be little, to be great, scand^ls refrain,
There Is joy for a lost sheep, that is found again,
Forgive, lest God thy sins also retain.
19 Christ heales, about divorce resolves a doubt,
Shows who may have wives, who may be without,
Ente^taines little children, bids sell all
For Christ, lest riches bring the greater fall,
To patient losers he l be liberal.
20 Vinedressers hired, a woman next does crave
Her Sons on Christ's two hands their seats might have, M. 3981 chapter 34.

Christ denies that, but sight to blind men gave,
Bids the ten humbly they themselves behave.
21 Christ riding on an Ass, does purify
The Temple, next the figtree cursed, does die,
Of two Sons, which does do his fathers will,
The Farmers after servants th heir do kill.
22 The Princes marriage feast, seven husbands dead,
One woman's husbands all, next here you read,
Two great Commandments, comprised in a word,
David in Spirit calls his Son Christ, Lord
23 The Scribes and Pharisees hear, but shun their ways,
Woe to the Scribes and Pharisees, he often says.
24 The Temples fall f^retels what signs forego
His comings sudden as the flood of Noc,
Who watches for his Lord shall feel no woe.
25 Ten Virgins, and ten talents, with a Scheme
Of the last judgment are our Saviors theme.
6 He Is 'nointed, sold, commands and eats the Pasch, M. 3981 chapter 34.

Ordaines the Eucharist, 'twas Judas task,
By the P^iests, to catch his Master, Peter fights,
Then plays the Coward, Christ is brought with lights,
To th bar, where diverse Knights of the post do swear
And get deaths sentence against our Savior dear.
27 Ju as is hanged, a dre^m of Pilates wife,
Make her sollic t for our Saviou^s life,
But she prevails not, no, it will not be,
The Jews ex laim, Barabbas must live, not he;
He s crucified, his tit e writ, interred,
His grave well-guarded, lest he should be stirred.
28 And yet he rose the third day, did appear
To his disciples, bad them not to fear,
Sends them to preach and Christen every where.
A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Gospel by St. MARK.
An. Mundi and Christi.
1 CHrist is baptized by John, is tempted, preaches,
Calls four disciples, and his mercy reaches
Mark writ his Gospel An. Mundi 4009. Christi 62. Eusebius. Helvic. M. 3979 chapter 32.
To a daemoniack, and St. Peter's mother,
And to a leper, besides many other.
2 Christ heales, and pardons a poor Palsie-man,
Vouchsafes to call Matthew the publican:
He Is charged with blasphemy, and much does say
TO excuse the corn-eares, plucked of the Sabbath day.
3 He heales the withered hand, rebukes the devil,
He calls his twelve, shows that division's evil,
Brings mutual ruin, on a fit occasion
He ownes the godly for his generation.
4 The mystic sower, and his precious seed,
Our light we must impart to who have need.
The mustard-tree grows great from a small grain,
A mighty tempest Christ makes calm again.
M. 3979 chapter 32.
5 The legion dispossessed, enter the swine,
The bloody issue, by a power, divine,
Is healed with a touch, Jaires daughter dead,
Is now revived, all are astonished.
6 Christ, slighted in's own country, the twelve sends,
John Baptist's slain, Christ loaves and fish commends,
Unto five thousand, on the sea he goes,
Virtue out of him, t'all that touch him flows.
7 The Pharisees blame eating with foul hands,
Yet they themselves break the divine commands,
Not meat, but manner do defile h'assures,
Who casts a devil out, and a deaf man cures.
8 A second wondrous feast of fish and bread,
The Pharisees denied a sign, Christ's seed
Against theirs, and Herod's leaven, heals blind eyes,
Asks who himself is, and for patience cries.
9 Transfigur'd, Christ instructs his Legates, and
A deaf dumb Spirit casts out by command;
Foretells his death and rising, bids be mild,
After the example of a sucking child,
The member must be cut off that offends,
These two things salt and peace Christ much commends
10 Divorce is questioned here, children are blessed, M. 3981 chapter 34.

Riches concluded dangerous, they do best
That leave all for Christ's sake, a fond request
Here follows, for two Sons, Christ checks ambition,
And puts a blind man in a good condition.
11 Christ rides upon an ass, the fig tree causes,
Purges the Temple, from both wares and purses,
Shows faiths great power, and questioned for's Commission
A cross Inter'gatory gets him dismission.
12 The heire's killed by Farmers, Christ does tribute pay,
No marriage at the Resurrection day.
The great command is this, love God, Christ's son
To David, two small mites have all outdone.
13 The Jewish plagues, signs of the great doomsday,
Read here, God knows the time of 't', watch and pray.
14 Christ is conspired against, anointed, sold,
Betrayed by Jud', arrested Peter's bold
To cut off Malchus ear, his followers flee,
The Knights of the Post false things do testify,
He Is spit on, struck, Peter weeps bitterly,
Because his Lord in's straits he did deny.
15 He Is tried, condemned, and lastly crucified,
Barrabbas escapes, Christ Jesus they deride.
Stab him of the Cross, guard his grave on each side.
16 Yet rise, he a gain, on the third day,
Appears to men and women, sends away
His twelve, to preach and christen, verifies
His words by wonders, and ascends the skies.
A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Gospel by St. LVKE.
An. Mundi and Christi.
1 OF Christ's, and John's conception the Angel brings
News, Mary goes to Elisa, and there sings
Luke wrote his Gospel. An. Mundi 4000. Christi 53 Eusebius. Helvic. M. 3960 chapter
13. Alti ad annum 12. currentem referunt. Helvic M. 3979 chapter 32.
For joy of this good tidings, Zach'ry's dumb,
Till John the Baptist Christ's forerunner's come,
And then he sings a sweet Encomium.
2 A great tax at Christ's birth, Angels and Swaynes,
Sing to the Lord, the babe Christ bears the pains
Of Circumcision, Mary's purified,
Simeon, and Hanna sing, Doctors that tried
His depth, at twelve years old, were stupifi'd.
3 John ushers Christ, Herod does him confine,
Christ is baptized a Dove, and voice divine
Do own him, Luke reports here Joseph's line.
4 Christ tempted conquers, preaches, is admired
Cures a Daemoniack, and as 't was desired
Peter's wives mother, then himself retired.
5 Christ's Pulpit is a Ship, miraculously
Fishes are taken, Jesus does purify
Leper, and palsie-man, Matthew is called,
And Christ for his companions sake's miscalled,
The Bridegrooms presence does from tears secure,
Old bottles wine that is new cannot endure.
M. 3979 chapter 32.
Eating of corn ears on the Sabbath's just,
Christ chooses twelve, heals the sick, that do trust
Upon him, preaches to them weal, and woe,
Teaches what to forbear, and what to do,
The beam, and more in the eye, the fruit, and tree
The hearts treasure, rock, and sand-house, come and see.
7 A servant healed, a son revived again, M. 3979 chapter 32.

Are mentioned here, Christ answers to the twain,
That John had sent, Christ drinks, S. John drinks not
Yet both are blamed, nor must it be forgot
How the weeping woman's tears her pardon got.
8 The sower sowes, the winds forbear their blasts
At Christ's words, who a legion next outcasts,
And then to quicken Jairus daughter hastes,
Besides another whom a Blood-flux wastes,
9 Christ sends his twelve, Herod would fain Christ se^;
Christ feeds with bread and fish miraculously,
He is transfigur'd, and a mad man cures,
Disswades affected greatness, scarce endu^es
The passion of the two, that would needs burn
Churlish Samaria, one that would return
To bury's father, Christ does here adjourn.
10 Seventy are sent, and lesson'd, three great woes
Are uttered against three Cities babes disclose
Great things, true joy is to be writ on high,
Feign would the Lawyer himself justify;
Mary in choosing, Martha does out use.
11 Pray thus, Our Father, M. 3081. chapter 34.
etc. houses that divide
Themselves, can never stand, the Lord does chide
Them that, to Jonah, ask another sign;
The single eye, as a clear light, doth-shine,
The Pharisees washed without, and not within,
Their woes are many, for their grievous sin.
12 Beware of leaven, fea^ God, Christ confess,
Take heed of too much worldly-mindednesse:
Like his, that built new barnes, wait for the Lord,
Who against the careless servant vows a sword,
Christ's coming blows the fi^e, by accident,
Though peace and union be his chief intent.
13 From sudden death Christ infers this, Repent,
Threatens a barren fig tree, and is shent,
For curing on the Sabbath, Mustard Seed
'Presents Gods kingdom, he tells all, they would need
To strive at the strait gate, foretells the fall
Of great Jerusalem, Temple, and all.
14 A dropsie's heald of the Sabbath, take the low'st place,
The Kings great supper, it is a foul disgrace
TO attempt, and leave imperfect, to undertake.
The trade of Christ, and not all else forsake.
Salt while it has it is savour's good, but when
That Is lost, it is trodden under foot of men.
15 The lost sheep, the lost groat, and wanton son,
All found again, betoken what is done
In heaven, when sinners cease to hell to run.
16 The unjust Steward's prudent in his way,
Make friends with Mammon, against the evil day;
No man can serve two masters, who does marry
Cannot divorce, except his wife miscarry.
Dives and Lazarus exchange estates,
Though Lazarus erewhile lay at Dives gates.
17 Forgive, but scandalize not, faiths increase
Beg of the Lord, faith's mighty, do not cease
M. 3981 chapter 34.
To cry down thine own works, ten lepers blessed
With cure, yet only one his thanks expressed.
Like Noah's sudden flood, like lightning clear,
So will the Son of man, in's day, appear.
18 A restless widow with a Judge prevails,
The Pharisees self-boasting naught availes,
Christ endeares children, rubs the rich man's sore,
When he bids sell all, and bestow't of the poor;
And now a blind man heals, as often before.
19 Zache ascends, descends, Christ entertaines,
Ten talents are improved by honest gains;
Christ on an Ass does into Salem ride,
Blessed he that comes in Gods name, all Saints cried,
By him, there come, the Temple's purified.
20 John's power to baptize justifies his Lord,
The Vineyard-farmers kill the heir with the sword,
Yet maugre their spite he is the cornerstone;
He Is asked should they pay Caesar, or pay none?
To the question of seven husbands to one woman,
He answered so exactly, thenceforth no man
Durst tempt him farther, and when they had done,
He asks, if Christ were David's Lord, or Son;
Of the Scribes pride, and prayers he will have none.
21 He magnifies the widows two poor Mites,
Foretells the worlds, and Salems end, invites
To soberness, and watching, till the day
Come, wherein heaven and earth shall pass away.
22 At's parting feast, they question who 't should be
That should betray him, strive for dignity,
Peter vows not to flinch, they show two swords,
He says enough, and gives them no more words,
But prayed, till he is assaulted, kissed and taken,
Peter cuts often an ear, Christ heals 't again,
Is led away, Peter denies him then,
And he is buffeted by graceless men.
23 At last accused, cried down, condemned, a thief
Is rather freed then he, 't was small relief
TO have help to bear his Cross, he is crucified,
And two thieves with him, one on either side;
Women lament, his title 's writ, the Sun
Grew dark, and the veil rent, when 's breath was gone.
Joseph his body begs, and does it lay
In the same tomb he would made for 's own last day.
24 The third day he arose, Angels declare
This to some women, they no pains do spare,
To tell it to others, two Emaus-men
In breaking bread discerned him, he went then
To the disciples, to open their mental eyes,
And lastly to himself opened the skies.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Gospel according to Saint John.
ST. John treats in this Gospel, of the Person of Christ, chapter 1.

Office of Christ, which is distinguished according to his four travels or
journeys.

I. To the Feast of the Passover, where we have His Passage from Cana of
Galilee to Jerusalem, chap. 2. Abode there during the Feast, chapter 3. Return
from thence thorough Samaria and Galilee, chapter 4.


II. To the Feast of Pentecost, where we have His Curing of a Palsie-man on the
Sabbath, chap. 5. Feeding of the People in the wilderness, chap. 6.


III. To the Feast of Tabernacles, where we have His Coming, chapter 7. Abode
there, whence followed the Quarrels of the Pharisees, about the doctrine of the
true light, chap. 8. and the healing of a blind man on the Sabbath, chap. 9.
Violences, more open, by stones, chapter 10. and more secret in their Councels, chapter
11.


IV. In his fourth travel happened his death, and thereof the Antecedents, Viz.
Acts Kingly entrance, chapter 12. Lowly washing, chapter 13,
Words, when, viz. at Supper, chap. 14. what kind of words, viz. Hortatory,
chap. 15. Consolatory. chap. 16. Pe^^tionary, chap. 17.


Concomitants,

Mediately, in the garden and Highpriests Palace, chap 18.

Immediately, in the Common Hall and place of punishment, chap. 19.

Consequents, as his Resurrection revealed To Those that were in Judea, chap.
20. Those that were returned to Galilee and Tiberias, chapter 21.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Gospel of St. JOHN.
An. Mundi and Christ.
1 CHrist is divine, himself he does display
To them that fain would know him, the third day
St. John returning from Pathmos wrote his Gospel. Hier. An. Mundi 4046.
Ch^isti. 98 Helvic.
Andrew and Peter he by John does call,
Nathaniel too, and Philip fo^re in all.
2 Makes water wine, the Temple purifies,
Shows his own death, and rising, the heart descries.
3 How to be born again he does direct,
And what the Serpent meant erewhile erect
IN the wilderness, how he the world indeares,
The greater he is, the less John appears.
4. Christ with a Dialogue, near Samaria's Well,
Converts a woman, and a many more.
At home a Prophet is not thought to excel,
M. 3978 chapter 31. M. ^979 chapter 32.
Ch is it heals a child was almost dead before.
5 Christ heales a man that at Bethesda missed,
And for that healing, on the Sabbath's hissed
And persecuted, he is as the father great,
The Scriptures show he deals with no deceit.
M. 3980 chapter 33.
6 He feeds five thousand with five loaves, two fishes,
To them that hear for fleshly ends he wishes
Pure Manna, and ^ own flesh celestial dishes.
7 Christ at a Feast of Boothes did preach aloud,
Maintained his Sabbath-cure, and was allowed
By some, not others, Nicodemus gets
A snub, because he Christ somewhat abets.
8 The adult'rous woman's pardoned, they compare,
Abraham with him, and non-pluss'd boldly dare
To throw stones at him, he evades in the air.
9 The Pharisees the cured blind man hate,
He baffles them, he is excommunicate,
Christ comforts him, foretells their heavy hate.
10 He is the blessed shepherd, and the door,
Diversely thought of, his works show his power,
Escapes beyond Jordan, it is not yet his hour.
11 He raises Laz'rus, Priests and Pharisees
Consult against him, Caiaphas prophesies. M. 3981 chapter 34. Ut alii An. Mundi.
40^0.

12 Mary 'noynts Christ, the rout would Laz'rus see,
And kill him too with Christ for company,
Christ rides an Ass to Salem, glorified
By thunder, foretells how he after di'd,
Complains of their ambitious worldly pride.
13 Washes his Pupils feet, warnes humble love,
Foretells that Judas shall the Traitor prove,
And Peter from his standing thrice remove.
14 He says no longer they must see his face,
And that he goes to prepare them a place,
Leaving mean time his Peace and Spirit of grace.
15 Christ and his Saints are like to branch and vine,
The world hates, as Christ, so all that are divine.
16 In trouble this is comfort, Christ will heed
Their Prayers, but against the world proceed,
He Will send them inward Peace in time of need.
17 Mean time, as for's own glory, so he prays,
That God would bless his chosen sundry ways.
18 Then follows here the arrest of Christ betrayed,
And what part every one at that time played,
Judas, Saint Peter, Pilate, the Highpriests maid.
19 Christ scourged, and crowned with thorns, Pilate Pilate at the last killed
himself. An. Mundi 3988. Christi 41.
would fallen
Reprieve him, but his labor's all in vain.
In fine, he dies, his title's writ, lots cast.
Mary assigned to John, Christ is embalmed,
And buried, so the Jews in part are calmed.
20 John, Peter, Mary, come on the third day
To 's grave, and find his body gone away.
To Mary Magdalene he first affirms,
His rising; and anon Thomas confirms.
21 To his disciples fishing he does come,
Dines, foretells Peter of his Martyrdom,
Says not, whether John shall stay to the day of doom
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Acts Of the APOSTLES.
SAint Luke in the Acts of the Apostles shows what things were done by the Old
Apostles, either amongst the Jews, where we have their Preparation Active, in
choosing Matthias, chap. 1. Passive, in receiving the holy Ghost, chap. 2.
Action, about the


Apostleship of Some, as Peter and John, their action, chapter 3. passion, chapter 4
All, chapter 5.


Deaconship, how instituted, chapter 6. Administered by Stephen the Martyr, chapter 7.
and Philip the Preacher. Upon whose Ministry followed the sostening of the
Samaritanes and Eunuch, chapter 8. and the hardening of Saul, afterward converted,
chapter 9.

Gentiles, that is, Cornelius taught by Peter. See His Doctrine, chapter 10.
Defense, chapter 11. Imprisonment, chapter 12.


New or later Apostles, as Paul, whose several peregrinations or journeys are
reckoned up, viz.

1. With Barnabas, leaving Antiochia, chapter 13. returning to it, chapter 14.

2. With Silas, where we have His Going out, chapter 15. Abode in Asia, chapter 16. and
Greece, chapter 17. Return, chapter 18.


3. In this third we have the place of his Setting forth, chapter 19.

Abode, viz.

At Jerusalem, where he goes about to pacify the Jews By Actions, as a formal
Vow, chapter 21. Words, with The People, chapter 22. The Magistrate, chapter 23.



At Cesarea, where we have his action.

Under Governor Felix, chapter 24. and Festus, chapter 25. King Agrippa, chapter 26.


4. Toward Rome, where we have His Sailing thitherward, chapter 27. Coming
thither, chapter 28.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the ACTS
of the APOSTLES.
An. Mundi and Christi
1 CHrist, after often appearing, climbes the skies,
To point out times and seasons he denies.
Matthias Judas-place does enterprise.
M. 3985 chapter 38. Joel 2.28.
2 At Pentecost the cloven tongues appear,
The Apostles speak all tongues, whereat some jeere,
Some wonder, Joels text is made good here.
Peter three thousand, in one day, converts,
And does baptize, they 're Christ's with all their hearts.
3 Peter and John do heal a man, that is lame,
Peter exhorts them to embrace Christ's name.
4 They 're both convented before the Ruler, and
Not to preach in Christ's name, receive command,
Yet they with the Church, do to their tacklings stand.
5 False Ananias, and Sapphira die
For halting, in their vowed community.
The Apostles wonders work, in prison lie,
Are freed by Angels, good Gamaliel
In saving them, from being killed, does well.
6 The Apostles for their help, do Deacons choose:
Stephen is one, him falsely some accuse.
7 He answers for himself, and pays them home,
For murdering Christ, wherefore his final doom
Is to be stoned, which came to pass that day,
While he most tenderly did for them pray.
8 Readiness one of 's foes, Philip Samaria teaches,
Seconded by John and Peter, Magus reaches
At spiritual gifts, to buy them, and 's blamed sore,
Philip bap^izing the Eunuch, 's seen no more.
9 Readiness ^o^ Damascus, by an heav nly light
Call d, he first loses, then receives his sight,
He preaches Christ, and saves himself by flight.
Peter does cure Aeneas, and the maid
Called Dorcas, whom for dead her friends had laid.
10 Cornelius sends, and Peter satisfied
By vision, comes, and preaching, edifi'd
The hearers, whom the Spirit sanctified,
And Peter, by baptizing, purified.
11 Peter is blamed, 'cause he to th Gentiles went,
But his Apology gives full content,
At Antioch first Christians got their name. M. 3989. chapter 42. M. 3993 Helvi^.
chapter 46. ut alii. M. 4010. chapter 63.

In Claudius Cesars time a famine came,
As Agabus had erst foretold the same.
12 Herod kills James and Peter lays by the heels,
The Angel frees Peter, but King Herod feels
Gods stroke, he of a lousie sickness dies,
And with his death Gods good word multiplies.
13 Barnabas and Saul go convert Sergius Paul,
Saint Paul Ba -- Jesus does the devils child call,
The Gentiles do believe, Jews not at all.
14 Barnabas and Paul are forced from Icony,
At Lystra they will needs them deifie,
But Paul's half-ston'd to death there by and by,
Yet escapes, and helps to ordain Presbytery.
15 'Bout ircumcision there is mickle stir, M. 3998. chapter 51.

The Apostles how to appease it do confer,
Barnabas and Paul are about Mark divided,
Silas with Paul, with Barnabas Mark sided.
16 An old man in a vision does them call
To Macedonia, Timothy by Paul,
Is circumcised, Lydia believes,
A spirit's cast out, which the Master grieves,
Makes them imprison Paul and Silas, they
By prayer and praise obtain an open way,
M. 3998. chapter 51.
But were dismissed as Romans the next day.
17 At Athens, and at Thessalony Pa l
Disputes and preaches, many God does call,
The name of unknow'n God h' expounds to all.
18 At Corinth Paul does preach, and work with his hands,
Encouraged in a vision fearlesse stands:
Gallio his foes combined soon disbands:
Apollos by Priscilla, and her mate,
In higher learning is indoctrinate.
19 Saint Paul gives the Holy Ghost, the Jew repines,
The devil beats the exorcists, Demetrius whines,
M. 4002. chapter 55. ut alii M. 4020. chapter 73.
And raises uproares for Diana's sake,
The Town-clark does at last a fair end make.
20 Paul ministers the Eucharist at Macedon,
Eutichus revives, and to Miletus gone
He calls the Ephesian elders, bids to attend
The Church, and so does with sad farwell end.
21 Paul will needs go to Jury, Agabus
Tells him that he must suffer thus and thus,
M. 4004. chapter 57.
Yet he will go, there come bound with two chains,
Speaks Greek and Hebrew when he audience gains.
22 Tells his Conversion, the Jews against him cry,
And yet because of his immunity,
At Rome he is dismissed by and by.
23 Paul pleads, the Priest bids smite him, diverse vow
His death, yet he is preserved, the text says how.
24 Tertullus Declaration Paul gainsayes,
To persecute St. Paul Felix delays,
Hears him preach Christ, and yet he leaves him bound,
He thought perhaps Paul would with him comp und.
25 Now before Festus must Paul's cause be tried,
Who to the Jews in this thing soon complied,
To send him down to Jury, Paul says, no,
He Will go to Caesar, and 't was ordered so,
This order Festus lets Agrippa know.
26 St. Paul himself 't Agrippa tells his mind,
His strange Conversion, when he was struck blind,
And how he preached ere since, although he had
Small thanks from the Jews, Festus says, Paul, thou 'rt mad. M. 4007. chapter 60
Helvic. ut alii. M. 4026. chapter 79.

27 St. Paul in 's way to Rome finds danger great,
They 're shipwrack't, swim for life, yet land they get
28 Where come, a viper on St. Paul's hand seized,
Yet he received no hurt, diverse diseased
Are healed by him, then they to Rome pass on,
Where Paul does preach to all, and denies none.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans.
OF this Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans, there are three parts, viz. A
Preface, a Treatise, and a Conclusion.

1. A Preface, to the 16. verse of chap. 1.

2. A Treatise, partly

Didascalical, or Doctrinal, concerning the cause of our salvation, both next,
and remote.

Next, where the

False and counterfeit cause is removed, viz Works, chap. 2, 3.

True is confirmed, By the Example of faithful Abraham, c. 4. Faiths own Object
Christ who is opposed to Adam, chap. 5. Double adjunct, viz. Sanctification
which he shows to be necessary, chap 6. Imperfect, chap. 7. Trust and
confidence from the Spirit justifying, sanctifying, comforting, chap. 8.




Remote, viz. Predestination, where he speaks of the Jews rejection and
restoration.

Rejection, and the Cause thereof, Gods will, chap 9. Signs and effects
thereof, viz. their supine negligence, chap. 10.


Restoration, and remnant, chap. 11.

Hortatory, to works and duties,

Generally, toward God and our brother, chap, 12.

Specially in Things Necessary toward Superiors, chap. 13. Indifferent
toward inferiors and weak ones, chap. 14.


3. A Conclusion, which contains Doctrine concerning Matter of duty. His own
person, chap. 15.


Diverse salutations, chap. 16.

A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to the ROMANS.
1 PAul's debtor to the Romans, would them see,
Tells of Gods wrath against all iniquity, An. Mundi and Christi.

And of the old worlds sins particularly.
2 Who does what he condemns, is worthy blame,
Be It Jew or Gentile, he must bear his shame;
God is impartial, and does him embrace
Who is a Jew in spirit, not in face,
3 Not so, but that the Jews Gentiles excel,
And yet as Gentiles Jews do sin as well,
Faith then with both, not works must bear the bell.
4 'T was Abraham's faith with Circumcision sealed,
That made him just, and as it is often revealed,
The Churches father, first in him concealed.
5 Faiths righteousness m^kes with God perfect peace,
Adam brought sin and death, Jesus release.
6 Not that we live in sin, we are baptized,
In token of our death to 't, enfranchised,
In all our members, for at death sin's prized.
7 No law to dead men, to the law we are dead,
To serve Christ in the spirit, yet we dread
To say, the law is bad, although there be
'Twixt it, and our lusts-law an enmity.
8 No death to them in Christ, they Abba say,
The Spirit too assists them when they pray,
'Nought can Gods love from them remove away.
9 Paul's sorry for the Jews, all Abraham's seed,
Of Gods good promise, were not heirs indeed,
God does, as Potters, with their clay, proceed.
10 Paul would have Israel saved, they have zeal that is blind.
The word works faith, published to all mankind.
11 All Israel's not cast off, and those that are,
Shall yet return in time, O Lord, how rare,
How deep are all thy ways, and past compare?
12 Please God because of's mercy, every one
Attend his calling, love and bless, curse none,
Revenge not for a wrong that is erewile done.
13 Obey Superiors, love fulfils the Law,
The approaching day bids from dark works withdraw.
14 Judge not for things indifferent, all are pure,
Only no weak ones to offend be sure.
15 The strong must bear with the weak, Gentiles rejoice,
Paul's their Apostle, and they hear his voice,
Where Christ was never named, he prays them pray
That God may bless him to and fro in 's way.
16 He praises ^hebe: and saluteth many,
Bids them mark Make bates, if so there be any.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Corinth.
IN this Epistle, after an Exordium follows a Treatise, containing in it

1. A redargution or reproof of their faults, which he understood of by report,
both in respect of doctrine and manners.

Doctrine, as Schisms proceeding from their preposterous judgment Of False
teachers vain eloquence, chapter 1. True and Orthodox Teachers;


Simplicity, which he proves to be more profitable for the glory of God, and to
illustrate his power, and wisdom, chap. 2. And to inform the weakness of
carnal men, chap. 3.

Contempt, chap. 4.

Manners, from The Excess of love In suffering the incestuous person, chapter 5.
The Defect of love In their contentions, chapter 6.


2. A doctrinal answer to their Epistle in things indifferent, in Private
Assemblies, where he speaks of marriage and single life, chap. 7, Public
Assemblies, where he teaches to abstain from things offered to Idols. From The
effect, viz. the scandal of Brethren, chap. 8. Example, both His own, chap. 9.
The Israelites, and their punishment, chap. 10.

Necessary, which were To be done, in respect of Spiritual meetings in prayer
and prophecy, and in the Lords Supper, chap. 11. Spiritual gifts, whereof he
shows,

The Abuse, chap. 12. Use, if they be referred To Charity, which he extols, c.
13. Prophecy, rather then a strange tongue, chap. 14.

To be believed, concerning the resurrection, chap. 15.
A conclusion for making collections, and about other private matters, chap. 16.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the first
Epistle of Saint Paul to the CORINTHIANS.
1 PAul salutes, and gives thanks, An. Mundi and Christi.
their strife cries down,
The world's a fool, Gods wisdom wears the crown.
2 Deep mysteries without man's eloquence
Saint Paul reveals, surpassing the worlds sense.
3 But Corinth's carnal, he does plant, and lay
A good foundation, fire at the latter day,
Shall try all structures, whether gold, or hay.
4 Reverence the Clergy, they are waved to God
By many suff^^ings, Paul will come with the rod,
It Is fathers precepts under foot be trod.
5 The incestuous person's excommunicate,
Old leaven they with care must extirpate.
6 Fie, fie, before heathen men you do implead
Your brethren, sin to heaven will never lead,
All things are lawful, yet not fit for me,
You are Gods Temples, fornication flee.
7 Marriage is a cure for it, each man must stay
In's calling, by and by he resolves whether,
A pair (one but in the faith) may live together,
And then of maids, and widows much does say.
8 Abstain from Idol-meats, and scandal fly,
Our freedom must be crowned with charity.
9 Preachers may live by th Gospel which they preach,
Our life's a race, run we the c^own to reach
10 Jews Sacr^ments are our types their plagues to us
Are admonitions ^ha^ we sin not thus,
By Idols, and their other sins, it is evil
For men to eat with God, and with the Devil.
11 Women must cover the head, men must be ba^e,
Come not to Gods board but with special care.
12 The Spirits diverse ^ifts mak^s the body one,
Like na^u^e, all gifts are sumin'd up in none.
13 All gi^ts are nothing without charity.
'Bove says and hope it has the dignity.
14 Speaking with tongues, to prophecy submits,
Silence in public women best besits.
15 Christ's resurrection proves ours some gainsay it,
Its truth and mode, but Paul does here display it.
16 Relief to the needy Saints must be extended,
Some rules are added, Timothy s commended,
With an A^ath^ma the Epistle's ended.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the second Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Corinth.
THis Epistle differs from the former, as Oil from Wine, the Gospel from the
Law, Reproof from Comfort. It has three parts, viz. 1. An Apology wherein he
excuses, and wipes away the imputations, Of Levity, chap. 1. Severity, chap. 2.
Ostentation; where we have the Praise of the Gospel, from its effects, and by a
comparison, chapter 3. Excuse of it, notwithstanding.

The Obscurity, chap. 4. that follow and attend it. The Cross, chap. 5. that
follow and attend it.

2. An Exhortation, General, to purity of life, and to shun the company of the
impure, which He Propounds, chap. 6. Confirms by an attestation of his own
Fidelity. Benevolence, chapter 7.

Particular, to alms, where he speaks of the Collection, chapter 8 of alms.
Collectors, chapter ^. of alms.

3. A reproof, partly of Troublers of the Church whom accusing by the way, he
excuses his own Lowliness and humility, chap. 10. Boasting of things Ordinary,
chapter 11. Extraordinary, as revelatio^s, c. 12
Erroneous persons, where he threatens, exhorts, comforts, and concludes, chap.
13.





A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
second Epistle of Saint Paul to the CORINTHIANS.
An. Mundi and Christi.
1 Against trouble Paul does Corinth fortify,
And for's not coming make Apology.
2 And here again quit the excommunicate,
And the unlike sense of several hearts relate,
That unto life, or death are destinate.
3 Needs Paul commend himself? they magnify
His Ministry enough, Christ's Ministry
Does Moses-es many degrees out-vy,
4 Paul's preaching's only hid to those are lost,
He Is zoalou^, and in the world with troubles tossed,
5 But his reward's in heaven, which to attain,
He labors to have his conscience without stain,
Live all to Christ, who di'd, and rose again.
6 See Paul's Herculean labors, we are all
Christ's Temples, who is Cross to Belial.
7 Paul's glad that they were sorry, 'cause it turned
To their good, Titus with good news returned.
8 The Ma^edonians bravely lead the way
For Contribution, Paul's mind is that they
Follow, and Titus must receive the pay.
9 But he would have them give with liberal mind,
That they an ample recompense may find,
When they that thinly sow shall come behind.
10 Spiritual, not carnal arms are St. Paul's here,
His power's against opposers far and near,
Yet to over vaunt himself he does forbear.
11 But now enforced, he lays himself more forth,
Comparing's own with Picudapostles worth
12 Boasts not of visions, but infirmity,
Ore which Gods grace does give him victory,
And yet even this he speaks unwillingly.
13 Threatens the obdurate, bids them their faith prove,
Prays, bids farewell, persuades to peace and love.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians,
SAint Paul in this Epistle treats of Himself and his Gospel, which he shows
To be Received, not from man, but God, chap. 1. Approved of all, yea even the
very adversaries, chap. 2.
Ours, that is, the Churches affairs, viz. Our Justification by faith, not by
the Law Moral, chap. 3. or Ceremonial, chap. 4. Liberty, thorough Christ, which
he wishes neither to be Cowardly letten down, nor Licentiously advanced, to The
Works of the flesh. Offense of Inferiors, chap. 5. Superiors, chapter 6.









A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to the GALATIANS.
An Mundi and Christi.
1 PAul won 'ers they so soon had him forsook,
Who not from men, but God his Gospel took,
Says, that if Angels speak against it, they
Are cursed, though once he walk 't a desperate way.
2 After some yea^es he unto Jury wends,
There with some pillars he some small time spends,
And Peter's halting sharply reprehends.
3 Begin in the spirit, and i th flesh conclude,
Sure some enchantment did the men delude:
Vainly they on the Church the law obtrude.
4 Christ frees his Saints from that, they 're Abraham's seed,
By the freewoman, therefore free indeed,
In hate, as erst in love, they do exceed.
5 Stand in your liberty, slay Circumcision,
Would they were quite cut off that cause division,
If you expect the Kingdom to inherit,
You must bring forth, not fruits of flesh, but spirit.
6 Bind up the wounds of weak ones Surgeon-like,
The seeding, and the crop are both alike,
In Christ, and 's Cross Paul only does delight,
Whereby all worldly joys are put to slight.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Ephesians
OF this Epistle there are two parts. I. A Treatise, which is partly doctrinal,
partly hortatory. Doctrinal, to confirm them in the faith by arguments drawn
from Christ, and his benefits granted To Others, as Generally, all mankind.
Specially, to the Apostles, chap. 1.
The Ephesians themselves, which he amplifies by a comparison with their life
past, in respect of their Sin-defiling, and grace-renewing Gentility, chapter 2.
Paul himself, where he relates his own Sufferings and afflictions.

Lessons which he Learned. Taught, chapter 3.
Hortatory, to advance and promote them in godliness, and it is either
General, chap. 4. Particular, chapter 5.




II. A Conclusion, containing a Cohortation, Obtestation and Comprecation,
chap. 6.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to the EPHESIANS.
An. Mundi and Christi.
1 BEfore the world was, God has chosen his,
To be Partakers of eternal bliss.
2 Vessels of wrath by nature, are by grace,
Vessels of honor, signed to an heavenly place.
3 The Gentiles calling is revealed to Paul,
Locked up of old, but now displaid to all.
4 W^lk worthy of 't in peace and unity,
Change the old man for the new man's purity,
Grieve not the Spirit, that seals to eternity.
5 He wills them love, be chaste, lead a pure life,
As Christ the Church, so each man love his wife.
6 Children and servants must learn to obey,
Our life 's a war, God arms us Cap-a-pe,
Only stand fast, and we shall get the day.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Philippi,
THis Epistle to the Philippians, contains I. An exhortation, to Progress and
Constancy, showing whom they should Follow, that is, Himself, and his patience
in bonds, chap. 1.
Others, as Christ most humble and glorious. The disciples, Timotheus and
Epaphroditus, whom he commends comparatively and simply, chapter ^.
Avoid and flee, that is, the Ministers of Circumcision, now unprofitable, and
therefore called Concision, chapter 3.
II. A Conclusion, which admonishes, commends, prays and salutes, chapter 4.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to the PHILIPPIANS.
An. Mundi and Christi.
1 ST. Paul gives thanks for them, gains by his chains,
Even death it self will bring him no small gains,
Though still he live for their good to take pains.
2 Be one, and humble too as Christ sto^p'd low,
With fear, and trembling in the Lords way go.
3 Beware of dogs, all is dung with Christ compared,
Him seek, by vicious men be not ensnared.
4 Rejoice, rejoice, be not in deep cares drowned,
Saint Paul has learned to want, and to abound,
Through Christ's great strength nothing can him confound.
A Logico-theological Analysis, of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossi.
THis Epistle to the Colossians contains 1. A Treatise, partly Doctrinal,
where he Teaches that we must trust in Christ alone, chap. 1. Confutes
Philosophers and false Apostles, and the things they couple with Christ, chap.
2.
Hortatory, where he speaks Generally, of The Fountain of Piety,
Mortification, and Regeneration. Streams of it, that is, diverse duties, chap.
3.
Specially, of some proper and personal duties.


2. A Conclusion, which exhorts, commends, salutes, and commands, concerning
the reading of this Epistle, and admonishing of Archippus, chap. 4.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to the COLOSSIANS.
1 PAul prays, and th^nks for them, does undertake
What Is yet unsuffer'd by him, for Christ's sake, An. Mundi and Christi.

With joy bids them the Gospel ne' e fors^ke.
2 Cleave close to Christ, the law, nor world, nor men,
Can precepts give like Christ's, die to them then.
3 Risen with Christ, raise up your hearts on high,
Your fleshly members see you mortify.
Husbands, wives, children, all, do 't cheerfully.
4 Lastly, he bids them pray with fervent heat,
Walk wisely toward them that know not yet
Christ Jesus, let their words have salt and grace,
Salutes, and bids Archippus look to 's place.
A short Analysis, of the first Epistle of Saint Paul, to the Thessal,
IN this Epistle, after a Salutation, he Commends them for that in the time of
tribulation they received the Gospel, chap. 1. retained it, chap. 2. where he
speaks of His own entrance amongst them, and Conversation with them. Their
Conversion by him, and Confirmation by Timothy, chap. 3.
Admonishes them concerning Things To be avoided, chap. 4. To be performed, chapter
5.



A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the first
Epistle of St. Paul to the THESSALONIANS.
An. Mundi and Christi.
1 PAul prays, and thanks for them, and farther says,
That which they have embraced is the true faith.
2 He fairly quits himself to them, commends
His followers, once and again intends
To see them, but the Devil does cross his ends.
3 By sending to them he his love declares,
Joys in their weal, for them no prayers spares.
4 Love piety, moderate sorrow are here preft,
The mode of Christ's last coming is confessed.
5 And here again enlarged, duties good store,
He presses against that day, and sales no more.
A short Analysis of the second Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessal:
IN this Epistle after a Salutation follows a Treatise Prophetical, concerning
the coming Of Christ, chap. 1. Antichrist, chap. 2.

Doctrinal, teaching how to carry Toward The Apostle himself. Others that were
wicked, chapter 3




A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
second Epistle of St. Paul to the THESSALONIANS.
1 HIs good opinion of them leads the way, An. Mundi and Christi

It follows, God their sufferings will repay
With joy, while bad men find a bitter d^y.
2 He bids stand fast, because there sure shall be,
Before Christ's coming an Apostasy,
When as Ben-Satan opes his mystery.
3 He prays for them, and craves their prayers back,
Bids them with their own pains help their own lack.
A short Analysis of the first Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy.
IN this Epistle St. Paul instructs Timothy, how he must carry himself in
respect of Gifts Preaching, chapter 1. Gifts Praying chapter 2.
in the public Assembly.

Persons, where there are Precepts Ecclesiastical, concerning those that are To
be chosen, where he shows that fit Bishops and Deacons must be chosen, chapter 3.
and false teachers must be removed, ch 4. Chosen already, as elders and widows,
ch 5.
Moral or Ethical, concerning servants, and rich men, chap. 6.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents in the first Epistle of St. Paul to
TIMOTHY.
1 PAul lessons Tim. descants of Gods command, An. Mundi and Christi.

Transmits two Renegades to the devils hand.
1 For all men through one Mediator pray,
Women are bid be modest and obey.
3 Here fai^e Idaeas of the Clergy made,
Put Timothy in mind of his own trade,
And how through Church Affairs he ought to wade.
4 Last times are worst, and Timothy for his times,
Is warnd against error, sloth and other crimes.
5 How to rebuke, of widows, elders, take
Wine mixed with water for his weakness sake.
6 The servants charge, and how all must beware
New fangled teachers. Money-love's a snare,
Fight a good fight, charge rich men that they be
Rich in good works, and look to eternity.
A short Analysis of the second Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy,
SAint Paul in this Epistle Confirms Timothy against evils Present, where he
exhorts to constancy in The Gospel delivered to him, chap. 1. Under the Cross
the consort of the Gospel, chap. 2 To come, where he shows The Disease, chap.
3. Medicine, chap. 4.






A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
second Epistle of St. Paul to TIMOTHY.
An. Mundi and Christi M. 4015 chapter 68.
1 PAul loves him, and reports well of his faith,
Of Onesiphorus house, much good he faith.
2 Bids Timothy to suffer and stand fast,
Fix upon Gods foundation, that will last,
And show himself with divine virtues graced.
3 Bad times are coming, fraughted with truth's foes,
Jannes and Jambres-like, against all those
Paul sets himself, and Scriptures them to oppose.
4 Tim. must preach more, the less the world will hear,
Paul tells him that his death is very near,
And that he shall be crowned for fighting here.
A short Analysis of the Epistle of St. Paul to Titus,
SAint Paul informs Titus here concerning Discipline, whom To Elect, Discard,
chap. 1.

Doctrine, particular and general. Particular in respect of Ages, Persons,
chap. 2.
General, what He should teach. He should avoid, chapter 3.



A POEM Bontaining the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to TITUS.
1 TItus must ordain elders every where, An. Mundi and Christi

Thus qualified, to the pure all things are clear,
But foul to the impure, void of Gods fear.
2 Titus taught how to teach men, women, all,
The grace of Christ for holiness does call.
3 Titus must teach to obey men in high place,
Stiff Heretics he is charged to disgrace,
Required to come to Paul, who ends with grace.
A short Analysis of the Epistle of St. Paul to Philemon,
See here Who entreats, viz. St. Paul. Whom, Philemon. For whom, Onesimus. For
what, to receive him again. By what arguments.
As Mutual love, ver. 9. Paul's agednesse and imprisonment. Onesimus his
regeneration in Paul's bonds, ver. 10. Hope of his better service for the
future, to them both, ver. 11. The perpetual benefit of his failing, for the
time, ver. 15. His Partnership in Religion and Christianity, ver. 17.
Satisfaction for his trespasses made to Philemon by St. Paul, ver. 18.
Philemons readiness to overdo, ver. 21.

To Philemon.
PAul w^es Philemon here to entertain
Onesimus his servant erewhile vain,
But now returned by the Spirit again.
A short Analysis of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews.
THis Epistle to the Hebrews treats of Christ himself. His Person in respect
of Divine, chapter 1. nature. Humane, chapter 2. nature.
Office, Prophetical, chapter 3. and 4. Sacerdotal, which is preferred to the
Levitical, in respect of The order of Melchizedech, which he Propounds, chapter 5.
Expounds, ch 6. and 7.
The object, about which, etc. as it is set forth Gen^rally, chapter 8. Specially,
and by parts, chapter 9.
The effect compared with the defects of the older Priests, chapter 10. Christians
duties, as Faith chap. 11. Hope, chap. 12. Charity, chap. 13.






A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of St. Paul to the HEBREWS.
1 GOd after sundry ways of spe^king, last
Spoke by his Son, who the Angels far surpast.
2 Him we must hear, for he was made as we,
A man to infranchise Adams Progeny.
3 Preferred to Moses too, to imply this,
He Is more to be believed then Moses is.
An. Mundi and Christi.
4 By faith his rest we enter, for his Word,
It pierces the heart like to a two-edged sword,
He does us entrance to Gods throne afford.
5 Melchizedech, Salems great Priest of old,
The Priesthood of our Savior erst foretold.
6 The Hebrews are bid proceed in the good way,
To make hope strong God swears, as well as say.
7 Melchizedech Aaron the Priest outvi'd,
Christ with the greater Priesthood's dignified.
8 Christ's endless Priesthood Levi's does expel
The eternal so de the legal does excel.
9 The blood and sacrifice of Christ surpass,
All the bloody rites and offerings when the law was.
10 Those were but weak, that is of Sovereign might:
Believe, and 't will advance to heavenly light.
11 What faith is, it is the thing that pleases God:
This way the fathers before us have t^od.
12 Faith, patience, godliness, are pressed all three:
The Old Testament the New does quite outvie.
13 Here Is precept upon precept, to be chaste,
T obey, love strangers, he concludes at last.
A short Analysis of the Epistle of St. James,
SAint James in this Epistle teaches how they should carry themselves toward
God intentations External, Internal, chap. 1.

Men; where he shows what they should Follow, In Actions, in respect of Rich,
Poor, chap. 2.
Speech and words Public, Private, chap. 3.



Flee and avoid, and that either Universally, or Specially. Universally, all
without exception, chapter 4. Specially, as Rich men. Poormen in Affliction,
Sickness, chapter 5.





A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Epistle of Saint JAMES.
1 Rejoice in trouble, pray in faith, An. Mundi and Christi.
and know
Lust tempts, not God, the laws commandments do.
2 Prosopolepsy's bad, one fault does tread
The whole law down, faith without works is dead.
3 Bridle the tongue, the fiercest of all things,
Says James, and then to Wisdoms difference sings.
4 Intemperance, Detraction, Covetise,
Presumption, who is indu'd with Gods grace, flies.
5 Rust, Wages, Cry, like patient Job, forbear,
Confess your faults, by no means do not swear.
A short Analysis of the first Epistle of Saint Peter.
SAint Peter in this Epistle does exhort Generally, to Live well, from the
benefits and favors of God, Conferred, To be conferred, chap. 1.

Converse holily With Superiors, chap. 2. Equals, Friends, as Wives, Husbands,
Enemies, chapter 3.


Suffer persecution, which is here spoken of As Imminent, Present, chapter 4.


Specially, where he exhorts The Elder, Younger, chapter 5.




A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the first
Epistle of Saint PETER.
1 HE thanks for grace, and divine preservation, An. Mundi and Christi.

Shows, blood not gold does compass our salvation.
2 Forbids all bitterness and fleshly lust,
Submit to higher powers each Christian must.
3 Husbands and wives are lesson'd, taught to bear
Afflictions, Noah's flood is mentioned here,
A type of baptism, which our spots does clear.
4 Sin not, and one another entertain,
To suffer for Christ's cause is joy and gain.
5 Elders must feed, the younger must obey,
Watch and be sober, drive the devil away.
A short Analysis of the second Epistle of St. Peter.
SAint Peter admonishes in this Epistle what the believing Jews shall Do, that
is, persevere in the doctrine received, chap. 1. Avoid, and flee Viz. False
teachers, whom He Foretells, Describes, chapter 2.



Scoffers, which deny the second coming of Christ, chapter 3.


A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the second Epistle of Saint PETER.
1 PEter says, make your calling very sure,
An. Mundi and Christi
And constant in the faith to the end endure.
2 Beware false prophets, whom God will confound,
Like the old world, and like Sodom they are found,
Like swine and dogs, who in their sins turn round.
3 Christ sure will come to judge, the heavens shall burn,
The world dissolve, ergo to God return.
A short Analysis of the first Epistle of St. John,
THis Epistle of St. John is partly Hortatory, and partly Didascalical or
Doctrinal. Hortatory To Faith in Christ, from whence is Communion, Remission of
sins, chapter 1.
Charity, whereof we have The Matter, what is to be beloved, and what not, chapter
2. Form of Divine, Humane, chapter 3.
Charity.



Didascalical or Doctrinal, concerning The Avoiding of seduction, whereunto
love is opposed, chapter 4. Embracing of Faith, Charity, chapter 5.





A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters of the first
Epistle of St. JOHN.
1 THe Lord is light; to that light all comply, An. Mundi and Christi.

Who says he sins not, tells a shameless lie.
2 Christ is our Advocate, him we must love,
And not the world, John Antichrist does prove
By his effects, the world toward its end does move.
3 Gods love our Sonship plainly does descry,
Therefore sin not, be pure, love mutually.
4 Believe not every Spirit hand ore head,
But try the Spirits, where love's perfected,
There slavish sear is quite extinguished.
5 Three witnesses in earth, in heaven three,
Yet three are one, he lives eternally
That has the Son, for's brother he must pray,
Except he sin to death, then John says, Nay.
II. JOHN.
ST. John instructs a Lady how to be Constant till death, and Pscudapostles
flee.

III. JOHN.
COmmends his good Host Gaius, does cry down Diatrephes, Demetrius renown.

A short Analysis of the Epistle of Saint Jude.
SAint Jude in this Epistle, does partly Confirm the godly against false
teachers, whom he describes by Their Reprobation from Eternity, ver. 4.
Personal viciousness, ver. 4. in respect whereof he compares them with The
Unbelieving Egyptians, ver. 5. Apostate Angels, v. 6. Sodom and Gomorrha, ver.
7.

Damnable doctrines Condemning Magistracy, which they do more speak evil of and
rail against, then Michael the Archangel durst do against the devil, ver.
8.9. Speaking evil of things for their mysteriousnesse and profundity, ver. 10.
Conformity to Cain, Balaam, and Core, ver. 11. Scandalousnesse and
offensivenesse to the Church of God, ver. 12, 13.
Foretells their destruction by the Authority of Enochs Prophecy, ver. 14.
Seconded with another description of these men, ver. 16. Exhorts them, To
Remember the many Predictions concerning these men, ver. 1^. Prayer and mutual
edification and confirmation, ver. 20, 21, 22. Caution and Circumspection
against all uncleanness, ver. 23.

Commends them in Conclusion to the grace and preservation of God, v. 2^, 25.


The Epistle of St. JVDE.
JUde does foretell false teachers, and their fall,
And of their fall and teaching forewarnes all.
A short Analysis of the Apocalypse of St. John:
THis book contains in it two parts, viz. 1. An Exordium, chapter 1. 2. A Treatise
of things present, chapter 2. and 3. and to come In this world, where we have an
history Common to the whole world, as concerning the Causes of things done, and
of the whole Revelation, chap. 4. and 5. Effects done therein, whereof read The
Presignation, chapter ^. Caution, chapter 7. Execution, chapter 8. and 9.
Proper to the Church where we have a Transition, showing who reveals, and to
whom, chapter 10. Description of the Church Militant, and that both Briefly, chapter
11. Largely, where we have its 1. Rise, from the first year of Christ to the
62. year, chapter 12. 2. Progress to the time of Boniface, chapter 13. 3. The
Preparation of The Lamb, chapter 14. His retinue, chapter 15
4. His execution of the Churches enenemies, chapter 16.

Triumphant and overcoming Babylon, chapter 17. chapter 18. Both beasts, chapter 19. The
Dragon, chapter 20.
After this world, chapter 21. and chapter 22.




A POEM Containing the (...), or Contents of the several Chapters in the
Revelation of Saint JOHN.
1 CHurches or Candlesticks, An. Mundi and Christi. M. 4061 ut alii. M. 4043
chapter 96. M. 4162 chapter 215.
in number seven John writes to, shows how Christ appears from heaven.
2 To the Angels of four Churches here he writes,
Their virtues or their vices he recites.
3 Sardis is blamed, but Philadelphia's praised,
The shame of lukewarm Laodicea's blamed.
4 John sees Gods throne, and four and twenty placed
About it, all with golden Crowns are graced.
5 The seven sealed book could not be opened, till
The dead live-lamb, did it with his great skill.
6 What followed the opening of each Seal, here see
What horses, judgments and extremity.
7 The Saints are sealed, ere the four Angels smite,
They praise the Lord, for ever clothed in white.
8 Incense, and prayers here to God ascend,
Four Angels blow, their blasts strange things portend.
9 A fifth blows down a star to hell from heaven,
Who locusts sends on earth, the sixth of the seven
Blew, and four Angels loosed beyond the flood
Euphrates, who did fiercely shed men's blood.
M. 4462 chapter 314.
10 The seventh blast all concludes, John has command
To eat the book taken from an Angels hand
11 How far the temple's measured, Come and see,
And how two Witnesses do prophecy,
How they forbid the ^aire, and how they die,
And how they live again ete^nally,
M 5322 chapter 1272. M. 4162 chapter 215.
And now the seventh Angel blows his blast,
And see what followe's, when that trumpet's past.
12 A woman travels, clothed with Sun and Moon,
And on her head wearing a starry Crown,
The Dragon gaping to eat her childe's th^own down.
Yet still pursues the woman, wi^h a flood,
Which the e^^th drinks up, to do the woman good.
13 A Sea-beast ^ises, and an Earth-beast next,
M. 4562 M. 4662 M. 5092 chapter 113.
Both An ichrists, by whom the Church is vexed.
14 The Lamb and 's ^so^k do on Mount Zio^ stand,
An An^el s^^gs, ^^eat Babels fall 's at hand,
An Angel ^e^p^ the earths vintage, by command.
15 Seven An^e^^ with seven Vial seven plagues bring,
But they tha^ t iumph ore the be st do sing,
16 The Angels p^^re out their Vi^^^s they that read
The plagues that follow cannot choose but dread.
17 The Sca^let-whore holding a Cup of gold,
Sits on the beast, he^ judgment is foretold.
18 G^d^ people must slay from her, for her fall
Will be so fearful, 't will astonish all.
M. 4362 M. 5162. chapter 11^2
19 G^d's prai^^^ for ^^n^ing his upon the Whore,
The Lamb is m^^i d^ the Angel to ado^e
Himself forbids, the fowls a^e ^^ded in,
To ^eed upon the men that di'd in sin.
20 S ^^n is bound a th^^^^nd years, a^^on
When ^^ ^^d, he is wit^ his G^g and Mag^g gone
Against G^^s C^^y, till all time be done.
21 Now Heaven and Earth, and now Jerusalem,
There ^ee 's n^ S^n^, Gods ^^ory lightens them.
22 The wa^ers, ^ad the t^ee of life are sweet,
Christ will come quickly and give gue^dons meet
For all, wh^ either a^^^, or t^^e aw y,
From this book, ^h^l^ b^y 't de^^, at the last day.
T^i^ (...) D^o Glo^ia.

