Female Pre-eminence: OR THE Dignity and Excellency of that Sex, above the
Male. An Ingenious Discourse: Written Originally in Latin, by Henry Cornelius
Agrippa, Knight, Doctor of Physic, Doctor of both Laws, and Privy-Counsellor
to the Emperor Charles the Fifth.

Done into English, with Additional Advantages. By H. C.

1 Esdr. 3.12. Women are strongest.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and M. D. and are to be sold by Henry Million, at the
Sign of the Bible in Fleet Street. 1670.

TO HER Most Excellent Majesty, KATHERINE, By the Grace of God, QUEEN of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
Madam,
THis little Champion, who long has Braved the World in Your Noble Sexes
Defense, being Arrived in Your Majesty's Dominions, and taught to speak the
English Dialect, is with all Humility prostrated at Your Royal Feet. The
Original Treatise was Graced with the propitious Regards of a Great Princess,
The Illustrious Margaret of Austria, afterward Empress; whence this mean
Translation derives an Ambition, not to take shelter under any less than
Sovereign Patronage. Yet is not Your Majesty's Greatness, so much as Goodness,
respected in this Humble Address; that serious primitive Devotion, exemplary
Virtue, and other excellent Endowments, that render You more truly Glorious,
than all the magnificent Advantages of Your Most Illustrious Birth and Fortune.
To Your Majesty this Discourse is necessitated to Appeal; for it is Your bright
Name alone, that can, being stamped thereon, (like Your Royal Consort's Effigies
on Coin) make it pass Current in the opinion of the World; who no longer will
be scandalized at the Title, nor think the Author too Lavish in Women's Praise,
when they Reflect on Your Majesty, that Great Example of Female Pre-eminence,
and Excellency, that have outdone the most daring Hyperbolies, and not only
Justified, but Surpassed in Life and Merit, whatever can be said in the behalf
of Your Most Glorious Sex.

That Your Majesty, Encircled with all Happiness, may long remain a President
of Piety to this Degenerous Age, and find as many to Imitate as Admire Your
Royal Virtues, is the Prayer of

Your Majesty's Most Humble, Loyal, and Obedient Subject, H. Care.

The Translators Preface.
IN this giddy Age wherein each extravagant opinion finds a welcome, and
Conceits more wild than any Bedlam-phrensie, have been entertained with zeal,
and promoted with passion, an innocent Paradox may fairly hope for Pardon at
least, if not Applause.

Since Praised by Po^^crates, and Isocrates.
Tyranny, By Glauco.
Injustice, By ^a^o^mus.
Vgliness, and By Era^mus.
Folly it self, have not wanted their respective Advocates amongst the Learned,
I see small reason why Asserting the Pre-eminence of the Female Sex, should too
severely be censured. But it is unjust to debar Readers of that tickling delight
they take in finding faults, it being oftentimes all the consideration they
have for laying out their Money. The Stationers humor and mine agree, Let them
but buy the Book, and then (being their own) use it as they please. I shall not
therefore waste time, either in Courting or Huffing the Reader, (for both ways
are now commonly used to surprise his good opinion,) but only endeavor to give
an Impartial Account of the Author, and Design of the ensuing Discourse.

To say much of the noble Agrippa, were to put an Affront on the Reader, (if he
pretend at all to traffic in the Commonwealth of Learning) by supposing him a
stranger to that Man, who was justly admired as the Prodigy of his Age, for all
kind of Science. That vast progress he made, Tam Mart quam Mercurio, in Arms
no less than Arts; the Titles and Honors he acquired; the respect paid him by
most of the Grandees, and famous Men, his Contemporaries; and those Monuments
of Learning, wherewith he has obliged Posterity; all speak him a Person above
the ordinary level of Mankind; to be rankt only amongst those few noble Heroes;

Que's meliore Luto finxit praecordia Titan.
Whom Titan with a gentle Ray,
Has molded of a purer Clay.
It Is true, (like all great Wits) he took no little pleasure in stemming the
impetuous Tide of popular opinion, as if nothing had been impregnable against
the puissance of his parts. Hence he made that desperate His Book of the vanity
of all Arts and Sciences.
Onset, to prove in particular, what Solomon was content to affirm in the lump,
That all things are Vanity; and with an excess of Gallantry undertook singly to
duel all Arts and Sciences.

Nor was this present Essay any other than a sally of the same Generosity, that
delights to engage on disadvantages, and bravely to assist the weaker party.
After so many slanderers (like ungrateful Mules, turning their brutish heels
to kick those Paps whence they received their first Nutriment) had dipped their
keen Pens in Gall, and filled their black Mouths with Calumnies, to sully the
Repute of this fair Sex, our Author was too noble, not to think himself
concerned in its Vindication; Common Justice, no less than point of Honor,
obliging all to succor oppressed Innocence. Hereupon the Generous Agrippa
enters the Lists, to assert the Honor of the Female Party, against the
immerited obloquies of the Male, which he chooses to attempt, not after the
low, timorous method of an Apology, the shallow Invectives of the Adversaries
being unworthy the refute of his Pen; but like a politic General, carrying the
War into the enemies Country, startles them with an expected Invasion, and
lets them know this noble Sex ought to be the object of their veneration, not
contempt, being in all respects their superior.

How prudently this Design was undertaken, or how well performed, I shall not
fore-stall the Readers opinion, so far as to determine; but must confess my
self pleased with that Diversion I met with in reading the Original; and
thereupon to have attempted the Translation, not without some Additions, and
variation, to render it more smooth and grateful to the present Age, thinking
I could scarce better devote my vacant hours, than to the service of that sweet
Sex, which every one deserving the Name of Man, cannot but love; and to whom,
whoever has not forgot he had a Mother, is obliged to pay a reverential esteem.

Yet is it no part of our Design to flatter Women, but to put some check to the
rude, undeserved reproaches, cast on them by the Men: To acquaint the fair Sex
with its natural Dignity, that they may scorn to act any thing unworthy of
themselves: to treat them with variety of real (not Romantic) Examples of true
Piety, exact Chastity, sincere, unalterable Affection, and other rare, sublime
qualities; whence inspired with a generous emulation, they may strive to
out-vye these ancient Heroinaes, and transcend the excellent Patterns here
recommended; finding, that it is Virtue alone that can embalm their Memories,
and render them still fresh and amiable, even then when Age or Sickness have
plowed their Faces with wrinckled furrows, and swept away the sparkling
Glories, of their Eyes.

To conclude: If the captious World shall a while ^ay aside its usual
severities, and vouchsafe any Acceptance of these our inconsiderable pains,
(now confusedly huddled up in have,) we shall use our utmost endeavors in the
second Edition to deserve that favor, by some further Additions and
Embellishments.

H. C.

To His Ingenious Friend Mr. H. Care: On his Pains in Translating, and Refining
this quaint Discourse of Female Pre-eminence.
'TI^ bravely done, dear Friend! thus to Engage
For the Fair Sex, in this detracting Age,
When vip'rous Tongues so virulently throw
Venom at those to whom their Lives they owe,
And each base Fopp poor Women's Judge does sit,
Who thinks Railing at them proves him a Wit,
And therefore Dams 'um, They Are all Whores, he will cry,
Though's Mother and his Sister both stand by:
Nor want there Squires of the Quill to wound their Name,
And with foul Ink Bespatter their bright Fame.
But as when Royal Phoebus shows his Face,
Those Sporads vanish which usurpt his place;
So all these black-mouthed screeching Birds of Night,
Are by your Book put to eternal Flight:
Your Book; For what you modestly do call
Translation, if with the Original
It be compared, 'twill easily be known,
That the far better part on it is your own.
You add, correct, and so the Whole Refine,
That it is no more Agrippa's now, but thine;
He laid the Plot, but you the Language bring,
And giv't a Dress as glorious as the Spring:
Choice Words composed in Periods, that surprise
The Ear with most harmonious Cadencies.
Such charming style, which France it self admired,
Was thought to have vanished when Love-Day expired;
Our English Prose seemed sunk ever since then,
But now there is hopes you will Buoy it up again:
For such fair Blossoms in your Youth, presage
No common Fruit from your maturer Age.
But what do aim at? (for I must profess,
In this Attempt, 'twill puzzle one to guess)
Weary of Retail-Love, by this Design,
Do thou intend to Court all Womankind?
TO Ingross their Favor, and ambitiously
Affect Loves universal Monarchy?
Or do thy Flames which to some one ^spire,
Transport thee, the whole Sex thus to admire?
What e're it be, unto thy pains and wit,
All Ladies must confess themselves in Debt;
And to thee, whence such Ornament they find,
They Are most ungrateful if they prove not kind.
Their Snow-white Hands thy welcome Book shall hold,
And sometimes wrap^t up in some silken Fold,
In their sweet Bosoms suffer it to Rest,
(Ah! who will not envy it when it is so Blessed?)
At other times it fairly shall be spread
In The Sun shine of their Eyes, and whilst it is read,
Their Amber-Breath and Rosie-Lips will lend
Perfumes unto its Le^ves, shall never spend.
Henceforth no Lawyer they will retain but thee,
Who plead'st their Cause so well without a Fee.
Philogynes.

To His Worthy Friend Mr. Henry Care: On his Ingenious Treatise, Entitled,
Female Pre-eminence, etc.
OH! for some Female-Wit! only a She
Can write to the full Height, your Eulogy.
What though Sappho, and brave Phillips be gone,
The Muses themselves are bound to see it done.
Methinks I see our English Ladies throng
To view your Name, that vindicate from wrong
Their Male-transcending Virtues, which of late
Have suffered, by a sharp, By a Book, entitled, A Discourse of Women, showing
their Imperfections Alphabetically.
censorious Fate
Of foul aspersions, whilst some Parricide
(To his own Mothers Name) in a full tide
Of misplac't Epethites, has rudely sought
To wound cause One an injury on him brought)
The whole Sexes Honor, whose innocence may think
The Milk from's Mother sucked too like his Ink;
Had too much in it of the bitter Gall,
Or for One Woman's Cri^^e he would never curse all.
But let that Person (with impartial eye)
Peruse your Book, His Books so written.
he will Alphabetic'ly
Write's Recantation, and a Convert die.
When I peruse your Book, I know not justly who
Deserves Pre-eminence, the Female Sex, or You:
For whilst I weigh their worth, I Am forced t'admire
Your weighty Wit. As by a well tuned Lyre
My Ear being ravished, dubiously I stand,
Whether to praise the Lute, or Artist's Hand.
So whilst you their Pre-eminence defend,
Your Wit in the proof makes me my faith suspend,
Whether to give it to the Feminine,
When you that writ it are oth' Masculine;
Not knowing which deserves the greatest praise,
Or You that Give, or They that Wear the Bays:
Both seem to me to claim priority,
Their Virtues, and Your Ingenuity.
Then this I Will do, I will resolve henceforth
T'Admire Their Virtues, and Extol Your Worth.
T. Martinne.

To the LADIES, On this Ingenious Discourse of Female Pre-eminence.
LAdies, at length your vindicated Fames
Appear, like bright, but long concealed Flames,
Which under some rubbish were placed, to show
That Fire, by Fuel hid, does stronger grow.
'Twas fit your brightness should some stains endure,
For Virtue's greatest when it is most obscure.
Princes though clothed with rags, are Princes still*
Nor yet decreases good beset with ill.
The stately Palm does by depression thrive;
Your Virtues died, more nobly to revive.
What said I? they died? No, they never could dye,
But only fell, pressed down by Calumny;
From whence they do with double force arise,
Just like recoyling Rams in Batteri^^.
Something to this Brave Authors Care is due,
But he the greater Laurel yields to you.
Conquering Soldiers, as worthy Men, we own,
Yet the Prince that commanded wears the Crown.
Thanks come from all, as debts to the Author's Will*
What Is their desert then, that thus inspired it. Ladies,
Defending you, success he never fears;
That Ship no sinking dreads, that C^sar bears.
T. P.

To the Ladies and Gentlewomen of England, On that Ingenious Treatise,
Translated, and Augmented, in Defense of their Sex; By Mr. Henry Care,
Entitled, Female Pre-eminence, etc.
LAy by your Needles, Ladies, take the Bays;
Express your Gratitude, in the Authors praise.
Come, show the World, your Wit has found a Flaw,
In Great Apolloes Male-made Salique Law.
If you peruse the Book, you will quickly find,
The Authors Care, as well as willing mind,
Has been employed to serve your Sex; and now
With your own Hands you ought to Crown his Brow.
I Will call him Author, or a Name he will want
To be known by, Translator is too scant.
Though He Translator-like new Souls does give
To the Virtues of your Sex, whereby they live;
Yet he is no Cobbler, does not Cap, Homo, ab Humo.
but Crown
Those Virtues, which by dirt were trodden
The Invention often, I know his Modesty
Does give to Learned Cornelius: ^ut when I down.
Peruse Agrippa, he I find does move, Co^nelius Agrippa writ it in Latin.

Excited by his Wit, not by his Love;
Whilst the Translator, from his generous Soul,
(Making your Virtues his Antartick Pole)
Revives Agrippa's dormant Work, and thence,
By's Love and Care proves your Pre-eminence;
Wherein by's Wit, and fluent Style, His Worth
Extols its self, in setting yours forth.
That then the Thanks you owe him, may be seen,
Come crown his Head, not with a Willow green,
But) with such lasting Bays the world may see,
You never are backward in Gratuity.
Or if your Modesty will not permit
To praise them, that prize you, Lend me your Wit,
I Will tell the world, (though now the Author knows*
I steal my Rhymes from his transcending Prose)
The Female Virtues do the Males excel,
Their Worth, our Weakness, find no parallel.
What is it that is good our Sex can claim, but thence
The Female Sex plead their Pre-eminence?
Do we lay claim to Wisdom, Learning, Art?
Therein Learned Pallas pleads a greater part.
Say we, our Sex are valianter in War;
In this Bellona does deserve a share.
If we dare challenge skill in Poetry,
The Learned Sisters will our Rivals be.
Whoever says, in Beauty we out-vye,
To them I Am sure Dame Venus gives the lie.
When all has failed, come we to Abstinence,
In that Chaste Vesta claims Pre-eminence:
Their very Birth's more noble far, for they
From Man refined were formed, Man was from Clay;
So that there dwells in their Heart and Face,
More outward Beauty, more internal Grace:
Their outward Beauty's greater, all confess,
Whence judge we then their inward Virtues less.
Do we imagine Virtue is so blind,
To dwell in the Male, when the Female's more refined?
Wit, Beauty, Virtue, can meet and agree
At once in them, whilst, self-enamour'd, we
Are too too apt, if the Female Sex but prize
Us, for One Good, that Good to Idolize;
Ovid. Met. lib. 3 lin. 415.
Narcissus-like, that fair and foolish Boy,
We Will dye, because we cannot our selves enjoy.
Beasts homage do to both, and most Men do
Give honor unto Women, as their due.
Man conquers by his Sword, whilst Women can
Sooner by words overcome Sword-conqu'ring Man;
Such Reth'ricks in their Tongue, none dare withstand,
Or in the least dispute what they command.
Where is that Ovid. Ep. D^iaa^ra to Hercules.
Hercules that dare resist,
To turn a Spinster with his clumsie Fist?
If Woman require't, he must come twist a Thread,
Or with her ^rowns she will strike the warrior dead.
Imagin^d Cupid has no other Bow,
Than that half Circle on a Females Brow;
His string's the Hair that cleaves unto this Dart,
A glance is from that ^ye that wounds Man's Heart.
But stay,
I cannot persist, desist I scarcely dare,
I fear the one, the other is not fair;
I Have stole so much already, that my crime
My Clergyes benefit exceeds. In time
I Will beg the Author's mercy, and then I
Will never again steal Wit, if ^s Felony.
Nor dare I to desist; for the Ladies then
Too soon will find, from whence I stole my Pen.
But though my Wit's not so legitimate,
And pure as his, yet is my Love as great,
And natural; for, from my Mothers Breast
I sucked it in her Milk. Now Pen take Rest,
When to this better Sex thou have made this Prayer,
TO accept thy Love, whilst they admire his Care.
T. M.

Female Pre-eminence, OR THE Excellency of that Sex above the Male.
ALmighty God, to whose eff^^^cious lord all things owe their original,
abounding in his own glorious Essence with infinite goodness and fecundity, did
in the beginning (...) Man after his own likeness, Male and Female, created he
them; the true distinction of which Sexes, consists merely in the different
site of those parts of the body, wherein Generation necessarily requires a
Diversity: for both Male and Female he impartially endued with the same, and
altogether indifferent form of Soul, the Woman being possessed of no less
excellent Faculties of Mind, Reason, and Speech, than the Man, and equally with
him aspiring to those Regions of Bliss and Glory, where there shall be no
exception of Sex. For though at the last Trumpets universal Alarm, when our
recollected bodies shall start up amazed, to find themselves released from
their Prisons of Darkness, we may perhaps appear in our resp^ctive proper
Sexes, yet shall we not then either ne^d or (...) use of Sex, but are promise^
by him who is Truth it self, a Conversation resembling that of blessed Angel^
in Heaven. Hence it is evident, that as to the essence of the Soul between Man
and Woman, there can no Pre-eminence at all be challenged on either side, but
the (...) innate worth and dignity of both, the Image of their Creator being
stamped as fairly, and shining as brightly in one, as the other; whereas in all
other respects the noble and delicate Feminine Race, does almost to infinity
excel that rough-hew^, boisterous kind, the Male.

This may at first perhaps seem an odd Assertion, and extravagantly
Paradoxical, but will appear a certain Truth, when we have proved it (which is
our present undertaking) not with empty flourishes of words, or gaudy Paint of
Rhetoric, nor with those vain Logical Devices, wherewith Sophisters too
frequently inveigle unwary understandings, but by the Authority of the most
Approved Authors, unquestioned Histories, and evident Reasons, as likewise with
Testimonies of holy Writ, and Sanctions of both Civil and Canon Laws. Since
Names are signs of things, and that all matter presents it self to us clothed
in words, the Learned have advised us in all Discourses, First, To consider
diligently the Notations or Appellations of those things whereof we intend to
Treat, which if we reduce to practice in our present Subject, we may observe,
that Woman was made at first so much more excellent than Man, by how much she
had given her a Name more worthy than he; the word Adam, signifying but Earth,
whereas Eve, is interpreted Life; whence it seems, Woman is no less to be
preferred before Man, than Life it self before sordid and contemptible Earth.
Nor let any weak heads fancy this Argument lame or invalid, because from names
it passes judgment on things, since it must be acknowledged, that the All-wise
Contriver both of names and things, well knew the things before he imposed
names on them; and therefore (it being impossible he should be deceived) did
undoubtedly bestow on them such fit and apposite names, as might best express
their intrinsic Natures and Dignity. Nor is it only the holy Tongue that
intimates this Sexes Pre-eminence, the Latins too seem very express in
asserting it, amongst whom Woman is named Mulier, quasi Melior, as much as to
say, Better or more worthy than Man. And in our English Language, although

Some little Wits at Woman rail and ban,
Swearing she is called so, quasi woe to Man;
Yet such vain Derivations are to blame,
Since God himself did her Man's help-meet name.
Women promote our joys, partake our woes,
But we men work our own, and their o^rethrowes.
It Is too great a derogation from the known prudence and piety of our Ancestors,
to imagine them at once so injurious and impious, as to brand this noble Sex
with a Name, diametrically thwarting that Character which Heaven it self had
given of its Nature. We may with much more probability, (the only Compass to
sail by in an Ocean of Etymologies) suppose the word, woman, to be derived,
quasi Woe man, she being the Loadstone of Man's Desires, and the sole adequate
Object of his Affections, whom he is to woe, court, and settle his Love on; or
else from With Man, abbreviated in the pronunciation, intimating the need Man
has of her presence and company, and his dull heartless condition without her.
Society is the Life of Life, and Women the Life of Society, compared with whom
all other pleasures and diversions are but flat and melancholy; whereof the
Protoplast, even whilst he was in his state of Innocence, and had a Garden of
pleasure for his Habitation, was not insensible; of whom thus a minor Poet,

Adam alone in Paradise did grieve,
And thought Eden a Desert without Eve,
Until God pitying his Lonesome State,
Crowned all his Wishes with a Lovely Mate.
No reason then has Man to slight or flout her,
Who could not live in Paradise without her.
However if we shall not be allowed the privilege of contriving for the Honor
of the Female Sex, such advantageous Etymologies, yet let us at least affirm
from the mysterious Learning of the Cabalists; that the Woman's Name in the
original Language, has a much nearer Affinity with the ineffable
Te^ragrammaton, or sacred Name of the Divine Essence, than the Man's, which
hear^ no Resemblance thereto either in Characters, Figure, or Number.

But waving (at present) this abstruser mode of proof, as a matter read by few,
understood by fewer, and requiring a more ample Explication, than our leisure,
no less than the Readers patience, can here allow of, we proceed from words to
things, and come to investigate and display Female Excellency, not barely from
the Name, but in Reality from its intrinsic worth and proper Endowments; for
long Jangling about Nominals, whilst Substances fleet by unregarded, may argue
some smattering in Grammar, or Sophistry, but no great stock of solid or
useful Learning.

L^^ us then (as we are commanded) search the Scriptures, and dating our
Discourse with the Worlds original, examine what Dignity was allotted to Woman
above Man, by order of Creation. We know that all things made by the Almighty
Architect, may not unfitly be branched into these two Ranks, some remaining
ever incorruptible, others subject to corruption and mutation; in the Creation
of both which, Divine Wisdom proceeded in a Method of Descension and
Ascension, beginning with the more noble of the one, and concluding with the
most noble of the other. Hence he first Created those purer Essences,
immaterial Angels and Souls, (for so the great St. Augustine contends, that the
Soul of our first Parent was created together with the Angels, before the
production of his body) then the incorruptible bodies, as the Heavens, and
those vast numbers of glorious Stars, wherewith the same are embroidered; as
also the Elements, incorruptible too, but obnoxious to various mutations, of
which last he composed all other things liable to corruption, beginning with
the meanest, and so proceeding upwards again by several degrees of dignity, to
the perfection of the Universe; so as first Minerals were brought forth, then
sprouted up Vegetables, Plants, Herbs and Trees, afterward Plant-Animals, then
Living Creatures in order, creeping, swimming, flying, and four-footed; and
last of all he formed our first Parents, after his own similitude, first the
Man, and then the Woman, in whom was completed the Heavens and the Earth, and
all the glory of them, for after her Creation the great Creator rested, as
having nothing more honorable to frame; and so well resented the pleasure of
having finished this glorious work so happily, that he instituted a day of each
seven to celebrate its Festival. Woman then being the last of Creatures, the
end, complement, and consummation of all the works of God, what Ignorance is
there so stupid, or what Impudence can there be so effronted, as to deny her a
Prerogative above all other Creatures, without whom the World it self had been
imperfect; it being impossible the same should be completed, but in some
Creature most perfect; and absurd to dream, that Infinite Wisdom would
conclude so noble a Fabric, with a thing any way trivial or defective: for the
whole Universe being Created by God, as an entire and perfect Circle, it was
requisite the same should be made up, and finished in such an exact and absolute
particle, as might with a most strict Tie unite and glue together the first of
all things with the last. Thus the Woman in relation to time indeed was formed
last, but in respect of Dignity, first of all conceived in the divine Idaea,
(as it is written, Before the Heavens were created I chose her;) the End,
according to the Catholic Creed of Philosophers, being ever first in
Intention, though last in Execution: but Woman was the End, and last work of
God, and introduced into the World, not unlike a Queen into her Royal Palace,
Paradise her Metropolitan Residence, being fitted and prepared beforehand for
her Reception and Entertainment, where the Man seemed only her Harbinger or
Attendant. Deservedly therefore does every Creature love, and pay respect and
homage to her, who is of all Creatures the Queen, perfection and glory; for
which cause the wise Man says, He glorifies the Generosity of the Woman,
having (...) with God, the Lord of all has loved her.

But further, in reference to the place of her Creation, how much Woman does
surpass Man in Dignity, sacred Oracles liberally inform us, witnessing her to
be Created in Paradise, a place no less noble, than pleasant and delightful;
but the Man out of Prradise, in a rural Field, with irrational Brutes. And
therefore as great Personages, of noble Extraction, though by the malice of
Fortune reduced to Extremities, retain still some marks of Grandeur, and a Mean
different from the Vulgar, so Woman carries yet an Air of Paradise, something
that speaks her sublime descent, her Inclinations being generally more pious
and devout, and her Countenance Angelical, and (as accustomed to that sublime
place of her first Birth) she enjoys this peculiar privilege, that looking
downwards, though from never so high a precepice, she is not seized with that
dizziness or dimness of sight, which frequently in such accidents happens to
Men. As also if a Man and Woman together chance to be exposed to danger by
Water, (deprived of all external aid or assistance) you may behold her a long
time floating o^ the Crystal Superficies, the compassionate Element seeming
unwilling to contract the guilt of destroying so much Excellency; whilst the
Man straight ^inks, and (like other gross bodies) tends to the bottom, as his
proper Center. Now that the dignity of the place of Nativity conduces not a
little to the enobling a person, both the Civil Laws, and sacred Canons plainly
intimate, and the Custom of all Nations confirms; and that not only in Men,
but in all other Animals, yea inanimate Creatures, esteeming each so much more
generous and noble, as they come from a more wo^thy place. Thus Isaac commands
his Jacob not to take a Wife of the Land of Canaan, but of the then more
renowned Country, Mesopotamia of Syria: not unlike which is that in John,
where Philip relating, that he had found Jesus of Nazareth, Nathanael (that
true Israelite) nimbly queries, If any thing good could come thence?

But to proceed; as in order and place, so also in matter of her Creation,
Woman far excells Man. Things receive their value from the matter they are made
of, and the excellent skill of their maker: Pots of common Clay must not
contend with China-Dishes, nor Pewter Utensils vye dignity with those of
Silver. One Line drawn by Appelles his exquisite Pencil, is more to be
esteemed, than whole Portraitures performed by the slubbering hands of vulgar
Artists. Woman was not composed of any inanimate or vile dirt, but of a more
refined and purified substance, enlivened and actuated by a Rational Soul,
whose operations speak it a Beam, or bright Ray of Divinity. Man was taken out
of the Earth, which of its own nature, with the cooperation of Celestial
Influxes, is wont to bring forth living Creatures: but Woman, above all
Influence of the Heavens, or aptitude of Nature, without any assisting virtue,
or cooperating power, was formed miraculously by God himself, out of that Ribb
taken from dormant Adam's side, whereby Man became maimed and imperfect; and
thence ever since, as a Needle that has suffered the Magnetic Touch, stands
always trembling till it looks full on its beloved North; so He can never
rest, till by taking a Woman, and Incorporating her with himself, he retreive
that loss, and render himself again entire and perfect. The rare Art exercised
in rea^ing this Female-Fabrick, is not obscurely intimated by the Divine
Historian, in his Original Language, where God is said to make Man, but to have
built Woman; that implying but common work, this, much curiosity, and
contrivance: insomuch that Man seems little more than the production of Nature;
Woman, the more immediate handywork of the God of Nature. And therefore for the
most part Woman is more susceptible of, and replenisht with divine splendour and
irradiations, than Man, of which her incomparable Neatness, and charming
Beauty, may be a pregnant evidence; for Beauty is nothing but the brightness or
radiancy of Divine Light, s^^^ing in created Essences, and casting on us its
glorious Reflections from fair bodies, as illustriously as our weak eyes are
capable without dazleing to behold it. And this most frequently chooses to
reside in Woman, rather than Man; whence she becomes beyond all expression
amiable and delightful, her Flesh ^ender and delicate, her Color bright and
clear, her Hair most becoming, her Locks ( Cupids Fetters, and the only Threads
wherewith he strings his Bow) soft, long, and glittering, her Countenance more
August and Majestical, her Looks more sprightly, vivid and joc^^^; a snow-white
Neck, and large smooth high Forehead; sparkling Eyes, armed with irresistible
Glances, and yet tempered with a lovely grace and cheerfulness, Arched over
with stately Eyebrows, (half Moons, that boast more Conquests, than the proud
Turkish Ensigns) which being divided with a beseeming, plain, and equal
distance, her well proportioned Nose leads to her pretty Mouth, and that
displaying with an amorous smile, the rosy Portals of its soft ruddy Lips,
discovers a Row of inestimable Pearl, her fine small Teeth, even, and out-vying
Ivory for whiteness, yet fewer in number than Man's, as having less occasion to
use them, being neither great Eater, nor Biter. Then her modest Cheeks, whose
Colors are so purely mixed, that Lillies and Roses seem there to contend for
superiority, and her pretty round Chin, beautified with a Love-dimple; a Voice
she has most sweet and enchanting; Breasts which seem two spears of Snow, or
swelling Mountainets of Delight; long Arms, little Hands, interwoven with a
curious La^^^ y^^th of Azure Veins; long slender Fingers, nimble Joints, and
all parts of her body plump, juicy, and attractive. Besides, her Gate is so
modest, her Motions decent and natural, her Gesture more free and noble, her
Air more taking and complacent, and the whole Form, Habit, and Symmetry of her
person, grace^ with such innumerable Charms, as without injuring truth, we may
affirm, That in the whole series of Creatures, there is nothing so much to be
admired, or miracle so deserving to be seen, since in her alone all that have
not their eyes blear'd with prejudice, or envy, may clearly see, the great
Creator (who is the Fountain of all that is good and amiable) has epitomized
the Beauty of all his other works; for those perfections which sparkle here and
there in them, are collected and constellated in her, whom we may call, a
Draught of the whole Creation in Miniature, or a Copy of that vast Volume done
in exquisite Shorthand. Hence all Creatures admire, love, and almost adore
her; for so Lib. 8. Not. Hist.
Pliny (that great Clark of Natures Closet) relates, That the Lion which
spares no other Creature, trembles at a Woman, and hardly proffereth her that
violence which usually he does to Man; as if Nature had taught that savage
Animal the Respects due to so fair a presence. Nor is it only the Conceit of
fond Opinion, but a very credible Truth, That even spiritual Natures,
incorporeal Essences, and Demons, have many times been enamoured on Women with
wonderful passion; for omitting those Stories Poets tell us, of the Amors of
their fabulous Deities, as Apollo and Daphne, Neptune and Salmonea, or rampant
Hercules with his three Wenches, Hebe, Jole, and Omphale, etc. The holy
Scripture seems to intimate no less; as in Genesis we find, That the Sons of
God seeing the Daughters of Men were fair, took of them for their Wives: to
which we might add, (if it be not thought too Apochryphal) the ill spirit
Asmodeus, who so jealously Courted the Lady, that he destroyed all his Rivals,
in the History of Tebit. Indeed these sacred Rolls are frequent in recommending
this divine Ornament, Beauty, and furnish us with various Examples of its power
and excellency. Thereby it was Abigail preserved her churlish Husbands Life and
Fortune, from the fury of incensed David; for thus the Royal Captain accosts
her, Return in peace, I have heard thy voice, and honored thy face, (or as
other Versions render it, Accepted thy person.) All beauty is either
intellectual, vocal, or corporeal; in each of which this Lady is recorded to
have been eminently accomplished, being both prudent in mind, eloquent of
speech, and beautiful in person; for which excellent perfections* David after
Nabal's decease accepted her for one of his Wives. Hesters Beauty was a means
to deliver her people out of the jaws of destruction, to which proud Haman had
devoted them. And fair Judiths Charms infatuating the besotted General,
preserved her Nation from a Ruin which seemed inevitable. After those various
temptations and tedious afflictions of holy Job, Heaven (as if it could not
bestow a better earthly Reward on such a stupendous and inimitable Patience)
blessed him with three Daughters so sweet, fair and attractive, that they surpast
those Graces Poets fable of, and the whole World ( Bankrupt of such other
Excellency) could not produce their Parallels. Who reading the Legends of the
sacred Virgins, can but admire in them that transcendent Beauty, which the
Church vouchsafes to celebrate with such solemn Eulogies of Honor? especially
that immaculate Virgin, the blessed Mary, whose Beauty is said to be so exactly
tempered with Chastity and Holiness, that though it captivated all hearts, yet
it never tempted any to folly, so much as in thought. Nor is Beauty only
esteemed amongst Men, but seems also to be particularly regarded even by God
himself, (as indeed how can he but respect his own Reflection.) Thus we
sometimes read him commanding all the Males (even Children) should be slain,
but the Women that were fair to be saved alive. And in Deuteronomy, liberty is
indulged to the Israelites, to take one of their Captives to Wife, if she were
beautiful, which otherwise was unlawful.

But besides this charming Excellency, which not only invites, but commands our
admiration; Woman is endowed with another natural Ornament, not vouchsaft to
Men; her Hair growing to that becoming length, as to veil those more reserved
parts, whereof Modesty commands concealment; and indeed of that blushing Virtue
this sweet Sex may justly challenge the far greatest share, it having been o^t
experienced, Thi^ Di^course in the Original was ^ed^cated by the Author
Agrippa, to the Princess Margaret, afterward Wife to Maximilian the Emperor,
who was her self a fatal Instance hereof; for breaking her Thigh by a fa^l from
a Horse as ^he was hunting, she would ^ot permit any Chyru^gi^^^ to set it, but
chose rather to die thereof, than prostitute her molesty. See Spee^^ Chronicl^^*
That in desperate Diseases, they have chosen to expose themselves to Deaths
Embraces, rather than to the view and handling of Chyr^^gions for cure. Nor can
Death it self rifle them of this modest bashfulness; for when drowned, (as
Pliny relates, and Experience proves) they lie in the Water with their Faces
downwards, Nature sparing their Modesty; whereas a Man in such case swims on
his back, exposing all his shame and nakedness to public view. Further, the
most worthy part of us, whereby we chiefly differ from Brutes, is the Head, and
of that, especially the Face. Now in Men, that noble member the Head, is often
by Age or other Infirmity plundered of Hair, its native Ornament, and grows
deformed with a despicable Baldness; from which misfortune Women by an
extraordinary privilege of Nature are exempt. As likewise their Faces remain
always smooth and comely; whereas Men's are frequently so beset with overgrown
Beards, and sordid Hair, that it is difficult to distinguish them from Beasts;
whence by the Law of the Twelve Tables, it was provided, Women should not shave
their ^heeks, lest it might occasion the growth of Beards, and destroy their
native pudor and comeliness. Now of the cleanness and purity of this Sex, this
oft-try'd Experiment cannot but be a proof beyond exception; for when a Woman
has once washed her self clean, let her wash again in fresh Water, and it shall
receive no spot or tincture of foulness; but a Man never so well washed, as often
as he washes again, will still leave behind some filth and sordities* Nor may
we omit, That Nature has given Women the greatest share in the procreation of
Mankind; for according to the opinion of those great pillars of the Art of
Healing, G^len and Avicenna, she contributes most to the matter and nutriment
of the Birth, which may be the reason that most Children resemble their Mothers
many times in external features, but almost always in Genius and Inclinations;
for where Mothers be simple, the Children generally prove Fools, and where they
are wise, these are witty: but on the contrary, the wisest Fathers have most
times Idiots to their Sons, and foolish Fathers frequently get wise Children,
provided the Mother be but possessed of a competent stock of discretion. And
hence it should seem, Mothers become more fond and indulgent to Children, as
being sensible of having a greater share and interest in them; in requital
whereof for the same cause, we are naturally more affected toward our Mothers
than to our Fathers, so as we seem but to respect our Father, and to love only
our Mother. And this leads us to make some reflection on that which is our
first Commons in this World, our Mothers Milk, a thing of that Catholic
virtue, that it not only nourishes Infants, cherishes the sick, and restores
consumptive and languishing Nature, but may in case of necessity suffice for
the preservation of life to persons of any age; a notable Instance whereof we
read in Valerius, of a poor young Woman, who therewith preserved her aged
Mother in prison, that otherwise had inevitably been swallowed up by the
devouring jaws of Famine, whereby She saved her Life, who gave her Life before,
And kindly did in kind her Milk restore;
Which signal Love and Tenderness not only procured the old Woman's Release, and
a competent maintenance for her and her Daughter, but for a Monument thereof
the Goal was converted into the Temple of Piety, a virtue to which Women are
almost ever more prone than Men; so that Aristotle recounts Piety, Mercy and
Compassion, as virtues peculiar to this Sex. Nor is it unusual for Physicians
to relate, That the heat of young Women's Paps, applied to the Breasts of
persons worn out with age, does stir up, augment, and serve the vital heat; of
which David not ignorant, when Age had snow'd her silver Hairs on his Head, and
robbed him of his youthful vigor* procured the fair young Shunamite for his
Bedfellow, that he might receive warmth from her sweet Caresses, and
cherishing Embraces.

Furthermore, to omit that Women are more early ready to accomplish that great
end of our being, generation, and the propagation of Posterity, than Men; and
that stupendous Miracle of Nature, their Longing, when many times without
danger they greedily feed on raw Flesh or Fish, and not seldom on Coals,
Dirts, Stones, and other Trash* which without damage they concoct* and convert
into healthful Nutriment: We only at present add, That according to the
Traditions of Philosophers and Physicians, ratified by Experience* Women have
obtained this excellent Boon from the indulgence and bounty of Nature, That in
all Dise^ses whatever* they of themselves, from their own proper stock, are
furnished with Remedies* and can cure themselves, without praying maid of any
foreign Help, or (...).

But that which transcends all wonder, is, that Woman alone, without Man,
should be able to produce humane Nature, which Man alone never could pretend
to; and yet this is commonly affirmed by the Turks and other Mahumetans, to be
feazible; amongst whom many are believed to be conceived without Fathers, whom
in their own Tongue they call Nef^fogli. Stories likewise go of Islands, where
the Women are conceived to Conceive by the Wind; but this we dare not admit
into our Creed, for thereby we should injuriously rob the blessed Mary of her
Honor, whose alone Prerogative it was to Conceive without the knowledge of
Man, when she brought forth her natural Son, our Savior, of her proper
substance, being Impregnated by the holy Spirit, and remaining still a pure and
Immaculate Virgin, such fruitfulness attending the precedent Benediction, that
she needed not Man's help in reference to Conception. But of brute Animals ^is
more confidently affirmed, some Females conceive without the ^^^pany of the
Male; as Origin against Faustus, delivers on the credit of History, concerning
she-Vultures; and Antiquity of certain Mares, which went to Foal by the
fruitful Gales of Zephyrus; of which the Poet,

Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum stant Rupibus alti^,
Excipiuntque leves Aura^, and saepe sieve ullis
Conjugtis vento gravidae.
Standing on tops of Rocks, the wanton Beast
Sucks in the gentle Breises of the West;
Whence she grows pregnant; and such Colts you will find
As fleet and nimble, as their Sire, the Wind.
What shall we say of Speech, that divine Faculty differencing us from Brutes,
whereby the Soul puts conceptions into words, and makes her Apprehensions
audible, which the profound Tresmigistus prizes at no lower rate than
Immortality; and the Poet Hesiad deservedly styles our best Treasure. I appeal
to each Man's own Experience, (and some I know have had cause to observe it)
whether Women are not naturally more eloquent of Speech, than Men and their
Tongues more apt and volub^ to cloth their thoughts in Language and express
their sentiments on any occasion. How sweet and insinuating ar^ their
Complements? how close an^ home their Objurgations? how sudden their Answers?
how ingenious their Retorts? how ready their Excuses? how neat their Evasions?
how irresistible their Entreaties? Did not every one of us first learn to speak
from no other Tutors than our Mothers or Nurses? and in this behalf Nature
(like a careful Governess) so wisely provides for Humanity, that scarce ever
any of that Sex are found dumb. Nor is this sure any mean or vulgar honor, but
meriting the greatest regard, to surpass Men in that, wherein Man himself
chiefly excells other Creatures.

But pretermitting these more vulgar and profane Instances of Feminine
superiority, let us return to sacred Letters, deducing the Rivulets of our
Discourse from the very Fountains of Religion; where we may observe, That Man
was first blessed for the Woman's sake, God vouchsafing no benediction on him till
after her Creation, as if before he had been unworthy that celestial favor.
Consonant whereunto is that Proverb of Solomon, He that finds a good Woman,
finds a good thing, and shall receive a blessing from the Lord. And that in
Ecclesiasticus, Blessed is the Husband of a good Woman, the number of his years
shall be doubled. Nor indeed can any vye dignity with him whose good fortune
it is to enjoy a good Wife; for (as the same Siracides says) she is a Grace
above all Graces: and therefore the wisest of Kings calls her, The Crown; and
the great Apostle, The Glory of the Man: Now Glory is defined to be the
consummation and perfection of a thing acquiescing and delighting in its end,
viz. when nothing more can be thereto added to augment its perfection.
Therefore Woman being the Complement, Felicity, Blessing, and Glory of Man,
it is but requisite every Man should love and respect her accordingly; and he
that does not do so, or shall be so barbarous as to hate or dis-esteem her, is
not only a stranger to all Virtues and Graces, but a very Rebel against
Humanity.

Hereto we might, perhaps not improperly, refer those Cabalistical mysteries,
how that Abraham was blessed of God in some respect through means of his Wife
Sarah; for by taking the Letter H from her Name, and adding it to his, he came
to be called Abraham. As also that Jacobs blessing was acquired by a Woman, his
Mother: of which sort there are in Scripture several other passages, not
requisite here to be unfolded. This may suffice to let us see, that the
blessing was bestowed for the Woman's sake, but the Law given to the Man: to him
was forbidden the fruit of that unhappy Tree, which set all Posterities Teeth
on edge; not to the Woman, who was not then so much as Created. For although
St. Gregory Greg. l. 35. Moral. c. 16.
read the Prohibition, You shall not eat, as though it were spoken to both Man
and Woman, yet the Original delivers it in the singular number. And St. A^stin
Genesis ad Lit. lib. 8. cap. 17.
takes away the Doubt, and tells us, That by Tradition the Woman received
this Commandment from the Man, not by immediate delivery from God; which if so,
we thence conclude, That by reason thereof the Woman might chance more easily
to break this Law, than the Man; since the All-glorious Majesty of God that
commanded, should take deeper impression in Man, than the equality of person
that related, could in the Woman; the roaring of a Lion being more trembled at,
than the braying of an Ass; the Commands of a King more powerful, than the
words of ones Companion. At most, when Woman fined, she did it, poor Soul,
unwittingly, being deluded by the insinuating Serpent: so that it appears the
Man sinned against perfect knowledge, and the positive Command of his Maker;
the Woman out of ignorance, seduced by the crafty wiles of the Tempter, with
whom for a considerable time she disputed the matter, and lost not the glory of
the day without a fair Com^ate, though at last she fell an unhappy Trophy to
his stratagems: whereas no sooner was that too-pleasing Apple proffered to the
Man, but without scruple he greedily falls on, and, Rebel as he was, would
needs taste its fancied sweetness, whose bitter relish remains to this day, and
has left on us those original stains, which nothing but Divine Blood can fetch
out.

That Woman was first set upon by the Adversary, may be an Argument of her
Excellency; for we know, that the sharpest points are soonest blunted, and the
perfectest white most easily soiled.

Envy strikes at the best; who stand on high,
Are fairest marks for foulest obl^quy.
The black Prince of the Air, that subtle degraded Seraphin, well knew Woman to
be the most accomplished of all Creatures; and seeing (as St. Bernard observes)
her amazing Beauty to be such, as before his Lapse he had beheld in the Divine
Light, and which above the sublimest Hierarchies enjoys Communion with God, did
thereupon merely out of envy, plot how he might dismount her from that Throne
of Perfection, and endeavored by his malicious Darts first of all to wound her
innocence, and sully her glory, whose transcendent Luster above others, his
hellish nature could not but most of all repine at. Nor want we further
intimation of the fair Sexes Dignity and Pre-eminence, if we reflect, That when
the promised seed of Woman, that bruised this cursed Serpents head, I mean our
blessed Savior, left the bosom of his Eternal Father, and the splendo^s of
inaccessible Light, to become visible in these lower Regions, and veiling the
Majesty of his glorious presence, clothed himself with humane flesh, coming
into the World in the lowliest manner imaginable, that by his humility he might
expiate the pride of our first Parents sin; we may with all humble Reverence
conjecture, That he was therefore pleas^d to assume the Male, as the meanest
and inferior Sex; contriving by his infinite wisdom, that since Man's offense
had reduced us all into this forlorn condition, (for had the Woman only sinned,
we never had had such cause to cry out, Oh Adam! what have thou done? nor the
Apostle to say, In Adam we all dyed) satisfaction for sin should be made in
that Sex, from whom that ocean of impiety which has overwhelmed the World, had
its first source and origin. But although this blessed Immanuel took not on
him the Female Sex, yet he so far honored it, as to assume his Flesh only from
the Woman; and is therefore entitled, Filius hominis, in respect of her, not
of Man, (which our vulgar Translations seem to have forgot.) This was that
stupendous miracle, the contemplating whereof put the admiring Prophet into an
Ecstasy, That a Woman should encompass a Man; that is, Christ be conceived in a
pure Virgins womb, Impregnated without the Contact of two prolifick Sexes; that
Divinity should be embodied in an earthly Tabernacle, and have its glories shut
up in a Cloud of Flesh, like Sunbeams in Curtains of Crystal. Nor did our
Lord afterward when he had dissolved the powers of the Grave, and destroyed
deaths Empire by his miraculous Resurrection, vouchsafe his first appearance to
Men, but Women, who are not known at any time to have quitted the faith, or
turned their backs on true Religion; whereas Men immediately after his
Ascension began to Apostatize. Nor can it be proved, that ever any Persecution,
Heresy, Schism, or Error in the Church, had Women for its first Authors, but
always Men. By that perfidious and cruel Sex was our blessed Jesus the Lord
of Life, and King of Glory, betrayed, sold, bought, accused, condemned,
crucified, and slain: yea when he was denied by his own great confident, Peter,
and abandoned by all the rest of his Male Disciples, even then the Women left
him not, but accompanied him still to the Cross and Sepulcher; and Pilate's
heathen Wife endeavored more his preservation, than any of the Men which
professed belief in him. Whereto we may add, That almost all School-Divines
concur in opinion, That the Church at that instant remained wholly and solely
in a Woman, viz. The Virgin Mary; and therefore this Sex is deservedly by them
styled sacred and Religious.

But if any object with Aristotle, That the Male is generally much the
strongest, and therefore to be more valued; we desire such to consider, how
contemptible a Glory it is to boast of big bones, or brawny Arms, and what mean
Trophies they can hope to raise to themselves by excelling Women, by those
advantages wherein they must confess themselves inferior to hundreds of Beasts.
If strength alone must give the pre-eminence, let Men give place to their
Horses, confess their Oxen their Masters, and pay homage to Elephants. But in
truth they have little reason to vaunt of the strength or prudence, the valor
or subtilty of their Sex, having been always shamefully baffled by those whom
they vainly call the weaker vessels. What Man was ever able to vye strength
with Sampson, whose single Arm no better weapon'd than with an Asses Jaw Bone,
could at once sacrifice a thousand Lives to his fury? yet did this prodigious
Hero (like Hercules) truckle to a Distaff, and was ridiculously captivated by a
Woman. Who could boast a more severe chastity than just Lot, whose righteous
soul did daily suffer pangs of grief and indignation, seeing the Sodomites
Debaucheries? yet Women easily enticed him to Ebriety and Incest. Who more
religious than David? yet a bathing Beersheba caused him at once to sully the
pure Robes of his Sanctity, with the black stains both of Adultery and Murder.
Who so wise as Solomon, who seems to have been Natures Privy-Counsellor, and to
have had the honor to behold her undrest? yet was not all his wisdom Amulet
sufficient to guard him against Women's Charms, but that he still placed more
felicity in their enjoyment, than in all the curious Contemplations and
Researches of Philosophy; and even abandoned the worship of that God, who had
bestowed those stupendous parts on him, to wantonnize in their Embraces. Who
more fervent and resolved in the faith, than Peter, the chief of the Apostles?
yet a silly Damsel caused that great Pastor of the Church thrice to deny his
Master.

But methinks I hear some whispering, That all this makes more against than for
Women, and tends rather to their infamy, than praise. To whom we Answer, That
the evil of the before-recounted actions redounds chiefly to Men the actors,
rather than to the Women, who were only accidentally the occasion of them. And
if the Suns Luster by dazzling our weaker eyes, bring on us any inconvenience,
shall we accuse his glorious brightness; or rather ought we not to bewail the
imbecility of our own Optics, unable to Cope with so much ^plendor? Besides,
admitting Women to be in some of these Cases Criminal, we could (if we
delighted to be paradoxical) allege, That even the holy Scripture seems to put
a more favorable construction on their lapses and failings, than on Men's. Is
not Rachel commended, who with a neat invention deluded her Father, in his
search for her Idols? And Rebecca, who by fraud procured Jacob his Fathers
blessing? Rahab with a lie deceived those that sought for Joshuah's Spies, and
it is accounted to her for Righteousness. Jahel most perfidiously destroyed
Sisera, as he lay innocently sleeping in her Tent, whither with an entire
confidence he had committed himself for preservation; which signal Treachery
notwithstanding, it is said, Blessed amongst Women shall Jahel be, etc. Read the
Story of Judith; observe well her dissembling Insinuations to Holofernes, and
those flatteries wherewith she having lulled him to sleep, cut off his Head,
for which she is applauded and extolled to the skies. Lot's Daughters pass
uncondemn'd for their Incest; and yet their Father is not excused, but has his
succession excluded from the Church of God. Lascivious Thamar is defended, and
said to be more just than the Patriarch Judah; and by that fraudulent Incest
obtains the honor to be named in our Saviors Genealogy. But it is time we
dis-entangle our self from this odd Digression and return to the prosecution of
our Subject.

There needs not any more evident Argument of this happy Sexes Pre-eminence,
than to reflect, That the most worthy of all Creatures that ever was or will
be, was a Woman, viz. the blessed Virgin. Nor is this any other than one of
Aristotle's own Arguments, That kind of which the best is more noble than the
best of another kind, is it self more noble than that other kind: now of the
Female kind the Virgin Mary is the best. In the Male there arose not a greater
than John Baptist; and how much that sacred Virgin, who is exalted above all
the Quires of Angels, does surpass him, there is no Catholic so ignorant but
understands. In like sort we may argue, That kind whose worst is worse than the
worst of another kind, is it self inferior to that other kind: but we know,
that the worst and vilest of all Creatures is Man; whether we understand it of
that wretched Judas, who committed high treason against the King of Kings, and
of whom it is said, It had been good for him not to have been born; or whether
there shall hereafter arise an Antichrist worse than he, in whom shall dwell
all the power of Satan. And here by the way give us leave to remark, that the
Scriptures mention diverse Men banished to eternal torments; whereas we no where
read of any Woman damned. But to proceed;

Nature her self gives a suffrage to our Assertion; for in all her productions,
when any thing is to be framed more excellent than ordinary, she makes it a
Female. Thus the Eagle, the noblest of Birds, and Queen of all the winged
Troops, is never found a Male. And the wondrous Ph^nix (to which the World is
too poor to yield a Mate) is related by the Egyptians to be (...) of the Female
Sex. But on the (...), The King of Serpents, whom they call the Basilisk, the
most mortal of all poisons, is always, and cannot but be a Male, as the more
proper receptacle of venom and destructive qualities. Whereas the Excellency
and Innocence of this other sweet-natur'd Sex, which we here recommend, is
hence abundantly manifest, in that all those black crimes and crying enormities
which incense Heaven, and infest Earth, derive their pedigree from Men. Adam
the first Man, first locked up the Gates of Paradise, and by presuming to
transgress the Law of his Maker, rendered all us his unhappy Posterity obnoxious
to sin, and consequently entitled to the wages thereof, death. And his
firstborn Son unlockt the Gates of Hell; first of all introducing that
infernal Train, Envy, Murder, Paracide and Despair into the World. The first
that ventured on Polygamy was Lamech; the first Drunkard, Noah; the first
setter up both of Tyran^^ and Idolatry, Nimrod, that mig^^^ Hunter, who thereby
at once (...) his cruelty both on body and so^^* Men they were that first
established a commerce with the Regions of darkness, by treating and making
compacts with infernal spirits, and inventing profane Arts. Men they were
whose raging lusts first transported them to offer violence to Nature, whereof
the ruins of Sodom and Gomorrah (once famous Cities) calcined by that
unnatural heat, remain to this day a dreadful monument. To read of Men that
have abandoned themselves to all kind of brutish sensualities; had two or more
Wives; or been Adulterers, or Whoremongers, is not at all rare or unfrequent.
How many Wives had Abraham, Jacob, Esau, Joseph, Moses, Sampson, Saul, David,
Solomon, R^boam, Ahashuerus, and a numberless number more, who besides their
Wives, had Concubines; and yet not satisfied, could not refrain tampering with
their Servants and Handmaids. But we find not one Woman (except Beersheba)
mentioned, but was content with one Man; nor any that made a second Choice, if
she had Issue by the first: for Women are naturally far more chaste and
continent than Men; insomuch that perceiving themselves unfruitful, they have
often abstained from their Husbands Bed, and brought in others to supply their
places, as Sarah, Rachel, Leah; and others voluntarily offered their Maids to
their Husbands Embraces, to raise them up posterity. But what Man pray ever was
there, though never so old, cold, impotent, or unfit for Chamber-practice, that
had either so much piety or pity, as to substitute any in his place, that might
Impregnate his Wives fruitful womb with a generous offspring. We read indeed,
that Lycurgus and Solon (persons rankt by Antiquity amongst the wisest of
Legislators) established Laws to this effect, That if any Man weakened with age,
or otherwise incapable of sacrificing to Venus, and performing the Rights of
the Nuptial Bed, had taken a young Wife, she should not be confined wholly to
his fumbling Courtship, but might make choice of some sprightly young Friend,
to pay her those Arrears of Benevolence, due from her insolvent Husband, whose
Issue should be deemed the Husbands to all intents, and not at all
illegitimate. But we find not these Ordinances put in practice; not so much by
reason of the Men's obstinacy in obstructing, as the Women's modesty and
continency, refusing the liberty thereby indulged.

Nor are Examples wanting of diverse Illustrious Ladies, surpassing the best of
Men, not only in an exact and rigid Chastity, but also for entire Conjugal
Affection. Some out of a passionate tenderness, not enduring to survive their
Husbands, have violently cast themselves into the Graves or funeral Piles,
together with the beloved Corpse. Others have thought no Tomb but their own
Bodies, worthy to inshrine the Ashes of their dearest Mates. How religiously
have they preserved their Loves flames, as pure and undecaying as vestal fires?
What means have they left unattempted? What hazards have they not embraced, to
serve those to whom Hymen's sacred Band has united them? Witness Cornelia, who
so dearly affected her Pompey, that she would not suffer him to go into the
Wars, (though he were the Worlds Terror) unless her self in person might wait
on him. Witness Demotia, who having lost her Leosthenes, could not find her
self, and therefore through solitariness made a speedy voyage to death after
him. Witness Sulpitia, who being adjudged to stay, and watched that she should
stay at Rome, when her Husband Lentulus was banished thence, did yet
(notwithstanding the Senates Command, her Princely Fathers Charge, the Love of
her City and Country, the loss of Friends and Family) alone expose her self
unto the danger of the night, beguiled the watchful eyes of her strict Guard,
brake forth of the City, and Lacquied after him along the fields, until she
became the joyful Companion of his woeful banishment, so little she esteemed
all the Worlds felicity in regard of her dear Lentulus; and for her Lentulus so
willingy she incurred whatsoever misery. Witness Panthaea, Rhodogune, Laodemia,
Martia, Valeria, Portia, Lucretia, Penelope, Alcinoe, and millions more, whose
singular fame herein as it has caused Antiquity to invest them in eternal
shrines of honor, so may their rehearsal enforce Posterity to receive them as
the fruitful patterns of imitation, and so far proselyte the bitterest
Woman-hater, as to convert his aversion into an admiration of this Sexes
Heroic virtues; especially if in his thoughts to these miracles of Affection,
he add those mirrours of Chastity, who have bravely slighted all both
temptations and torments to preserve their Honor, which they not only scorned
to prostitute for sordid gain, or aerie Titles, for a flattering Complement, or
prodigal Treat, but also withstood the Importunities of Grandees, and defied
the Menaces of Tyrants, valuing their Virgin-purity more than Crowns, or
Kingdoms, or Life it self; as the Calidonian Atlanta, the Volcian Camilla, the
Grecian Iphigenia, Cassandra and Crise, and diverse Lacedemonian, Spartan,
Theban, and other Virgins, whose Names are embalmed in History, for the wonder
and imitation of Posterity.

But here perhaps some barking Zoilus may interrupt us, by objecting the fatal
Matches of Sampson, Jason, Deiphobus, Agamemnon, etc. and those Tragedies
thence ensuing: in most, if not all which, if we narrowly inspect all
circumstances, we may easily find the Women to be wrongfully accused; for
scarce ever do ill Wives happen to any but bad Husbands, and such as by their
own vicious Examples debauch them, and teach them to be wicked by a President.
We are more easily swayed by patterns, than by precepts: every Example is a
most pleasing Invitation, where the eye is guided unto present action, not the
ear fed with fained speculation. A lascivious Husband will make a wanton Wife;
a spend-thrift Husband an extravagant Wife; and a modest, honest, careful
Husband, a modest, honest, careful Wife. We should therefore take St. Austin's
counsel, and such as we would have our Wives appear unto us, the same should we
first approve our selves to them. It Is an impudent and impious fellow (says
Seneca Ad Lu^ Epist. 94.
) that requires of his Wife an undefiled Bed, yet he himself defiles it. For
this reason (as Diogenes struck the Father, when the Boy swore, because he had
taught him no better) so in some places the Husbands are punished only for the
faults of their Wives; as in Catalonia, whoever is Cuckolded, pays a sum of
money; and in Paris; he rides in disgrace through the City, the Crier
proclaiming these words before him, So do, so have; from which our English
Custom of Ridings is not much different. Nor do these deplorable Consequences
always arise from any extreme ill habit or disposition of either of the
parties, but from their indiscreet Conjuncture; their Tempers disagreeing cause
their Discord, and their Humors being contrary, are unfit for so close an
union; such jarring Notes can produce no harmony, but rather dismal effects: as
a fiery Vapor inveloped in the arms of a cold Cloud, breaks forth with amazing
Flashes, and terrible Thunderclaps. A mature deliberation is requisite before
such an eternal Bond be entered into: The mutual Affection of each party; the
consent of Parents; the approbation of Friends; the trial of Acquaintance; the
special observation of Disposition, Genius, Kindred, Education, and Behavior,
ought seriously to be weighed, before one conclude for better, for worse, and
tie that Gordian knot, which cannot be loosed till death cuts it. Now then if a
Man make his Choice with these due respects, his Marriage cannot but prove a
merry Age, and be crowned with joy and felicity, because he is guided by
Prudence, which never fails her followers. But if not, he may well be styled
a Fool, since he is hurried on with passion, and a giddy fancy, which easily
impoison the best designs. He therefore that is truly wise, cannot but choose
a virtuous Wife, and by consequence live happily with her; and if any take one
that proves vicious, it argues his own folly, and so by good reason he ought
patiently and without repining to endure her, as the effect of his own
Inconsiderateness, and not to aggrandize his misfortune, by quarrelling with
his own Choice.

Besides, as the Lion in the Fable replied to the Fellow upbraiding him with a
Picture, wherein was drawn a Man killing a Lion; Were we Lions Painters, you
should see one Lion tearing a thousand Men. So had Women but the power of
making Laws, and writing Histories, what Tragedies might they not justly have
published of Men's unparalleld villainy? Amongst whom are daily found so many
Murderers, Theev^s, Ravishers, Forgers, Fi^rers of Cities, and Traitors, who in
the time of Joshua and King David, robbed in such vast multitudes, that they
marched in a posture of War, and made them Captains of their padding Bands, (a
trick they have scarce forgot at this very day) whence so many Prisons become
crowded, and so many Gibbets loaded with their Carcasses. Whereas on the
contrary, to Women we owe the invention of all things useful or beneficial to
Mankind, which may either adorn and enlighten our dark minds, or relieve and
accommodate the necessities of our frail bodies. Hence both the Muses and the
Graces are said to be She Is; and the Names of all Arts, Sciences and Virtues,
are Feminine, and drawn by Painters in the habit of Women. Nor was there
amongst all kinds of Idolaters, ^^y so much celebrated for Learning and
Prudence, as those who paid their Adorations at the Altars of Female-Deities;
such being the veneration and esteem of this Sex of old, that those three
principal parts (which Antiquity conceited to be all the World) were Christened
after the Names of Women; one taking its Denomination from Asia the Nymph; the
other from Europa, the Daughter of Agenor; and the third from Lybia, the
Daughter of Epaphus, which is also called Africa.

If we particularly take an impartial Survey of all kinds of Virtues and
Excellencies, we shall find that Women may in each without usurpation challenge
the principal place. If we look on Chastity, 'twas a Woman first vowed
Virginity to God. If the gift of Prophecy be required, Lactantius, Eusebius,
and St. Austin, can tell us with what a divine spirit the Sybils were inspired:
and holy Writ records Miriam the Sister of Moses, and Olda, Jeremiah's Unkles
Wife; and no less than four Sisters, Daughters of Philip, all eminent
Prophetesses. If constancy and perseverance in virtue be regarded, you will
find Judith, Ruth, and Hester, so gloriously celebrated by the holy Spirit,
Indirer of those sacred Volumes, that the Books themselves retain their Names.
If a lively, vigorous, and stable faith be expected, we shall see Men generally
come short of Women. The poor Widow of Sarepta believed the Prophet Elias,
though the things he told her could not but to carnal reason appear in the
shape of impossibilities. Zacharias was reprehended for his Infidelity by the
Angel, and struck dumb; but his Wife Elizabeth prophesies both with her womb
and her voice, and loudly celebrates the praises of the blessed Virgin Mother,
saying, Blessed ar^ thou who have believed the things which are said unto thee
by the Lord. To omit the Samaritan Woman, with whom Christ entertained
Discourse at the Well, and being satisfied with the more acceptable dainties of
her steadfast faith, refused the Apostles provision. And that irresistible
belief of the Woman of Cananaa; and her who had the Issue of Blood, who seemed
to storm Heaven, and offer a welcome violence to their Savior, not to be put
off with any denial. Was not the faith and confession of Martha equal to that
of Peter? What a noble constancy of faith and resolution do we find in Mary
Magdalen, verifying that saying, She to whom much was forgiven, loved much. For
when the Priests and Jews, blinded with rage and ignorance, Crucified that
Messiah, whom they had so long passionately expected, she stands weeping by the
Cross, a flood of tears flowing from her fair eyes, to see those streams of
blood and water trickle from his precious side. Afterward she brings spices
and precious ointments to embalm his body, but missing it in the Tomb, enquires
of the supposed Gardener, and soon acknowledges him to be God; goes with as
much speed as (...) to the Apostles, and tells them her Lord is risen: They all
doubt the miracle, or rather deride her narration, as if 'twere only some dream
of her melancholy fancy; but still her confidence continues, and her faith
remains unshaken, even when all those Pillars of the Church seemed weak and
tottering. What shall we say of holy Priscilla, who instructed Apollo, a person
learned in Law, and (as Ecclesiastical Histories inform us) Bishop of Corinth,
which great Apostolical Man was so much a stranger to the pride and conceited
humor of our giddy Age* that he thought it no shame to learn of a Woman what
he might teach in the Church.

If we consult primitive Histories* and turn over Martyrologies, we shall find,
those Women who have testified their faith in the flames of Martyrdom, and
embraced death and torments, rather than renounce true Religion, not to have
been out-numbred by the Men; all which particularly to enumerate we should be
infinite: only give us leave not to forget that wonderful Matron, deserving a
place in all good men's memories, who not only with a divine and incredible
patience, beheld her seven Sons perishing in her fight by cruel Martyrdom, but
also courageously exhorted them to death; and putting her entire confidence in
God, was afterward her self destroyed for the Laws of her Country.

To this good-natured Sex, (as instruments of providence) whole Nations stand
indebted for their faith, and owe their Conversion. Did not Theodilina, the
Daughter of the King of Bavaria, convert the Lombards? Greisil, the Sister of
the Emperor Henry the First, the Hungarians? Clotidis, the Daughter of the
King of Burgundy, the Francks? and a poor she-Apostle of very mean Extraction,
the Hiberti? each of them illuminating with the bright Beams of the Christian
Faith, many thousand souls which before lay groping in the hellish darkness of
Pagan Superstiti^n and Idolatry. By this method of Beneficence, doing good to
the better part of those we converse with, and promoting the eternal Concerns
of Mankind, is true Honor only acquired. This alone is the Royal Road to that
immense Glory, which will still remain fresh and sparkling, when Pyramids shall
lie buried in rubbish, and the noise of victories be forgot; for so Divinity
assures us, They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars in
the Firmament for ever and ever.

But lest any scrupulous heads should doubt of Women's abilities, to dispatch
all those affairs which are usually transacted by Men, let us join Issue, and
try the matter by Examples, and we shall find, That never any difficult Office
was managed, hazardous undertaking attempted, or brave, generous Exploit
achieved by Men, but the same has been performed as famously, and with as
much dexterity and success in every respect by Women. That of old they were
Priests, is evident; for Melissa amongst the Gentiles was so eminent in the
Priesthood of the Goddess Cybele, that all that succeeded her were called
Melissa. And to pass by Hype^a^stria, the Priestess of Minerva; Mera of Venus;
Iphigenia of Diana, etc. it may be nothing unpleasant to repeat those various
Names, wherewith Bacchuse's she-Priests were honored; as Thyades, Bacchae,
Menades, Eliades, Mimallonides, Aedonides, Eubyades, Bassarides, Triaterides,
etc. Amongst Gods own people too, the Jews, Mary, Moses's Sister, used to
accompany Aaron into the Sanctuary, and was by all reverenced as a Priest. Nor
are there wanting at this day many holy Recluses, whom Antiquity scrupled not
to call ( Sacerdotes) Priests.

Famous for Prophecy has this Sex been amongst all Nations; witness
Cassandra; all the Sybils; Moses his Sister, mentioned but now; Deborah, Hulda,
Anna, and others of old; besides diverse more modern, as Bridget, Hildegard, etc.

In Magic, or the inexpugnable Discipline of good or ill Spirits, (which many
talk of, most condemn, and few understand,) Circe and Medaea wrought more
wonders than Zoroastes himself, though most believe him the first inventer of
these black Arts.

For profound knowledge in the abstrusest parts of Philosophy, were eminent,
Thaeana, Pythagoras his Wife, and his Daughter Dama, excellent at explaining
her Fathers mysterious Sentences; Aspasia and Diotima, Scholars of Socrates;
Philesia and Axiochia, both Disciples of Plato; Pl^tinus extolls Gemina and
Amphiclea; Lactantius applauds Themiste; the Christian Church glories in St.
Katherine, a Lady that alone for Learning surpast all the wisest Men of that
Age. Nor may our Memory here without an impardonable crime, let slip the
mention of Longinus; the Philosopher's excellent Pupil Queen Zeno^ia, for her
vast knowledge in Letters, and clear understanding, called Ephinissa, whose
devout Works Nichomachus rendered into Greek. If we proceed to those
soul-charming faculties, Oratory and Poesy, behold a whole Troop crowd about
us; as Armesia, surnamed Androgenia, Hortensia, Lucretia, Valeria, Copiola,
Sappho, Cor^^na, Erimua, Telia, or Tesbia, sirnam'd the Epigrammatist;
Semprania in Salust; and amongst the Lawyers, Calphurnia.

It Is a proud self-flattering Conceit of the Bearded-Tribe, to arrogate all
Learning to themselves, or think the noble Female Sex incapable of making as
generous flights toward the top of Par^assus, as they. Women's Fantasies are
much more quick and searching; their memories as tenacious and faithful; their
judgments as solid; all their faculties as ready; and their thirst after
knowledge and fame no less intentive, than Men's. Why then should they not with
the same advantages, make at least an equal progress in Literature? It Is true,
our male Dictators strive to monopolize Learning, and having by a brutish
custom barred the Doors of the Muses Temple against Women, do now pretend they
are unable and unfit to enter: yet vain are these their envious designs, to
depress or cloud the Glories of this Sex: for indeed Women by nature alone do
excel the Professors of Arts, even in those particular Arts which they pretend
to; those Sciences and Accomplishments which Men acquire not without a vast
expense of time, waste of spirits, and other inconveniences, being all in
Women as it were innate and con-natural. That this may not seem a naked
affirmative, or inconsiderate Rant, be pleased to consider, That although
Grammarians proudly boast themselves Masters of the Art of well-speaking, as if
all must be dumb, or at least barbarou^, that have not submitted to the tyranny
of their Ferula; yet we learn far better to speak from our Mothers and Nurses,
who are continually engaging us to prattle, and correcting the errors of our
lisping Tongues, than from the crabbed Instructions of those supercilious
Pedagogues. 'Twas Corneliaes Industry that formed her Sons the Gracchi's
Tongues, to such an admired height of Eloquence; nor had the King of Scythia's
Son Siles any other Tutor to teach him the Greek Tongue, but his Mother
Istrinea. When Colonies are planted, and several Nations mingled, do not the
Children always retain their Mothers Languages? For which reason, both Plato
and Quintilian have been so exact in giving Precepts for the choice of a fit
Nurse, that Childrens speech may rightly be ordered, and discreetly molded
from their infancy.

Are not the Poets in their trifling fables surpast by hundreds of old Women?
and Logitians in their contentious brawlings outdone by each
Billingsgate-Fish-wife?

Your smooth-tongu'd Orators seem almost Almighty in words, and able at
pleasure to raise or calm the passions, by the Magic of their Rhetoric; yet
where was there ever any of them so happy, but that a pretty obliging Wench
would out-go him in the Art of persuasion? What subtle Arithmetician is able to
mis-reckon a Woman when he goes to pay her a Debt; or cheat her of a penny by
all his rules of practice or falsehood? What Musician can equal her for singing;
or dare compare the squeeking of his Crowd to the melody of her ravishing voice?

A silly Gammars predictions have often been answered with suitable events;
whilst the Prognostications of great Mathematicians, and famous Star-readers,
(that boast themselves of Heavens Cabinet-Councel) serve only to prove their
Authors either lying fools, or flattering knaves. How frequently is the Art of
the most eminent Physicians forced to veil to the skill of a Countrey-Matron?
who with an ordinary Receipt chases away those sullen Distempers, which bid
defiance to all the slops and hard words levied against them by Master Doctor.

Nor need any of these Artists resent this ill, since Socrates, the wisest of
Men (if you will credit an Oracle) thought it no shame in his wisest Age to learn
of Aspasia: nor did Apollo the Divine blush to receive instruction from good
Priscilla.

Having thus briefly vindicated the fair Sexes Reputation in the Schools, we
next proceed to the Court and Camp, and find them there not at all deficient in
policy of State, or that civil prudence requisite for the conduct of humane
affairs: not so ignorant as many imagine, in State-craft; that refined skill
which dis-imbroils the Intrigues of the Court; which teaches the Science of
War, and the dexterity of treating for peace; Women's Wi^s having generally been
esteemed more quick and ready in sudden exigents, and most fertile and
dexterous for the plotting and carrying on any politic design, or subtle
contrivance.

No Stratagem did Warrior e're devise,
Which first he learn^t not from their catching eyes.
Of these she-Machiavils and Feminine Hectors, History copiously affords us
Examples; as Opis, reverenced by the Egyptians as a Deity; Plotina, the Wife
of Trajan; Amalasmutha, the Queen of the Ostrogothi; Deborah, to whom in all
cases of difference the Israelites repaired for judgment, and rescued
themselves from slavery, by a memorable victory under her conduct. Semiramis,
who for forty years with much honor and renown governed the Assyrians; and
Candaces, Queen of Ethiopia, no less eminent for prudence, than power and
magnificence, of who^ some mention is made in the Acts: but wonders are related
by that worthy Register of Antiquity, Josephus, for laying the foundations of
Empires, and building Cities; Semiramis, Dido, and the Amazons, for both skill
and success in War; Thomiris, Queen of the Massagetae, who conquered Cyrus,
that great Monarch of the Persians; as also Camilla, of the Nation of the
Volci; and Valisca, of Bohemia, both potent Queens. To whom might be added the
Indian Pande, and the Women of Phocia, Chios, and Persia; with many other
Illustrious Viragoes, who in the greatest exigencies, and most desperate shocks
of Fortune, have preserved their gasping Countries; of whom the noble Judith
and fair Hester deserve to lead the van, as the glory of their own, and shame
of the other Sex. Whilst Rome stands, the Name of that grave Matron Vetr^ria,
will be famous; who by checking the inordinate rage of her Son Cori^lanus,
preserved that Emperial City, the young Captain at his Mothers persuasions
desisting from his unnatural hostility against his Mother-Countrey. Nor can the
brave Art^emisia want her due applauses, who destroyed the Rhodian Navy that
invaded her, and to return the civility of their intended visit, subdued their
Island, erecting an ignominious Statue in the midst of their chief City, to
remain there as a perpetual brand of infamy and reproach.

The English Nation were most ungrateful, should they ever forget their
Obligations to this Sex, to whose courageous resolution alone, they owe their
deliverance from the insufferable tyranny of the Danes. Nor is the most
Christian King less engaged, whose tottering Crown was once refixt on his
Ancestors Head by a Female hand. That strange ridling Prodigy of valor, Joan
of Arc, (celebrated by some as a Saint, and branded by others for a Witch,)
when the English had almost spread their victorious Ensigns over the whole
Kingdom of France, and wanted little to complete its total conquest, taking
Arms like an Amazon, arrested their fortune, put a stop to the torrent of their
victories, and by degrees restored the withering de Luce^ to their former
luster; in honor of which gallant Enterprise, a Statue sacred to her memory
stands erected on the Bridge at Orleans.

An innumerable Catalogue could we here produce of most excellent Women, out of
both ancient and modern Histories of the Graecians, Romans, and other Nations;
Plutarch, Valerius, Boccace, and many others, having written largely of them:
but we study brevity, that our Work may not overflow its intended limits; for
we fancy not those overgrown Treatises which are divided into Tomes and
Volumes; so that we shall not here say so much in Women's praise, but that we
shall conceal much more that might, and deserves to be said; being not so
extravagantly ambitious, as to undertake to comprehend or display the infinite
Excellencies and Virtues of that Sex, in so curt a Discourse. What Mortals Pen,
or Angels Tongue, is sufficient to enumerate and proclaim their praises, on
whom depends our very being, and the preservation not only of particular
Families, and Republics, but of all humane kind, which without them would soon
decay, and the World in one Century droop into a solitary Desert.

This Rome's first Founder well understood; and rather than want Women, chose
to incur a sharp hazardous War with the Sabines, for stealing away their
Daughters, without whom his intended Empire had quickly mouldred away, and
never arrived at that proud Grandeur, to give Laws to all the World. Upon which
quarrel, when afterward the Sabines intending a rescue, had taken the Capitol,
and a bloody fight was begun in the midst of Romes Marketplace, the
good-natured Women rushing in between both Armies, their Husbands on the one
side, their Fathers on the other, procured by their entreaties a cessation from
that unnatural conflict, which ended in an indissoluble peace, both Nations
being glew'd together in perpetual amity. Whereupon Romulus caused the Women's
Names to be enrolled in the Courts; and by common consent it was Enacted, That
none of them should be put to grynde, or do Kitchin-Drudgery, or any such
servile employment; nor should receive any thing as a gift from her Husband,
nor he from her; that they might not dream of any particular propriety, but
know, that whatever either of them enjoyed, was common to both: ^or he that
makes a present to his Wife, offers an injury in a Complement, pretending to
entitle her to that by his donation, which is hers before in her own right.
This gave birth to that Custom, when the Bride was brought home, to use these
solemn words; Ubi tu, Ego; (that is) Where you are Jack, I Will be Jill; Where
you are Master, I will be Dame.

After the expulsion of Kings, when the Forces of the Volsci, who had espoused
the Tarquins quarrel, were advanced within five miles of Rome, they were beat
back by the sole courage of the Women; for which gallant service a famous
Temple was built, dedicated to Female-Fortune; and many notable marks of
dignity and honor conferred on them by Decrees of the Senate: as to have the
upper hand in walking, the Men standing up, and giving place when they pass by;
as likewise leave to wear Purple with Gold-fringe, Earrings, Jewels, Gold
Chains, and other ornaments. And by a Law of later Emperou^s, Women were
enabled to succeed in Inheritances, and take Administrations; and suffered to
have their Funerals publicly celebrated with Encomiastick O^ations, as well as
the most Illustrious Men. And it was provided, That in all Edicts prohibiting the
wearing of any Apparel, Women should not be included: an Indulgence they well
deserv^d, since they knew so well how to part with their Ornaments on a good
occasion. For when Camillus had vowed a Present to Apollo of Delphos, and the
whole City could not yield Gold enough to make up the sum, the Women freely
opened their Cabinets, and brought in their Rings, Bracelets; etc. so ready
were they to support the honor of their Country, though with the loss of what
their Sex is said most to delight in. In the War which Cyrus waged against his
Grandfather Astiages, the Persian Army being put to flight by the prowess of
the Medes, was reinforced by the seasonable reproof and exprobration of the
Women; for thereupon shame and indignation infusing fresh courage, they faced
about again, routed their pursuers, and came off, crowned with the Laurels of
victory; for which good service Cyrus ordained, That as often as the Kings of
Persia entered the City, they should bestow on each Woman a Medal, or piece of
Gold; which was frequently performed accordingly; yea, and doubled to such as
were with Child.

Thus were Women, by those ancient Princes of Persia, and the valiant Romans,
from the very infancy of their Empire, treated with all kind of respect and
honor; and to this day, by how much each Nation is more civilized, and refined
from Barbarism, so much greater liberty and honor do Women there enjoy. Nor is
there a surer Character of a noble birth, or any thing that sooner discovers a
generous education, than a respective carriage, and complacent deportment
toward Ladies.

That the renowned Justinian had a particular veneration for this Sex, is
evident; for that he thought fit to consult his Wife in the modelling of his
Laws, and framing those Institutes, whose excellent prudence all succeeding
generations have admired: and no wonder, since the Law it self affirms, That
the Wife shines in an equal sphere of honor with the Husband; so as how much
soever he is preferred in dignity, so much she too, is advanced. Thus an
Emperors Wife is styled Empress, and a Kings, Queen, and a Prince's, the
Princess, and Illustrious, though they are never so meanly descended. So
Vlpian, The Prince (he means the Emperor) is absolved and free from the
Coercive power of the Laws, but the Empress his Wife, though of her self she be
not freed therefrom, yet her Husband conferrs on her the same privileges which
he has himself. Hence by the Civil Law it is permitted to noble Women to judge,
arbitrate, purchase, sell, and decide controversies between their Tenants, or
Vassals, and sometimes to retain peculiar Servants, and give Name to a Family,
so as the Children shall be called by the Mothers Name, not the Fathers, with
several other privileges, in relation to their Dowers, expressed in diverse
places throughout the whole body of the Law: Which also provides, That a Woman
of honest fame shall not be imprisoned for Debt; and that the Judge who shall
commit her, shall in such case be liable to capital punishment: And if she be
apprehended on suspicion of any crime, she shall be put into a Monastery, or
delivered to the custody of persons of her own Sex. Moreover, a Woman in the
eye of the Law is of a better condition than a Man, so that in the very same
kind and degree of Crime, he is esteemed a greater offender, and worthy of
severer punishment than she. Hence a Man found in Adultery is punished with
death, the Woman only shut up in a Monastery. Many other privileges of Women
you may read, collected by Az^, in his ^^mme on the Title, Senatusconsultum
Velleianum, and Speculator of Renunciations, and others.

No wonder then if those ancient Legislators, Men grave for their wisdom, and
prudent for science, Lycurgus, I (...), and Plato, understanding by their
diligent Researches into the most profound parts of Philosophy, that Women were
not a whit either for excellency of wit, strength of body, or dignity of
nature, inferior to Men, but equally able in all respects whatever; did
thereupon ordain, That Women should exercise together with Men in Wrestling,
and other public games and pastimes; and as well as Men, make an inspection
into all things appertaining to Martial discipline, as shooting, slinging,
casting Stones, darting, handling of Arms, both on foot and horseback, pitching
of Tents, Leading up, Marshalling, and setting Armies in Array, etc.

Let us peruse the Volumes of credible Historians, and they will assure us,
That by the custom in Getulia, ^^^tria, and Galletia, the Men devoted wholly
to ea^e^ made much of themselves at home, whilst the Women tilled the Ground,
built, negotiated, rid up and down, went to the Wars, and transacted all those
affairs which amongst us are managed by Men. That amongst the Cantabrians, the
Men brought the Women Portions; the Brothers were disposed of in marriage by
the Sisters; and the Daughters were the Heirs. That amongst the Scythians,
Thracians, and other Nations, all Offices were undertaken by Women, as well as
Men. And in their Treaties Women were concerned; as appears by the League made
between Hannibal and the Celtae, in these words: If any of the Celtae complain
that he is injured by any of the Carthaginians, let the Magistrates or
Commanders of the Carthaginians who shall be in Spain, judge thereof. If any
Carthaginian shall receive damage from any of the Celtae, let the Women be
Judges of the same. Nor did the ancient Britains and Picts regard any
difference of Sex, for the sovereign Command, but usually went to War under the
conduct of Women, as both Tacitus and Beda witness.

From what has been said, appears conspicuously, as if written with Sunbeams
on a Wall of Crystal, That this Sex are not incapable of, nor were in the
primitive and more innocent Ages of the World, debarred from managing the most
arduous or difficult affairs, till the tyranny of Men usurpt the dispose of all
business, and unjust Laws, foolish Customs, and an ill mode of education,
retrencht their liberties. For now a Woman (as if she were only the passtime of
Men's idle hours, or a thing made merely for trifling Courtiers to throw away
their non-sensical Complements on) is from her Cradle kept at home; and as
incapable of any nobler employment, suffered only to knit, spin, or practice
the little curiosities of the Needle. And when she arrives at riper years, is
delivered to the tyranny of a jealous-pated Husband, or cloistered up in a
Nunnery; all public Offices are denied them; implead, or sue at Law in their
own Names, though never so prudent, they must not; no Jurisdiction they can
exercise; nor make any Contract that is valid without their Husbands license;
and several other hard Impositions they have laid on them.

By which unworthy, partial means, they are forced to give place to Men, and
like wretched Captives overcome in War, submit to their insulting Conquerors,
not out of any natural or divine reason, or necessity, but only by the
prevalency of Custom, Education, Chance, or some tyrannical occasion: yet
might Women's excellent good natures possibly persuade them calmly to undergo
this servitude, did not the male-usurpers add shame and reproach to their
tyranny. But as all slavery is miserable in the account of generous minds, so
that which comes accompanied with scorn and contempt, stirs every ones
indignation, and can be endured by none whom Nature does not intend for slaves,
as well as Fortune. Although it is evident, That unto Womankind the World owes
half of its life, and Man is indebted the whole of his love, she being the only
adequate object of his affections on earth; yet Custom spreading like some
Epidemick Contagion, has made it common to undervalue this Sex, and bespatter
their reputation with all kind of opprobrious Language, and slanderous
Epethites. Each idle Poetaster has a Rhyme to reproach them; and every
fantastic Gull a scandalous Sonnet or musty Proverb to impeach their Honor;
particular reasons whereof, many may be gathered from the diverse humors of
their Accusers. Some will dispraise that Woman, whom before they adored,
because her modesty has repelled their unchaste desires. Some turn their
amorous Complements of wooing, into a barbarous style of railing, because for
want of desert they obtain not Love. Many love not Women, because they know not
how to love them; and most of all Men being evil themselves, love but few
things that are good, and thence entertain Women with hatred. Some to make
ostentation of their parts, and acquire the title of wits, few with any show of
reason, and none on any just cause, have yet filled the World with Pamphlets,
things no less idle in themselves, than disgraceful to Women. But Oh unmanly
Men, and stain of your Sex! Is this a point of Manhood, or any ornament of your
valor, to busy your selves for disgrace of Women? Is this the thankful
Tribute you return to the Authors of your Being? Is this the Recompense you
afford them for their sorrow and pains at your Birth, for their care and
diligence in your Infancy, for their love and tenderness, their assistance and
endearments throughout your Life? Such and so many obligations should not
(methinks) be so easily cancelled, nor such courtesies forgotten, much less so
injuriously remembered, as to be repaid with causeless detraction, and immerited
invectives. But why speak we to these Men of Gratitude, the greatest of
virtues, who never were acquainted with any virtue at all? It can be no great
dishonor to be evil spoken of by them, who never learned to speak well of any.

We shall not therefore so vainly spend our own or the Readers time, as to take
notice of all those black scandals by them cast on this fair Sex, they being
only fl^xes of gall, or the purgings of idle brains: only one we must briefly
examine, which seems more plausible and passes for current in the vogue of the
World; and that is, their terming Women, Necessary Evils. This is indeed the
common Tenure, and the Comical Wits think they have very judiciously spoken,
when thus they have defined them; which yet in truth is no other than an
egregious Solecism; an error almost blasphemous. That they are necessary, we
needs must grant; since he that made Man, saw it was not good that Man should
be without them. That they are Evils, we utterly deny; since he that made
Woman, saw that all he made was good. Is Woman good then in the judgment of
God, and in your conceit also necessary? then change your phrase, and
henceforth style her, A necessary good. Those very Terms, Necessary, and Evil,
are inconsistent: All things that are necessary for Man, are good; food is
necessary, it is good; Apparel necessary, it is good; the Fire, the Air, the
Earth, the Water necessary, they are good; Women necessary, therefore good. For
else if we suppose God has bound Man in so hard a Condition, that some things
are necessary for him, yet evil, we both impair the wisdom of God, and detract
from his goodness.

To conclude: If Woman be so necessary for Man, and he of himself so weak and
impotent, that he could not even in Paradise live without her; If Abraham the
friend of God be commanded, by no less Authority than the voice of Heaven, to
hear his Wife Sarah whatsoever she should say to him; If Nature have so
illustriously marked out Women for the most excellent of all Creatures, and
crowned them most prodigally with the choicest of her ornaments; Since they in
no respect come short of the most celebrated Heroes, and that their Names and
gallant Actions have swelled the Records of Fame, and stand Registered there
with such obliging Eulogies; what remains but that without delay we render them
those Homages which such extraordinary Merits challenge? Let us no longer
dis-esteem this noble Sex, or abuse its goodness, or usurp on its Prerogative.
Let us allow them those Privileges which God and Nature have invested them
with. Let us re-inthrone them in their Seats of Honor and Pre-eminence. Let us
regard them with that Reverence that is due; pay them that Devotion that
becomes us; and treat them with all that respect and veneration which belongs
to such Terrestial Angels.

Thus have we endeavored to show the Pre-eminence of the Female Sex, from the
name, order, place, and matter of Creation; and what Dignity bounteous Heaven
has vouchsaft thereto above the Male. We have also promiscuously, yet plainly,
demonstrated the same from Divinity, Nature, Humane Laws, various Authority,
Reason and Examples; yet have we not said so much, but that we have left much
more unsaid; for we took not up our Pen in this Cause out of ambition, or
design to purchase Applause by ostentation of Wit, or Reading; but merely as
conscious of our Duty, and out of loyalty to Truth, that we might not seem
sacrilegiously to rob this worthy Sex of its due Praises, by an envious silence.

But if some more curious Head shall find (as easily he may) any Argument by us
omitted, which he shall judge proper to be here inserted, we shall be ready to
acknowledge our Obligations to him; esteeming it a Courtesy, not an Injury, if
by his Wit and Learning he render this well-intended Work of ours better; to
which, lest it swell to too great a Volume, we here affix a final Period.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Henry Million, at the Bible in Fleet Street.
BIshop Andrews Sermons, folio. 18 s. Heylin's Cosmography, in Four Books,
containing the Chorography and History of the World; in folio. 1 l.

Burges Spiritual Refining; or a Treatise of Grace and Assurance; wherein are
handled the Doctrine of Assurance; in folio. 18 s.

Burges of Original Sin; asserted and vindicated against the old and new
Adversaries thereof, both Socinians, Arminians, and Anabaptists; in four parts:
folio. 12 s.

A General Martyrology; containing a Collection of the greatest Persecutions
which have befallen the Church of Christ, from the Creation to our present
times, both in England, and all other Nations: Whereunto are added, Two and
twenty Lives of English Modern Divines. By Samuel Clerk; in folio. 1 l. 6 s.

Pious Annotations upon the Holy Bible, expounding the difficultest places
thereof learnedly and plainly. By the Learned and Godly Divine Mr. John
Diodati, Minister of the Gospel; in folio. 18 s.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths of those Noble,
Reverend, and Excellent Persons, that suffered for their Allegiance to his Late
Majesty, in our late Civil Wars, and continued till 1666. With the Life and
Martyrdom of King Charles the First; in folio. 12 s.

The Saints Everlasting Rest. By Mr. Richard Baxter, Teacher of Gods Word; in
large 4 o. 8 s.

The Life of Faith; in 4to. 5 s.

The Reasons of the Christian Religion. The First Part of Godliness: The Second
Part of Christianity. By Richard Baxter. 7 s.

The Young Clerks Guide: Or an Exact Collection of choice English Presidents,
according to the best forms now used, for all sorts of Indentures, Letters of
Attorney, Releases, Conditions: Very useful and necessary for all, but chiefly
for those that intend to follow the Atturneys Practice. 8o. 4 s.

Memorials of Godliness and Christianity; in Three Parts: Part the First,
containing Meditations. 1. Making Religion ones Business. 2. An Appendix,
applied to the Calling of a Minister: With a full Account of the Authors Life.
The Tenth Edition; Corrected and Enlarged. In 12o. 1 s.

The Rule and Exercise of Holy Living and Dying. By Jer. Tailor, D. D. in 8o. 5
s.

The English Rogue, described in the Life of Meriton Latroon; a witty
Extravagant, comprehending the most eminent Cheats of both Sexes. First Part, 2
s. 6 d. Second Part, 2 s. 6 d.

Ready for the Press.

The Female Secretary: Or Choice Letters, fitted and wholly designed for the
capacity and occasions of Women; with plain, yet more full and exact Rules and
Directions, for the inditing, composing, and writing of Letters, than any
extant. Devoted to the service of the fair Sex, by the Translator of Female
Pre-eminence.

This Water cures the Gout in old or young.

Take of this Anti-scorbattical Water, two ounces, heat it as hot as possibly
you can, and with a linen Rag dipped therein, foment the place grieved; repeat
the application often, be it never so hot, it will not produce a Blister, but
through Gods great blessing works a perfect Cure. It is to be had at Mr. Henry
Millions, a Bookseller, at the Bible in Fleet Street. By the Quart, 5 s. or
Pint, 2 s. 6 d. in Glass Bottles, sealed up.

This Excellent Water Cures the Scurvey in the Mouth, in Old or Young; fastens
the Teeth; kills the Worms in the Teeth; makes the Teeth white; thus to be
applied: Take a small quantity in a Galley-Pot, and with a linen Rag dipped
therein, gently rub the Teeth Morning and Evening. It is sold at Mr. Henry
Millions, a Bookseller, at the Bible in Fleet Street. A Glass Bottle
containing a Quart, 3 s. and a Pint, 1 s. 6 d.


