AESOP AT AMSTERDAM, Balancing the AESOPS AT Tunbridg, Bathe, Whitehal, etc.

BY LUDLOW REDIVIVUS.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for Mine Here Vanden Flounder, Boekverkooper, School.

And Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster.

Epistle Dedicatory, TO Old AESOP at Whitehal, etc.
FATHER,
WHERE the Devil have you been all this while? It is now ever since the fifty
fourth Olympiad you died at Delphos, and to arise again at Whitehall is very
remarkable. I am now apt to believe the Doctrine of Transmigration, and that
your Soul having past the Habitations of the Bodies of the Horse, the Ass, and
other Beasts, you are now informing the Body of a Courtier. Good Dad! don't come
too near me, you stink most damnably of Sulphur, I Am almost suffocated. You
have been lamentably paid off in the other Country; your Clothes are horridly
bedawb'd with liquid Bitumen, Links, Flambeaux and Card-matches; you make a
very indifferent Figure indeed Father. What Country you have been in I cannot
tell, but by your new Fables I find you have lived under a Monarchical
Government, and are mightily in love with it, as are my two elder Brothers of
Tunbridg and Bathe; but your youngest Son, my Right Worshipful self, begs your
Pardon if he don't jump with you and the rest of his Brethren in their notions
of Government. You cannot tell, Father, what a lamentable spot of work you have
made with the Fables you wrote the first time you lived; the sower Pedagogues
have made the blind Cheeks of many a Boy as raw as a piece of Beef, because
they could not understand 'em; nay I have been persecuted my self upon the same
account. Besides, Sir, your Fables have been the foundation of abundance of
Lies; your Book serves instead of a Charter to the Mythologists of all Ages;
you stand in competition even with the Devil himself, which shall be the
reputed Father of Liars. And one would think after you had slept so many years,
your Consulatation with your Pillow might have afforded you better Thoughts.
It Is pity, Father, you and I should fall out after so long absence; but you
ought to allow us that live upon the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, to see
farther than you, who have been so many Years embowel'd in the Caverns of the
Earth: Indeed, Father, I would advise you to return home again, unless you had
brought better Notions with you from the other Country; for those possessed with
your Notions here, we esteem either Stupid or Mad. Now being in this place,
Father, and breathing in a free Air, I can talk of nothing but Freedom, Liberty
and Property. I hope, if it does offend the Assertors of Tyranny, they will
consider I am in a common Asylum, and out of their reach.

AMSTERDAM.
AESOP AT AMSTERDAM.
FAB. I. The Summons.
THE mighty Puss, not long since ruled the State,
Beneath a lonesom Furzbush purring sat;
Stroak'd her long Smellers, and rejoiced to see
Her awful Picture in her Progeny:
Mean while her Kitlings dance before her face,
And toss, like trembling Mice, the Roots of Grass.
Not one amongst 'em but a Claw dos wear,
Fit a Monarchic Tyrant Rat to tear.
The Good old Cause informed the Mother's Breast,
Darts through their Eyes, is by their mein expressed.
Such, such the ancient Race of Heroes were,
Who did their Rights before their Lives prefer.
She calls one to her, of the eldest brood;
Do know, said she, how drowned in native Blood
My Country lies? how the wild Boars invade
The Land, and desert have my Country laid?
It Is true, I once did ease 'em of their Pain;
But they, like Fools, embraced again the Chain;
Wear those dull Fetters I so kindly broke,
And halt, like Slaves, beneath the servile Yoke.
Once more I Will try, if my Advice may prove
Successful, once exert my ancient Love;
Summon the Slaves to meet at Whitehal Gate,
Beneath the Scaffold where I whilom sat,
And punished Tyranny, the worst of Crimes;
A just Example unto future Times.
Young Puss the Message takes, and bids fair Warning
To all the Slaves t'appear on the next morning.
FAB. II. The Interview.
THE Morning come, the Slaves await,
And flock like Bees 'bout Whitehal Gate.
Some yoked, like Country Hogs appear;
Others confounded Fetters wear,
And some most horrid Burdens bear.
Thus loaded, thus enslaved, oppressed;
Nature, it is strange, don't call for rest:
Tho Legs are galled, and Shoulders sore,
The bulky Slaves still crave for more:
And not an Idiot of the Town
Has sense to lay his Burden down.
Strait Puss in Majesty appears,
Mounting the Scaffold, pricks her Ears,
Shakes her Majestic Head, aloud
She thus bespoke the numerous Crowd.
I have deserted long the nauseous Town,
Mourning my Country's Ruin, and my own
Exposed to Tyranny, whilst Beasts of prey
Ravage my Fields, and steal my Lambs away.
My Freeborn Subjects now are forced to bear
Loads, which more fit for backs of Camels are;
You well deserve the Fetters you do wear.
You under heavy iron Shackles pine,
Whose Fathers did in glorious Armor shine,
Through fields of Blood to Freedom cut their way,
And taught the proudest Tyrants to obey;
By me supported, potent Tyrants fell
A Sacrifice to their just Cause and Hell;
No more, no more their sacred Lineage stain,
No more their names in your cursed Race profane.
Let not their Offspring such Alliance have,
Shackles were never the Trophies of the Brave;
They could wide Conquests, and just Honors boast,
But you, dull Slaves! have all your Freedom lost.
Where 'ere a Tyrant raised his impious Head,
Strait their bold Hands struck the damned Monster dead.
Had you a spark of ancient Honor left,
You should not long be of my Aid bereft;
My Claws are hard and sharp as e're they were,
As fit a Tyrant and his Rats to tear.
The Villains that support a Tyrant Crown,
This angry Tail will horridly sweep down;
Shake off your Fetters once, and you shall see,
I Will once more save you from cursed Slavery.
She said, and away she galloped amain,
But in hopes they their Sense would recover again;
For a Doctor will never the Fatigue endure,
To heal such dull Blockheads, that don't love the Cure.
FAB. III. The Frogs Concern.
A Generous Race of croaking Frogs,
Which lay entrench't betwixt two Bogs,
Who as the morning Sun did shine,
Daily encreast their stock divine;
Just as the Solar Influence burned,
Prolifick spawn to Life was turned,
Until the young ones had at length
An equal Vigor, equal Strength.
So numerous at length they prove,
They supplicate to mighty Jove;
A King and Governor they crave,
As other Beasts and Insects have:
But Jove allowed all Mortal Elves,
To choose a Monarch for themselves.
The Croaking Elders now consult
About a King, and the Result
Was, that a neighboring Log should be
Executor of Monarchy.
About the Log their Heads they raise,
In sounds uncouth they croak his Praise:
At length some crawl upon his Top,
And frisk about, and croak and hop:
Says one Frog, Here Is fine business done,
Was e're a King thus trampled one?
'Troth, says another ancient Frog,
We'll never be governed by a Log;
The heat at length so far arose,
They did the Loggerhead depose.
To new Election they proceed,
And to their Hearts content succeed;
A neighboring Stork at length they chose,
Which should their Heats and Feuds compose:
He took upon him the Command
Of all the People in Frogland;
But he as the other before had done,
Made it an Arbitrary Throne;
Up from the Mud the Frogs would pick,
And squeeze their Corpse within his Beak.
One Frog much wiser than the rest,
To those about him thus addressed:
Good Friends, this is confounded work;
Shall we be governed by a Stork;
To have our Bones in pieces torn,
Our young ones eat just as they are born?
As if Kings only had a Power
To ruin Subjects and devour;
I think it is just to choose again:
The brood of Frogs all croak'd, Amen.
The next they chose was a dull Ass,
Which proved as bad as the other was;
For tho he was not so malicious,
His folly made him as pernicious;
Stumbling on Empire, often he stood
Upon his Subjects choked in Mud:
Whole beds of Spawn he did destroy,
At every flounce did Frogs annoy.
The Devil's in it, said one, for we
In choosing Kings still wretched be.
Thus often we have chose a King,
And still have found it the same thing.
FAB. IV. The Bees and the Hornet.
A Hive of Bees had plundered every Field,
And every Herb dos Wax or Honey yield:
Large Troops of winged force they daily arm,
Large as the Flocks that about Hybla swarm;
From distant Fields did every Evening come,
Laden with Sweets and wholesome Honey home:
Blessed with abundant Wealth the Swarm dos thrive
Beneath the Blessings of a well stock't Hive.
But Wealth and Luxury together go,
And Bees, when rich, do vain and wanton grow;
Pampered with Food, they loath their happy Fate,
And Changlings like, attempt to change their State.
Large Herds they saw, as they abroad did rove,
Governed by Monarchs, by the leave of Jove.
They Jupiter invoke, that also he
Would please to favor them with Monarchy.
Jove from Olympus nodding, gave consent,
And strait the Bees to an Election went.
An o'regrown Hornet in an Oaken-Tree,
Was what they chose, and must their Sovereign be:
For Bulk and Valor was elected King,
The greatest Warrior ever drew a Sting.
His Paunch more Honey still did bear away
Then ten strong Bees could gather in a Day.
But what was worse, he often would invite
His Family to dine, and sup at Night:
His numerous Favorites did devour more,
Then his small Regions ever saw before;
His lazy Drones did more Provision spoil,
Than is the product of a Summers toil.
The Bees thus robbed of all their Honey, grieve;
It Is Winter too, they know not how to live.
Their Monarch goes to rob another Swarm,
And there remain till Summer's heat shall warm.
The Bees bereaved of all their Nourishment,
Their Wax decayed, and all their Honey spent;
Around their Hive their Obsequies they sing,
Lament their Fortune, and they curse their King.
FAB. V. The Lion and Fox.
A Youthful Lion in the Wood,
Of Bulk and Nature strong;
Still used to rav'ning and to blood,
And came to Empire young:
He too, as other Monarchs use,
New Methods did pursue:
His Father's Favorites did refuse,
And chose a set of new.
He having loved, and used to gore;
An arbitrary sway,
A base, a wild Despotick Power
His Subjects must obey.
But want of Brains do still attend
Unlimited Command:
And therefore he would have some Friend
Might Business understand.
There was a cunning Fox lived near,
For many years had killed
The neighboring Lambs and Poultry there,
With Bones his Kennel filled.
He summoned Reynard to appear,
Next Night, at Council Board.
Which Reynard did, and when was there,
Looked grave as any Lord.
The Lion told him, he must be
The chief Support of State.
At which kind Reynard bowed his Knee,
And wished him better Fate.
O, says the Lion, thou art skilled
In Arbitrary Sway:
Thou many Beasts and Fowls have killed,
To govern know the way.
Ask, and I Will give Thee any thing,
Is in my Power to give:
Thou shall be next unto the King
As long as I do live.
Quoth Reynard, make me then the Priest,
I Will make all Beasts your Slaves:
The Body You, I Soul at least,
We'll tyrannize by halves.
Thus Fate did Men to thraldom bring,
Oppressed just like a Beast;
Rod, spurred, and whipped by such a King,
And eke so lewd a Priest.
FAB. VI. The Weesil, Rats and Mice.
A Mighty Weesil of Renown,
Well verst in things of State,
Was chosen King all over the Town,
Of all the Mice and Rats.
His Coronation Day was come,
And all the Grandees meet
The Weesil in a gaudy Room,
And bow beneath his Feet.
His Chair of State was Rind of Cheese,
And over his Royal Head
Some Bacon swerd in goodly guise,
Like Canopy was spread.
At length he walks and struts about,
Like any Lord or Duke;
Sometimes he does one Subject flout,
And sometimes one rebuke.
He calls an aged Rat aside,
And asked him his advice,
Whether a Project may not be tried
To eat up all the Mice.
Ay quoth the Rat, your Majesty
May be well satisfied,
Mice haters are of Monarchy,
And Regal State deride.
The Rats and Weesils now devour
The Mice in piteous sort,
They dye the Cellers with their Gore,
And with their Bones they sport.
At length the Mice are all destroyed,
The Weesils and the Rats
Would other Food find out abroad,
But that they feared the Cats.
The Weesils now together plot,
How they the Rats may eat;
Provision must be daily got,
Kings must have sumptuous Meat.
The Rats now all do go to pot:
Some baked, some boiled, some roasted;
It Is hoped they had not then forgot
How they the Mice accosted.
Thus some Men often by Tyrant Power,
Their Kindred, Subject-Slaves devour,
Do all the Villainies are done
To prop a beastly Tyrant Throne;
Tho others Blood the Tyrant filled,
They must at length to's Fury yield;
Naught stops a Tyrants Course but Decollation,
Or else a modern Abdication.
FAB. VII. Lubberland.
A Land there is, as Maps do tell,
(Tho they describe it not right well)
Nor near the Hot nor Frigid Zone,
But Latitude of fifty one;
In Natures plenty does abound,
With Fruits and Flocks is amply crowned:
The Natives never are content
But with tyrannick Government;
They Men resemble by their Faces,
But by their Backs resemble Asses.
For each is born with a great pack,
A warlike Saddle on his Back,
Which does adorn the parts are upper,
On nether parts they wear a Crupper.
Their Kings, as it is decreed by Jove,
Do always jump down from above:
Armed Cap-a-pee with Boots and Spurs,
Just fit to mount such servile Curs:
With Hunting-Whips they daily maul 'em,
And with long rowel'd Spurs do gall 'em.
He only is the great Bravado,
Has most the Regal Bastinado.
They leap and jump, and frisk and skip,
And sing the Praises of the Whip:
They bear the Lash without once bogging,
Extol the Royal Art of flogging.
With Blanket-Coat and wooden-Shoes,
The Man the Camel scarce outdoes.
Whilst Freemen feed on Dainties fine,
These do on Bread and Garlic dine;
And if they spend a Soulx in Wine,
The Health drank round must always be,
Their Kings applauded Tyranny:
Still let 'em be cursed Slaves for me.
FAB. VIII. The Hawk and Birds.
I.
A Hawk, that of Yore,
Had long welter'd in Gore,
And many a Sparrow had killed;
By the Birds he was told,
Now he was grown old,
He his number of Sins had fulfilled.
II.
No said the old Hawk,
My Actions to balk
If you shall but once thus combine,
The Gods will avenge,
My Cause will revenge,
I may murder ye Jure Divino.
III.
The Gods, said the Birds,
We'll not take their words;
If they've'gin you an Absolute Power,
They've'gin us a part,
Is not worth a Fart,
While you have a Right to devour.
IV.
The Birds all agreed,
And thus 'tvvas decreed,
That Slaves they no longer would be;
They throttl'd their King,
Then sweetly did sing
The Praises of free Liberty.
FAB. IX. The Owl and the Mice.
THE harmless Mice by Tyranny oppressed,
And by the Owls vast insolence distressed,
Came to a consult, where they did debate
Of Means to save their yet declining State.
Up stands a Mouse of generous noble Blood,
Free from the Fears of the more slavish Brood;
Says he, my Project, Sirs I hope will take,
We'll tie a Bell about the Owls damned Neck:
Thus when the Tyrants Bell does ever toll
Each Mouse secures himself within his hole.
At which a Mouse for Courage famed, arose,
And did as follows to the rest propose.
Brethren, says he, this enterprise is vain,
There is no end of this Tyrannick Reign,
As long as Owl, or any of his kind,
Shall here Dominion and an Empire find:
You may hang Bells about his Neck, but then
He pecks it off, and turns an Owl again.
Lets try for once, since our Condition's so,
What bold Micean Potentates can do.
The only way to guard our Empire well,
Is both to rid our selves of Owl and Bell.
Thus we our State and Freedom shall repair,
And live as free as our Forefathers were.
FAB. X. Neptune and the Fishes.
NEptune the God of the Tempestuous Deep,
When Is Brother Boreas hush't the Storms asleep;
Upon a Rock erected had his Throne,
His Chair of State was carved out of the Stone;
On either hand the lovely Mermaids sat,
The glittering Pageants of the Monarchs State;
The golden Tresses which their Heads adorn,
Died with the yellow glittering of the Mo^n.
He shook his Trident, when both far and near
His Guard du Corpse of Tritons shook for fear;
One he commanded strait to go and tell,
All Clans of Fish beneath the Surface dvvell,
That to his Court they presently repair,
Away the Triton flounc'd as swift as Air,
The scaly Tribe's in endless numbers flock
And rendevouz before the Royal Rock;
Neptune in State unto the brink did go,
And vievv'd the numerous Shoals of Fish below:
Then pointing to the Mermaids, thus he said,
"See there the lovely work the Gods have made,
"By them and Nature destined for my own,
"The just Supporters of my virtuous Throne.
"My Pleasure is, that every sort of Fish,
"For them do every Day provide a Dish,
"The best and wholesom'st Fish of every sort,
"And bring them every Day unto the Court.
Each Fish beneath the Surface dovvnvvard darts,
But glide along with very heavy Hearts;
In vain says one the heavenly Sun does burn,
Warm the vast Deep, and Spawn to Fishes turn:
The Gods its seems thus Neptune has empovver'd
And we are born only to be devoured;
Our Offspring still must pay their Parents Scores
Made for a Tyrants Food, and Bawds and's Whores
When vast lascivious Paunches spend always,
More than the numerous Shoals of Fish can raise
No more said he, by my consent, we'll own
A Tyrants Empire, but abjure his Throne;
The watery Tribes the motion did approve,
And to his Station every one did move.
FAB. XI. The Asylum.
THE Princes once did all combine,
The Peoples Liberty to mine;
Would make 'em right or wrong obey
An absolute Despotick Sway,
One Method, was to make us poor,
By loading Taxes more and more;
For when to Poverty Men fall,
They easily are brought to thrall:
And when their Spirit's sunk and gone,
Tyrants may lay vast Burdens on.
This did in some, in all it could
Not do: Some Men had better Blood,
And though they could not mend their Fate
They murmured at the Tyrants hate;
Which so incensed the Tyrants Ire,
Some they condemned to ravenous fire;
Some were to slavish Galleys sent,
Others in Fetters did lament.
Some Men were strangled in their Beds,
Others were hanged, some lost their Heads;
Some whipped till bleeding Backs were killed,
The Lands with Tyranny were filled,
But those whom better luck and hap
Did favor with a wished escape,
A City on Batavian Shore,
Did shelter from the Ills before;
Where native Liberty does thrive,
And no cursed Tyranny can live.
Long live great City, Favorite of Heaven,
And never want those Blessings thou have given.
FINIS.

