Londerias; OR, A NARRATIVE Of the SIEGE of London-Dery: Which was Formed by
the Late King James the 18th of April, and Raised the 1st. of August, Anno Dom.
1689

Written in Verse by Joseph Atckin.

DVBLIN: Printed by J. B. and S. P. at the back of Du^^^ Coffee-House in
Skinner-Row, for the Aut^^^ and Sold by him at his ^^ool near^ (...) And by the
Bookseller^ (...) Dublin (...) 1699.

To the Worshipful the MAYOR: To the Honorable ROBERT ROCHFORT, Esquire
Attorney General, and Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS, the Recorder:
And to the Aldermen, Burgesses, and Freemen of the City of LONDON-DERY.
Honored Sirs,
I Thought it my Duty to Dedic(...) this Poem to Your Honors, (...) have had
such a hand in the Subject^ it. Your Loyalty and Sufferings for the Protestant:
Interest have exceeded that of any other Society of Men: For when all the World
judged the Protestant Cause in IRELAND lost, Your Courage and Zeal Retrieved
it. Had the Late King JAMES Subdued Your City, the next Attack had been Fatal
to all Protestant Countries: But Your Courage and Conduct opposed the Torrent,
that was like to sweep the Protestant. Religion away with it. Your Sufferings
likewise have sufficiently demonstrated Your Zeal for the Crown of ENGLAND: But
to attempt Your due Eulogy, were to undertake an Herculean Labor, let the
following Poem speak the rest; which deserved the Pen of a Homer or Virgil
rather. The Actions and Occurrences of this Famous Siege are so Heroic of
themselves, that they needed no strokes of Poetry to set them off. He that
considers the uncoath Names made use of (...) this Poem, and how unfit they are
for Meter, will easily pardon the unl^ftiness of the Stil^. I have seen several
Narratives of the Siege, but all far short of the thing. And I may boldly aver,
That no Material Passage is wanting in this, having ba^^ my Informations from
good Hands, besides the Advantage of the Printed Narratives. I have Styled
Colonel Adam Murray, Here, and General; which I am sure no Man that knew his
particular Merits in the Siege, will think unjust or unsuitable, especially
such as have Read the Printed Narratives. But to Anticipate all Detraction, I
will Insert the Paragraph upon London-Dery out of the great Historical and
Poetical Dictionary, Published by Authority. London-Dery was defended by Eight
Sakers and Twelve Demiculverins; the People at first were thereunto encouraged
to hold out by Colonel Adam Murray, who gave frequent proofs of an unheard of
Valor, in his Sallies upon the Enemies, and killed the French General Maimont
with his own hands before the Walls. As Your Honors particular concern in the
Subject of this Poem, moved me to Dedicate it to You, so also the Opportunity
of knowing the Truth of the Actions encourages me to expect Your Protection:
For You are the best Judges of the Matter of Fact. That Your City may be for
ever Perserved from all such Popish Innovations, and from all Insults of
Foreign and Domestic Enemies, shall be the daily Prayer of Your Honors,

Most Obedient Servant and Orator, J. A.

Londeriados. Lib. I.
Contains the Occasion of the War, viz. The great growth of Popery, in
England, Scotland and Ireland, in the late King James's Reign, his attempting
to repeal the Penal Laws, and the committing the Bishops to the Tower for
opposing it. The Prince of Orange being invited, enters England with an Army,
and rescues it from Popery and Slavery: K. James flies to France, and begs Aid
to reinforce his Army in Ireland under Talbot; He obtains Six Thousand French;
Lands in Ireland, and calls a Parliament, and breaks the English Establishment;
which forced the Protestants in the North of Ireland to rise in Arms to defend
themselves: Upon which he calls a Council of War, and sends an Army to reduce
them. The Number and Quality of K. James's Army, their March to the North. The
Number and Quality of the Protestant Forces: Their General Londee's Treachery,
their defeat at Cladyford, and Retreat to London-dery: and the approach of the
Irish and French Forces to London-dery.

Sect. 1.
I Sing the Men, who Dery did restore
To the condition, as it was before.
They taught the French that Cities might withstand
Their Storms and Bombs under a good command.
Why should Heroic Deeds in silence be?
Since Poets are of the Fraternity.
Assist me Muse? whilst I the Siege do sing,
Into my memory all the matter bring?
Inspire my tongue? when I the causes tell,
How the dire War, how this famed Siege befell;
How the Townstands, how the proud foe advance,
How they are repulsed, and who great fame enhanse.
Sect. 2. The Occasion of the War.
THe Popish bigots did so far prevail,
As to attempt the Penal Laws repeal;
Which being opposed by the seven mitred lights,
King James commits them to the Tower to rights.
This daring Action opened Englands Eye,
To see their loss of Truth and Liberty:
The Prince of Orange they did then Invite
To enter England, and support their Right.
The generous Prince, but now our lawful King,
Did only thirteen thousand with him bring;
Who rescued England soon from Popery,
And sent King James abroad immediately,
A second time to crave for Foreign Aid;
Who humbly thus to's Gallick Brother prayed.
Sect. 3. K. James's Application to the K. of France for Aid.
DRead Sir? your poor distressed Brother James,
Succors according to the League he claims.
England again has forced me to fly,
For life and safety to your Majesty;
I trusted too much to their Non-resistance,
Which makes me now this treachery to instance.
The Prince of Orange has usurped my Throne;
And now there is nothing I can call my own:
Ireland excepted, where Tyrconnel stands,
Loyal and Faithful to my just demands:
He forty thousand Native Irish has,
Who in my Cause will spend their dearest breath.
There Is Maxwell, Mackarty and Hamilton,
Brave Sarsfield, Shelden and Teague-O Regan:
Fit to Conduct our Forces in that Land;
Who will be Faithful to Our just Command.
But in the North a stubborn City lies,
On which I Have cause to look with jealous eyes.
It Is Dery called, and fully cramb'd by those,
That Roman Doctrine and its Friends oppose.
Besides the Lord Montjoy, I fear him more,
Than all the Subjects on the Irish shore:
Him the Scots-Party have chose for their Guide
And vowed to fight in no Command beside.
I Against those some veteran Troops demand,
To reinforce our Army in that Land.
Sect. 4. The King of France's Answer.
TO him great Lewis gave attentive ear,
And thus replied, Dear Brother never fear?
With that he drew his Sword, and nobly swore,
I Will never sheath thee, till I you restore.
I Will transport over to the Irish Coast,
Six Thousand Horse and Foot out of my Host:
These will suffice to open the Campeign;
I Will add some more to forward your design.
Maimont, Lozin and Rose shall Generals be,
Marquis Anlieur, Boiston, and brave Pontee.
And least the Prince should any Troops send over,
I Will cause my Fleet ride on the Irish shore.
Sect. 5. The Lord Montjoy Prisoner in France.
WHilst one thus prays, and the other thus replies
Behold Expresses from Tyrconnel flies;
To the French Court; amongst whom for to decoy
They sent the Brave and Noble Lord Montjoy:
Pretending to consult King James's mind,
If Talbot might the Government resign.
But he could scarce his Errand fully tell,
Till he was sent Prisoner to the Bastile.
The Dery Party their great loss solace,
And all their hopes in Adam Murray place;
For Londee he was treacherous and base.
And thus our Hero secretly prepares,
All things convenient for the bloody Wars;
He viewed Londee with a careful eye,
And daily checks his subtle treachery,
Sect, 6. King James lands in Ireland.
MEan time K. James lands on the Irish Coast,
In greatest spendor with his Gallick Host.
Great was the joy and triumphs of that day;
For th'Irish began to divide the prey:
Nor King nor Talbot could restrain their pride,
For they did all the English lands divide
This being done, the next and greatest care,
Was to take measures for the future War.
The English Lords, People and Clergy fly,
Who leave the Kingdom to the Irish sway;
And Mass is sung in Christ-Church every day.
Only the North withstands their furious rage,
And does bad success to their arms presage.
Which to reduce, they used a thousand tricks,
But all in vain were the Irish Politics.
Threats and rewards with them will take no place,
Naught can force them th'Irish yoke to embrace.
Sect. 7. King James's Council of War.
THerefore King James calls a Council of War,
And plainly states the matter as they are;
You know, my Friends? the Northern Heretics
Have still withstood our milder Politics;
There Is naught can conquer them but dint of sword,
We must use force, I see, upon my word.
I Have called you hither for your sound advice,
Lets think how we may do it in a trice.
If England such true Friends as you had bred,
I never had bowed unto the French for aid.
Sect. 8. Tyrconnels Speech.
UP starts Tyrconnel, and he thus declaimed,
In my Opinion we may be ashamed,
To suffer such a Bo^rish number stand,
In opposition to our just Command.
Ten Thousand of your Maiesty's best Troops,
Will them reduce and frustrate all their hopes:
Send all the French and our best Cavalry,
Thus we may end the War immediately.
Sect. 9. Sarsfield 's Opinion.
Against whose Opinion Sarsfield does enveigh,
And states the matter clear another way.
My Liege? Ten thousand thrice will scarce suffice,
To grapple with such stubborn Enemies:
For we must first oppose them in the Plain,
And then suppose some of our Troops be slain;
Where Is a just number to push on a Siege?
Dery will certainly hold out, my Liege?
The valiant Murray's Friends dwell in the Town
And all the neighboring Scotsmen are his own:
He Is a stout Man, his Trade of late has bin,
To hunt the Tories, and their Heads bring in:
Let Us to the North a puissant Army send,
If we that City to obtain intend.
Sect. 10. Teague Oregan 's Speech.
THus the brave Sarsfield. Next spoke Teague Oregan,
In short my Liege? I am of his Opinion.
Were to sustain a Siege, I may boldly tell,
No Man in Ireland could my self excel.
To Mann the Counterscrap and line the breach,
These nobler Arts my better genii teach.
But to pickeer and skirmish I know not;
These are as facil, as to drink a Pot.
Thus Berwick, Shelden, and thus all the rest,
Approve great Sarsfield's Sentence as the best.
Sect. 11. The General's Ordered.
THen in all haste Maimont is ordered forth,
With thirty thousand to reduce the North;
Maimont whose early valor on the Rhine,
'Bove all the Gallick Officers did shine.
Him the French King sent to assist King James,
Against each such Subject as his reign declaimes.
Hamilton likewise was next worthy found,
To head the Army on the Irish ground.
He that young Temple had outwitted so,
That naught but death could expiate the blow.
The wretched Youth against his false friend exclaims;
And in despair drowned himself in the Thames.
Sect. 12. King James 's Horse.
KIng James displayed his Royal Banner then,
To which repaired these Military Men.
The sound of Drums and Trumpets fills the air;
And every Warlike chief does hasten there.
Both Horse and Foot crow'd daily to the Plain,
And all appear with a most gaudy Train.
Mars never looked so big in any Field;
With polisht Armor and bright glittering shield.
Of all the gallant Troops that crowded there,
None did so brave as Sarsfield's Horse appear.
Those he had raised upon the swift Liffee,
And out of Connaught where his Friends they be.
Next him came valiant Parker with his Men,
On stately Geldings prancing over the plain.
Those he at Kailes and Navan quickly raised;
Then Tarah, County Mead him greatly praised.
Next those Tirconnel's Royal Regiment came,
Who from Minuth obtained a mighty name:
Though they were of another core of old;
But in Kildare great Talbot's praise is told.
Next unto those my Lord Strabanes did prance;
Fagan of Filtrim did his Horse advance.
His Fathers Friends had him forsaken all,
Then for Assistance he fled to Fingall.
My Lord Galmoy's did from Kilkenny ride,
But most were raised upon the Barahs side;
His Friends the Butlers did his Regiment fill,
And for his Honor did obey his will.
Luttrell's Reg'ment's from Kings-County brought,
Southerland's Reg'ment's from Tirconnel sought.
Sect. 13. King James 's Dragoons.
THe swift Dragoons came next unto the ground,
And placed their Standards as they Storage found;
My Lord Obryan his Dragoons did raise,
Upon the banks of Shannon; to whose praise,
Let future ages their great actions tell:
For they the Danes from Ireland did expel.
County of Lowth, Lord Dungan raised his Men,
And from Tradath and County of Dublin.
The County Clare Lord Clifford's Troops advance,
Who to the Camp in noble manner prance.
To Antrim and Loughneat Sir Neal Oneal,
Did for his Reg'ment of Dragoons appeal.
In Tipperary, Purcell raised his Men;
Who in brave order rode into the Plain.
In Kings and Queens County brave Luttrel raised
His Regiment, who for his valor's praised.
The last Dragoons that came into the plain,
Were Col'nel Cottrel's, all brave lufty Men,
Sect. 14. King James 's Foot.
THe Drums did beat and Hautboys sweetly played,
The gallant Foot marched next unto the aid.
Ramsey marched first with his tall Regiment,
To him Tirconnel did the same present.
Near Cork Glencarty raised his Regiment,
Who skipt and danced all the way they went.
In ancient times his Ancestors were Kings,
Over all that Country which his praises Sings.
Gordon Oneal came next with Heart and Hand,
To fight for's King against his Native Land,
Most of his Foot he raised in Tyrone,
Ocane his Nephew joined some of his own.
Gordon Oneal is that dire Traytor's Son,
Who raised a great Rebellion in Tyrone.
In Westmeath, Nugent raised his Regiment,
Who to the Camp in gallant Order went.
Roscommon youths brave Dillon's Reg'ment made,
Who marched with noble courage to the aid.
Barker of Guards the tallest Men he chose,
To grace the Army, and to daunt the Foes.
Mackartymore near Cork a Reg'ment raised,
Which for brave Soldiers all the Kingdom praised.
The Earl of Antrim's red-shants next went on,
To join the Army in Battalion:
The same from Antrim and Dinluse he drew,
Who t^ the Camp with noble courage flew.
Lord Slane his Men near to Ardee he chose,
Brave valiant youths fit to oppose the Foes.
Though he was stout, and they were valiant,
Yet General Ginkle gathers up his Rent.
Great Cav'nagh raised a noble Regiment,
With which from Carry to the Camp he went.
Out of Kilkenny Colonel Butler made,
A Regiment, with which he joined the aid.
From Carrigmacross, and from Mannaghan,
A Regiment was raised by Mackmahon.
From Waterford my Lord Tyrone Collects
A Reg'ment which the Name of Powers affects.
Into the Camp Sir Maurice Eustace sent,
From Naas and Kilcullin a Regiment.
Anth'ny Hamilton in the Kings-County,
Raised a noble Reg'ment near Roscreagh.
My Lord of Louth a noble Regiment made,
In his own County which he led to the aid.
About Dundalk Lord Bellue raised another,
And let them to the Camp in gallant order.
Sir Michael Creagh, Lord Mayor of Dublin,
Raised a Regiment of valiant Men.
Waughop and Buchan two Scots Gentlemen,
From Tirconnel two Regiments obtain.
All these and many more their station take,
And with brave Men a puissant Army make.
King James he viewed the Forces as they stand,
And gave the General Officers Command:
Around the Camp Huzza's did rend the Sky,
And treble Volleys crowned the Harmony.
He of this Army Thirty Thousand chose,
His Fatal Enemies in the North to'ppose.
In gallant order they their march begun,
And to the North of Ireland quickly run;
Charlemont and Dunganon were their own,
They found no opposition in Tyrone.
Betwixt Tyrone and Donnegal remains,
A silent River swollen by the Rains;
This stopped their March; the Bridge was broken down,
At Cladyford by the adjacent Town.
Here we will leave the Irish to consider,
The best expedient to get over the River.
Sect. 15. The Protestant Army in the North.
WEll did the Northern Protestants foresee,
The dire effects of this new Tragedy;
How that Religion and Estates must go,
If they yield all up to the common Foe.
A Foe that is seldom merciful and kind
To any Person of a different mind.
They Must'red up near Thirty thousand Men,
Both Horse and Foot in Warlike Discipline.
They chose Londee their General, and did grace
The brave Lord Blaney with the second place:
Next 'him Sir Arthur Roydon. These they be
Our Northern Forces Foot and Cavalry:
Upon a spacious Plain near Ballendret,
In gallant order these brave Reg'ments met.
The sound of Drums and Trumpets rent the sky,
To England's Banner these brave chiefs did fly.
Sect. 16. The Protestant Horse, Foot and Dragoons.
SIr Arthur Roydon's Horse rode to the Plain
In Warlike Order, 'bove a Thousand Men:
Some of his Men strong polisht Armor bore;
But he himself a Silken Armor wore.
Above a thousand Foot he thither brought,
Who at Drummore against the Irish fought.
Thither my Lord Mount-Alexander's Horse,
And Foot advance to join the English Force.
Both Horse and Foot the relicts of Drummore,
Where they the shock of th'Irish Army bore:
For he Nore-East a General Post obtained,
When at Drummore the Irish Army gained
The Victory. Young Lord Mountjoys Dragoons
Advanced next, raised in his Fathers Towns:
For near to Newton Stuart in Tyrone,
The Neighboring Gentlemen are all his own.
The false Londee under Dumbarton bred,
His Fathers Reg'ment of Foot thither led.
Next unto these brave Skivington's Reg'ment
Into the Camp in gallant order went:
From Killeleagh, young Sir George Maxwell,
Was to that Reg'ment Lieutenant Col'nel.
From Ballymanagh the Lord Dontreth's Men,
Were the next Foot that marched to the Plain.
Then Baron Blaney a brave Reg'ment led,
Which near Ardmagh and Blackwater were bred.
Next Montgomery's Foot of Bellilesson,
From Ligachurry the brave Ritchison,
Amongst which the brave Sir Nicholas Atchison.
Then Audley Mervin from Omagh was sent,
To join our Forces with a Regiment.
Sir John Magill from Down some Forces sent
From Garvagb, Kenney a brave Regiment.
Then Parker brought a Reg'ment from Coleraine,
Col'nel Hammil another from Strabane.
From Dungannon brave Chichester was sent,
With Cafil the Lord Charlemonts Regiment.
The Lagan Horse under James Hamilton,
In that Encampment great applauses won.
From Colemackletrain from Bert and Inishowen,
'Squire Forward brought Horse and Foot of his own.
From Glaslough, Mannaghan and Caledon,
A thousand Foot were brought by Squire Johnson.
Squire Moor of Aghnacloy a Reg'ment brought,
And Gairnes of Knockmany at Derry fought.
From Hammiltons-Ban Franck Hammilton led,
A brave Reg'ment which near Ardmagh were bred.
From Roewater and Newton-Limmavady,
'Squire Philips sent of Foot a mighty body.
From Hilsburrough 'Squire Hill a Reg'ment sent,
Which to the Camp in gallant order went.
From Down likewise Major Stroud did bring
A gallant Reg'ment which his praises Sing.
Alderman Tomkins from Tirkearing sent
Into the Camp a Gallant Regiment,
Which joined Col'nel Murray as they went.
The Vaughans likewise brought forth of their own,
Some Independent Troops from Inishowen.
From Loughsuilly, the Stuarts and Conninghams
A Party brought, which to our Forces joins.
Groves of Castle Shannaghan Forces brought,
From Kilmackrennan which the Enemy fought.
This valiant Man after the Wars was slain,
When on the Fues he is by the Tories taken;
He Is much Lamented for his Worth and Zeal,
And suff'red greatly for the Commonweal;
Him Charles Colquhoun assisted with some Horse,
From Letterkenny, and they joined our Force.
These and some thousands more came to the plain,
A puissant army of brave lusty Men;
The Generals viewed the Forces as they lay,
And valiantly St. George's arms display;
Then they in haste upon the spot did call
A Council of the Off'cers General.
Sect. 17. The Protestants Council of War.
TO whom Londee addressed himself in kind,
And in few words he opened his mind,
Great Sirs, King James advances to the Fin,
But that is the Question, where he will enter in,
At Cladyford, at Lifford, or Castlefin;
To Guard these Passes, and Secure this Ground,
Is the great Topic which I do propound.
From hence to Lifford near two miles you see,
To Cladyford three miles and more there be;
And four to Castlefin; from hence we can
Send speedy succor, and the Fords Command.
This I advise, but yours its to prepend,
What Is more conducive to the proper end.
Sect. 18. Detachments sent to Guard the Fords of Fin.
THe Noble Council fearing no Treachery,
Applaud his Wisdom, and the same decree,
From thence to Lifford some good Troops they send,
To Oppose the Irish, and the Ford defend;
Marvins and Kenneys Regiments they be
That Guard the Town and Ford from the En'my.
To Cladyford five thousand men they send,
To Guard the Ford, and Broken-Bridge defend:
Sir Arthur Roydons Horse and Foot went there,
Of all the Army the best Troops they were.
To Castlefin they sent three thousand Men,
To stop that pass, and guard that Ford of Fin.
Ballylessons and Skivingtons Men they be
Who guard that Town and Ford from the Enemy.
Sect. 19. The Engagement at Lifford.
THe Morn from South, the Fin from West commence,
At Lifford they conjoin their confluence;
From thence to Dery in full streams they flow,
And guard the South of Dery from the Foe:
Therefore King James must pass the swollen Fin,
If he the City does expect to win.
This to effect he sent some of his Horse,
To pass the Ford at Lifford with great Forc^
The sound of Drums and Trumpets rent the air,
And th'Irish Forces to the Ford repair.
And boldly enter in: when lo! our Men,
Pour showers of Bullets from a Ravelin.
The Irish drop, and with the purple gore,
Of dying Soldiers stain the waters over.
From the other side the En'my fiercely fire,
And reinforce their Troops as need require.
Till they got footing on the other shore,
And with unequal Force our Men o're-power.
Then Death appeared in many a dismal hue,
Our Men retreat the Enemy pursue.
Sect. 20. The Engagement at Cladyford.
SOme of our Forces unto Clady hye,
T'assist our Party, against the Enemy;
Amongst whom great Murray with some friends ascends,
To Cladyford, and stoutely it defends.
On the other side King James's forces stood,
Upon a Hill which covered all the flood:
From whence they fired smartly on our Men,
Drawn up on the other side upon a Plain.
This galled our Troops, the Foot began to fly,
And quit the Pass clear to the Enemy.
Maimont to pass the Ford a Squadron sends
Of his best Horse, Murray the Pass defends.
Mayor Nangle who led the Irish Force,
Dropped in the River headlong from his Horse;
And many a valiant Trouper floating lay,
Which the slow River scarce could bear away.
Thus he opposed the Foes till all his own,
Forsook the Ford and left him there alone.
Our Troops expected succor from the Camp,
But none being sent, this did their courage dam^.
To valiant Hero's flights a dismal sting,
Great Murray hopes to rectify the thing;
Paulus ashamed died upon the spot:
Great Varro fled, 'cause he despaired not,
To conquer Hannibal. Our Forces fly,
And quit the passage to the Enemy.
Horror and Death our flying Troops pursue,
The Irish Horse our scatt'red Forces slew.
They intercept our Troops from Castlefin,
With Death and slaughter and that Country win.
Brave Wigton of Rapho at Long-Casey,
Opposed their Horse, till the Foot got away.
The Irish Foot the broken Bridge repair,
And in few hours at Ballandret they were.
Sect. 21. Londee 's Treachery.
OUr beaten Troops the doleful Tidings bring
Of both defeats, which through our Camp did ring
The dire Alarm. Our rouzed Chiefs to Arms?
And nobly vowed soon to revenge their harms.
Nature it self our Camp thus fortifies,
For on its Front a rapid River flies;
Each wing a Wood, the Rear a bog does stay,
Through which a narrow pass the long-Casey,
But false Londee had other Fish to Fry.
Thus in the Camp he uttered his mind;
Dear Friends? you Row against the Tide and Wind:
Let Us fly to walls, where we may safely fight,
Against our Foes and there support our right.
His words like Lightning through the Camp did fly,
And daunted all their hearts immediately.
Some call him Coward, some Traitor, most do judge
It most expedient, and to Dery trudge;
At last the venom poisoned each Man's breast,
Then all to Dery fly in greatest haste.
Londee himself rid Post to tell the News,
Of our defeat, never spared his Horses Shoes.
Sect. 22. The March of the Irish Army to London-Dery.
OUr broken Forces into Dery fly,
And shut the Gates thereof immediately.
Some to England, others to Scotland go,
And leave the Country naked to the Foe.
The Irish Troops ravage the Country round,
And carry away whatso'ere they found.
They march to Dery in a full career,
And in few days before the Walls appear.
King James took up his Quarters at St. Johnston,
And there dispatched, what was fit to be done.
Londeriados LIB. II.
Contains a description of London-Dery, its Situation and Fortifications: The
Charter of London-Dery broken by Tyrconnel. The Protestant Corporation turned
out, and a Papist Corporation chosen. An Irish Convent built, and a Papist
Regiment put into the Garrison, which being sent for to some Rendevouze, the
Protestants rise in Arms and expel all the Papists out of the Town. They
refuse to receive the Earl of Antrims Regiment. The Lord Montjoys Mediation,
who obtains Londee to be their Governor, and entreats the City to receive six
Companies of his Regiment, after the Papist Soldiers were disbanded out of it.
William III. Proclaimed King. The Contributers toward the holding out of the
City. Their Application to England and Scotland for Aid. K. James's offers to
the City. Londee the Governor's Capitulation. Colonel Adam Murray moves the
City to hold out, and discharges Londee. The General Council choose Lieutenant
Colonel Baker and Dr. Walker, a Clergyman, to be Governors. The reformee of the
broken Regiments. Eight Regiments formed in the City. The Irish Encampments
before the Walls. The Earl of Abercors Message to the City.

Sect. 1.
ASsist me Muses? with your Sacred flame,
That I may celebrate the mighty name,
Of this famed Town, nor Troy, nor Carthage are
To be compared with thee in art of War?
For Troy was raised, and Carthage burnt. Thy name,
Out-lives the fury of more Stratagem.
'Bove Rome it self thy praises I Will extol;
The Gauls burnt Rome all but the Capitol.
The Greeks sacked Troy, the Romans Carthage strong,
The Gauls burnt Rome: but thee they could not wrong.
Sect. 2. A Description of London-Dery.
DEry whose proud and stately Walls disdain,
By any Foreign En'my to be t'ane;
Betwixt surrounding Hills which it command,
On an ascending brow dos snugly stand.
Against those Hills the Walls rise equally,
And on strong Bastions planted Cannon lie.
The curtains likewise have an equal power,
T'annoy the Foes, and the Town to secure;
A River deep and swift with flowing Tide,
Surrounds the East and South, and guards that side.
A higher Wall and Bastions do defend,
The West and North from the Foes cruel end.
There Is a great Church from whose high Steeple goes,
Thunder and Lightning to annoy the Foes.
Near it is a Sally-Port, from whence they may
Safely spring out to hurt the Enemy,
From whose high Bulwark several Cannon play.
The Town's near Oval with four stately Gates,
The wholesome Air an Appetite creates.
The Shipkey-Gate receives the Merchants store,
There ride such Ships as Sail up from Kilmore;
To whose proud Flag all Ships must strike their Sails,
If not the Fort to sink them never fails.
From that to Dery its a League and more,
The swifest River and the finest shore:
For near this place the noble Salmon play,
Till the wise Fisher makes of them a prey.
The cunning Angler likewise with his fly,
Entraps the noble Salmon as they play:
Panting for breath he halls them on the sand,
And seizes the noble booty with his hand.
Upon its banks some noble Buildings stand,
Fit to divert the Nobles of the Land.
Ships of the greatest burden safely go,
Above the City to careen, or so.
Near the South-gate the Ferry-key dos stand,
Where they waft over the Natives of the Land.
On The Other side some noble Buildings be,
Fit for the ends of Pride and Luxury.
On each side pleasant Gardens to the eye,
Which do abound with fruit exceedingly.
Near Bishops-Gate, the fatal Windmills lie,
Where Cattle feed and Criminals do dye.
This is the ready passage to Rapho,
And Donnegal from whence their Trafficks flow.
Upon the North, the Butchers-Gate does lie,
This side some moorish grounds do fortify;
But yet it leads to St. Columba's Well,
To Inishowen, to Bert and Pennyburn-Mill.
Here Is a plain path to Brookhall and Kilmore,
A fertile Country, and a pleasant shore.
A Major the Town, a Dean the Church demands,
A Governor the Garrison commands.
In the Towns center stands the Common Hall,
On stately Pillars: the Main-guard and all.
There Is a Parade for near Ten Thousand Men,
In the four main streets and the Diamond.
In this great Hall the Magistrates do meet,
To take good Counsel, and to do what is fit.
Sect. 3. The Charter of London-Dery broke by Tirconnel.
ANd in this Hall the City Records be,
Amongst which of Common Council a Decree
That no Papist shall dwell within the Walls,
This Statute to the Irish fury falls;
For Talbot had their ancient Charter broke,
And all the English Customs did Revoke;
The Learned Rochfort Recorder of the Town,
Opposed the same to his great Renown;
Yet in spite of Reason and the English Laws,
Talbot the Charter from the City draws:
Turned out the English Corporation,
And chose all Popish Members of his own.
Cormick Oneal of Broughshanes chosen Major,
For Aldermen some of the fol'wing are.
Brian Oneal of Ballinaskreen is chose,
Whose Fathers did the English Tooops oppose,
In Queen Eliza's Reign most barbarously;
And Rore Ocane the Lord of Canes Country.
The great Orourk is made an Alderman,
Who afterward a Col'nels Post did gain.
Then Shane Oneal Con-Baccaghs Eldest Son
Mackon'ways and Macanallies from Tyrone,
And the Odogherties from Inishowen.
For Burgesses and Freeman they had chose,
Broagmakers, Butchers, Raps, and such as those.
In all the Corporation's not a Man
Of British Parents except Buchanan.
An Irish Convent's built, and several Friars,
Did teach the Irish youth to say their Prayers.
Thus they the English City did o're-sway,
And Mass is said at Market-cross each day.
The Protestants did their sad case bemoan,
For Irish Soldiers kept the Garrison.
My Lord Mountjoy was Col'nell to the same;
At length an Order from Tyrconnel came:
To march this Reg'ment to the Rendevouze,
By which o'resight he did the City loose.
For when this Reg'ment did the City quit,
They never would after Popish Troops admit.
At length a Trumpet's by Tirconnel sent,
T'admit the Earl of Antrims Regiment;
They boldly shut the Gates and time Demand,
To weigh the matter and their Answer send.
Sect. 4. The Protestant's refuse to Admit the Earl's Regiment.
AT the Great Hall the Protestants conveen,
And freely speak their minds as may be seen.
Alderman Tomkins was the first that spoke,
And thus declaimed against the Irish Yoke;
Dear Friends Tyrconnel seeks us to enslave,
And this strong City in his power to have.
But if your minds shall all with mine agree,
We Will trust to England for our Liberty.
Up starts Buchanan and thus boldly spoke,
Take Heart good Sir, never fear the Irish Yoke,
Receive the Earl of Antrims Regiment
^n Peace and Plenty rest your self content.
Alderman Gervace Squire gave this reply,
Sir! you're a Traitor to our Liberty:
And to the English Crown from whence we draw,
Our Right and Title, Charter and our Law.
Whilst they debated thus, another came,
With weeping Eyes and thus accosted them.
Dear Friends a? War upon your selves you will bring,
Talbots Deputed by a lawful King:
They that resist the power do God withstand,
You Will draw a Potent Army to this Land;
Who will these goodly buildings soon deface,
Ravish your Wives and Daughters before your face.
And all your wealth and substance soon devour,
Submit your selves unto the present power.
Against whom Lieutenant Campsy boldly stood;
To save the City with his dearest blood;
And for an Answer to the Regiment,
In greatest haste some Cannon ball he sent:
But the Lieutenant was shot in the Arm,
As they the cent'nel at the Store disarm.
Two days this Reg'ment lay at Ferry-key,
The chiefs whereof, the following Parties be:
From Antrim the Macdonnels numerous race,
From Glenwoods, the Ohagans came apace,
The Lord Macquhire from Enniskilling came,
The great Ocanes came from the River Bane;
Captain Talbot, Tirconnels natural Son,
Then all the great Oneals out of Tyrone;
And Capt. Macdonnel, Colkittagh's Son.
The Earl himself was hastening hither too,
Threatening to force the City thereunto:
But all the Country gathered in apace,
Fearing the Irish might surprise the place.
Then Master Hindman, Captain of the Guard,
To strengthen whom the Neighbors all repaired;
Attackt this Party, as the City fired,
Then in disorder they in haste retired:
But this retreat such consternation bred,
That some with Arms and some without them fled.
The Earl himself, and the brave Lord Macquhire,
In greatest haste to Antrim did retire.
Londee being gone to Dublin at that hour,
They chose Squire Philips for their Governor:
Who in his Wisdom to their great content,
Prescribed to them a form of Government.
These things alarmed the Irish Government,
In which matter much time and pains were spent.
My Lord Mountjoy to mediate came down,
Who placed Londee Governor of the Town.
My Lord did likewise beg the Towns consent,
T'admit six Comp'nies of his Regiment;
To perform duty with the City foot,
With much ado the Town consented to it.
Upon their Solemn Oath for to stand by,
The right of England, against all Popery.
March foll'wing they proclaimed his Majesty,
The Popish Members of the City fly,
And all the City joined in Loyalty.
Sect. 5. The Contributers toward the holding out of the City against King
James.
DUring th'interregnum the Loyal Town,
Behaved it self with Zeal to'he Engl. Crown.
Campsy the Major all the four Gates did close,
And did the Earl of Antrims Men oppose.
The Aldermen was at a vast expense,
In Stores and Money for the Towns defense.
Alderman Tomkins raised a Troop of Horse,
And laid in Stores against the Irish Force.
And Gervace Squire with all his might assists,
In Council, and our Troops with Stores subsists.
Alderman Craig with Stores asists the Town,
Preaching Obedience to the English Crown.
Alderman Grahms laid to his helping hand,
With Stores and Money does the Foe withstand.
Cocken an Alderman in Council sat,
He did the Church and State both Regulate.
Alderman Hobson with Stores of Provision,
Supplied the Forces of our Garrison.
Lennox and Leckey which are Aldermen,
For speedy succors went into Scotland.
Out of their Shops our Army Clo^ths received;
Thus all the Aldermen themselves behaved:
Except Buchanan whose a Knave all over,
For he had learned to tell his Beads before.
The Burgesses and Freemen gave their aid,
And for their Loyalty have nobly paid.
Lady a Merchant was at vast expense,
In Stores and Money for the Towns defense.
Brave Gemmit the Collector of the Town
For its defense spent great Stores of his own.
Morrison and Shennan Apothecaries,
Were at a vast expense in remedies.
James Roe Cunningham, and Master Brooks,
Gave great supplies, as are seen by their Books.
Ewins and Wilson Merchants gave the same,
And forty Merchants which I cannot name.
Horrace Kennedy went into Scotland,
And moved the Council some relief to send.
Harvey a Tanner, was a leading Man,
And John his Son, now their Chamberlain;
The same and Curlew did attend the Store,
Dividing Portions both to Rich and Poor.
Master Mackay and Evins did assist,
And with their Substance did our Troops subsist.
Then Master Mogrige the Clerk of the Crown,
With Stores and Council did assist the Town,
Captain Mo^crief raised a Company,
And Captain Morrison fought the Enemy.
Thus all the Town were at a vast expense,
In Stores and Money for the Towns defense?
The County likewise gave a helping hand,
And with their Forces did the Foe withstand.
Old Major Philips, a chief in forty one,
In's Ninetieth Year into the City came.
Endured the Siege and with sound Councils taught,
Our brave Commanders, who the En'my fought.
Next him brave Captain Godfrey of Colerain
Into the City with a Comp'ny came.
Lieutenant Col'nel Stuart from Maghera,
Did to the City with a party draw.
Then Captain Thomas Lance came from Colerain,
From Prehend Captain Michael Conningham,
And Captain Bacon from Magilligan.
Captain Molholland came from Maghera,
From Tibbermore we Ensign Jackson saw.
Squire Forward helped the Town most nobly,
With thousand Horsemen against the Enemy.
Squire Philips went to England to procure,
Some speedy succors the Town to secure;
The Learned Couns'ler Cairns to England hies,
To move that Court to send us fresh supplies.
Their Majesty's like tender Parents sent,
Two Regiments and Stores for the intent.
James Hammilton the useful Stores did bring,
Who was entrusted therewith by the King:
He Is Son to the great Lady Hammilton,
Which has Estates on either side the Town.
Richards and Cuningham the Reg'ments led,
The Stores were landed, but the Col'nels fled.
For base Londee had packt them out of Town,
Misrepresenting our condition.
This happened but four days before the King,
The Irish Army before the Town did bring.
Sect. 6. The late King James's Offers to the City.
Archdeacon Hamm'lton by K. James is sent;
Unto the City with this Compliment:
If they in four days would yield up the Town,
All the Inhabitants should enjoy their own;
With pardon for all past Rebellion.
And he in his Commission sped so well,
That Londee forced the Town to Article;
Th'Ingenious Nevil, and the said Divine,
Went to King James to tell him they would sign
In a few days; to hasten which the King,
The Irish Army before the Town did bring;
Delays are dangerous, and he pushes on,
The Town to sign the Capitulation.
Which being signed and ready to be sent
Great Murray throws himself and Compliment.
Just to the Walls, who lay then at Kilmore,
And bravely fought his way upon the Shore.
Londee refused him entrance, but the Town
Opened the Gate to their great renown.
The Loyal party knew his grand design,
Then to his conduct they themselves resign.
Then in a Moment all the Town rebels,
And curse the Author of the Articles.
For at the Guard a Proclamations made,
That all true hearts repair to the Parade;
With Handkerchiefs on Arms; that all shall die,
Who would yield up the Town to Popery.
Then in a trice eight thousand Men conveen,
To whom great Murray did this Speech begin.
Sect. 7. Col. Murray moves the City to hold out.
DEar Friends? this City is our last effort,
Let Us not quit this I earnestly exhort;
Least that in Albion to our disgrace be spoke;
That we submitted to the Irish yoke.
Hold out brave boys, England will succor send,
If we like Men the City do defend.
Here are sufficient to sustain a Siege,
If we to Loyalty our selves oblige;
Yet all is in vain, if we do not expel,
The Traitor Londee with his false Caball.
The Town consents, huzza's do rend the Sky;
Then unto Londee all in haste did fly.
Sect. 8. Londee's Impeachment and Discharge.
TO whom great Murray spoke this fatal speech,
Of Treachery, I do you now Impeach,
Both to the Prot'stant Cause, and to our King,
A Popish Reign upon us you do bring;
You quit Tyrone unto the Enemy,
At Cladyford you caused our Army fly;
And now you think for to betray the Town,
By a Capitulation of your own?
Therefore lay down your Power? for we will chose;
Such Loyal Men as shall oppose the Foes.
Lieutenant Cook who from fair Lisbon came,
Courageously did the same Cause maintain.
Great Murray seized the Guards, the Keys and all,
They presently a General Council call:
The Church and Kirk do thither jointly go,
In opposition to the common Foe;
Although in time of Peace they disagree,
Yet they sympathize in Adversity.
Sect. 9. Baker and Walker chosen Governors, and Eight Regiments formed.
THem in like words great Murray thus adrest,
Dear Friends, th'Intestine Foe I have suppressed.
Here at your feet, I Will lay down all my Power,
If you will contrive, how we may best secure
This Loyal Town. Then all with one consent,
Agreed upon this form of Government;
Baker and Walker Governors they chose,
And formed eight Reg'ments to oppose the Foes.
The Horse to Col'nel Murray they bestow;
Him General of the Field they do allow.
From Philiphaugh near Tweed, his Fathers came,
Where they enjoy the Lairdship of that name.
The noble Name of Murray is well known,
For their great Service to the Royal Crown.
Cairnes of Knockmany's his Lieutenant Col'nel,
From County of Mead his brave Major Bull.
Coghran, Carleton, Moor, Stephen Herd, and Murray
His valliant Brother, Captains to him be.
The Borderers did fill his Regiment,
Who to the Field with noble Courage went.
Sect. 10. The Reformee of the Foot.
THe Foot in manner foll'wing they dispose,
Baker and Walker Colonels they chose;
Whitney and Mitchelburn the same honor gain;
To Parker the brave Reg'ment of Colerain:
Crofton and Hammill the same Station grace,
These and the Volunteers defend the place.
Out of the broken Regiments they chose,
The Soldiers which this Army did compose.
The Governors all matters soon dispose,
The Col'nels their Subaltern Off'cers chose.
Watson's made Master of the Artillery,
Two hundred Gunners and Montrosses be.
James Murray was Conducter to the Train,
Our Ingenier was Adams of Strabane.
For Town-Major they chose Captain Freeman:
Thus in few hours they formed a noble band,
Which did King James's Forces all withstand;
Which now begirt the City every where,
And these their several Encampments are.
Sect. 11. Galmoy's and Ramsey's Camp near Balliugry hill, West.
UPon the West the Danish Forts among,
They formed a Camp of 13 thousand strong,
This stops relief from Lifford and Rapho,
Opposed the Windmill hill and Fields below.
Galmoy and Ramsey did this Camp command,
Which did the Town West and Nore-west withstand.
On each side Bishops-gate some Bastions be,
Which did this Camp annoy exceedingly.
Sect. 12. General Hammilton's and Maimont's Camp at Brookhall, North.
A Second's formed at Brookhall near Kilmore,
Which did consist of thousands 12 and more
Of their best Horse and Foot, the French beside,
Hamm'lton and Maimont did this Camp preside.
This Camp did awe the Town Nore-west and Nore,
The fatal Boom lay here near to Kilmore.
Sect. 13. The Lord Lowth's Camp on the East over the Lough.
UPon the East another Camp was laid,
Beyond the Lough at Strong-Orchards. They made
A Trench and Batt'ry to annoy the Town,
From whence most Booms and red hot Balls were thrown.
Bellue and Lowth commanded in this Plain,
With the forces that conquered Colerain.
Sir Michael Creagh did the Boom command,
To stop all succors from the Neighboring land.
The Boom was made of great long Oaken beams,
Together joined with Iron athwart the Streams;
On top of which a mighty Cable run,
A cross the Lough through Staples of Iron:
The Boom on either side was fastened,
With a cross Beam in a Rock mortized.
In breadth the River's half a mile and more,
The floating Boom did reach from shore to shore.
Sect. 14. Brigadier Kearnie's Camp on the South.
ONeals Dragoons and Kearny Brigadier,
Did on the South a Trench and Batt'ry rear.
The Town thus girt, prepared for its Defense,
And with Heroic Deeds the Siege commence.
The Traitor Londee into Scotland flies,
From thence's sent Prisoner to their Majesty's.
Then from King James Lord Abercorn was sent,
To pay the Garrison this Compliment?
That he would them a General Pardon fign,
If they the Town immediately resign.
And to withdraw great Murray from their side,
A thousand pounds he offered; beside
An equal Post among the Irish Horse,
If he would quit the Town, and join their Force.
Besides, quoth he, your Forces dare not fight.
To whom great Murray gave this Answer straight?
I Will make no terms, and you for to convince,
That we dare fight, come meet us two days hence
At Pennyburn-mill? The Delegates do part,
And to their Friends the Intercourse impart.
Londeriados. LIB. III.
Contains the Battle of Pennyburn-Mill. Col. Murray beats the Irish Horse,
and kills Maimont the French General with his own hands. The fatal Pybald Horse
taken by the Protestants. Major Taffe slain. The Governors encouraged by this
Victory. The Battle near Elah, Pusinan, Pontee and Barwick wounded. General
Hammilton takes Colonel Murray's Father Prisoner, forces him to intercede with
his Son to quit the Town. Colonel Parker's oversight, who for fear of
Impeachment flies to the Enemy. A Council added to the Governors upon some
Grievances. Colonel Lance obtains the Colerain Regiment. Colonel Whitney tried
by a Court Martial, and Convicted. Colonel Monroe obtains his Post. Colonel
Milchelburn confined. The Battle of the Windmill-hill. The Lord Netterfield,
Colonel Talbot, Colonel Newcomb and Sir Gerard Ailmer taken Prisoners. General
Ramsey stain. Colonel Murray Sullies forth and burns the Enemies Fascines. The
Irish Entrench themselves over the Bog. Colonel Murray beats Col. Nugent in
Pickeering. The second Battle of Windmill-hill. Two thousand of the Enemy
slain. Colonel Talbots Lady offers Five hundred pounds for his Ransom.

Sect. 1.
NExt unto thee? thy Hero's praise I Will tell,
By whose great Deeds, the Irish Army fell*
Assist me Muse? Whilst I their praises sing,
With whose famed actions all the World does ring.
Hector was by the stout Achilles slain,
Thrice his dead Corpse around Troy walls he ta'n.
The Rutulan King great Aeneas slew,
From David's sling a weighty stone there flew,
Which sunk the proud Goliath down to Hell:
By Murray, Maimont the French General fell.
Sect. 2. The Battle of Penny-burn-Mill.
ON Sunday Morn the appointed day commenced,
By break of day the Irish Horse advanced:
In 2 Squadrons: their Horse prepared to fight
On the left Wing: their Foot were on the right.
Maimont their Horse, Hammilton their Foot Command,
At Pennyburn River they began to stand;
The sound of Drums and Trumpets rend the Air,
The Flower of all King James's men were there.
Then noble Murray hastens to the Strand:
Who in like manner dos his Troops Command.
Foot against Foot, Horse against Horse he placed,
In gallant order he the En'my faced.
He with a thousand Foot his Horse sustained,
Which noble Stratagem the Battle gained.
Mounted upon a gallant Steed that hour,
He fought the Irish with unequal power.
The loud Huzza's of both Hosts rent the sky,
Each side prepared to fight the Enemy.
Like to bold Lions eager of their prey,
Roar to amuze it, and then to it fly.
The French came on with glittering sword in hand,
But our smart Firing made their Horse to stand.
Maimont the French, Murray our Horse led on,
Thirst of honor, pusht their ambition.
Murray like thunder through their Squadron broke,
A gallant Monsieur fell at every stroke.
Maimont did likewise with like Terror ride,
Thorough our Troops slaying on every side.
Both Squadrons fight with equal force and rage,
And in close combat mutually engage.
Till death and wounds had covered all the shore,
For both Reserves had fled the spot before.
For our Rerserve had fled into the Town,
And their Reserve could not keep their ground;
For the brave Luddle, an English Buccaneer,
Who led the thousand Foot caused them retire.
In the pursuit brave Major Tasse was slain,
Brave Captain Coghran did that honor gain.
Lieutenant Carr, the Lord of Gradons Son,
In the pursuit great reputation won.
Sect. 3. Col. Murray kills Maimont the French General.
THe Strand thus cleared, Murray and Maimont meet,
Who with dire threatenings one another greet.
For they had often sought one another out,
But still were parted in the bloody rout.
First they discharged their Pistols on the spot,
In which first firing Murrays Horse was shot.
Yet the brave Beast n'ere felt the deadly wound,
But wheeled and pranced on the bloody ground.
Redoubled blows they gave with sword in hand,
Which the strong Armor scarcely could withstand.
They thunder like the Cyclops at the Forge,
When they the Metal on the Anvil urge.
At last their Swords in several pieces flew,
Then with their Rapiers they the Fight renew;
The brave Maimont began to falsify,
And thought the day his own immediately:
He wheeled his Horse, which then began to spurn,
But Noble Murray made a quick return,
For under his heaved arm, his Sword he thrust,
Till at his neck the purple gore out burst.
His fleeting Soul with the free blood expired,
And our great Hero to the Foot retired.
Sect. 4. The Irish Foot beaten.
WHere they the Irish Foot had soundly beat,
And caused them all into their camp retreat.
Brave Major Blair the Enemies fire sustained,
And with great Feats a reputation gained.
Young Franck Crofton among their Forces flew,
And with dire blows a multitude he slew.
Noble like lightning fell amongst their Foot,
Dumbar with Red-coats put the En'my to it.
The valiant Cook from Lismagarvy fought,
And conquered hundreds which his ruin sought.
Lieutenant Rankin hewed the Irish down,
And in that Battle gained much Renown.
Tom Bar a Trooper with one mighty blow,
Cut off the head of an opposing Foe.
Two thousand slain, the empty shore had filled,
With seventy three Commissioned Off'cers killed.
On our side not a few: Cornet Brown's slain,
And the valiant Lieutenant Phetrix then.
Lieutenant Mackay fell upon the spot,
And young Macklellan's wounded with a shot:
The ancient Father did his Son revenge,
Who with the Foe did many a blow exchange.
The tender Parents viewed the bloody day,
From off the stately Walls by the Ship-key,
For near the Walls upon the shore they fought,
The tender Parents their dear Children sought,
The Wife her Husband; then back to the Town,
Our Host returned in Triumph and Renown.
Great was the Spoil and Plunder of that day,
For all returned with some goodly Prey;
Amongst which a Pyde-bald Horse which Columkill
Foretold, if taken at the Pennyburn-Mill,
The Irish should expect no more success,
This fatal Horse was taken in the Chase.
Sect. 5. The Governors Encouraged by this Victory to Act.
THis Victory Confirmed the Government,
Baker and Walker mutually Consent
To settle Quarters, and to Regulate
The Stores, over which Harvey a Merchant's set
The Town into four Quarters they divide,
And place two Regiments in every side.
They gathered all Provisions into Store,
And equally dispense to rich and poor:
This was good Policy without all doubt,
That they might longer hold the City out.
They placed two Great Guns on the Steeple top,
Which gave the Irish many a deadly rap.
They planted Gunners likewise on the walls,
And then dispatch each matter as it falls.
The Church and Kirk did jointly preach and pray,
In St. Columba's Church most lovingly:
Where Doctor Walker to their great content,
Preached stoutly against a Popish Government.
Master Mackenzie preached on the same Theme,
And taught the Army to fear God's great Name.
The Reverend Ruit did confirm us still,
Preaching submission to God's Holy Will.
He likewise Prophesied our Relief,
When it surpassed all Humane belief.
The same was taught by the learned Mr. Crooks,
And Master Hammilton showed it from his Books.
Then Mills a Ruling elder, spoke the same,
Of our Relief, six weeks before it same,
From Sunrising to Sunsetting they taught,
Whilst we against the En'my bravely fought.
Thus Heaven assists those Actions which proceed
From un^ty, in greatest time of need.
Sect. 6. General Hammilton takes Collonell Murray's Father Prisoner, and sends
him to move his Son to quit the Town.
General Hammilton had Intelligence,
That Murray's Father lived not far from thence.
Who Is eighty years of age, and somewhat more,
For him he sent a Guard with mighty power;
To bring him Prisoner to their Northern Camp,
This great surprise did not his Courage damp.
For with the Guard the old Man hastens on,
TO appear before Great General Hammilton;
With great Courage the Senior ask't his will,
Quoth he, your Son does against the King rebel,
And forces them to hold the City out;
Whom you may Counsel better without doubt,
In short, we'll hang you up immediately,
If you will not make him to our will comply.
To whom the Senior gave this answer straight,
I Will use m'authority with all my might;
But when all is done, I Am sure he will never disown
His firm Allegiance to the English Crown.
But if you will guard me to the Town, I Will try
If I can make him with your will comply:
In haste he is guarded to the Loyal Town,
Where he is received with great joy by his Son.
They tenderly do one another greet,
And his grave Parent Counsels him what is meet.
Dear Son, I Am sent by General Hammilton,
To see if I can make you quit the Town;
But by this sacred Book I you conjure,
Never to yield unto a Popish Power;
Our holy Faith and Loyalty enjoin,
A strict abhorrence of a Popish Reign.
Thus Hannibal was at the Altar swore,
Eternal En'my to the Roman Power.
With kind embraces the old Man departs,
And to the General the sad News imparts?
That naught can force his Son to quit the Town,
And therefore humbly begs Protection.
The Generous Hammilton does grant the same,
Then to his Dwelling the grave Senior came,
Where all along he did in safety dwell;
Though by his Son the Irish Army fell.
Sect. 7. The Battle near Elah.
AGainst the weakest side our General saw,
The Enemy their greatest Forces draw;
Which to prevent, with all the Forces he
Sprung forth at Morn to fight the Enemy.
Near Elah in the Parks Murray came on,
The Irish Army led by Hammilton.
Where he continued Fighting till 't was noon,
Then we were flanked by The Enemies Dragoon.
To beat ^ff which, he chose five hundred men,
With Captains Tailor, Moor and Saunderson.
Murray himself did the brave Troops Command,
Who bravely did the Foes Dragoons withstand;
Great Pusman came boldly up to fight,
But Murray quickly put him to the flight,
Berwick and Pontee likewise wounded were,
By valiant Murray and the brave Dumbar.
Brave Major Bull did wonders in that fight,
For he beat back the Enemy on the right.
Crofton and Bashford did much Honor gain,
By Captain Noble multitudes were slain;
From Lisneskea in Farmannagh he came,
But now he is Mayor Noble of the same.
Gairnes in our Center stood firm as a Rock,
And never was moved with their mighty shock.
He and his friends opposed the Enemy,
And in this Battle fought most valiantly.
Lieutenant Lindsey Baron of Donrodes Son,
Did in this Battle great applauses won.
Captain Barrel from Orney near Strabane,
Did in this action Reputation gain.
Sanderson of Tillilagan in Tyrone,
With bravery great Reputation won.
The valiant Moor of Ochar with great might,
Cut down the En'my in this bloody fight.
Lieutenant Cook opposed the Enemy,
And forced their bravest Hero's for to fly.
Lord Abercorn both quit his Boots and Horse,
Without his Cloak he fled with all his Force.
Then in a trice we did the Enemy beat,
And caused them to their Camp in haste retreat,
We burned their Store at Elah without pity,
And then began to march home to the City.
Sect. 8. Colonel Parkers oversight.
WHen we marched forth we carefuly had sent,
Most of our Horse, of Foot a Regiment,
T'observe the Camp by General Ramsey kept;
Lest they our marching home might intercept.
But Col'nell Parker for some grand design,
Had them commanded off; before that time.
Them Ramsey boldly with both Foot and Horse,
Came quickly up to intercept our Force.
This great surprise did all our spirits damp;
Fearing our men were slain by to'ther Camp.
But Col'nell Murray and brave Aubery,
Opposed the fame and forced them back to fly
Till all our men got safely into Town,
In which brisk action, they gained great renown.
Baker and Hammil brought forth a great Gun,
Strengthened by Lieutenant Col'nell Wigton;
But their assistance came to us too late,
For Ramseys firing forced us to retreat.
But Col'nell Parker for some policy,
Fled the same night unto the Enemy.
His Coletain Reg'ment Col'nell Lance obtains,
Who in the present service Honor gains.
Sect. 9. A Council added to the Governors upon some Grievances.
UPon some Grievances we changed the powers
And add a Council to the Governors;
First all the Col'nels, and then four more;
Two for the Town, two for the Country Boor,
Cocken and Squire were chosen for the Town;
For Country, Doctor Jennings and Gladstone.
Jennings the Archdeacon of Ossory;
And now the learned Rector of Artree.
Then in this Council, this a Law was made,
No ^ct should pass unless seven gave their aid:
Mogrige was Secretary to this power,
For Bennet was to England sent before,
To give their Majesty's an Information,
Of what had happened since the Sieg's formation.
He to their Camp as a Deserter flies,
And in few days himself from thence conveys,
And tells our case unto their Majesty's.
Whitneys convict; Monroe his Post obtained,
Who by his merits had that honor gained;
He Is Ma^or General Monroes Brother Son,
Who did oppose the Foe in forty one.
They likewise Col'nell Michelburn confine,
And by good Laws their Government maintain,
Sect. 10. The Battle of Windmill-Hill.
THen General Ramsey with 5 thousand strong,
By break of day, entrenched himself upon,
The Windmill-Hill: our liberty was gone,
They from their Trenches could kill every one,
That issued forth or entered Bishops-Gate;
This sudden motion did much hurt create.
To repel which we sent forth a strong Band,
Which Captain Bashford and Dumbar Command;
And Wilson, Gunter, Moor and Flemming, they
Attack their Trenches and the En'my slay.
Courageous Gunter past their Trenches end,
And flankt the Enemy with some valiant Men.
Forbus like Thunder amongst their Forces flew,
And with his Sword a multitude he slew?
In that Attack Ramsey himself was slain;
Scarce of five thousand the one half remain.
Major Dobbin led on some valiant Men;
Who presently the Irish Trenches gain.
Then Captain Pogue fought most courageously,
And with his Sword cut down the Enemy.
We took some Prisoners of Quality,
In this Attack, and these their honors be;
Lord Netterfield, Col'nell Talbot and Newcomb,
Sir Gerard Ailmer; these we carry home.
At length our Horse came into the pursuit,
And then our General put the En'my to it.
To Bellimagrorty we the foe pursue,
And all along the Brow their forces slew.
Murdagh our Generals Quarter masters slain,
Who in all actions did much honor gain;
For he could six or seven at least withstand,
And could effect a desperate command;
Though he be slain, his Fame shall never dye,
Whilst Derry's Siege is told in Poetry.
We forced them to blow up a Magazine
Of Powder, for fear we the same should win.
Then we returned with Glory and renown,
With cheerful hearts unto the joyful Town.
Sect. 11. The burning of the Enemies Fascines.
IN a few days our General sallies forth,
With 15 hundred Men toward the North:
Capt. Coningham and Noble he Commands,
T'attack a Fort which toward the Inch stands:
Which they possessed with mighty strength and force,
But were surpised by my Lord Galmoys Horse;
Who beat them off and slew 'bove thirty men,
Amongst whom their valiant Captain Coningham;
After quarters given: then Noble he retreats,
Unto our General who wrought mighty feats;
For he attackt their Trenches near Brookhall,
And beat them out, and burnt their Fascines all;
In this great action Colonel Monroe,
Cut down the Irish with a mighty blow.
Captain Erwin acted above man's power,
But was disabl'd by a Shot; that hour,
He Is Son to Cornet Erwin of forty one,
Who gained great praise in that Rebellion.
Into the City we retreat apace,
For us most boldly they began to chase.
Sect. 12. The Enemy Entrench themselves over the Bog.
WIthin few days the Enemy begin,
T'entrench themselves, Hamilton and Lozin,
Were Generals; it was just over the Bog,
Where they their Trenches in our presence dug;
This bold attempt roused up our Generals Soul,
For they their Trenches made without control;
He chose three thousand Men and fally'd out;
And soundly beat the En'my without doubt,
Out of their Trenches; but they reinforce,
And beat us still of with some Troops of Horse.
Thrice he their Trenches gained, they regain them,
^o reinforcement from the City came;
^anghop against us came with fresh supplies,
^ur beaten Forces to the City flies.
This raised great anger to the Governors,
(...) they sent aid the Trenches had been ours.
Our General did wonders every where,
Assisted by Lieutenant Coll'nel Blair.
Sect. 13. Co^^nell Murray beats Col'nell Nugent in Picqueering.
IN a few days our Forces salley all,
To fight the Foe entrenched near Brookhall
But they retreat without e're striking blow;
Then our General dos a Picqueering go.
Col'nel Nugent had made a solemn vow,
That he would Col'nel Murray overthrow;
Then in a Danish Fort he and his friend,
To intercept our General did intend:
As he returned, they challenge him to stand;
And who he is for, they boldly do demand;
For you quoth he; and then at them let us fly,
The one escaped; but the other there did dye.
He that fled his Scarlet Cloak had lost,
Which on our General by the wind was tossed.
Sect. 14. The second Battle of Wind-mill-Hill.
TO guard the Wind-mill-Hill from th'e^
We raised strong Trenches up immed^
From Columb's-Wells near to the flowing tide*
And lined the same with Men on every side.
Col'nel Monroe, was posted near the Walls,
Brave Campbels Post upon his left hand fall^
Along the Trenches some brave Captains, (...)
Who valiantly our Forces did command.
Near to the Lough Liuetenant Col'nel Ca^
Receives his standing, who great honor ea^
In a few hours their Granadeers came on,
Col'nel Nugent led the Battalion:
He briskly us attacqued at the Wells;
And brave Monroe as briskly him repells.
They fought like Lions, till their Col'nel fell
Nugent was wounded: then brave O farrel,
Upon his right with two Battalions,
Came fiercely up, who fought like bold Lions
^ill he was slain. Waughop and Buchan next,
With ten Battalions which our Trenches ve^
Ye^ they could not our constant fire sustain,
^or dead Men's Corpse had covered all the pla^
The Irish pressed our Trenches at the Strand;
^ill Noble Captain Ash did them withstand.
Captain Armstrong came boldly up to fight;
And put their bravest Heroes to the flight.
Brave Robert Porter his Pike away he threw,
And with round stones nine Irish Soldiers slew,
Gladstones and Baird encouraged our Foot,
And Captain Hannah the Foe stoutly fought;
Their Horse came stoutly up with heart and hand;
And thought our Trenches could not them withstand
Th'attack was fierce, we briskly them repel,
For in this action many a Trooper fell.
Of the enemy brave Captain Watson's slain,
Captain Mackdonnel and Captain Butler taken;
A Captain of Horse and all his men were slain.
The Valiant Cairnes did wonders in the field,
Some of the bravest Foe did to him yield;
Brave Captain Lane encouraged our Men;
For on this place al multitude were slain.
Their Foot bore off their dead upon their back;
To save their Bodies from our fires attack.
In fine two thousand of th'enemy's slain,
For with our Troops we them pursue again.
Of ours brave Maxwell fell upon the spot;
For he was wounded with a Cannon Shot.
Whilst Col'nel Hammil dos the Foe pursue,
Thorough his Cheek a Pistol Bullet flew.
The Valiant Murray flew from Trench to Trench
And helped our Men in any deadly pinch.
Sect. 15.
IN a few days a Trumpeter was sent,
To treat of Col'nel Talbots releasement.
^ive Hundred pounds his Lady offered,
If we her Husband to her delivered.
The same in Council held some long debates;
Which 'twixt our Senators great heats creates;
^or Baker he withstood the same boldly;
But Walker and the rest the same decree.
To whom great Baker opened his mind,
And with sound reasons did his arg'ments bind.
What would our Noble King hereunto say,
If we for lucre should his cause betray.
Great Murray would thereto have given consent,
If she had Bullocks for the Money sent.
Yet the same Spring that moved the Loyal Town,
Sent back the Lady with Five hundred pound.
And presently without e're taking Bail,
Locked up the Prisoners in the common Goal.
Londeriados. LIB. IV.
Contains the Account of a Star which appeared in the day time during the
Si^ge, as a good Omen of their Relief. Major General Kirk's coming into the
Lough, with Forces and Provisions from England: But Kilmore-Fort and the Boom
hinder our Relief. A Messenger sent to swim to the Fleet, but is drowned. A
Barge built for Intelligence, upon the News of Enniskilling Men being come for
our Relief. The Engagement of the Barge with two Irish Boats. Glencarty's
Bravado. The scarcity of Food; The Pestilential Fever. Governor Baker's
Sickness and Death: His Character. Colonel Mitchelburn named Governor by Baker
before his Death. The Bombarding of the City. The driving of the Protestants to
the Walls, to move the City to yield. The Famine. A Treaty about Surrendering
the City. The Sto^m at Butchers-Gate. Colonel Murray mounded with a Shot.
Captain Coghrans Salley. Counselor Cairne's Express to Kirk to Relieve the
City. Captain Browning breaks the Boom, and is Shot; but his Ship and Captain
Douglasses Relieve the City. The Service of the Gunners on the Walls. The Irish
Army raise their Siege, and march to Dublin. Kirk Lands near Inch, and marches
with the English Forces to Dery, and appoints Colonel Mitchelburn Governor.

Sect. 1.
ASsist me Muse? whilst I his praises Sing,
Who is of all the everlasting Spring;
The Powerful God, who led the Hebrews on
Through thousand dangers; from Gen'ration
To Gene'ration; till at length he brought
Them to the Land of Canaan so long sought.
The same Jehovah kept this Garrison,
'Twas he alone, who all these Battles won.
'Twas he that dispossessed the Jebusite,
'Twas he alone that beat the Jacobite.
For as he led the Hebrews by a Fire,
^n the dark Night, when Phoebus did retire;
And as a Star foretold our Savior's Birth,
Who brought Salvation to the Captive earth;
So at this time a glistering Star we have,
Which all day long a benign aspect gave,
From the South-East; the learned thence did draw
Hopes of Relief; and our Success soresaw.
The thoughtless Mob never heed the glorious Star,
^ut generally against good Omens War.
^t shone till even from the bright morning-dawn;
At our Relief the Heavenly light's withdrawn.
Sect. 2.
It Was plain the Irish had Intelligence,
When we designed our Sallies forth from hence;
Which to prevent and join in secrecy.
The Council took an Oath of Privacy,
To Salley forth on Monday Morn betimes,
And fight the En'my in their strongest Lines.
Nevertheless on Sunday even they cry,
Are you not ready for your great Salley.
Envy the bane of all Society,
Defeats designs of Magnaminity.
This treachery our designed measures broke,
Then we our Preparations all revoke.
Sect. 3. The English Fleet-appears in the Lough.
MEan time some Transport Ships and Men of War,
Below Kilmore by us discovered are;
But all in vain, Kilmore was in the hands
Of The Enemy, which Fort the Lough commands
Besides the Irish Camp on each side stood;
The fatal Boom and Rope did cross the Flood.
We fired a Beacon on the Steeple head,
To give the Signal of our want of Bread.
Yet all in vain, Kirk would not venture up,
Some say of Usquebaugh he had got a Cup.
We likewise heard that Enniskilling Men,
For our Relief were come near to Strabane.
We sent a Man to swim to the English Fleet,
As he swam hence, he died with cramp in's feet.
He carried Letters in a Box with skrews,
But by his death they lost the dismal news.
Sect. 4. The Exploit of the Barge of Intelligence.
TO get Intelligence we built a Barge,
Of wondrous swiftnss, which was long and large;
And placed a Drake therein or two beside,
When we had need to sail or row with tide.
To know the truth, and let them understand,
Our great distress: Great Murray did command,
Some of the ablest Seamen of the Town,
To Mann the Barge, and sail to Donnelong.
With him ascend near thirty Officers,
Besides the Boys prepared for Messengers.
Noble and Holmes and the brave Dumbar,
His true Companions in the Feats of War.
Thus in the Even our valiant General sailed,
Though from their Battr'ies showers of bullets hailed;
Which to eschew, he made up to their shore,
Where they had planted some Dragoons before.
Those he beat off and sailed to Donnelong,
Though at the Barge they fired all along.
The noise of Oars had given them th'alar'm,
And yet we sailed five Miles without all harm.
But all in vain, their guards on every side,
Forced our Hero's return with ebbing tide.
As we returned the Enemy manned out,
Two large Boats filled with some Dragoons on foot;
The One Star-board, the other us Lar-board hall'd:
But Pilot Pogue with his wide drake them Mauled;
For as they thought to board our Barge, then he,
Fired off small shot amongst their company.
Which Boat shear'd off with several persons slain,
We board the other and them Prisoners taken.
They fought us stoutly with their Swords in hand,
We slew the one half, and their Boat Command.
At Sun-riseing we land at Ferry-Key,
And in their Boat near thirteen dead men lay;
Thirteen we took alive; then straight we sailed
To to'ther side and Lord Louths Camp assailed.
We beat them from a Trench and took their Arms,
And some course Loaves, this their whole Camp Alarms.
Yet we returned in safety to the Town,
The truth whereof is to the City known.
The Prisoners taken aboard, we detain,
And forced them daily to interr their slain,
On Windmill-Hill; for their fat Bodies sent
A Noisome smell, to our great Detriment.
Sect, 5. Glencarty's Bravado.
Glencarty with two thousand men of might,
Came up to storm the Butchers Gate at night.
Come out ye Dogs, quoth he, why do you sleep?
But from the Walls they made his Forces weep;
More than the half were slain, the rest retreat,
For six brave Captains came from Bishops-Gate.
Kennedy, Dumbar, Baird, Noble and Grahm,
With young Murray, who did their courage tame.
Their great design was to place Ingeniers
To undermine the Walls, as then appears.
Some we surpised at work and others slew,
Thus we the Lord Glencarty's brags o'rethrew.
Sect. 6. The Scarcity of Food and Pestilential Fever.
ABout this time the raging Fever reigned,
Which multitudes of the Towns people drained.
It was occasioned by the want of Food
And uncouth Diet which enflamed the blood.
For some eat Starch, others on Tallow live,
At length for Victuals the Ox-hide they give.
And some eat Dogs, others on Horses fed,
The sprightly Geldings to the slaughter led.
A Cats a Ladies feast tho never so thin,
Though you might count all the Ribs in her skin.
A Swallow's sold for eighteen pence and more;
Then you may judge what became of the Poor.
Some Horses Blood did eat, who now disdain,
To eat good Mutton if not lately slain.
Such Food to the veins corrupt blood commends;
Which in a Pestilential Fever ends.
Sect. 7. Governor Baker Sickens.
THis dismal Fever seized our Governor,
Whom the Physicians in few days gave over.
Thus the Great Baker fails: we then propose,
A successor but none the Council chose.
They it referr to the dying Governor,
He Mitchelburn named for his successor.
Against which the Council never spoke a word,
For they were pressed by Famine and the Sword;
Then in all haste to Mitchelburn is sent,
An Order to release his confinement.
To justify his Zeal, when he ascends
The Chair, he for three thousand Men demands;
To sally forth and to oppose the Foes,
With them into the Bishops Parks he goes;
In the mean time, the Enemy appear,
In a Body and some Horse in their rear;
The wise Commander thought it best to shun
Unequal Combat, to retire begun.
Yet this retreat such Consternation bred,
That some with Arms, and some without 'em fled.
Sect. 8. The Bombarding of the City.
THe Council and the Governors decree,
That all the Off'cers should together be,
Captains in one place, Lieut'nants in another,
The Ensigns in a third and so in order:
That they might be in readiness at call,
To sally forth or to defend the Wall.
This was hard service every one may judge,
Yet no man did at this hard service grudge.
The Irish likewise pressed them with their Booms,
Which forced all People to forsake their Rooms.
The dreadful Booms the sickly people's toil,
Both night and day our stately Buildings spoil.
The Towns one heap of Rubbish many dye,
By this dire art, witness the Charging Boy:
Whilst he lay sleeping on his fatal Bed,
A dreadful Boom through his great body fled.
Thus Alderman Thompson died: and many more:
Hot Balls they likewise threw from the other shore.
This is the hardship of a Town besieged:
Who dies in Battle, to the Fo's obliged.
Yet we do own the providence of God,
Who exercised us with this heavy rod;
Though all the Houses of the Town were slapt,
By dreadful Booms; Columba's Church escaped;
Wherein great store of Ammunition lay,
And where the Church and Kirk did jointly pray.
In all Columba's Church, no dammage's found,
Yet the Booms tore the dead out of the ground.
For at this sacred place they daily aimed,
Where we protection from God hourly claimed.
Yet all these hardships did not move the Town,
To quit the Interest of the English Crown.
But all these are not for to be compared,
To want of food, when a poor Mouse is shared,
Betwixt the tender Parent and the Child,
All kinds of death, to that of hunger's mild.
These they endured to a miracle,
And ought to be set down in Chronicle.
Sect. 9. The driving of the Protestants to the Walls, to move the City to
yield.
THe Irish still of Stratagems have more,
To move the City their defense give over.
They gathered all the Protestants that were,
In three Counties and forced them to repair,
Unto our Walls, both Man and Mothers Son;
And hemmed them in with a Battalion;
This moved the Town to see their friends so dear,
Before their face in this sad case appear,
Not having wherewith to supply their want,
That they were 14 Thousand all men grant.
Yet these poor people begged it as a Boon,
That we would not deliver up the Town;
They Would rather suffer many a dismal blow,
Then we should yield the City to the Foe.
We beat a Parlee: General Rose did show,
His Orders from the King and Council's so.
To whom the Town replies, send these folks home,
Or we'll hang up our prisoners every one.
Upon the Royal Bastion we erect;
A stately Gallows in the Foes prospect,
This moved the Irish to compassion,
Then the next day they sent the People home;
A thousand of our sick went out with those,
We in their stead as many fresh men chose.
Great Mitchelburn and Murray had decreed,
If the enemy had not the people freed,
To arm the Men and with the Garrison,
To give Battle to General Hamilton.
This was a modern Stratagem of War:
In History no such examples are.
Sect. 10. Governor Baker's Death and Character.
ABout this time the Noble Baker dies,
His Loyal Soul to his Creator flies;
He Is much lamented and admired by all,
Who knew his Merits for they were not small.
The Town he Governed with assiduous care,
Was sound in Council and expert in War.
Loyal and faithful to our Sovereign King,
True to the Prot'stant Cause in every thing;
Great was his strength of Body, but his Soul,
Did greater Actions, which none dare control.
True to his Friend; and faithful to his trust,
Upright in dealing and to all men just.
In solemn manner, we his Corpse interr,
As it became a Valiant Man of War.
A Funeral Sermons preached, the Bells did ring,
And treble Volleys did his praises sing.
Lieutenant Dalton was his faithful friend,
And Counselor, what e're he did intend.
Sect. 10. A Treaty of Surrendering proposed by the Enemy.
THen Hamilton Bombards us in our lines,
To beat us out of which he then designs;
But seeing us ready to receive their Fire,
With his advanced Troops he does retire.
Then great distress upon the City falls,
For on the North, the Foe lay near the Walls.
Our want of food did the Towns council force
To slay 'bove fifty of our fattest Horse.
And in few days, we must yield up the Town;
When lo! the Enemy a Parley sound.
To treat of Peace Commissioners were sent,
We to surrender on these Terms consent.
If they would grant us twenty days respit,
And their Hostages to our Ships commit;
Then safely to conduct us to the Fleet,
With all the honor for brave Soldiers meet.
These they reject: our Delegates return,
And they the Treaty to next day adjourn.
To quit the Town and Arms they offer all,
That the best Subjects of the Kingdom shall
Enjoy, our Church, Estates, and reparation,
That every man repair to his own Station.
By Colonel Hammil, Lance and Campbel, we
A flat refusal of these signify.
And to convince them of our true intent,
Murray with some gallant Battalions went;
T'attack them in their Lines toward Rapho,
Waughop, Oneal and Galmoy felt the blow;
The Name of Murray grew so terrible,
That he alone was thought invincible:
Where e're he came the Irish fled away,
And left the Field unto the English sway.
The Valiant Noble to their Trenches flew,
And with smart firing several Persons slew.
Sect. 11. The Walls at Butchers-Gate Stormed and Colonel Murray Wounded.
IN a few days their Foot and Granadeer,
To storm our Walls at Butchers-Gate appear:
The Storm was fierce; then Murray sallies out,
At Bishops-Gate and put them to the rout;
Brave Bellifatt'n fell briskly on their flank,
And with his men o'rethrew both File and Rank.
We them pursued into their Trenches strong,
And never bethought us, till we were among,
Their strongest body, valiant Murray fought,
And hewed down hundreds, which his ruin sought;
Till a fierce Bullet through his Body past;
Then we retreated to the Town at last.
Our wounded General on his feet came back,
And never complained that he Blood did lack;
Brave James Murray a volunteer is slain,
Who in all actions did applauses gain.
In a few hours, Coghran revenge demands,
And in their Lines with a Battalion stands:
Captain Wilson and Mackollogh gave their aid,
Who in their lines a horrid slaughter made;
And to their General this great service paid.
His Wound was great, but by the mighty Skill,
Of Dr. Aickin and Herman he grew well,
In seven weeks time; this was our last sally,
For Couns'lor Cairnes arrived immediately,
And brought an Express from his Majesty;
Commanding Kirk for to relieve the Town,
To guard some Transports from the Fort and Boom.
Sect. 12. Captain Browning and Captain Douglas relieve the Town, with two
Merchant Ships and the Dartmouth Frigate.
THen in all haste two Merchant Ships are sent.
With all provisions for the same intent.
The Dartmouth Frigate, with the said effects
The Merchant Ships against the Fort protects.
The valiant Browning Native of the Town,
With flowing tide attack the horrid Boom,
And a full Gale, the Ship is josled back,
But with her side she made a fresh attack;
The wind and tide with a most violent course,
The Beams and Cable into pieces force;
The Ship sailed on, but Browning lost his life,
A dismal story to his tender Wife.
Then Dowglass in the Phoenix safely sails,
Though from both shoars a shower of Bullets hai^
The Fort and Boom are past yet thousands more
Of deaths fly swiftly from the Neigh'bring sho^r
Each side the River planted cannon play,
With which a power of the Ships crew they slay;
When they had past the Boom, the Wind it failed:
Then with their Boats and Oars the Ships they haled.
Mean time the En'my ply them with small shot,
The bold Tarpallian dies upon the spot;
At every bounce the Enemies Cannon gave,
The hungry people against the En'my rave.
Yet favoring Heaven the Merchant Ships defends;
And our provisions to the Harbor sends:
The' unlade in haste the English Beef and Cheese,
Bacon and Butter, Brandy, Pork and Pease.
By Dowglass, Scotland plenty of Oatmeal sends,
Which to their Suffering Brethren them commends.
The Governors divide the joyful Store,
And equal portions give to Rich and Poor.
The Towns o'rejoy'd, the thundering Cannons roar,
The Bells do ring, and Bonefires the Town over.
Sect. 13. The Service of our Cannon from the Church-steeple and Bulwarks.
IN all attacks our Gunners played their parts,
For from the Walls they tamed the Enemies hearts,
Eight Sakers and twelve Demiculverin
Discharged their fury daily from within.
Against the Enemies Camps on every side,
Which furiously amongst their forces glide.
Brave Watson fired upon their strongest Ranks,
And swept off Files from the Enemies Flanks;
Lieutenant Crookshanks dismounts from our walls
The Enemies Cannon which upon us falls
At Pennyburn-Mill. And Captain Gregory,
From the Church Steeple slays the Enemy.
At both Attacks of Windmill-Hill, and from
The Royal and the Double Bastion.
James Murray from the Northern Bastions,
Near Elah hurt the Foes Battallions.
Robert Stev'^son never mist the Enemy,
But furiously amongst their Troops lets fly.
Lieutenant Dyell and some brave Seamen,
Did from the walls slay many on the plain;
Lieutenant Evins praise shall now be told,
Who in all actions was both brave and bold:
Tho sev'nty years of age, he stoutly fought
At several Battles, and young Soldiers taught:
Until a Bullet pierced his hardy Breast,
Yet he returned bravely with the rest:
To save his Life, his tender Daughter found
The safest Course, to suck his bloody Wound.
He laid in Stores, and willingly attends,
And lost 'bove twenty of his dearest Friends.
Of all the Powder which from England came,
Five hundred Barrels, eighty scarce remain,
And Scotland likewise fifty barrels sent,
All which against the Enemy we spent.
Sect. 15. The Enemy withdraw their Siege, and Major General Kirk marches the
English Forces to Dery.
THese joyful Stores the Irish army awe,
Then in the Night they silently withdraw;
In greatest haste to Dublin they return,
And all along our strongest Buildings burn.
They gathered all the Papists from our coast,
And made them march along with the Irish Host.
Then Kirk with the English Troops his march commenced
From Inch, and to our ruined town advanced.
Sir Matthew Bridges House and Gardens all,
Were quite destroyed by the En'my at Brookhall.
The large and spacious suburbs were burnt down,
Which was a great Detriment to the Town:
Their Houses and their Goods destroyed were,
Both by the Booms and Cannon in the War.
Their fruitful Parks and Suburb-Gardens fell,
Them to the Ground the Enemy Level.
Their Debitors were slain, and Debts were lost,
A hundred thousand pounds scarce quit the cost.
The rich Inhabitants were turned to poor,
Which lived like Princes on their wealth before.
In this Condition Kirk did see the T^^^,
The truth whereof is to the world known.
Mitchelburn Governor he did Decree,
And sent great Walker to His Majesty;
Whose benign Stars did influence our heart,
And wa^mth and vigor to our Souls impart
His infant reign produced this noble act,
And yearly greater Trophies did contract:
Witness the Boyne, Athlone and dire Aghrim,
Lim'rick and all the Kingdom gained by him,
May favoring Heaven preserve his precious breath,
And lasting Laurels round his Temples wreath?
THe Work is done, Apollo does presage
The Success of it, in the future Age.
Zoilus himself dare not the Actions blame:
The Author values not a Poets Fame.
He wrote it for the sober Men of Sense;
Not for the Beau's or Wits Intelligence.
If Jove and they approve the former Words:
His Hero's will defend it with their Swords.
FINIS.

