

Behold the figure of that man of Parts
who dive'd into the Secrets of all Arts,
A Second Solomon, the mighty He
That try'de them all, and found them Vanity.


THE VANITY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES.

BY Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight, Doctor of both Laws, Judge of the
Prerogative-Court, AND Counselor to Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany.

ECCLES. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Samuel Speed, and sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster. 1676.

TO THE READER.
Studious Reader,
Will thou not look upon this Labor of mine, to be a most bold and almost
Herculean attempt, to wage War against the Giant-like Opposition of all the
Arts and Sciences? And thus to challenge the stoutest Hunters of Nature?
Doctors will knit their enraged brows upon me: the Authority of Masters, the
endeavors of the Batchelors of Art, the heat of the Schoolmen, the sedition of
the Mechanics, will be all up in arms against me. All which if I stab at one
blow, will it not be a greater work than Hercules in the accomplishment of all
his Labors was ever guilty of? Shall I not have performed a nobler Task, if
with no less danger and labor, I overcome these Monsters of Schools,
Universities and Pulpits? For I am not ignorant how bloody a Battle I must
fight, or how hazardous and difficult the War will be, being to meet with such
an Army of potent Enemies. Woe is me, with what Engines will they seek to destroy
me? With what weight will they not endeavor to crush me? What reproaches will
they not endeavor to throw upon me? The Grammarians will rail at me: the
Etymologists will derive my name from the Gout: the mad Poets will call me Goat
and Momus: the frivolous Historians will profane me beyond Pausanias or
Herostratus: the obstreperous Rhetoricians will plague me with their big Words
and mimical Gestures: the quarrelsome Logicians will confound me with their
Syllogismes. The nimble Sophisters will saw my jaws with the snaffles of
their subtle Questions. The barbarous Lullist will make me mad with his absurd
Soloecisms. The Atome-numbring Arithmeticians will set an host of Usurers upon
me. The Gamesters will curse me. The Musicians will sing Ballads of me. The
proud Matrons will expel me their Meetings. The Wenches will deny to kiss me.
The giggling Girls will laugh, and cry, I dance like a Camel. The lewd Players
will kill me in a Tragedy. The intricate Geometrician will imprison me in his
Triangles and Tetragonals. The vain Painter will make me more ugly than an Ape,
or Thersites himself. The Cosmographer will banish me amongst the Bears into
Greenland. The Astrologer will erect some wicked Scheme or other for me. The
Physiognomist will defame me for being impotent. The Epicures will bespew me to
death. The Tyrant will crucify me in Phalaris's Bull. Hypocrites will declaim
against me in their Pulpits. The Whores will pox me. The Priests will
excommunicate me. The blasphemous Mariner will throw me overboard. The
yawling Hunter will set his Dogs upon me. The Soldier will plunder me. The
Ordure-tasting Physicians will throw their Vrinal at my Head. The Chyrurgeons
will anatomize me. The Lawyers will accuse me of Treason. The Judges will
condemn me. Thus, though I omit for brevities sake many others, do thou not
see, Reader, what dangers I am like to run through? But I am in hopes to avoid
their fury, provided that thou, patient to hear the Truth, and laying all
Prepossession and Obstinacy aside, wilt but give thy mind heartily and without
passion to read what I have writ. I have moreover the Word of God to defend me,
which with an undaunted Courage I intend to make use of for my Buckler. I would
have thee moreover to know, that I have not writ these things either out of
Hatred, Envy, Ambition, or vain Error, nor did Arrogance prompt me to it; but
of all Causes the most just and truest: because I see that so many men, pufft
up with Humane Knowledge and Learning, not only contemn and despise the Oracles
of the Sacred Scripture, but also prosecute and deride it with the same
contempt. Others we see, though to themselves they seem to be more holy, who
endeavor to confirm and approve the Laws of Christ, yet attribute more
Authority to the Maxims of Philosophers, than to the holy Prophets of God, the
Evangelists or Apostles, though there be so vast a difference between them.
Moreover, we find that a most detestable Custom has invaded all or most
Schools of Learning, to swear their Disciples never to contradict Aristotle,
Boethius, Thomas Albertus, or some such like School-Deity: From whom if there
be any that differ so much as a nails breadth, him they proclaim a scandalous
Heretic, a Criminal against the Holy Sciences, fit only to be consumed in Fire
and Flames. Therefore these and ^cious Giants, these Enemies of Scripture are
to be set upon, their Bulwarks and Castles are to be stormed: And it behooves us
to show how intolerable the blindness of Men is, to wander from the truth,
misguided by so many Sciences and Arts, and by so many Authors and Doctors
thereof. For how great a boldness is it, what an arrogant presumption, to
prefer the Schools of Philosophers before the Church of Christ? and to extol or
equal the Opinions of Men, to the Word of God? Lastly, how impious a piece of
Tyranny it is, to captivate the Wits of Students to prefixed Authors, and to
deprive their Disciples of the liberty of searching after and following the
Truth? All which things being so manifest, that they cannot be denied, I may be
the more easily pardoned, if I seem to have more freely and bitterly inveighed
against some sorts of Sciences and their Professors,

Farewell.
The LIFE of Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight, AND Judge of the Prerogative
Court.
HEnry Cornelius Agrippa, descended from a Noble Family of Nettesheim in
Belgia, was by his Parents so educated, that he became Doctor of the Laws and
Physic, Master of the Rolls, and Judge of the Spiritual Court. He was
naturally inclined to study, making it his Recreation from his Youth to learn:
Nor was his Labor spent in vain; for by his Ingenuity he obtained wonderful
Skill and Knowledge in the several various Arts and Sciences. Notwithstanding
which, his Fancy guided him to attend or accompany the Army of the Princes,
with whom he so prudently behaved himself, that he gained the affections of all
that knew him; and for his singular Valor, was created Knight in the Field. It
was about the year 1530, that his Merits grew great, and he became the Subject
of every (...) Wonder and Discourse, some admiring his Learning, others his
Valor; and all with a reverend adoration applauding him. In his Studies he
grew expert in Occult Philosophy, and composed four Books thereof; whose
incomparable Worth is beyond the reach of an Encomium. Not long after that, he
published this his Satirical Invective, or Cynical Declamation against the
Vanity of Arts and Sciences; informing and affirming with much Reason,
Learning, and Piety, that all things are uncertain, except only the pure and
solid Word of God. He likewise composed a^ History of the double Coronation of
Charles the Emperor, to whom his Parts advanced him to be his Counselor.
Then he composed a Treatise of the Excellency of the Feminine Sex; and another
of the Apparition of Spirits. Diverse were of opinion that he held a
Correspondency with Devils, since he published Commentaries on the Ars Brevis
of Raymund Lully, and was extremely inclined to delight in the study of Occult
Philosophy and Astrology. To vindicate himself from those various Aspersions
that arose concerning him, he published an Apology, wherein he showed that what
he did, was purely done by Art; nor did he exceed the bounds thereof.

In the year 1538, he wrote many learned Orations, by which his Wit appeared to
be excellent: Amongst the large number, these Ten were the chief: The first, on
Plato's Banquet, uttered in the Academy of Tricina, containing the praise of
Love. The second, on Hermes Trismegistus, treating on the power and wisdom of
Almighty God. The third, in behalf of one who was about to take his degree of
Doctor. The fourth, for the Lords of Metz; he being then chosen their Advocate
and their Orator. The fifth, to the Senate of Luxemburgh, in behalf of the
Lords of Metz. The sixth, for the said Lords, by way of Salutation to the
Prince and Bishop thereof. The seventh, likewise for the aforesaid Lords, by
way of Salutation to a Nobleman. The eighth, in behalf of a certain Kinsman of
his, a Carmelite, made Bachelor of Divinity when he received his Regency at
Paris. The ninth, for the Son of Christiern King of Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden, delivered at the coming of the Emperor. The tenth, at the Funeral of
the Lady Margeret, Princess of Austria and Burgundy. He also writ a Dialogue
concerning Man; and a Declamation of a disputable Opinion concerning Original
Sin, to the Bishop of Cyrene; an Epistle to Michael de Arando, Bishop of St.
Paul; a Complaint upon a Calumny, printed at Strasburgh, 1539. These are the
chief of those Pyramids that disperse the Glories of Agrippa, who grew
eminently famous, not only among the Germans, but all other Nations too. He
was much beloved, more admired, and somewhat envied: Momus will carp, although
among the Gods: Hercules amongst the Heroes, hunts after Monsters: Pluto
amongst the Devils, as King of Hell, is angry with the Ghosts: Democritus
amongst Philosophers, derides and laughs at all things; and on the other side,
Heraclitus, as if his Eyes were a Fountain of Tears, is always weeping:
Pirrhias is ignorant of all things; and Aristotle believes that he himself
knows all things: Diogen^s scorneth all things; and Cornelius Agrippa spares
none: he contemns, knows, is ignorant, weeps, laughs, is angry, pursues,
carps at all things, being himself a most Satirical Philosopher.

His Epitaph.
WHy weep'st thou, Marble? is thy Trust
Too great for such a Sacred Dust?
Or do thou make thy Pious moan,
That we might turn our Hearts from Stone?
As Converts then we'll weep with you;
Our Hearts shall melt to Marble too:
For there is penned up within thy Pit,
A world composed of Worth and Wit.
On the LEARNED AUTHOR Of the Vanity of ARTS and SCIENCES.
ILlustrious Penman, whose immortal Name
Speaks thee above the loudest blast of Fame,
Since thou for learning wast the choicest He,
Whose Head was Europe's University.
Oxford and Cambridge both, do still admire
How thou attained'st thy Celestical Fire.
Well might great Charles, though Germans Emperor,
Confer with thee, Dame Nature's Counselor.
'Twas pity thou wast born, great Soul, for why?
Thousands have di'd for grief, that thou did die.
Yet thy rare Works that after thee survive,
Instruct the Learned that at present live.
The Destinies sure sent thee in their rage,
To teach the World, and to correct the Age,
Like some prodigious Wit, within the Sphere
Of being Priest, and a Philosopher;
A Prophet, and a Poet, to exclaim
Against the Worthies, and to laugh at Fame;
To unfold Mysteries, and be in the List
Of all the choice, the chief Evangelist.
I Am full of wonder, when I contemplate
Thee, and thy Works, ordained to conquer Fate:
An Ecstasy surprises every part.
I seem a Man, and yet I want my Heart;
From me it is flown, and yet methinks it meets
Again, when I peruse thy learned Sheets.
Then in a Grove I Am lost; and wish I may
Get out, yet Pleasure forces me to stay:
For there is delight that does the Senses fill,
As Accents written with an Angels Quill.
To fix thy Sepulcher we'll show our Arts,
Cementing that with Tears and broken Hearts.
Can broken Hearts an Habitation make?
If not, for grief of that, our Hearts shall break.
Thou need no Supporter, for thy Staff
Shall be thy Works, thy Fame thy Epitaph.
For when weak Poets have their Praises spent,
Thy Name shall be thine own rich Monument.
S S.

Licensed,

September 18. 1675. Roger L'^strange.

An ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Of
Arithmetic Page 50-53 Architecture 77 Astronomy 82 Astrology 88 A^gury 103
Agriculture 243-250 Apothecaries 299 Anatomy 304 Alchymy 31^ Advocates 324
Of
Balls 60 Beginning of natural things 1^^ Beggary 211
Of
Cosmimetry 74 Chiromancy 10^ Conjuring 115 Cabalists 12^ Ceremonies 173
Court-Discipline 22^ Courtiers Noble 22^ Vulgar 230 Court-Ladies 234 Surgery
303 Cattle-curing 304 Cookery 307 Chy^^stry 312 Canon Law 320 Conclusion of the
Work 364
Of
Dicing 51 Dancing 60 Divination 99 Dreams 105 Dieting 305
Of
Elements of Letters 9
Of
Fishing 245 F^^ling 246
Of
Grammar 12 Geomancy 50.103 Geometry 66
Of
History 26 Holy Days 170 Husbandry 243 Hunting 246 Heraldry 276
Of
Images 164 Inquisition 327 Interpretative Theology 336
Of
Logic 40 Lullius Art 47 Looking-Glasses 73 Law in general 316 Study 326
Of
Memory 48 Mathematics in general 49 Music 54 Miners and Metals 80
Metoposcopy 100 Madness 107 Magic in general 109 Mathematical Magic 112
Metaphysics 142 Moral Philosophy 146 Monks 183 Merchandising 237 Military Art
253 Masters of Arts 357
Of
Natural Magic 110 Necromancy 115 Natural Philosophy 128 Nobility 257
Of
Optics 67 Economy in general 216 Private 218
Of
Poesy 21 Pythagorean chance 52 Perspectives 67 Painting 69 Plastic 70
Prospective 73 Physiognomy 100 Plurality of the World 131 Politics 154
Pandarism 193 Paymasters 241 Pasturage 243 Physic in general 281 Practical 285
Public Notaries 325 Prophetic Theology 340 Praise of the Ass 360
Of
Rhetoric 33 Rhetorism 65 Religion in general 161 Regal Economy 224
Of
Sciences in general 1 Sophistry 43 Stage-dancing 63 Statuary 70 Speculatory
Divination 105 Soul 133 Superiors of the Church 177 Study of the Law 326
Scholastic Theology 331
Of
Theurgy 119 Temples 168 Theology Scholastic 331 Interpretative 336 Prophetic
340
Of
Witchcraft 113-126 Whoring 187 Word of God 348
OF THE INCERTAINTY and VANITY OF Worldly ARTS and SCIENCES.
CHAP. I.
Of the Sciences in General.
IT is an old Opinion, and the concurring and unanimous judgment almost of all
Philosophers, whereby they uphold, that every Science adds so much of a
sublime Nature to Man himself, according to the Capacity and Worth of every
Person, a^ many times enables them to Translate themselves beyond the Limits of
Humanity, even to the Celestial Seats of the Blessed. From hence have proceeded
those various and innumerable Encomiums of the Sciences, whereby every one has
endeavored, in accurate, as well as long Orations, to prefer, and as it were
to extol beyond the Heavens themselves, those Arts and Mysteries, wherein, with
continual Labor, he has exercised the strength and vigor of his Ingenuity or
Invention. But I, persuaded by reasons of another nature, do verily believe,
that there is nothing more pernicious, nothing more destructive to the
well-being of Men, or to the Salvation of our Souls, than the Arts and Sciences
themselves. And therefore quite contrary to what has been hitherto practiced,
my Opinion is, That these Arts and Sciences are so far from being to be
extolled with such high applauses and Panegyricks, that they are rather for the
most part to be disprais'd and vilifi'd: And that indeed there is none which
does not merit just cause of Reproof and Censure; nor any one which of it self
deserves any praise or commendation, unless what it may borrow from the
Ingenuity and Virtue of the first possessor. However, I would have you take
this Opinion of mine in that modest Construction, which may imagine, that I
neither go about to reprehend those who are of a contrary judgment; or that I
intend to arrogate any thing singly singular to my ^elf, above others:
Therefore I shall entreat you to suspend your Censure of me, differing in this
one thing from all others; so long as you find me laying an auspicious
Foundation of proof, not upon Vulgar Arguments drawn from the Superficies and
outside of things, but upon the most firm reasons deduced from the most hidden
bowels of secret Knowledge; and this not in the sharp style of Demosthenes or
Chrysippus, which may not so well beseem a Professor of Christianity, but would
rather show me to be a vain pursuer of flattery and ostentation, while I
endeavor to varnish my Speech with the Fucus's of Eloquence. For to speak
Properly, not Rhetorically, to intend the truth of the Matter, not the ornament
of Language, is the du^^ of one Professing Sacred Literature. For the seat of
Truth is not in the Tongue, but in the Heart. Neither is it of importance, what
Language we use in the Relation of Truth, seeing that falsehood only wants
Eloquence, and the trappings of Words, whereby to insinuate into the minds of
Men; but the language of Truth, as Euripides writes, is plain and simple; not
seeking the graces of Art, or painted Flourishes. Therefore if this great Work
of ours, undertaken without any Flowers of Eloquence (which in the series of
our Discourse we have not so much flighted as condemned) do prove offensive to
your more delicate ears; we entreat you to bear it with the same patience, as
once one of the Roman Emperors made use of, when he stood still with his whole
Army to hear the tittle-tattle of an impertinent Woman: and with the same
humor that King Archelaus was wont to hear Persons that were Hoarse, and of an
unpleasant Utterance; that thereby afterward he might take the more delight in
the pleasing sounds of Eloquent Rhetoricians, and Tuneful Voices. Remember that
saying of Theophrastus, That the most Illiterate were able to speak in the
presence of the most Elegant Persons, while they spoke nothing but Truth and
Reason. And now that I may no longer keep ye in suspense, through what Tracts
and Byways I have as it were hinted out this Opinion of mine, it is time that I
declare unto ye. But first I must admonish ye, That all Sciences are as well
evil as good, and that they bring us no other advantage to excel as Deities,
more than what the Serpent promised of old, when he said, Ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil. Let him therefore glory in this Serpent, who boasts
himself in knowledge; which we read the Heresy of the Ophites not a little
unbeseemingly to have done, who Worshipped a Serpent among the rest of their
Superstitions, as being the Creature that first introduced the knowledge of
Virtue into Paradise. To this agrees that Platonic Fable which feigns, That
one Theutus being offended with Mankind, was the first raiser of that Devil,
called the Sciences; not less hurtful than profitable: as Thamus King of Egypt
wisely discourses, writing of the Inventors of Arts and Letters. Hence most
Grammarians Expound and Interpret the word Damons, as much as to say Artists.
But leaving these Fables to their Poets and Philosophers, suppose there were no
other Inventors of Arts than Men themselves, yet were they the Sons of the
worst Generation, even the Sons of Cain, of whom it is truly said, The sons of
this world are wise^ than the sons of light in this generation. If men be
therefore the Inventors of Arts, is it not said, Every man is a Liar, neither
is there one that does good? But grant on the other side, that there may be
some good men; yet follows it not, that the Sciences themselves have any thing
of virtue, any thing of truth in them, but what they reap and borrow from the
Inventors and possessors thereof: For if they light upon any evil Person, they
are hurtful; as a perverse Grammarian, an Ostentatious Poet, a lying Historian,
a flattering Rhetorician, a litigious Logician, a turbulent Sophister, a
loquacions Lullist, a Lotterist Arithmetician, a lascivious Musician, a
shameless Dancing Master, a boasting Geometrician, a wandering Cosmographer, a
pernicious Architect, a Pirat-Navigator, a fallacious Astrologer, a wicked
Magician, a perfidious Cabalist, a dreaming Naturalist, a Wonder-faigning
Metaphysician, a morose Ethic, a treacherous Politician, a tyrannical Prince,
an oppressing Magistrate, a seditious People, a Schismatical Priest, a
superstitious Monk, a prodigal Husband, a bargain-breaking Merchant, a pilling
Customer, a sloathful Husbandman, a careless Shepherd, an envious Fisherman, a
bawling Hunter, a plundering Soldier, an exacting Landlord, a murderous
Physician, a poisoning Apothecary, a glutton-Cook, a deceitful Alchymist, a
juggling Lawyer, a perfidious Notary, a Bribe-taking Judge, and a heretical and
seducing Divine. So that there is nothing more ominous than Art and Knowledge
guarded with impiety, seeing that every man becomes a ready Inventor, and
learned Author of evil things. If it light upon a person that is not so evil as
foolish, there is nothing more insolent or Dogmatical, having besides its own
headstrong obstinacy, the authority of Learning, and the weapons of Argument
to defend its own fury; which other fools wanting, are more tame and quietly
mad: As Plato says of the Rhetorician, That the more simple and illiterate he
is, the more he will take upon him to declaim; will imitate all things, and
think himself not unworthy of any undertaking. So that there is nothing more
deadly, than to be as it were rationally mad. But if good and just men be the
possessors of Knowledge, then Arts and Sciences may probably become useful to
the public Weal, though they render their possessors nothing more happy. For
it is not, as Porphyrius and Iamblicus report, That Happiness consists in the
multitude of Arts, or heaps of Words. For should that be true, they that were
most laden with Sciences, would be most happy; and those that wanted them,
would on the other side be altogether unhappy; and hence it would come to pass,
That Philosophers would be more happy than Divines. For true Beatitude consists
not in the knowledge of good Things, but in good Life; not in Understanding,
but in living Understandingly. Neither is it great Learning, but Good Will,
that joins Men to God. Nor do outward Arts avail to Happiness, only as
Conditional means, not the Causes of completing our Happiness, unless assisted
with a Life answerable to the nature of those good things we profess. Therefore
says Cicero in his Oration for Archias, Experience tells us, That Nature
without Learning is more diligent in the pursuit of Praise and Virtue, than
Learning without natural Inclination. It shall not then be needful (as the
followers of Averroes contend) so violently to labor to season our minds with
the so long, so tedious, so difficult, so unattainable learning of all sorts of
Sciences, which Arist^tle confesses to be a common felicity, and easy to be
attained to by labor and diligence; but only to give our selves to what is
more easy and common to all, the Contemplation of the most noble Object of all
things, God: which common Act of Contemplation so easy to All men, is not
obtained by Syllogism and Contemplation, but by Belief and Adoration. Where is
then the great felicity of enjoying the Sciences? where is the praise and
beatitude of the wise Philosophers, that make so much noise in the School,
founding with the Encomiums of those Men whose souls perhaps in the mean time
are at that instant suffering the Torments of Hell? This St. Austin saw and
feared, while he exclaims with St. Paul, The unlearned rise, and take heaven by
force: while we with all our Knowledge, are cast down into Hell. So that* if we
may be bold to confess the Truth, That the Tradition of all Sciences are so
dangerous and inconstant, that it is far safer to be Ignorant, than to know:
Adam had never been Ejected out of Paradise, had not the Serpent been his
Master to teach him Good and Evil. And St. Paul would have them thrown out of
the Church, that would know more than they ought. Socrates, when he had dived
into the Secrets of all sorts of Science, was then by the Oracle adjudged to be
the wisest among many, when he had publicly professed, That he knew nothing.
The knowledge of all Sciences is so difficult, if I may not say impossible,
that the age of Man will not suffice to learn the perfection of one Art as it
ought to be: Which Ecclesiastes seems to intimate, where he says, Then I
beheld the whole Work of God, that man cannot find out the work that is wrought
under the Sun; for the which man labors to seek it, and cannot find it: yea,
and though the wise man think to know it, he cannot find it. Nothing can happen
more Pestilential to Man, than Knowledge: this is that true Plague that invades
all Mankind with so much confusion that subverts all Innocence; subjecting us
to so many Clouds of Sin and Error, and at length to Death. This is that that
has extinguished the Light of Faith, casting our Souls into profound darkness,
which condemning the Truth has mounted Error to a Throne. Therefore in my
Opinion, neither is Valentinian the Emperor to be disprais'd, who is reported
to be such an open Enemy of Learning; nor is Licinius to be accounted
blameworthy, who affirmed Learning to be the Poison and bane of the
Commonwealth. But such is the large freeness, and free largeness of Truth, as
can be apprehended by no contemplations of Science, by no judgment of Sense how
quick soever; by no evident proof, no Syllogistical Demonstration, no humane
Discourse of Reason, but only by Faith: which he that is endued with, Aristotle
in his Book of First Resolves, accounts to be in a better Condition, than he
that* is endued with Knowledge: which Words Philoponus Expounding, says, is to
be better disposed, as more knowing by Faith, than by Demonstration, which is
done by the cause. Therefore says Theophrastus in his Book of Supernaturals,
As to so far, we may discern by the Cause, taking our beginnings from the
Senses; but after we have passed the Extremes, and first Principles, we can go
no farther, either because we know not the Cause, or through the defect of our
weak understanding. Plato in his Timaeus says, That our Abilities will not
reach to the Explanation of those things, but commands to believe those that
delivered them before, though they speak without any necessity of
Demonstration. For the Academick Philosophers were in high esteem, for
affirming, That nothing could be Affirmed. There were also the Pyronicks, and
many others, who were of the same Opinion, That nothing could be affirmed. So
that Knowledge has nothing super-excellent above Belief, especially where the
Integrity of the Author directs the freewill of Believing. Hence that
Pythagorical Answer of He has said it; And that vulgar Proverb of the
Peripateticks, We are to believe every man expert in his Art. Thus we believe
the Grammarian, as to the signification of Words. The Logician believes the
Parts of Speech, delivered by the Grammarian. The Rhetorician takes for granted
his Forms of Argument, from the Logician. The Poet borrows his Measures from
the Musician. The Geometrician takes his Proportions from the Arithmetician:
And upon both these, the Astrologer pins his sleeve. Supernaturalists use the
Conjectures of Naturalists, and every Artist rightly trusts to the Method and
Rules of another: For every Science has certain Principles that must be
believed, and can be by no means Demonstrated; which if any one deny, those
Philosophers will straight cry out, He is not ^o be Disputed withal, as a
denyer of Principles; or else they will deliver him over to the rack of his own
experience: as if one should deny Fire to be hot, let him be thrown into the
Fire, and then resolve the Question. So that of Philosophers, they are forced
to become Executioners, compelling men to believe that by force, that they
cannot teach by Reason. To a Commonwealth there can be nothing more pernicious
than Learning and Science, wherein if some happen to excel the rest, all things
are carried by their Determination, as taking upon them to be most Knowing; who
thereupon laying hold upon the simplicity and unskilfulness of the Multitude,
usurp all Authority to themselves; which is often the occasion of the changing
Popular States into Oligarchie, which dividing into Factions, is at length
easily oppressed by single Tyranny: which never any man in the World was ever
known to attain to without Knowledge, without Learning, without Literature;
only Sylla the Dictator, who an Illiterate person, invaded and obtained the
Supreme Government: to whose ignorance the Commonwealth was yet so far
beholding, that it was the occasion that at length of his own accord he quitted
his great Command. Furthermore, all Sciences are but the Opinions and Decrees
of private Men; as well those that are of use, as those that are prejudicial;
as well those that are wholesome, as those that are pestiferous; as well the bad
as the good; being never perfect, but both doubtful, full of Error and
Contention: and that this is evident, we shall make appear, by taking a survey,
and making a particular inspection into every particular Science.

CHAP. 2.
Of the first Elements of Letters.
FOR who sees not, that the Arts of well speaking, that is to say, Grammar,
Logic, Rhetoric, which are but the Porches and Wickets of Sciences, but not
of Knowledge, are oft-times the Causes of more mischief then delight? which
notwithstanding have no other rule of Truth for their Establishment, than the
Decrees and Statutes of their first Institutors; which evidently appears in the
Invention of Letters themselves, which are the Elements and Materials of all
Arts. The first Letters were Caldaean, invented by Abraham, as Philo affirms,
and were in use among the Galdaeans, Assyrians, and Phoenicians; though others
say, that Radamanth was the first that framed Letters among the Assyrians.
After this, Moses delivered certain Characters to the Jews, though not the same
which are used at this day; the Author of which, Ezra is said to be, and not
only so, but of all the Books of the Old Testament. Afterward, one Linus a
Calcidian is said to have brought over Letters out of Phoenicia into Greece,
being the Phoenician Characters, which were there used till Cadmus the Son of
Agenor made public among them other new Letters of another sort, sixteen in
Number; to which in the time of the Trojan War Palamedes added four more; and
after him, Simonides the Melitian as many more. To the Egyptians it is said
that one Memnon first taught the use of Writing by the Portraitures of Beasts,
as is seen in their Obelisks; but as for Letters, Mercury is said to be the
first that gave them the Knowledge thereof: that Mercury, whom Lactantius
affirms to be the first of that Name, to whom Vulcan the Son of Nilus
succeeded in the Kingdom. But the first that taught the use of Letters among
the Latins, was Nicostrata, sirnam'd Carmenta. Thus we see seven sorts of
Letters most famous in Antiquity, the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Syriac, Caldean,
Egyptian, and Getic. Of which in a very Ancient Manuscript Crinitus reports
that he has read these following Verses.

First Moses Hebrew Letters did invent:
To A^tica the wise Phoenicians sent:
The Latin ones Nicostrata found out:
Syriac and Caldee, Abram without doubt:
Ipsis the Egyptians taught, not with less Art:
To Getans, Galsela did theirs impart.
But other People and Barbarous Nations of latter times have invented new
Letters. For Cordanus* the Bishop invented Letters for the Goths; and the
Ancient Franks, who under the Leading of Marcomirus and Pharamond vanquished
the Gauls, used certain Characters very little different from the Greeks: which
Letters Wastaldus, writing their History in their own Language, made use of.
There are also other Letters extant among the Franks, whose inventor one
Doracus is said to be, far differing in Character from those of Wastaldus;
together with others, of whom Hichus the Frank was Author, who came out of
Scythi^ to the Mouth of the Rhyne with Marcomir. Beda also produces the
Characters of certain Norman Letters, but without any certainty of their first
Inventor. Many other Nations have appointed for their own use several new
Characters of Letters; either borrowed from the Ancients, or which they did
impart, change, and corrupt: Thus the Dalmatians corrupted the Grecian; the
Armenians the Caldean; the Lombards and Goths defaced and altered the Latin
Characters. Many Ancient Letters are also quite lost, as of the Ancient
Hetrurians, which notwithstanding formerly were in high esteem among the
Romans, as Livy and Pliny witness. Of which Letters, the Characters are to be
seen in many Ancient Coyns, although their signification be altogether unknown.
For the Romans heretofore Conquering the greatest part of the World, took from
many Nations the use of their own Letters, and violently imposed upon them
their own Forms. In the like manner the Hebrew Letters were lost in the
Captivity of Babylon, and their Language was corrupted by the Caldeans. Thus
the ancient Letters of the Germans, Spaniards, and other Nations, perished upon
introducing the Roman Character; and their Languages were also by the same
means wholly corrupted. On the other side, the Letters and Language of the
Romans were corrupted and changed by the Goths, Lombards, Franks, and other
Barbarous Nations: Neither is the Latin Language now in use the same with that
in times of yore. Concerning the Hebrew Language and Character, there is no
small dissension among the Talmudists; for Rabbi Jehuda says, That Adam the
first man spoke the Aramaean Language. Marsurra affirms, That the Law was
delivered by Moses, in the Character which is said to be the Hebrew; but in the
Sacred Idiome of Speech, which being afterward changed into the Aramaean
Idiome, and written in the Assyrian Character by Esdras; a little while after
retaining the Assyrian Character, reassumed the Sacred Idiome. Others say, That
the Law was not Written in other Characters at first, than those at present
known; but that sometimes it was changed upon their fallings away, and by and
by restored upon their Repentance. Rabbi Simon the Son of Eleazer believes
neither the Language nor Character to have at any time been changed: So little
of certain concerning the Hebrew Letters is there among the Hebrews themselves.
And indeed, such are the alterations happening through the Vicissitude of times,
that there are no Languages or Letters that are able to make good the Antiquity
or Truth of their first Original.

CHAP. 3.
Of Grammar.
YET out of these so inconstant, and in all Ages mutable Principles of Letters
and Languages, Grammar first, then the other Arts of well speaking proceeded:
For when it seemed to be of little use to know Letters, unless they were joined
together in a certain Method and Form, and Syllables framed thereof, which at
length might grow into Words and Sentences for the understanding of Speech;
then did certain Ingenious Men undertake to Ordain Rules of speaking; that is
to say, the Construction of government of Words and things signified, imposing
as it were a bridle upon Speech, that whatever was written or said according to
those Rules, should be well written or said, and should be the Art of well
speaking, which Art they called Grammar. The first Inventor whereof among the
Grecians is said to be Prometheus. Crates Mallotes was the first that brought
it into Rome, being sent by Attalus between the second and third Punic War;
which afterward Palaemo Professed with great Ostentation, so that he gave a
new Name thereto, calling Grammar the Polaemonian Art: A man so Arrogant, that
he boasted That Letters had their beginning, and should dye with him; so
proved, that he despised all the most Learned men of this Age; not forbearing
to call Marcus Va^ro Hog. However, the Latin Grammar is so barren, and so much
beholden to Greek Literature, that whoever understands not so much, is to be
ejected out of the Number of Grammarians. Therefore all the Foundation and
Reason of Grammar consists only in the use and Authority of our Ancestors, who
have been pleased, that a thing shall be so called and so written, that words
shall be so compounded and construed; which being so done, they esteem well
done. From whence though Grammar boast it self to be the Art of well-speaking,
yet does it falsely claim that Pre-eminence, seeing that with more advantage we
learn that very thing from our Mothers and Nurses, rather than from the
Grammarians. The Language and Speech of the Gracchi, (who were most Eloquent
Men) their Mother Cornelia polished and adorned. Istria taught her Son Siles,
Son of Aripethis King of Scythia, the Greek Tongue. And it is well known, that
in many Provinces where Foreign Colonies have been introduced, the Children
have still retained the Dialect of their Mothers. Hence it is, that Plato and
Quintilian are so careful in appointing Rules for the choice of a fit Nurse.
Far be it from us therefore to acknowledge the reason of well-speaking to these
Grammarians; who professing Grammar only, and making that their only business,
yet are skilled in nothing less. Priscian could not learn this Art in the whole
time of his Life. And Didymus is said to have four, some say six thousand Books
upon this Subject. They report that Claudius Caesar was so given to the Greek
Tongue, that he added three new Letters thereto, which he afterward made use
of when he was a Prince. Charles the Great is said to have Compiled a Grammar
for the German Tongue, giving new Names to the Months and Winds. Even to this
hour how men toil and labor Day and Night! scribbling continually of all sorts,
Commentaries, Forms of Elegancy, or Phrases, Questions, Annotations,
Animadversions, Observations, Castigations, Centuries, Miscellanies,
Antiquities, Paradoxes, Collections, Additions, Lucubrations, Editions upon
Editions. And yet not one of them all, whether Grecian or Latin has given any
account how the Parts of Speech are to be distinguished, or what order is to be
observed in their Construction; or whether there be only fifteen Pronouns, as
Priscian believes, or whether more, as Di^medes and Focas will have it: whether
a Participle put by its self, be sometimes a Participle, or whether Gerunds are
Nouns or Verbs: why among the Greeks, Nouns plural of the Neuter Gender are
joined with a Verb of the singular Number: upon what account it may be lawful
to pronounce in um, Latin words terminating a and us, as for Margarita,
Margaritum; for Punctus, Punctum: how it comes that the Word Jupiter makes
Jovis in the Genitive Case: Why many write most Latin words with a Greek
Diphthong, others not; as Foelix, Quaestio: whether the Latin Diphthongs are
only written, and not pronounced; or whether there be a double pronunciation in
one Syllable: Likewise, why in some Latin words some use the Greek y, and some
the Latin i only; as in considero: Why in some words some double the Letters,
some not; as causa, caussa; religio, relligio: Why the word Caccabus, by
position long, by reason of the double cc, is notwithstanding most commonly by
the Poets made a Dactyle: Whether Aristotle's word for the Soul, ought to be
writ endelechia with a Delta, or entelechia with a Tau. I omit their infinity
and never-to-be-reconcil'd contentions about Accents, Orthography,
Pronounciation of Letters, Figures, Etymologies, Analogies, Declinings, manner
of Signification, change of Cases, variety of Tenses, Moods, Persons, Numbers;
as also about the various impediments and order of Construction. Lastly,
concerning the Number and Pedigree of the Latin Letters, whether H be a Letter
or not; and many other trifles of the same Nature: so that not only as to Words
and Syllables, but also in the very Elements and Foundations of Grammar it
self, no reason can be given of such their continual warfare. Such a kind of
Battle as this, Lucian of Samos has very elegantly described, about the
Consonants S and T, whether should have the Victory in the word Tbalassa, or
Thalatta: Answerable to which, one Andreas Salernitanus has with very much wit
compiled his Grammatical War. But these are poor and low things; but more, and
of greater Consequenc^, could we urge concerning their depraved significations
of Words, with which they impose upon the greatest part of the Universe, not a
little to the damage of the Public Weal, while they interpret subjection to
the Law, Servitude; Liberty of the People, they call that when every one has
Liberty to do what he pleases; Acrisonomie or Equality of right they call that,
when there is the same punishment, the same reward to all alike. In like manner
they call that a quiet and peaceable Government, when all things submit to the
inordinate will of the Prince; That a happy Government, when the People wallow
in ease and luxury. By suchlike expositions as these, and many other, Physic
and Law are corrupted: nay, the very Scriptures, and Christ himself, are
compelled to be at a kind of variance one with another, and himself with
himself; wresting those holy words not according to the meaning of the holy
Ghost, nor to the Advantage of humane Salvation, but to the sense and meaning
of their insignificant Compendiums and discants thereupon: whence arise most
eminent mischiefs; Error in Words, being many times the parent of Error in
Matter. This mistake was grievous to Saul first King of the Jews, in the word
Zobar, which signifies both a Male, and the Memory. So that when God said, I
will root out the memory of Amalech, Saul thought he had sufficiently executed
the Command, in destroying all the Males. The like Error befell the Greeks and
Latins in the word Phos, which signifies both Light, and Man; by which
ambiguity of the word, the ancient adorers of Saturn being deceived, were wont
to Sacrifice a Man in their usual Ceremonies; whereas otherwise they might have
as well appeased their Deity by the only kindling of proper Lights and Fires:
which Error was afterward reformed by the prudence of Hercules. Last of all,
Divines and holy Friars mixing themselves among the Tribe of Grammarians, are
forced to make use of Heresy to make good their Contests about the
signification of Words, overturning the Scriptures for Grammars sake; evil
Interpreters of words well spoken: men truly vain, and truly unhappy, blinding
themselves with their own Art, and flying the Light of Truth; who while they
over-diligently scrutinize into the sorce of Words, lose the sense of the
Scripture, not willing to understand the word of Truth: which puts us in mind
of the story of the Priest, who having many Hosts at one Elevation, for fear of
committing a Grammar-absurdity, cried out, These are my Bodies. Whence arose
that execrable Heresy of the Antidicomarianites and the Elvidians, denying the
perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Virgin, but from that one word until, where
it is said, Because Joseph did not know her until she had brought forth her
firstborn? What strife and contention have those two Syllables from and
through raised between the Latin and Greek Church! The Latins asserting the
Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and from the Son; the Greeks denying him
to proceed from the Son, but from the Father through the Son. How many
Tragedies has the word Nisi been the occasion of in the Council of Basil! the
Bohemians asserting the Lords Supper to be necessary in both kinds, because it
is written, Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood, ye
shall not have life in ye. Whence that Opinion of the Waldenses and others
their followers concerning the Eucharist, but from the word is, which they will
have Symbolically understood, which the Roman Church would have meant
Essentially? There are other pernicious Heresies of the Grammarians, but so
nice, so subtle, that unless the Oxonians the most acute Divines of England,
or the Sorbonists of Paris, had discovered them with their Lynx's eyes, and
condemned 'um under their great Seals, it would be difficult to shun them* of
this nature are those subtleties, which is best said, Christ thou Preachest,
Christ Preaches; I Believe, thou Believes, Believing am I: also that the
Word, the permanent Word, may be deprived of all its accidents: also that there
is no name of the Third Person, and the like; which if they be Heretical, then
are Isaias and Malachy in the first place to be accounted Heretics, who both
introduce God speaking of himself in the Third Person: the first, when God
speaks to Ezechiel, saying, Ego addet, not addam super dies tuos. The other is
this, Et Domini Ego, ubi est timor meus? In which place he makes God giving
himself the appellation of Dominos in the plural Number. Much rather ought they
to be accounted Heretics, who are now esteemed the chief Divines in the Roman
World, amusing and clouding the whole Doctrine of the Orthodox Church, with
noveltie of Pronunciation contrary to all the rules and maxims of Grammar,
with far-strain'd words, new-made Vocabularies, and abstruse Sophisms; teaching
moreover, That the Doctrine of Theology cannot be truly delivered in neat and
genuine Language. And a miserable thing it is to consider, what Debates, what
Errors these obstinate Grammarians and proud Sophists are the occasion of, by
means of their perverse and imperious Interpretations of Words; while some out
of words gather Sentences; others, out of Sentences gather Words. Hence in
Physic, in both Laws, in Philosophy, in Theology, infinite Arguments and
Errors arise. For Grammarians demonstrate nothing, but solely lean upon
Authorities, which are oft-times so various and discordant among themselves,
that of necessity the most of them must be false; insomuch that they who most
confide in their Precepts, must be thought to utter least of all to the
purpose. For all the Laws of Speech abide not with the Grammarians, but with
the People, that by continual custom attain the use and habit of well-speaking.
Now the vigor of the Latin Tongue after it ceased among the People, through
the Invasion of barbarous Nations, the true substance thereof is not to be
sought among the Grammarians, but among the most Authentic and Learned
Authors, as Cicero, Cato, V^rro, both Plinies, Quintilian, Seneca, Suetonius,
Quintus Curtius, Livie, Salust, and suchlike; in whose Writings only remain
the delights of the Latin Language, and the Custom of well-Speaking; not in
the scribblements of Grammatical Letter-mongers, who by their starched Rules
concerning declining of Verbs and Cases, Compounds and Deponents, impose more
upon the Latin Tongue, and oftentimes frame to themselves stranger words than
is fit for the Latin Language to own. Though it be apparent to the World, that
there is no faith to be given to these Grammarians touching the truth of the
Latin Tongue, yet these impertinent Scriblers arrogate to themselves to be the
only Censurers of other Men's Writings, their Judges and Interpreters, and all
Books and Authors to reduce into Method, and to allow or reject at their
pleasures. Never was any Author of so sublime a wit whatever extant, which has
escaped their malicious slanders, or whom they have not taxed and calumniated as
they thought good. They accuse Plato of Confusion, of whose faults George
Trap^zund has put forth several Books, who as Crinitus declares, is therefore
by others called the Parent of Truth and Verity. They seek perspicuity in
Aristotle, condemn him of Obscurity, giving him the nickname of Sepi^ (or
Cuttle-fish.) Vergil they condemn for little Wit, and for being a Pla^arie, and
an Usurper of other men's Works. Demosthenes displeases Tully. On the ot^^r
side, Tully that great Rhetorician of the Latins, is accused of Bribery,
reproached for being Fearful, superfluous in Repetitions, cold in his Joking,
tedious in his Exordiums, idle in his Digressions, seldom growing Warm, slowly
Swelling, yea, reprehended by those even of our Age, and by Capella taxed for
his disorderly Style, but more by Apollinaris branded for being Flat and
Insipid. Trogus condemns Livies Orations for Fictions. Plautus and Horace
cannot agree. Lucilius is damned for the rustickness of his hobling Verse.
Pliny like a Rapid Stream is said to grasp and overflow with too much Matter.
Ovid is complained of, for too much Indulging his own Fancy. Salust is accused
of affectation, by Assinius Pollio. Terence could do little without the
assistance of Labeo and Scipio. Seneca is adjudg'd to be Lime without Sand;
whom Quintilian taxed in these words: If he had not contemned his Equals, had
he not been Covetuous, had he not too much loved and admired his own things, if
he had not injured weighty Matters with trivial Sentences, he then might have
been esteemed more in the judgment of Learned Men, than in the Love of
Children. Marcus Varro is called a Hog. Macrobius a most Learned man degraded,
as one of an impudent and ungrateful Genius: neither is there any that ever
wrote in Latin, whom Laurentius Valla the Learnedest of all the Grammarians
has spared in his Anger; and yet him has Mancinellus most cruelly butchered.
Servius of old was thought to have well deserved of the Latin Tongue, yet has
Bero^ldus most furiou^ly opposed him; and our later Grammarians altogether shun
him as a Barbarian. Thus all the Grammarians rage one against another: but
lastly, by their means it comes to pass, that the Translation of the Holy
Scriptures, under pretense of Correction, has been so often changed, that now
it seems altogether to differ from it self: Through their devices and censures,
those doubts now reigning have been raised concerning the Revelation, the
Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews, the Epistle of Jude; and many other places
and Chapters of the New Testament by many called in question, even to an
endeavor of subverting the Evangiles themselves. But now to the Poets.

CHAP. 4.
Of Poesy.
POeste, in the Judgment of Quintilian, is another part of Grammar: for this
reason not a little proud, that heretofore Theaters and Amphitheaters, the most
stately Fabrics of the time, were with great cost and magnificence erected,
not for Philosophers, Lawyers, Physicians; not for Rhetoricians,
Mathematicians, or Divines but to represent the Fables of the Poets. An Art
invented to no other purpose, but with lascivious Rhythmes, measure of
Sillables, and the gingling noise of fine words, to allure and charm the Ears
of men addicted to folly; and furthermore, with the pleasing inticements of
Fables, and mistakes of feigned Stories, to ensnare and deceive the mind.
Therefore has she deserved no other title, than to be the female Architect of
falsehood, and the preserver of idle and fond opinions. And though we may pardon
so much of her as coun^enances Madness, Drunkenness, Impudence, and Boldness;
yet who can bear with Patience her undaunted Confidence in maintaining Lies?
For what corner of the Earth has she not filled with her hairbrain'd Trifles,
and idle Fables! Taking the first rise of her fabulous Stories from the very
Chaos, she relates the divisions of Heaven, the birth of Venus, the fight of
the Titans, the infancy of Jove, the deceits of Rhea, and cheat of the Stone,
Saturnus Bonds, the Rebellion of the Giants, the Thievery and Punishment of
Promethe^, the wanderings of Delos, the travail of Latona, the slaughter of
Pytho, the Treachery of Tyrus, Deau^ale^^s Flood, Stones turned into Men, the
Butcheries of Iacchus, the Fraud of Juno, Semel^s Conflagration the double
Prog^ny of Bacchus, and whatever is reported of Minerva, Vulcan, Erichthonius,
Boreas, (...), Theseus, Aegeus, Castor, Pollux, the Rape of Helen, the death of
Hippolytus; To these may be added the absconding of Ceres, the Rape of
Proserpina, together with the stor^s of Minos, Cadmus, Niobe, Pe^theus,
Attaeus, Oedipus, the Labors of Hercules, the Fight of the Sun and Neptune,
Athamas madness, ^o turned into a H^^fer, and Argos her keeper killed by
Mercury, with those other Dreams of the Golden Fleece, Peleus, Jason, Medaea;
the death of Agamemnon, and punishment of Clytemnestra, Danae, Perseus, Gorgon,
Cassiopea, Andromeda, Orpheus, Orestes, the Travels of Aeneas and Ulysses,
Circe, Thelagon, Aeolus, Palamedes, Nauplius, Ajax, Daphne, Ariadne, Europa,
Phaedra, Pasiphae, Daedalus, Icarus, Glaucus, Atlas, Geryon, Tantalus; Pan,
Centaurs, Satyrs, Sirens, and whatever else has been delivered to memory
concerning these notorious untruths. Neither has she been contented only with
Mankind, but also she has made the Gods themselves Parties to her delusive
Stories, relating in pleasing measures, and in the mischievous charms of Verse,
their Birth, their Deceases, Strifes, Quarrels, Animosities, Battles, Wounds,
Lamentations, Bonds, Loves, Lusts, Fornications, Adulteries; not only deceiving
and infecting the present Age, but having neatly preserved and pickled up these
be^^ialities of the Gods in neat Verse and Meter, communicates the same to
posterity, like the Venom of Mad Dogs, compelling all that are Bit, to be in
the same condition. And with so much Art are her Lies woven, that they are
often prejudicial to true History, as appears by the feigned Adultery of Dido
with Aeneas, and the taking of ^rey by the Greeks. Some there are arrived at
such a height of madness, that they ascribe some share of Divinity to her,
because the Devils formerly returned their Answers in Poetical Anagrams. Hence
Poets are in some sense said to be Prophets, and inspired from above; their
trifling Verses being used as Oracles and Answers of Divination; which is the
reason that Spartianus, in the Life of Trajan, makes mention of Sorts
Homericae, so called from the Verse of Homer, and of the Vergilianae sorts, so
named from the Poems of Vergil, which superstition is now transferred and
applied to sacred Text, and the Poetry of the Psalms, not without the
connivance of some of the greatest Masters of our Religion. But to return to
Poesy St. Austin; has commanded it to be exiled from the City of God: Heathen
Plato expels it out of his Commonwealth, and Cicero forbids it to be admitted:
Socrates admonishes the person that desires to keep the Virgin-purity of his
good name undefiled, to beware of the acquaintance of Poets, for that their
power to praise is not so great, as the force that lies in their slander and
dispraise. Thus we see Minos, celebrated by Homer and Hesiod for the justest of
Kings, because he made War upon the Athenians, raised all the Tragic Poets
about his Ears, who immediately sent him packing to Hell. Penelope, so famous
in Homer for her Chastity, yet Licophron reproaches as one that lay with many
Adulterers. Dido, a most virtuous and continent Widow, Foundress of Carthage,
Ennius the Poet, in his Poem upon Scipio's Life, feigns to have unchastly loved
Aeneas, whom by computation of time it was impossible for her to have seen* And
Vergil confirms the same so plausibly, that the Story has almost gained
belief. At length this Liberty of lying and slandering was advanced to that
height, that the Censors thought fit to enact a Law, whereby the falsehoods and
reproaches of Poets might be suppressed. Among the Ancient Romans, Poesy was
held in great disrepute, so that whoever gave his mind to the Study thereof,
was, as Gellius and Cato witness, accounted as a public Enemy. And Q. Fulvius
was accused by M. Cato, for that he going Pro-Consul into Asia, had taken
Ennius the Poet along with him to bear him company. Neither does that great
Justiciary, the Emperor Justinian, give any freedom or immunity to the
Professors thereof. Homer was called the Philosopher of all Poets, and the Poet
of all Philosophers; yet the Athenians laid a Fine upon him as a Madman, of
fifty Drams; and they laughed at and derided Ti^hteus the Poet, as one
beside his Wits. The Lacedaemonians also commanded the Books of Archilochus the
Poet to be carried out of their City. And thus the best and wisest of Men have
always despised Poesy as the Parent of Lies, finding Poets to be such
monstrous Liars, as being such who never made it their Study to speak or
deliver in Writing any thing of sound knowledge, only to tickle the Ears and
Fancies of vain Persons with idle Stories, always building Castles in the Air,
as Campanus has truly said of them.

Mad Poets only on their Verses feed;
Reject their Fables, they will starve for need:
Their Lies their Riches are, and all their Gold
They faign, and think that they enjoy; so bold
To think the Palm grows only the reward
To Crown the Brows of every lying Bard.
Furthermore, there are most desperate contentions not only about the Forms and
Figures of Verses, and also concerning the Feet, Accents and quantity of
Syllables long and short (for these are the Trisles of Grammarians) but also
about their own Toys, Figments, and Lies: for example, the Club of Hercules,
the chaste Tree, the Letters of the Hyacinth, the daughters of Niobe, the Tree
under which Latona brought forth; as also concerning the Country of Homer, and
his Sepulcher: Which was eldest in time, Homer or Hesiod: Whether Patroclus
were before Achilles: In what Attire Anacharsis the Scythian slept: Why Homer
did not honor Palamedes: whether Lucan be to be placed among the Poets, or
Heretics: Also concerning the thefts of Vergil, and what time of the year he
dyed. Who was the Author of the little Epigrams, is a great Contest among the
Grammarians, and hitherto undecided. To say truth, all the Verses of the Poets
are full of Impostures and Fables, invented for the delight of Fools, under
pretense of Flattery, or detraction of the worst of Men. Whatever Poets do,
whether they relate, praise or invoke,'it is all but in flattery of their own
Fables; again, whether they inveigh, satyrize, or accuse, they do it in
applause of their own Fables, acting always the parts of Madmen. Rightly
therefore did Democritus call Poesy not an Art, but Madness. Therefore Plato
said, that he never knocked at a Poets Doors, being in his Wits. Then are Poets
said to express most admirable lines, when they are either Mad or Drunk. For
this cause St. Austin calls Poesy the Wine of Error, quaft only by drunken
Doctors. St. Jerome also calls Poesy the Meat of the Devils. An Art of it self
thin and naked, which is in reality a mere insipid thing, unless it be clad and
seasoned with some other learning. An Art always hungry, always starving, and
like Mice, feeding on stolen Cates, yet I know not with what boldness in the
midst of their trifles and fables, like Tithonus Grasshoppers, the Lycian Frogs,
the Myrmidons Emmets, promising to themselves immortal Fame and Glory.

Live happy then, such Charms my numbers boast,
No day shall see ye in Oblivion lost.
Which indeed is no Fame or Reward at all, or at most very little profitable.
Neither is it the Office of a Poet, but of a Historian, to prolong the life of
Reputation.

CHAP. VI.
Of History.
NOw History is a Narration of Actions, either with praise or dispraise, which
declares and sets forth the conduct and event of great things, the Actions of
Kings and Illustrious Men, according to the order of Time and Place. Therefore
most Men think this to be the Mistress of well-living, and most useful for the
instruction thereof; for that by the examples of great things, it both incites
the best of Men, out of a desire of Immortal Glory, to undertake great and
noble Actions, and also for fear of perpetual Infamy, it deters wicked Men from
Vice. But it often falls out contrary; and many, as Livie relat^ of Manlius
Capitolinus, had rather purchase great than good Fame: and when they cannot
obtain their desired greatness by virtuous means, will endeavor to atchieve it
by Acts of Impiety; as Justin out of Trogus relates of Pausanias the young
Macedonian, famous for the Murder of King Philip; and is also justified of
Herostratus, who burnt the Temple of Diana, the most famous Structure in the
World, which had been two hundred years in building, at the expense of all
Asia; as Gellius, Valerius, and Solinus report. And although it was enacted
under most severe Penalties, that no Man should so much as make mention of his
name, either by Word or Writing; yet he attained the end which spurred him on
to commit so great a Villainy, his name being still remembered, and yet living to
this our present Age. But let us return to History; Which being a thing that
above all things promises Order, Fidelity, Coherence, and Truth, is yet
defective in every one; For Historians are at such variance among themselves,
delivering several Tales of one and the same Story, that it is impossible but
that most of them must be the greatest Liars in the World. For to omit the
beginning of the World, the Universal Deluge, the Building of Rome, or of any
other great City from whence they generally commence the first beginnings of
all their huge Narratives, of which they are all altogether ignorant, of the
other generally very incredulous, and of the third very uncertain what to
determine: For these things being the most remote in time, more easily gain
Pardon for vulgar Error. But as to what concerns later times and Ages, within
the memory of our Ancestors, there is no excuse that can be admitted for their
Lying. Now the causes why they so much differ among themselves, are many. For
the most of Historians, because they were not living at the same time, or were
not present at the Actions, or conversant with the persons, taking their
Relations upon trust at the second hand, mist the chief scope of Truth and
Certainty. Of which Vice Eratost^enes, Metrodorus, Speptius, Possidonius, and
Patrocles the Geographer, are accused by Strabo. Others there are, who having
seen by halves, as in a March, or as Mendicant Travelers to perform Vows,
viewing many Provinces, undertake to compile Histories; such as formerly
Onosicritus and Aristobulus set forth concerning India. Some others to please
their own Fancies will feign upon true History, and sometimes for the Fables
sake omit the whole Truth, as Diodorus Siculus notes of Herodotus Liberianus;
and Vopiscus of Trebellius, Tertullian and Orosius of Tacitus; among which you
may likewise reckon Danudes and Philostratus. Others convert the whole Story
into Fables, as Guidius, C^esias, Haecateus, and many other of the Ancient
Historiographers. Others there are, who impudently arrogating to themselves the
Name and Title of Historians, lest they should seem to be ignorant of any
thing, or to have borrowed from others, presume to write strange and wonderful
Relations of unknown Places, and inaccessible Provinces. Of which nature, are
those Figments of the Arimaspi, Gryphons, Pigmies, Cranes, People with Dogs
Heads, the Astromori, People with Horses Feet, the Phanissii and the
Trogladytes; akin to which are those Relations that ave^ the Northern Seas to
be frozen all over: However, they find Fools, and Men without Wit or Judgment,
who believe these things, and take 'um for Oracles. In the number of these idle
Writers is Ephorus to be reckoned, who related that there was but one City in
Ireland; as also Stephen the Grecian, who said the Franks were a People of
Italy, and that Vienna was a City of Galilee; together with Arianus, that
affirmed the Germans to be Borderers upon Ionia; and Dionysius, so notorious
for his tales of the Pyrenaean Hills. For further confirmation, we find that
what Tacitus, Marcellus, Orosius, and Blondus discourse concerning many places
of Germany, is for the most part very unagreeable to Truth. Falsely does Strabo
affirm, that Ister, which is the Donaw, rises not far from the Adriatic Sea:
Falsely does Herodotus affirm the same River to flow from the West, that it
rises among the Celtae, the farthest people of all Europe, and disgorges it
self among the Scythians. Again, falsely does Strabo relate, that the Rivers
Lapus, and Visurgus, flow as far a Hanasus; when as Lapus falls into the Rhine,
and Visurgus into the Sea. So Pliny relates, that the River Mosa hastens into
the Ocean, whereas it runs not into the Ocean, but into the Rhine. Errors like
these, we find among Historians and Geographers of a later date. Sabellicus
makes the Alani to be descended from the Alemanni, and the Hungarians from the
Huns. Moreover, he asserts the Goths and Getars to be the Scythians, and
confounds the Danes with the Dacians, and fixes the Mountain of D. Ottilias in
Bavaria, which was not far from Argentoratum. Volaterranus also will have
Austerania and Austria, the Avari and Savari, Lucerna and Naulium, to be the
same; and says that Pliny makes mention of the Switzers of the Canton of
Bearn, when it is known they were placed there long after by Bartholdus, Duke
of the Zaringii. In like manner, Conradus Celtes believes the Dacians and
Cimbrians to be the same; and places the Riphean Mountains in Samaria, saying
besides that, that the Gum Amber distills out of a Tree. There are yet other
Historians guilty of greater Lies than this, and deserving double blame, who
though they were present at the transactions themselves, or otherwise knowing
the carriage and management of things, yet overcome by favor and affection, in
flattery of their own Party, against the Faith of History, will confirm Falsity
for Truth, and deliver to Posterity a wrong account of things. Of these there
are some who undertaking to write Histories in excuse, or justification of some
particular Men's Actions, and relating only such things as conduce to make good
their Argument, while they (...) her dissemble, pass by, or extenuate the rest,
make imperfect and corrupt Histories. Of which fault Blondus taxes Orosius, for
that he omits that famous overthrow in Italy, which made the Goths Masters of
Ravenna, Aquilegia, Ferrara, and almost all Italy; lest he should injure the
Argument which he had propounded to himself. Others there are, who out of Fear,
Envy, or Hatred, detract from the Truth. Others, while they greedily desire to
extol their own Acts, vilify the deeds of others, so to bring them into
contempt; writing not what the thing is, but what they desire it should have
been: not doubting they shall ever want those that will not only confirm, but
Patronize their untruths. This Vice was very familiar among the Ancient Greek
Authors, and at this time many of your Annalists and Chronographers are guilty
of the same; as Sabellicus and Blondus, in their Venetian Stories; Paulus
Emylius, and Gaguinus, in their Relations of the Franks. Men whom, as Plutarch
says, Princes cherish for no other reason, than that they by their smart wits
suffocating and concealing the Merits of others, may be only free to advance
their Actions, magnified by the addition of Fables, countenanced by the Majesty
of History. Thus the Greek Historians writing of the Inventors of things,
assume and arrogate all things to their own Countrymen. There is another Crew
the most abominable of all, which are Flatterers, who endeavoring to deduce
the pedigree of their Princes from the most* ancient Kings, when they cannot
compass their ends in the right line, extravagate into foreign Pedigrees and
Fables, feigning the names both of Kings and places, not omitting any Fraud,
that may help out their purpose. Of this sort is that Barbarian Hu^ibaldus, who
writing the History of the Franks, has feigned the names of Scythia, Sicambria,
and Priamus the younger, which never any Historian did before, or ever followed
him in doing after, unless those that were like himself, as Gregorius
Turonensis, Rhegino, and Sigisbert, and some few others. Of the same Chaff is
Vitiscindus, who will have the Saxons, the most ancient people of Germany, to
be descended from the Macedonians, especially the Race of Alexander, whom the
greatest part of the rest pursue in the same Error. Many write Histories, not
so much for Truths sake, as to delight the Reader, and to set forth some Idea
of a King which they have framed to themselves. Whom if any one convince of
falsehood, they cry they did not aim at the Truth of Transaction, so much as the
profit of Posterity, and propagating the fame of their own Ingenuity; therefore
they do not relate how things were done, but how they ought to have been done;
it not being their business obstinately to defend the Truth, but to feign and
falsify where it seems profitable, calling Fabius to witness, that a lie is not
to be dispraised, which persuades to honesty: And furthermore affirming, that
when they write to posterity, it matters not under whose name, or in what order
of time the example of a good Prince be exposed to public view. Thus Xenophon
wrote the Story of Cyrus, not as he was, but what he ought to have been;
propounding him as a true Pattern and example of a Just and Heroic Prince.
Hence it comes to pass that many apt to feign by Nature, and using industry
therewithal, have applied themselves to write those Romances of Morgant, and
Morgalona, Amadis, Floran, Tyran, Conamor, Arthur, Lancelot, Tristram;
generally unlearned, and worse than the mad Dreams of Poets, and more fabulous
than Comedies and Fables themselves. Among the learned, Lucian and Apulcius
obtain the first degree; part also of the History of Herodotus is not to be
left out, which Cicero denies not be to very full of lies and ridiculous
Fables. For there we read of the Medes drinking up whole Rivers at a Dinner,
and how people sailed over the Mountain Athos.

And whatsoever else the lying Greek
In Story dares --
And these are the reasons that there is no exact Truth to be found in
History, though it be the thing we most seek for there. Seeing then there are
no Writings of public transactions that are able to declare the real Truth,
and convince Error, but that every Man is left to his own opinion; hence it
happens that there is so much discord among Historians, in so much that they
write sometimes quite contrary of the same things. In how many Places, says
Josephus, does Helianicus differ from Agesilaus in point of Genealogy! in how
many places does Agesilaus correct Herodotus! How does Ephorus show Hellanicus
to be false in most things! how does Timaens rebuke Ephorus! and others coming
afterward, how do they find fault with Timaeus! but every one blames
Herodotus. In many things Thucydides is accused to be fallacious, though he
seem to have written very tenderly, and with much care. This Josephus writes of
others, whom notwithstanding our Aegesippus very severely corrects.
Furthermore, many from the relations of Historiographers relate many things,
but not upon proof; and those that go about to prove things that are not to be
justified, generally propound the worst examples for imitation. For they who so
much extol, and raise such lofty Pyramids to the praises of Hercules, Achilles,
Hector, Theseus, Epaminondas, Lysander, Themistocles, Xerxes, Cyrus, Darius,
Alexander, Pyrrhus, Hannibal, Scipio, Pompey, and Caesar; what have they done,
but described the greatest and most furious Thieves and Robbers in the World?
Say they were great Generals, yet were they the worst and wickedest of men. If
any one shall say to me, That there is much wisdom to be gained by the reading
of History; I will grant it, so he allow that there is also more impiety to be
learnt: and indeed, as Martial upon another occasion says, There are some good
things made indifferent, but an infinite of Evil.

CHAP. VI.
Of Rhetoric.
NOW Rhetoric, which is the next, whether it be an Art or no, is mainly
disputed among the most Learned men, and remains to this day a question
undetermined. For Socrates in Plato by most sound Reasons argues it to be
neither an Art nor a Science, but a certain kind of subtilty, and that neither
noble nor honest, but mere low, illiberal, and servile flattery. Lycias,
Menedemus, and Cleanthes were of Opinion, That Eloquence could not be
comprehended within the bounds of any Art, but that it proceeds from Nature,
which is the common School-mistris of Mankind; and as occasion serves, teaches
every one to soothe, to r^^ate pleasant Stories, and to use Arguments: and as
for Memory, right Pronunciation, and Invention, they are merely Natural
Effects; which is indeed not a little evident in Antonius, the Prince of the
Latin Orators. And although before Thisias, Coraces, and Gorgias, there was not
any one who had either taught, or wrote of Rhetoric; yet were there many men,
who through the strength of their Natural Parts became to be very Eloquent.
Furthermore, seeing that Art is defined to be a Collection of Precepts, it is a
great Dispute among the Rhetoricians, what that end should be, whether to
persuade or to teach good utterance: and not content with the true grounds,
they daily seek to invent new and fictitious. To which end, they have found out
so many Theses, Hypotheses, figures, colors, characters, suasorie phrases,
controversies, declamations, proems, insinuations, courtships, and artificial
stories, that it is impossible to recount them all; and yet they deny, that
among all these, the end of Rhetoric is to be found. This made the
Lacedaemonians altogether refuse it; believing that the speech of good men
ought to proceed from the sincerity of the heart, not from the Hypocrisy of
Studied Artifice. The ancient Romans would not admit Rhetoricians into their
City in a long while. And when Cicero had after much labor endeavored to show
that the faculty of making Orations did not proceed from Art, but from Wisdom,
as he aspires to prove in his Book De Oratore; yet is not the Rhetorician whom
he there proposes for the only true pattern of an Orator so well approved of;
nay to Brutus, a man of singular Integrity, no way pleasing. And always this
Opinion has born sway, That the Precepts of Oratory are more hurtful than
useful to the Life of Man. And to say truth, it is evident that the whole
Discipline of Rhetoric is nothing else but an Artificial help, or the mystery
of Flattery; or as some more boldly affirm, Lying, whereby they endeavor, what
they cannot gain by truth, to effect by the flourishing varnishes of fine
Language: As Archidamas the Sophist said of Pericles, by the report of
Eunapius; which Archidamas being demanded which was the more powerful, Pericles
or himself made answer, If Pericles were overcome by me in War, yet such is his
Eloquence of Speech, that should be but discourse thereof, he would rather
appear a Victor, than a Person Vanquished. And of Carneades, Pliny reports,
That while he Disputed it was hard to discern, what was true, and what not: of
whom it is likewise related, that when he had one day spoken many things wisely
and elegantly in the behalf of Justice, the next day with the same Learning and
Eloquence declaimed in her dispraise. There was Corax a Rhetorician among the
Syracusans, a man of an accute Wit and promptness of Speech, who taught this
Art for gain. To him Tisias came, and not having ready money, promised him
double pay so soon as he should have taught him his Art: which condition Corax
willingly accepted, and taught him. Tisias having afterward learnt his Art,
and intending to defraud Corax of his reward, demanded of him, What is
Rhetoirck? who answering, That it was effectual persuasion: Then said Tisias,
Whatever agreement has been made between us, if I can persuade my self that I
owe thee nothing, then shall I be quit of my Debt: If I cannot persuade my
self, notwithstanding I shall then owe thee nothing neither, because thou have
pretended to teach me how to persuade. To which Corax replied, Whatever, said
he, I agreed to take of thee, (...) can persuade my self to take it, I ought so
to do, because I have so persuaded my self: If I cannot persuade my self,
however I ought to take my reward, for having bred a Scholar that so far excels
his Master. When the Syracusans heard 'um thus contending, and wrangling
together, they cried out, Bad Crows lay bad Eggs; meaning, That bad Masters
make worse Scholars. A story not unlike this, Gellius reports of Protagorus the
Sophist, and Evath^us his Disciple. Now as it is many times commendable,
delightful, and always profitable, to know how for a man to express himself in
neat, exact, discreet, and fluent Language; so sometimes it falls out to be a
thing very much to be discommended, many times of ill consequence, and always
very much to be suspected: wherefore Socrates thinks Rhetoricians worthy of no
respect, and will not allow them any power in a well-ordered Commonwealth. And
Plato excludes them out of his Commonwealth with the same contempt as he
rejects Players and Poets, not without reason: For there is nothing more
dangerous in civil Affairs, than this deluding Mystery, as that from whence all
prevaricators, juggling shufflers, backbiters, sycophants, and all other lewd
and vile-tongu'd persons derive their malice and knavery. With this Art many
Persons endu'd, raise Seditions and Commotions in Nations, while by their
nimble Tongues some are deceived, some flattered, some over-perswaded; usurping
as it were a kind of Tyranny over men, not so subtle as themselves. Therefore
says Euripides, It is Tyrannical to boast of Knowledge: and Aeschylus writes,
That composed Orations are the greatest Evils in the World. And Raphael
Volaterranus, a most studious lover of Histories and Examples, confesses, That
upon due consideration of all that he had read or seen either of ancient or
modern Stories and Examples, he finds very few Eloquent men to have been good
men. Has not this thing called Eloquence, not only greatly disturbed most
Potent Commonwealths, but also wholly ruined them? Witness the Examples of
Brutus, Crassus, Gracchus, Cato, Cicero, Demosthenes, who as they were
accounted the most Eloquent, so were they the most seditious and turbulent of
their time. For Censorious Cato being himself forty times accused, seventy
times accused others; being nothing but a continual disturber of the Peace,
with his mad Declamations, all his life long. The other Cato, called Vticensis,
by provoking Caesar, was a great occasion of the utter subversion of the Roman
Liberty. In like manner did Cicero provoke Antony, to the great mischief of the
Empire; and Demosthenes incensed Philip, to the ruin of the Athenians; so that
there is no State of Government, but has been highly injured by this wicked
Art: no society of men, that ever lent their Ears to the Charms of Eloquence,
that has not been extremely mischiefed thereby. Moreover, a confident Eloquence
prevails much in Judicature: Eloquence being the Patroness, bad Causes are
defended, the guilty are saved from the punishment of the Law, and the innocent
are Condemned. Marcus Cato, the most prudent among the Romans, forbad those
three Athenian Orators, Carneades, Critholaus, and Diogenes, to be admitted to
public Audience in the City; being men endu'd with such acuteness of Wit, and
Eloquence of speech, that they could with great ease make evil good, and good
evil. And Demosthenes was wont to boast among his friends, That he could sway
the Opinions of the Judges, by virtue of his Eloquence, which way soever he
pleased; and that according to his will and pleasure, Philip and the Athenians
either made War or Peace. Such is the force of Eloquence, either to allay or
incite the Affections of men, having as it were Supreme Dominion over Nations,
to make them follow her Persuasions. For this reason C^cero was at Rome called
King, because he Ruled and guided the Senate by his Orations which way he
pleased. Hence it appears, that Rhetoric is nothing else but the Art of moving
and stirring the Affections by subtle Language, exquisite varnishings of neat
Phrase and cunning insinuation, ravishing the minds of heedless People, leading
them into the Captivity of Error, and subverting the sense and meaning of
Truth. So that if by the benefit of Nature there is nothing but may be
expressed in proper Language, what can be more pestilent than the fucus and
varnishes of fallacious words? The Language of Truth is simple, but quick and
penetrating, a discerner of the intentions of the Heart, and like a Sword
easily cuts in sunder the difficult Enthymems and Gordion-knots of Rhetoric.
This made Demosthenes, though he contemned all other the fine and Eloquent
speakers of his time, nevertheless, to stand in awe of one Phocion, who also
spoke pithily, short, plainly, and to the purpose; and was therefore wont to
call him the Hatchet of his Orations. Perchance, the Ancient Romans were not
ignorant of these things; who, as Suetonius witnesses, Twice Expelled
Rhetoricians, by Public Edict, out of the City; once, when Faunius Strabo, and
Valerius Messala were Consuls; and the second time, in the Consulships of
Domitius Aenobarbus, and Licinius Crassus: and a third time, in the Reign of
Domitian the Emperor, by an unanimous Decree of the Senate, they were not only
expelled out of Rome, but also out of all Italy. The Athenians forbad them to
come near the Seat of Judicature, as being perverters of Justice; they also put
to Death Timagoras, for flattering Darius, according to the custom of the
Persians, in too high and obsequious a manner. The Lacedaemonians exiled
Tesiphone, only because he bragged, That he could talk a whole day upon any
Subject. For there was nothing which they hated more, than this curious
Artifice of the Tongue, appertaining to men that nothing regarded the speaking
of Truth; but whatever work they propose to themselves, that to polish with
high-flown and bigg words; and only intending to deceive the minds of their
Auditors, and to boast of their leading them by the Noses* And now it is
evident, That never any men were made better by this Art, but many worse; who,
though they sometimes speak handsomely of Virtue and Honest things, yet are far
more Polite, Elegant, and Ingenious in the defense of Error, to sow Sedition,
to stir up Factions, to heap Slanders, and Reproaches, and Calumnies, than in
the reconciling of differences, making peace, maintaining amity, or in the
commendation of Love, Faith, or Religion. Moreover, many men presuming too far
upon this Art, have revolted from the Orthodox Faith. From this Art flow those
numberless Sects, Heresies, and Superstitions, that contaminate Religion; while
some so contemn the Scripture, because it abounds not in Ciceronian Phrases,
that many times they take part with the quaint and fallacious Arguments of the
Heathen against the Catholic Truth: which is manifest from the Tatian
Heretics; and from those whom Libanius the Sophist, and Symmachus the Orator,
great Champions of Idolatry; together with Celsus Africanus, and Julian the
Apostate, seduced from the true Religion, insulting over Christianity with
their flashes of Rhetoric: From whose pernicious and Blasphemous Oratory,
Heretics have drawn many persuasive Arguments to seduce simple People from the
true Faith. And do we not now adays see the most Eminent and Learned, most
Elegant and Subtle Doctors and Disputants in the World to be the greatest
heads of Heresies and Factions? So are men affected with the Charms of
Eloquence, that rather than not be Ciceronians, they will turn Pagans. These
becoming Impious, while those that are more zealously devoted to Aristotle and
Plato, become altogether superstitious. But all these vain Bablers that so fill
the ears of their Auditors with their empty and idle Orations, shall one day
stand before the great Tribunal, to give an account of those Errors which they
have so vainly feigned, and invented against the Truth of God.

CHAP. VII.
Of Logic.
Logic succeeds in aid of the foregoing Arts, being it self also the Mystery
of contention and darkness, by which the other Sciences are rendered more
obscure and difficult to be understood: and this Logic, forsooth, they call
the Art of Reasoning. A most miserable and brutish sort of people surely, that
are not able to reason or discourse without the Assistance of this Art.
However, Servius Sulpitius extols this for the greatest of all Sciences, and as
it were a Light to those things which are taught by others; as being that
which, as Cicero says, distributes the whole matter into parts, and by
definition explains the hidden sense of things, explains obscurity,
distinguishes between things doubtful, and points out the certain Rule to
distinguish Truth from Falsehood. Furthermore, the Logicians promise to find-out
the Essential definition of every thing, yet are not able to render themselves
Masters of their own word, in making things so clear, but that they may be
asked why they could not as well call Man a Man, as Animal Rationale, or a
Mortal Rational Creature. More of this you shall find in Boethius, whose Works
are not esteemed, but are beyond all the Predicaments, Topics, Analyticks, and
other trifles of Aristotle, whom the Peripateticks following, believe that
nothing can stand or be known, unless what is proved by Syllogism, that very
Syllogism which is set forth by Aristotle; who never observed in all his
Maxims, how all his Arguments are deduced from suppositions, or things granted
before: whose rule those other great boasters following, have hitherto as yet
made out no true or real Demonstrations, not so much as in Naturals, but deduce
them all out of the Precepts of Aristotle, or some other that went before him,
whose Authority they preserve and make use of for all their Principles of
Demonstration. Now Aristotle affirms that for true Demonstration, which Creates
a Science; which is made by Quiddities, as the Logicians call them, and by the
proper differences of things to us unknown and hidden. He says farther, that
Demonstration is made by the Causes; which Causes proceed, either De, per, or
secundum quod ipsum. Which parts of Speech, being convertible, and relating
back one to another, yet, says he, no circular Demonstration can be granted
out of the Causes, for all that. If therefore the Principles of Demonstration
are unknown, and that Circulation be not admitted, certainly little or no
knowledge can be thence concluded: For we believe things demonstrated, through
certain very weak Principles, to which we assent either through the preceding
authority of the wise, or else approve by experience of our Senses. And indeed
all Knowledge has its original from the Senses. And it is a certain experiment
of the Truth of Speech, as Averroes says, when the words agree with the things
thought. And that is most truly known, to the Knowledge of which most Senses
concur. Out of sensibles, we are by the knowledge thereof led to all those
things that fall within the compass of our Knowledge. But now when all the
Senses are subject to be deceived, they can surely produce to us no real
experience. Wherefore seeing that the Senses cannot attain to an Intellectual
Nature, and that the causes of inferior things, out of which the Natures,
Properties, Effects, and Passions of those things ought to be discovered and
demonstrated, are by the consent of all Men, altogether unknown to our Senses;
does it not hence appear, that the way of Truth is wholly shut up, and obscured
from our Senses? So that all those deductions and seeming Sciences deeply
rooted in the Senses themselves, must of necessity be altohgther erroneous,
uncertain, and fallacious. Where is then the benefit of Logic? where is the
fruit of this Scientifical Demonstration from Principles and Experiments? which
when we must be forced to consent to, as to known Terms, will not those
Principles and Experiments be rather things perfectly known, than demonstrated?
But let us consider this Art a little more remotely. Logicians reckon up ten
Predicaments, which they call, most general Genus's: Those are Substance,
Quantity, Quality, Relation, When, Where, Situation, Habit, Action, Passion.
By which they hope to comprehend and understand all things whatever are
contained within the round circumference of the World. They add moreover five
Predicables, so called, because they are predicated of themselves, and of their
parts; that is to say, Genus, Species, Difference, Proper, Accident. Then they
assign four Causes of every thing; the Material, Formal, Efficient, and Final;
by which they believe themselves able to discover the Truth or Falsehood of all
things, by a certain infallible Demonstration. Now they compound every
Syllogism, o^ Demonstration, of three Terms: the first is the Subject of the
Question, and is called the Major; the next the Predicate of the Question; the
third is the Middle, participating between both: with these terms they form two
Propositions, which they call the Pr^mises, out of which at length springs the
Conclusion. This is that egregious Engine, and these the Terms and Parts
thereof, whereby they undertake to join, divide, and conclude all things, by
the help of certain Axioms which they dream impossible to be refuted. These
are the deep and profound Mysteries of Artificial Logic, invented with so much
care by these fallacious Doctors, which being such great and secret Mysteries,
are not to be exposed or learnt by any other, than they who are able to give
great rewards for the same, and to be at large expenses to purchase Authority
among the Schoolmen. These are the Nets, and these are the Hounds with which
they hunt the Truth of all things, whether natural, as in Physics; or
supernatural, as in Metaphysics: but according to the Proverb of Clodius and
Varro, can never overtake, by reason of their bawling and brawling one with
another.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Sophistry.
BUt the late Schools of Sophistry have made an addition of far greater and
more Monstrous Prodigies; such a Scroll of Infinitu^s, Comparatives,
Superlatives, Incipits, and Desinits, Formalities, Haecceities, Instances,
Ampliatio^s, Restrictions, Districtions, Intentions, Suppositions,
Appellations, Obligations, Consequences, Indissolubles, Exponibils,
Replications, Exclusives, Instances, Cases, Particularizations, Supposits,
Mediates, Immediates, Completes, Incompletes, Complexes, Incomplexes, with many
more vain and intolerable Barbarisms, which are thick sown in their Logical
Systemes, whereby they endeavor to make all those things to appear Truths,
which are in themselves absolutely false, and impossible; and those things
which are really true, like furies breaking out of the Trojan Horse, they seek
to ruin and destroy with the Flames of their barbarous words. Others there
are, who will admit of no more than three Predicaments, not but two Figures of
Syllogisms, and of them but eight Moods; laughing to scorn all Modal
Compositions, together with concrete and abstract Terms. Others are not wanting
who have found out the eleventh Predicament, and a fourth Figure of Syllogisms;
Increasing the number likewise of Predicables and Causes; and have moreover
invented so many invincible Stoical subtleties, that the Niceties of Cleanthes
and Chrysippus, together with the little conceits of Daphita, Euthydemus, and
Dionysiodorus, seem dull, and mere rustical, when compared with the new devices
of our Modern Sophisters; in the Study whereof, the whole fray of our
Sophisters are so stupidly employed, that their whole business seems to be, to
learn to err, and with perpetual Skirmishes to render more obscure, if not
quite to obliterate the Truth which they pretend to explain; so that the great
Art which they profess, is but a Gallimaufry of depraved and barbarous words,
by nice and froward Cavilling, perverting the use of Speech, offering violence
to the poor Tongue that is scarce able to manage them, the glory whereof
consists only in noise and reproach; the professors themselves coveting Combat
rather than Victory, and seeking all occasions rather of Contest, than to find
out the Truth. So that he is the best Man among them, who is most impudent, and
fullest of Clamor: of whom Petrarch writes, that whether it be the modesty of
their Style, or a confession of their Ignorance, they are implacable in their
Language, yet dare not abide a true Challenge; and are unwilling to appear in
public, knowing what frivolous Ornaments they are attired withal; and
therefore like the Parthians, they exercise a flying Fight, and darting their
volatile words up into the Air, may be said to commit their Sails to the Wind.
These are they, who, as Quintilian says, are extraordinary subtle in
Disputing; but take them from their impertinent Cavilling, and they are no more
able to endure the blows of right Reason; like little Buggs, that secure in
Chinks and Crevises, are easily trod upon in the plain field. Sophisters are
unwilling to Fight under the Banners of sound and approved Authors, but like
Stratagematists fly for Refuge to the strength of Memory, and the whifling
clamor and noise of a nimble Tongue. Neither do they think it of any
consequence to consider what reason to use, so they can but give any high
instance or example; nor matters it what they think or say, so that they talk
loud and bold enough: For he that among them is fullest of words, seems to be
the wisest, and the most learned Person. Armed with these Sorceries, they visit
the Schools, haunt the Streets, frequent great and full Tables, provoke
Antagonists: if the Fight begin, and they find themselves worsted, then they
fly to their old lurking holes, and their accustomed Labyrinths. If they find
any person unwilling to grapple, then they endeavor to entrap him at unawares
with some unusual Question; to which, if they have not a ready and pertinent
Answer, or that the Party seem any thing puzl'd, then they raise to themselves
mighty Pyramids and Triumphs. But what good fruit this Logic with her Sophists
has brought forth, or is likely to bring forth in the Church, let us consider:
Surely we shall quickly find, that they not assenting to Divine Tradition,
confound the holy sense with Reasons deduced from their own fallacious
suppositions; to which while they give too much credit, they banish the Light
of Truth, and embrace darkness; and being thus wrapped and infolded in those
shades of Error, blind leaders of the blind, they draw many with their false
Argumentations, and shadows of Reason, into the Ditch, together with
themselves; and always blundering in the deep Ocean of Ignorance and Error,
seduce the more Ignorant to adore their Fictions; in honor of which, they dare
presume to aver, That sacred Theology is not able to subsist without Logic;
that is to say, without Brangling and Jangling, without Contention and
Sophistry. I deny not, but that Logic may be useful in Scholastic Exercises;
but how it may assist or uphold Theological Contemplation, I cannot apprehend;
whose chiefest Logic consists in Prayer. For truly that promise of Christ was
not made in vain; Pray, and ye shall receive. Through which means, the Faithful
of Christ shall obtain from the Master of Truth all necessary Knowledge of the
Truth, long before they shall be able to compass the height of their Logical
skill. Furthermore, Sophistry with all her quirks and devices could never soar
higher than Philosophy; but through the path of Prayer lies the certain and
straight way to the highest Knowledge of Divine and Humane things. Therefore
they are in the wrong, who affirm this Sophistry to be the only Engine, and
most Potent for the subversion of Heresy; when it is indeed the chief Strength
and Pillar of Heresy. For Arrius and Nestorius relying upon this Art, the one
affirmed diverse Substances in the Trinity, the other denied the Virgin Mary to
be the Mother of God: giving greater credit to the Sophisms of Aristotle, than
to the Word of God. For, as St. Jerome observes, all the Opinions of the
Heretics have made their Nests and founded their Sanctuaries among the Briars
of Aristotle and Chrysippus. Hence Eunomius argues, That which is born, could
not be before it was born. Hence the Manichaean, because he would free God from
being the Cause of Evil, makes a bad or evil Deity. Hence Novatus, that he may
take away Repentance, denies Pardon. From such Fountains as these, do spring
all the larger Rivolets of Heresy: for seeing there is no sentence which may
not be contradicted, nor no Argument which may not be assailed by another;
hence it is, that it is so impossible to attain to any end of Knowledge, or to
come to the Knowledge of Truth, by the means of Sophistical Argumentation: and
hence it is, that so many deviate from Truth to Heresy; thinking that they
have found some appearance of more powerful Truth, by the help of Logical
Disputes; or else condemn one Heresy, to be themselves the Establishers of a
new one. And thus far of Logic and Sophistry.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Art of Lullius.
RAymund Lullie in these latter times has Invented a Prodigious Art, not
unlike Logic; by means whereof (like another Gorgias Leontinus, who was the
first that in a Public Assembly durst put the Question what they would have
him to Discourse of) to enable any person to discourse extempore upon any
Subject. But to insist farther upon this, it will not be needful now, seeing we
have Commented sufficiently upon this Art already; and the thing it self is so
obvious, that it will not be necessary to use many words about it. This I am to
admonish ye of in general, That this Art is of no other use, than only to show
the Pomp and Magnificence of Wit and Learning, and is no way prevalent for the
attaining of sound Learning; having in it far more of confidence than efficacy.

CHAP. X.
Of the Art of Memory.
AMong these Arts, is to be reckoned the Art of Memory; which, as Cicero says,
is nothing else, but a certain method of Teaching, and Precept; like a thin
Membrane, consisting of Characters, Places, and Representations; first invented
by Simonides Melito, and perfected by Metrodorus Sceptius. But let it be what
it will, more certain it is, that it can never come to good, where there is not
a very god Natural Memory before; which sometimes it perplexes with such
monstrous Apparitions, that instead of a new Memory, it is the cause of Madness
and Phrenzies; and over-burdening the Natural Memory with the Characters and
Images of innumerable things and words, it occasions those that are not
contented with the bounds of Nature, to run Mad with Art. This Art, when
Simonides or some body else did offer to Themistocles, he refused it, saying,
He had more need of Forgetfulness than Memory; said he, I remember what I would
not, but I cannot forget what I would. As for Metrodorus, Quintilian thus
writes concerning him: It was a great piece of vain Ostentation, says he, to
glory rather in his Memory by Art, than in that by Nature. Of this Art Cicero
makes mention, in his Book of Rhetoricks; Quintilian in his Institutions; and
Seneca. Among Modern Authors, Francis Petrarch has writ something concerning
it; together with Mareol, Veronensis, Petrus Ravennas, Hermannus Buschius, and
others, though unworthy of a Catalogue, as being obscure Persons. Many there
be, that at this day Profess the same, though they get more Infamy and
dis-repute, than gain thereby; being a sort of rascally Fellows, that do many
times impose upon silly Youth, only to draw some small piece of money from them
for present Subsistence. Lastly, it is a childish Triumph to boast of a great
Memory; besides that it is a thing of shame and disgrace to make a show of
great Reading, exposing a great Fair of words without doors, when the House
within is altogether unfurnished.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Mathematics in general.
IT is now time to discourse of the Mathematics, surely the most certain of
all the Arts. Yet all of them chiefly consist in the Opinions of their Teache^s
who have got the most credit; yet in their several Opinions have committed
sundry Errors, which Albumazar among the rest acknowledges, saying, That the
Ancients long after Aristotle's time did not rightly understand the
Mathematics: And that though all these Arts are chiefly invented for the
understanding of Figures, Number, and Motion; yet are their Professors forced
to confess, that there was never any Figure yet found, either according to Art
or Nature perfectly Spherical. And though these Arts have been the occasion of
little or no Heresy in the Church; yet St. Austin says, That they avail
nothing at all to Salvation; and that they do rather lead men into Error, and
take men off from the Contemplation of true Divinity: and as St. Hierome
observes, are not the Sciences of Piety.

CHAP. XII.
Of Arithmetic.
OF these Sciences, the first is Arithmetic, or the Doctrine of Numbers, which
is indeed the Mother of all the rest; not less superstitions than vain, and
only valued among Merchants, for the low and mean benefit of keeping their
Accounts: it treats of Numbers and their Divisions, which is even, which odd;
which is evenly odd, and which odly even; which superfluous, which a Fraction;
which perfect, which compounded: also of proportion, and proportionality, and
their kinds. Lastly, of Geometrical and Harmonical Numbers; the Effects and use
of Number, and their Fractions, and the ways and rules of casting Accounts.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Geomancy.
A Rithmetick produces to us Geomantick Divination, Cards, Tables, and Dice;
and whatsoever else in the Nature of Numeral Chances: This Geomancy most men do
rather make a Member of Astrology, by reason that their method of judgment is
the same; and because the force and virtue thereof consists not so much in
Number, as in Motion, according to the saying of Aristotle: The Motion of
Heaven is perpetual, and is the Principle and Cause of all Inferior Motions.
Of this Geomancy, among the Ancients, Haly has written; among our Modern
Authors, Gerard of Cremona, Bartholomaeus of Parma, and one Tundinus. I my self
have written a Geomancy, far different from those before mentioned, though not
less superstitious and fallacious; or if you will, I may say, not less crowded
with Lies.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Art of Dicing.
THE Art of Dicing is one of those Arts that depends wholly upon Chance;
wherein, he that is most studious, and most expert, becomes so much the more
vile and wicked, while out of covetousness of another man's, he bears no
reverence to his own Patrimony. This is the Mother of Lies, Perjury, Thefts,
Quarrels, Injustice, and Murder; rightly an Invention of Evil Spirits, which
after the overthrow of the Asian Empire, was carried away Captive into Greece
among the Spoils of those Cities; where afterward (...) enslaved and bewitched
the Conquerors themselves. It is said, that Attalus King of Asia was the first
Inventor of that Game, having found it out by his skill in Arithmetic. Among
the Romans, it is reported that Claudius the Emperor wrote a Treatise thereof:
He, together with Augustus Caesar, being great Admirers of this Game. An
Exercise most Infamous, and forbidden by the Laws of Nations, insomuch, that
Cobilon the Lacaedemonian being sent to Corinth for the obtaining a mutual
League and Friendship between those two Cities, when he saw the Captains and
Senators of Corinth playing at Dice, returned without doing any thing, saying,
that he would not so much defile the Glory of the Spartan's, as that it should
be said, they had made a League with Gamesters. This Art was so much
dis-esteem'd among the greatest of men formerly, that the King of Parthia is
reported to have sent a Bale of Golden Dice to Demetrius, on purpose to upbraid
his Inconstancy. Now adays it is a Game in the greatest Request, even among
the greatest Princes, and the chief Nobility. How do I say, a Play? Yea, the
only Wisdom, and highest Knowledge of Men most carefully and wickedly bred up
to Cheat and Cozen.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Pythagorean Chance.
NEither do I think it fitting to pass by what the Pythagoreans did Assert,
what others thought, and what Aristotle himself did believe, That there are
certain Numbers in the Elements of Letters, from whence some will undertake to
tell Fortunes by the Prope^ Names, the Letters whereof being added together*
and the Names repeated as often as there be Letters they give the day to him,
whose Name comes to be last reckoned; whether the Question be concerning War,
Quarrel, Marriage, Life, or any other concernment. And thus, they say, it was
foretold that Patroclus should be killed by Hector, tha^ he should be slain by
Achilles. Of which, Terence makes mention in Verse, and how they made use of
the Letters of their Names.

These greater Numbers, those the less require.
He that in doubtful War his Chance would know,
If the great number stop, may safely go.
But signs of Death, the lesser sums presage;
And thus Patroclus fell, by Hector's Rage.
Thus from small sums they did of old foretell
How Conquering Hector by Achilles fell.
Some will undertake to Erect Horoscopes by these kind of Computations, as one
Alchandrius, an obscure Philosopher said to be the Scholar of Aristotle, has
been ready to assert. And Pliny relates, That by the ^inventions of Pythagoras,
there is in the Eye a peculiar property to foretell Lameness and some other
mischances.

CHAP. XVI.
Yet of Arithmetic.
BUT to return to Arithmetic: Plato says, That this was first Invented by
some Cacodaemon, together with Cards and Dice: and Lycurgus, that great
Lawgiver among the Lacedaemonians, expelled it as a most turbulent and
factious Science out of his Commonwealth: For it requires a great deal of idle
Labor, and diverts men from other more lawful and honest employments, raising
great and mischievous quarrels many times about the smallest matters. Hence
arises that irreconcilable dispute among Arithmeticians, Whether an even or odd
Number be most to be preferred; which is the most perfect Number between Three,
Six, and Ten; and whether any Number may be properly said to be evenly even: in
which matter of so great consequence, they say that Euclid the Prince of
Geometricians, has very much erred. It is a hard matter to say, what strange
Pythagorical Mysteries, what Magic Virtues they Dream there be in number,
though naked and abstracted from things; and with a great deal of Presumption
aver, That the World could not have been Created by God, had not Numbers been
Instrumental; and that all Divine Knowledge is contained in Numbers, as in a
certain Rule. From these beginnings, the Heresies of Marcus, Magus, and
Valentinus, took their first growth and progression, who presumed that they
were able to discover an innumerable company of Divine Secrets of Truth and
Religion, by the dull and weak assistance of Numbers. Some account the
Pythagorean inventions among the Sacraments, with many other ridiculous fancies
and idle stories not worth repeating; Arithmeticians having nothing to boast
of, but an insipid, inanimate, and senseless Number, though they think
themselves Gods, because they can only cast a Figure, or can tell how to
reckon: But such honors the Musicians will scarce allow them, who think them
rather due to their Music.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Music.
LET us now discourse a little concerning Music, of which among the Grecians,
Aristoxenus has written very largely, asserting that Music was the Soul of
Man; whose Writings Boethius has Translated into Latin.

Now, by Music I understand that part of Music which relates to the knowledge
of Sounds, and manages either the Voice or Hand; not that part which teaches
the Laws and Rules of Meter and Rythm, more properly termed Poesy, which, as
Alpharabises says, is carried on not by any method of Speculation or Reason,
but with a certain frenzy and madness, as we have before discoursed. Now that
part of Music which consists in Sound, and is the consort of Strings or Voices
agreeing in Sounds inoffensive to the Ear, treats more particularly of Sounds,
Intervals, Changes of Mood, and variety of Notes. This the Ancients have
divided into Enharmonick, Chromatick, and Diatonick. The first, that is to say,
the Enharmonick, by reason of its profound abstruseness, and the impossibility
of discovery, they altogether laid aside: The second, by reason of its wanton
measures, they contemned and utterly refused: The last, as agreeing best with
the composition of the world, they only admitted. Others there are who have
distinguished the Moods of Music as derived from sundry Countries, for whose
particular Genius they seemed at first to have been more properly contrived; of
which there are three named, the Phrygian, the Lydian, and the Dorick; which,
according to the opinion of Polimestres, and Saccadas a native of Argos, are
said to be of greatest Antiquity. To these Sappho the Lesbian added a fourth,
termed the Mixolydian, of which others take Tersander, others Pythoclides the
Piper, to have been the Authors; though Lisias makes Lamprocles the Athenian
inventer thereof. These four Moods pass current under the Seal of Authority.
This whole Structure or Fabric, they call Encyclopedie, or the Sphere of
Sciences, as if Music did comprehend all Sciences, seeing, as Plato observes
in his first Book of Laws, that Music cannot be understood, without the
knowledge of all the other Sciences. Among these four Moods, they approve not
the Phrygian, for that it distracts and ravishes the Mind; therefore Porphyrius
gives it the name of Barbarous, as exciting and stirring up men to fury and
battle: Others give it the appellation of Bacchick, furious, impetuous,
turbulent; which being generally used in Anapesticks, were those Charms which,
as we read, formerly incited the Lacedaemonians and Cretans to War. With this
sort of Harmony Timotheus incited King Alexander to Arms: and Boethius relates
how Taurominitianus, a young man, was moved by sound of this Phrygian Harmony
to burn a house where he knew a certain Curtisan lay concealed. The Lydian Mood
Plato refuses, as too sharp and shrill, and coming short of the modesty of the
Dorian, being most proper for Lamentation; though, as others will have it, most
agreeable to merry and Jolly dispositions. This made the Lydians, a Merry and
Jocund people, to be very much affected with that sort of Music; which
afterward the Tuscans, the Offspring of the Lydians, were wont to make use of
in their dancing. The Dorick, as being more grave, honest, and every way
modest, consequently most congruous and agreeable to the more serious
affections of the Mind, and graver gestures of the Body, they preferred above
all the rest; and was therefore held in great esteem among the Cretans,
Lacedaemonians, and Arcadians. Agamemnon being to go to the Trojan War, left
behind him, at home, a Dorick Musician, to the end he might by his grave
Spondaick Songs preserve the Chastity of his Wife Clytemnestra, so that it was
impossible for Aegysthus to obtain his desires of her, until he had first
murdered the said Musician. As for the Mixolydian, only fit for Tragedies, and
to move Pity and Compassion; they were of opinion that it had a great power
either to quicken or put a damp upon the Spirits, either to raise or depress
the Affection, and that it had an absolute dominion over Grief and Sadness. To
these four Moods, some there are who have added others, which they call
Collateral, the Hypodorian, the Hypolydian, and the Hypophrygian; to the end
there might be seven, correspondent to the number of the Planets: to all which
Ptolomy adds an eighth, the Hypermixolydian, the sharpest and shrillest of all.
But Lucius Apuleius only names five; the Aeolian, Hyastian, Varian, shrill
Lydian, warlike Phrygian, and Religious Dorick. Marcian, according to the
tradition of Aristoxenus, numbers five principal Moods, and ten Collateral. Now
though they confess this Art to contain very much of sweetness and delight, yet
the common Opinion is verified by general experience, that Music is an Art
professed only by men of depraved and loose inclinations, who neither know
when to begin, nor when to make an end; as is reported of Archabius the Fiddler,
to whom they were wont to give more money to leave off, than to continue his
play: Of which impertinent Musicians, we find this Character in Horace.

Among their Friends all Singers have this vice,
That begged to sing, none are more coy or nice;
Vnbid, they will never cease --
Music has been always a Vagrant, wandering up and down after sordid hire; an
Art which no grave, modest, chaste, magnanimous, and truly valiant person ever
professed: therefore the Greeks generally term them Father Bacchus's
Artificers, Bacchanal or lewd Artists, generally of loose behavior,
incontinent in their lives, and for the most part in great poverty and want;
which is not only the Mother, but Nurse of Vice. The Kings of the Medes and
Persians reckoned Musicians (...) of their Jesters, Parasites, and Players,
pleasing themselves with their Songs, but contemning their persons. And the
wise Antisthenes hearing that one Ismenias kept an incomparable Musician in his
house, quoth he, He is a bad man, for he would not be a Fiddler if he were
honest: for that is not an Art becoming a good and virtuous man, but only the
lazy Epicure. This made Scipio, Aemylius, and Cato utterly to despise this
Science, as being contrary to the Majesty of the Roman Manners. Therefore were
Augustus and Nero so much condemned for giving their minds so much to Music.
It Is true, Augustus being reprehended, gave it over; but Nero more eagerly
pursuing it, was for that cause hated and derided. King Philip when he heard
that his Son had sung very finely at a certain Entertainment, burst into a
passion, reproaching him in these words: Art thou not ashamed to sing
handsomely? for it is enough that a Prince will vouchsafe to be present while
others sing. Jupiter is never said to sing or play on the Harp, by any one of
the Poets: But the learned Pallas is said to hate all manner of Piping. In
Homer we read of a Harper to whom Alciones and Ulysses willingly lent their
Ears. In Virgil, Iopas both sings and plays, while Dido and Aeneas give
attention: Yet when Alexander the Great was singing, his Schoolmaster Antigonus
brake his Harp and threw it away, telling him, It was his business to reign,
and not to sing. The Egyptians also, as Diodorus witnesses, forbad the use of
Music to their Youth, as rendering them luxurious and effeminate. And Ephorus,
according to Polybius, condemns it as an Art invented only to delude and
deceive men. And indeed, what is more unprofitable, more contemptible, more to
be avoided, than the society of these Fiddlers, Singers, and other kind of
Musicians; who with so many sorts of Songs, Dialogues, Catches, and Roundelays,
more chattering than Rooks or Daws, do but like Sirens bewitch and corrupt the
well-dispos'd minds of men, with their lascivious sound of Ribaldry and
Debauchery? Therefore the Mothers of the Cycones persecuted Orpheus even to
Hell, for effeminating their Males with his charming Harmony. And if there be
any authority in Fables, we find that though Argus had his head guarded with a
hundred Eyes, yet they were all charmed asleep with the sound of one single
Pipe. It is true, that from hence the Musicians take occasion to extol
themselves far above the Rhetoricians, for that their Art has a greater power
to move the passions and affection: and to such a hight of madness they are
carried, as to affirm that the Heavens themselves do sing; not that they were
ever heard so to do, but only as their drunken Dreams and Imaginations prompt
them to believe. Neither was there ever any Musician that ever descended from
Heaven, who could ever pretend to know all the Consonances of Sound, or the
true reason of Proportions: Only they say, that it is a most complete Art, and
comprehends all other Sciences; nor can be thoroughly understood by any one not
Universally learned. Yea, they attribute to it the virtue of Divination, and
that thereby men may make a judgment of the habits of the Body, affections of
the Mind, and manners of Men. They say moreover, that there is no end of this
Art, and that every day produces new discoveries therein; which in another
sense Anaxilas wittily hints, that Music is like Libya, which every year
produces some new sort of venomous Creature or other. Athanasius therefore, by
reason of its vanity, exiles it from the Church. It is true, St. Ambrose more
delighting in Pomp and Ceremony, instituted the use of Singing and Playing in
Churches. But St. Austin in the mean betwixt both, makes a great doubt of the
lawfulness thereof, in his Confessions.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Dancing and Balls.
TO Music Dancing is a kind of Appendant, most grateful to Children, and
youthful Lovers; a thing which they learn with great care, and practice all
night long; most punctually observing the time of the Music, and that the
measures of their Feet and Capring-steps may exactly answer the time of the
Fiddles; laboring to perform the silliest and maddest thing in the world, with
the greatest knowledge and activity their Bodies and Souls will admit: A thing,
which were it not set off with Music, would appear the greatest Vanity of
Vanities, the rudest, most nonsensical, and ridiculous sight in the world. This
is that which lets loose the reyns of Pride, the friend of Wickedness, the food
and nourishment of Lust, the bane and enemy of Chastity, and unworthy so much
as the thought of any honest person. At these Balls, says Petrarch, many a
grave Matron has lost her longpreserv'd Honor: Many an unhappy Virgin there,
has learnt what she had better never have known: from thence many have
returned home polluted, many half overcome; but never any one more virtuous
than they were before. Yet have some of the Grecian Writers highly praised this
idle Art (as the worst and most pernicious things never want their extollers)
and have deduced the Pedigree of Dancing and Balls even from the Heavens
themselves, comparing the Steps of Dancing to the motion of the Stars, that
seem in their Harmonical order to imitate a kind of Dancing motion, which they
began so soon as the world was created. Others say, it was an invention of the
Satyrs. By the help of this Art, Bacchus is said to have softened and overcome
the Tyrrhenes, Indians, and Lydians, most Warlike Nations. Whence Dancing was
by them made use of in their Religious Rites, and the Exercise thereof by the
Goddess Rhea commanded the Corybants in Phrygia, and the Curetes in Crete. And
in Delos there was no sacred Ceremony performed without Dancing; no Festivals,
Sacred or Civil, celebrated, where Dancing was left out. The Brachmans also
among the Indians, morning and evening, with their faces toward the Sun,
dancing, were wont to worship his Beams. Likewise among the Aethiopians,
Thracians, and Scythians, Dancing was used in all their Religious Ceremonies,
as being first instituted by Orpheus and Museus, the best Dancers of their
times. There were also among the Romans the Salian Priests, whose duty it was
to dance about in honor of Mars. The Lacedaemonians, the bravest people of
Greece, having learnt the custom of Dancing from Castor and Pollux, in all
their Feasts and public Ceremonies used Dancing. In Thessaly it was held in
such Veneration, that the Commanders and chief Leaders were honored with the
Title of Foremost Dancers. Socrates also, by the Oracle judged to be the wisest
of men then living, was not ashamed to learn to dance when he was far stricken
in years; and not only so, but highly extolled the same Art, and reckoned it
among the most serious parts of Education; and was esteemed by him a thing of
that Gravity as could hardly be expressed, and entered into the world together
with the Love of the Gods. But what wonder it should be so highly honored
among the Grecian Philosophers, who are not ashamed to make the Gods themselves
the Patrons of Adultery, Rapes, Parricides, and indeed of all manner of
Villainies? Many have written Treatises of Dancing, wherein they set forth all
the several sorts and measures thereof; expounding their several names, and who
were the particular Authors and Inventers of each; so that I need proceed no
farther therein. But the Ancient Romans, men ever famous for their Gravity and
Wisdom, condemned all manner of Dancing; neither was any woman among them
accounted Virtuous, that was given to Dance. Therefore Salust reproaches
Sempronia, that she sang and danced more exquisitely than was convenient for an
honest woman. Nor are Gabinius and Marcus Celius, men in Consular dignity, less
blamed for their overgreat skill in Dancing: And Marcus Cato objected it as a
Crime to Lucius Murena, that he had been seen to dance in Asia; whose Cause
when Cicero took in hand to defend, he durst not justify the act as well done,
but utterly denied the Fact, saying, That no sober man ever danced either
alone, or so much as at a moderate Banquet, unless he were mad; Dancing being
always the Companion and Attendant upon immoderate Feasts, and inordinate
Plays. We must therefore necessarily conclude, that Dancing brings up the rere
of all Vices. Neither is it hard to tell what evils come many times to pass
through idle Discourse and Toying. At such time as Youth in the heat of
Dancing, uses antic Gestures, and makes a hideous stamping noise, skipping to
wanton Tunes, and the sound of obscene Airs, then are Virgins and Matrons
handled with shameless hands, tempted with immodest Kisses, and lustful
Embraces; then, what Nature hides, and Modesty vails, Wantonness discovers, and
civil sport becomes the pretense of wickedness. An Exercise not sprung from
Heaven, but invented by the Devil in defiance of Divinity; so that when the
Children of Israel had erected themselves a Calf in the Wilderness, they
sacrificed thereto, eating and drinking, and afterward rising up to play, they
fell to Singing and Dancing.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Gladiatory Dancing.
NEither must I here omit to tell ye, that there are many other sorts of
Dancing, the greatest part whereof are now laid aside, others still in use; for
example, Dancing in Arms, proper only to Gladiators and Soldiers; a Tragical
invention to kill the Innocent in sport, making it a great infamy for a man to
receive his deaths wound for want of Agility. A hateful Invention; Folly and
Impiety mixed together. And indeed, all sorts of Dancing, as they are full of
vanity and shamelesness, are not only to be disprais'd, but utterly
abominated, seeing they teach nothing but a wonderful mystery how to run mad.

CHAP. XX.
Of Stage-Dancing.
STage-dancing was designed for Imitation and Demonstration, whereby to explain
things conceived in the mind, by the gestures of the body; so clearly and
perspicuously representing manners and affections, that the Spectator shall
understand the Player by the motion of his body, though he say not a word. So
far the excellency of this Art appears, that without the help of an
Interpreter, while the Actors by motion represent an Old Man, a Young Man, a
Woman, a Servant, a Drunkard, an angry Person, or of any other condition or
affection whatsoever, the Spectator at a distance hearing nothing of the story,
shall be able to understand the subject of the Play. This brought Stageplayers
into great request, as Macrobius witnesses, so that Cicero was wont to contend
with Roscius, who was also very intimate with Sylla the Dictator, who should
plainest and soonest, and with most variety, express the same Sentence; whether
the one by Gesticulation, or the other in set Language: which encouraged
Roscius to write a Treatise wherein he compares Stagemotion or Action with
Eloquence. But the Massilienses, great preservers of serious Gravity, would not
endure a Stage Player among them, for that most of their Arguments consisting
in the repetition of Rapes and Adulteries, they thought the often seeing
thereof would accustom men to the practice of such things. In fine, it is not
only a dishonest and wicked Calling to exercise Stage-playing, but also a
matter of great dishonor to behold them: for the pleasure of lascivious minds
often degenerates into wickedness. So that of old there was no name so
ignominious as that of a Stage Player, who by the Laws was made incapable of
all Honor and honorable Society.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Rhetorism.
THere was also a Rhetorical Gesticulation, not much differing from
Stage-action, but more careless, which Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Quintilian, and
most of the Stoics have deemed most necessary and commendable in a
Rhetorician, and an Orator; as teaching a graceful gesture of the Body, and
composure of the Countenance: seeing that the vigor of the Eye, the sound of
the Voice, accommodated to the signification of Words and Sentences, together
with a decent motion of the Body, and managment of the Countenance, add much
to the force and efficacy of Oration. But this Histrionical-Rhetorical
Gesticulation began at length to be little used, while Tiberius admonishes
Augustus, That he should speak with his Mouth, and not with his Fingers; and is
now quite laid aside, unless it be among some Mimmick Friars, whom you shall
see now adays with a strange labor of the Voice making a thousand faces,
looking with their Eyes like men distracted, throwing their Arms about, dancing
with their Feet, lasciviously shaking their Loins, with a thousand sundry sorts
of wreathings, wrestings, turnings this way and that way of the whole Body,
proclaiming in their Pulpits their frothy Declamations to the People: mindful
perhaps of that Answer of De^nosthenes, reported in Valerius Maximus, who being
asked what was most efficacious in speaking, replied, Hypocrisy and
Counterfeiting: and being asked over and over again, still made the same Answer
as before; testi^ying thereby, that the whole force of Persuasion lay therein.
But that we may not digress too far from the Mathematics, let us return to
Geometry.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Geometry.
THis is that Geometry which Philo the Jew calls the Principle and Mother of
all Arts, and has this Excellency above the rest, that whereas there are
manifold Contentions among the Professors of all other Arts, the Masters of
this Science generally agree in their Problems; neither is there any great
matter of debate among them, but only as to Points, Lines, and Superficies,
whether they be divisible or no; but they differ not from one another either in
Doctrine or Tradition: only every one strives to excel the other in the
Invention of new Subtilties, and in making additions to what is already found
out. Yet there is no Geometrician that could ever find out the right Quadrature
of a Circle, or the Line truly Equal to the side: though Archimedes of
Syracuse, and after him many even to our times, pretended to have found the
same out. This we may say, That there are very few, or none, that do acquiesce
in the Traditions and Axioms of their Predecessors; and therefore, while they
go about to be still adding something which their Masters left Imperfect, they
run themselves into such an extremity of Madness, which all the Hellebore in
the World is not able to Purge away. To this Geometry, which instructs us in
Lineaments, Forms, Intervals, Magnitudes, Bodies, Dimensions, and Weights,
belongs the Art of making all Mechanic Engines, and Instruments appertaining
to the Mechanic Arts; all Engines of War, and Architecture, as Battering Rams,
Tortoises, Catapults, Scaling-Ladders, moving Towers, Ships, Galleys, Bridges,
Carts, Carriages, Wheels, Bars; together with all those Engines by which great
and massy Weights are moved and lifted up with little help, and much ease.
Besides these, all those pieces of Art that move by the assistance of Weight,
Wind, Water, Ropes or Lines; as Clocks, Hydraulick Organs. By this Art Mercury
is said to have made certain Idols among the Egyptians, that made an Articulate
noise with their Tongues, and could walk several Paces. Architas the Tarentine
is also said to have made a Dove so exactly by rules of Geometry, that the
Figure would move and fly of it self. And Archimedes is said to have made a
Brazen Heaven in such sort, that it showed all the Motions of the Planets and
Spears, the like whereof we have seen brought to pass in our time. From this
Art also proceed the several varieties of Guns, and Fire-vomiting Engines; of
which lately my self have Written a special Treatise, Entitled Pyrographie,
which I now Repent me to have done; seeing that it only Teaches a most
pernicious and destructive Art. Lastly, Painting, Measuring of Land,
Agriculture, Founders, Statuaries, Smiths, Carpenters, and all that make use of
Wood, or Metals, all borrow their Experience from Geometry.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Optic and Perspective.
NEarest of kin to Geometry, is the Art Perspective. Now Perspective is an Art,
that teaches a Threefold way of seeing Direct, Reflex'd, and Broken: as also
the difference of Light, Shadows and Spaces; how Visibles appear through false
Intervals, how the beams of the Sun are received through one or more
perspicuous Bodies, and how they play upon several figures of Bodies; the
several accidents of Object, Sight, and Medium; and how the Object and the
Sight are affected according to the variety of the Medium. Now, as concerning
the reason of Seeing, there are sundry and different Opinions. Plato thinks
that the sight proceeds from an equal clearness in the Eye, and the Object; the
clearness from the Eye, being caused by the flowing of the Light to one
extrinsick Air; that which proceeds from the Body, being caused by a
reverberation of the Sight to the Eye; the middle clearness about the Air,
being easily fluid, and apt to receive shape, according to the force of the
Sight that always extends it self in a fiery Form. Galen agrees with Plato. But
Hipparchus says that the Beams extended from the Eyes to the Bodies
themselves, touching them as it were with a certain Palpitation, returns back
the apprehension thereof to the Sight. Aristotle is of Opinion, that the Images
of things pass from the Object to the Sight according to their quality, through
the alteration of the middle Air. Porphyrius believes, neither Beams nor
Images, nor any thing else to be the Cause of Sight, but that the Soul knowing
her self, apprehends and sees her own self in all visible beings. But the
Geometricians and Optics coming near to Hipparchus, have invented certain
Cones made by the co-incidence or falling together of the Beams, which are
emitted through the Eyes, so that the Eye apprehends many visibles at one time;
but those most certainly, where the Beams meet together. But Alchindu^ teaches
another thing, which St. Austin thinks to be most true, That the Power of the
Soul does act something in the Eye, which is above humane Wisdom to find out.
This Art therefore much conduces to the understanding the variety of Celestial
Bodies, their Distance, Magnitude, Motions, and Reflections; and is also a
great help to Architecture, in the measuring, adorning, and perfecting great
Buildings. But in the Art of Painting and making of Landskips, is of so great
use, that neither can be done without it. For it shows us how to make Figures
seem undeformed, and in Symmetry, at whatsoever height or distance they are to
be seen.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Painting.
PAinting is a wonderful Art, imitating the shapes of Natural things, by an
accurate description of the Lineaments, and apt choice of Colors. This was
once in such high esteem, that it was accounted the chief of all the Liberal
Sciences. Not less Liberal than Poetry, in the Opinion of Horace.

-- Painters and Poets have free leave
With equal power to dare and to deceive.
For Painting is nothing else but mute Poetry, and Poetry a speaking Picture;
so near akin they be to each other: for as Poets, so Painters feign Histories
and Fables, and representations of all things; expressing and figuring Light,
Splendour, Shades, Heights and Depths. This moreover it borrows from Optics, to
deceive the sight; and in one Picture, the situation being varied, to
represent various shapes to the sight: and what the Statuary cannot reach, this
attains to: it represents in lively colors, fire, beams, light, thunder,
lightning, evening, morning, dawn, clouds, passions of Men, the senses of the
Mind, and even almost the Voice it self; and by falsifying measures and
dimensions makes these things appear to be, which are not; and those things
which are not, to appear to be. As is related of Zeuxis and Parrhasius,
Painters, who contending both for Excellency, the first showed painted Grapes,
so like, that the Birds flew to feed upon them. The other showed a Coverlet
only Painted; which was so rarely done, that when the First went to put it
aside that he might see the Workmanship that was under, and found his Error, he
was forced to yield the Victory to the Latter: whereas, he had only deceived
the Birds, but Parrasius an Artist. And Pliny relates, That in the Plays of
Claudius there was such excellent Painting, that the Crows have flown to the
representation of Tiles, mistaking them for the tops of Houses. And the same
Pliny relates, How it had been found by experience, that the singing of Birds
has been stinted by the sight of a painted Dragon. This moreover is always
attributed to Painting, That in all her Works there is more to be understood
and judged of, than is to be seen, as Plutarch has diligently found out in his
Icons; so that though the Art be extraordinary, yet the Ingenuity thereof is
beyond the Art.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Statuary and Plastic.
PAinting is accompanied with the Arts Statuary, Plastic, Casting, and
Engraving: the Inventions of Laborious Wit, which may notwithstanding be all
comprehended in Architecture. The Statuary makes the likeness of things, either
in Stone, Wood, or Ivory; the Plaster performs the same in Earth; the like
Images the Caster performs, by casting melted Brass and other metals in Moulds;
The Graver expresses the same things in Stones and Gems. Of all which,
Pomponius Gauricus among Modern Writers has chiefly Treated. But all these
Arts, together with Painting, were merely invented by the Devil, for the
nourishment of Pride, Lust, and Superstition: the Authors were those, who
first, according to the words of St. Paul, Changed the Glory of the
Incorruptible God, into the likeness of Corruptible man, of Birds, of Beasts,
and of Serpents: the first, who contrary to Divine Command, that forbids the
Graven Image, or the likness of any thing either in heaven above, or in the
earth beneath, introduced Idolatry so detested of God. Of whom the wise man
says, The Idol is cursed; and be that made the same, together with the thing
made, shall suffer Torments. For the Vanity of Men, as the same Author says,
invented these Arts, to tempt the Soul of Man, and to deceive the Ignorant: And
the Invention it self, is the Corruption of Life. However, we Christians above
all other People are so mad, and carried so headlong into this corruption of
Life and Manners, that in all our Courts, Houses, and Chambers, we are not
ashamed to keep and admire these wicked Ornaments; thereby to invite Women and
Virgins to Wantonness, with the sight of obscene Pictures: nay, we stick not to
introduce 'um into our very Temples, Chapples, and over our Altars, to the
great hazard of breeding Idolatry. But of this more when we come to Treat of
Religion. Now that there is a certain Authority not to be contemned in Statues
and Pictures, I learnt not long ago in Italy: where there happening a very
great debate before the Pope, between the Austin Friars, and the Regular
Canons, about the Habit of St. Austin; that is to say, whether he wore a black
Stole over a white Vest, or a white Stole over a black Vest: and finding
nothing in Scripture that gave Light toward the determination of the Question,
the Judges at length thought fit to refer the whole matter to the Painters and
Statuaries, resolving to give judgment according to what they should declare
they had seen in Ancient Pictures and Statues: Confirmed by this example, I my
self laboring with indefatigable diligence to find out the Original of the
Monks Cowl, and not finding any that might resolve the doubt in Scripture, at
length I referred my self to the Painters; seeking the Truth of the matter in
the Porches of Halls of the Monasteries where the Histories of the Old and New
Testament are generally Painted. Now seeing that I could not perceive in all
the Old Testament, neither any of the Priests or Prophets, no not Elias
himself, whom the Carmelites make their Patron; I went and diligently viewed
all the New Testament: There I saw Zacharias, Simeon, John Baptist, Joseph,
Christ, the Apostles, Disciples, Scribes, Pharisees, High Priests, Annas,
Caiphas, Herod, Pilat, and many others; but yet I could not see one Cowl among
them All: till at length, examining the whole story over and over again, and by
and by in the very Front of the Piece I found the Devil himself with a Cowl on,
as he stood tempting Christ in the Wilderness. I was very glad to find that in
a Picture, that I could observe in no Writing, that the Devil was the first
Inventor of Cowls, from whom I am apt to believe the Monks and Friars have
borrowed the same, though wearing it of diverse Colors, if they do not
absolutely claim it by Inheritance.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Prospective, and Looking-Glasses.
TO return to Optics, to which the use of Looking-Glasses and
Prospective-Glasses does mainly conduce; the Experiments whereof are daily seen
in the various kinds of Glasses, Hollow, Unequal, Plane, Pillar-fashion'd,
Pyramidal, Globular, Gibbose, Orbicular, full of Angles, Inverted, Everted,
Regular, Irregular, Solid and Perspicuous. So we read, as Celius in his ancient
Readings relates, That one Hostius, a Person of an Obscene Life, made a sort of
Glasses that made the Object seem far greater than it was; so that one Finger
should seem to exceed the whole Arm, both in bigness and thickness. There is
also a sort of Glass, wherein a man may see the Image of another man, but not
his own; and another, which being set in such a posture and place, gives back
no representation; but the posture being altered, presently returns the Object
presented. Some that show all sorts of Representations; some not all, but many.
Other Glasses there are, that contrary to the fashion of all others, will show
the right hand directly opposite to the Right, and the Left directly opposite
to the Left. Other Glasses there are that do not represent the Image within,
but as it were hanging in the Air. Burning-Glasses there are too, that
Collecting the beams of the Sun into one point, kindle fire at a distance upon
any Combustible Matter. Little Perspicuous Glasses also are not without their
Impostures; that is to say, to make a little thing appear great; those that are
afar off, near; those things or places that are near, afar off; those that are
above us, below us; those things that are below us, above us, or in any other
posture or situation whatever. There are other of these Glasses that make one
Object appear to be many, and will represent things with diverse Colors like
the Rainbow; as also, in diverse Shapes and Figures. And I my self have learnt
to make Glasses, wherein, while the Sun shines, you may discern for the
distance of Three or Four Miles together, whatever places are enlightened or
overspread with his Beams. And this is to be admired in plain Glasses, that by
how much the less they are, so much less than themselves they will represent
the Object; but let them be never so big, yet shall they not represent the
Object ever a whit the larger: which when St. Austin considered, writing to
Nibridius, he conceives it to be something of an occult Mystery. However, they
are vain and useless things, invented only for Ostentation and idle Pleasure.
Many both Greek and Latin have Treated of Looking-Glasses and Perspectives,
but above all the rest, Vitellius.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Cosmimetry.
LET us have a few words now concerning Cosmimetry, which is divided into
Cosmography and Geography: both measure the World, and distinguish it into
Parts; the First, according to a method drawn from the Heavenly Bodies, by
distinguishing Places as they are Situated under such Stars or Constellations,
measuring them by Scales of Degrees, or Minutes, by Climates, by the difference
of Day or Night, Points of the Winds, various risings of the Stars, Elevations
of the Pole, Parallels, Meridians, shadows of Gnomons, and the like; all which
is performed by Mathematical Rules. The Second not regarding any thing of the
Celestial Bodies, measures the World by Furlongs and Miles; divides it into
Mountains, Woods, Lakes, Rivers, Seas and Shores, Nations, People, Kingdoms,
Provinces, Cities, Ports, and whatever else is worthy taking Notice of.

They Native Customs, Native Habits show,
And what each Region suffers there to grow.
And in imitation of Painting according to the Rules of Geometry and
Perspective, describe the whole World in Plain Tables or Maps.

In little Volumes Painting all the World. Of this they reckon Chorography to
be a part, which undertaking the particular Description of particular Places,
sets them out more fully and accurately.

Each part distinguished, various order yields
Of Vines, of Woods, of Meadows, Fountains, Fields.
Behold, how swelling Streams the Ocean fill!
There falls a Valley, there a mounting Hill
With woody top assails the distant Stars.
All these things, and whatever we have before spoken of in this Chapter,
Cosmimetry teaches in chief. But what Authors shall instruct us in this Art! so
manifold are the Contentions among them about Bounds, Longitudes, Latitudes,
Magnitudes, Measures, Distances, Climates, and Qualities of Countries. All
which Eratosthenes has one way explained, Strabo another; another way Marinus;
another way Ptolomy; another way Dionysius; another way the Later Authors.
Neither do they agree about the Navil or Middle of the Earth, which Ptolomy
places under the Equinoctial Circle; Strabo believes it to be the Mountain
Parnassus in Greece: with whom Plutarch, and Lactantius the Grammarian agree,
and believe, That in the time of the Deluge it was the only Mark of distinction
between the Skies and the Water.

When all the World lay all in Water drowned,
This only appeared, the Waters utmost bound.
But if this reason be the only satisfactory reason of that Opinion, then shall
not Parnassus of Greece, but Gordicus a Mountain of Armenia be the Navel of the
Earth, which, as Berosus testifies, first appearing above the Waters, was the
first resting Place of the Ark. Others Assign other places, and how the middle
of the Earth was found out by the flying of Eagles. There are some Divines, who
thrusting their Sickle into this Corn, will have Jerusalem to be the Middle of
the Earth; because it is written by the Prophet, God has wrought Salvation in
the middle of the Earth. Lucretius, Lactantius, and Austin, fall under the same
Censure, who have so constantly denied the Antipodes; as also those who deny
any other Habitable Part beyond Europe, Asia, and Africa; which notwithstanding
we find to be utterly false, by the Voyages and Discoveries of the Spaniards
and Portugals; who also confirm to us all the Torrid Zone to be Inhabited,
contrary to the Fables and Trifles of the Poets. Other Errors of the
Geographers we have recited in the Chapter of History. Now this Art that
undertakes to teach us to Describe and Measure so large a World, such
unsearchable Seas, and discover to us the Situation of all Islands and
Regions, Bounds, and remarkable Places; together with the Originals, Customs,
Manners, and different Dispositions of innumerable Nations, what fruit does it
further yield us? but only that it makes us covetous to pry into the
Concernments of other people, while we forget our selves; and as St. Austin in
his Confession says, Men Travel to admire the high Mountains, the Prodigious
Waves of the Sea, the large and dismal Falls of Rivers, the Compass of the
Ocean, and the Rounds of the Stars; but in the mean time, forsake themselves.
Pliny says, That it is a madness to Measure the Earth; which while we
endeavor to measure, we go our selves beyond all bounds.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Architecture.
NO doubt but Architecture seems to bring great advantages and ornaments both
to public and private Building. This makes us Walls and Roofs, Mills and
Carts, Rivers, Ships, Temples, Churches, Towers, fenced Walls and
Fortifications, and all other Engines, either to defend or adorn both Public
and Private Buildings; a very necessary and honest Art, did it not so much
bewitch the minds of Men, that there is no man scarce to be found, if his
Wealth will permit him, who does not wholly employ himself, either in
Re-building, or adding to that which is well and decently already done: through
which insatiable desire of Building it happens, that there is no end or bound
thereof: but to please Fancy, Rocks have been cut, Valleys filled up, the
bowels of the Earth dug into, Promontories made over the Sea, the currents
of Rivers turned, Seas joined to Seas, Lakes exhaust, Pools dried up, the Seas
curled, the depth of the Ocean searched into, and New Islands have been made.
All which things though they seem to have been done in desyance of Nature, yet
have brought not a little advantage to the Public. But let us compare with
these, all those other things that are of no use at all but for men to gaze and
stare at, and out of vain Ostentation to show the vastness of the Builders
Wealth; such as are the superstitious Wonders of the Egyptians, Greeks,
Hetrurians, Babylonians, and other Nations; their Labyrinths, Pyramids,
Obelisques, Colosses, Mausoleum, the Monstrous Statues of Rapsinatis,
Sesostres, and Amasis, and that Extravagant Sphynx, in which King Amasis was
said to be Entombed. For, says Pliny, it was hewed out of a Natural Red-stone;
the compass of the Head was One hundred and two foot round the Forehead; the
length thereof One hundred forty three. But there are greater Wonders than
this, the stupendous work of Memnon and Semiramis, in Bagisianum, a Mountain
of Media, a vast E^figies, containing Seventeen Furlongs in bigness. Which had
been far exceeded by that Architect, whoever he were, whether Stesicrates, as
Plutarch reports; or Democrates, as Vitruvius asserts, who proposed to have
made an Effigies of Alexander out of the Mountain Athos, which should have held
in the hand thereof a City capable to receive Ten thousand men. We may add to
these the Babylonian Den, the Basis whereof was a full Furlong in Compass, as
Herodotus witnesses* together with that famous Tower which was made to swim in
the wide Sea, upon the backs of Glass Lobsters. With these may be numbered the
Gordian Edifices, the Triumphal Arches, the vast Temples of the Gods; that
especially in Ephesus Dedicated to Diana, which was two hundred Years in
Building, at the Expenses of all Asia: and that Chapel dedicated to Latona,
built in Egypt all of one Stone, broad in Front forty Cubits, and covered over
also with one entire Stone: as also, the Statue of Nebuchodonosor King of
Assyria, all of pure Gold, sixty Cubits in bigness; which it was a Capital
Crime not to Worship: and another Statue Forty Cubits high, framed all out of
one entire Topaze, in honor of an Egyptian Queen. Not unlike these are the
Temples Erected in our days with most lofty Towers and Spires, vast heaps of
Stones, rising to an Incomparable and Prodigious Height; together with
innumerable Steeples for Bells, erected at the vast expense of money drained
under the pretense of Pious uses and Charity, which had been better improved to
the relief of thousands of the Poor, who being the true Temples of God, perish
in the mean time with hunger, cold, and sickness, more proper to be kept in
repair with those Sacred Alms. Now what Destructions, what Devastations this
Art Causes among Men, whose Warlike Engines of Batteries, Catapults, Scorpions,
Slings, and other manifold instruments of Death, framed by the chief industry
and invention of her Professors; so many Nations thereby ruined, so many Cities
thereby destroyed, do afford sufficient Testimony: and of this, not only by
Land, but by Sea, whole Navies built only for fight and combat do give evident
proof: wherein men do not seem so much to Navigate, as to Inhabit the most
dangerous Seas, which as they are of themselves full of hazard and terror, by
these Ships are rendered far more unsecure and terrible to us; therein, as on
the solid Land, Fighting and Robbing one another. The first that writ of
Architecture was Agatarebus, an Athenian; afterward Democritus and Anaxagoras;
after them Silenus, Archimenides, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Cato, Varro, Pliny;
and Lastly, Vitruvius, and Nigrigentus. Of Modern Authors, Leo Baptista, Friar
Lucas, and Albertus Duretus.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Miners and Metals.
TO Architecture is adjoined Mining and Digging of Metals; an Art of no small
ingenuity, discovering by the very Superficies of the Earth, either in Plain or
Mountain, what Veins are there to be found, how far they extend their bounds
and sides, and how to undertop the hollow and empty bowels of the Earth:
concerning which, Strato Lampsacus, among the Ancients, has written a large
Treatise, Entitled, De Machinis Metallicis. Though how out of the Metallic
Oar, to consolidate and purify the true Metal by fire; or if mixed, how to
separate them, few or none have hitherto taken the pains to teach; perhaps
because that being an Art too Mechanic and Servile, learned and ingenious Men
have thought it beneath their Studies. However, being my self some years since
made Overseer of some certain Mines by his Imperial Majesty, searching
diligently into the Nature of all those things, I began to write a special
Treatise thereof, which I have yet in my hands, continually adding and
correcting the same, as my Experience and Knowledge increased; intending to
omit nothing that may serve to further the Invention and Knowledge thereof,
whether in relation to the searching and discerning of the Vein, melting the
Oar, under-propping of Mines, framing all manner o^ Engines, and whatever else
belongs thereto: Mysteries hitherto altogether hidden before. By means of this
Art, we come to be Possessors of all Humane Wealth; the eager desire whereof
has so invaded Mortals, that they make their approaches to Hell, and seek
Riches in the very mansions of the Infernal Ghosts; as Ovid elegantly describes
it.

Deep in the Bowels of the Earth they toil;
There what she strove near Stygian shades to hide,
They dig up Wealth, the baneful Root of Pride,
Now fatal Steel, but far more fatal Gold,
With gain bewitched did Mortals first behold.
Desire of gain, that Truth and Virtue chased,
And in their room Deceit and Treason placed.
Or as another Poet does express himself, Now Truth is driven out by Gold,
By Gold our Laws are bought and sold.


Certainly therefore he first found out the greatest plague of Humane life,
that first found out Mines of Gold, and other Veins of Metal. These men have
made the very ground the more hurtful and pestiferous, by how much they are
m^re rash and venturous than they that hazard themselves in the deep to dive
for Pearl. Concerning the places where these Metals are found, Authors do very
much vary. Lead, they say, was first found in the Islands called Cassiterides,
not far from Spain: Brass in Cyprus, Iron in Crete, Gold and Silver in Pangaeus
a Mountain of Thracia: At length they infected the whole world; only the
Scythians, as Soline relates, condemned the use of Gold and Silver, resolving
to keep themselves eternally free from public avarice. There was an ancient
Law among the Romans against the superfluity of Gold. And indeed, it were to be
wished that m^n would aspire with the same eagerness to Heaven, that they
descend into the Bowels of the Earth, allured with that vein of Riches, which
are so far from making a man happy, that many repent too often of their time
and labor so ill bestowed.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Astronomy.
IN the next place, Astrology offers it self, otherwise called Astronomy; an
Art altogether fallacious, and more to be derided than the Fables of the Poets;
whose Professors are a sort of confident persons, Authors of Prodigies; who
with an impious Confidence and Curiosity, at their own peasures, beyond humane
ability, undertake to erect Celestial Orbs, and to describe the measures,
motions, figures, shapes, number, and reciprocal harmony of the Stars, as if
they had long conversed in Heaven, and were but newly descended thence:
however, among themselves of most different and dissenting Opinions, even
concerning those things by which they say all things are kept up and subsist:
that I may well say with Pliny, that the incertainty and inconstancy of this
Art, plainly argues it to be no Art at all; of whose very Fundamentals the
Indians think one thing, the Egyptians another, the Moors another, the Caldeans
another, the Jews another, the Arabians another, the Latins another, the
Ancients another, the Moderns another. For Plato, Proclus, Aristotle, Averroes,
and almost all the Astrologers before Alphonsus, treating of the number of the
Spheres, reckon up but only eight Spheres; though Averroes and Rabbi Isaac
aver, that one Hermes and some Babylonians did add a ninth: to which Opinion
Azarcheles the Moore adheres, with whom Albertus Teutonicus agreed, in his
time, for what notorious fact I know not, called the Great; and all those that
approve the accesses and recesses of the Spherical Motions. But the later
Astrologers have constituted and appointed ten Orbs; which Opinion the same
Albertus believes that Ptolomy also held. But Alphonsus following the judgment
of Rabbi Isaac, surnamed Bazam, held only nine Spheres; but four years after,
in an Edition of his Tables, adhering to the Opinions of Albuhassen the Moore,
and Albategnus, he reduced them to the number of eight. Rabbi Abraham Avenezra,
Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Abraham Zacutus, believe no moveable Orb above the eighth
Sphere. But they differ very much about the motion of the eighth Orb, and of
the fixed Stars. For the Caldeans and Egyptians are of opinion, that it is
moved by only one motion; with whom Alpetragus, and among the Modern Writers
Alexander Aquilinus agree: but all the other Astronomers from Hipparchus even
unto these times, affirm the same to be turned with various motions: The Jewish
Talmudists assign thereunto a double motion: Azarcheles, Tebeth, and Johannes
Regiomontanus, added the motion of Trepidation, which they call approachings
and recedings, upon two little Circles, about the heads of Aries and Libra: but
in this differing one from another, for that Azarcheles affirms, that the
moveable head is distant from the fixed not more than ten parts. Tebith asserts
them to be distant one from the other not above four parts, with some minutes.
Johannes Regiomontanus makes them distant more than eight parts, which is the
reason given that the fixed Stars do not always incline to the same part of the
Sky, but sometimes they return to the place where they began. But Ptolomy,
Albategni, Rabbi Levi, Avenezra, Zacutus, and among the later Authors Paul the
Florentine, and Austin Ritius my familiar Acquaintance in Italy, affirm that
the Stars do always move according to the successions of the Signs. The later
Astrologers make a threefold motion of the eighth Sphere; the one which is most
proper, and is the motion of Trepidation, which is finished once in seven
thousand years; the second they call the motion of Circumvolution, being the
motion of the ninth Sphere, and is finished in forty nine years: The last is
made by the tenth Orb, and is called the motion of the Primum mobile, or the
rapid and diurnal motion, which turns round in the Compass of one natural day.
However, among them that give a double motion to the eighth Sphere, there is
great diversity of Opinions; for all the Modern Authors, and they who admit the
motion of Trepidation, say that the Sphere is carried about by a superior
Sphere. But Albategni, Albuhassen, Alfraganus, Averroes, Rabbi Levi, Abraham
Zacutus, and Austin Ritius, say, that the Diurnal motion, which they call the
Rapid motion, is not proper to any Sphere, but that it is made by the whole
Heaven. Averroes also confirms it, that Ptolomy in his Book entitled
Narrations, does deny the motion of Gyration: and Rabbi Levi says, that
Averroes was in the same opinion with Ptolomy, that the Diurnal motion was the
motion of the whole Heaven. Again, there is not less difference among them
about the measure of the motion of the eighth Sphere, and of the fixed Stars:
For Ptolomy believes that the fixed Stars do move one degree in a hundred
years. Albategnus will have them to move so far in sixty six Egyptian years;
with whom Zacutus, Rabbi Levi, and Alphonsus in the correction of his Tab^es,
give their assent. Azarcheles the Moore says that they move one degree in
seventy five years; Hipparchus, in seventy eight. Many of the Hebrews, as Rabbi
Josua, Moses, Maymon, Rabbi Avenezra, and after them Hay Benrodam, in seventy
years; Johan^ Regiomontanus in eighty. Augustine Ritius took the middle way
between the opinions of Albategni and the Hebrews, delivering his opinion that
the fixed Stars do not move one degree in less than sixty years, nor in more
than seventy. But Rabbi Abraham Zacutus, as Ritius declares, by a tradition of
the Indians discovers to us, that there are two fixed Stars most diametrically
opposite one to another, which do not finish their course, contrary to the
order of the Signs, in less time than a hundred and forty years. And
Alpetragus is of opinion, that there are many motions of the Heavens which are
yet unknown to men; which if it be true, then there may be also Stars and
Bodies proper to those motions, which men have either not been able to behold
by reason of the hight, or else they have not fallen within the discovery of
any observation. To which opinion Phavorinus the Philosopher assents, in his
Oration mentioned by Geliius against Genethliacks. So that it remains most
apparent, that never any Astronomer was ever yet in Heaven, to teach us the
certain and true motions thereof. Neither is the certain motion of the Planet
Mars known to this day: of which Johannes de Monte regio complains, in an
Epistle to one Blanchinus: the error also of the motion of that Planet, a
certain famous Astrologer, named William of St. Clou, above two hundred years
ago has left discovered, but never any one as yet corrected. As truly
impossible it is to find out the ingress of the Sun into the Equinoctial
points, as Rabbi Levi proves by many reasons. But what shall we say of things
since brought to light, and what strange errors were committed about those
things in former times? For many, with Tebith, thought the greatest variation
of the Sun to be continually varied; which we know now to ke^p always one
certain measure. And although Ptolomy thought otherwise thereof, yet Albates,
Rabbi Levi, Avenezra, and Alphonsus, found otherwise by experience. Otherwise
also have they found out concerning the motion of the Sun, and the measure of
the year, quite different to what either Ptolomy or Hipparchus delivered. Also
concerning the motion of the Aux of the Sun, Ptolomy is of one opinion,
Albategnus and the rest of another. Concerning the Figures of the Signs, and
the considerations and observations of the fixed Stars, the Indians have
thought one thing, the Egyptians another, the Caldeans another, the Hebrews
another, and Arabians another; Timotheus is of one mind, Hipparchus of
another, Ptolomy of another, and the later Authors of another. I omit their mad
contentions, which is the right, or which is the left side of Heaven;
concerning which when Tho. Aquinas and Albertus the Teutonick endeavor to say
something seriously, they are yet altogether unable to deliver any thing of
certainty. Again, what the Galaxy or Milky way should be, is yet controverted
among Astrologers. I omit also all their vain disputes about Eccentricks,
Concentricks, Epicycles, Retrogradations, Trepidations, accesses, recesses,
swift motions, and Circles of motion, as being the works neither of God nor
Nature, but the Fiddle-faddles and Trifles of Mathematicians, taking their
beginnings from corrupt Philosophy and the fables of the Poets: Yet which the
Professors of this Art believe as true, created by God, and established by
Nature; from these Fictions deducing the causes of inferior accidents,
asserting those feigned motions to be the principles of all inferior motions.
These Astronomers a Serving-maid of Anaximenes very seasonably taxed with a
sharp reply. This Maid was wont to walk with her Master, who one day going out
a little later than ordinary to look upon the Sky, while he was gazing among
the Stars never minding the situation of the place, fell into a Ditch. Then
quoth the Maid, I wonder Sir how you can pretend to foreknow things in Heaven,
that cannot tell those things that are just before your Nose? Thales Milesius
was reprehended with a like witty saying, by his Maidservant Thressa. Neither
does Tully much vary from either: Astrologers, says he, while they search and
pry into every Coast of Heaven, are ignorant of that which is just before
their feet. I my self learnt this Art from my Parents, and have lost not a
little time and pains therein; but at length I found that the whole Art had no
other foundation than the mere figments and trifles of imagination: and it very
much repents me of the time which I have wasted, and I wish I could absolutely
forget and abolish the memory thereof in my mind; and would wholly abandon the
use thereof, unless the violent entreaties of great personages, who oftentimes
make use of noble Ingenuities to bad purposes, did not compel me to continue my
studies therein; and that domestic profit did not over-perswade me to enjoy
the folly thereof, and with toys to please those that seek after and are
covetous of trifles; I say, Trifles! for what has Astrology in it worth
notice, unless the Fables of the Poets, their monsters and wonders with which
they have filled the whole Region of Heaven? Neither do any sort of people more
agree one among another, than the Astrologers and Poets; only in that one
thing of Lucifer and Vesperus; the Poets affirming that what day Lucifer
appears before the Rising Sun, that day he follows the Setting Sun; which all
the Astrologers deny can be done in one and the same day, only those that
place Venus above the Sun, because those Stars that seem to be at greatest
distance from us, seem to appear soonest in their rising, and to set most
slowly. But this discord between the Astrologers about the situation of the
Stars and Planets I had quite forgot, had I not had this occasion to remember
them, the handling whereof has been more particular to Philosophers than
Astrologers. For Plato places the Sphere of the Sun next about the Sphere of
the Moon; and the Egyptians do the like, placing the Sun between the Moon and
Mercury. Archimedes and the Caldaeans make the Sun to be the fourth in Order.
Anaximander, Metrodorus, Chius, and Crates, constitute the Sun uppermost, below
him the Moon, beneath her the other Planets and fixed Stars. Zenocrates will
have all the Stars to move in one Superficies. No less contention there is
among them about the distance and bigness of the Sun, Moon, and the rest of the
Stars fixed and wandering: Neither is there indeed any constancy of Opinions
among them, nor truth of Assertion: and no wonder, when the Heaven it self,
which they so much endeavor to search and dive into, is the most inconstant of
all, and crowded with Fables and Fictions: for all the Twelve Signs, with the
Northern and Southern Constellations, got all into Heaven by the help of
Fables, and by these Fables Astrologers live, cheat, and get money, while the
Poets their Inventors are ready to starve for hauger.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Judicial Astrology.
THere is another part of Astrology remaining, which they call the Divining or
Foretelling Part, otherwise called Judicial Astrology, which Treats of the
Revolutions of the Years of the World; of Nativities, of Horary Questions, and
by what sort of means to foretell and know Future Events, and the Secrets of
Divine Providence, thereby to avoid ill Success, and secure the undertaker of
Prosperity. Astrologers therefore borrow the Effects and Influences of the
Stars from the most remote Ages of the World, beyond the memory of things, even
before the days of Prometheus, and from Conjunctions that were before the
Flood; pretending themselves able to display the hidden Natures, Qualities and
Effects of all sorts of Animals, Stones, Metals and Plants, and whatever else
being part of the Creation; and to show how the same do depend on the Skies,
and flow from the Stars, and partake of their Influences. A most credulous sort
of People, and no less impious, not acknowledging this one thing, That God made
the Plants, Herbs, and Trees, before the Heavens and the Stars. The gravest
Philosophers also, as Pythagoras, Democritus, Bion, Phavorinus, Panetius,
Carneades, Possidonius, Timaeus, Aristotle, Plato, Plotinus, Porphyrius,
Avicen, Averroes, Hippocrates, Galen, Alexander, Aphrodisius, Cicero, Seneca,
Plutarch, and many others who have diligently labored in the search of the
Causes of Things through all Arts and Sciences, never do remit us to these
Astrological Causes, which although they might be allowed for Causes, yet when
they themselves do not rightly understand the Course of the Stars, which is
most evident to all wise men, they can never be able to give a certain judgment
of their Effects. Neither are there others wanting among them, as Eudoxus,
Archelaus, Cassandrus, Hoychilax, Halicarnassaeus, and many others of later
date, grave in esteem, who confess, That it is impossible that any thing of
certainty should be found out by the Art of Judicial Astrology, by reason of
the innumerable cooperating Causes that attend the Heavenly Influences; and so
Ptolomy is also of Opinion, both for that there are many occasions of
Obstruction, as Customs, Manners, Education, Virtue, Empire, Place, Geniture,
Blood, Diet, Liberty of Will, and Learning; as also for that, as they say, the
Influences do not compel but incline. Furthermore, they who have prescribed the
Rules of Judgments, set down their Maxims so various and contradictory, that it
is impossible for a Prognosticator, out of so many various and disagreeing
Opinions, to be able to pronounce any thing certain, unless he be inwardly
Inspired with some secret and hidden instinct and Sense and of future things;
or unless by some occult and latent Communication of the Devil, he be enabled
with a discerning faculty: which two means he that wants, can never be a true
Prophet in Astrological Judgments; Astrological Prediction not depending upon
Art, but merely upon obscure Chance: And as young People light upon such or
such verses in Fortune-Books, not by Art, but by Chance: so Prophesies flow
from the breast of an Astrologer by the same Chance, and not by Art; which
Ptolomy witnesses, saying, The knowledge of the Stars is in thee, and thence
proceeds; thereby intimating, that the Prediction of hidden and future things
is not attained to so much by Observation of the Stars, as of the qualities and
affections of the Mind. There is no certainty therefore in this Art, applicable
to all things according to Opinion; which Opinion is gathered and delivered
from Conjectures, through an unperceiveable Inspiration of the Devil, or else
by mere Chance: therefore is this Art no more than a fallacious Conjecture of
Superstitious men, who by the Experience of long time have attained to some
insight into uncertain things, wherewith to such out a little money; they many
times deceive the ignorant, and are as often deceived: for if their Art were
true, and rightly understood by them, whence so many Errors and Deceits
continually swimming in their Prognostications? and if not true, do they not
vainly, foolishly, and wickedly profess the Knowledge of things which are not,
or are not rightly understood? But the more cautious among them will not utter
their Prognostications but in obscure and ambiguous terms, and which may be
applied to all things, times, Princes, and Nations whatever. If any thing which
they have said do come to pass, then they Collect together the Causes thereof,
confirming after the thing is apparent, their old Prophesies by new Reasons,
that they may seem to have foreseen: like your Interpreters of Dreams, upon the
relation of a Dream know nothing of certainty, but apply their Interpretation
to that which happens afterward. Furthermore, seeing it is impossible in so
great a number of Stars, but that we must find some in bad, some in good
Positions; they take occasion from thence of speaking to whom and what they
please: foretelling Life, Death, Health, Honors, Wealth, Power, Victory,
Offspring, Friends, Marriage, Magistracy, and many other things: To others,
from a bad Position, foretelling Death, Hanging, Shame, Overthrows, Barrenness,
Sickness, and Misfortunes; not by the power of their wicked Art, but by a
wicked stupefaction of the Mind, and forcing a necessity of Actions concurring
to such Events, drawing credulous people to their ruin, causing also among
Princes and Nations most severe Wars and Seditions. Now if it happen that
fortune jumps with any of their Prognostications, that among so many ambiguous
Vaticinations one or other happen to prove true, how they strut and crow, and
fall into raptures and high admiration of themselves! If they be found to lie
continually, and be still convinced of falsehood, then they excuse it with
Blasphemy, fortifying one Lie with another, saying, That a wise man has power
over the Stars: whereas in truth, neither the Stars are governed by wise men,
nor wise men by the Stars; but both are governed by God: or else they cry, That
the unaptness of the subject, or the solly of the party, was an obstruction of
the Influences; but if ye require more of them, they are angry. Yet these
Fortune Tellers do find entertainment among Princes and Magistrates, from whom
they receive considerable Salaries; whereas there is indeed no sort or
generation of men more pernicious to a Commonwealth, than those that undertake
to prognosticate by the Stars, by Dreams, or any other Artifices of Divination,
and scatter their Prophesies about: Men always enemies to Christ, and all that
believe in him: Of whom Cornelius Tacitus complains: Your Mathematicians, for
so they are vulgarly called, are a sort of men, says he, treacherous to
Princes, deceitful to those that believe in 'um; were always pro^ibited from
our City, but never expelled. Varro also a grave Author testifies, That all the
Vanities of superstition flowed out of the bosom of Astrology. There was a
certain Tribute assess'd in Alexandria, which the Astrologers pay, being called
Blacenomium, which signifies Folly, because that out of ingenious Folly they
made a certain Gain, and because that none but rash and inconsiderate people
were wont to consult them. But if our life and happiness proceed from the
Stars, what do we fear? why are we so sollicitous? Let us trust all these
things to God, and the Stars, who can never err, never do any evil. Let us not
dive into things beyond our own capacities, but only learn to know that which
is only in our reach; and being that we are Christians, let us leave the Hours
to Christ, the Minutes to God the Father. But if the Stars have nothing of
force, nothing of power, nothing of influence over our life and happiness, then
is every Astrologer a very vain and idle person. But there are a sort of people
so very timorous and credulous, that as Children frighted with the stories of
Hobgoblins, they believe and are more afraid of those things which are not,
than of those things which are; and by how much a thing seems to be less
possible to come to pass, so much the rather are they afraid thereof; and the
less probable a thing is, the sooner they believe it; who if they were not
Astrologers, might eat their nails, or die with hunger. And this strange
credulity of theirs, forgetful of things past, negligent of the present,
running headlong after future things, is so favorable to these deceivers, that
though but one lie told, shall injure the credit and reputation of other men,
so that they shall be scarcely believed again when they speak truth; On the
contrary, among the Doctors of Lying and Falsehood, one Chance-truth shall gain
belief of a hundred Public lies: In which they who chiefly confide, are the
most unhappy of all men, such superstitious trifles always bringing their
Adorers into ruin: Which Antiquity witnesses of Zoroastes, Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, Caesar, Crassus, Pompey, Diotharus, Nero, Julian the Apostate,
who as they were most addicted to these Gugaws, so did they perish through
their confidence in them: All things falling out most unfortunate to them, to
whom their Fortune Tellers promised all things favorable and auspicious. As to
Pompey and Caesar, whom they both made believe that they should die aged, in
their beds, and in great honor, yet both of them came to bad and untimely
ends. A perverse and preposterous generation of men, who profess to foreknow
future things, in the mean time altogether ignorant of past and present; and
undertaking to tell all people most obscure and hidden secrets abroad, at the
same time know not what happens in their own houses, and in their own chambers:
Even such an Astrologer as Moore laughed at in his Epigram.

The Stars, Ethereal Bard, to thee shine clear,
And all our future Fates thou make appear.
But that thy Wife is common all men know,
Yet what all see, there is not a Star does show.
Saturn is blind, or some long journey gone,
Not able to discern an infant from a stone.
The Moon is fair, and as she is fair she is chaste,
And will not behold thy Wife so leudly embraced.
Europa Jove, Mars Venus, she Mars courts,
With Daphne, Sol, with Hirce Hermes sports.
Thus while the Stars their wanton Love pursue,
No wonder, Cuckhold, they will not tell thee true.
In the next place, it is notorious how they differ from one another among
themselves, Jews, Caldeans, Egyptians, Persians, Graecians, Arabians, about the
Rules of giving judgment; and how Ptolomy quite lays aside all the ancient
Philosophy; for which how Avenr^dan defends him; how Albumasar rails at him;
and how Abraham Avenezra the Jew falls upon the bones of all these. Lastly,
Dorotheus, Paulus, Alexandrinus, Ephestion, Maternus, Aomar, Tebith, Alchindus,
Zahel, Messahalla, are all of another opinion; and when they cannot prove what
they say to be true, they endeavor to defend themselves by Experiments, and
yet they are not all unanimous in that neither. Neither is there less discord
about the propriety of the Houses, whence they fetch the Predictions of all
Events: wherein Ptolomy is of one opinion, Heliodorus of another, Paulus of
another, of another Manlius, Maternus of another, of another Porphyrius,
Abenragel of another, the Egyptians of another, of another the Greeks and
Latins; the Ancients and Moderns alike dissenting. Neither can they agree where
to place the ends, where the beginnings of their Houses; which structures the
Ancients have built after one fashion; Ptolomy, Campanus, and Johan
Regiomontanus, every one in another distinct manner; whereby they themselves
take away all credit from their own observations, several ascribing several
properties to the same persons. An impious Race of men, attributing that to the
Stars, which belongs only to God; making us that were free born, to be slaves
of the Stars; and when we know that God created all things good, they will be
appointing some Stars to be Malevolent in their Aspects, and the Originals of
bad Influences; not without great contempt of God, and injury to the Heavens,
in that Divine Senate make all mischiefs and misfortunes to be decreed; and
whatever is done by us out of the depravity of our Wills, which nature cannot
avoid, through the corruption of the Subject Matter, all that they Attribute to
the fault of the Stars. Neither are they ashamed to teach men to be most
pernicious Heretics and Infidels, while they endeavor to make the gift of
Prophecy, the power of Religion, the secrets of Conscience, dominion over
Hell, the virtue of Miracles, the efficacy of Prayer, the state of future Life,
all these mighty things to depend upon the Stars; to be granted by them, and
the knowledge thereof to be wholly derived from them: For they say, that Gemini
being the Ascendent, Saturn and Mars being in Conjunction in Aquarius, That a
Prophet should be born in a new part of the World; and that Christ was
therefore famous for so many Virtues, because Saturn and Gemini were together
in that place. The several Sects of Religion they make to be governed by other
mixtures of the Constellations; Jupiter being nevertheless their Lord and
Patron. Jupiter joined with Saturn, governs the Religion of the Jews; joined
with Mars, the Caldean; with the Sun, the Egyptian; with Venus, the Saracen;
with Mercury, the Christian, with Luna, the Antichristian. They say moreover,
that Moses instituted the Sabbath among the Jews upon certain Logical reasons
that urged him t^ereto; and that therefore the Christians Err, that will not
observe the Sabbath of the Jews, which is the true Saturday. Next they impugn
all Faith both toward Religion, toward Men, and God himself; affirming, That
the secrets of Conscience may be discovered from such a part of the Sun, being
in the ninth, third, eleventh houses of the Heaven; and many have prescribed
Rules, whereby they pretend to disclose the very thoughts and intentions of
Men. Exalting the Celestial Constellations, above the Miraculous Works of God,
as the superintendant Causes of the Universal Flood, the Law given by Moses,
and the Childbearing of a Virgin; and vainly attributing to Mars the occasion
and necessary cause of Christ's All-redeeming death. Yea they do affirm, That
Christ himself did make choice of his hours wherein to work his Miracles; and
when he rode in Triumph into Jerusalem, what times he knew the Jews could have
no power to hurt him; which was the reason he chid his Disciples in these
words, Are there not Twelve hours of the day? They say moreover, That if any
one were happily placed under Mars, being in the Ninth House, such a one shall
be able to cast out Devils with his presence only. But he that shall Pray to
God, Luna and Jupiter being in Conjunction in the Mid-heaven with the
Dragons-head, shall obtain all his desires; and that Saturn and Jupiter do
promise future prosperity of Life. Moreover, that he who has Saturn happily
constituted with Leo at his Nativity, shall when he departs this Life
immediately return to Heaven again. Now who could think it? as silly and as
idle as these Heresies are, yet want they not abettors, Petrus Aponensis, Roger
Bacon, Guido Bonatus, Arnoldus de Villa Nova, Philosophers; Alyacensis Cardinal
and Divine: and many other famous Christian Doctors, who have not without great
Infamy given their Assent to the same; and more than that, have been so bold as
to testify and defend the truth thereof. Against these Astrologers of later
years, Johannes Picus Mirandula wrote Twelve Books so fully, that he has
scarce omitted one Argument, but with such a force of Eloquence, that neither
Lucius Balantius a most strenuous Champion of Astrology, nor any other Hector
of this Art could ever defend it from the ruin of those Arguments that
Mirandula has brought against it. For he makes it out by most strong
Arguments, That Astrology is an Invention not of Men, but of the Devil (which
Firmianus confirms) by which he endeavors to exterminate and abolish all
Philosophy, Physic, Law, and Religion, to the general mischief of Mankind: for
first, it takes away the use of Faith in Religion, lessens the reverence of
Miracles, takes away Divine Providence, while it teaches, That all things
happen by force and virtue of the Stars, and from the Influences of the
Constellations, by a kind of fatal Necessity. It patronizes Sin, excusing Vice
as descending from Heaven; it defiles and subverts all good Arts, in the first
place Philosophy, translating the Causes of things from right Reason to Fables;
translating the practice of Physic from the application of Natural and
Efficacious Remedies, to vain Observations and idle Superstitions deadly both
to Body and Soul; Abrogating all Laws, Customs and Rules of humane Prudence,
when Astrology must be only consulted at what time, how, and by what means to
Act; as if she only held the Scepter that governs humane Life and Manners,
together with all Affairs public and private, deriving an uncontrolable
Authority from Heaven, and accompting all things else vain and ridiculous that
will not submit to her jurisdiction. A most worthy Art! which the Devils
heretofore Professed, in contempt of God, and to the deceit of Men. Neither
can we think that the Heresy of the Manicheans, which takes away all liberty
of Free Will, had any other Original than the false Opinions and Doctrines of
Astrology. From the same Fountain sprang that Heresy of Basilides, who
believed that there were Three hundred sixty five Heavens, all made
successively, and in the same likeness, according to the number of the days of
the year; and assigning to every one of them certain Qualities, Principles, and
Angels; and also giving them names: he calls the supreme Ruler of them all
Abraxas, which name according to the Greek Letters contains the Numerals of
Three hundred sixty five, to answer the Number of Heavens which he had
invented. These things I have therefore set forth, that ye may understand
Astrology to be the Mother of Heresy. Besides this same Fortune-telling
Astrology, not only the best of Moral Philosophers explode, but also Moses,
Isaias, Job, Jeremiah, and all the other Prophets of the Ancient Law; and among
the Catholic Writers, St. Austin condemns it to be utterly expelled and
banished out of the Territories of Christianity. St. Hierome argues the same to
be a kind of of Idolatry. Basil and Cyprian laughed at it as most contemptible.
Chrysostom, Eusebius, and Lactantius, utterly condemn it. Gregory, Ambrose,
and Severianus, inveigh against it. The Council of Toledo utterly abandon and
prohibit it. In the Synod of Martinus, and by Gregory the younger, and
Alexander the third, it was Anathematized, and punished by the Civil Laws of
the Emperors. Among the Ancient Romans, it was prohibited by Tiberius,
Vitellius, Dioclesian, Constantine, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius,
Ejected also, and Punished: by Justinian made a Capital Crime, as may appear in
his Codex.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Divinination in general.
IT willnot be amiss here to bring in those other sorts of Divination, drawing
predictions not so much from the observation of heavenly bodies, but of
inferior things that retain a kind of shadow and resemblance of heavenly
things; that those things being understood, ye may the better understand this
Astrological Tree that yields such trashie Fruit; and from whence, as from a
Lernaean Hydra, the Beast of so many Heads is generated. Among the Arts
therefore of Fortune-telling Vulgarly professed in hope of gain, are
Physiognomy, Metoposcopie, Chiromancy, Soothsaying, Speculatory, and
Interpretation of Dreams; to which we may add the mad Oracles of former times:
All which have not the least of solid Learning in them, nor have any ground of
Reason to fix on, but depend upon Chance, familiarity with Spirits, or some
apparent Conjectures, which are gathered from ancient Traditions, or long
Observations. For all these prodigious Arts of Divination, defend themselves
with the Buckler of Experience, and to dis-entangle themselves out of the bonds
of hampring Objections, by suggesting to work beyond Faith and Reason; of all
which, the Law takes notice, thus Commanding: Let none be found among you that
makes his Son go through the fi^e, or that uses Witchcraft, or a regarder of
times, or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that
councelleth with Spirits, or a Soothsayer: for all that do those things are an
abomination unto the Lord.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Physiognomy.
PHysiognomy taking Nature for her Guide, upon an inspection, and well
observing the outward parts of the Body, presumes to conjecture by probable
tokens, at the qualities of the Mind, and Fortune of the Person; making one Man
to be Saturnal, another a Jovist, this man to be born under Mars, another under
Sol, some under Venus, some under Mercury, some under Luna; and from the Habits
of the Body, collects their Horoscopes, gliding by little and little from
Affections to Astrological Causes, upon which Foundations they Erect what idle
Structures they themselves please.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Metoposcopie.
MEtoposcopie, to know all things from the sole Observation of the Forehead,
prying even into the very beginnings, progress, and end of a Man's Life, with a
most Acute Judgment, and Learned Experience; making herself to be likewise a
Foster-Child of Astrology.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Chiromancy.
CHiromancy fancies Seven Mountains in the Palm of a Man's Hand, according to
the number of the Seven Planets; and by the Lines which are there to be seen,
judges of the Complexion, Condition, and Fortune of the Person; imagining the
harmonious disposition of the Lines, to be as it were certain Celestial
Characters stamped upon us by God and Nature, and which, as Job says, God
imprinted or put in the hands of men, that so every one might know his works;
though it be plain, that the Divine Author does not there Treat of vain
Chiromancy, but of the Liberty of the Will. These Fortune Tellers have this to
say for themselves, That though they judge not of the Events or Effects of
things by the Causes of things, yet they judge thereof by such Signs as are
taken like Impressions from the same or like Causes, which to the same things
continue still the same; and to things alike, continue still alike. They
farther say, That Pythagoras made use of this Art, who made his Conjectures of
the Nature, Conditions, and Ingenuity of Children, by the lineaments and
features of the Face and Body, and received none into his School but such as he
judged capable of Learning. Which was also the practice of Pharaotes King of
India, as Philostratus relates. But there is no need to bring any other reason
to make manifest the Errors of this Arts Professors, than only that one, that
they have no Reason in 'um. Many grave and ancient Authors have Written
concerning the same, as Hermes, Alchindus, Pythagoras, Pharaotes the Indian,
Zophirus, Helenus, Ptolomeus, Aristoteles, Alpharabius: besides these, Galen,
Avicen, Rasis, Julianus, Maternus, Loxius, Philemon, Palamon, Constantine and
Africanus: among the Latins, Lucius Sylla and Caesar were mightily addicted to
this Art. Of later years, Peter of Appo, Albert the Teutonick, Michael Scotus,
Antiochus Bartholomeus, Coclitis, Michael Savonarola, Antonius Cermisonus,
Petrus de arca, Andreas Corvus, Tricassus Mantuanus, Johannes de Indagine, and
many other famous Physicians: but none of them have been able to make any
farther progress than Conjecture, and observation of Experience. Now that there
is no certainty in these Conjectures and Observations, is manifest from thence,
because they are Figments grounded upon the Will; and about which, the Masters
thereof of equal Learning and Authority do very much differ. Therefore are they
most certainly mad, and drowned in Error, that will undertake to foretell by
such Signs as these, not only the Complexion of the Body, and Disposition
Natural; but also the very Affections of the Mind, and Chances of Fortune,
evident in the judgment of Zopyrus concerning Socrates. Nor must we believe
what Appion the Grammarian has left behind him in writing, that one Alexander
did so discerningly paint or express the likenesses of resemblance, that from
thence he could tell the certain years of past or future death; which that they
can be known by those Arts, is not so much incredible as it is impossible. But
it is given to these idle sort of people thus to dote and frame Chimaeras to
themselves by the instinct of the Devil, who by that means leads them from
Error into Superstition, and from Superstition into Infidelity.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Geomancy.
GEomancy, of which we have spoken before in the Chapter of Arithmetic, is an
Art that by certain Points separated either by Chance or by Force; out of which
it composes certain Figures by Numbers Even and Odd, likened to those in the
Heavens; makes a kind of Divination, and therefore by all Writers called the
Daughter of Astrology. There is another sort of Geomancy which Almadal the
Arabian introduced; which by conjectu^es taken from sound, or appearance, as
Noise in the Earth, motion, cleaving, swelling of the same, as also by the
sounds of Thunder, raises a kind of Divination, or Fortune-telling; leaning
entirely upon the Prop of Astrology, as very observant of hours, of Lunations,
as also of the Rising, Setting, and Figures of the Stars.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Augurie.
AVgurie, or marking the Entrails of Fowls, of which there are many sorts, is
an Art which was held in great Veneration in Ancient times; even so great was
the esteem thereof, that nothing of those things that belonged either to
public or private Affairs was acted, before the Entrails of Beasts were
inspected. This most ancient Art, as Pomponius Laetus testifies, was received
by the Greeks from the Caldees; the first among whom Amphiateus, Tyresias,
Mopsus, Aphilotes and Calchas, were accounted the chief: from the Graecians it
passed to the Hetrurians, and from them to the Latins. Romulus himself was a
Soothsayer, who first Ordained, that the choice of Magistrates should be
confirmed by Augury: and Dionysius tells us, That the Art of Soothsaying was
most ancient even in the time of the Aborigines: and Ascanius before he put his
Battle in Array against Mezentius, made an Inspection into the Fowl; and seeing
the Augury answered his expectation, he Fought and overcame. The Phrygians
also, Pisidians, Cilicians, Arabians, Vmbrians, Tuscans, and many others,
observed the Ceremonies of Soothsaying. The Lacedaemonians always had an Augur
to attend upon their Kings, whom they appointed to be always attending in
Public Councils; and among the Romans there was a College of Augurs. They who
first brought this Art in request, were those that taught how that there were
certain Lights of discovery and Revelation that descended from the Heavenly
Bodies upon the Inferior, as it were certain Signs constituted and settled in
their Motion, Lying, Resting, Gesture, Walking, Flying, Voice, and Feeding, in
their Color and Working; wherein, by a certain occult Force, and silent
Harmony, they do so far sympathize with the Celestial Bodies, with whose
qualities they are affected, that thereby they are enabled to foretell whatever
those Celestial Bodies intend to act. From whence it is apparent, that this
sort of Divination depends only upon Conjecture, grounded partly upon the
Influences of the Stars, partly taken from parabolical Similitudes, than which
there is nothing more deceitful. Therefore Panaetius and Carneades, Cicero,
Chrysippus, Diogenes, Antipater, Josephus, and Philo, held it very ^idiculous:
besides, the Law and the Church condemn it. Of this sort are those Mysteries of
the Caldaeans and Egyptians, which the Hetrurians of old, then the Romans, and
now the vulgar sort of Superstitious Heathens adore.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Speculatory Divination.
UPon the same Grounds the Art of Speculatory Divination, is founded which
makes interpretations of Thunder and Lightning, and other Airy Meteors, as also
of Monsters and Prodigies; but no otherwise than by Conjecture and Comparison;
which how false and erroneous it is, is notoriously manifest.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Interpretation of Dreams.
HEre we may usher in the Interpretation of Dreams called Onirocritica, whose
Interpreters are properly called Conjecturers: according to that Verse in
Euripides; He that Conjectures least amiss,
Of all, the best of Prophets is.
To this Delusion, not a few great Philosophers have given not a little credit,
especially Democritus, Aristotle, and his follower Themistius, Sinesius also
the Platonic, so far building upon Examples of Dreams, which some accident
has made to be true, that thence they endeavor to persuade Men, that there
are no Dreams but what are real. For say they, as the Celestial Influences
produce diverse Forms in Corporeal Matter, so out of certain Influences
predominating over the power of the Fancy, the impression of Visions is made,
being Consentaneous, through the disposition of the Heavens, to the Effect
which is to be produced; more especially in Dreams, because the mind being then
at liberty from all corporeal Cares and Exercises, more freely receives the
Divine Influences: therefore it happens, that many things are revealed in
Dreams to them that are asleep, which are concealed from them that wake. With
these reasons they pretend to beget a good Opinion of the Truth of Dreams. But
as to the Causes of Dreams both External and Internal they do not all agree in
one judgment. For the Platonicks reckon them among the specific and concrete
Notions of the Soul. Avicen makes the Cause of Dreams to be an Vltimate
Intelligence moving the Moon in the middle of that Light with which the Fancies
of men are Illuminate while they sleep. Aristotle refers the Cause thereof to
Common Sense, but placed in the Fancy. Averroes places the Cause in the
Imagination. Democritus ascribes it to little Images or Representatives,
separated from the things themselves. Albertus, to the Superior Influences,
which continually flow from the Sky through many Specific Mediums. The
Physicians impute the Cause thereof to Vapors and Humors; others to the
affections and cares predominant in persons when awake. Others join the powers
of the Soul, Celestial Influences and Images together, all making but one
Cause. Arthemidorus and Daldianus have written of the Interpretation of Dreams:
and certain Books go about under Abraham's Name, whom Philo in his Book of the
Giants and of Civil Life, asserts to have been the first Practiser thereof.
Other Treatises there are falsified under the Names of David and Solomon,
wherein are to be read nothing but mere Dreams concerning Dreams. But Marcus
Cicero in his Book of Divination, has given sufficient Reasons against the
vanity and folly of those that give Credit to Dreams, which I purposely here
omit.

CHAP. XL.
Of Madness.
BUT though I had almost forgot it, let us with these Dreamers number those
that give a kind of sacred Credit to the Prophesies of Mad-folks, who
themselves have lost all knowledge of things present, memory of past, and
indeed all humane sense, fondly imagining them to have the gift of
Foreknowledg; as if what the wise and waking know not, Mad-folks and Dreamers
should see; as if God were nearer at hand to them, than to the vigilant,
watchful, intelligible, and those that are full of premeditation. Unhappy men
that believe such Vanity, that give obedience to such Impostures, that cherish
such Deluders, submitting their own Faith and Discretion to their Bellies. For
what can we imagine Madness to be, but a departure of Reason persecuted by evil
Spirits, conveyed through the Stars, or through the Inferior Bodies by the bad
Angels? which Lucan seems to intimate, when he brings in Arvus the Thuscan
Prophet: In Thunders motion skilled, and Lightnings bright,
And in the downy Feathers airy flight.
Then after the City-Procession, after the Offering slain, after the Entrails
inspected, he brings in a Potter, thus delivering his judgment: What rage, ye
Gods, what w^es do ye prepar^?
If Saturn's baneful Star in topmost Air
Should kindle his dull Fires, we then should moan
To see Aquarius pour whole Rivers down,
And all the World in total deluge drown.
If Sol should mount the Nemaean Lions back,
In Flame would all the Worlds whole Fabric crack,
And all the Sky with Sol's burnt Chariot blaze
These Aspects cease; but thou that burntst the claws,
And firk'st the Tail of threatening Scorpion.
What great thing breed'st thou Mars? mild Jove goes down
Oppressed in his fall, and in the Skies
The wholesome Star of Venus dulled is,
Mercury looses his swift motion,
And fiery Mars rules in the Sky alone.
Why do the Stars their Course forsaking glide
Obscurely through the Air? why does the side
Of Sword-breaking Orion shine too bright?
Wars rage is threatened, the Swords power all right
Confounds by force: Impiety shall bear
The name of Virtue; and for many a year
This fury lasts.
Therefore all these delusions of Divination have their root and foundation
from Astrology. For whether the Lineaments of the Body, Countenance, or Hand be
inspected, whether Dream or Vision be seen, whethe marking of Entrails or mad
Inspiration be consulted, there must be a Celestial Figure first erected, by
the means of whose indications, together with the conjectures of Signs and
Similitudes, they endeavor to find out the truth of what is desired: So
requisite is the use of Astrology to the Arts of Divination, as if it were the
Key that opens the door of all their Mysteries. Therefore how much all these
Arts are distant from Truth, is evident from this, that they make use of
principles so absolutely false and feigned; which being such as neither are,
ever were, or will be, and yet they will have to be the causes of future
Events, what can appear to be more contrary to all Truth?

CHAP. XLI.
Of Magic in general.
IT is requisite that we should here say something of Magic, which is so linkt
to Astrology, as being her near Kinswoman, that whoever professes Magic
without Astrology, does nothing, but is altogether out of the way. Suidas is of
opinion, that Magic took its Original and Name from the Magusaei. The common
opinion is, that it is a Persian name, with whom Porphyrius and Apuleius
consent; and that Magos signifies in that Language, no more than a Wise man or
a Philosopher; so that Magic containing both Natural Philosophy, and the
Mathematics, takes into the same Society the forces and bands of all
Religions; joining to its self Goetia and Theurgy; which is the reason that
Magic is generally divided into Natural and Ceremonial.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Natural Magic.
NAtural Magic is taken to be nothing else, but the chief power of all the
natural Sciences; which therefore they call the top and perfection of Natural
Philosophy, and which is indeed the active part of the same; which by the
assistance of natural force and faculties, through their mutual and opportune
application, performs those things that are above Humane Reason. The
Aethiopians and Indians were the greatest admirers of Magic, where there was a
great supply of variety of Stones and Herbs conducing thereto. Of this, some
think that St. Jerome to Paulinus makes mention, where he says, That
Apollonius Tyaneus was a Magician or Philosopher. Of the same sort were those
Magi who bringing Gifts to Christ, did first adore him; which the Expositors of
the Evangels call the Philosophers of the Caldaeans. Such were the Hiarchs
among the Brachmans, Tespion among the Gymnosophists, Budda among the
Babylonians, Numa Pompilius among the Romans, Zamolxides among the Thracians,
Abbas among the Hyperboreans, Hermes among the Egyptians, Zorastes the Son of
Ormasus among the Persians. for the Indians, Aethiopians, and Persians always
had the pre-eminence in Magic: wherein, as Plato in his Alcibiades testifies,
the Children of the Persian Emperors were always instructed, that they might
learn to govern the Kingdom by the Pattern of the Grand and Universal Order.
And Cicero, in his Book of Divinations, asserts, That no Persian could enjoy
the Scepter of that Empire, if he were not skilled in Magic. Natural Magic
therefore is that, which considering well the strength and force of Natural and
Celestial beings, and with great curiosity laboring to discover their
affections, produces into open Act the hidden and concealed powers of Nature;
so cupoling inferior with superior faculties, by a mutual application thereof,
that from thence many times great and marvelous Miracles have been effected:
not so much by Art, as Nature, to whom Art only shows her self a Handmaid and
Assistant in her operations. For Magicians, as the most accurate inquirers into
Nature, taking along those things which are prepared by Nature, and applying
Actives to Passives, oftentimes produce effects before the time ordained by
Nature; which therefore the Vulgar take for Miracles, when they are
notwithstanding only natural Operations: as if any person should in March
produce Roses, ripe Figs, or Garden-beans; or should cause Parsley to spring
from the Seed into a perfect Plant in few hours; and greater things than these,
as to cause Thunder, Clouds, Rain, Animals of diverse sorts; and several
transmutations and transigurations of living beings, such as Roger Bacon is
said to have done by pure natural Magic. Of these Operations sundry have
written: as Zoroastes, Hermes, Evantes King of the Arabians, Zachary of
Babylon, Joseph the Jew, Bocus, Aaron, Zenotenus, Kirannides, Almadal, Thedel,
Alchindus, Abel, Ptolomy, Geber, Zahel, Nazaharub, Tebith Erith, Salomo,
Astropho, Hipparchus, Alcmeon, Apollonius, Tryphon, and many others; of which
Writings there are many whole and entire, some imperfect, which have come to my
hands. Of Modern Writers, there have been but few who have treated of Natu^^l
Magic, nor have they left many Writings behind them; that is to say,
Albertus, Arnoldus de Villa nova, Raymund Lully, Bacon and Aponus, and the
Author of the Book dedicated to Alphonsus, which mingles abundance of
Superstition with Natural Magic, which many others have also done.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Mathematical Magic.
THere are besides these, many other imitators of Nature, wise inquirers into
hidden things, who without the help of natural Virtues and Efficacies,
confidently undertake, only by Mathematical learning, and the help of
Celestial influences, to produce many miraculous Works, as walking and speaking
Bodies; which notwithstanding are not the real Animal: such was the wooden Dove
of Archytas, which flew; the Statues of Mercury, that talked; and the Brazen
Head made by Albertus Magnus, which is said to have spoken. In these things
Boethius excelled, a man of a large Ingenuity, and manifold Learning; to whom
Cassiodorus writing upon this Subject, Thou, says he, have propounded to thy
self to do great things, and to know the most difficult: by thy ingenious skill
Metals are heard to roar, Brazen Diomed sounds a Trumpet, a Brazen Serpent
hisses, Birds are counterfeited, and they that are incapable of a voice of
their own, yet are heard to make a sweet noise: We relate but small things of
thee, that have so great a power to imitate Heaven. Of these delusory Sciences
may be said that which we read in Plato's tenth Book of Laws: Art is given to
Mortals, which enables them to produce certain posterior and succeeding
Inventio^s, neither pertaking of Truth or Divinity, but ce^tain Imitations
somewhat akin thereto: Wherein Magicians have adventured to proceed so far, by
the help of that ancient and subtle Serpent, the great promiser of knowledge;
that Aping him, they become imitators of God and Nature.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Witchcraft.
THere is a sort of Natural Magic, which they call Witchcraft; the effects
whereof are wrought by Potions, Philters, and other compositions of
Medicaments: such as Democritus is said to have made for the begetting of good,
happy, and fortunate Children; and that other by which we should be able to
understand the Language of Birds, which Philostratus and Porphyrius relate
Apollonius to have made. Virgil also speaking of certain Pontick herbs: Such
Herbs as these when Meris used,
Straight as a Wolf unto the Woods did flee;
And by their powerful Charms dead bodies reared
From out their Graves in open Air appeared.
And Crops of Corn to ripeness were improved,
Straight have I seen to other Fields removed.
And Pliny declares, that one Demarchus Parrasius at a Sacrifice which the
Arcadians made to Jupiter Lycaeus, wherein they offered Humane Bodies, tasted
the Entrails of a Boy, and straight changed himself into a Wolf; by reason of
which transmutation into Wolves, Austin believes the name of Lycaeus was
attributed to Jupiter and Pan. St. Austin declares also, That when he was in
Italy, certain Female Witches, like Circe, giving to certain Travelers a kind
of Enchanting Medicament in Cheese, turned them into Cattle; and when they had
made them to carry what burdens they thought fitting, they restored them again
to their former shape: which thing, as he affirms, happened to one Father
Prestantius. Now, lest any person should believe these things to be mere
Chimaera's and Fictions, let him remember how Sacred Scripture testifies of
Nebuchadnezzar's being changed into an Ox, and that he lived upon Fodder seven
years together; though at length, by the mercy of God, he was restored to his
former shape; whose body his son Evilmerodach, after he was dead, caused to be
thrown to the Vultures to feed on, lest he should rise from the dead, that had
been changed from a Beast into a Man. And concerning Pharaoh's Magicians, many
more things are related in Exodus. But of these Magicians or Witches, the Wise
man speaks but a hard Sentence, when he cries, Thou have abhorred them O God,
because they work abominable works by Medicaments. I would have you also
farther to understand, that these Magicians do not only pry into Natural
things, but also those things which accompany Nature, and do almost shake off
all Relation to her; as Numbers, Figures, Sounds, Voice, Lights, Affections of
the mind, and words. So the Psylli and Marsi called Serpents together, which
others with other Charms put to flight. So Orpheus asswag'd the Tempest of the
Argonauts with a Song: and Homer relates, how the course of Ulysses blood was
stopped by the power of words. Moreover, in the Law of the Twelve Tables, there
is a Law against those that did inchant the standing Corn; whereby it is
apparent, that Witches have a power by the force of words, to produce strange
Effects, not only upon themselves, but also upon outward things: All which
things, that is to say, to separate the hidden force of things, and either draw
them to themselves, and repel them from themselves, they credibly believe
themselves to effect no other way than as the Loadstone draws Iron, or Amber or
Jet draws Chaff, and as Onions again destroys the Magnetic Power. So that by
this Gradual and Concatenated Sympathy, not only Natural and Celestial Gifts,
but also Intellectual and Divine may be received into humane Souls, as
Iamblicus, Proculus, and Sinesius gather from the Opinions of Great Men; and
that by this Consent and Harmony of things, Magicians do call up the very
Spirits. For some of them are arrived at such a height of Madness, that they
believe that upon the right Observation of such and such Constellations at such
intervals of time, and by such reason of Proportions, an Image being made would
receive Life and Motion; which upon counsel desired, should be able to give
Answers, and Reveal the hidden Secrets of Truth. Hence it is manifest, That
this Natural Magic inclining toward Conjuring and Necromancy, is often
entangled in the Snares and Delusions of Evil Spirits.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Conjuring and Necromancy.
THE Ceremonial Parts of Magic, Conjuring and Necromancy. Geocie or Conjuring,
cursed for being familiar with unclean Spirits, ceremonies of wicked curiosity,
composed of Prayers and Enchantments, is held Abominable, and wholly Condemned
by the Decrees of all Lawgivers.

Men hateful to the Gods, that stain the Sky,
And blot the Stars, though Natures Progeny:
The settled course of things they can confound;
Can fix the Poles, send Lightnings on the ground;
Pull down the Heavens, and Hills eradicate.
These are those that Invoke the Souls of dead Bodies, who Inchant Children,
and cause them to give the Answer of the Oracle; and as we read of Socrates,
carry about with them certain Pocket- Demons; and who, as they say, nourish
little Spirits in Glasses, by which they pretend to Foretell and Prophecy. All
these proceed in a twofold manner. For some of them make it their business to
adjure and compel Evil Spirits to appearance, by the Efficacy and Power of
sacred Names; because seeing that every Creature does fear and reverence the
Name of its Creator, no wonder if Conjurors, and other Infidels, Pagans, Jews,
Saracens, or profane Persons, do think to force the Devils Obedience by the
Terror of his Creators Name. Others, more to be detested than they, and worthy
the utmost punishment of Fire, submitting themselves to the Devils, sacrifice
to them, and Worship them, become guilty of the vilest subjection and Idolatry
that may be; to which Crimes though the former are not quite so obnoxious, yet
they expose themselves to manifest dangers. For the Devils are always watchful
to entrap Men in the Errors they heedlesly run into. From this insipid crowd of
Conjurors have flowed all those Books of Darkness, which Vlpian the Civilian
calls by the name of forbidden Writings. Of which, one of the first Authors is
said to be Zabulus, a man wholly inclined to unlawful Arts. Then Barnabas (...)
Cyprian; and now frequently other Books are Published up and down, under the
feigned Titles and Names of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and Solomon; others
under the Names of Paulus, Honorius, Cyprian, Albertus, Thomas, Hierome, and
one Eboracensis; to whose silly trifles Alphonsus King of Castile, Robert the
Englishman, Bacon, Apponus, and many other of depraved Fancies have adhered.
But besides this, they have not only made the holy Patriarchs and Angels
Authors and Upholders of their detestable Studies, but also show several Books
which they pretend were written and delivered by Razial and Raphael, tutelar
Angels of Adam and Tobias. Which Books notwithstanding, to any one that
narrowly considers the Rules of the Masters, the Customs and Ordinances of
their Ceremonies, the Nature and Choice of their Words and Characters, their
insipid and barbarous Pharases, sufficiently betray themselves to contain
nothing but mere Toys and Geugaws, and that they were in far later Ages
contrived by such as were utterly ignorant of that Magic Professed by the
Ancients, being ^ounded only upon certain profane Observations mixed with the
Ceremonies of our Religion, with an addition of many unknown Names and
Characters, to terrify ignorant and silly people, and to amuse those that are
void of sense and understanding. Neither does it therefore follow, that these
Delusions are Fables; for unless there were something of reality in them, and
that many mischievous and wicked things were accomplished thereby, both Divine
and Humane Laws had not so strictly provided for the punishment thereof, and
Ordained them to be quite extirpated from the Earth. Now why these Conjurers
make use only of evil Spirits, the reason is, because the Good Angels seldom
appear, being only attendant on the Commands of God, and not vouchsafing to be
known, but only to upright and holy Men. But evil Spirits submit themselves
more willingly to their Invocations, falsely assuming to themselves, and
counterfeiting Divinity, always ready to deceive, and delighting to be adored
and worshipped: and because Women are more covetous of the Knowledge of Secrets,
and not less cautious and prone to Superstition, and more easily Deluded;
therefore to them the Devils show themselves more familiar, and make them the
performers of many Miracles, as are related of Circe and Medaea; of many others
the Stories of the Poets are full: and Cicero, Pliny, Seneca, St. Austin, and
many others, both Philosophers, Doctors, and Historians, as also Sacred Writ,
bring many Testimonies; For in the Book of Samuel we read of a certain
Woman-Witch that lived in Endor, that raised the Soul of Samuel: though most
Interpreters agree, that it was not the soul of Samuel, but an Evil spirit that
took upon him the shape of the Prophet. Yet some of the Hebrew Doctors aver,
neither does St. Austin to Simplician deny the possibility thereof, that it was
the true Soul of Samuel, which before a complete Year after its departure from
the Body, might be easily called up, according to the rule of Necromancy. The
Necromantick Magicians believe, that the same may be performed by certain
Natural ties and Obligations; which was the reason that the Ancient Fathers
well-read in Spirituals, not without good cause, ordained, that the Bodies of
the Dead might be buried in Holy-ground; should be assisted with Lights, and
sprinkled with Holy Water, be perfumed with Incense, and prayed for by the
Living, so long as they were above Ground. For say the Hebrew Doctors, All our
Carnal Body remains as Food for the Serpent which they call Arazel, which is
Lord of the Flesh and the Blood, and Prince of this World: in Leviticus named
the Prince of the Deserts: to whom it was said in Genesis, Thou shall eat the
dust all the days of thy life. And in Isaiah, The Dust is thy bread, that is,
our Corporeal Body Created out of the dust of the Earth, so long as it remains
unsanctifi'd, and not changed for the better, to be no longer then at the
disposal of the Serpent, but of God, according to the word of St. Paul: It is
sowed corporal, but shall rise spiritual: And in another place, All shall rise,
but all shall not be changed; for that many shall remain perpetual food for the
Serpent. This foul and detestable matter of the Flesh, the food of the Serpent,
lies in the Grave, in hopes of a better Lot, and spiritual Transmutation; which
is already come to pass in those that have already tasted the First Fruits of
Redemption; and some have attained it by virtue of the Deifick Spirit, as Elias
and Enoch, and as some are of opinion, Moses; whose bodies being changed into
the nature of Spirits, never saw corruption, nor, as other Carcasses, were left
to the power of the Serpent. And something to this purpose, it was thought, was
the great dispute of Michael with the Devil about the body of Moses, which St.
Jude mentions in his Epistle. Thus much concerning Conjuring and Necromancy.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Theurgy.
MAny there are that believe Theurgy not to be unlawful, which pretends to have
to do with none but good Angels, and the Divine Numen himself; though under the
names of God and Angels, it proves to be only the delusion and mockery of evil
Spirits. It pretends no natural Power, but to make use of Celestial Ceremonies,
by which they think to attract and reconcile the Divine Natures: Concerning
which, the ancient Magi have delivered several Rules in several Volumes. But
the chiefest part of their Ceremonies is, in observing Cleanliness, first of
the Soul, then of the Body, then of those things about the Body, as in the
Skin, the Garments, the Dwelling, Vessels, Utensils, Immolations, and
Sacrifices; which cleanliness renders them capable of being the receptacles,
and fit for the entertainment of Divine Spirits, and is very much encouraged
and commended in Sacred Scripture, according to the words of Esaias: Be glad and
be clean, and take away the evil of your thoughts. But uncleanness, which often
corrupts, and defiles, and infects man, disturbs the most clean and pure
Society of Celestial Beings, and chases away the spotless Spirits and Angels of
God. It is true, that many times unclean and delusive powers, to the end they
may be adored and worshipped for Gods, do counterfeit this Purity; and therefore
great diligence and care is to be used for the avoiding thereof; and therefore
we have abundantly discoursed thereof in our Books of Occult Philosophy. Now of
this Theurgy or Divine Magic, Porphyrius having delivered many things, at
length concludes, that by Theurgick Operations the soul may be made fit to
receive Spirits and Angels, and to see and converse with them: but that there
can be any access to the Deity thereby, he altogether denies. His Rules and
Directions are contained in his Art Almabel, his Notorious Art, his Art
Pauline, and his Art of Revelations, where are abundance of Superstitions to be
found, which are so much the more pernicious, by how much they seem more Losty
and Divine to the unskilful.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of the Cabalists.
HEre the words of Pliny come into my mind: There is, says he, another Sect
of Magicians, of which Moses and Latopea, Jews, were the first Authors; which
words bring to my remembrance the Cabala of the Jews, which as the constant
opinion among the Hebrews goes, was delivered by God to Moses, and thence,
through succession of Ages, even to the times of Ezra, preserved by Tradition
only, without the help of writing. As of old the Doctrine of Pythagoras was
delivered by Archippus and Lysiades, who kept School at Thebes in Greece, where
the Scholars learning all their Masters Precepts by heart, made use only of
their Memories instead of Books. So certain Jews despising Letters, placed all
their Learning in Memory, Observation, and verbal Tradition; whence it was
called by the Hebrews, Cabala, that is to say, a receiving from one to another
by the Ear: An Art, by report, very ancient, though the name be but of later
times known among the Christians. Now this Cabala they divide into three parts:
the first contains the knowledge of Bresith, which they call also Cosmology,
explaining and teaching the force and efficacy of things created, Natural or
Celestial; expounding also the Laws and Mysteries of the Bible according to
Philosophical reasons, which for that cause differs little from Natural Magic,
wherein they say K. Solomon excelled. Therefore we find in the Sacred
Histories of the Jews, that he was wont to discourse from the Cedar of Libanon
to the low Hyssop; as also of Cattle, Birds, Reptiles, and Fish, all which
contain within themselves a certain kind of Magical virtue. Moses also the
Egyptian, in his Expositions upon the Pentateuch, and most of the Talmudists,
have followed the Rules of this Art. The other part thereof contains the
knowledge of more sublime things, as of Divine and Angelical Powers, the
contemplation of Sacred Names and Characters; being a certain kind of
Symbolical Theology, wherein the Letters, Figures, Numbers, Names, Points,
Lines, Accents, are esteemed to contain the significations of most profound
things, and great Mysteries. This part again is twofold: Arithmantick, handling
the nature of Angels, the Powers, Names, Characters of Spirits and Souls
departed; and Theomantick, which searches into the mysteries of the Divine
Majesty, his Emanations, his Names, and Pentacula, which he that attains to,
they account endu'd with most admirable power. By virtue of this Art they say
Moses wrought so many Miracles, changing his Rod into a Serpent, the Water into
Blood, and plagued Egypt with Frogs, Flies, Lice, Locusts, Emrodes, and
Pestilence, slaying the firstborn of Man and Beast: By this Art he divided the
Red Sea, caused Water to flow out of the Rock, brought the Qualls into the
Wilderness, sweetened the bitter Waters, made Lightning by day, and a Pillar of
Fire by night to lead the March of his people, called down the Voice of God
among the people. By this Art he punished the Arrogant with Fire, the Murmurers
with Leprosy, Mutiners with sudden Destruction, causing the Earth to swallow
them up; preserved the Clothes of the Israelites from wearing out, and gave
them Victory over their Enemies. Lastly, by means of this Art, Josua commanded
the Sun to stand still; Elias called down Fire from Heaven, and raised the dead
Youth to life; Daniel muzzled the Lions mouths, and the three Children sang in
the middle of the fiery Furnace. Nay, the perfidious and unbelieving Jews stick
not to aver, that Christ himself wrought all his Miracles by virtue of this
Art. Solomon, as they say, did excel in this Art, and that he discovered
several secrets thereof, containing several Charms against Devils and their
Possessings; as also against Diseases, as Josephus writes. As for my part, as I
do not doubt but that God Revealed many things to Moses and the Prophets, which
were contained under the Covert of the words of the Law, which were not to be
communicated to the profane Vulgar: so for this Art which the Jews so much
boast of, which I have with great Labor and diligence s^arch'd into, I must
acknowledge it to be a mere Rhapsodie of superstition, and nothing but a kind
of Theurgick Magic before spoken of. For if, as the Jews contend, coming from
God, it did any way conduce to perfection of Life, Salvation of Men, Truth of
Understanding; certainly that Spirit of Truth, which having forsaken the
Synagogue, is now come to teach us all Truth, had never concealed it all this
while from the Church, which certainly knows all those things that are of God;
whose Grace, Baptism, and other Sacraments of Salvation, are perfectly Revealed
to all Languages. For every Language is alike, so that there be the same Piety;
neither is there any other Name in Heaven or on Earth, by which we can be
Saved, but only the Name of Jesus. Wherefore the Jews most skilful in Divine
Names, after the coming of Christ were able to do nothing, in comparison of
their Forefathers. But by that which we have common Experience of, we see, that
oft-times wonderful Sentences of very great Mysteries are wrested from the
Sacred Text; that is, nothing but a certain playing with Allegories, which some
slothful Persons employed only in the consideration of particular Points,
Letters, or Figures, which this Language and manner of Writing easily admit of,
take occasion to fancy; which many times make a noise as if they were very
great Mysteries, but are able to prove or evince nothing; but that according to
the words of St. Gregory, they may be contemned with the same easiness, as they
are Asserted. Rabanus the Monk has invented several of these, but in Latin
Characters and Verses, inserting sundry Pictures, which being to be read which
way soever you turn the Letters, declare some Sacred Mystery representing the
Painted History; which no man denies; but that they may be extorted out of
profane Authors, no person is ignorant, especially he that has read the
Centones upon Christ, composed out of Virgil, by Valeria Proba: all which
things, and all of this Nature, are but the speculations of Idle People. But as
to what pertains to the working of Miracles, surely there is no man can be so
stupid, as to believe there is any force in this Art to accomplish any such
thing. The Cabala of the Jews therefore is nothing else, but a most pernicious
Superstition, the which by Collecting, Dividing, and Changing several Words,
Names and Letters dispersed up and down in the Bible, at their own good will
and pleasure, and making one thing out of another, they dissolve the Members of
Truth, raising up sentences, Inductions, and Parables of their own, apply
thereto the Oracles of Divine Scripture to them, defaming the Scriptures, and
affirming their Figments to consist of them, Blaspheme the Word of God by their
wrested suppositions of Words, Syllables, Letters and Numbers; endeavoring to
prop up their Villainous Inventions, by Arguments drawn from their own
Delusions. And being blown and puffed up with these Trifles, boast themselves to
have found out, and to know those ineffable Mysteries of God which are not
Revealed in Scripture; by means whereof, they are able to Prophecy, Work
Miracles; all which they blush not with confidence to aver. But it happens to
them, as it did to Aesops Dog, who leaving the substance, and catching after
the shadow, lost his Food; who being always busied in the shadows of the
Scripture, and laborious in the study of their own Fictions, their
Superstitious Cabala, snatching at they know not what, they loose the Bread of
Eternal Life; and feeding upon empty Notions, loose the Word of Truth. From
this Judaical ferment of Cabalistical Superstition, I verily believe the
Ophites, Gnostics, and Valentinians came, Heretics that with the help of
their Disciples invented a Cabala, corrupting the Mysteries of the Christian
Faith; and by a Heretical Artifice, drawing and patching together the Greek
Letters and Numbers, and framing out of them a thing, which they call, The Body
of Truth; they teach, that without the help of those Letters and Numbers, the
Truth of the Gospel cannot be found out, being so various and repugnant one to
another, and full of Parables; written so, that those that have Eyes should not
see, and those that have Ears should not hear, but propounded to the Blind, and
wandering according to their weak capacities; so that the hidden Truth is not to
be understood by Writing, but by successive Tradition, delivered Viva Voce,
which, they say, was that Alphabetary and Arithmantick Theology secretly
delivered to his Apostles by Christ himself, and which St. Paul says, He only
speaks among those that are perfect. For these being most high Mysteries,
therefore they are not written, nor to be written; but to be kept in silence
among the Wise Men, who are to reserve them in the most secret parts of their
Hearts.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of Witchcraft.
BUt to return to Magic, a part of which is the delusion of Witchcraft, that
is to say, of delusions that are only made in outward appearance, such as are
the Phantasms and Miracles daily wrought by common Juglers; which is not so
much performed by Geotick Enchantments, and Imprecations, and Fallacies of
Spirits, but by Fumigations, Lights, Philters, Collyries, binding and hanging
of Phylacteries and Charms to the parts of the body, Rings, Images, Glasses,
and like devices of Magic Arts. Many things are performed by Agility and
slight of hand, as we see done by Players and Juglers; which are therefore by
some called Hand-philosophers, or Chirosophi. Of this Juggling Art there are
many Treatises extant, written by Hermes and others. We read of one Pas^tes a
Jugler that was wont to show a great Banquet to an abundance of Guests sitting
thereat, which when he pleased he caused to vanish again out of sight, leaving
all the Guests a-dry and hungry. Numa Pompilius also made use of these kind of
Prestiges or Witchcrafts: And we read how that the most learned Pythagoras did
once ridiculously act an odd business, which was this: That which came into his
mind he wrote in a Glass with his Blood, which being held against the Full
Moon, whatever was written appeared to him that stood behind, as if it had
been in the body of the Moon. To this, whatsoever is written of the changing of
Men's shapes, either believed by Poets, related by Historians, or credited by
some of our Divines. Thus some men seem to have the shape of Asses or Horses,
or other Animals; the Medium Air being disturbed, or else the Eyes by some
Incantation fascinated, such things as these sometimes seem to be done by good
and evil Spirits, or else upon the Prayers of good men to God; as we read of
Elisha, when Dothan was besieged by the Army of the King of Assyria: but the
pure and open sight of God cannot be deceived. Thus the woman, which the people
thought to have been a Cow, to Hilarion appeared to be what she was indeed, a
woman. Thus those things which are said to be done by deception of the sight,
are called Praestigia. But the transmutation of shape, as of Nebuch^donozor, or
of place, and when the Crop of Corn was removed into another field, of these we
have spoken before. Now of this Art of Witchcraft Iamblichus thus writes: As to
what those persons who are bewitched imagine, they have no other certainty of
the truth of the essence of the action, but what is barely imaginative: for the
end of this Craft is not to do things simply, but to extend imagination to
appearance, and then on a sudden to remove all sign of any thing. Out of all
that has been said, we must resolve, that Magic is but a mixture of Idolatry,
Astrology, and superstitious Physic: And indeed there are a great crowd of
Heretics that daily increase in the Church, who with their first arguments and
foundations from these Magitians, who as Jannes and Jambres contradicted Moses,
so do they resist the truth. The Ringleader of these, was Simon the Samaritan,
who at Rome, under Claudius Caesar, was honored with a Statue, for his
excellency in this Art, with this Inscription, To Simon the Holy God: Whose
Blasphemies are sufficiently related by Clement, Eusebius, and Irenaeus. From
the Positions of this Simon, as from a Seminary of all Heresy, sprung those
monstrous Ophites, those shameful Gnostics, Cerdonians, Martionists,
Montanians, and many other Heretics, for gain and vain-glories sake, lying
before God; yet bringing neither profit nor advantage to Men, but leading them
into Error and Perdition; whose believers and admirers, the Judgment of God
shall overtake. It Is true, that being young, I wrote three Books of Magic my
self, which I Entitled, Of Occult Philosophy; in which, what Errors soever I
then committed in my Youth, now grown more wary, I do publicly Recant, as
having formerly spent too much time in those Vanities. This advantage I got,
that now I know by what Reasons to Convince others of the Ruin which those
Vanities will lead them into. For while they presume to Prophecy, and Divine,
not in the Truth of God, but according to the Operations of Evil Spirits, and
boast themselves the Workers of Miracles, not ceasing while they live, and Act
by the means of Magic, Vanities, Exorcisms, Incantations, Love-potions, and
other Demoniacal Operations, they are all with Jannes and Jambres, and Simon
Magus, Destined to the Eternal Torments of Hellfire.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of Natural Philosophy.
BUT let us now come to things that far surpass all these, the very Maxims of
Philosophy it self, which dive into Nature it self, and inquire into the
Principles of things by the means of subtle Syllogisms. Which what Truth they
have more than what they borrow from the Credit of their first divulgers and
defenders, there is no man that very well understands. The Poets were the first
Professors thereof, among which were Prometheus, Linus, Musaeus, and Orpheus^s
among which, Homer may be numbered. Now what Truth can that Philosophy afford
us, which had its beginning out of the Fables and Gewgawes of the Poets? Which
that it is so, Plutarch does prove, by manifest Arguments, for that all the
sects of Philosophers took their Original from Homer: and Aristotle confesses,
That the Philosophers are by Nature Philomythi, that is to say, Admirers, or
Lovers of Fables. The Sects of Philosophers some have divided into Nine, some
into Ten; But Varro into a far greater Number. So that should one man Assemble
all the Philosophers together, it were impossible to find out among them which
Opinion were first to be chosen, or what Sect to follow. So repugnant and
differing they are among themselves about every particular, maintaining a
perpetual War one against another: and as Firmianus says, One Sect labors to
subvert another, to establish themselves and their own Opinions; neither will
either grant the other to be wise lest he should acknowledge himself to be Mad.
He that disputes of particular Philosophers, delivers nothing of certainty
concerning any one; which makes me at a stand, whether to reckon Philosophers
in the number of Men, or of Brutes: for indeed they seem to excel Beasts, in
that they have Reason and Understanding; but how they should come to be Men,
whose Reason is so uncertain, so unconstant, and always staggering upon
various and slippery Opinions, whose Understanding cannot find out any thing
fixed, either to hold by, or follow, is a very great Quere. The Truth whereof,
we shall now show you more at large.

CHAP. L.
Of the beginning of Natural things.
FOR first, as concerning the Principles of Natural things, upon which the
whole Foundation of this Art lies, there is a most deadly Combat among the
greatest and wisest Philosophers; and the Contention is yet undecided which
has determined best. Most persuasive Reasons are urged on both sides. For
Thales Milesius, accounted by the Oracle the chief wise Man, was of Opinion,
That all things had their beginning from Water: His Scholar, and Successor in
his School, Anaximander, said, That the beginnings of things were Infinite: but
his Disciple Anaximenes held the Infinite Body of Air to be the beginning of
all things. Hipparchus and Heraclitus the Ephesian, held Fire to be the first
Principle; to whom Archelaus the Athenian agrees. Anaxagoras the Clazomenian
makes Infinite Principles, at first small and confused Particles, but
afterward by the Divine Creator reduced into Order. Xenophanes said, that
there was but one beginning of all things, and that Mutable. Parmenides upheld
Hot and Cold, Heat being the Fire that moved, and Cold the Earth that formed.
Leucippus, Diodorus, and Democritus, were all for Full and Empty. Diogenes
Laertius was altogether for the Air, which he made capable of Divine Reason.
Pythagoras the Sami^^ set up Number for the beginning of all things; to whom
Alcmeon the Crotoniate adhered. Empedocles the Agrigentine Discord and Concord,
and the four Elements: Epicurus, Atoms and Vacuum or Emptiness. Plato and
Socrates, God, Idea and Matter. Aristotle raises up Matter coveting Form by
privation, which he makes the Third Principle; contrary to what he has taught
in another place, that Equivocals are not to be reckoned for Principles.
Wherefore some later Peripateticks have set up a kind of impulsive Motion, in
the stead of Privation; which being an accident, how can it be the Principle of
Substance? Or what shall be the mover of this Motion? And therefore the Hebrew
Philosophers admit of no other Principles than Matter, Form, and Spirit.

CHAP. LI.
Of the Plurality of the World, and of its Continuance.
IN their Disputations concerning the World, they are very various. Thales was
of Opinion, There was but one World, and that it was the Structure of God
himself. Empedocles was of the same Opinion as to one World; but said withal,
that this was a small Particle only of the Universe. But Democritus and
Epicurus were of Opinion, That there were Innumerable worlds* whom Metrodorus
their Disciple follows, saying, That there are Innumerable Worlds, being that
the Causes of them are Innumerable: neither was it less absurd to think, that
there should be one World in the Universe, than to imagine one Ear of Corn in a
whole Field. But as to the Continuance of the World, Aristotle, Averroes,
Cicero, Xenophon, make it Aeternal, and void of all Corruption. For when that
they could not understand, whether the Egg or the Bird were first Generated,
since no Bird could be without the Egg; Hence they imagined, that this World,
and the Beginning of every begotten thing, together with the End thereof, was
by perpetual Revolution sempiternal. Pythagoras and the Stoics said, That the
World was of God; yet as far as its Divine Nature could permit, should be
corrupted in time: with whom Anaxagoras, Thales, Herocles, Avicen, Algasel,
Alcmeus, and Philo the Jew, concur in Opinion. But Plato affirming that it was
Created by God, after his own likeness, denies that it shall ever be destroyed.
Democritus says, That the World was once Created, shall once be Destroyed, and
never more be renewed. Empedocles and Heraclitus the Ephesian were of Opinion,
That the World does every day renew, and every day perish or decay. Let us
discourse of any thing which they say proceeds from a Natural Cause; as for
Example, let it be an Earthquake, yet are they at no certainty therein, but
wander in Extravagancies; while Anaxagoras makes the Cause thereof to be the
Air; Empedocles, Fire; Thales Milesius, Water; Aristotle, Theophrastus, and
Albertus, Subterraneal Wind or Vapor; Asclepiades, great Mischances, or
Devastations, Possidonius, Calisthenes, and Metrodorus, the Destinies. Seneca
and others variously dissenting, seem to have labored in vain in the search
thereof. And therefore the Ancient Romans, when they either felt, or heard of
shaking or trembling of the Earth, commanded Holy Days; but never did Enact to
which of the Gods they should be Dedicated, because it was uncertain what
force, or which of the Gods was the Cause thereof.

CHAP. LII.
Of the Soul.
IF you desire to know any thing from them concerning the Soul, there is far
less of certainty among them. For Crates the Theban affirmed, that there was no
Soul, but that the Body was moved by Nature. Those who grant that there is a
Soul, supposed it to be the most thin and subtle of all bodies, infused into
this thick and earthy body. Others there be that affirm it to be of a fiery
nature; of which number were Hipparchus and Leucippus, with whom the Stoics
for the most part agree, who define the Soul to be a hot Spirit, together with
Democritus, who calls it a moveable and fierce Spirit, mixed and infused into
Atoms. Others said it was the Air, as Anaximines and Anaxagoras, Diogenes the
Cynick, and Critias; with whom Varro concurs, where he says, that The Soul is
Air received into the Mouth, heated in the Lungs, tempered in the Heart, and
diffused over the whole Body. Others will have it of a watery substance, as
Hippias. Others of an earthy substance, as Heliodorus and Pronopides; to whose
opinion Anaximander and Thales willingly agree, both fellow-Citizens with
Thales. Others will have it to be a Spirit composed partly of Fire and partly
of Air, as Boetes and Epicurus. Others, composed of Earth and water, as
Zenophantes. Others, of earth and fire, as Parmenides. Others affirmed the Soul
to be the blood, as Empedocles and Circias. Some would have it be a thin Spirit
diffused through the body, as Hippocrates the Physician. Others, flesh
exercised by the senses, as Asclepiades. But many others have been of opinion,
that the Soul is not that little body, but a certain quality or complexion
thereof infused through all the particles of the same; as Zeno the Cithick, and
Dicearchus, defining the Soul to be the complexion of the four Elements:
Cleanthes also, Antipater, and Possidonius, affirming the same to be a certain
heat or complexion of heat, drew Calenus the Pergamenian into the same opinion.
Others there are that uphold that the Soul is not that quality or complexion,
but something residing in some part of the body, as the heart or brain, as it
were in its proper point or center, and from thence governing the whole body.
Amongst the number of these, are Chrysippus, Archelaus, and Heraclitus
Ponticus, who thought the Soul to be Light. There are others who have thought
more freely, believing the Soul to be a certain unfix'd Point, tied to no part
of the Body, but separated from any determinated Situation, being totally
present in every part of the Body; which whether it were begot by Complexion,
or Created by God, yet was first hatched and formed in the bosom of Matter: Of
this Opinion were Zenophanes, Colophonius, Aristoxenus, and Asclepiades the
Physician, who held the Soul to be the Exercise of the Senses: and Cretolaus
the Peripatetick, who called it the Fifth Essence; as also Thales, who held,
That the Soul is an unquiet Nature moving it self; and Zenocrates would have it
to be a Number moving it self: whom the Egyptians follow, asserting the Soul
to be a certain Force or Virtue passing through all Bodies. The Caldaeaus were
of Opinion, That it was a Force or Virtue without a determinate Form, but
receiving all Forms that are External. So that they altogether agree, That the
Soul is a certain Virtue fit to cause Motion; or that it is else a Sublime
Harmony of all the Corporeal Parts, depending however upon the Nature of the
Body. The Footsteps of these Men are followed by that Daemoniack Aristotle, who
by a new-invented Name of his own, calls the Soul Entelechia; that is to say,
the Perfection of a Corporal Organ, Potentially having life, from which the
same Body receives the Principles of Understanding, Perceiving and Moving. And
this is the most received, though most imp^rtinent Definition of a Soul, found
out by that great Philosopher; which does not, however, declare or make
manifest the Nature or Original, but only the Affections of the Soul. There are
others that soar somewhat higher than these men; who affirm the Soul to be a
certain Divine Substance whole and individual, diffused through the whole and
every part of the Body, produced in such manner from the Incorporeal Author, as
that it depends upon the force of the Agent, not on the Generative Faculty of
the Matter. Of this Opinion were Zoroastes, Hermes Trismegistus, Pythagoras,
Euminius, Hammonius, Plutarch, Porphyrius, Timaeus, Locrus, and Divine Plata
himself, who defined the Soul to be an Essence moving it self, endu'd with
Understanding. Eunomius the Bishop, consenting partly to Plato, partly to
Aristotle, affirms the Soul to be an Incorporeal substance made in the Body;
upon which definition he laid the Foundation of all his Opinions. Cicero,
Seneca and Lactantius affirm, That it is impossible to define what the Soul
should be. Thus it is apparent what great Contention there is among them
touching the Essence of the Soul. Nor are the Contentions and Variances less,
or less Numerous than their Disputes, when they come to make inquiry which is
the Seat of the Soul. For Hippocrates and Hierophilus place it in the Fibers or
Ventricles of the Brain. Democritus, in the whole Region of the Temples.
Eratistratus, in the Epicranidal Membrane. Strabo, within the space between the
Eyebrows. Epicurus gives it room in the whole Breast. Diogenes, in the Arterial
Ventricle of the Heart: the Stoics with Chrysippus, in the whole Heart, and
Spirits that surround the Heart. Empedocles seats it in the Blood; to which
Opinion Moses seems to give way, while he forbids his People to eat the Blood
of any thing, because the Soul of every Animal is seated therein. Plato and
Aristotle, and the more Noble Sects of Philosophers, place the Soul in the
whole Body. Galen is of Opinion, That every part of the Body has his particular
Soul: For so he makes it appear, in his Book of the Usefulness of the Parts:
There are many Particles of Animals, some greater, some lesser; others
altogether indivisible into the Species of the Creatures, yet necessarily every
of those wants a Soul. For the Body is the Organ thereof; and therefore the
Particles of the Body are very much different one from another, because the
Souls are different. I cannot here pass by a Sentence of Beda the Divine, who
writing upon Mark, The Principal seat of the Soul, says he, is not, as Plato
thinks, in the Brain; but to follow the Doctrine of Christ, in the Heart. Now
as concerning the Continuation of the Soul, Democritus and Epicurus were of
Opinion, That it died with the Body. Plato and Pythagoras held it to be
altogether Immortal; but that being out of the Body, it retires to some Nature
or being like it self. The Stoics taking the middle way between both these,
assert, that the Soul shall leave the Body; but that if it be not purified and
dignified with the excellent Virtues to be possessed in this Life, that then it
shall presently dye; but that if it be endu'd with Heroical Virtues, then that
it may attain the Heavenly Seats, and be associated with those Sympathi^ing
Natures that stay there in expectance of being joined unto it. Aristotle
taught, That some parts of the Soul which remain in Corporeal seats are
inseparable from the same, and therefore dye with them; but that the
Understanding, which wants no Corporeal Organ, is separate from the Corruptible
Parts. But he is so far from delivering any thing of farther perspicuity, that
his Interpreters do wholly abandon the Discourse thereof. Alexander the
Aphrodisean says, That most certainly he held the Soul to be Mortal. And of
the same Opinion among us, is Gregory Nazianzene. Against these, Pleton, and
Thomas Aquinas in defense of Aristotle, most stiffly stands up, affirming that
he was in the right Opinion concerning the Immortality of the Soul. Moreover,
Averroes, that most exquisite Commentator upon Aristotle, believes that every
man has a peculiar Soul, but Mortal; But that the Mind or Understanding is
Eternal, having neither Beginning nor End; of which there was but one kind,
that all men use in this Life. Themistius says, That Aristotle held one only
Active Understanding; but that the Understanding capable of Subjects was
manifold, and that both were Immortal. Thus through the strange Dissentions and
Garboils of these Philosophers, it comes to pass, that there are so many absurd
Contests among our Christian Divines about the Original of the Soul; among
whom, there are some that believe that the Souls of all Men were Created at the
Beginning, and remaining there as in a Storehouse till they come to be used; of
which Opinion above all the rest is the Learned Origin. St. Austin also
believes, That the Soul of our First Parent had its Original from Heaven, being
something Elder than the Body; and perceiving the Body to be a fit Habitation,
of its own accord did covet the same: however, he does not affirm it for any
certain or positive Maxim.

Others believe the Soul to be propagated extraduce, from Parent to Parent; and
that the Soul is begot by the Soul, as the Body is begot by the Body: of which
Opinion was Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea, Tertullian, Cyril, and
Luciferianus; against whose Heresy St. Jerome fiercely Combats. Others are of
Opinion, That Souls are Created daily by God: which Opinion Thomas Aquinas
follows, defending himself with that Peripatetical Argument, that seeing that
the Soul is the Form of the Body, the same ought not to be Created apart, but
in the Body: to which Opinion the Universal Judgment of our Modern Divines
adheres. I omit the Degrees, Ascentions and Descentions of Souls, which the
Origenists have brought into play, as being neither strengthened by Scripture,
nor consen^aneous to the Thesis of Christianity: so little of certainly there
is, either among Philosophers, or among Divines, concerning the Original, or
indeed the very meaning and definition of the Word Soul. For Epicurus and
Aristotle believe it Mortal; Plato's Circle brings it to the same Station
again, in so many years. Some there are that, as Plato says, contract it within
the Verges of Humane Bodies; others diffuse it into the Bodies of Animals: some
restore it to Heaven from whence they had it, others send it on Pilgrimage
about the World: Some that Compel it to Infernal Hell, others deny any: some
say, That every Soul is Created by it self; others say, They were all Created
together. So far Thomas. There was Averroes, who undertaking to broach
something more remarkable, First held the Unity of the Understanding. The
Manichaean Heretics were of Opinion, That there was but one Soul of the
Universe, dispersed as well into Inanimate as Animate Bodies; but that those
things which are without Life, l^^s participate thereof: that Animate things
have a greater share, and Celestial things the greatest of all: and at length
they conclude, That singular Souls are but parts of the Universal Soul. Plato
also holds but one Universal Soul of the World, but other Souls for particular
Creatures; as if the World subsisted only by its own Soul, but particular
Creatures were animated by particular Souls. Others there are that will have
but one sort of Souls. Others make a twofold Soul; that is to say, Rational and
Irrational. Others say, there are many, as many as there be species of living
Creatures. Galen the Physician affirms, That there are various and distinct
Souls in diverse Creatures, according to the variety of the Species; and
moreover, he appoints many Souls in one Body. There are other that place two
Souls in a Man, one sensitive from Generation, the other intellectual from
Creation: among these we find Occam the Divine. Plotinus will have the Soul to
be one thing, and the Understanding to be another; with whom Apollinaris
consents. Some there are that do not distinguish between the Soul and the
Understanding; but they say, that it is the most Principal Part of the
substance of the Soul. Aristotle believes the Intellect to be present only
Potentially in the Soul, and that Actually it works from without; neither that
it conduces to the Essence or Nature of Man, but only to the Perfection of
Knowledge and Contemplation. Therefore he affirms, That few Men, and those only
Philosophers, are endu'd with Actual Understanding. And indeed, there is a
great Dispute among Divines, whether, according to the Opinion of Plato, the
Souls of Men after they are Departed from the Body, do retain any Memory of
things done while the Body was alive; or whether they altogether want the
Knowledge thereof: which the Tomists, together with their mighty Aristotle,
firmly assert. And the Carthusians confirm it, from the Testimony of a certain
Parisian Divine returning from Hell, who being asked, what Knowledge he had
left him, returned Answer, That he understood nothing but Pain: and then citing
the words of Solomon, There is no understanding, no knowledge, no wealth in
Hell, he seemed to them to make it out, that after Death there was no Knowledge
of any thing: which notwithstanding is not only manifestly against the Opinion
of the Platonicks, but repugnant to the Authority and Truth of the Scripture it
self also, which teaches, That the wicked shall see and know that he is God;
and that they shall give an account not only of a^l their Deeds, but of all
their idle Words and Thoughts. Moreover, there are some that have adventured to
write and report many things concerning the Apparition of separated Souls, and
those oft-times repugnant both to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the sacred
Text. For whereas the Apostle teaches us, That we ought not to believe the
Angels from heaven, if they should preach otherwise than what is delivered; yet
the Gospel is so much out of date with them, that they will rather believe one
come from the Dead, than the Prophets, Moses, Apostles or Evangelists. Of this
Opinion was the Rich Man in the Gospel, who believed that his Brothers and
Kindred living would give credit to any one that were sent from the Dead. To
whom so vainly Conjecturing, Abraham made answer, If they will not believe
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe any one that should be sent
from the dead. However, I do not absolutely deny some Holy Apparitions,
Admonitions, and Revelations of the Dead; but yet I admonish ye to be very
wary, knowing how easy it is for Satan to Transform himself into an Angel of
Light. Therefore they are not absolutely to be believed, but to be entertained
as things which are Apocryphal, and without the Rule of the Scripture. There
are many Fabulous stories to this purpose, written by one Tundal in his
Consolation of Souls; and also by some others, of which your Cunning Priests
and Friars make use, to terrify the Vulgar sort, and get Money. A certain
French Notary has also lately put forth a Relation of a Spirit walking at
Lions; a Person of no Credit, and less Learning. But the most approved Authors
that write of these things, is Cassianus, and James of Paradise, a Carthusian.
But there is nothing in them of solid Truth or secret Wisdom, tending to the
increase of Charity, or edifying of the Soul; only they thereby persuade people
to Alms, Pilgrimages, Prayers, Fastings, and such other Practical Works of
Piety; which the Scripture nevertheless with far greater Reason and Authority
enjoins. But of these Apparitions we have discoursed at large, in a Dialogue
which we have Written of Man, as also in our Occult Philosophy. But now let us
return to the Philosophers. All the Heathen, who affirm the Soul to be
Immortal, by common consent also uphold the Transmigration of the Soul: and
farther, That rational Souls do sometimes Transmigrate into Plants, and
Creatures void of Reason. Of this Opinion of Transmigration, Pythagoras is said
to be the first Author; of which, thus Ovid: Souls never die, but in Immortal
state,
From dead to living bodies transmigrate.
I now my self can call to mind how I,
When long since Troy the strength of Greece did try,
Was then Euphorbus, that my life sold dear,
To crown the Conquest of Atrides Spear,
Which then my left hand b^re; I knew the Shield
Which late in Juno's Temple I beheld.
Much more has been written concerning this Pythagorical Transmigration, by
Timon, Xenophanes, Cratinus, Aristophon, Hermippus, Lucianus, and Diogenes
Laertius. But Iamblicus, who has many other Abettors, asserts, That the Soul
does not Transmigrate out of Man into Brutes, nor return from Creatures
Irrational into Men; but that there are Transmigrations of Souls, that is, of
the Souls of Beasts into Beasts* and of the Souls of Men into Men, he does not
deny. There are also Philosophers, of which number E^^ripides is one, a
greatfollower of Anaxagoras, together with Archelaus the Naturalist, and after
them Avicen, who report the first Men to have sprung out of the Earth like
Herbs: in that not less ridiculous than the Poets, who feign certain Men to
have sprung from the Teeth of a Serpent sown in the Earth. Some there are who
deny that the Soul is Generated, and others who deny that it has any Motion.

CHAP. LIII.
Of Metaphysics.
BUT let us go a little farther, and make it appear, that these Philosophers
are not only at a loss about those things that seem to have a Being in Nature,
but that they are also at great variance among themselves concerning such as
have no Principle or Foundation at all; it being altogether uncertain whether
they be or no; and which they believe to subsist without Body or Matter, and
which they call Separated forms; which because they are not in Nature, but
thought to be above Nature, therefore they are called Metaphysics, and said to
be beyond Nature: from thence sprang those Infinite, every way contradictory,
and not less impious and unlearned Opinions concerning the Gods For Diagoras,
Milesius, and Theodorus Cyrenaicus, altogether deny that there was any God.
Epicurus held that there was a God, but that he took no care of things below.
Protagoras said, that whether they were or no, they had little or no Power.
Anaximander thought that there were Gods Native of Countries, some in the East,
and some in the West, at great distances one from another. Xenocrates held,
that there were Eight Gods. Antisthenes, that there were many popular Gods, but
one Supreme, the Creator of the rest. Others have precipitated themselves into
such a profundity of Madness, as to make with their own hands the Gods which
they intended to Worship* such was the Image of Bell among the Assyrians: which
made and carved Gods, Hermes Trismegistus does notwithstanding very much
applaud, in his Aesculapius. But Thales Milesius discoursing of the Divine
Essence, asserted the Understanding to be God, who Formed all things out of
Water. Cleanthes and Anaximenes held the Air to be God. Chrysippus Deified the
Natural Ability endu'd with Reason, or Divine Necess^^y. Zeno ascribes Divinity
to the Divine Law of Nature. Anaxagoras, to the Infinite Intellect moveable of
it self. Pythagoras would have a certain Soul diffused, and passing through the
Nature of all things, from whom all things receive Life, to be God. Alcmaeon of
Crotona Deified the Sun, Moon, and other Stars. Zenophanes would have God to be
All whatever had a Being. Parmenides makes a certain Circumscribed Orb of
Light, which he calls a Crown, to be God. Aristotle, as if a certain Knowledge
of God could be collected from the Motion of the Heavens, has invented
Fictitious Gods of the Nature of them; and sometimes will have the Mind to be
Divine; and sometimes he calls the World i^ self God: sometimes he makes
another God far more Supreme and Superintendent over it; whom Theophrastus
imitates with the same inconstancy. I omit what Strato, Perseus, Aristo the
Disciple of Zeno, Plato, Xenophon, Speusippus, Democritus, Heraclitus, Diogenes
the Babylonian, Hermes Trismegistus, Cicero, Sene^a, Pliny, and many others
have delivered, whose Opinions notwithstanding are far different from the
former, not yet recited. I might here run through all their Debates, and
Monstrosities of words, concerning Idea's, Incorporeals, Atoms, Hyle, Matter,
Form, Vacuum, Infinity, Eternity, Fate, introduction of Forms, Matter of the
Heavens; whether the Stars* consist of the Elements, or of the Fifth Essence,
which Aristotle invented; with many other such kind of Trifles, that have
afforded Men great cause of Dispute and Contention. But I suppose I have made
it sufficiently apparent, how far Philosophers are from agreeing about the
Truth it self; to whom, the nearer a man adheres, the more remote he is from
any certainty, and the farther he wanders from right Religion. Hence it is,
That we find John the Twenty second, Pope, in a very great Error, who was of
Opinion, That the Souls of the Blessed should not see the Face of God before
the day of Judgment. We know also that Julian the Apostate did Abjure Christ,
for no other Cause, than that because being much addicted to Philosophy, he
began to scorn and contemn the Humility of the Christian Faith. For the same
cause Celius, Porphyrius, Lucian, Pelagius, Arrius, Manichaeus, Averroes, have
with so much madness barked against Christ and his Church. Hence that common
Proverb among the Vulgar, That the greatest Philosophers are the greated
Heretics. St. Jerome therefore calls them the Patriarchs of Heresy, the
Firstborn of Egypt; seeing that all Heresy whatsoever has had its first
rise out of the Fountain of Philosophy. By this Philosophy is all Divinity
almost Adulterated, so that instead of Evangelical Doctors and Teachers, false
Prophets and Heretical Philosophers have appeared in the World, who have
adventured to Equalize the Divine Oracles with Humane Inventions; polluting the
same with strange Opinions of Men, have Tranform'd true and simple Divinity (as
Gerson says) into swelling and Sophistical Loquacity, and Mathematical
Figments. Which St. Paul the Apostle foreseeing, with many times^repeated
admonitions commands us to beware left any person should prevail over us, and
seduce us through vain Philosophy. St. Austin defends and fortifies his City of
God against them. All other Divines and Holy Fathers have condemned it to be
wholly extirpated out of the Church. Neither are there wanting Examples of the
Heathen, by which we find that they have done the same. For the Athenians put
Socrates to Death, that was the Father of the Philosophers. The Romans threw
Philosophers out of their City. The Messanians and Lacedaemonians never admitted
them: and in the Reign of Domitian, they were not only Expelled the City, but
forbid through all Italy. There was also a Decree of Antiochus the King against
those young Men that durst take upon them to study Philosophy; and more than
that, against their very Parents that permitted them. Neither have Philosophers
been only condemned and expelled by Kings and Emperors, but also exploded by
most Learned Men in their several Writings Extant; of which Number is Phliasius
Timon, who wrote a Treatise, Entitled Sylli, in derision of Philosophers; and
Aristoph^nes, who wrote a Play in Contempt of them, which he called Nubes, or
the Clouds: and Lastly, Dion Prusaeus, who made a most Eloquent Oration against
them. Aristides also made a most Learned Oration in the behalf of Four Noble
Athenians against Plato; and Hortensius, a most Noble and Eloquent Roman, has
with most strong and powerful Reasons most sharply oppugned the same.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Moral Philosophy.
IT remains now, that if there be any part of Philosophy that contains the
Discipline of Manners, to inquire whether the same do not rather consist in
variety of use, custom, observation, and perservation of life, than in the
little Rules of Philosophy; which are changeable according to the times,
places, and opininions of men; and such as threats and fair words teach
Children, Laws and Punishments cause men to learn. Of some things which cannot
be taught, natural Industry makes an addition in men; for many things wax out
of use, through process of time, and consent of the people. Hence it comes to
pass, that that was then a Vice, which is now accounted a Virtue; and that
which is here a Virtue, in another place is compted a Vice; what one man thinks
honest, another man thinks dishonest; what some hold to be just, others condemn
as unjust, as the Laws, Opinions, Times, Places, and Interests of Government
vary. Among the Athenians, it was lawful for a man to marry his Couzengerman;
among the Romans, it was altogether forbidden: Formerly among the Jews, and now
among the Turks, it is lawful to have plurality of Wives, besides Curtisans and
Concubines; but among us Christians it is not only forbid, but accounted a
most horrible sin. Lastly, that the women should go to Playhouses, and be seen
publicly by all persons, was among those Nations accounted no dishonor; and
yet among the Romans so to do, was held infamous and dishonest. However, the
Romans were wont to take their Wives with them to great Entertainments, where
they went to appear in great Splendour, and abide in the best parts of the
house: but in Greece no married wife was admitted to any Banquet or Feast,
unless it were among their nearest Relations; nor was she to converse but in
the most retired parts of the house, where no man went but the nearest of Kin.
Among the Lacedaemonians and Egyptians, it was accounted an honorable thing to
steal; but among us, Thieves are taken and hanged. Some Nations are so planted
by Heaven, that they appear eminent for the unity and singularity of their
Customs. The Seythians were always infamous for Savageness and Cruelty. The
Italians were always eminent for their Magnanimity. The Gauls were reproached
for Stupidity. The Sicilians were always subtle. The Asiaticks Luxurious, the
Spaniards Jealous, and great Boasters. Besides, several Nations have some
particular marks of distinction, which are the more immediate marks of Heaven;
so that a man may easily discern of what Nation such or such a stranger may be,
by his Voice, Speech, Tone, Design, Conversation, Diet, Love or Hatred, Anger
and Malice, and the like. For who that sees a man marching in more state than a
Dunghill-Cock, in gate like a Fencer, a confident Look, a deep Tone, grave
Speech, severe in his Carriage, and tattered in Habit, that will not straight
judge him to be a German? Do we not know the French by their moderate Gate,
effeminate Carriage, smiling Countenance, pleasing Voice, courteous Speech,
modest Behavior, and careless Habit? The Italians we behold more slow in Gate,
their Carriage grave, their Countenances varying, of few words, captious in
Discourse, in their Behavior magnificent, and decent in their Habit. In
Singing also the Italians Bleat, the Spaniards Whine, the Germans Howl, and the
French Quaver. In Discourse, the Italians are grave, but subtle; the Spaniards
neat, but great boasters; the French quick and ready, but proud; the Germans
four, but simple. In Council, the Italian is provident, the Spaniard subtle,
the French rash, the German for profit. Toward Strangers, the Italians are
officious, the Spaniard pleasant, the French are mild, the Germans rude and
churlish. In their Anger and Malice, the Italians are close, the Spaniards hard
to be appeased, the French full of threats, the Germans full of revenge. In
Conversation, the Italians are prudent, the Spaniards cautious, the French
gentle, the Germans imperious. As to their Amors, the Italians are jealous,
the Spaniards impatient, the French inconstant, the Germans ambitious. In
business, the Italians are circumspect, the Germans laborious, the Spaniards
watchful, the French careful. In War, the Italians are stout, but cruel; the
Spaniard full of Stratagems, the Germans fierce and mercenary, the French
magnanimous, but rash. The Italians are famous for Learning, the Spaniard or
Portugal for Navigation, for Affability the French, for Religion and Mechanic
Arts the Germans. And indeed, every particular Nation, whether civil or
barbarous, has some particular Manners and Customs particularly imprinted by
Heavenly Influence, different from others, not to be acquired by any Art or
Philosophy, but such as are merely natural to the Inhabitants, without any
assistance of Education. But let us return to those who have publicly treated
concerning these things. Those Authors, like the Serpent, have given us the
possession of that fruit, by the eating whereof we shall understand Good and
Evil; though they all cry, that it is best for men to follow Virtue, and eschew
Vice. But how much more certain, how much more profitable, and indeed how much
more happy would it be for us, that we should not only not commit sin, but
also not know it? Who is ignorant that by that very thing we all then become
miserable, when our first Parents learnt to distinguish between Good and Evil?
And therefore perhaps the Error of Philosophers might be pardoned, if under
the notions of Virtue and Goodness they did not teach us the worst of Evils,
and the most shameful Vices. Now there are many Sects of these Philosophers
that teach us Ethics; as the Academick the Cyrenaick Eliack. Megarick, Cynick,
Eroitick, Stoic, Paripatetick with many other suchlike. Of all which, that
Theodorus, who was honored with the Title of a God, thus gave his Verdict;
That wise men would not stick to give their minds to Thieving, Adultery, or
Sacrilege, when they found a seasonable opportunity: for there is not any one
of these that is evil by nature; and therefore if the vulgar opinion generally
conceived concerning these things, were set aside, there is no reason but a
Philosopher might publicly go to a Whore without a reproof. This was one of
the Maxims of that Heavenly Philosopher, than which nothing could have been
revealed more wicked, unless it be that which we read in Aristotle, and was
also by the Law permitted in Crete, male-Venery, which Jerome the Peripatetick
extolls, saying, That the use thereof had been the destruction of many
tyrannical Governments. But the words of Aristotle in his Politics, where he
makes it profitable for a Commonwealth that the Vulgar should not be too
numerous in Offspring, are these. The Lawgiver, says he, wisely and
carefully ordained many things in relation to temperance in Diet, a thing very
necessary; as also touching Divorcing of women, providing and establishing the
use of Males, left the multitude of Children should increase too fast. This is
that Aristotle, whose Ri^es and Customs were condemned by Plato; whence grew
that hatred and ingratitude of his toward his Master: This is he who fearing
the punishment of his wicked life, fled privately, and in haste, out of Athens;
who being the most ungrateful person in the world to his Benefactors, poisoned
Alexander, by whom he was most liberally and magnificently rewarded; who also
restored him to his Country, and trusted him with his Life, his Body, and Soul.
This was he, who having an ill opinion of the Soul, denied any place of Joy
after death; who filching the sayings of the Ancients, and likewise putting
false Interpretations upon them, sought to increase the fame of his Ingenuity
by Theft and Calumny. He who at length grown old in wickedness, and running mad
out of an immoderate desire of knowledge, was the Author of his own death,
becoming a Sacrifice fitting for the Devil that taught him his learning. This
is that worthy Doctor so frequent now adays in our Latin Schools, whom my
fellow-Pupils, Cullen Divines, have translated to Heaven, having published a
Book entitled Of the salvation of Aristotle; as also another Pamphlet both in
Prose and Verse, Of the Life and Death of Aristotle; upon which they have made
a Theological Comment, at the end whereof they conclude, that Aristotle was the
forerunner of Christ in Naturals, as John the Baptist was his forerunner in
Spirituals. But now let us hear what these Philosophers say concerning
Happiness and the chiefest Good, which some placed in Pleasure, as Epicurus,
Aristippus, Gnidius, Eudoxus, Philoxenes, and the Cyrenaicks. Others joined
Honesty with Pleasure, as Dinomachus, and Caliph^. Others in the choice gifts
of Nature, as Carneades, and Hierome of Rhodes. Others in Grief, as Diodorus.
Others in the Virtues, as Pythagoras, Socrates, Aristotle, Empedocles,
Democritus, Zeno Citicus, Cleantes, Hecaton, Possidonius, Dionysius of Babylon,
and Antisthenes, and all the Stoics. Many also of our Divines, adhering to
them, do to this day raise great Disputes concerning the connection of the
Virtues, and what should be that common foundation of Happiness, to the
building of which all the Virtues ought to meet: For unless they all meet in
one, it is impossible they should make a man happy, though there should be but
one wanting. Seeing therefore that the Virtues themselves are in some manner
different and repugnant one from another, as Liberality and Thrift, Magnanimity
and Humility, Mercy and Justice, Contemplation and Labor; unless they all
concur Harmoniously together, they are not to be esteemed Virtues, but Vices.
Now that wherein they ought all to concur, is Justice, according to the Opinion
of Ambrose and Lactantiu^, who together with Macrobius, have followed the
Opinion of Plato in his Commonwealth. Others take it to be Temperance, that
imposes a mean in all things. Others will have it to be Sanctity, as Plato in
his Epinomides. Others hold it to be Charity, without which all other Virtues
little avail, as says St. Paul; and upon this Question Scotus, Henry, Thomas
Aquinas, and others, have at this day raised very great Disputes. But let us
return where we began. Some men have placed Felicity in Fortune, as
Theophrastus. Aristotle places it in Fortune, joined with Virtue, and the Gifts
of generating Nature: as also in Pleasure, varnished over with the profession
of Virtue; as if Epicurus did not defend and shelter his Pleasure under the
same pretense. The other Peripateticks thought that it consisted in
Speculation. Herillus the Philosopher, Alcidamus, and many Socraticks, held
Knowledge to be the chief good. The Platonicks, together with their Master
Plato, and Plotinus, never without a smack of Divinity, will not permit
Happiness to be separated from the Chief Good. Bias of Pryena constituted
supreme Happiness in Wisdom; Bion and Borysthenes in Prudence* Thales Milesius
in a mixture of these: Pittacus of Mitylene in well doing: Cicero in leisure
from all business; though when we have sought far and near, it is only to be
found in God alone. I pass by the crowd of Vulgar Philosophers, that took away
all Felicity; as Pyrrho Eliensis, Euricolus, and Xenophanes; or else placed it
in Glory, Fame, Honor, Power, freeness from Trouble, Riches, and the like: as
Periander Corinthus, and Lycophron, together with those of whom the Psalmist
thus says: Whose mouth talks vanity, and whose right hand is the right hand
of iniquity; whose sons are as new plantations in their youth, and whose
daughters are as the polished corners of the Temple; whose garners are full and
plenteous with all store; whose sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands
in their steets: whose oxen are strong to labor; who have no decay, no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in their streets. Those who enjoyed these
benefits, they accounted happy. Now concerning Pleasure, they all believe as
differently concerning it: for, as I told you before, Epicurus makes it to be
the Supreme Good; but on the other side, Architas^ Tarentinus, Antisthenes, and
Socrates, account it to be the Chief Evil. Speusippus, and some of the ancient
Academicks, said, that Pleasure and Pain were two Evils opposite one to the
other; but that was the Good, which was in the mean between 'um. Zeno esteemed
Pleasure neither Good nor Evil, but an indifferent thing. Critolaus the
Peripatetick and Plato, affirm Pleasure not only to be evil it self, but also
the fountain of all evils. It would be over-tedious to recite the Opinions of
all men concerning Felicity, and to heap 'um up all together; with which many
Scriblers have filled whole Volumes. For St. Austin puts us in mind of one
hundred and eighty Opinions collected by Varro, touching this very Subject; the
chiefest whereof we have here taken an occasion to repeat. But now let us see
how all these Opinions agree with the Doctrine of Christ, and we shall find,
that Blessedness and chief Happiness are not to be attained or acquired by
Stoic Virtue, Academical Severity, or Peripatetick Speculation, but by Faith
and Grace. You have heard how some Philosophers place Chief Happiness in
Pleasure; but Christ in Hunger and Thirst. Others in Fame and Renown; but
Christ in the Curses and Hatred of Men. Others in Beauty, Health, Mirth, and
Pleasure; but Christ in Weeping and Mourning. Others in Wisdom and Knowledge,
and the Moral Virtues; but Christ in Innocence, Simplicity, and uprightness of
Heart. Others in Military Glory, and famous Actions; but Christ in Peace.
Others in Fortune; but Christ in Mercy. Others in Pomp and Honor; but Christ
in Humility, calling the Meek Blessed. Others in Power and Victory; but Christ
in Persecution. Others in Riches; but Christ in Poverty. Christ teaches us,
That Virtue is not to be acquired but by Grace granted from above; the
Philosophers, by use and Natural Gifts: Christ teaches us to desire the Good
Will of all Men, to Love our Enemies, Lend freely, to take Revenge of no body,
to give to every one that asks; the Philosophers, only to those that are able
to recompense Courtesy for Courtesy; and that there is nothing more Lawful,
than to be Angry, bear Malice, make War, and exercise Usury. These Philosophers
were they that first Erected the Pelagian Heresy, with their Free Will,
dictates of Reason, and Light of Nature. Therefore says Lactantius, all Moral
Philosophy is a vain and empty thing, neither sufficient to instruct men in the
Rules of Justice, neither in their duty or Government of themselves. Lastly, it
is altogether repugnant to the Law of God, and Doctrine of Christ; owing its
chief honor to Satan.

CHAP. LV.
Of Politics.
TO this kind of Philosophy Politics in the next place appertain, which is the
Art of Administering and Ordering Public Affairs. Now Government is divided
into three sorts. Monarchy, which is the Government of one Man, or Kingly
Sovereignty. Aristocracie, when a few, and those of the Nobility Govern.
Democracy, when the meaner sort, or the Common People bear sway. Near of kin to
th^se is, First Tyranny to Kingship; Oligarchia to Aristocracy; and Anarchy to
Democracy. But which of all these Forms of Government is in the first place to
be preferred, is not yet concluded among Writers. They who assert Monarchy,
confirm their Thesis by the Example of Nature, saying, That as there is but one
God that governs the Universe, as there is but one Sun among the Stars, one
King among the Bees, one Master-Ram in a Flock, one Commanding Bull in a Heard,
one chief leader of the Cranes; so in a Nation there ought to be but one King,
as Sovereign and Head of the Political Body, from which the Members ought in no
wise to disagree. This Form of Government Plato, Aristotle, and Apollonius
approved above the rest; to whom among those of our own Religion, Cyprian and
Jerome adhere. But those who extol Aristocracy, say that there is nothing more
effectual in the management of great Affairs, than the Consultations of many,
and those the most noble. For the Counsels of the chiefest men ought to be
best; neither can any one man be complete in Wisdom, seeing that is only
proper to God himself. To the Judgment of these Men, Solon, Lycurgus,
Demosthenes, Tully, and almost all the ancient Lawgivers, together with Moses,
unanimously subscribed. Neither did Plato Diffent from them, affirming that
Commonwealth or City to be most happily and firmly Constituted, which was
Governed by wise Men; to whom we may likewise add, without prejudice, the most
Noble, as being an Opinion Confirmed by the common consent of all Writers. But
they who prefer a Popular State, have dignified it with the most agreeable and
specious Title of Isonomie; That is to say, Impartiality in the Administration
of Justice. For therein all things are referred to the Common Vote, all Councels
are carried on by the Multitude; the more certain, by how much the greater
Number advice is given. Moreover, the Voice of the People is said to be the
Voice of God. Hence whatsoever is Enacted by the Generality, whatsoever is
Established by the common consent of the People, that seems to be Ordained by
God himself, and may be presumed to be best and most just. Besides, they
conclude this Form of Government to be safer than that of Aristocracy, as being
less subject to Sedition. For the People seldom or never disagree among
themselves; but the Nobles very often, and with great Contention. In a popular
Government there is all Freedom and Equality, no oppression of Tyranny: where
the degrees of Estates are equal, no man is richer than his Neighbor, but all
the People Rule and Command by ^urns. Democracy therefore has been especially
commended by Othanes the Persian, Eufrates, and Dion Syracusanus: and we
observe at this time the Venetian and Helvetian Commonwealths to be the most
flourishing People in the Christian World; renowned for their Prudence, Power,
Riches and Justice, and no less famous for their Victorious Achievements. The
Athenian Commonwealth also commanding a large Dominion with great Force and
Power, was governed only by Democracy, all things being acted by the People,
and with the People. The Romans also making use of this Form of Government,
became Masters of the greatest part of their Empire under Democracy, and were
never in a worse Condition than under the Command of their Kings and Nobility;
but chiefly suffered from their Emperors, under whose Command their vast
Dominion suffered Shipwreck. So that which of these three Forms is best, is
hard to judge, since there is neither of them but has its strong Defenders and
Oppugners. Kings, they say, who Command altogether according to their own Will
and Pleasure, seldom Govern well, and very rarely without War and great
Combustion. Kingly Rule has also this most unavoydable Mischief in it, that
they who before were counted good and just, having obtained as it were a Regal
Authority, and Liberty to do evil, grow uncontrollable, and the worst of Men;
which is verified in Caligula, Nero, Domitian, Mithridates, and many others.
Scripture also witnesses the same in Saul, David, and Solomon, Kings chosen by
God: and of all the Kings of Juda, few were approved; of the Kings of Israel,
none. Emperors also, Kings and Princes that now adays Reign, think themselves
Born and Crowned not for the sake of the People, not for the Good of their
Citizens and Commonalty, not to Maintain Justice, but to Defend their own
Grandeur and Prerogative; Governing so, as if the Estates of the People were
not committed to their Custody, but to be shared and divided by them, as their
own proper spoil and prey. They use their Subjects at their pleasure, and as
they list themselves, abusing the Power with which they were Entrusted; Oppress
their Cities with borrowing, the Common People, some with Taxes, some with
Penal Statutes, others with excessive Subsidies and Imposts, without Measure
and without End. Or if some more moderate do release the excess of these
Grievances, they do it not in respect of the Common good, but for their own
Private ends, permitting their Subjects to be at quiet, that they may live at
ease themselves; or else to gain to themselves the name of being Mild and Just.
Others most severely punish guilty Offenders, Confiscating their Goods, and
setting great Fines upon their Heads, not caring how many they take in the same
Praemunire: For as the Offenses of Delinquents are the strength of Tyrants, so
does the Multitude of Offenders enrich Princes. Being in Italy, I had the
honor to be very familiar with a powerful Prince, whom when I once advised to
suppress the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellines within his Dominions, he
confessed to me ingenuously, that by means of those Factions, above Twelve
thousand Ducats came every Year into his Exchequer. Now where the Nobility
Command in chief, there is nothing but Jealousy, Hatred, and Emulation. Rarely
therefore they agree in Amity, every one seeking to be Chief, and to make his
own Sentence pass. Hence Factions, Seditions, Slaughters, Civil War, and at
length, the Total Ruin of the Commonwealth. Whereof there are infinite
Examples in the Histories both of the Greeks and Latins. And at this day in
most of the Cities of Italy, the Effects of those miscarriages are to be seen.
But Popular Government is Universally accounted the most destructive, and worst
of all. Apollonius with many Reasons disswades Vespatian from it. And Cicero
Affirms, That there is neither Reason, Council, Discretion or Diligence among
the Vulgar People, as the Poet also sings.

By opposite desires and humors led,
The uncertain Vulgar move, once taking Head.
Othanes the Persian also asserts, that there is nothing more insolent, nothing
more stolid; nothing more proper to the Rabble, than to know; nothing but
headlong, like a Current, to carry all business before 'um. Demosthenes calls
the people an Evil Beast. Plato, a Monster with many heads; which Horace does
not forget. And Phalaris writing to Egesippus, All multitudes, says he, are
rash, mad, slothful, apt to change their Opinion, perfidious, uncertain,
treacherous, heady, fraudulent, good for nothing but to make a noise, easy to
love or condemn. Hence it follows, that he who in governing the Commonwealth
strives to please the people, must be contented to submit to a hundred
undeserved Contumelies. Lycurgus being asked why he had not erected a Popular
Government in his City, Rather do thou, says he, submit to a Popular
Government in thy house. Aristotle also in his Ethics condemns the government
of the people to be the worst of all, but the rule of one person to be the
best: for the Commonalty is the Ringleader of Error, the Mistress of evil
Customs, and a rude heap of Mischief. No Reason, no Authority, no Persuasions
can move, where it either wants knowledge, or is in contempt: Therefore are the
Vulgar so indocible and obstinate against all persuasion, whose nature is so
unconstant, always desirous of Novelty, despising the present Authority, not to
be curbed by the learned Admonitions of the Wise, by the Precepts of their
Ancestors, Authority of Magistrates, or Majesty of Princes. This we find
verified in Socrates, questioned by the Athenians about his opinion of the
Gods; In Capys the Trojan, delivering his judgment about the bringing in of the
Grecian Horse; In Magius the Campanian, advising that Hannibal should not be
received into the City; In Paulus Emilius persuading not to fight at the Batt^l
of Canna; Lastly, in so many of the Predictions of the Prophets of God, no way
obeyed or hearkened to by the people of the Jews. Moreover, as to the Laws and
Statutes of the people, how is it possible that any of them should be good or
profitable, seeing that it is impossible for the popular Multitude to
understand which are good, and which are evil? the greatest part whereof are
ignorant laboring Handicraft people, not led by Reason of Justice or Equity,
but consisting only in Number, where there are generally more bad than good:
Neither is the determination of Affairs led by Judgment, but guided and turned
to and fro according to the favor, number and affection of the Multitude:
Which Pliny the younger affirms; for the decrees and choices of the people are
numbered, not considered. For in popular Consultation, that always carries the
day, which not the wisest, but the greatest number think most convenient: among
whom, while they all account themselves equal, there is nothing more unequal
than that Equality it self. Nothing therefore can be rightly ordered by the
promiscuous heat and headlong fury of the Multitude; nor can any thing be
rightly amended, that shall be found amiss and disadvantageous to the
Commonwealth: rather, those Statutes and Decrees which are made and confirmed,
and found to be most wholesome for the public good, by the rage of the
inconsiderate Multitude, are overturned and abrogated. Now among all these so
various forms of Rule, and administrations of Government, most Authors have
another, compounded of two particular kinds: Such an one did Solon compose,
partly of the Nobles, partly of the People; so making his public Honors
communicable to all. Others thought fit to frame their Political Rules by
making a mixture of all three together. Such was the government of the
Lacedaemonians, for they had a King who was perpetual; but he had little or no
Command, only in time of War: then had they a Senate chosen out of the richest
and wisest part of the Nobility; moreover, out of the Common People they
Created Ten perpetual Ephori, who had power of Life and Death, and were
Controulers both of the King and Senate, being Elected out of the Vulgar
people. Among the Romans, the Authority of the Senate plainly showed that there
was an Aristocracy mixed with their Democracy; and we find that many things
were commanded by the Senate, many things by the People. And at this day,
though in many places Kings and Princes do rule at their own pleasures, yet do
they make use of the chief Nobility and Gentry in the several Counties and
Provinces of their Kingdoms, to transact many Affairs, and of great
consequence: from whence has arose a question, which it is most sat to live
under, a good Prince and bad Counselors, or bad Counselors and a wicked
Prince. Marius Maximus, Julius Capitolinus, and others, choose the latter;
notwithstanding that many grave Authors are no way willing to consent to them;
finding by experience, that evil Counselors may be corrected sooner by a good
Prince, than an evil Prince be amended by good Counselors. However, for the
good government of a Commonwealth or Kingdom, it is not Philosophy nor
Kingcraft, nor any other Science that can avail, but the integrity, fidelity,
and ability of the Ruler: for a single person may govern best, so may a few, so
may the people, provided that in each there be the same intention of Unity and
Justice; but if the designs of each be evil, then can neither rule as they
should. But that which convinces the strange rashness of Men addicted to Rule,
is this, that when Men in their several stations, some plainly confess
themselves ignorant how to Plough and Sow, how to keep Sheep, some how to guide
a Ship or govern a Family; yet there is no Man who does not think himself
sufficiently gifted to bear Office in a City, to act a King or Prince, or to
command great Nations and People, which is the most difficult thing.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Religion in General.
TO the perfect Weal of a State or Kingdom, Religion is of main concernment,
which is a certain Discipline and Canon of outward Rites and Ceremonies, by
means whereof, as by certain signs, we are admonished of our Internal and
Spiritual Duties. Cicero defines it to be a Discipline teaching us to exercise
the Ceremonies of Divine Worship with a reverent Famulatu: which that it is
most useful and necessary for all Cities and Governments, the same Cicero,
together with Aristotle, firmly holds. For thus says he in his Politics, It
behooves a Prince above all others to seem Religious. For the People are of
Opinion, that such Rulers will do 'um no harm; and they will be the more afraid
to Plot against them, by how much the more they think themselves defended by
the Gods. Now Religion is so deeply Rooted in Men by Nature, that it makes the
difference more plain betwixt them and Beasts, than Reason. Now that Religion
is thus Naturally grafted in us, Aristotle confesses; besides that it is
apparent from ^his very experiment, That as often as we are oppressed with any
sudden Dangers, or put to any sudden Affright, presently before we search
into the Cause, or seek for any other help, we fly to Celestial Invocation;
Nature it self teaching us, without any other Instructor, to Implore Divine
Assistance. From the Beginning of the World we find, that Cain and Abel did
Religiously Sacrifice to God; though Enoch were the first that taught the Forms
and Ceremonies of Divine Worship: for which reason the Scripture says, That
then the name of the Lord first began to be called upon. After the Flood, how
many several Laws and Ordinances of Religion were Instituted by several persons
in several Nations! For Mercury and King Menna taught the Egyptians their
Forms of Worship. Melissus the Foster-Father of Jove, instructed the Cretans in
their Ceremonies. Faunus and Janus Instituted the Rites of the Latins. Numa
Pompilius, those of the Romans^Moses, those of the Hebrews. Cadmus also, the
Son of Agenor, is said to have brought out of Phoenicia all those Solemn
Mysteries, Consecrations of Images, Hymns, Festivals, and other Sacred Rites
and Customs, performed in honor of the Gods* which were afterward in use
among the Graecians. Neither did they only give names to the Gods, but also
Ordaina what Rites and Ceremonies should be due to each. They held, that there
were certain Numens the Protectors of Criminal Offenses, and ascribed a Deity
to Diseases, and evil Accidents: Therefore did the Romans Worship Jove the
Adulterer, and Dedicated a public Temple to the Goddess Fever, and in their
Esquiliae placed an Altar to Misfortune. In Hell they also found out Deities to
adore, and the Prince of Darkness, Satan, the most miserable, and the lowest of
all, they made a shift to Worship, under the Names of Pluto, Dis and Neptune,
assigning to him for a Keeper the Three-headed Cerberus, that greedy Monster
that Compasses the Earth seeking whom he may Devour; sparing none, hurtful to
all, the Accuser of all Men.

From Captive Souls, the Lord of Stygian Lands,
For past Offenses, Punishment demands:
Against all the shades, remorseless Rage he breaths;
With Furies compassed, and a thousand Deaths.
Here sundry sounds of sundry wayling Pains,
There Thousand Torments shake their dismal Chains.
The Egyptians, together with their Deities, adore Brute Beasts and Monsters;
and there are at this day that Worship Idols and Images. At this day likewise a
great part of the World, as the Turks, Saracens, Arabians and Moors, give
Divine Honors to Mahomets; though the Author, or first Founder of a most
absurd Religion: and the Jews yet persisting in their folly, believe their
Messiah yet to come. Among us Christians, several Popes, several Councils,
several Bishops have prescribed several Varieties and Forms of Worship;
differing among themselves, either touching the manner of the Ceremonies, Meats
lawful, Fasts, Vestments, Public Ornaments: or else about Clerical Promotions
and Tithes. But one thing overcomes the admiration of Wonder it self, to see
how these Ambitious men think to climb Heaven, by the same ways that Lucifer
fell from it. Neither do all these Laws and Rules of Religion lean upon any
other Foundation than the mere Opinions and Pleasure of their Founders.
Consider from the Beginning of the World how many there were, how many there
are several Inventions of Religion; how many Ceremonies, how many Heresies, how
many Opinions, how many Decrees, how many Canons; yet cannot Religion lead men
in so many Ages to the right Path of Faith without the Word of God; which being
once made Flesh, and Triumphing over his Enemies on the Cross, Temples and dols
were thrown down, and the Powers of Numens and Oracles ceased.

The Voice of Pytho's gone, that seldom ^rr'd.
Apollo too, so many Ages* heard,
Is now in silence locked.
Tby Service done, to thine own Country go;
Return to thine own Altars down below.
For no sooner the Word of God came to shine in the World by the manifestation
of the Gospel, but all the Gods of the Heathen, being as it were Thunderstruck,
fell to Destruction, according to the saying of Christ in Luke, I saw Satan
falling from Heaven like Lightning. How far this concerns Faith, Theology, and
the Decrees of the Canonists, we shall discourse hereafter: For now we are only
treating of Religion, so far as to those Mysteries contained therein, which
concern the benefits of the Priest, or that suffice to render the outward face
of the Commonwealth sumptuous with Images, Statues, Temples, Phanes, Chapels,
Dignities, Pomp and Riches of the Ministers and Ecclesiastical Officers, of
which I have Disputed at large, in my Dispute upon the Theological Decrees,
held by me at Collen, in the Year 1510: and therefore I shall the more briefly
pass them over now, yet show you, that among those things which were set apart
for the decency of Worship, and most proper for the safety of Men's Souls, not a
little of the Tare of Vanity and Destructive Superstition has been mixed.

CHAP. LVII.
Of Images.
THe worship of Images has not been anciently by all people admitted: For the
Jews, as Josephus relates, after they had been so often chastized, and indeed
at first the most strict observers of the Law, did abhor nothing more than the
making of Images. For the commands of God, delivered by Moses, did utterly
prohibit the use of Images, either in Temples or in any other place. And
Eusebius testifies, that among the people called Seres, the adoration of Images
was by Law absolutely forbidden. Neither do we read either in Clement or
Plutarch, that (for so Numa had decreed) there was any Image to be seen, or
that was spoken of, for above a hundred and seventy years after the building of
the City. Which also St. Austin alleadges out of Varro, whose words most
clearly witness, that there was no Image or Idol in the City for one hundred
and sixty years; and that afterward it came to pass, that by reason of the
Multitude of Images and Idols, the Worship of the Gods was not only neglected,
but had in contempt. The Persians also, as Herodotus and Strabo Witness, never
suffered Images among them. On the otherside, in the honor of Idols there were
none more Superstitious and dotingly stupid than the Egyptians, from whence
that Impiety, as from a corrupted Fountain, overran other Nations; which
Superstitious Customs, and false Religion of the Heathens, when the same
People became to be Converted to the Christian Faith, did not a little
contaminate the Purity of our Religion; introducing Idols and Images into our
Church, together with many Barren Pomps and Ceremonies, of which there was
nothing thought of among the Ancient and Primitive Christians: Nor can it be
imagined how strongly and superstitiously Idolatry is riveted into the Minds of
the Unlearned Multitude by the means of Images; the idle Priests among the
Catholics conniving thereat, as reaping not a little benefit thereby. It Is
true, they endeavor to defend themselves by the help of St. Gregory's Words;
who says, That Images are the Books of the Vulgar, whereby the Memory of
things is by them the more easily retained; so that by these, they who cannot
read, may yet be taught, and by the sight thereof be drawn to the Contemplation
of God. However, these are but the humane Comments and Suppositions of
Palliating St. Gregory; and though that good Man might in some sort approve of
the Images themselves; yet it cannot be thought that he did any way allow the
Worship thereof. For it is no part of our duty to learn from the Forbidden Book
of Images, but from the Book of God, which is the Scripture. He therefore who
desires to know God, let him not endeavor to obtain that Knowledge from the
handiwork of Painters and Statuaries; but according to the Direction of St.
John, Let him search the Scriptures what testimony they give concerning him.
And they who cannot read, let them hear the Word of the same Scripture, where
St. Paul pronounces, That Faith comes by hearing; and what Christ in another
place ^aith. My Sheep know my Voice. As also what in another place he avers, No
man can come to him unless the Father draw him, and no man comes to the Father
but by Christ himself. Why then do we take the Glory from God, giving it to
Pictures and Images, as if they could draw us to the Knowledge of the most
Divine Being? To this we may add the vain and immoderate Worship of idle
Relics. We confess, That the Relics of the Saints are Holy, and that they
thall one day shine with the Glories of Eternity; Yet to give them Adoration as
to the Reilqu^s of D^ities that hear our Prayers, is a most stupid piece of
Fascination. Lest therefore we fall into Idolatry and Superstition, it is the
safest way for us not to fix our Faith upon visible things. But the Covetous
Generation of the Romish Clergy, greedy after gain, raising matter to ^eed
their Avarice, not only out of Wood and Stones, but also from the Bones of the
Dead, and Relics of the Saints, make them the Instruments of their Rapine and
Extortion. They show the Sepulchers of the Saints; they expose the Relics of
Martyrs; which no man must so much as touch or kiss, but for money. They adorn
their Pictures, set out their Festivals with great Pomp and State, they extol
'um for Saints, advance the Fame of their Miracles, utterly disagreeing in
their Lives and Conversations, from the Lives and Examples of those whom they
praise. These were the Men to whom our Savior spoke, when he cried out, Woe be
to you that build up the Sepulchers of the Prophets like to those that show
them. Like to the Heathen, to every Saint they allot his proper charge; to one
with Neptune they share the Command of the Seas, and power of Deliverance from
the dangers thereof: to another with Jupiter, to have the Dominion of Thunder:
to another with Vulcan to control the Fire: to another they pray with Ceres
for seasonable and plentiful Harvests: to another with Bacchus they give the
Charge of their Vintages and Vines. The Women also have their Deities, from
whom, as from Lucina, they beg for Children, and the cure of Barrenness: and
another, by whose Power they either Appease, or Revenge themselves upon their
Angry Husbands. Others there are, to whom they give the privilege of
recovering and finding Lost Goods. Neither is there any Disease which has not
its peculiar Physician among the Saints. Which is the reason that Physicians do
not get so much as Lawyers; there being no sort of Action, though never so
just, that ever could boast of a Saint for its Patron. It Is true, the Papists
aver, That as the Soul in every Member Displayes a several Act; and every Act,
as it is variously disposed, receives a distinct Power, as the Eye to see, the
Ears to hear: So Christ in his Mystical Body, of which he is the Soul, by his
several Saints, as Members accommodated to the same Body, does Administer and
Distribute the several gifts of his Grace to the Inferior Creatures; and that
to every Saint is allotted a particular operation for the dispersing of several
Graces, according to the variety of Graces given to each Man. But this
Conjecture, as being one of Agrippa's Vanities, for which there is no ground in
Scripture, we cannot reckon among the Vanities of Science, but as a peculiar
Invention of his own.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Temples.
NOW as concerning Temples, there was nothing wherein the Superstition of the
Gentiles was more eminent, who to every Deity were very curious in Building
particular Temples; after whose Example, the Christians afterward Dedicated
their Temples to particular Saints. Yet there were many Nations that never made
use of any Temples; and Xerxes is reported to have burnt all the Temples
throughout Asia, at the persuasion of his Magicians, believing it to be an
Impious thing to enclose the Gods in Walls. But of these Temples Zeno Citicus
Disputed formerly in these Words; To build Churches and Temples, says he, it
is no way necessary: for nothing ought to be accounted Sacred by Right, nothing
to be esteemed Holy which men themselves Build. Among the Persians of old there
were no Temples; Neither was there among the Hebrews from their first
beginning, but only one Temple Dedicated to Divine use, which was Built by
Solomon, of which however it is thus written in Isaias; Thus says the Lord,
The Heaven is my seat, the Earth the footstool for my feet, what is this house
which thou buildest for me? And Stephen the Protomartyr adds, Solomon built a
House, but the most High Inhabits not in places made with Hands. And Paul the
Apostle says to the Athenians, God dwells not in Temples made with hands: for
being the Lord of Heaven and Earth, he is not served by men's hands, who wants
not their help. However he teaches, that Humane Nature, even Men themselves
Holy, Pious, Religious, Devout to God, are the most acceptable Temples to God:
as he Asserts, writing to the Corinthians, Ye are the Temple of God, and the
Spirit of God dwells in you; the Temple of God is holy, so ought you to be.
Moreover, Origin writing against Celsus, confesses, That at the first beginning
of Christian Religion, and long after Christ's Suffering, there were no Churches
Built; Confirming by many Arguments, that among Christians they avail neither
to the right Worship of God, nor to the Honor of true Religion. Therefore
faith Lactantius, Temples are not to be made to God of Stones piled up to an
immense height, but there is a place to be reserved in the Heart of every Man,
where his Thoughts ought to retire when they are taken up in Religious Exercise.

Not Temples made with hands the Almighty hold;
Just men are the true Temples made of Gold.
And Christ sends his Adorers not into the Temple, not into the Synagogues, but
into their private Closets to Pray. And we read, that he himself did many times
appear with the Multitude in the Cities, in the Temple, in the Synagogue, when
he made his Sermons; but he went into the Mountain to Pray, where he spent the
Night in Prayer. However, the Church, that does nothing but by the Inspiration
of the Spirit of God, when the Christian Religion began to increase, and that
Sinners entered into the Temple with the Godly, the weak with the strong in
Faith, and as they entered the Ark of Noe, the Clean with the Unclean, did then
Ordain certain Temples, Chapels, Churches, and separated Places free from
Profane business, wherein the Word of God might be Publicly Preached to the
Multitude, and the Sacraments might be more decently and orderly Administered;
which have since been held by the Christians in most Venerable Esteem; and
being guarded with the Immunities of several Princes, have increased to such a
vast Number, augmented with the Addition of Monasteries, Abbeys, and the like,
that it is very necessary that many of them should be cut off as superfluous
and unnecessary Members. And here we cannot be unmindful of another Enormity,
which is the superbity of Building, wherein vast sums of Alms and sacred Money
is expended; which, as we have observed before, would be more fitly and
honestly employed in the maintenance of the true poor of Christ, the true
Temples and resemblances of God, many times ready to perish for hunger, thirst,
cold, labor, sickness, and want.

CHAP. LIX.
Of Holy Days.
Holy Days, both among the Gentiles, as among the Jews, were always in great
estimation; who did all at certain times of the year, and upon certain days,
set apart several Holy Days for Divine worship upon several occasions; as if it
were lawful to be more religious or more ungodly at one time than another; or
that it were the pleasure of God to be worshipped more at one time than
another: which St. Paul objects to the Galatians as a shame, writing to them
afthis manner: Ye observe days and months, and times and years: I fear I have
labored for you in vain, and without a cause. Concerning which when he
admonishes the Colossians, he commands them in these words: Let no man judge
you for meat or drink upon a Holyday, or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath,
which are members of future things. For to true and perfect Christians there is
no difference of days, who are always feasling and pleasing themselves in God,
always keeping a perpetual Sabbath; as Isaiah prophesi'd to the Fathers of the
Jews: The time shall come that their Sabbath shall be taken away; and when the
Savior comes, there shall be a perpetual Sabbath, and perpetual New Mons.
However, for the sake of the common people, and the more illiterate part of the
Church, the Holy Fathers did institute Holy Days, that they might have liberty
and vacancie to come and hear the Word, and to celebrate Divine Worship, and
for receiving the Sacraments; yet so that the Church should not be subservient
to the days, but that the days should be subservient to the Church. Therefore
did the Fathers ordain certain Holy Days wherein the common people were
exhorted to abstain from worldly business and bodily labor, whereby they might
be the more free to serve God, the more at leisure to pray and think upon
Divine matters, to be present at Service and Sermons, and to tend such other
Duties as might most directly tend to their Salvation. But that same perverter
of Equity, that destroyer of all Order and Decency, that author of all Evil,
the Devil, endeavoring to pull down whatever the Holy Ghost sets up, has near
demolished this Tower of Beauty also. While we behold the greatest part of
Christians not converting this Holy leisure of Holy Days to the exercises of
Prayer, or hearing the Word of God, but spending their precious time in the
corruption of all good Manners, Dancing, Stage Plays, lewd Songs, idle Sports
and Games, Drinking, Feasting, Visiting, and in all worldly and Carnal works
quite opposite to Spiritual. As Tertullian speaks of the solemn Feasts of the
Caesar's: They were wont, says he, to make a great stir, to bring forth into
the public street their Fires and their Chorus's, to junket in the Highway,
to make a Tavern of the whole City, to pour Wine down one another throats by
violence, then to run headlong to do all manner of mischief, and to please
themselves in all manner of filthy Lust. Are we not therefore deservedly to be
condemned, who celebrate the Festivals of Christ and his Saints after such a
lewd fashion? I confess we do not find many Heretical Disputes concerning
Holy Days, omitting the madness and Blasphemy of the Manichaeans, and the
pestiferous opinions of the Cataphrygians; yet had they like to have occasioned
a great breach in the Church, when Victor the Pope excommunicated all the
Eastern and Southern Churches for not keeping Easter Day according to the
direction of the Western Decrees; who notwithstanding was notably resisted,
among others, by Polycrates Bishop of Asia. Ireneus also Bishop of Lions,
though he observed Easter Day as was commanded by Victor, yet with great
freedom undertook to chide the Pope, for that he had, contrary to the Example
of his Predecessors, as a disturber of the Peace, lopped off so many Limbs of
the Church, not for any Error in point of Faith, but only for disagreeing in
point of Ceremony from the Church of Rome. It Is true, there have been many
decrees of Popes and Councils to confirm and settle the observation of
Easter Day, and many Ecclesiastic Computations have been made, for the better
finding out of the true day: And yet to this very hour they could never find
out a certain day, or that was Universally observed through the whole World at
one and the same time. A very worthy business indeed, that for the humor of
one obstinate Pope, the whole Church should suffer Shipwreck.

CHAP. LX.
Of Ceremonies.
OF the Members of Religion, the Pomp of Rites and Ceremonies in Habits, in
Vessels, in Lights, in Bells, in Organs, in Singing, in Perfumes, in Postures,
in Pictures, in the choice of Meats and Fasts, and the like, have been received
and approved with great Adoration and Veneration by the Multitude, especially
Papistical, who understand no more than what they see with their Eyes. Numa
Pompilius first Instituted Ceremonies among the Romans, thereby to invite a
rude and fierce People, that had obtained a Kingdom by Violence and Rapine, to
Piety, Truth, Justice and Religion: such were the Ancylia and Palladium, the
Sacred Pledges of the Empires Safety; the double-Fronted Janus, Arbiter of
Peace and War; The Fire of Vesta, over which a she- Flamin did continually
Watch: The Year also divided into Twelve Months, with the variety of Good and
Evil Days. The Sacerdotal Dignity divided into Pontifexes and Augurs; their
various Ceremonies of Sacrifices, Supplications, Shows, Processions, Temples;
of which the greatest part, as Eusebius testifies, has been Translated into our
Religion. But God himself, who delights not in Flesh and Humane Signs,
contemns and despises these Carnal and Exterior Ceremonies. For he is not to
be Worshipped with Corporal Actions, Eye-pleasing Works, or Carnal Adoration,
but in Spirit and Truth by Christ Jesus. For he looks upon the Faith,
considering the inward Thoughts and Intentions of Men; the searcher of Hearts,
that sees the very Secrets of the Soul. Therefore those Carnal and outward
Ceremonies no way advance us toward God, with whom there is nothing acceptable
but Faith in Jesus Christ; with a perfect imitation of his Charity, and an
unshaken hope in his Salvation and Reward. This is the true Worship, spotless
from all Contamination of External and Carnal Ceremonies; wherein St. John
instructing us, says, That God is a Spirit, and to be worshipped in Spirit and
Truth. This some of the Ethnic Philosophers were not ignorant of; therefore
Plato forbid that any Ceremonies should be used in the Worship of the most high
God. For there is nothing wanting to him, who is all things himself; only it is
requisite that we should adore him, by returning our thanks to him for all
things. Neither have we any thing more grateful to return to God, than Praise,
Glory, and Thanks. Neither will it serve for an Objection, to insist upon the
Sacrifices, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, as if God had taken
delight in them. For God brought them not out of Egypt to offer up Sacrifices
and Incense to him; but that forgetting the Idolatry of the Egyptians, they
might hear the Voice of God, and obey him in Faith and Truth to the ob^aining
of their Salvation. Now the reason that Moses Instituted Sacrifices and
Ceremonies among them was, that he bare with their Infirmities, and yielded to
the hardness of their Hearts, indulging a small Error, to recall them from
things more unlawful, directing their Sacrifices to God, and not to Devils. For
those things were not principally Instituted, but by consequence; neither could
that Law oblige them otherwise, than as it was approved by the people.
Therefore Moses when he produced the Laws of Ceremonies, he collected the
suffrages of the Elders and the people, whereby to render them more pliable to
his commands. Therefore might that Law be changed according to the alteration
of times and manners, and was at last totally abrogated; but the Law of God
delivered in the Tables of Stone, that is perpetual. For so God spoke by
Jeremiah, Why do ye offer to me Frankincense of Saba* and Cynamon fetched from
a far Country? Your Holocau^ts and your Sacrifices have not pleased me. And
again by the same Prophet, Thus says the Lord, Put your burnt offerings to
your sacrifice, and eat flesh, for I spoke not to your Fathers, nor commanded
them when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning sacrifices and
burnt-offerings; but this thing commanded I them* saying, Obey my voice, and I
will be your God, and ye shall be my people; and walk ye in all the ways that I
have commanded, you that it may be well with you. And Isaiah 43. 23. Thou have
not brought me, faith the Lord, the sheep of thy burnt-offerings, neither have
thou honored me with thy Sacrifices; I have not caused thee to serve with an
Offering, nor wearied thee with Incense; thou boughtest me no sweet savor with
money, neither have thou made me drunk with the fat of thy Sacrifices: but thou
have made me to serve with thy sins, and have wearied me with thy iniquities.
And Chap. 66. v. 2. To him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and that trembles at my words. For it is not thy fat flesh
that shall cleanse thee from thy iniquities. For Chap. 58. v. 5. It is such a
fast that I have chosen, verse. 6. to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off
the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke.
verse. 7. To deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that
wandreth into thy house: when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and
hide not thy self from thine own Flesh. Verse 8. Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thy health shall grow speedily, thy righteousness
shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall compass thee. Verse 9.
Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, Here am I. I will not deny,
but that as by Moses and Aaron formerly in the Synagogue, and after him by the
succeeding Priests, Judges and Prophets, even to the Scribes and Pharisees; so
also in the Christian Church it was the practice of the Apostles, Evangelists,
Fathers, Priests and Doctors, to deck and adorn her with decent Rites,
Ceremonies and Institutions, to render her a more amiable Bride to her
Celestial Spouse. To which later Ages have added many things too much savouring
of Humane Weakness. But as it often happens, that that which is provided as a
Remedy, turns oftentimes to nourish the Disease; so happens it now with the
Ceremonies of the Church, that through the folly of Popish Superstition,
Christians are now adays more clogged with continual innovations than were the
Jews of old; and, which is worse, though these Ceremonies are many of them
neither good nor bad in themselves, but things indifferent; yet the
superstitious people groping in the dark of Popery and Superstition, place a
greater belief in them, and observe them more strictly than the Commands of
God: the Bishops, Abbots, Monks and Priests conniving all the while thereat,
and well providing thereby for their Bellies. Now these Ceremonies, though they
have been the occasion of few Heresies against the Faith, yet have they
introduced innumerable Sects into the Church, and have been the seed of many
Schisms. For from hence it came to pass, that the Greek Church was separated
from the Romans, while the one Consecrated Unleavened, the other Leavened
Bread; when it matters not which, so the Bread be consecrated. Hence the
Bohemian Church separated from the Roman, that they might administer the
Sacrament in both kinds; but as St. Paul says, Gal. 6. 15. Neither
circumcision avails, nor uncircumcision, but the observance of the Commands
of God, which the same Author in the same place calls, the new creature.
Therefore is it a most abominable piece of Iniquity, for such slight causes,
and about things indifferent, to disturb the Unity of the Church, and divide
the Body of Christ; and as our Savior objects to the Pharisees, to Cleanse the
outside of the Cup and swallow a Camel. Therefore by the providence of God the
Pope did himself little good, when he was so stingy against the Leaven of the
Greeks, and the Bohemian Cup.

CHAP. LXI.
Of the Magistrates and Superiors of the Church.
IN the Government of the Church, it is necessary to make use of Ecclesiastical
Magistrates and Officers, for the avoiding confusion. Now whatsoever is done in
the Church, either for Ornament or for the increase of Religion, whether it be
in the Election of Overseers, or in the Institution of Ministers, unless the
same be done by the instinct of the Divine Spirit, which is the Soul of the
Church, it is altogether impious, and contrary to the Truth: For whosoever is
not called to the great Office of the Ministry, and Dignity of Apostleship by
the Spirit, as was Aaron; and whoever enters not in at the door which is
Christ, but gets another way into the Church through the window, that is to
say, by the favor of men, by purchasing Voices in Election, or by superior
Power; certainly such a one is no Vicar of Christ or of his Apostles, but a
Thief and an Impostor, the Vicar of Judas Iscariot, and Simon the Samaritan.
Therefore it was so straightly provided by the ancient Fathers in the Election
of Prelates, (which they therefore call the Sacrament of Nomination) that the
Prelates and Apostles who were to be Overseers of the Ministers of the Church,
should be men of most unspotted Integrity in their Lives and Conversations,
powerful in sound Doctrine, able to give a reason of all their doings: But the
ancient Constitutions falling from their Majesty, and the late Pontifical
Jurisdiction by damnable Custom getting a head, such a sort of Popes and
Prelates now adays ascend into the Throne of Christ, such as were the Scribes
and Pharisees in the Chair of Moses, who talk and do nothing, binding heavy
burdens to the shoulders of the people, to which they will not put the stress
of a little finger: Mere Hypocrites, performing all their works to be seen of
men, making a show of their Religion as it were in Scenes; they covet the chief
Seats at Feasts, in Schools, in the Synagogues; the upper hands in the streets,
and to be saluted with the ponderous appellations of Rabbi and Doctors. They
barricado up the Gate of Heaven, not only not going in themselves, but
excluding others. They devour Widows houses, jabbering long Prayers, traveling
Land and Seas to seduce children and ignorant persons; that having by the
addition of one Proselyte increased their forlorn number, they may with a more
numerous train enter the Regions of Fire prepared for them. With their idle
Legends and Traditions, they corrupt the most Holy Laws of Christ; and
neglecting the true Temple of God, the living Images of the Son of the Father,
and the Altars of the peoples Souls, with a covetous eye seek after only Gold
and Gifts; and minding the more profitable and sinister parts of the Law, are
very strict in their Decrees touching Tithes, Oblations, Collections, and Alms;
Tithing Fruits, Cattle, Money; not sparing also things of the smallest price,
as Mint, Anise, and Cumin, for which, barking like Dogs, they daily contend
with the people in the Pulpit. But as for the more weighty and righthand-works
of the Gospel, Law, Christian-Justice, Judgment, Mercy, Faith, these they
altogether neglect, slumbling at a little Stone, but leaping over a great Rock;
blind Guides, false and treacherous, a Generation of Vipers, whitened
Sepulchers; outwardly in their Miters, Caps, Habits, Garments and Cowls, making
a show of Simplicity and Sanctimony, within full of Filth, Hypocrisy, and
Iniquity; Whoremongers, Dancers, Players, Pimps, Gamesters, Gluttons,
Drunkards, Sorcerers, who being advanced to Bishoprics, Cardinalats, Abbeys,
and the like, not by virtue of their deserts, but either by servile Flattery,
Gifts, favor of Princes, or affection of Friends and Kindred, under the Mask
of Hypocrisy heap to themselves private riches; devouring the goods of the
Poor, making Fairs and Monopolies of the Alms of our Predecessors, wasting them
again in Brothel-houses, Gaming, Hunting, and in all manner of Riot and Luxury.

-- Who Cure of Souls neglecting quite,
In Horse and Hounds place all their chief delight.
They perplex the People, set Kings and Princes together by the Ears, solicit
Wars, pull down Churches which the Devotion of their Ancestors reared, to Bu^ld
stately Palaces in their places, clad in Purple and Gold, to the great loss and
impoverishment of the People, infamy of Religion, and insupportable burden of
the Commonwealth; whom the Famous Bernardus Clarevallensis in a S^rmon at the
opening the general Synod of Rbeimes, before the Pope, openly styled, not
instead of shepherds Mercenary, not instead of Mercenaries Wolves, but instead
of Wolves Devils. Now as for the Pope himself, as the Bishop, Camotensis
complains, he is the most intolerable and burdensome of all, whose Pomp and
Pride never any the most haughty Tyrant yet equaled. And yet they boast, that
the safety of Religion and the Church is established only in them, who throwing
the burdens of Religious Duties, and the Ministry of the Gospel, which is the
true Pontifical Function, upon their Inferiors, fit at the Helm making their
own Laws, and receiving the benefits and profits of the Church, themselves in
the mean while as idle, as they are full of iniquity. And making us believe,
that the Pontifical Chair either admits none but Holy Men, or else makes them
so; thence they think it lawful for them to perpetrate any manner of
wickedness. A perfect Example of all which, Crinitus gives us in Boniface the
8th. This is that great Boniface who did three Great and Miraculous things; who
Cousening Clement with a counterfeit Message from Heaven, caused him to resign
the Pontifical Chair to him; who compiled the Sixth Book of Decretals, and made
the Pope Lord and Supreme in all things. Lastly, who Instituted the Jubilee,
Erecting Fairs for Indulgencies, extending his Jurisdiction as far as
Purgatory. I omit those other Monsters of Popes, such as was Formosus, and
those other Nine that followed him; neither do I insist upon those other of
later times, as Paulus, Sixtus, Alexander, Julius, most famous Disturbers of
the Christian World. I pass by Eugenius, who violating the League made between
him and the Turks, was the occasion of such dreadful Calamities that afterward
befell the Christian Commonwealth. How great mischief Alexander the sixth
brought upon all Christendom, by poisoning Selim Brother of Bajazeth the Great
Turk, is known to all Men. The Legates also of the Popes, as the said
Camotensis witnesses, and daily Experience makes manifest, rage with such Fury
in their several Provinces, as if Satan were sent from the face of God to
scourge the Church. They trouble the Earth, and put it in an Uproar, that they
may seem to have a Charm to appease it again; they are glad when evil things
are committed, rejoicing in the worst and most wicked Actions, and scarce can
refrain from Tears when they behold nothing Lamentable. They eat the sins of
the people, are clad and nourished with the same; and luxuriously wallow in the
same: yet have they fine names and pretenses for their Vices; neither can any
thing be objected against them, which they cannot excuse by the Example of some
Saint or other. For if it be thrown in their Teeth that they are Illiterate and
Ungodly, they say, That Christ chose such for his Apostles, who were neither
Masters of the Law, nor Scribes, nor ever frequented Synagogues or Schools.
Tell them of the barbarousness of their Language, they will tell ye Moses had an
impediment in his Speech; and that Jeremie knew not how to speak; and that
Zachary, though he were dumb, was not excluded from the Priesthood. If you
object against them their Ignorance of the Scripture, Infidelity, Error, or
Heresy; they repeat to ye, That St. Ambrose not yet a Christian, but only
Catechumenos, was Elected to be a Bishop; and that St. Paul, not only from
being an Infidel, but a Persecuter, was called to be an Apostle; that St.
Austin was a Manichaean; and that Marcelline the Martyr in his Papacy,
Sacrificed to Idols. If you upbraid them for their Ambition, they bring ye for
an Example the Sons of Zebedee; If for Faint-heartedness, Jonas and Thomas, the
one fearing to go to the Ninivites, the other to the Indians. If for
Fornication, they say Oseas married a Strumpet, and Sampson a Whore. If for
Quarrelling, Fighting, Murder, or taking up Arms; they tell you how St. Peter
cut off Malchus Ear, how St. Martin served under Julian, and how Moses killed
the Egyptian and hid him in a Stable. So that among them it is a matter of no
Moment what manner of Person he be, that is admitted to the chiefest
Ecclesiastical Promotions: and then every one must submit his Neck to the Sword
of these Ecclesiastical Tyrants. Not the Sword of the Word, of which they ought
to be the chief Keepers and Ministers; but the Sword of Ambition, the Sword of
Covetousness, the Sword of Injustice and Extortion, the Sword of bad Example,
the Sword of Blood and Murder, with which they arm and defend themselves
against all Truth, Justice and Honesty.

The Scepter 's forceless, where no Justice raigns;
That 's true Religion, Honesty maintains.
Freedom is Force, licentiously used;
The Sword Protects not, when to Rage abused.
Nor is it lawful to contradict their Decrees, or disobey their Wills, unless
any one be prepared to suffer Martyrdom as a Heretic; the very reason that
Jeremy Savanarola, a Divine of the Order of Preaching Friars, was burnt at
Florence, and suffered a Martyrdom. However, because all Powers are good, as
being of God, who is the giver of all things, and of all good things; and
though to those that are in authority, and those that are in subjection they
may sometimes prove of evil consequence, however to the generality there is
something of good in them; God so providing, who turns all our evil actions for
the best. Whoever is therefore by God constituted a Bishop or Ruler in the
Church, him we ought to obey, and in no wise to contradict; for who disobeys
the Bishop or Priest, disobeys not man but God, as he himself spoke to the
Contemners of Samuel: They have not contemned thee but me: And as Moses
reproving the murmuring people, says, Ye have not murmured against us, but
against the Lord your God; nor will God suffer them to go unpunished that
resist their Bishop or Prelate. Thus Dathan and Abiram rebelled against Moses,
and the Earth swallowed them up. Many conspired with Corah against Aaron, and
were consumed with Fire. Achab and Jezebel persecuted the Prophets, and were
eaten by Dogs. The Children mocked Elisha, and were torn and devoured by Bears.
Vzzia the King presuming to meddle with the Priesthood, was stricken with
Leprosy. Saul adventuring to sacrifice without the presence of Samuel the High
Priest, was deprived of his Kingdom, and not only deprived of his Prophetic
Spirit, but possessed with an Evil one. It is a point of Infidelity not to
believe the Scriptures, a point of Impiety to despite the Ecclesiastic
Government.

CHAP. LXII.
Of the several sorts of Monks.
THere are yet remaining in the Church a sort of People of several Opinions
which are called Monks and Friars Anchorites, altogether unknown to the Old
Law: At this day they assume to themselves the Title of Religious Persons;
prescribing to themselves most severe Rules of Living; and Professing most Holy
Duties and Exercises, march under the Name and Banner of some most Religious
and noted Person or Martyr, as Bernard, Austin, Benedict, Francis, and the
like: but at this time there is an Abominable Rout of sinners crept in among
them. For hither, as to a Sanctuary, flock together all those, who out of the
guilt of their Consciences, or otherwise fearing the Punishment of the Law, are
safe no where else, others who have committed certain Crimes that are to be
Expiated by Sufferance and Repentance, whom the dis-repute of their
Conversations has rendered proof against Infamy; who having wasted their
Estates with Whoring, Drinking, Gaming, and all manner of Riot, at length Debt
and Want compells 'um to Beg: others there are, whom the hope of ease, loss of
Mistress, or their being Cheated when Young, fierce Mothers-in-Law, or severe
Tutors, compel and drive to these Houses, the Massy Body of which Higgle-de
Piggle-de is joined and soder'd together with a reigned Sanctimony, a Cowl, and
a confidence of sturdy Begging. The Body of their Houses is that great Sea
wherein, with the other little Fishes, dwell the great Leviathans and
Behemoths, the Great Whales, Monsters, and creeping things, whose number is not
to be told. From thence are spewed up so many Stoical-Apes, so many
Penny-Beggers, so many Mendicant Gown-men, so many Monsters in Cowls, so many
Beard-weare^s, Rope-carriers, Staff-bearers, black, sad-colour, gray, white,
woodden-shooes, ba^^-footed Budget bearers, vary-colour'd, many-coated,
canvas-wearing cloak-carriers, gown-men, coat-carriers, some loose, some tucked
up, with all the rest of the crowds of Histrio's, who having no Faith in
Worldly things themselves, by reason of their monstrous habit, are yet by the
poor People of the World accounted Divine, Usurping the Sacred Name of Religion
to themselves, and boasting themselves to be the Companions of Christ and his
Apostles; whose Life and Conversation is generally most Wicked, contaminated
and defiled with all manner of Covetousness, Lust, Ambition, Sawciness,
Impudence, and all manner of enormity; yet going safe and unpunishable, under
the defense of pretended Religion. For they are fortified with the Privileges
of the Romish Church, and exempted from all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to the
end they may the more lawfully go on in Wickedness: and although they are able
to cite all other Persons whatsoever before their false and illiterate
Tribunal, yet they themselves can be Cited no where but either to Rome or
Jerusalem. As for their Vanities and Errors, were I to set them down in
Writing, not all the Parchment in Madian would comprehend them; I mean of them
who profess not Piety for Religions sake, but put on the Cowl to maintain their
Luxury. Most rapacious Wolves, who under Lambs-skins and Sheeps-cloathing hide
the Fox in their Breasts, using such Arts of Dissimulation, that their whole
Profession seems to be a mere Mimick Hypocrisy, and a mere trade of Piety
driven on by personated Persons, which under a Pale Visage hide their pretended
Fasting, making their dutiful Tears obey their deep Sighs, counterfeiting
Prayers with the Motion of their Lips, and by means of their sober Gate, and
demure Postures, With Head dejected, fixing on the Ground
Their Leacherous Eyes.
Assuming Modesty and Devoutness to themselves, with their poor Garments
covering their pretended Humility, and by means of their Cowls hanging down
their backs, creating to themselves an Opinion of Holiness, though their inward
and private Conversations be most detestable; who though they commit very great
Enormities, are yet saved; with the pretense of Religion overcoming, and with
their Cowls, as with Bucklers, warding off all the Darts of ill-Fortune; and
thus living secure from all civil Troubles and Dangers, eating the bread of
Idleness, instead of that which they ought to Labor ^or, they afterward lie
down to Rest in ease and quiet: Esteeming it to be Evangelical poverty, to feed
upon the Labors of other men in beggary and idleness. These are they who
Professing utmost Humility, clad in mean and vile Habit, barefooted,
Stage Players, bound with Ropes, like Robbers and Thieves, with their Heads
shaven like Mad-folks, with their Cowls, Beads, and Bells like Morris-Dancers
and Carneval-mummers, prosess themselves to wear these Emblems of Poverty and
Contempt for the sake of Christ and Religion: yet swelling inwardly with
Ambition, and giving to the chief of their Orders the most Arrogant^Tides of
Paranymphs, Rectors, Guardians, Presidents, Priors, Vicars, Provincials,
Archimandritae, and Generals; so that no sort of People seems more covetous of
People than they are. There are not wanting many other Enormities which may be
truly reported of them; but there are others before me, who have made
sufficient discovery thereof already. I will not deny but there are some Pious
and Devout men among them, but the Generality of 'um are Infidels, Reprobates,
and Apostates, that deform and deface Religion.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of Prostitution, or the trade of Whoring.
HEre it seems no way unseasonable for us to speak something of the Art of
Bawdery, seeing that among the Egyptians, the first institutors of Religion, it
was not lawful for any person to be made a Priest that was not first initiated
in the ceremonies and mysteries of Priapus; and for that in our Church it is
also a received Maxim, that there can be no Pope without Testicles, and that
Eunuchs and gelt persons are forbidden to be admitted into the Priesthood; and
for that we also find, that wheree're there be the most stately Priories and
Abbeys, there are always certain Bawdy-houses adjoining to 'um: and for that
the recluse houses of Nuns, and Religious houses, are for the most part but the
receptacles of lewd women, whom the Monks themselves do often keep privately in
the Habit of Men, for their particular solace. Therefore I say, it seems very
proper to bring in a little discourse of the Practice of Bawdery in this place,
which many wise Philosophers have thought not only profitable, but necessary,
in a well-ordered Commonwealth: For Solon the great Lawgiver of the Athenians,
and adjudg'd for one of the seven Wise Men by the Oracle of Apollo, as Philemon
and Menander do both witness, took care for the buying of Wenches for the Young
men, the first that dedicated the Temple of Venus Pandemia at the expense of
the Rents of Prostitutes: he also instituted Brothel-houses, established them
by Law, and likewise gave them several privileges and immunities. In Greece*
Whores were had in so great esteem, that when the Persian was expected to make
his violent invasion, the Corinthian Curtesans were ordered to make a public
supplication for the safety of Greece in the Temple of Venus. It was also a
Custom among the Corinthians, that when they were to make any supplication to
Venus, about any great matter, the care of that Affair was always committed to
their Curtesans. Many Temples were built by the Curtesans among the Ephesians;
and they of Abydos built a most stately Temple in honor of their Prostitutes,
having recovered their lost liberty by the means of a Curtesan. The wise
Aristotle also was of opinion, that Curtesans were worthy of Divine honors,
when he sacrificed to Hermia the Harlot, in the same manner as is she had been
Ceres Eleusinae. Now the invention of this Art is attributed to Venus, who was
therefore translated among the number of the Gods. For she being a woman of
little shame, and prostituting her self to all manner of Lust, was the occasion
that the women in Cyprus made profit of the use of their bodies: Whence it was
a Custom among the Cypriotes, that their Virgins so long before Marriage
appointed, might Prostitute themselves for money to pay their Portion; and for
their Future Chastity should make a small Offering to Venus. It was a Custom
likewise among the Babylonians, as Herodotus affirms, That they who had
consumed their Private Estates, might compel their Daughters to Prostitution
for their Maintenance. Aspasia the Socratick Curtesan filled all Greece with
Harlots; for the Love of whom, and for that the Megareans had ravished from her
certain of her Young Girls, Aristophanes reports that Pericles undertook the
Peloponnesian War. The Emperor Heliogabalus did very much advance the Art of
Baudery; who, as Lampridius witnesses, would always have them prepared in his
own House for his Friends and Clyents. He also bestowed great Banquets on them,
of Twenty two great Dishes apiece, providing that between every Dish they might
wash and retire, and they were sworn to perform duty. Many times he would
redeem Harlots from Bawds, and give them their Freedom. And he is said among
the rest to have redeemed a certain Noted and very fair Curtesan for Thirty
pounds of Silver. And in one day he is said to have visited the Circus,
Theaters, and Amphitheatres, and all the Curtesans through all Parts of the
City, and to have distributed to every one a Crown in Gold. Another time he
assembled all the Harlots and Curtesans from all Parts of the City into one
Public spacious place, where he made them as it were a Military Oration,
calling them Fellow Soldiers, and disputed with them about the Variety of
Postures and Pleasures; and after he had made an end of his Harangue, he
ordered 'um, as to Soldiers, a Donative of Three Crowns in Gold: moreover, to
such Roman Women as would play the Harlot, he not only granted Immunity but
Impunity, and decreed Sallaries to the Harlots out of the Public Treasury. He
also Promulgated several wanton and sportive Decrees of the Senate touching
Harlotry, which by the Name of his Mother and Wife, he called Semiramid's Laws:
He also invented several sorts of Postures, whereby he might not only exceed
the Cyrenian Curtesan called Duodecamechanick, for having invented Twelve ways
of Venereal Exercise; but that he might also Excel all the Ancient Tribad's
Hostia's, Apbia's, Spinctria's, Gasalvada's, Casarita's, Prostipula's, and all
the other famous Artists of their Times. I omit Juda the Jewish Patriarch a
Fornicator, and Sampson, one of the Judges of the People of God, who Married
two Harlots; and Solomon the wisest King of the Jews, who kept whole Troops of
Curtesans: Caesar the Dictator, a most strong man, and therefore called the man
of Women: and Lastly, Sardanapalus Monarch of Babylon, with many other
Innumerable and most Potent Patrons of Curtesans. But I cannot pass by
Proculeius the Emperor, who has not got a little Fame by Indulging to the
Venereal Exercise, for that having taken an Hundred Sarmatian Virgins, he lay
with Ten the first Night, and Deflowered 'um all in fifteen days. Though that
were a far greater Labor which the Poets relate of Hercules, that he made
Fifty Virgins Women in one Night. Theophrastus a grave Author relates, That
there is an Herb of such Virtue in India, that he who Eats of it may be able to
lie with a Woman Seventy times. Add to all this, that this Art has received no
small ornament and credit from the Verses of Sappho the Poetess beloved of
Phaon, and from Leontium, with whom Metrodorus kept Company, most Learned in
Philosophy; insomuch, that she wrote against Theophrastus, in defense of
Fornication against Wedlock. Among which, we may number Sempronia, most Elegant
both in the Greek and Latin Tongues. Nor is L^aena to be passed by, kept by
Aristogiton; of a most approved Fidelity toward him, who being put upon the
Rack, to cause her to betray her friend, suffered the torments with an
unspeakable silence and constancy. Neither did ^^hodope the Curtisan less
ennoble this Art, the Preservatrix and Bedfellow of Aesop that compiled the
Fables, who attained such a mass of Wealth by prostituting her body, that the
built a third Pyramid, reckoned among the Wonders of the world. Next to her
Thais is to be remembered, who trusting in the prerogative of her Beauty,
disdained the company of any others than Kings and Princes. In the advancement
of this Art, Messalina far exceeded all these, who frequenting the public
Brothel-houses, overcame a noble Curtesan, suffering her self to be lain withal
twenty five times in twenty four hours, returning wearied, but not satisfied:
With whom we may join Joane the most Illustrious Queen of Naples of fresher
memory, with many other Princely Curtesans and Palatine Harlots, were it safe
to name them; yet in this differing from the common sort of Strunipets, that
contrary to the Law of Heliogabalus, they acted not in public Brothel-houses
like the Empress Messalina, but in private Chambers. We may add to these both
the Julia's, the Niece and Daughter of Octavianus Augustus, together with
Populea, and Cleopatra Queen of Egypt; nor can we forget Semiramis and
Pasiphae, most ancient Examples of Lasciviousness: Of which the Lust of the one
was so burning hot, that she not only wooed her own Son to her embraces, but
also passionately loved a Horse even to desire of Copulation. The other, Wife
to King Minos, suffered her self to be known by a Bull. It is not our business
to set forth here a Catalogue of Illustrious Curtesans; yet we must not omit to
inform you, that the Beds of Harlots and Adulteresses have brought forth the
most Illustrious Heroes in the world; for example, Hercules, Alexander,
Ishmael, Abimelech, Solomon, Constantine, Clodoveus King of the Franks,
Theodorick the Goth, William the Norman, and Raymund of Arragon. So lightly are
the Laws of Matrimony set by among great Personages, who at their pleasure
divorce, leave, and change their true and lawful Wives; and so often they wed
and rewed their Sons and Daughters, that it is hard to say which is the most
lawful Marriage. Do we not read how Ladislaus of Poland, having taken Beatrice
to Wife, by whose very nod, as it were, he obtained the Kingdom of Hungary, at
length repudiated her to marry a French Harlot? Do we not find, how Charles
the Eight the French King having divorced Margaret the Daughter of Maximilian
Caesar, took away his espoused Wife and married her? whom afterward Lewis the
Twelfth, having put away his own Wife, took afterward to his Bed; the Bishops
and Chief Clergy of the Kingdom assisting him therein, and consenting thereto;
who esteemed and valued the ends of obtaining Britany, more than the
observation of the Laws of Marriage. But let us return to the Discourse of
Harlots, whose cunning devices he that will understand, that is to say, by what
ways they prostitute their Chastity, with what wanton casts of the Eye, with
what nods of the Countenance, with what gestures of the Body, with what
flatteries of Speech, with what obscene Embraces, with what allurements of
Habit and artificial Paintings they provoke their Corrupters, together with the
rest of their cunning Harlotry Devices, Snares, and Stratagems, let him seek
'um among the Comic Poets. But he that desires to know what Allurements, what
affectionate Language, what Kissing, Handling, Rubbing, Resisting; what
postures of Lying, what impulse of Action, what reciprocations of Kindness
complete the Venereal Game, let him search into the Volumes of Physicians. Yet
there be others that have set forth Treatises of Harlotry, as Antiphanes,
Aristophanes, Apollodorus, and Callistratus; in particular, Cephalus the
Rhetorician wrote in the praise of Lais the Curtesan, and Alcidamus in honor
of Nais. Not have many others both Greeks and Latins been wanting to discover
their wanton Amors, as Callimachus, Philetes, Anacreon, Orpheus, Alceon,
Pindarus, Sappho, Tibullus, Catullus, Propertius, Virgil, Juvenal, Martial,
Cornelius Gallus, and many others, more like Panders than Poets; though all of
them were outdone by Ovid in his Heroic Epistles dedicated to Corinna, which
were also outdone by himself in his de Art Amandi, which he might have better
entitled, The Art of Whoring and Pimping: The learning whereof, because it had
corrupted Youth with unchaste Documents, therefore was the Author deservedly
banished by the Emperor Octavianus Augustus to the farthest parts of the
North, Archilochus also the Lacedaemonian, caused all Love-books and Verses to
be burnt. Yet now adays this Art is publicly learnt and taught in every School
by our unwary Pedagogues, with vain and obscene Commentaries upon the Text.
Nay, I my self have seen and read under the Title of The Curtesan, published in
the Italian Tongue, and printed at Venice, a Dialogue touching the Art of
Bawdery, wickedly explaining the Veneries of both Sexes, which with the Author
were more fit to be committed to the fire. I omit to rehearse the most
detstable vice of Buggery, which the Great Aristotle so much approves of, and
which Nero solemnized with a public Wedding; at which time St. Paul writing to
the Romans, denounces the anger of the Omnipotent against them. For on them
shall God certainly rain Brimstone, and Coals of fire shall be the portion of
their Cup. Against these the Emperor commands the Laws to arm themselves, and
with exquisite torments to inflict capital punishment upon them, the Sword
being the Executioner; but now adays they are burnt with Fire. Moses in his
Laws ordained most severe punishment for this Crime: and Plato extirpates it
out of his Republic, utterly condemning it in his Laws. The Ancient Romans, as
Valerius and others witness, inflicted most severe penalties on those that used
it. Examples whereof were Quintus Flaminius, and the Tribune stain by Caelius.
But that we may not farther vex the honest Ear, let us return from this
monstrous Lust and beastly uncleanness, to our first Subject. For the Love of
women is common to all, and there is no person that at one time or other does
not feel the Fire thereof; though the women love one way, the men another;
young men one way, great pesonages another way; the poor one way, the rich
another way: and, which is more miraculous, according to the difference of
Nations and Climates. The Italians are of one humor in their Amors, the
Spaniards of another, the French of another, the Germans of another. The same
difference of Love appears in the difference of Sex, Age, Dignity, Fortune, and
Nation, every one having a different sort of amorous Frenzy. The Love of men is
more ardent and impetuous, the love of women more constant; the love of young
men is wanton, the love of aged persons ridiculous; the poor Lover strives to
please with Obsequiousness, the rich Lady with Gifts; the vulgar sort with
Feasts and Treatments, Noblemen with Interludes and Plays. The ingenious
Italian courts his Lady with a dissembled heat, a quaint kind of Wooing,
praising her in Verse, and extolling her above all other women. If he be
jealous, he perpetually shuts her up, and keeps her as his Captive; if he
despair of enjoying his Mistress, then he confounds her with a thousand Curses,
and loads her with Maledictions. The Spaniard is rash, impatient of his heat,
mad, and restless, and bemoaning the torments of his Flames, with miserable
lamentations worships and adores his Mistress. If he be crossed in his Love, he
grieves and pines away to death; if he grow jealous, he kills her, or being
^atiated, leaves her to prostitute her self. The lascivious Frenchman trusts
in his Obsequiousness, and strives to win his Ladies favor with Songs and
merry Discourse. If he grow jealous, he complains of his hard fortune; but if
he lose his Love, he reviles her, threatens revenge, and attempts to compass
his ends by force. After enjoyment, he neglects her, and marries another. The
cold German slowly moves to love; but being once inflamed, he makes use of art
and liberality. If he grow jealous, he shuts his Purse. After enjoyment, the
heat is quickly over. The Frenchman feigns his Love, the German dissembles his
Heat: the Spaniard has a good opinion of himself, and believes himself to be
beloved; but the Italians Love is never without Jealousy. The Frenchman loves
a witty, though unhandsome woman; the Spaniard prefers a fair woman before a
witty: the Italian loves a fearful bashful woman; the German one that is bold.
The Frenchman, through vehement desire, of a wise man becomes a fool; but the
German having wasted all his Estate, at length, though late, of a fool becomes
a wise man: the Spaniard, for his Mistress sake, will attempt great things; and
the Italian, for the enjoyment of his Lady, contemns all thought of danger.
Moreover, we see that great men entangled in the Shares of Love and Passion,
many times forsake great Actions, and leave most noble Enterprises behind
their backs, as formerly Mithridates in Pontus, at Capua Hannibal, Caesar in
Alexandria, in Greece Demetrius, Antonie in Egypt. Hercules ceased from his
labors for Iole's sake: Achilles hides himself from the Battle for love of
Briseis: Circe stays Ulysses: Claudius* dies in Prison for love of a Virgin:
Caesar is detained by Cleopatra; and the same woman was the ruin of Antonius.
We read in Scripture, that for the Fornication of Seth with the Daughters of
Cain, that the whole Race of man was drowned in the Flood. The Sichemites and
the House of Amor was destroyed in revenge of Fornication and the whole people
of Israel, for committing Fornication with strange women, were many times
overcome in Battle, and carried into Captivity. And for the single Adultery of
one person, David the King, what a destruction and waste of people ensued! For
Fornication and ravishing of women, the Thebans, Phoceans, and Circeans were
assailed and quite overthrown; and for the same reason was the Peloponnesian
War undertaken, as I said before, by Pericles; and Troy for the same reason,
ten years besieged, to the vast detriment of Greece and Asia. For the same
reasons, and upon the same score, Tarquinius, Claudius, Dionysius, Hannibal,
Ptolomy, Marck Antony, Theodorick the Goth, Rodoaldus the Lombard, Childerick
of France, Advinceslaus of Bohemia, and Manphred the Neapolitan, suffered
death, and the ruin of their Countries. Merely for the vitiating of Julia Cana
Daughter of the Governor of Tingitana, by Rodorick the King, the Moors having
driven out the Goths, possessed all Spain. Henry the second, King of England,
for abusing the contracted Wife of his Son, Daughter of Philip the French King,
had like to have been driven out of his Kingdom by his Son. For being false to
their Beds, those enraged Wives, Clytemnestra, Olympia, Laodicea, Beronica,
Fregiogunda and Blanch both Queens of France, Joane of Naples, and many other
women, slew their Husbands. And this was the reason that Medea, Progne,
Ariadne, Althea, Heristilla, changing their maternal Love into Hatred, were
every one the cause and plotters of their Sons deaths. And now adays we find,
that many women revenge the Adulteries of their Husbands upon their Children;
and of most mild and patient Mothers, have become most cruel Medea's, furious
Althea's, and impious Heristilla's.

CHAP. LXIV.
Of Pandarism, or Procuring.
NOw because that by the advice, assistance, and persuasion of Pimps and Bawds,
both Whores and Whoremongers commit their mutual Follies; Let us discourse a
little concerning their Subtleties and Devices; for as it is the Calling of a
Whore only to prostitute her own body, so it is the business of a Pimp or Bawd
to batter and overcome the Chastity of another. Which is therefore a Trade to
be in some respects preferred before the Trade of Self-prostitution, by how
much it is the more wicked; and so much the more powerful, as being guarded
with the Artillery of many other Arts, and Experience besides: so much the more
pernicious, that while it makes use of other Arts and Sciences, whatever there
is of poison in any Art or Science, that this worshipful Vocation wholly sucks
to it self; out of which the weaves those Snares, that not like Spiders Cobwebs
take the Flies, but let go the stronger Birds; nor like the strong toils of
Hunters catch the bigger Beasts of Chase, and let go the less; but such strong
Nooses and Bands, that no Maid, no Virgin, no Woman, never so silly, never so
prudent, never so constant, never so obstinate, never so bashful, never so
fearful, never so confident, but will at length lend a willing ear to a Bawd,
and be ensnared with her persuasions. So fine a Craft is this, that no woman
can vanquish, whose persuasions no Virgin, Widow, Wife, or Matron, though a
Vestal, can resist; whose unarmed Militia vanquishes the Chastity of most
women, which a whole Army would not be able to conquer. The crafty tricks,
cunning shifts, deceit, circumventions, delusions, frauds, and strange
inventions of the Art of Bawdery, no Pen can suffice to set down, nor Wit to
express: So that it is nothing strange, that though there be so many Professors
of this Trade of both Sexes, yet there are few that arrive to a perfection
therein. For since the Baits of Pandarism lie couched in every Art or Science,
it behooves therefore a Bawd to be perfect in every one. Therefore she that
intends to be a perfect Bawd, must not direct her studies to one particular
sort of knowledge, as to her Polestar, but to be universally learned, as
professing an Art to which all other Arts and Sciences are but the Slaves and
Handmaids. For first and foremost, Grammar, the Art of Writing and Speaking,
affords ye ability to write Love Letters, and how to compose and frame them of
Complements, Petitions, Lamentations, and Moans, Invocations, Protestations,
and alluring persuasions; of all which ye have many late Presidents, in
Sylvius, Jacobus, Caviceus, and many other Modern Authors. There is also
another use of Grammar for the manner of abstruse and secret writing in
Characters, an Invention of Archimedes the Syracusan, as Aulus Gellius reports.
Concerning this, Trithemius Abbot of Spanheime has written two Treatises some
few years since, one under the Title of Polygraphy, the other under the Title
of Stenography; in the latter of which, he has discovered such mysterious ways
and means of expressing the mind at what distance soever, and concealing the
meaning of words plainly legible, that the most discerning jealousy of Juno,
nor the strict custody of Danae, nor the watchful eyes of Argos can ever
prevent. Next to Grammar comes Madam Poesy, who by the assistance of her
lascivious Rhimes, wanton Stories, and Love-dialogues, Epigrams, and Epistles,
taken out of the Armories of Venus, playing the part of a Pimp and Bawd
together, corrupts all Chastity, destroys all the hope, towardliness, and good
manners of Youth. Well therefore do Poets deserve to have the Precedencie above
other common Pandars and Bawds, of which the chiefest among the Ancients were
these, whom we have above named in the Chapter of Prostitution: as Callimachus,
Philetes, Anacreon, Orpheus, Pindarus, Alceon, Sappha, Tibullus, Catullus,
Propertius, Virgil, Ovid, Juvenal, and Martial: and we have now adays too many
that write after a most impudent and shameful manner. Next to Poets,
Rhetoricians claim Precedencie, the contrivers of fraudulent Flatteries and
Persuasions; for which cause Suadela or Persuasio was held to be the chief
Goddess of Pandarism. Historians also have not a little Interest in the World,
especially the Compilers of those Historical Romances of Lancelot, Tristram,
Eurialis, Peregrinus. Callisthus, and the like; by means whereof, young
Children are in their tender years bred up and accustomed to the Intrigues and
Mysteries of Fornication and Adultery. Neither is there any Engine so powerful
whatsoever to overthrow and oppress the Chastity of young Virgins, Wives, and
Widows, than the reading of a wanton History: no woman so well principled, or
of so chaste a disposition, which is not spoiled and tainted thereby. And yet
for Maids and Virgins to discourse what they have read in these Books, to taunt
and jeer, and prattle with their Servants or Wooers in imitation of what they
read there! Now there have been many of these Historical Pandars, of which some
of obscure same; as Aeneas Sylvius, Dantes and Petrarch, Boccace, Poutanus,
Baptista de Campo Fragoso, and Baptis de Albertis a Floremine: Also Peter
Haedus, Petrus Bembus, Jacobus Carniceus, Jacobus Calandrus, Mantuan, and many
others, from all which Boccace bears away the Bell, especially in those Books
which he calls his hundred Novels; where the Stories and Examples set down, do
but discover the Stratagems and Tricks of Whores and Bawds. Now when a woman
Virtuous, Religious, and Chaste, is to be assailed, then all the fallacious
Arguments of Rhetoric are let loose; and how far they avail, the Fable of
Myrrha in Ovid tells ye. Now as concerning the Mathematics, what greater
assistance and help to familiarity, than your Mathematical Plays and Games?
Neither is Music a contemptible friend of this Art, as being no small
incentive and provocative to Lust, by means of her wanton Airs, and the Charms
of Voice, and sweet touches of an Instrument, softning the Mind, moulding the
Affections, and afterward introducing variety of Society and Company, who
begin at length to be Lovers and Admirers. Neither is there less use of Dancing
and Dancing-schools, where the Lovers have freedom of Discourse, liberty of
Kissing, Handling, and Embracing; and many times, after that, the conveniencie
of withdrawing. Neither is the Geometrical Artist wanting to give his
assistance, by whose contrivance fine convenient Ladders are made for the
scaling of Windows, and by the cunning of Daedalus, Keys are many times
counterfeited, and no invention omitted that may farther Pasiphae's obedience
to her Adulterer. But as for Pictures, these, women that never had the
advantage of reading, may understand more than they who had read never so much;
while they behold within their Chambers Copies of Obscenity, easy enough to be
imitated, whereby the Eyes, as well as the Ears, become the Conduits to convey
evil thoughts to the Heart. Pictures make a deep impression upon the Mind,
seeing that the representation of what has been done, easily moves men to do
the like: For example, Venus of G^idos drawn in her Temple by the hand of
Praxitiles, in the Act of being Vitiated: and a Cupid of the same Artist
corrupted by Alchidas a Rhodian young man. Elian also reports, that the Statue
of Fortune was so vehemently beloved by an Athenian young man, that when he
could not be permitted to buy it, he expired at her feet. Terence also in his
Eunuchus, brings in a young man inflamed with Love, seeing a Picture, where was
painted the Story how Jupiter lay with Danae in a Golden shower. Therefore not
undeservedly propose, that a severe penalty should be inflicted upon those
Painters, who exposed such things to the eyes of the multitude, whereby to
kindle and inflame Lust; so that it was not without cause that the wise man
said, That Statuary and Painting were invented by the Devil, as a chief means
to tempt them to evil. In the next place we meet with Astrologers, Palmistry,
Gypsies, Fortune Tellers, Dream-expounders, Witches, and Conjurers, an
innumerable tribe of Assistants to Pandarism, by a kind of Divine Imposition
of their Fallacies upon the disturbed Fancies of Youth, bring unlawful Amors
to perfection, contrive and finish most wicked and abominable Marriages, and
er'e they be well knit together, dissolve them by and by into most heinous
Adulteries. From such Panders as these, not only credulous women, but to their
unspeakable shame, men also fetch the prosperous Omens of their Loves and
Marriages, grounding the hopes of Possession or Enjoyment upon their uncertain
guesses; and upon their not so stupid as impious assurances, either Marry, or
leave the Pursuit of their Love. Nay, some are so mad as to believe, that by
Astrological Images, and observation of Hours, Love may be compelled, as
Theocritus, Virgil, Catullus, Ovid, Horace, Lucan, and many other triflng Poets
have made the world believe: By which single piece of Cunning, your Astrologers
and Fortune Tellers make no small advantage. Next to which, Magic also brings
a very considerable aid.

That by her Charms some Lovers trees from fears,
Afflicting others with consuming Cares.
Of which Lucan thus sings: -- Love that before was sl^w,
Thessalian Charms now cause to overflow
The inflamed heart --
In Horace we find Candidia; in Apuleius, Paemphilae provoking their Lovers;
and in the Tragi comedy of Callisthus, Celestina the Bawd inflames the Virgin
Melibae^ by her Magic Art. To these we may add the use of Philters and
Love-potions, though very dangerous, sometimes the cause and procurers of Death
instead of Love. One of these Drenches killed Lucullus and Lucretius, who
before they did grew mad, and lost their senses. We read also of a certain
woman who was acquitted by the Areopagites, because she did it out of Love. But
there is no Art or Science so useful and profitable to Pandarism as Physic,
that promises fairly, by renewing the Hymen^an Film, to restore lost Virginity,
to hinder the Breasts from swelling, to put a Spell upon the Womb, administering
procurements of Sterility for the longer continuation and se^resie of Venereal
Combats, and teaching how by the swift motion of the Reins, to eject the first
matter of Conception, as we read in Lucretius.

Thus for their own sakes, Whores were wont to move,
Left they should fill too soon, and gravid prove,
Not equal Pleasure with their Loves enjoy.
By which one benefit of Physic, many Matrons and Widows, many that go for
Maids, many Court-La^^es most securely follow the sports of Venus. Neither is
Physic less Officious in filling up the clefts of Age, in composing Pomatums
and Fucus's, for which you may find infinite Receipts in every Volume of
Physic, and in all their Pharmacopoeas, under the Title of Decorating and
cleansing the skin; and are of great use for Bawds, to put off their old
Worm-eaten Ware: which Compositions the Scripture calls Ointments of Whoredom.
With these you shall also see set down many Incentives and Provocatives to
Lust, which are called by another Name, Restoratives; by the help of which,
Ovid boasts himself to have lived to the Ninetieth Year. Moreover, there is no
design of Bawdery so closely and undiscernably carried, as that which is Acted
under the Design of Physic; for there are no Houses so fast shut, no Nunneries
so Recluse, no Prisons so well guarded, which will not admit a
Physitian-Pander, in whose shape Adulteries have been Committed in the Courts
of Princes, as by Eudemus with Livia the Wife of Drusus; and by Valerius
Vectius with Messa^^ina the Wife of Claudius. Now lest any one should think the
Philosophers unuseful for Pandarisme, behold Aristippus the very Master of the
Cyrenaicks, who associating himself among other Rivals with Thais a Noble
Curtesan, boasted that he enjoyed Thais, others were only enjoyed by Thais; so
that while they wasted their Estates upon her, he had his Pleasure with her
gratis. Whereby it is shrewdly to be suspected, that ^he Jade did but make the
Philosopher her Pimp, by his Example and Authority, minding to draw the young
Nobility to her Embraces. Neither was Aristippus satisfied in making himself
Pimp to a Whore; ^ut he also began to teach the Arts of Lust in Public,
Translating them from the Brothel-house into the Schools. Nor are the Mechanic
Arts less favorable to the Art of Bawdery than these we have rehearsed;
especially, the Phrygian Arts of Weaving, Knitting, Sewing, and other the like
Female Exercises, under pretense whereof your old Bawds while they pretend to
carry about Linen, Silk, Head-cloaths, Hoods, Lockets, Gloves of young Whores,
now become stale and experienced Bawds, making those Toys the Baits of their
Allurements, and thereby also obtaining the opportunity of Discourse; and these
are immediately seconded by Laundresses and Chare-women, who have freedom of
access into Houses: There are also Beggars that under pretense of Charity are
constant at the doors where any Design is laid, on purpose for the Conveyance
of Letters and Messages.

And to the Married Wife those Gifts convey,
Which the Adulterer sends to make his way.
The Exercises of the Nobility also, as Tilting and Ju^ing, give great
opportunities to Compass the Designs of Pandarisme, as also your Military
Traynings, by means whereof, Romulus ravished the Sabin Virgins, And as for
Hunting, how often have the Woods been privy to the secret Adult^ries of great
Personag^s? In relation to which, Virgil takes a very good occasion to be
merry, discribing the opportunity that Dido and Aeneas had when they lost their
Company in Hunting. And Jupiter himself did oft-times make the Shepherds his
Pimps. What great opportunities are got by going by Water, Venice can testify.
The Art of Cookerie gives also the same advantages at great Feasts and Dinners.

After the Feast was ended, all took down,
They mighty Goblets place, and Bacchus Crown.
Here rich with Gems and Gold, the Queen requires
A Bowl with Wine; them merry be, desires.
Then having gently kissed the swelling Cup,
Gave't Bicias: be the full Gold soon turns up;
Next other Peers. --
Tyrians and Trojans praise with one consent,
But the slow Night unhappy Dido spent
In various talk, and long imbibed Love.
There are many other Artifices also of Bawds and Pimps: but above all, there
is nothing like the temptation of Gold, wherein if the Alchymist could satisfy
our Expectation, they would be the most Invincible Panders in the World.

A Wife well Portion'd, high Repute and Friends,
Kindred and Beauty, all Queen Pecunia sends.
The Jealous Husband is appeased with Gold, the inexorable Rival mollified with
Gold, the most strict and watchful Keepers and Guardians are corrupted with
Gold: there is no Door, no Gate, but opens to Gold: no Bedchamber, but gives
entrance to Gold: Bars, Stone-walls, and the indissoluble Bonds of Wedlock, all
yield to the Force of Gold: and what wonder if Virgins, Widows, Matrons, Vestal
Virgins, are sold and bought for Gold, when Christ himself was sold for Silver?
Moreover, under the Leading and good Conduct of this Captain of Pandarism, many
have risen from very low and mean Fortunes, to the highest degree of Nobility.
That man prostitutes his Wife, and is presently made a great Officer; another
prostitutes his Daughter, and is presently made an Earl; another for procuring
such or such a Lady into the embraces of his Prince, is streightway thought to
be worthy of some great reward, and is presently made a Bed-chamber-man. Others
are come to be great persons, for marrying the Kings Concubines; and being
preferred to great Employments by the same Arts of Pimping and Pandaring, make
sufficient gain of Popes and Cardinals; neither is there any way more
compendious to get an Estate. Now how much Religion conduces to Pandarism, the
History of Paulina a most Chaste and Constant Lady, related by Aegesippus, most
abundantly testifies, whom the Priests of Isis prostituted to a young Knight,
whom they made her believe to be the God Anubis. What more powerful Charm for
the advancement of Pandarism, than Auricular Confession? as is sufficiently
manifest in the Tripartite History, and of which, were I so minded, I could
give fresh Examples upon my own knowledge. For the Priests, Friars, Monks, and
Sisters, have a special Prerogative to be both Pimps and Bawds, having the
liberty to wander where they please, and with whom they please, when and as often
as they please, to converse with all privacie and secrecy, without any
witnesses near; so well and securely and their Bawderies personated and
disguised. Some there are among 'um, who think themselves anathematized, should
they touch Money; yet the words of St. Paul nothing move 'um, That it is not
good to touch a woman: and yet they not only handle 'um with their unchaste
hands, but secretly also haunt the public Brothel-houses, deflowering the Holy
Nuns, vitiating Widows, and adulterating the Wives of their Host^ sometimes,
which I both know and have seen; like the Trojan Ravisher, they carry 'um quite
away, and prostitute 'um in common to their Fellows, according to Plato's Law;
and whereas they ought to gain their Souls to God, they sacrifice their souls
to the Devil. Many other more wicked Crimes than these, their mad Lust commits,
which it is a shameful thing to utter; in the mean while, believing that they
have sufficiently performed their Vow of Chastity, if they do but in words
only bitterly inveigh against Luxury, Fornication, Adultery, and Incest; not
being able to talk of Virtue without shaking their Buttocks. Such as these the
great Ladies always keep near 'um, the Contrivers of Court-marriages and
Adulteries. There was in ancient time a Decree of the Senate engraven in two
Tables, and kept in the Temple of Venus, a Law favorable to Whoremongers and
Bawds; a Copy whereof we find set down by Crinitus in these words: The Laws of
visiting, courting, whispering, toying, intruding, saluting, discoursing,
wooing, let them be permitted by me. Let no man hinder them from all
conveniences in the House, at the Windows, in the Garden, postico impluvio, let
them carry their Messages, let them keep Faith, let them give all aid and
Assistance. In the second Table thus: At Night let them mind their Vows, let
them with their protestations mingle Complaints, let them put away all shame
and fear; let them suppress sorrow, let them take hold of time and place, never
give way to opportunity; in their Love Letters succidunto; in them let them
urge their hopes, their affection, their expectation, necessity and compassion,
fraud, force or stratagem, let them moderately use; let them act prudently, or
foolishly; from a Mistress, let them always take any thing as a Pledge or Pawn;
by her permission let them proceed, or seek a new one; let them Court a Noble
high-minded Lady with pomp and subtletie: His Conjectures let him silently
pursue. Lycurgus also made a Law, That if any person stricken in Age, and unfit
for Marriage, should happen to Wed a young Virgin, it might be lawful for her
to choose any young Man strong and lusty, to hansel her Fruitful Womb with a
more generous Seed, provided that the offspring should be her Husbands. There
was also another Law made by Solon, which gave liberty to Wives, if their
Husbands were grown infirm, and not able for the Venereal sport, to choose some
one person, next of Kin, to lie with 'um, provided the Offspring should not be
alienated. And I only touch upon it by the way, that there are many Noble
women now adays, who are well known to make use of other men to get them with
Child, and impose their spurious Issue upon their Husbands: Afterward being
brought to Bed and up again, they return to the Society of their Adulterers: In
that worse than Julia the Wife of Agrippa, who would never receive a Passenger
till the Ship was laden. In the Sacred Writ also we find the stratagems and
devices of Lovers and Love-assistants, as of the Mother-in-Law of Ruth, in
Jonadah whom the Scripture calls a Wise man, and in Achitophel a grave and
prudent Counselor. We read also, that Abraham when he sojourned with the
Egyptians, knowing his Wife to be fair and young, I know, says he, that thou
art a fair woman to look upon, therefore it will come to pass when the
Egyptians see thee, they will say, She is his wife; so will they kill me, but
thee will say, keep alive: say, I pray thee, that thou art my sister, that I
may fare well for thy sake, and that my life may be saved. So the woman was
taken into Pharaoh's house, and Abraham was entreated well for her sake. The
same subtlety he also used toward Abimeleck King of the Philistines; and so
did Isaac the Son of Abraham. Thus you see the Art of Pandarism has been highly
honored and advanced by the Gods, by Heroes, Legislators, Philosophers, Wise
men, Divines, Princes and Prelates. Pan and Mercury themselves were Pandars,
and the little Boy Cupid: The Hero Ulysses, the Lawgivers, Lycurgus and Solon,
were Pandars, who were the first that built Brothel-houses, and countenanced
the Prostitution of young women to men. Of later days Pope Sixtus built up a
most noble Brothel-house at Rome; the Emperor also Heliogabalus fed whole
droves of Whores in his own house, for the use of his friends and acquaintance.
It has been the great care of Queens, Princesses, and great Ladies, to practice
this Art, in so much that many Queens have been the procurers of
Female-pleasure to their own Sons. Nor have the chief Magistrates and
Burgomasters of Cities disdained the Office; for the Corinthians, Ephesians,
Abydens, Cyprians, Babylonians, and many other Magistrates of other Towns, were
all of them Pimps and Panders to their Subjects, building and maintaining
Bawdy-houses in their Cities, not a little enriching their Treasuries with the
Tribute which they exacted from Curtesans: which is a thing common in Italy,
and in Rome every Curtesan pays a Julio a week to the Pope, which many years
amounts to above Twenty thousand Ducats; the hire and wages of Whores being a
great part of the Ecclesiastical Treasury. Nay, I have heard some compting up
their Estates in this manner: He has, says he, two Benefices, one Curateship
of twenty Crowns, another Priory of forty, and the tribute of three Whores in
the Bordelli, which amounts to twenty Julio's a week. No less Pimps and Bawds
are those Bishops and Officers, that exact a yearly Tribute from the Priests,
to permit them the use of Concubines; which exaction is become a Proverb among
the common people, who cry, Shall he, or shall be not have a Concubine? Let him
pay a Crown, and take one. But in the Kingdom of Covetousness, there is nothing
accounted shameful by which Money is to be gotten. I pass over the invention of
Toleration, which gives a woman liberty, by means of a little Money paid to the
Bishop, to co habit in Adultery with another man. All which things are so
manifest, that it is impossible to say which is most apparent, the impudence of
the Prelates, or the stupidity of the common People: so that it were very
needful for the Princes of Germany to seek redress hereof, as one of the
greatest grievances and oppressions of their Empire. Such Patrons has the Craft
of Pandarism, who with no less power defend the mysteries of Putanism; for
which, to our great grief and shame be it spoken, there are such great
Privileges and Immunities throughout the whole Christian Commonwealth, such
ample tolerations, contrary to the Divine Laws, and the Word of God it self:
Humane Reason and the Power of Pandarism so potently contriving to give to
Youth this wicked Liberty, under the pretense of keeping them from acting
higher Impieties. Take away Whores, they cry, out of the Commonwealth, and
straight the world will be filled with Rapes, Adulteries, and Incests: no
Matron shall remain unviolated, the Chastity of no Widow shall be safe, Virgin
and Vestal Nuns will not escape their fury: From whence they conclude it to be
impossible for a Commonwealth or Nation to be in a quiet posture of Government,
without the allowance of Harlots; without whom the Children of Israel however
lived so Chastely and Continently for many Ages together: for such was the
Command of God, There shall be neither whores nor whoremongers suffered among
the children of Israel. Notwithstanding which, that beastly liberty before
mentioned has endeavored to invade the Pale of the Church under the pretense
of Religion, and was the ground of the Nicolaitan Heresy, who to avoid the
suspicion of Jealousy, prostituted their own Wives, and by a Platonic custom
maintained community of Wives. But we are bound to let all Princes, Judges, and
Magistrates understand, that whoever they be that permit the use of Brothels,
or by any way connive at their sufferance, though they themselves may perhaps
not be guilty of the Crime it self, to them shall God speak as is spoken by the
Psalmist: If thou did see a thief, thou did run with him, and did set up
thy portion with Adulterers. These things have thou done, and I have held my
peace; Thou did believe I would be like thee, but I will convince thee, and
set thy transgressions before thee.

CHAP. LXV.
Of Beggerie.
IT is a great part of the duty of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, to be
mindful of the Poor and Diseased, lest People should commit Sin, or Steal
through Poverty, or by continual wandering should occasion the bringing in of
Plagues and Pestilences into Cities, or should Perish for Hunger, to the shame
of Mankind. Therefore there are Public Almshouses Erected in sundry places at
the Public Charge, whose stipends daily increase through the Alms of
well-disposed People. For Publicly to beg and wander from place to place, was
from the Beginning a thing prohibited by the Laws of all Nations. For in the
Old Law, the Jews were commanded by Moses, Let there be no poor or beggar among
ye. And in the Roman-Law, Justinian has very sharply Ordained against sturdy
Beggars, that if any one stout in his Limbs should presume to Beg, he was
presently to be Imprision'd, and set to Work. In the Evangelical Law, Christ
commanded, that what was superfluous should be given to the poor, that so there
might be no Beggar among the People, but that there should be a kind of
Equality, as says St. Paul writing to the Corinthians: Let your abundance
supply their want, that their abundance may also supply your want, and equality
be among ye; as it is written, He that has much has not abounded, and he that
has little has not less. And Writing to the Ephesians, He that stole, says
he, let him steal no more, but rather let him labor and work with his hands
the thing that is good, that he may have to give unto him that needs. The
same Apostle commands the Thessalonians to labor with their hands, and to
endeavor to abound; confirming a severe Decree among them, That he that would
not Labor should not Eat; Commanding Loyterers to be Expelled from the
Communion of the Faithful. And in his Epistle to Timothy, he condemns those who
imagine Beggary to be Godliness. The Papal Decrees Ordain Alms to be given only
to those who are past their Labor, accompting all others that receive Alms in
the number of Robers, Thieves, and Sacrilegious persons. By which Authorities
we are taught, not only to compassionate Poverty, but to detest Beggary. But
those cunning Impostures daily practiced to advance the trade of Beggary, are
by all men to be Abominated, while their Contrivers rather choose to lie before
the Gates of Churches, to the great shame of mankind, and contrary to the
Command of God, enduring all the hardships of the bitterest cold, the burning
Sun, and Torments worse than Death, rather than to be contented with the mean
Allowance of an honest Almshouse; And which is far more Abominable, in the
midst of all their Torments and Pains, Blaspheming, Swearing, Forswearing,
Cursing, Banning, Fowl-mouth'd, Injurious and Drunk, using the Name of Christ,
but neither Worshipping Christ, or regarding any thing of Sacred or Religious;
filling the Ears of Passengers not with the cries of Martyrs, but with the
bannings of Infernally-tormented Creatures. There is another most Impious sort
of Beggars, who crusting over their Scars and Wounds with Bird-lime, Meal, and
Clotted-Blood, expose themselves all full of Soars and Botches. And others that
by counterfeiting other sorts of Diseases and Sicknesses. Others there are,
that under the pretense of Vows and Pilgrimages, wander up and down from
Country to Country, designedly avoiding Labor, out of a wicked love of
Poverty; begging from Door to Door, yet would not change their Lives for
Princes, while they have liberty to Vagabond it where they please at their own
pleasure; concerned neither in War nor Peace; every where free from Taxes,
public Charges and Duties: And yet they are many times the causes of great and
most pernicious Mischiefs, and by their means great Enterprises are brought to
pass, while under the rags of Beggars many times Spies are sent to discover the
secrets of Fortified Places; many times Beggars themselve are made use of to
bring and carry Letters of Intelligence: By some of them Cities have been set
on Fire, as we find by the late sad example of the City of Tryers; sometimes
Wells have by them been poisoned, and the Plague it self brought into Kingdoms,
to the Destruction of Thousands of People. Among these we must reckon that sort
of Cattle which they call Cyngani or Gypsies.

They live on strangers, hate at home to 'bide;
Abhor to know their own, no Land beside.
These having their Original from a certain Country between Egypt and
Ethiopia, of the Race of Chus, the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah, still suffer
under the Curse of their Progenitor: These are they who Erecting Boothes in the
Highway, or else taking up the next Barn for their Habitation, give themselves
to nothing but Thievery and Whoredom, and by Thest and Fortune-telling
maintain their idle Lives. Volaterran believes, that the first that set up this
Trade, from whence it derived it self into these Parts, were the Vxii, a People
of Persis; following Scilates, who wrote the Constantinopolitan History. For he
reports, that Michael Traul^^ obtained the Empire by the Fortune-telling of the
Vxii; which sort of People being dispersed through Europe and Moesia,
maintained themselves by telling people their Fortunes. Polydore affirms 'um to
be Assyrians and Cilicians. But this Itch of damnable Lying does not only
possess the most profane and lowest sort of People and wandering Vagabonds, but
has also advanced it self among the Religious, and into the Orders of the Monks
and Priests. Hence those Sects of Friars, Monks, and other Religious Traders in
Palmestry had their Original, who under a cursed pretense of Religion carrying
about the Reliqu^s of the Saints, and making show of great Holiness, by the
help of many feigned Miracles; threatening some with the Anger of the Saints,
promising to others Indulgencies and Dispensations; instead of Alms, they get
great Riches. For in this posture wandering from Country to Country, from silly
Wenches and trimorous Women here they get a Sheep, there a Goat, here a Kid,
there a Pig, or a young Calf: sometimes Wine, Oil, Butter, Pulse, Milk, Cheese,
Eggs, Hens, Wool, Linen and Money; as it were Plunder and prey upon the whole
Country where they go, returning home Laden with the rich spoils of their
Villainy, where they are received by their Companions with all expressions of
joy and applause for the Triumphs of their most damnable Impositions: while on
the other side, they who by their Fallacies and lying Devices have thus robbed
the Country, think they do God and the Saints good Service, to fat and cram the
Guts of their idle Associates, with the fruits of their Cousening and
Quacksalving devices, altogether neglecting and contemning to expend these
Gifts upon Objects of Charity, to which intent they were both begged and given.
Apuleius in his Ass is not forgetful to make them part of his Story, under the
Title of the Priests of the Assyrian Gods. Among these we may number the whole
Tribe of Mendicant Friars, who laying aside the Sanctimony of their Profession,
follow Gain in lieu of Godliness; as if they made a profession of Religion for
no other reason, but that under the pretense of Poverty they may have liberty
to profess a wandering Beggary, and with an impudent and bold Hypocrisy to rake
Money together; ashamed of nothing in all places: from which neither Courts of
Justice, Temples, Schools, Courts, Private or Public Societies, Consessions,
Sermons, Pulpits are free, where they are wont to sell their Indulgencies,
extol the benefits of their Ceremonies, extorting in that manner from Usurers
and rich Thieves no small share of their ill-got Gains, and from the
thick-scull'd Shopkeepers, and illiterate Rabble, squeezing good store of
Money; beginning like the Serpent with the Women first, that by their
Assistance they may the more easily Delude the Men. Who making a show of
Poverty with their affected Rags, and every where Preaching the Contempt of
Money, and the shunning of Ambition; yet themselves in the mean while make
nothing more their utmost study and business than to rake money with their
Profession; to which purpose they compass Sea and Land, intrude themselves into
the houses of all sorts of people, performing nothing of their Holy Function
but for Hire, exacting Alms more Tyrannically than Tribute; thrusting
themselves into all peoples business, making up doubtful Matches, ordering
Wills, composing Suits in Law, informing and reforming the Holy Nuns; but
nothing of all this, unless they find something coming. These are the Tricks
and Deceits of the Friars, by means whereof they have arrived to so high a
pitch of Authority, to the Terror even of Popes and Monarchs, rich beyond the
Estates of great Merchants, or the Treasures of Princes, which has enabled 'um
with great Sums, not only to purchase Mitres and Hatts, but even the Papacy it
self. So Powerful is Religious Beggary; to which, how opulent soever, they will
pretend, while they touch not the money with their bare Fingers, but have their
Judas to keep the Keys of their Treasury, and to make up their Accounts; daring
then, most bold Equivocators, to say with St. Peter and St. John; Gold or
Silver have I none. Against these Apes of Christ and S. Francis, are Richard
Bishop of Armachanus, Malleolus Governor of Tigurines, and John Bishop of
Camot, whose Writings would have been more acceptable, had they not only
condemned the Abuse, but also the very allowance of this Religious way of
Begging it self.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of Economy in general.
UNder the Title of Government-administration Economy is contained, which is
the Government of a Family, Republic, or a private Monarchy; of which there
are several sorts. For Economy is partly Regal and Noble, partly Military,
partly Public, or in Community, as in Covents and Colleges, partly Private
and Monastic. This Private Economy teaches how Wives, Sons, Nephews,
Servants, and whole Families are to be governed; how to enlarge and increase an
Estate; how to manage Expenses. Under the notion of Public Economy, goes that
Craft or Cunning which is used in ordering great Revenues, as Gabels, Customs,
Tithes, great sums of Interest, Monopolies, and whatsoever other Arts of
advancing the public Revenue, or in the management of Treaties and Leagues.
National Contests and Wars, which admitting of no certain Rule or Method, is
therefore called Anomalous. Therefore cannot Economy be said to be either an
Art or a Science, but a certain Domestic Discipline or Doctrine made up of
Opinion, Use, Custom, Prudence, and Craft, whereto all your laboring
Handicrafts, and Mechanic Arts relate; such as work in Linen, Wool, Wood,
Iron, Brass, and other Metals: as also the more servile Trades of Barbers,
Cooks, and Victuallers: together with the several ways of getting Livelihoods,
and increasing private Wealth, which neither belong to Rule or Magistracy, nor
conduce at all to the Government of the Commonwealth; aiming at nothing Divine,
Ingenious or Heroic. Of which there are so many, and those mean and poor, that
they are not to be numbered: some of these that get their Livings by mean
things, are generally noted for particular Vices; as Carters, Mariners, and
Victuallers are commonly said to be very great Liars and Tale-bearers, as
likewise are Barbers and Bakers. So Songsters, Fiddlers, and Pipers, men
altogether Mercenary, made use of to Sing and Play at great Feasts and
Entertainments, are generally of lewd and vicious Conversations. But the Life
of a Mariner, as it is the most unhappy for hardship, so is it the most vicious
and dishonest, who always live as it were in Prison, feeding hard and slovenly,
their Apparel Nasty, unprovided of all sorts of Conveniences, perpetual Exiles
and Vagabonds, never at rest, tossed with uncertain Waves and rage of Winds,
liable to all the hazards of Summer, Cold, Storms, Thunder, Hunger, Drowth and
Diseases; to these we may add the dangers of Rocks, those Insects of the Seas,
and Hurricanes; not omitting Tempests, than which there is nothing more
dreadful or horrible: which makes it seem more strange, that as Mariners are
the most unhappy of men, and always in most dangers, so they are the most
wicked and desperate. But among the whole Crowd of Mechanic Arts, there are
none that bear so great sway as Merchandise, Tillage, Warfare, Surgery, and
the meaner part of Law. Of all which we shall discourse in their Order. Though
before we begin, let us look into the Fundamentals of Economy.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of private Economy.
THE chief strength of Private Economy consists in Matrimony; therefore
Metellus surnamed Numidian being Censor, and exhorting the Romans to Marry, If,
said he, we could live without a Wife, then we should all be willing to shift
our selves from the trouble: But since we can neither live commodiously with
'um, and that without 'um there is no possibility of living; we ought to choose
the perpetual Multiplication of Mankind, rather than a short Pleasure. Thus
Aulus Gellius relates. For indeed, without a Wife there is no Family can either
be maintained or long endure; for without a Wife there is no Issue to be had,
no Heir, no Inheritance, no Kindred, no Family, no Master of a Family can be.
He who has no Wife, has no House, because he keeps not to his House; or if he
have a House, he lives like a stranger and a sojourner in it. He who has not a
Wife, though he be very rich, has nothing that he can call his own, because he
knows not to whom to leave it, nor whom to trust to, and therefore he is afraid
of every body; his Servants thieve from him, his Friends deceive him, his
neighbors slight him, his Acquaintance neglect him, his Kindred seek to betray
him: his Children, if he have any born out of Wedlock, are a disgrace to him,
neither can he leave them the Name of his Family, the Arms of his Ancestry, nor
his Inheritance, being restrained by the Laws: neither are they by the common
Consent of all Legislators to be Advanced to any Place or Dignity in the
Commonwealth; for he is not fit to Govern a City, that cannot Rule his Family;
nor to Rule the Commonwealth, who never knew how to Govern a private Family,
which is the true Pattern and Exemplar of a Republic. This the Grecians well
knew, who when Philip of Macedon studied to appease a Dissension among them,
and that Leontias the Gorgion rehearsed a Treatise of Concord, which he had
written in the City of Olympia, they were both Laughed at, who sought to make
Peace abroad, who had none in their own Families. For at home, the Son of
Philip and his Mother were at Variance; and Gorgias his Wife could not agree
with her Maid: therefore they thought that they who wanted Prudence and
Authority to quiet Domestic Brauls, could never be able to compose Public
Discords. That Person therefore who Commands a City, or a Commonwealth, unless
he know how to Govern his own House and Family, is very inauspiciously
preferred. Lastly, this is the only condition of Humane-Life, wherein a Man
loving his Wife, giving good Education to his Children, well-ordering his
Family, preserving his Estate, and increasing in Children, may be said to live
happily. Wherein, if any thing fall out of Burden and Labor, as many times
Crosses will happen, and there is no man's Life without Misfortune; yet that
very Burden becomes light, and the Yoke easy: especially the Yoke of
Marriage, if they prove not such Wives, whom Covetousness, Pride, Deceit, or
Lust, but God has joined, for whose sake, a man is bound to forsake Father and
Mother, Son and Brother, and Kindred, and adhere to his Wife, whose love ought
to exceed the love of all others. So Hector seeing the Fate of Troy, which was
to be Destroyed, seems not so much troubled for his Parents, Brothers and
Kindred, as for the loss of his dearest Wife. So we read in Homer, I well
foresee the Fate of Mighty Troy,
That Priam and his People shall Destroy;
But nor my Countries nor my Fathers smart,
Nor Priam's fall so much Afflict my Heart,
Nor loss of Kindred many and Renowned,
Whom Hostile rage shall bury under ground,
As care for thee my honored Spouse does vex
My grieved Mind. --
I confess, that unhappy Matches are attended with many Evils and Miseries;
which Socrates remembers us of, that is to say, perpetual Care, consuming
Jealousy, continual Quarrelling, upbraidings with Dower, the scornful looks
and countenances of Kindred, the manifold Expenses and uncertain dispositions
of Children; sometimes Barrenness, and Extinction of the Family, a strange
Heir, innumerable Sorrows; many times the restraint of Election, Marriage being
imposed; so that whether she be of a good Humor, a Fool, Perverse, Proud,
Sluttish, Deformed, Unchaste, nothing of all this can be known, till after
Consummation, none of which are seldom, or ever after mended. Of unfortunate
Marriages there are many Examples. Marcus Cato Censor, in his time the Chief,
and Prince of the Roman Commonwealth, who had scarce his equal both in Peace
and War, having in his declining years Married a young Maid the Daughter of one
Solomon, a man poor, and of mean Extraction, lost all Mastership and Authority
at home in his own House. Tiberius having Married Julia the Daughter of
Augustus, Infamous for many detected Adulteries, and not daring to Correct,
Accuse, or Repudiate her, was forced to retire to Rhodes, not without manifest
detriment to his Fame, and danger of his Life. M. Antonie the Philosopher
having Married Faustina the Daughter of Antonius Pius, was forced to be
contented with her, though an Adulteress, for fear of hazarding the loss both
of Dower and Empire together. But all these Inconveniences happen, not so much
through the fault of the Women, as the negligence of the Men. For it seldom
happens that the Women are bad, unless the Husbands are worse. Of whom, thus
Varro discourses in Gellius. The Vices of Women are either to be endured, or to
be taken away. He that forces a Woman to mend a fault, renders her more
tolerable to himself; but he that endures a fault, makes himself the better
Man. Of all which we have spoken more largely in our Declamation upon the
Sacrament of Matrimony. Again, many times the Education of Children proves not
so happy as it was intended, many growing stubborn and disobedient to their
Parents, others become Contentious, others Mad, others Foolish, others dull and
thick Scull'd, others given to all Debauchery, spending all in Luxury, Lust,
and Gaming; Others prove Parricides, as Al^meon and Orestes, and the Malleoli
who killed their Mother. Therefore Artaxerxes, surnamed Mnemon, having be got a
Hundred and fifteen Children, was forced to put to Death the greatest part of
'um, for Plotting to take away his Life; and for this Cause, Euripides modestly
supposes, what our Bernard positively ^vers, That it is an unknown good to want
Children. Augustus also, the most Fortunate of Emperors in other things, yet
beholding the behavior of his Daughter and Niece, was wont to cry out in the
Words of Homer: -- O that Unwedded I had lived,
And never all my days for Issue strived.
Of Servants also, thus says Euripides: At home there is no greater Enemy;
nothing worse or more unprofitable than a Servant. Says Democritus, A Servant
is a necessary Possession, but not pleasing. And Petrarch has written, I knew,
says he, that I lived among Dogs, but never knew my self to be a Hunter, but
by Admonition. Servants are called Dogs, as being snappish, devouring, and
snarling. Plautus in his Pseudolus well expresses their conditions: A
Pestiferous Generation of People, into whose thoughts nothing enters that may
at any time persuade 'um to do well; but when there is occasion, snatch, catch,
carry away; this is their Practice, that a man had better leave Wolves among
Sheep, than to entrust these Servants at home. And Lucian in his Palinute; The
Curses of Servants are always ready against their Masters, and there is
nothing more at hand among 'um than thievery, deceit, running-away, arrogance,
negligence, drunkenness, gluttony, sleepiness, sloth and laziness. From whence
arose that Proverb, As many Servants, so many Enemies. But we do not so often
find 'um Enemies, as make 'um so; while Masters carry themselves proudly,
covetously, cruelly, and contumeliously; becoming Lords and Tyrants at home,
exercising a feverity over them, not as we ought, but as we please: concerning
whom Plautus brings in Strophilus thus speaking in his Aulularia.

Masters their Servants use injuriously,
And as corruptly Servants now obey.
So what is just on neither side is done.
Your sparing Old Men with a thousand Keys,
Their Cupboards, Kitchins, Cellars, Butteries shut:
Which to their Children they will scarce unlock.
But Servants, subtle, cunning, crafty Thieves,
With Keys Two thousand open 'um again.
And then by stealth they swallow and consume
What rackt a hundred times they will nere confess:
Damned slaves, on their enslavers thus revenge
With Jokes and Laughter take; which makes me say,
Free Masters only faithful Servants make.
Many Commonwealths have egregiously suffered by reason of their Servants. As
well those Historians testify who have written the Rebellions of Servants
against their Masters: More especially the City of the Valsinenses, a City
flourishing in Riches, famous for the excellency of her Laws and Government,
afterward a most miserable spectacle of the Insolency of her Slaves. For when
the strict severity of the Citizens over their Servants decreased, insomuch
that they sometimes admitted them to their Councils; afterward a few of them
presuming to take upon them the Order of Senators, they Invaded the
Commonwealth it self; they commanded Wills to be made at their own pleasures;
they forbid the Public Feasts and Assemblies of the Freemen; Married their
Masters Daughters. Lastly, they Ordained by Law, that all Adulteries committed
by them with Widows, all Fornications with Unmarried Women, should be
unpunished; and that No Virgin should be Married to a Freeman, whose Chastity
some one of them had not Defiled before. Thus a most Opulent City, once the
Metropolis of Caria, through her too kind Indulgence to her Servants, sunk into
the Abyss of Injuries and dishonest Sufferings. For says Aristotle in his
Politic Orations, Omit severe Discipline among Servants, and they straight
practice Treachery against their Masters. So did the Helots against the
Lacedaemonians, and those of Praeneste against the Thessalians.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of Regal Economy, or Court-Discipline.
WE have now a fit opportunity to treat of Regal or Court Economy. And to say
Truth, the Court is nothing else but a College of Giants, that is, of noble
and splendid Knaves, a Theater of a Wicked Lifeguard, a School of most corrupt
Manners, where Pride, Arrogance, Haughtiness, Extortion, Lust, Luxury, Envy,
Gluttony, Violence, Impiety, Malice, Treachery, Deceit, Cruelty, and whatsoever
other corrupt Customs and Vices rule and bear sway; where Adulteries, Rapes,
and Fornication are the sports of Princes and great Persons, where oftentimes
the Mothers of Kings and Princes are Bawds to their own Sons, where the Storms
and Tempests of Vice cause an unspeakable Shipwreck of all Virtue, where every
Good Man is oppressed, the worst of Men are advanced; where the Downright are
laughed to scorn, the Just are Persecuted, the bold and Arrogant are Promoted.
There only Flatterers, Whisperers, Detractors, Talkbearers, Calumniators,
Sycophants, Liars, Supplanters, Inventers of Evil, sowers of Discord prosper,
and the worst of Crimes are openly Professed. Their Lives ^^d Conversations are
the most dishonest of all Men's, and whatsoever Heinous is to be observed in the
single Natures of the worst of Monsters, all seems as it were to be amassed
together in the Rout attending a Court. There is to be seen the fierceness of
the Lion, the cruelty of the Tygre, the rudeness of the Bear, the rashness of
the Bore, the pride of the Horse, the greediness of the Wolf, the craft of the
Fox, the unconstancy of the Camelion, the various colors of the Leopard, the
currishness of the Dog, the timorousness of the Hare, the petulancy of the
Goat, the nastiness of Swine, the desperateness of the Elephant, the revenge of
the Camel, the stupidness of the Ass, the scurrility of the Ape. There Inhabit
the raging Centaures, the pernicious Chimera's, the mad Satyrs, the filthy
Harpies, the wicked Sirens, the horrid Struthiocamels, the devouring Gryphens,
the rapacious Dragons, and whatsoever fatal Monsters and destructive Prodigies
at which Nature is Affrighted; where every particular Virtue finds a Tyrant and
a Hangman. In fine, a man must fit himself for all Wickedness, Malice, and
Impiety, or not come near a Court.

It is not Lawful unless far from Court
Vnpunish'd to be good. --
The provoked Power of a Potent Courtier, is like a Comet, the Forerunner of
many Mischiefs, and a most Contagious Pestilence where it fixes; leaving behind
most uncurable Effects of its Venom, like the biting of mad Dogs. The Court is
generally accompanied with scarcity, the price of things being enhansed, where
men think to gain by the Confluence of People: it is accompanied by the excess
of Luxury in Diet, with newfangled Dishes, driving out the customary Diet of
the Country. It is attended with the height of Pride, which when Men and Women
strive to imitate, and seek in change of Fashions to out-vye one another, they
consume and waste their Patrimony in Apparel. Now when a Court departs out of
any City or Town, what a filthy Tail it leaves behind! Here Men find their
Wives Adulterated, there their Daughters carried away for Whores, their
Servants corrupted and abused: What follows? great Complaints, and the face of
the whole City is become as it were the Face and Countenance of a Whore. I know
a Famous City of France by these means so corrupted, that there was hardly a
Chaste Matron or a Virgin left; so that it was counted a great Honor to be a
Count's Whore: and the old Women were generally Bawds to the younger; and so
shameless they became at length, that Modesty was quite Exiled; so that Men
never took notice of their Wives playing the Whores, so that, as Abraham says,
It were well with them for their sakes.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of Noble Courtiers.
THE Inhabitants of a Court are twofold. The chief are the Peers and Nobles,
those Huffing Thraso's, who are mad with Pride, Luxury, and Pomp; clad in
Purple and Silk, with their Plumes of Feathers, and Garments laced with Gold
and Vanity. Whom Whoring pleases and affected Gouts,
Loose Hair, and strange new Names for gaudy Clouts.
For upon Whores they waste all the strength and heat of their Youth; nor is
their Gluttony less active and ingenious, or their Palates less ingenious; and
it is no small part of Honor which they look for, to be splendidly Invited,
nobly Entertained, and gloriously Treated. And among them there are that count
it no dishonor to be so prodigal at one Meal, as to be forced to be beholding
to other men's Tables for a quarter of a Year after. To these great
Entertainment-mongers resort your Fiddlers of all sorts, Mimick Parasites,
Players, Whores, Bawds, and Dancing-masters, Huntsmen, Faulkners, and such kind
of Prodigies of Men. Dogs, Horses, Greyhounds, Hawks, Apes, Parrots must be
kept; and for the greater state of the business, Bears, Lions, Leopards and
Tygres. Their common discourse is mere trifling Tittle-tattle, Detracting,
Accusing, Giggling, Lying, and Bragging. Some are always twatling of their
Dogs, of their Hunting, what close Woods they met with, how many faults their
Dogs made, how they recovered it, and what other casualties happened in the
Chase. Others are always prating of their Horses, and what Races were lately
run; of the Wars, and what valiant Acts they themselves performed there. If any
one has a mind to cross the other, he begins a Discourse quite contrary, to put
the other out, though generally his Narratives prove as idle as the former;
which another not brooking, undertakes to contradict him, and jee^ him out of
the Pit; which many times turns to Wrath and Anger, so that the Feast proves at
length a Banquet of the Lapithae, which seldom ended but in the drawing of
Blood, as if the end of their Invitations had been according to the Distick:
Cherish your Bodies with your choice of Fare,
And then Pot-valiant for the Fight prepare.
Now the chiefest Lesson which they learn, is to observe the Princes times and
seasons, for fear of Acting irregularly; wherein they do not advise either with
Stars, Heaven, or Ephemerides, but consult the several Opportunities of the
Princes Drinking, Eating, Banqueting, Hunting, Rising, and going to Bed; laying
hold on his freedom of Humor, at which time Mirth yields a more easy Audience
to discourse; and then beginning to tickle the Ears with some pleasing story,
they proceed by degrees to the sum of their Request. Observing the Counsel of
Aristotle to Calisthenes, That to a Prince a man should either discourse very
wittily and pleasantly, or else be very silent; by silence either to keep
himself secure, or by pleasing-Discourse to render him self more acceptable.
Wherefore if the Prince seem to be pleased with any one of 'um, to show any
liking of what they have spoken or done, if he trust him with any thing, or be
plea'd to Discourse in private with any one, Then shall such a one be Magnified
in the Eyes of Men, he shall presume to do any thing, he shall revile all men,
laugh at all men, slight all men, talk ill of 'um privately, rebuke 'um
publicly; he shall speak great things, and all People shall fear him; he shall
spurn at his Inferiors, contemn his Equals, disdain his Superiors, altogether
puffed up, and seeking to enlarge his Power. Freedom of doing ill is virtue
thought,
And high command --
Whoever is not pleased, and applauds him not when he has done evil, is
therefore guilty, for he shall be thought either to envy his Good Fortune, or
not give him his due Honor. Nor are they only troublesome to their Equals and
Inferiors, but also most pestilent to their Princes themselves, whom under
pretense of severity, prudence, and giving wholesome Counsel, they perniciously
Flatter, and cause to commit most horrid Crimes; as in Lucan, Curio instigates
Caesar.

What remiss Power withholds thy Potent Arms?
Is it mistrust of us thy Courage charms?
While in my breathing Veins warm Blood does flow,
And brawny Arms the Massy Pile can throw,
Caesar shall never brook the Senates Reign,
Nor the Degenerate Gown. --
Such instigators had Alexander the Great, who being hotheaded enough of
himself, when he was in his maddest humors, stirred him up the more to Wars and
Mischief: such advisers were the Counselors of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon,
and such and too many do the present Courts of our Princes abound with, who
yielding and soothing 'um up in their Pleasures, obey and humor 'um to bring
about their wicked Designs; and with such cunning they persuade or dissuade,
that thereby with greater force they work 'um to their Ends; and where they
would have things done, urging slender and impotent Reasons against the doing
of it, that by seeming to be convinced, they may the better confirm the Error
of the Prince: So deceiving, that they cannot be found out, but rather receive
a Reward for their Perfidy. Such Counselors Francis the King of France at this
time makes use of; so prone to take all Evil Council, that while they persuade
him to act all sorts of Perfidie and Rigor against Caesar, are notwithstanding
accounted Faithful and Loyal Subjects. Thus far of Court-Nobility.

CHAP. LXX.
Of the Vulgar sort of Courtiers.
THere are the Common sort of Court-Attendants, a very wicked Generation, who
live in a perpetual Slavery, visiting Noblemens Houses, and parasitically
hanging on upon other men's Tables.

And as their chiefest Good they daily seek
The Trenchers of another man to lick.
Therefore they are submissive to every body, flatter every one, studying to
become all things to all, counterfeiting more shapes than Proteus, whereby to
gain the savor of a Lord: To which purpose they mainly study to remember
Discourses at Table, that they may not want matter for Report; with great craft
they inquire into the secrecies of such as are at odds, which they discover
sometimes to their Friends, sometimes to their Enemies, so to render themselves
acceptable to both, to both Treacherous; so much the fitter for Treason, as
pretending a great deal of simplicity and harmlesness. For though there be no
Crime so wicked as Treachery, yet for the obtaining of Riches and Preferment,
there is no way more ready nor more compendious, nothing more pleasing or
grateful to Princes.

They strive the Secrets of a House to know,
To keep the Master under --
And if at any time any person make 'um privy to any Treason, then they are
brave Fellows, and hold up their heads above measure.

Dear shall he be to Verres in whose power
The Life of Verres lies.
Thereby familiarity and kindred is Contracted, in confidence whereof they
aspire to great things. First therefore some greatly labor to be listed in the
number of Noblemens Servants, though they serve 'um without Salary: For they
doubt not to get the favor of the Great Ones, having now fair opportunities of
Flattery, and to insinuate themselves with all manner of obsequiousness and
small gifts: what duties others out of Laziness, Fear, or Covetousness omit,
they greedily undertake; they watch day and night, run, ride, post to and fro
with Messages, undertake and suffer any toil.

Daring to Act, nor fearing to endure
The Punishments provided for the Poor.
Till by this means they become Secretaries, Treasurers, or other very great
Ministers of State. And now having passed the Straits and Difficulties of
Labor, double diligence and fawning obsequiousness are quite laid aside, nor
regarded by them in others, there being now nothing in esteem but Money. Their
new Honors have changed their Manners; they forget what they were, contemn
their Beginnings, they covet what is to come, and wholly devoted to Avarice,
bend all their endeavors and studies in the pursuit of gain and riches;
sparing in the performance of Promises, yet full of Words; Flattering, yet at
the same time Treacherous; dark in their Sentences, and like Oracles hard to be
understood: whatever they see, whatever they hear, they consture to the worst
sense: they trust only themselves, love only themselves, are wise only to
themselves; they trust in no man's faith or friendship, they care for no
Society, but for the love of Gain; their own Profit they prefer above all
things; their Friends, their Guests, their Companions, their Kindred, they
Despise 'um all, and look upon 'um as barren Trees, if there be nothing to be
got by 'um; and their former Companions and great Chronics, if they meet 'um in
their Dish, they will take no more notice of 'um than if they had never seen
'um. If any one requires their Friendship or Assistance, they feed 'um with
Words and Promises, promising Ten times more than they will perform; and
perchance if there be no feeling in the Case, they will not only not help him,
but ruin his Cause: all Kindness and Courtesy is vendible; they despise all
Virtue, clouding the Praises of others with Ambiguous Sayings, and Feigned
Detractions behind their backs; they themselves speak in the Praise of no man
without a Reserve, as the Orator said of Julius, That he was fortunate indeed,
that he was a stout man, and had done many valiant Acts; but how he could evade
being accounted guilty of Bribes, I should admire, but that I know the force of
Elocution. And as another says, Happy in Children Proteus, and a Wife,
And bating Phocas crimes, that stained his Life,
A man not to be matched. --
After Gifts they are as greedy as Vultures, everywhere hunting after their
Prey, which they snatch out of one another Chaps, as the Harpyes were said to
tear the Meat out of the mouth of Phinaeus. If any misfortune befall a Rival,
they rejoice; they compassionate no man's Calamity; they believe that they ought
to keep promise and faith with no body, but for their own pleasure and
advantage; never to acknowledge any kindness, judging all men equally unworthy
of any favor, or not fit to be taken notice of, or else to be recompensed with
hatred and envy: rather when they hate, they counterfeit kindness, and
dissemble their Anger; unless the Prince or King, they give reverence or
respect to no body, nor them neither but out of Fear, or for the hopes of
Reward. At length growing gray in Fraud, Treachery, Labor and Toil, and having
by such base and sordid acts attained to high Honors and vast Riches, then
they omit no breach of Law Divine or Humane, so that they may be able to leave
their Sons Heirs of their Wealth, their Honor and Iniquities.

-- With Serpents thus and Lizards sought
In Fields remote, the Storks their young ones feed,
Who straight the self-same Prey their Mothers did,
Now taking Wing, by hunger pricked pursue.
The Birds of Jove thus to their offspring true,
In shady Woods hunt out the Goat and Hare,
And constant supper for their Young prepare:
But for themselves now able to provide,
Their raging Hunger is not satisfied
Until they find the Prey they tasted first,
So soon as Life their tender shells had burst.
And these are the Arts and Devices of the Common sort of Courtiers, by means
whereof many of mean and low condition rise to the highest Preferments,
Dignities, and places of Profit, and the next places of Authority to Kings and
Princes themselves; in Riches equal to their Princes, with which they build
stately and Magnificent Structures and Palaces, while the more Noble Courtiers
indeed, wast their Estates in Whoring, Gaming, Hunting, Horse-races,
Entertainments, Masks, and Gorgeous Apparel; selling their Lordships,
Castles, Possessions, Inheritances, to those Upstart Courtiers, who by their
wicked Practices and Contrivances are now mounted into the rank of Nobility.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of Court-Ladies.
NEither are the Court-Ladies without their Vices. It Is very true, that we
behold a great number of Women for Elegancy of Body and exactness of Beauty to
be admired, splendidly dressed, and apparel'd in Purple and Silks, set out with
Jewels; but it is not easy for all men to see what wicked Monsters are
concealed under those fair shapes: Wherefore Lucian most fitly compares 'um to
Egyptian Temples; for there you shall behold a Structure most beautiful
without, both for the Materials and curiousness of Work, but if you once look
for the God within, you shall find there nothing but either an Ape, a Dog, a
Goat, or a Cat. Even so it is with those Court-Ladies and Virgins, who being
bred up from their tender years in Dancing, Masquing, soft-idleness, and all
manner of Luxury and Voluptuousness, and having sucked the worst of Education
out of those Books of Courtlove, and fine Histories of Lust, Adulteries,
Fornications, and Pandarisms, as also Comedies, Novels, and wanton Songs, are
thereby seasoned with all sorts of evil Manners, becoming Light, Insolent,
Arrogant, Peevish, Impudent, Obscene, Contentious, Contradictory, Obstinate,
Revengeful, Crafty, Petulant, Loquacious, Lascivious, and Shamelesly and
Obscenely wanton. They have tongues to which silence is a Punishment, their
Lips not to be wearied with tittle-tattle, generally the most idle, most
impertinent, and troublesome to the hearers. For what can we think they should
be able to talk for so many hours together, but Folly? for Example, how to
shade the Hair, how to comb it, how to dye it, how to wash their Faces, how to
pleit their Peticoats; what Gate to observe in walking, rising, or lying; what
Apparel becomes such or such best, who and who are to take or give place, how
far to bow in saluting, to whom the honor of the Lip is due, to whom not; who
are allowed to ride a Horseback, who in a Coach, and who in a Litter: Who
ought to wear Jewels, Pendants, Necklaces, Bracelets, and who not; with a
Thousand other trifling enquiries into the Laws of Semiramis. Neither are there
wanting many of the older sort, who will tell ye how many Sweet-hearts they
had, who sent her Gifts, who were most Courtly in their Addresses. This Woman
talks of him that she Loves, that Woman can hardly forbear from speaking evil
of him that the hates; and whatsoever they say, they think they are admired by
the Company: sometimes they stuff their Discourse with unseasonable Scoffs and
Impudent Lies: neither do they want most desperate Malice, and quarrelling one
among another; backbiting and flattery there is nothing more frequent: their
Eyes, their Looks, their Glances are full of Allurements; their Nods, their
Gestures, their Becknings full of Wantonness; they are full of Subtilty, and
have studied words to deceive their Servants, and get gifts of value from 'um.
Let 'um have any Ring, Jewel or Bracelet about them, these Females will never
lin till they have flattered it into their own Possession; for which, they
return Kisses, Embraces, and Amorous Discourses, which are their public Ware,
and the nutriment of Court-love. It were a shame to discover what Crimes are
committed in secret Bed-chambers, as if Marriage had been Consecrated only in
Derision of Nature; and that the putting on their Clothes, were sufficient to
cover all their Enormities. Such Virgins how faithful think ye will they prove
afterward to their Husbands! Oh what a grief are they to all good Women!
continually hitting them in the Teeth with their Nobility, their Portion, their
Beauty, their Foreign Matches; teazing their Husbands Ears with continual
Clamours and Contumelies. They despise a frugal Table at home, and yet twit
their Husbands with their Court-Expences; and being used to Pomp and
Extravagancies, they wast their Husbands Wealth, ruin their Families, compel
their Husbands to undertake wicked Designs for gains sake; to which end, they
are forced to omit no Fraud, Treachery, Dissimulation, and Hypocrisy
whatsoever, to compass their Ends. I will not speak of their Foreign Amors,
their private Adulteries, their concealed Lyings-in, and Bastard Issue; which
affection turning once into hatred, they then prepare for Poison or some other
Mischief. But the most familiar practices of Evil Women, (as St. Jerome Writes
against Jovinianus) are Frauds, Treacheries, Witchcrafts, Enchantments, and
Magic Tricks. So Livia killed her Husband, whom she hated to Death. Lucilia
also killed hers; the first mixing Henbane with her Jealousy, the other
drinking to him a Cup of Poison instead of a Love-Potion. So that it is safer,
(as Ecclesiasticus says) to live with the Lion and the Dragon, than with a bad
Woman. He that would Marry, let him have a care of taking such a Courtier to
Wife. It my Tongue has been too free in Discourse, yet I have said what it was
impossible for me not to have said: But I will put my hand upon my mouth, and
speak no more of 'um; and therefore let us depart the Court, and fall to the
consideration of those more useful parts of Economy, Merchandising,
Agriculture, and Warfare.

CHAP. LXXII.
Of Merchandising.
Merchandising being the most subtle searcher after hidden gain, the most
Covetous Devourer of her detected Prey, is never happy in Enjoyment, but always
most miserably Tormented with the desire of more. And yet it is not a little
profitable to the Commonwealth, and usefully conducing to Contracts of
friendship between Foreign Princes, and not a little advantageous to private
Life; and as some have thought, absolutely necessary. So that Pliny relates it
to have been invented for the support of Living. And therefore many famous and
wise men have not disdained to follow it. Of which number, as Plutarch
testifies, were Thales, Solon, Hippocrates. But whatsoever Arts and Sciences we
follow, some we admit for Pleasure, some we esteem for the Exercise, some we
follow for Virtue and Honesties-sake, some for their Truth and Justice we
admire: but Arts, how gainful, how pleasant, how necessary, how laborious
soever, are not therefore to be presently accounted Laudable and Honest. Thus
the Trades of Merchandising, Usury, Money-changing, Bankers, are both
necessary, profitable, and laborious; and yet they are accounted illiberal,
srdid, and base ways of getting, because they are not Arts, but laborious
Cheats that are bought and sold; which is the Office and Trade not of a
clear-spirited, well-meaning, ingenuous, just good man; but of a crafty, close,
deceitful knavish dealer. For all Merchants buy in one place, that they may
sell dearer in another, and he is accounted the wisest that can gain most;
among whom, Lying, Imposing, Cheating and Perjury is most frequent; neither is
there any way of attaining Profit which they think disdainful. Nay, they affirm
it to be Lawful to Cheat their Chapmen half their just price: neither is it to
be doubted, but that seeing the whole course of their Lives is fitted to follow
after Gain, and to seek Riches, that they are forced many times for Lucres-sake
to do many ugly and dishonest Actions: For no men grow Rich without Deceit, as
says St. Austin.

-- And far beyond the value raises
The Wares he striveth to put off with Praises.
And as another Poet has it, The Merchant only worthy Stygian Lake,
Vpholdeth Perjury for Lucres sake.
One buys, another sells; one carries, another brings; this man is Creditor,
another Debtor; one pays, another receives, another casts up the Accounts; but
all of 'um guilty of Perjury, Cheating, and Deceit; hazarding Soul, Body, and
Estate, in hopes of Gain: respecting neither Kindred, Friends, nor Allies, but
only for profits sake: and thus all of 'um all their Lifelong run after Gain
and Riches, as if Rest and the Comforts of Living were no where else to be
found. The painful Merchant to the Indies runs,
And proudly thorough Fire, and Surges Shuns.
What Cheats Merchants put upon the World, in Wool, Linen, Silk, Cloth,
Purple, Gems, Spices, Wax, Oil, Wine, Corn, Horses, and many other Creatures,
and indeed in all sorts of Commodities, there is no person who is ignorant: who
sees not, who feels not, that is not altogether stupid and insensible? But
these are small matters, there are far greater behind. These are they who
importing hurtful Commodities, which either for wantonness or rarity being
coveted by Women, though they are of no use to humane Life, but only for the
support of Luxury, Pride, for Sport, Effeminacy and wanton Pleasure, bring from
the utmost ends of the Earth all Allurements to Wickedness. Kingdoms and whole
Provinces every Year they empty of great sums of Money; they corrupt Native
Good Manners, by introducing Foreign Vices; and quite Abolishing wholesome
Paternal Customs, always inquisitive after new Inventions, fill the Land with
most depraved Fashions. Thief are they who in Guilds and Companies, contrary to
Right and Law, set up Monopolies, trying, endeavoring, searching out all ways
and devices to rake to themselves the Wealth of the People; by virtue of their
large Stocks, out-buying others, preventing others, deter^ing others; by
holding up, or enhauncing Prizes, they themselves engrossing all, which they
retail again at their own Rates and Pleasures: many times having borrowed great
Sums of Money, they break Faith and Promises, fly their Country, and seldom
or never returning, undo their Creditors; who oft-times thereupon despair and
Hang themselves. These are they who prying into the Secrets of Princes, the
Councels of City-Senates, and laden with the news of their own Country, reveal
all to the Enemy many times for considerable Rewards, lie in wait for the
Princes Life; there being nothing which for love of Money they will not
enterprise, endeavor, do or suffer. All the whole mystery of their Calling
consists in Lying, dark Sentences, Siftings, Shiftings, Treachery, Cheating and
Deceit. This was the reason that the Carthaginians provided distinct
Residences for Merchants, because they should not live in Common with their
Citizens. The way was open for them to the Market; but where their Ships rode,
and to the more secret parts of their City, they allowed them not so much as to
cast an Eye. The Grecians did not receive 'um within their Cities; but that
their Inhabitants might be free from the suspicion of danger, they always kept
their Markets for Merchandise in the Suburbs. Most other Nations forbid the
Access of Merchants, as being the great depravers of all Good Manners. The
Epidaurians, as Plutarch Witnesses, when they saw their Citizens corrupted by
Commercing with the Illyrians, fearing the Contagion growing from strangers,
and a change of Government with the change of Manners, Elected every Year one
grave and circumspect Person out of their whole City, whom they sent to Buy for
the rest of the Citizens whatever Commodities of the Illyrians they stood in
need of. Plato very much blames Merchandising, as the chiefest corruption of
Good Customs, and therefore would have it Ordained in a well-constituted
Commonwealth, that the wanton Exuberancies of Foreign Countries should not be
imported into such a one, and that no Citizen should be permitted to Travel
under the Age of Forty Years; and that all Foreigners should be sent home,
knowing that there was nothing which sooner caused the People to forget and
hate the frugality of their Ancestors, and their old Country-Customes, then the
Contagion of Novelty brought in by Strangers, which generally makes Cities most
wicked, filling 'um full of all sorts of Fornications, Adulteries, Luxury and
Lust. Such are Leiden and Antwerp, at this time Cities of the greatest Trade of
any in these Parts: And Aristotle exhorts Magistrates to take all diligent care
of keeping their Cities from being corrupted by the mixture of Forrainers. For
though Merchants may be necessary, they ought not to be received into the
number of Citizens, and therefore to be detested, because they live altogether
by Lying; and besides that, disturb the Markets, cause Tumults and private
Discord. Therefore among many Commonwealths there was an ancient Law, That no
Merchant should be a Magistrate, or be admitted into the Senate or Council.
Beyond all this, Merchandising is palpably condemned by the Opinions of most
Divines, and by the Canonical Decrees, (as St. Gregory, Chrysostom, Austin,
Cassiodorus, and Leon testify) and by all true Christians utterly forbid. For
as St. Chrysostom says, A Merchant cannot please God; And therefore, says
he, let no Christian be a Merchant; or if he will be so, let him be thrown out
of the Church. St. Austin also says, That it is impossible for Soldiers and
Merchants truly to Repent.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of Paymasters.
PAymasters are little better than Merchants; a Thieving Generation of Men, and
most commonly of servile Dispositions, Mercenary, and letting out themselves
for Hire; rude and sloathful, but bold and impudent, knowing little but what
concerns their own Trade, that is to say, Writing and Casting Account: but
their chief study is an ordinary method of Stealing, somewhat more ingenious
than the Common road of Thieving. And therefore of all men living, they are the
most given to Filching Wealth by their Fingers Ends, with which they tell
Thousands and Millions: which Fingers of theirs are so Birdlim'd, and stuck
with so many infinite Hooks, that there is no Money, a thing so light, fugitive
and slippery as an Eel or a Serpent, but if they touch it, it sticks so close
to 'um, that it cannot be pulled away. In this they are to be accounted less
mischievous, that they only Prey upon the Treasuries of Kings and Princes, and
then, that what they Steal from them, they liberally consume in Whoring,
Gaming, Banqueting, Building, Horses, Dogs and Plays. Or if they prove Older
and Wiser, yet the Sons they leave behind 'um are such, that whatever their
Fathers have heaped together by Perjury, Rapine and Theft, they in a short time
scatter and lavish away in Gluttony and Riot, Whores, Hounds, Horses, fine
Clothes, and whatsoever Pleasures else their Luxury prompts 'um to. Nor is
this all, for these Paymasters take Use-Money, delaying Payment in hope of
Bribes, buying Debentures, holding in with the Captains, counterfeiting
Original Bonds, opening Letters and sealing 'um again, washing and
counterfeiting Money, and therefore very familiar with Alchymists, many of 'um
Alchymists themselves; or if they want Wit, great favorers at least of the
Art. Now whereas Cicero is of Opinion, That Merchandising, if a man drive a
great and plentiful Trade, Importing many Commodities, and those not idle and
unprofitable, is not much to be discommended; and that Merchants and Paymasters
were to be commended, if knowing when they had enough, they would then retire
into the Country to Husband and till their Lands; therefore let us now consider
what may be thought of Agriculture.

CHAP. LXXIV.
Of Agriculture.
AGriculture, to which feeding of Cattle, Fishing and Hunting is to be annexed,
was so highly honored among the Ancients, that it was no shame for many Roman
Emperors, and most Potent Kings and Princes to Till their own Lands, to Sow,
Graft, and Plant: this course of Life did Dioclesian follow, having quitted his
Empire; and Attalus forsaking his Kingly Throne. Cyrus also, that great Monarch
of the Persians, was wont to glory very much, that when his Friends came to see
him, he was able to show 'um a Garden of his own Planting. Seneca also Planted
Plane-Trees, dug Fish Ponds with his own hands, and made his own
Waterworks, and delighted to be no where more willingly than in the Fields.
Hence the Sirnames of those most noble Families of the Fabii, the Lentuli, the
Cicero's and Piso's, from the Multitude of that sort of Grain.

CHAP. LXXV.
Of Pasturage.
BY the same Reason, from the feeding of Cattle came the Families of the
Bubulci, Statilii, Tanri, Pomponii, Vituli, Vitelli, Porcii, Cato's, Annii, and
Caprae. Dioclesian was raised from a Shepherd to be an Emperor. Spartacus,
that Terror to the Roman Power, was a Shepherd. Paris and Anchises the Father
of Aeneas were Shepherds: so was the fair Endymion, so much beloved of the
Moon; together with Polyhemus and the Hundred-eyed Argos. Among the Gods,
Apollo himself fed the Herds of Admetus King of Thessaly. And Mercury inventor
of the Oaten-Pipe, was the Prince of Shepherds; as also his Son Daphnis. Pan
was the God of the Shepherds; and Protheus was both a Shepherd and a God: and
that we may not forget some of the Hebrew Patriarchs, Judges and Kings, the
greatest men among them, and most beloved of God, were Shepherds. So was Abel
the Just, Abraham the Father of many Nations, Jacob Father of the chosen
People; also Moses their Lawgiver, a Prophet very familiar with God; and David
their King, a man after Gods own heart. Among the Ancient Grecians every most
Illustrious man was a Shepherd; whence some were called Polyarne, some
Polymele, some Polybute, from the numerous Herds and Flocks of Lambs, Sheep,
and Oxen which they possessed. Thus that Italy was so named from Vitulus a Calf,
which the Ancient Greeks call Italus, as all men of reading well know. So both
the Bosphori, the Cimmerian, and the Thracian, the Aegean-Sea, the Ships Argos
and Hippion, were so called from the Passage of Bulls, from Goats and Horses.
And Numidia a Province of Africa has its Name from the abundance of Pasturage
therein. The first Course of Life that men led after the Fall of Adam, was the
Graziers and Shepherds Life. For Pasturage, besides that it affords us all
sorts of flesh for Food, it produces Milk, Chese and Butter, as also Wool,
Skins and Hides, most useful and necessary for our humane Subsistence and
Being: None of which man had the liberty of using till after, whereas man
before was sed with the spontaneous Herbs that grew in Paradise.

CHAP. LXXVI.
Of Fishing.
TO these we may join Fishing and Hunting. The Art of Fishing was so highly
esteemed and set by among the Romans, that they were wont to stock the
Italian-Sea, and as it were to sow it as men do Grain, with strange Fish, and
unknown to those Coasts, brought thither in Ships from far distant parts of the
Ocean; besides that they were at great Expenses, and vast Costs to make
Fish Ponds, and Store-ponds for all the choice sorts of Fish; from whence many
Roman Princes have derived their Sur-names, as the Licinii, Murenae, Serii,
Oratae; which made Cicero to call Lucius, Philip, and Hortensius Fish mongers,
from the great delight they took in Fishponds. We read, that Octavianus
Augustus was wont to Angle with a Rod: and Suetonius writes, That Nero Fished
with a Net wrought with Purple and Scarlet Silk. Ways of Fishing there are but
few: for what Fish there are, are taken either with a Hook, Nets, Weels,
Nooses, Jackspears, and Darts. But Fishing deserves the less praise, for that
Fish are of hard and bad Digestion, neither grateful to the Stomach, nor were
they ever accepted in Sacrifices.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Of Hunting and Fowling.
AS Fish are taken, so are Birds and Fowl, saving that there is a greater
strength and exercise of the Body required in Fowling and Hunting, than in
Fishing; and a more industrious search after the Game. Besides several sorts of
Nets, there are many sorts of Pitfalls, Traps, and Springes; nor must we omit
the great use of Birdlime, Hawks, Hounds, and Greyhounds. A most detestable
Recreation, a vain Exercise, and unprosperous and unhappy sport, with so much
labor and watching Night and Day to rage and make War against the poor Beasts:
A pastime cruel, and totally Tragical, chiefly delighting in Blood and Death.
And therefore from the beginning it was accounted the chief Exercise of the
worst of Men, and greatest Sinners. For Cain, Lamech, Nimrod, Ishmael, Esau,
are reported in Scripture to be mighty Hunters: Nor do we read of any one in
the New Testament that was given to Hunting; Nor of any Nations that were
greatly addicted to the Sport, unless the Ishmaelites, Idumeans, and other
People that did not know God. Hunting was the first Original of Tyranny, which
cannot find a fitter Author, than such a one, as by continually sporting
himself in Blood and Murder, has learned to despise God and Nature. The
Persian Kings however esteemed it, as an imitation of Warlike Exercises: For
Hunting has in it self something fierce and cruel, while the Poor Beast
overcome at length by the Dogs, becomes a Spectacle of Delight, in having its
Blood shed and Bowels torn out; at which the Barbarous Hunter laughs, while the
Foe-Beast rowted with an Army of Dogs, or entangled in a Toil, is carried home
by the Triumphant Huntsman, with a great Troop at his heels; where the fatal
Prey is cut up in bloody terms of Art, and proper words of Butchery, other than
which it is not lawful to use. A strange madness of such kind of Men, a most
renowned Warfare, where they themselves casting off their Humanity become
Beasts, and by a strange perverting of their Manners, like Acteon, are changed
into Irrational Creatures. Some of these Hunters grow to such a height of
Madness, that they become Enemies to Nature, as the Fables relate of Dardames.
Now the Inventors of this Fatal Exercise are said to be the Thebans, a Nation
infamous for Fraud, Theft, and Perjury, and no less to be detested for Perjury
and Incest; from whence the practice thereof was transmitted to the Phrygians,
a Nation equally Abominable, Foolish, and Vain, which therefore the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians had in great contempt. Afterward when the Athenians had
repealed their Law against Hunting, and that the Exercise was admitted
publicly among 'um, then was the City of Athens first Taken; which makes me
wonder to find Hunting commended by Plato Prince of the Academicks. Unless the
Event, honesty of the Invention, or Necessity should be occasions of its
Commendations. Thus Meleager slew the Caledonian Boar, not for his own
pleasure, but to free his Country from a common Mischief. So Romulus hunted
Deer not for pleasures-sake, but to get Food.

There is another sort of Hunting, which is called Fowling; not so Cruel, but
not less Vain. Ulysses is reported to be the first Inventor thereof, who after
the taking of Troy was the first that brought into Greece Birds of Prey manured
for Game, to comfort with new Recreations those that had lost their Parents and
Acquaintance in the Trojan War. And yet he commanded his Son not to make any
use thereof. True it is, that these Exercises, so mean and servile in
themselves, are come to be so far esteemed, that now the chief Nobility and
Gentry, forsaking all other Liberal and Noble Studies, they are become their
chief Learning, and no mean helps to Preferment. Now a days the whole Life of
Kings and Princes, nay, which is a greater Grief, the very Religion of Bishops,
Abbots, and Chief Doctors and Overseers of the Church, is all consumed in
Hunting; wherein they chiefly experience their Ingenuities, and show their
Virtues. Among the slothful Herds he longs to try
A foming Boar, or from the Mountains high
A Lion make his fell descent --
And they who ought to be Examples of Patience, are the only Active Persons in
seeking to Hunt and Prey upon what they are able to overcome; and those Beasts
which by Nature are free, and by Law belong to those that can possess 'um, the
Tyranny of the Great Ones has by rash Edicts Usurped to themselves. Husbandmen
are driven from their Tillage, their Farms are taken from them, their Meadows
likewise; Downs and Woods are shut up from the Shepherds, for shelter for Wild
Beasts, for the Butcherly delight of the Nobility, for whom it is only Lawful
to be Possessed thereof; of which, if a Husbandman or a Countryman do but only
taste, he presently becomes guilty of Petty Treason, and together with the
Beasts is made a Prey to the Hunter. Let us search the Scripture; certainly,
neither in the Sacred Scripture, nor in any other Moral History, shall we read
of any Holy, any Wise man, or Philosopher, that was addicted to Hunting; but
many Shepherds, and some Fishers. St. Austin affirms it to be an Exercise of
all most Wicked; and the Sacred Elibitan and Aurelian Councels utterly
condemned it; and in the Sacred Canons Hunters are not only forbid Promotion to
Holy Orders, but the Degree of Chief Priest is thereby taken from him that has
attaind it. And therefore no man can deny Hunting to be an ungodly Exercise,
which is so Exploded and Condemned in the Opinion of all Wise and Holy Men.
Anciently also, when men did live in Innocence, there was no Creature that fled
from 'um, there were none on the other side that Offended them, or were hurtful
to 'um, but they had an absolute Obedience over all. Examples whereof are in
latter Times apparent among those that led Holy and Religious Lives. Thus
Daniel lived among the Lions; nor was St. Paul in any danger of the Viper. A
Crow fed Eliab the Prophet, Paul and Antony the Hermites, and a Heart nourished
St. Aegidius. Helenus the Abbot commanded a wild Ass, and the Beast obeyed, and
carried his Burden: he Commanded a Crocodile, and the Crocodile carried him
over a River. Many Anchorites lived in the Deserts, and frequented the Dens of
Wild Beasts, fearing neither Lions, Bears, nor Serpents. But with Sin, entered
also the mischief, dread, and fear of the Creatures, and upon that occasion was
the exercise of Hunting sound out. For as St. Austin observes upon the 3d. of
Genesis, No Animals were in their first Production Venomous, Terrible, or
Mischievous to Mankind; but after Sin they became so, for the Punishment of
Man's Transgression. Therefore says God to the Serpent, I will put Enmity
between thee and the Woman, and between her seed and thy seed: Out of which
Sentence arose the Warfare of Hunting, and the Antipathy of Men with Beasts.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
More of Agriculture.
BUT let us return. Of the Exercises of Husbandry, Pasturage, Hunting, and
Fowling, Hiero, Philometer, Attalus, and Archelaus, all Kings, have severally
written. Zenophon and Mago great Captains have done the like, together with
Oppian the Poet. And besides them, Cato, Varro, Pliny, Columella, Virgil,
Crescentius, Palladius, and many others of later times. Cicero believed there
was nothing better, nothing more gainful, nothing more delightful, nothing more
worthy the employment of a generous Spirit, than the occupations above
mentioned. Not a few placed the chief Good and Supreme Happiness in them:
Therefore Virgil calls Husbandmen Fortunate, Horace Blessed. The Oracle of
Delphos also pronounced one Aglaus a most happy man, who having a little Farm
in Arcadia, never stirred out of it; His Content keeping him free from the
Experience of Evil. But miserable men that they are; while they so highly
honor Agriculture, little do they consider, that it was the Effect of Sin, and
the Curse of the most High God. For chasing Adam out of Paradise, he sent him
to till the Earth, saying, Cursed be the Earth for thy sake; in sorrow shall
thou Eat of it all the days of thy Life. Thorns also and Thistles shall it
bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the Earth, for out of it
thou wast taken. Nor are there any persons that feel the sadness of this saying
more than Husbandmen and Countrymen; who after they have Plough'd, Sowed,
Harrow'd, Weeded, Mowed, Reaped, Grazed, Shear'd, Hunted, Fished; here one
looses his Father for Grief, to see his Labors all on a sudden come to
nothing, and wasted with Hail and Tempests: Another Man's Sheep dye, another
man's Oxen, or else they are driven away by the Soldiers: Beasts of Prey
devour his Lambs, and destroy his Fish: the Wife laments at home, his Children
cry, Famine follows; and after all, with uncertain hope of benefit, he is
forced to return to his hard Labor. Before the Fall there was no need of
Artificial Tillage, no want of Grazing, Hunting, or Fowling, for the Earth was
to have produced all things of its own accord, always flourishing with all
sorts of Fruits, fragrant Smells, constant Summer, and verdant Meadows. Nor had
the Earth brought forth any thing noxious, no Herb endu'd with poisonous
Qualities, no venomous Toads, Vipers, or other Reptiles. And Man himself being
then Lord of the whole Creation, having had the least occasion for the wild
Beasts, had found none such, but all naturally Tame: had he but beckned to the
Beasts of Carriage, they had willingly submitted to his Burdens. Man then but
new Born, had had the use and strength of all his Members and Limbs; not
wanting Garments to hide his Nakedness, Houses for Shelter, nor Sawces to
provoke his Appetite; and had prolonged his happy days without the help of
Physic, all things offering themselves spontaneously to satisfy his desires.

The Earth had been his Food, his Garments Air,
And for his Bed, the Fields their Flowr's prepare.
But the mischief of Sin, and the necessity of Death, rendered all things
incommodious to us: for now the Earth produces nothing without our Labor and
our Sweat but deadly and venomous, and as it were upbraiding us that we live;
nor are the other Elements less kind to us: Many the Sea destroys with raging
Tempests, and the horrid Monsters devour: the Air making War against us with
Thunder, Lightning, and Storms; and with a crowd of Pestilential Diseases, the
Heavens conspire our Ruin. Nor are the Creatures only our Enemies: For Man, as
the Proverb has it, is to himself a Wolf. We are encompassed with innumerable
Temptations of Unclean Spirits, whereby to draw us into the Dark Receptacles of
Pain and Punishment, there to be Tormented in Eternal Fire. By all which it
appears, that Agriculture with all its appurtenants of Fishing, Hunting,
Fowling and Grazing, is a loss of the greatest happinesses, the invention of
Mischief, and a trouble to Humane Life. Those Exercises appurtenant to
Agriculture being only incommodious means to restore the Barrenness of the
Earth, to supply the want of Food, and defend us from the Rigor of cold, which
puts us in mind of Death. And yet this Calamity and necessity of ours might in
some measure deserve commendation, could it have retained it self within
moderate bounds, and not shown us so many devices to make strange Plants, so
many portentous Graftings and Metamorphoses of Trees; How to make Horses
Copulate with Asses, Wolves with Dogs, and so to engender many wondrous
Monsters contrary to Nature: And those Creatures to whom Nature has given leave
to range the Air, the Seas and Earth so freely, to Captivate and Confine in
Aviaries, Cages, Warrens, Parks and Fishponds, and to fat 'um in Coops, having
first put out their Eyes, and maimed their Limbs; had it not also taught us so
many varieties of Weaving, Dying, and dressing of Linen, Woollen, Skins and
Silk, which Nature only designed for plain and homely Clothing, but invented
for the increase of Pride and Luxury. Pliny complaining of these
inconveniences, gives for instance the Seed of Hemp, which being but a little
Seed, in a short time produces a large Sail, that by the help of the Wind
carries a Ship all over the World, occasioning men, as if they had not Earth to
perish in, to perish in the Sea likewise. I omit the many Laws, and Maxims, and
Observations of Husbandmen, Shepherds, Fishers, Hunters and Fowlers, so
ridiculous, and not only foolish and ridiculous, but Superstitious, and
Repugnant to the Law of God; How to prevent Storms, make their Seed Fruitful,
kill Weeds, scare Wild Beasts, stop the flight of Beasts and Birds, the
swimming of Fishes, to charm away all manner of Diseases; of all which those
Wise Men before named have written very seriously, and with great cruelty.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Of the Art Military.
BUT now from Husbandmen, let us pass to Soldiers chosen out of the
Countrymen, and therefore more fit for Fight, as says Vegetius: and whom Cate
affirms to make the strongest and hardiest Soldiers: and we find in Scripture,
That Cain the first Warrier or slayer of Men, was a Husbandman and a Hunter.
Therefore the Art of War ought least to be despised, which, as Valerius
remembers, made the Roman Empire Mistress of all Italy, and of many Cities and
Kingdoms of great and Warlike Nations beside; opened the streights of the
Pontick-Sea, forced through the close passages of the Alps and Taurus. And
Scipio Africanus glories in Ennius, that by the slaughter and Blood of his
Enemies, he opened a way to Immortality. To whom Cicero assents, saying, that
Hercules ascended to Heaven by the same means. The Lacedaemonians are said to be
the first that delivered Rules for teaching this Art; and therefore Hannibal
having taken a Resolution to Invade Italy, desired a Lacedemonian General:
Under the Power of Lacedemon many Kingdoms and Nations grew great; neglected by
her, or neglecting her, from large Dominion they fell to nothing: for under the
Leading of rash Captains fell the Warlike Numantia, Corinth, the curious Proud
Thebes, the Learned Athens, the Holy Jerusalem, and at last the most Potent
Rome. This Art, writ with much more Blood than the Laws of Draco, teaches ye
how advantageously and neatly to order a Battle, to Assail the Enemy, to use
Stratagems, to move Vigorously forward, to Retreat, to maintain a Shock, to
strike to purpose, to avoid the strokes to handle nimbly all manner of Arms, to
pursue, when to leave Pursuing; when to Pursue far, when not too far; when to
fall to the Spoil, to rally, make good Breaches, defend Forts and Towns. It
teaches ye also how to prepare and Rig out great Navies, build Castles,
fortify Towns, place fit Garrisons; to Encamp, cast Trenches, Mine,
Countermine, make Engines, Assault Ramplers, provide Provision necessary for
the Army, to place and avoid Ambushments, and the like; also to Besiege Cities,
plant Batteries, advance the Trenches, dig down the Walls, shake down the
Towers, scale Walls, to burn and demolish Towns and Castles, to spoil Temples,
plunder Cities, depopulate Countries, abolish Laws, adulterate Matrons, vitiate
Widows, ravish Virgins; to Wound, take Prisoners, Captivate and Kill. So that
the whole Art studies nothing else but the subversion of Mankind, transforming
Men into Beasts and Monsters. So that War is nothing but a general Homicide and
Robbery by mutual Consent. Neither are Soldiers other than stipendiary Thieves
armed to the subversion of the Commonwealth. Now the Events of War being always
uncertain, and that Fortune, not Skill affords Victory; to what purpose serve
all the Stratagems, Ambuscades, and Rules of War? Yet the Divine Plato praises
this Art, Teaches it to his Scholars, and commands them to be enrolled as soon
as fit for service: and the Famous Cyrus affirmed, That War was as necessary as
Agriculture: Nay, St. Austin and St. Bernard, Catholic Doctors of the Church,
have approved thereof; neither do the Pontifical Decretals at all impugn it,
though Christ and his Apostles teach quite another Doctrine. So that contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ, it has obtained no small Honor in the Church, by
reason of the many Orders of Holy Soldiers, all whose Religion, consists in
Blood, Slaughter, Rapine and Pyracy, under pretense of defending and enlarging
the Christian Faith; as if the Intention of Christ had been to spread his
Gospel, not by Preaching, but by force of Arms; not by Confession, and
simpleness of Heart, but by Menaces, and high Threats of Ruin and Destruction,
strength of Arms, Slaughter and Massacres of Mankind. Nor is it enough for
these Soldiers to bear their Arms against the Turks, Saracens, and Pagans,
unless they Fight also for Christians against Christians. War and Warfare have
begot many Bishops, and it is not seldom that they Fight stiffly for the
Popedom; which made the Holy Bishop of Camora Affirm, That seldom any Pope
ascends the Chair without the Blood of the Saints; and it is called constancy
of Martrydome in those that dye Fighting desperately for the Papal Seat.
Concerning the Art of War, Zenophon, Zenocrates, Onozander, Cato Censorius,
Cornelius Celsus, Iginius, Vegetius, Frontinus, Helianus, Modestus, and many of
the Ancients; among the Moderns, Volturius, Nicholas the Florentine, James Earl
of Porcia, and some few others. These are great Doctors in the Art, but
Speculative, and therefore not so dangerous as the Practisers. Now as to the
Titles, Dignities, and Degrees of the Scholars, there are neither Batchelors,
Masters, nor Doctors; Neither are they, as they are vulgarly, to be called
Emperors, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Knights, Captains, Centurions, Lieutenants,
Ensigns, names begotten by injury and Ambition; but Thieves, House-breakers,
Robbers, Murderers, Sacrilegious, Fencers, Adulterers, Panders, Whoremongers,
Traitors, Gamesters, Blasphemers, Parricides, Incendiaries, Pirates, and
Tyrants. All which who ever would express in one Word, let him call 'um
Soldiers, that is to say, the most barbarous dregs of Wicked Men, whom their
own wicked Natures and Desires carry headlong to all Villainy: among whom the
Name of Dignity and Liberty takes the freedom to commit all sorts of Enormity
and Cruelty, seeking all occasions of Mischief, looking upon Innocence to be a
kind of likeness of Death, all of 'um being one body of their Father the Devil:
Like the Leviathan, of whom thus speaks Job, They are a body Armed with
scales like strong shields, and which is sure Sealed. One is set to another,
that no wind can come between them. One is set to another; they stick together
that they cannot be sundred, Job 41. They assist one another and are assembled
together against the Lord, and against his Christ, Psa.2. Neither are Purple,
Chains of Gold, Garlands and Crowns the Ensigns of War, but wounded breasts,
and bodies deformed with scarrs. An Exercise which is never performed but with
the ruin and mischief of many, the destruction of Good Manners, Laws and
Piety; diametrically at Enmity with Christ, with Happiness, with Peace, with
Charity, with Innocence and Patience. The Rewards thereof are Glory got by the
Effusion of humane Blood, Enlargement of Dominion, out of a greedy desire of
Rule and Possession, obtained with the Damnation of many Souls. For seeing that
Victory is the End whereat all War drives, no man can be a Conqueror, but he
must be a Murderer; neither can any one be overcome, but he must wickedly
Perish: Therefore the Death of Soldiers is the most desperate, sin writing but
a bad Epitaph upon their Graves. They that kill are wicked, though the War be
just; For Soldiers consider not the justness of the War, but what Plunder and
Booty they shall get from those that they kill. If there are any who are justly
slain, yet they that claim Honor by doing the Fact, make themselves but a kind
of Butchers, or Hangmen, who while the Laws are so strict against Thieves,
Incendiaries, Robbers, Homicides and Murderers, yet presume under the Title
and Pretense of being Warriors, to be accounted Noble and Virtuous.

CHAP. LXXX.
Of Nobility.
THus we find the Original of Nobility to spring from War, a Dignity obtained
by Butchery, out of the blood and slaughter of the Enemy, and adorned with
Ensigns of Public Honor. This was the reason of so many sorts of Crowns among
the Romans, Civil, Mural, Obsidional, Naval; so many Military largesses of
Bracelets, Spears, Trappings, Chains, Rings, Statues, and Images; from whence
the Pedegrees of Nobility took their first rise. Among the Carthaginians they
had so many Rings given 'um as they had been present in Fights: the Iberians
raised about the Sepulcher of the Dead so many Obelisques as he had slain
Enemies. Among the Scythians, at their Public Festivals, it was Lawful for
none to receive the Cup that was openly carried about, but they who had slain
an Adversary. Among the Macedonians there was a Law, That he that had not slain
an Enemy, should be girt with a Headstal or Capistrum, in de^ision of his
Cowardice. Among the Germans, no man was to Marry a Wife, till he had brought
the Head of a slain Enemy before the King. And many times the Indignity which
many Persons have thought has been put upon 'um in not being rewarded according
to the Services which they presumed themselves to have done in War, had urged
'um to take up Arms against their Country: Examples whereof we find in
Coriolanus, the Gracchi, Sylla, Marius, Sertorius, Catiline and Caesar.
Therefore is we do but Examine the Foundations and first Beginnings of
Nobility, we shall find it acquired by Perfidiousness and Cruelty; if the
growth thereof, we shall find it increased by Mercenary War and Robbery. If we
look into the Original of Kingdoms and Empires, we shall meet with most Impious
Murders of Parents and Brothers, Tragical Matches, Fathers expelled from their
Kingdoms by their Sons: and therefore let us view a little the Infancy of
Nobility, and we shall find it to be nothing but a sturdy Power, and robustious
Dignity, a Happiness got by Wickedness, and the Inheritance of the worst of
Children: And that this is apparent, is evident out of Scripture, and no less
manifest out of the Ancient and Modern Histories of the Gentiles. For no sooner
had Adam at the first Creation of the World begot his Firstborn Cain the
Husbandman, and his other son Abel the Shepherd, but there began a distinction
of Power: Abel seemed to resemble the Commonalty, Cain the Nobility, who being
according to the Flesh proud and cruel, and a Persecutor of him that was
according to the Spirit meek and gentle, slew his Brother. But the Commonalty
was again restored in the Birth of Seth, the third Son of Adam; so that Cain
was the first Author of Parricide and Nobility together; who contemning the
Laws of God and Nature, yet trusting in his own strength, and Usurping Dominion
to himself, he built Cities, instituted Empire, and by Law began to curb Men
Created free by God, the sons also of the Holy Generation; and to bring them
into servitude and subjection, till they themselves contemning the Command of
God, all Flesh soon growing Corrupt, by promiscuous Copulation begat Giants,
which the Scripture seems to Interpret, men Powerful in their Time, and famous
for their Deeds. And this is the most apt and real definition of Nobility; for
these were they that first oppressed the Weak, advancing themselves by Robbery
and Spoil, and glorying in their great Riches, spread the greatness of their
Fame by calling Regions, Rivers, Mountains, Cities, and Seas by their own
names; of whom Cain the first Parent, by nature Wicked, enviously and inwardly
malicious of God, incorrigible, a treacherous dissembler of his Anger, slew his
own brother, adding Blasphemy to Parricide. And thus we see the Primitive and
most Ancient Ornaments, the chief Virtues and Embellishments which continue to
this very day, whose first Author was the Father of the Giants whom God
destroyed in the Deluge, reserving only Noah a Just Man, of the Generation of
Seth. This Noah had three sons, Sem, Japhet, and Ham, who restoring the World
after the Flood, according to the Custom of the Ancient Giants, began to build
Towns and Cities; which is the Reason that from Noah till Abraham the Scripture
makes no mention of Just Men: wherefore we are to believe, That all from Noah
to Abraham were the Architects of Nobility, that is, of powerful Impiety,
Confusion, Power, Warfare, Violence, Oppression, Hunting, Luxury, Pomp, Vanity,
and such other marks of Nobility, with which the sons of Noah were stamped.
Among others Cham, because he was wickeder than the rest, and the first that
was disobedient to his Father, therefore he was thought fittest to be the sole
Monarch of the World at that time: he begat Nimrod, whom the Scripture
describes to be a mighty Potentate upon the Earth, a mighty Hunter before the
Lord, some read it, against the Lord. He built Babylon the Great, and gave the
first occasion of the Confusion of Languages; set down Rules how to Govern;
distinguishing the degrees of Honor, Dignity, Offices, and Arms. After that,
Laws being made to curb the Commonalty, then was slavery and subjection
introduced, Taxes laid upon the People, Armies were raised, and cruel Wars were
first carried on. From the same Cham proceeded Chus, from whom the Aethiopians;
Misraim from whom the Egyptians; and Canaan, from whom the Canaanites. The most
noble and populous Nations, but the wickedest, most reprobate, and accursed of
God. At length, after some process of time, again God Elected a Just Man, even
the Patriarch Abraham, from whose Loins he might raise to himself a Holy Seed
and People, whom he distinguished by the Mark of Circumcision, from the
Multitude of all other Nations: he begat two sons, one of his Maidservant,
Natural, the other of his Wife, Legitimate. Ishmael became a fierce Hunter, a
Potentate, Prince of the Ishmaelites, giving from his own a lasting Name to his
Nation; and God blessed him, and established his Grandeur and Nobility upon the
foundations of War and Rapine, saying, And he shall be a wild man; his hand
shall be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell
in the midst of all his Brethren. But Isaac observing the Religion of his
Father, kept his Flock, and had at length by his Wife Rebecca two sons, Jacob
and Esau; Esau a man whom God beloved not, red and hairy, a Hunter, a Bowman,
and a Glutton, insomuch that for one mess of Pottage he sold his Birthright; he
became a Potent Man, and Prince of the Idumeans, receiving for his blessing the
fat of the Earth and the dew of Heaven, but to live by his Sword and in
servitude. Jacob being a Just Man, an Exile with his Uncle Laban, fed his
Uncles Sheep, whose Daughters when he had both earned by an Apprentiship of
Fourteeen years for his Wives, he begat of their bodies Twelve Children; and
his Name was called Israel, which Name he left to his Posterity the people of
Israel. By the names of his Twelve Sons, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar,
Zebulon, Joseph, Benjamin, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and Ashur, were the Twelve
Tribes of the whole Nation called: But Joseph was sold by his Brethren into
Egypt, where he was instructed in all the Learning of the Egyptians, made a
most skilful Interpreter of Dreams; which he made use of in Prison. So skilful
in Oeconomicks, that by his Ingenuity he found out new ways of increasing the
Public Revenue, and heaping up Riches to himself; whereupon he became a great
Favorite of Pharaoh's, being constituted by him Lord and Governor over all
Egypt: and of a Slave, was created Noble, after the solemn Custom of Egypt,
for the King put his Ring upon his finger, and a Chain of Gold about his neck;
clad him with Purple, made him to ride in his Chariot, the Crier proclaiming,
That all men reverence and esteem him as one of the chief Nobility. The like
manner of ennobling of men we find the Persians to have used; of which
Mordecai the Hebrew ennobled by Artaxerxes in Esther was an Example, from
whence the Custom of creating Noblemen has continued to this day among the
following Races of Emperors and Kings: of which some of 'um purchase their
Nobility with Money, others by Pimping and Pandarism, others by Poison, others
by Parricide: Many by Treason have been advanced to Grandeur and great Power,
as we observe in the Histories of Euthierates, Philocrates, Euphorbus, and
Philager. Many more by Flattery, Detraction, Calumny, and Sycophantry; many by
prostituting their Wives and Daughters to Kings; many by Hunting, Rapine,
Murder, and Witchcraft, have attained the highest degrees of Honor. But let
us return to Joseph. He growing great in the house of Pharaob, and having begat
his eldest Son Manasseh, pufft up with his unexpected Nobility, not without
blame, spoke too severely in contempt of his Father's house and his own Family:
God, said he, has made me forget all my labors and my fathers household: For
which cause when Jacob blessed the two Sons of Joseph, he set Ephraim before
Manasseh. Joseph also, although he were the Son of Jacob, yet by reason of his
Nobility contemptible in the sight of God, was not honored to have any one of
the Tribes bear his name, which was given to his two Sons Ephraim and Manasseh.
After this the people of Israel lived in Egypt, and kept Sheep in the Land of
Goshen; but when they grew numerous and populous, they grew also suspected and
envied by the Potentates and Kings of Egypt, who thereupon thought to oppress
'um with continual hard labor and servitude. They also slew their
Male-children, thinking to have quite extirpated them from the Earth: But one
of those Children, because of his Beauty, was preserved by the Daughter of
Pharaoh, who adopted him for her Son, and called him Moses, because she had
preserved him out of the Water. Moses therefore grew up in the house of the
King, and being bred up in all the Learning of the Egyptians, was accounted as
the King's Son, was made a great man, and Captain of Pharaoh's Army against the
AEthiopians; but having married the King of AEthiopia's Daughter, he got the
ill will of the Egyptian Lords; and being banished out of Egypt, fled into
Midian, where at a certain Well taking part with certain Damsels against the
Shepherds of that Country, for that kindness he had bestowed on him for a Wise
one of those Virgins, the Daughter of the Priest of Midian. At length
increasing in Age and Wisdom, and remembering himself to be an Hebrew, he
returned into Egypt, and renouncing his Egyptian Honors, encouraged by God, he
undertook to be Captain of the Children of Israel; and by the assistance of
many Miracles carried them out of Egypt: and when the people had sinned against
God in making a golden Calf, Moses being angry, calling to his aid the strong
men of the Sons of Levi, commanded 'um, saying, Put every man his sword to his
side, go to and fro from gate to gate through the host, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his Neighbor. Now after he
had made this memorable Slaughter of about three, some say three and twenty
thousand persons, he blessed 'um, saying, Consecrate your hands, or ye have
consecrated your hands this day unto the Lord, every man upon his son, and upon
his brother, that there may be given you a blessing this day; fulfilling what
was said by Jacob of his Sons Simeon and Levi, calling them Instruments of
Cruelty in their habitations, cursing their wrath, for it was fierce; and their
rage, for it was cruel. And thus we find this signal Slaughter to be the first
Original of Nobility in Israel: For after that did Moses appoint Princes and
Captains among 'um, Captains of hundreds, Captains of fifties and tens; famous
Warriors and stout Fighters through their Tribes and Families: Among whom if
there were any that excelled in valor and strength, him they made their Chief,
giving him the power of Judgment and Command. For they had no King, but were
governed by Judges; among whom Joshua a Nobleman, strong, warlike, a vanquisher
of Kings, not fearing any man, after Moses was dead, held the most Supreme
Command; after whose death they lived under a Democracie, without any Prince or
Leader. But growing seditious, fell out one among another, and had almost
totally extirpated the Tribe of Benjamin, insomuch that there were not above
six hundred men remaining. And when they had forsworn to given 'um their own
Daughters, they contrived a way to let 'um have four hundred of the Virgins of
Jabesh-Gilead, and for the other two hundred they were permitted to take 'um by
force from the men of Silo. And thus was fulfilled the Blessing of Benjamin's
Nobility, like unto a Wolf seizing his Prey in the morning, and diving his Prey
in the evening. After this they returned to Aristocracie, and the Government of
Princes; among whom Abimelech the natural Son of Gideon, of the Tribe of
Manasseh, having slain seventy of his legitimate Brethren upon one stone,
obtained the Kingdom, and ruled in Sichem. After this the people universally
clamouring for a King, God gave them Kings in his wrath; very few good, very
many wicked. For the Lord was angry with them, forewarning them of the high
Prerogative of Kings, and the subjection they must suffer under 'um; affirming
that Kings would take their Sons and their Daughters, and would make Carters
and inferior Servants of 'um; that they would at their own pleasure take their
Lands, their Farms, their Menservants, and their Maidservants, and employ 'um
in his own service; and that as often as the King was wicked and did evil, the
people would suffer for his sake. The first King he gave them, was a young man
of the Tribe of Benjamin, named Saul, a man of great strength, tall of Stature,
insomuch that he was higher than any of the rest of the people from the
shoulders upwards: and God struck such an awe upon the peoples Spirits, that
they esteemed and reverenced him as a sacred Minister of God. This man, before
he began to reign, was as innocent as a Child of one year old; but having
obtained the Kingdom, he became a wicked man, and a Son of Belial. Therefore
God took the Kingdom from Saul, and gave it to David the Son of Jesse, of the
Tribe of Judah: He from a Shepherd was advanced to be King; but then being
infected with the contagion of Nobility, he also became a man of sin,
Sacrilegious, an Adulterer, a Murderer, though God in his mercy did not quite
forsake him. He reigned at first in Hebron, Ishbosheth the Son of Saul reigning
beyong Jordan; after which he reigned over all Israel in Jerusalem. Nor could
he reign in peace neither; for while he was yet alive, his Son Absalon invaded
the Kingdom in Hebron; who being slain, Siba the Son of Bochra rebelled again:
After that Adoniah his other Son attempted to gain the Crown, at what time
David on his deathbed appointed Solomon his younger Son, born of Bathsheba the
Adulteress, to inherit his Throne. He being the first absolute Monarch of the
Hebrews, confirmed himself therein by the Murder of his Brother Adoniah; but
being once established, he forsook the ways of God, and ^ell to Fornication and
Idolatry. His bad Son Rehoboam succeeded him, a great sinner against God;
therefore the sole Monarchy of the people was taken from him, ten of the Tribes
revolting from his Government, choosing to themselves Jeroboam for their King, a
most wicked man of the Tribe of Dan, who poisoned all Israel, seducing the ten
Tribes to Idolatry, setting up Golden Calves in Samaria, that the Blessing
might be fulfilled, saying, Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder by the
path, biting the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. As for the
Tribe of Judah, it remained quite under the Posterity of David, according to
the Prophecy of Jacob, That the Scepter was not to depart from Judah till the
Messiah came. Yet was Judah one of the worst of Jacob's Sons, and one that lay
with his Mother-in-Law. His Sons also were most lewd and evil; wherefore the
blessing of Power and Nobility was granted to him in the enjoyment of the
Scepter, and his blessing to be as strong as a Lion. After that the people of
Edom and Jobne revolted from the King of Israel, choosing Rulers of their own at
their own will and pleasure, and God promised to Esau that he should shake off
the Yoke. Among all the Kings of Juda and Israel, scarce four were known to be
good. At last their Kings and all their Nobility being ruined and overcome, the
Jews were carried Captive to Babylon. In process of time, God taking compassion
of their Calamities, where they erected a king of Popular Government, living
happily under the command of their Priest, and the chief Heads of their Tribes,
until Aristobulus the Son of Hircanus took the Regal Diadem, and renewed the
Kingdom of the Jews, with the murder of his Mother and Brothers: To him many
Kings succeeded, till at length, under Archelaus an insolent and obscene
Tyrant, the Kingdom was by the Romans reduced into a Province, and last of all
wholly ruined and laid waste by Vespasian and Titus; the whole Nation being
scattered over the whole world from that time to this day in a continued
servitude. All this I thought convenient to repeat out of the Sacred Scripture,
to the end I might make it apparent that at the beginning of the world there
was no Nobility whose Original was not evil even among the people of God, and
that Nobility is nothing else but the reward of public Iniquity; and by how
much the life of a man is most polluted, so much the more famous it shall be
accounted; the fuller of wickedness, the greater his Glory and Recompense. As
Diomed the Pirate, when he was taken, wittily pleaded before Alexander, I, said
he, because I rob but with one Ship, am accused for being a Pirate: Thou,
because thou do the same thing with a great Navy, are called an Emperor: If
thou were single and a Captive, thou would be a Pirate; if I had an Army at
my command, I should be esteemed an Emperor: For as to the matter we differ
not, unless it may not be disputed whether he be not the worst that takes with
greatest violence, who deserts Justice most manifestly, and contemns and breaks
the Law. For those whom I fly, thou pursuest: those whom I honor, thou
contemnest. The hard^ness of my Fortune, and the narrowness of my Estate, makes
me; thy intolerable Pride, and insatiable Ava^rice, makes thee a Thief. If my
wild Fortune would grow more tame, perhaps I might be better; but if thou were
more fortunate, thou would be worse. Alexander admiring the constancy of the
man, caused him to be ^ifted in his Army, that he might lawfully fight and make
War, that is, rob and steal. Now to proceed to the Histories of the Ethnicks, I
shall from thence also show, that Nobility and Greatness is nothing but
Improbity, Madness, Robbery, Rapine, Homicide, Luxury; the sport of Hunting and
violence arising from principles of disorder, prosecuted more wicked, and
always coming to a disastrous end; all which shall be made out from the four
famous Monarchies, as also from the success of other more petty Kingdoms. The
first Monarchy then after the Flood, was that of the Assyrians, the Founder
whereof was Ninus, who first of all not content with the bounds of his own
Empire, resolved to extend his Dominions as far as he could, made cruel Wars
upon his Neighbors, subdu^ng all the Eastern Nations, and increasing the
vastness of his Empire with new Acquests and successful Victories. he brought
all Asia and Pontus under his subjection. He also murdered Zoroastes King of
the Bactrians. Ninus had a Wife named Semiramis; she begged of her Husband that
she might rule only five days; which being granted her, she took the Regal
Ornaments, and seating her self in the Royal Throne, commanded the Guard to
kill her Husband; who being slain, she succeeded him in the Empire, and not
satisfied with the large extent of her Dominions, she conquered Ethiopia, and
carried the War into India: she Walled Babylon with a most stately and
magnificent Wall, and at length is killed by her Son Ninus the second, whom she
had wickedly conceived, impiously exposed, and incestuously known. Under these
Murderers the Assyrian Monarchy took its original of Grandeur, till
extinguished by the death of Sardanapalus, a man more vicious and effeminate
than any woman, whom Arbactus Prefect of Media slew in the midst of all his
Concubines, and taking upon him the Kingdom, translated the Empire from the
Assyrians to the Medes, which Cyrus afterward translated to the Persians,
among whom Cambyses his Son, founder of New Babylon, joining and adding by
conquest many Kingdoms to his own, began the second Monarchy, which he
confirmed to himself by the murder of his Brother and Son. This Empire
declined under Narsus the Son of Ochus, who being slain by Bagoas the Eunuch,
Darius succeeded him; and he being overthrown by Alexander, put a period to the
Persian Monarchy, with his life; which the said Alexander, conscious with his
adulterous Mother of his Fathers death, and indeed the contriver thereof
translated again to the Macedonians. The fourth Monarchy was that of the
Romans, the most powerful^ and of largest extent: but should we repeat the
successions of Governments from the building of the City, we find it founded
upon most wicked beginnings, and maintained by as bad principles: Let us
therefore observe who were the Founders of this great City. Rome was built by
two Twins, Remus and Romulus, incestuously begot upon a Vestal Nun. Remus at
the beginning of his Government was murdered by Romulus, a second Cain; who
suffering himself to be called the Son of the Gods, having gathered together a
Crew of detestable Villains, ravished the Daughters of the Sabines to get
themselves Wives; and from them sprung the Offspring of Roman Giants so
formidable to all the world. After this, thirsting after the blood of his
Father-in-Law, he slew Titus Tatius, a good Old man, and Captain of the
Sabines; having drawn him into a League, and associated him into Partnership of
the Kingdom. These were the Originals of the Roman Empire, which for two
hundred forty three years was governed by cruel Kings, and ended under
Tarquinius the Proud, exiled for the Rape of Lucrece. And as the Posterity of
Cain ended in the seventh Generation destroyed by the Flood, so these Roman
Successors in the Seventh King from Romulus, were driven out of the City by
Popular Tumult. However, though the Romans threw off the Yoke of Kingship, yet
they could not shake off the Yoke of Servitude. For the Kings being now thrown
out, and the Government translated into the hands of the Nobility, Brutus a
Nobleman was the first Roman Consul chosen. He to establish the Foundations of
intended Empire, not only labored to equal Romulus, the first Founder of the
City, in Murder, but also to outdo him; for he slew two of his own Sons, and
two of his Wives Brothers in the Marketplace, after he had caused 'um to be
publicly whipped. After this the Government continued for many Ages, sometimes
in the hands of the Nobility, sometimes of the Commonalty, under the power and
command of sundry Magistrates and petty Tyrannies; at length under Julius
Caesar, a man I cannot say whether stronger in War, or corrupter in Manners;
and afterward under Antonius, a man enslaved to Lust and Luxury, wholly
determined: After which the whole Command of the Roman Empire fell into the
sole hands of Octavianus Augustus. In him began the fourth Monarchy of the
World, but not without Murder: for though Augustus was accounted one of the
mildest Princes in the world, yet he put to death a Son and a Daughter of his
Uncle Caesar, begot upon Cleopatra, though his Uncle had Adopted him, and left
him his Heir by Will, not regarding Name, Kindness, Affinity, nor Childhood.
And now the Roman Emperors held the Monarchy of the world, among whom behold
these Monsters of Cruelty and Impiety, Nero, Domitian, Caligula, Heliogabalus,
Galienus, and others, under whom the whole world was oppressed, till
Constantine the Great having slain Maxentius, for his Lust and Cruelty hated of
the Roman people, was proclaimed Emperor. He, because he re-edifi'd Byzantium,
making her equal with Rome, or else as it were a new Rome, and commanded it to
be called Constantinople, from his own name, seems to have translated the Roman
Empire to the Greeks, and at Constantinople, as Romulus at Rome, assured it to
himself by the murder of the two Licinii, the Husband and Son of his Sister,
as also of his own Child and Wife. Thus the Empire remained among the Greeks
till the time of Charles the Great, under whom the name of the Empire only was
removed into Germany. And thus far for Monarchies. Let us make inquiry into the
beginnings of some other Kingdoms, and we shall find them founded upon no
better principles, nor upheld by less impiety, nor the occasions of their
dissolutions less remarkable. I shall omit the Murders of Dardanus, and by
what devilish contrivances having besotted the Greeks to be his impious
accomplices, he laid the Foundation of the Greek Monarchy. I omit the
Governments obtained by the murders of their Husbands, as the stories relate
concerning the Amazonians. I come to later times, and the verges of our own
memories. In Spain, in the time of Theodosius the Emperor, Alarick the Goth
was the first that reigned, at which time the Vandals also possessed a great
part of the same Country. The first King of the Goths that obtained the
Monarchy of Spain, was S^ytilla, which Roderick the King, because he had
ravished Julia Daughter of the Prefect of the Province of Tingitana, some while
after lost to the Saracens or Moors, who after him possessed Spain, till
Pelagius having again recovered some places, they were then called no more
Kings of the Goths, but Kings of Spain, the Seat of the Empire being settled at
Leon, until the reign of Ferdinando the Holy, who first called himself King of
Castile, who having slain his Brother Garsias, by means of that parricide
obtained the Kingdom of Navarre. Their Brother Romanus, whom their Father had
begot upon a Concubine, being a warlike and fierce man, became the first King
of Arragon. The first King of Portugal was Alphonsus the Son of Henry of Lorain
and Terese the Bastard-daughter of Alphonsus King of Castile; A stout man at
Arms, who slew five Princes or great Governors of the Saracens in one Battle;
which was the reason that the Kings of Portugal carry five Shields for their
Arms: yet was this Alphonsus cursed and cruel to his Mother, whom because she
married a second time, he cast into perpetual imprisonment, nor could be moved
to set her free by any persuasions, entreaties, prayers, or menaces of
Ecclesiastical Censure. Thus all the Kingdoms of Spain have been obtained by
unheard of Villainies, and held by the same Arts. I omit the Kingdoms of the
Burgundians and Lombards, composed of the greatest and most famous people of
Germany, and begun in Lombardy by Alboynus, in Burgundy by Gondaicus, and in
both places maintained and propagated by Murder and Bloodshed. Let us view the
most Potent Kingdom of the Franks in Gallia, whose first Foundations were laid
by Pharamond Son of Meroveus, who coming out of Germany into France, was made
King of the Franks; excelling in nothing more than in Cruelty and Fierceness:
His Posterity remained till the time of Childerick the Third, who for his sloth
and libidinous wantonness was deposed from his Kingdom, and thrust into a
Monastery. In his place was Pipin advanced, Steward of Childerick's House, who
having got the Kingdom for himself and his Posterity by treason, established
his own Power by the Murder of Grifo his Brother. His Posterity continued to
Lewis the Second, Son of Lotharius, who for adulterating his Wife Blanch's bed,
was poisoned by her: at which time Hugh Capet laid violent hands upon the
Scepter; a stout Warrier, and there highly esteemed by the Parisians; but
otherwise ignoble, as being the Son of a Butcher. He rebelling against Charles
the Uncle of Lewis, and right Heir of the Crown, scrapes together a loose Band
of debauched fellows and Vagabonds, and having got the said Charles into his
hands by treachery, thrust him into Prison, and there kept him till he di'd;
and thus having most barbarously murdered his King and Prince, he assumed the
Regal Diadem, changing a Kingdom into a Butchers shop; whose Succession endures
to this day. It would be too long and tedious in this place to enumerate the
Originals of all Kingdoms, and discourse the Histories of all Antiquity. I have
in another Volume writ more at large of what I have here but lightly touched,
where I have painted out Nobility it self in its proper Colors and Lineaments;
and I have showed that there never was, nor is any Kingdom in the world, or
famous Principality, the Foundations whereof were not built upon Particide,
Treachery, Perfidiousness, Cruelty, Murder, Slaughter, and other most horrid
Crimes, the Arts and Utensils of Nobility, whereof when we see the Head, we may
easily conjecture at the monstrosity of the rest of the Members; only prompt
and ready for the Execution of all manner of Vice, Violence, Rapine, Murder,
Men-hunting, and Lust. Would any person become Noble, let him be a Huntsman,
this is the first step to Preferment; or let him be a mercenary Soldier, and
let himself out to commit Murder: This is the true Noble virtue, whereby he
that shows himself the bravest and stoutest Thief, shall deserve the greatest
Honor and Dignity. He that is a Fool or a Coward, let him buy Nobility with
money; for Nobility is often exposed at the Market: Or if he cannot do that,
let him flatter Great men and Princes, Pimp for Noblemens Wives, prostitute his
own Wife and Daughter to the Kings pleasure, marry the Kings Cast-Mistrisses,
or espouse his natural Daughters; and this is the highest Degree of Nobility,
for then he becomes embodied to the Root. These are the Highways, these are
the Steps and Ladders by which men most compendiously climb up to the top of
Honor. Now they who would appear more magnificent and noble than others, boast
themselves to be of the Race of those, which there is no body but would
contemn, that is to say, Macedonians, Trojans, Vagabonds, Fugitives, and
Exiles, infamous for thousands of Crimes and Misdemeanors: and yet forsooth we
must magnify and extol this Nobility, that had such nefarious beginnings.
Others deducing their Pedegrees from Whores and Concubines, cover their shame
with some Fable, as we read in the Story of Melusina. There are others that
have had other most wicked Originals, from Incest, Rapes, Fornications, and
Adulteries. Thus Baldwin was made Earl of Flanders by Charles the Bald, who had
ravished his Daughter. For the same reason were those Marquesses of Piedmont,
viz. Montferrate, Saluces, Sena, and others, advanced by Otho the Emperor. For
Kings and Emperors are wont, when they cannot for shame punish an Injury, to
honor the Actors with some Title of Dignity. Moreover, there are ^our
principal Gifts in Noblemen, wherein consists their chief Virtue and Knowledge,
if not their only Happiness: Their first is Rapaciousness, whereby they are
taught and instructed to Desire, Gain, and Possess, contrary to all Law and
Equity. The second is Pleasure, which carries 'um headlong to all
Voluptuousness and Luxury. The third is Liberty, whereby, guarded with the
powers of Violence, they presume in contempt of the Law, to act according to
their pleasures. The fourth is Ambition, which swells 'um to seek advancement
beyond their Merit, and to stop at no wickedness or villainy while they are in
the pursuit of vain Honor. Lastly, the compleatness of Nobility is discerned
in these things: if he be a good Hun^sman, if he be cunning in the wicked Arts
of Gaming, if he be able to show his great strength in Drinking, if the force
and vigor of Nature become renowned by his mighty Acts of Venery, if he be
addicted to Pride, Luxury, and Intemperance, if he be an enemy of Virtue, or
grow forgetful that he was born, and that he shall die. More noble yet, if
these Impieties be but successive from Father to Son, and be inculcated into
their Youth by great Authorities. If the Old man be fortunate in Play,
It Is fit the H^ir should thrive the self-same way.
These are the signal Virtues of Noblemen. But there is another sort of
Industry among the Nobility, wherein they are most excellent above others, to
make themselves to be accounted all this while honest and good, famous for
Prudence, Liberality, Piety, and Justice; to which end they faign themselves
courteous, fair-spoken, affable, making a conspicuous show of all Virtue: They
steep their Speeches in Oil: they banquet splendidly from house to house, talk
freely of State Affairs, observe the opinions of other men, from whence they
gather what is good, and ascribe to themselves the same of other men's wisdom
and prudence: By their covetousness they get an opinion of Liberality, while
what they take from one, they give to another; bountiful Thieves; and what the
Ancients write concerning Sylla, by the injuries which they do to some, they
enrich others, being themselves in the midst of all their Rapine. The opinion
of Justice and Piety they procure, by undertaking the differences among poor
people, and maintain their causes against the rich sort; but they no longer
give assistance to the afflicted; but while they can empty the Coffers of the
wealthy. For their intention is not to do good to the Poor, but to injure the
Rich; which they can more easily do, than do good: And under this pretense of
Justice and Piety, sometimes they arrogate to themselves the greatest License
in the world, on purpose to use violence to Cities and great persons, glorying
in their sins like the ancient Giants, and like evil Spirits seeking all
occasions of mischief, and then thinking that they do most good, when they do
no harm; so behaving themselves, to be a terror to all, to be beloved by none;
combining with the wicked and flagitious, oppressing and ruining all persons
that put their confidence in 'um. Of whom Aristophanes thus writes, saying,
That it is not convenient for a City to breed and nourish Lions within it; but
if they be of a mild temper, then we ought to be obedient to 'um. The
Switzers, formerly oppressed by the tyranny of these Noblemen, slew them all,
and extirpated their Race by that memorable slaughter of their Nobles,
obtaining a lasting name with the recovery of their liberty, wherein they have
happily flourished for above four hundred years, the hatred of that sort of
Nobility yet remaining among 'um.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Of Heraldry.
NObility was the Foundation of that noble Art of Heraldry, and Philosophy has
been very much employed in designing and ordering the Arms of Noblemen, for
whom it is unlawful to bear in their Coats an Ox, a Calf, a Sheep, a Lamb, a
Capon, a Hen, or any of those Creatures which are necessary for the use of
Mankind; but they must all carry for the Ensigns of their Nobility, the
resemblances of cruel Monsters, and Birds of Prey. Thus the Romans chose to
carry an Eagle, the most rapacious of all Birds: the Phrygians a Boar, a most
pernicious Animal: the Thracians, Mars: the Goths, a Bear: and the Vandals
invading Spain, carried a Cat, a creature most greedy, and treacherous withal:
the ancient Franks, a Lion: the Saxons, the same. Afterward the Franks
remaining in Gallia, chose the Owl: the Saxons a Horse, a most warlike
creature. The Cymbrians had for their Ensign a Bull, the Emblem of strength
and good fortune. Antiochus had for his Imprese an Eagle holding a Dragon in
her pounces. Pompey bare in his Shield a Lion; Attila, a crowned Basilisk. The
Romans, whose Capitol was preserved from the Gauls by the Geese that were fed
therein, yet could not be persuaded to carry a Goose for their Shield. There
are that admit Cocks and Goats into their Shields, because those creatures are
known to be proud and lustful. For the same reason Peacocks are received,
because of their pride; and the Lapwing or Heath-hen, for that she seems to
carry the Emblem of Majesty, wearing the resemblance of a Crown on her head:
Nor is she refused, because she makes her Neast in Excrements, for we know that
Vespatian imposed a tribute upon Piss, acknowledging, That the smell of Gain
was always sweet. There be many of smaller Animals also that claim a
prerogative in the Shields of great men, provided they be the Documentors of
mischief: Such are Coneys, Moles, Frogs, Locusts, Mice, Serpents, Salpeges,
Scolopenders; through the multitude of which sort of Animals, as Pliny
testifies, people have been forced to forsake their Habitations, and Cities
have been forsaken: For the same reason, some have not been ashamed to bear
Lice, Fleas, and Flies; and some there are that count it a great honor to be
marked with Blains and Botches, while there are those that hold them for the
best Gentlemen that have been most peppered with the French Pox. Some there are
that bear for their Arms Swords, Daggers, Faulcheons, Towers, Battlements,
Engines of War, Fireworks, and whatsoever other Instruments of Murder and
Mischief. The Scythians carry Thunder for their Arms, the Persians a Bow and
Arrows, the Coralli Wheels. Thus among the Gods Jupiter carried Thunder,
Neptune a Trident, Mars a Spear, Bacchus a Thyrse, Hercules a Club, and Saturn
a Scithe. And these Ensigns of Armory, as they are the Emblems of Cruelty,
Rapine, Violence, Fortitude, Rashness, and other Heroic Virtues, are by the
judgment of the Heralds, some nobler than others. Now those Shields that are
blazo^^d with things that are less noxious, as Trees, Flowers, Stars, as the
Harp of Apollo* the Caduceus of Mercury, or are otherwise distinguished only
by variety of Colors, these are accounted much more modern, and less noble
than the other, as not being acquired by any Acts of War, or other Artifices of
Ruin and Destruction. However, it is a wonder to see how foolishly and idly
these applauded Heralds play the Philosophers, Astrologers, and Divines, while
they ascribe black and brown to Saturn; and therefore Perseverance, Patience,
and Taciturnity to him also: But Saphyr, and Azure, Faith and Zeal, belongs to
Jupiter. Over Red, which signifies Anger and Revenge, they give Mars dominion.
The Golden Color they dedicate to the Sun; and by reason of the Price of the
one, and the Luster of the other, think it signifies desire and joy. Over Green
and Purple Venus is made chief Ruler; to Purple by reason of its Rosy beauty,
ascribing the signification of Love, though the French will have it to denote
Treachery: but Green by the consent of all, was the Emblem of Hope, seeing that
from the green Fields Fruit is expected at the end of the year. White is
ascribed to the Moon, which being simple without mixture, yet is it capable of
all mixture, and therefore they will have it to denote Purity, Docility, and
Simplicity of heart. All other mixed Colors they assigned (...) Mercury, who
being himself inconstant and of several humors, so they observe that those
humors signify the various Affections of the Mind: As Ash Color being near
to Black, signifies Trouble: Flesh-colors inward Grief of the Soul, or secret
and hidden Thoughts: Straw-colour, Desperation and Suspicion, or Jealousy. Too
long it would be to repeat their Trifles of the same nature, feigned and
digested into Emblems, from the Water, Days, corners of the World, Winds, Wood,
Planets, Plants, Stones, and the very Mysteries and Sacraments of Religion:
Nay, they have translated all the Apocalypse into Fables and Trifles of their
own invention: And this is that Heroic Philosophy of the Heralds. And here I
had made an end of this Discourse, had I not met with the Original of these
Heralds. Aeneas Sylvnius deduces the Original of the Heralds from the Heroes.
Now these Heroes were old Soldiers, which they ought also to be; and Harald
the Teutonick word, signifies an old man in Arms, or a Veterane Soldier. But
now every Servile and Mechanick-fellow, fecial Messengers, and Caduceators,
frequently are admitted to the Employment. However, the Privileges and Offices
of Heralds remain inviolable to this very day. Their first Institutor was
Father Bacchus, who having conquered India, gave them their first beginning, in
these words: This day I free you from War and Labor; I will that ye be called
Veterane Soldiers and Heroes. Your business shall be now to take care of the
Commonwealth, to punish the bad and cherish the good. From other Offices ye
shall be free, in whatever part of the world ye shall be found. Your Diet and
Clothing shall be at the King's Charge: Ye shall be honorable among all men;
Princes shall send ye Gifts: Firm credit and authority shall be given to your
words; ye shall abhor Lying, ye shall sit and judge Tratyors; those who ill
entreat their Wives, ye shall adjudge infamous: Ye shall be free in all
Countries, secure in Travel and Habitation: Whosoever shall molest or injure
any of you, shall be put to death. Alexander the Great, after many Ages
following, added very much to their Privileges, giving them liberty to wear
Garments of Gold, Purple, and Scarlet; as also to bear Royal Coats and
Escutch^ons in whatsoever part of the world they inhabited. If any person
struck them, or injured them in words, they forfeited their Goods as guilty of
Treason. All which Thucydides, Herodotus, Didymus, Magasthones, and Xenophon
have related, as the same Aeneas reports. Thirdly, Octavianus Augustus, being
settled in the Roman Empire, incorporated them, and gave them several Laws:
Whoever thou art that has served us in the Wars ten years, provided thou art
forty years of age, whether thou were a Footman or a Horseman, after that thou
shall be free from farther service; let him be a Hero and a Veterane: Let free
access be given thee to all Cities, Pleading-places, Temples, public and
private Houses: Let no man accuse thee of any Crime, impose any Burden on
thee, or exact any Money from thee. If thou have done amiss, only expect to be
punished by Caesar: Whatever foul act men commit, let them expect thee their
Judge, and the Proclaimer of their Miscarriages, whether private or public
persons: what thou shall affirm or say* let no man contradict, whether Prince
or private person. Let all Highways and places be open to thee. In the houses
of Great men let there be a Table provided for thee. Sufficient to keep thee
and thy Family, receive out of the public Treasury. Let thy lawful Wife take
place of other women. Whom thou shall contemn and name for infamous, let him be
contemned, and esteemed infamous. Let a Hero bear the Ensigns, Arms, Names
and Ornaments of Kings. What thou have a mind to do or say, that do or say in
any part of the World, in any Country or Nation whatsoever: be that injures
thee, let him want a head. At last Charles the Great having obtained the name
of the Empire into Germany, and being styled Caesar Augustus, after he had
overcome the Saxons and Lombards, honored them as follows: My
Fellow Soldiers, said he, ye shall be called Heroes, Companions of Kings, and
Judges of Crimes: Live henceforward free from Labor, consult and advise with
Kings for the Public good, reprehend soul Actions; be kind to Women, and be
tender over Orphans; encompass Princes with your counsels: From them demand
your Food. Apparel* and Wages; whoever denies ye, let him be dishonorable and
infamous: He that offers ye injury, let him confess himself guilty of High
Treason. And for your parts, take you heed, that so great Honors, so great
Privileges acquired by the labors of War, that ye stain them not, nor defile
them with Drunkenness, or any other Vice: that what we give for your Glory, may
not redound to your Punishment; the infliction whereof, if ye exceed your
bounds, we reserve to our selves and our Successors Kings of the Romans. And
this is the magnificent Degree of Heraldry, for which by ancient Custom, they
esteem themselves so great.

CHAP. LXXXII.
Of Physic in general.
FRom War and Nobility let us hasten to Physic, which is it self a kind of
Art of Killing, altogether Mechanic, though she pretend to be shadowed with
the Title of Philosophy, and sits above the Law next to Divinity in degree and
place; which has caused great contention between the Civilian and the
Physicians. For thus the Physicians argue: Seeing, say they, there are three
sorts of Goods, the Goods of the Soul, the Goods of the Body, the Goods of
Fortune; of the first the Divine takes care, of the second the Physician, the
third only belongs to the Lawyer: Hence it is that the Physicians claim the
next pre-eminence to the Divines, forasmuch as the strength and health of the
Body is to be preferred far before the Riches of Fortune. But this strife was
once determined by a witty Question. For some one of these Contenders desiring
to know* what order and method was observed in leading Criminals to Ex^cution,
which followed, and which should precede, the Thief or the Ha^gman? and when
one answered that the Thief went before, and the Hangman followed, the other
presently gave judgment that the Lawyers should go before, the Physicians
follow; denoting the remarkable Robbery of the one, the rash Murder of the
other. But let us return to Physic, of which there are many sorts of Heresies:
For there is one which they call Rational, Sophistical, and Dogmatical, which
was practiced by Hippocrates, Diocles, Chrysippus, Caristinus, Paraxagoras, and
Herosistratus; approved also a long while after by Galen, who above all the
rest following Hippocrates, brought all the Art of Physic to be comprehended
in the knowledge of the Causes, judgments upon Signs and Symptoms, qualities
of things, and the several habits and ages of Bodies. But this Heresy
contending more for substance than shadow, I confess to be the meaner part of
Philosophy; but toward the cure of the Sick not at all necessary, if not
altogether destructive, as that which rather sends us for Health and Cure to
screwed and forced Maxims, than to any sincere and real Medicines: and being
employed in Scholastic Syllogisms, unacquainted with Woods and Fields, becomes
altogether ignorant of Herbs and good Remedies. And therefore Serapion was of
opinion that this Rational Method of Physic did nothing at all avail to the
Cure of diseases. Therefore there is another Faction of Physicians, altogether
Mercenary and Mechanic; which is therefore termed Operative, and is divided
into Empirick and Methodical; of which we are now to treat. They call it
Empirical, because of the Experiments which it makes: whose chief Professors
were Serapion, Heraclides, and both the Apollonii. Among the Latins, Marcus
Cato, C. Valgius, Pomponius, Leneus, Cassius, Felix, Aruntius, Cornelius,
Celsus, Pliny, and many others. Out of this, Hierophilus the Calcedonian
constituted his Methodical Physic; and by the help of long Experience, the
Mistress of all things, fixed it to certain Rules, which afterward
Asclepiades, Themistion, and Archigenes confirmed by most strong arguments, and
afterward Thesillus the Italian completed; who, as Varro affirms, set aside
all the Opinions of his predecessors, madly raging against all the Physicians
of the former Age. After these, many Barbarous Physicians of foreign Nations
ventured abroad in Writing; among which, the Arabians became so famous, that
they seemed by many to have been the Inventors of this Art; and might have
easily made it good, but, for the Original Greek and Latin words which they
used, betraying another original of the Science. This made the Volumes of
Avicen, Rhasis, and Averroes, to have equal Authority with the Books of Galen
and Hippocrates; so that if any one presume the Cure of a person without their
Rules, he seemed to throw away the life of the Patient. Now these Factions
among Physicians be not many, yet is the Contention and Combat of Opinions not
less among them, than among the Philosophers. For observe how idly they contend
about the substance of the Seed. Pythagoras will have it to be the spume or
froth of the most useful part of the Blood, or the most useful part of the
excrement of the meat. Plato affirms it to be a deflux of the Back-bone-marrow,
seeing that the Back and Reins are pained by the overmuch use of Copulation.
Alcmaeon asserts it to be part of the Brain, for that Copulation weakens the
Eyes, which are nourished by the Brain. Democritus will have it to be derived
from all parts of the body, and Epicurus to be as it were forcibly strained
from body and soul together. Aristotle affirms it to be the excrement of the
Sanguineous nourishment, which is last digested in the body. Others believe it
to be blood ripened and made white by the heat of the Stones, for this reason,
That they who copulate too often, do eject drops of blood. Add to all this,
that Aristotle and Democritus are of opinion that a Woman's seed does not at all
contribute to Generation, neither that she does emit any seed at all, but only
a kind of Sweat. Galen affirms that they eject seed, but more imperfect; and
that the seed of both sexes assists in generation. Though Hippocrates is of a
contrary judgment, affirming that the bodies of all Animals are coagulated out
of the four Humors. Yet Aristotle maintains that the Blood is the next cause
of Generation, and that the seed is generated out of the Blood. Many of the
Arabians are of opinion that perfect Animals might be generated without the
mixture of Male and Female, and be produced without the help of seed; and
therefore did aver that there was no necessity of the Matrix, but by accident.
Now speaking of the Original Causes of Diseases, Hippocrates places them in the
Spirits, Hierophilus in the Humors, Erasistratus in the blood of the Arteries:
Asclepiades makes them to be certain Atoms entering in through the invisible
pores of the body: Alcmaeon believes all diseases to proceed from the
exuberance or scarcity of the Corporeal faculties: Diocles, from the inequality
of the Corporeal elements, and temper of the air we breathe in: Strato, from
the surplusage and crudity of Nourishment, and the consequent corruption
thereof. Nor do they less differ about the alteration of the Aliment. For
Hippocrates, Galen, and Avicen affirm the meat to be concocted in the Stomach
by the heat thereof. Erasistratus believes Concoction to be perfected lower in
the Belly. Plistonicus and Paraxagoras affirm not only a Concoction, but
Putrefaction. Avieen also, and his Exposi^ors, Gentiles and Jacobus de Ferlino,
not without a manifest error, affirm that Ordure is made in the Stomach. But
Asclepiades and his followers believe that the meat is not concocted, but
distributed raw into all parts of the body; and affirm the Opinions of all the
former to be vain and ridiculous. I omit their Judgments of Urine, not yet
perfectly known by any of um; and the beatings of the Pulses as little
apprehended by um. Hippocrates, whom they look upon as a God, has not only
differed from many in opinion, but erroneously mistaken: for, in his Book of
the nature of Infants he says, The Bird is generated of the yellow of the
egg, but is nourished by the white of the egg; which Aristotle proves to be
manifestly untrue, in his Book of Animals: and in his Book of the Generation of
Animals, writing against Alcmaeon, who was of the same opinion with
Hippocrates, he concludes the original of the Chicken is in the White;
nourishment is sucked in through the Navel out of the Yolk: to which Pliny
adheres, saying, The creature is generated out of the White, his nourishment is
out of the Yolk. And is not that Aphorism of Hippocrates false? No woman has
the Gout, till her Terms forsake her; it being evident that many Menstruous
women have the Gout.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Of Practical Physic.
THe whole Operative art of Healing is built upon no other Foundation than
fallacious Experiments, and the slender Credulity of the diseased, doing more
harm than good; there being generally more danger in the Physician and Physic,
than in the disease: which the chief Doctors of this Art ingenuously confess,
that is to say, Hippocrates himself, who does not deny this Art to be both
difficult and fallacious; together with Avicen, who says, that the Patients
confidence in the Physician oft-times prevails more than the Physi^k it self.
Galen also affirms, that it is very difficult to find a Medicament that does
very much good, but easy to find many that do no good at all. There is
another who tells us that the knowledge of Medicines is delightful, as of all
other things that consist of Rule and Art; but that the effects of Medicinal
operation are merely fortuitous. Let the fortunate diseased therefore go and
put their trust in dangerous Experiments, and habnab-Remedies. But so general
is the sweetness of hoping well for a man's self, as Pliny says, that he
believes every Physician that offers himself, though there be no delusion more
dangerous. Hence it is that generally men seek for help from Death; he being
the best Physician esteemed, whom the Apothecary, that shares with him,
recommonds, or deceives the person; whose servants are at the Physicians
devotion, who like Pandars for reward commend him with praises to the sick. He
is also accounted a most excellent Physician, whom a Velvet Coat, or two or
three good Rings upon his fingers shall make to be admired; or else his being a
Forraigner, or a great Traveller; or else his being of such or such a Religion.
Of no less efficacy to give um credit, fame and authority, is a solid
Confidence, and a constant bragging of his Receipts: add to these a spirit of
Contradiction, many Greek and Latin sentences, and the names of Authors, which
make him seem learned. Thus armed with a Leaden Gravity, but a Military
confidence, he undertakes the Trade of a Physician: and first, he visits the
sick, looks upon his Urine, feels his Pulse, considers his Tongue, feels his
Sides, examines the Excrement, enquires into his customary Diet; and if there
be any thing more privately kept, he desires to find it out, as if he would
weigh the Humors of the Patient in a pair of Scales. Then with great boasting
he prescribes Medicaments: R Catap^tia, let blood, give Clysters, use
Pessaries, Oynments, Plasters, Lozenges, Masticatories, Gargarisms, Fumes,
Quilts; use Preserves, Waters, Treacles. If the disease be light, and the
Patient dainty, then will the Physician invent fine pleasing Gugaws, fit for
women and effeminate persons. Provoking Sleep sometimes with hanging beds;
sometimes extenuating the disease with Baths, Frictions, Cupping-glasses;
sometimes re^reshing the sick with delicate diet, and change of air. And to
obtain greater fame and authority, observing times and seasons, and seldom
administering Physic but according to the directions of some Mechanical
Ephemeris. He also claims a great authority over the Apothecary, many times
ordering him to make his Medicines before him; pretending himself to be at the
choice of the best ingredients, when for the most part he knows^ not good from
bad, nay hardly knows the things themselves when he sees them. But if the
Patient be rich, and a great person besides, then for his greater fame and
profit he prolongs the distemper as much as may be, although perhaps he might
have cured it with one single Medicine: sometimes exasperating the disease, he
brings the Patient to deaths door before he will cure it, that he may be said
to have delivered the Patient from a most dangerous fit of sickness. If he meet
with a Patient whose distemper is dangerous, and that he finds the effect of
the Cure to be doubtful, then he uses these Stratagems: severely he prescribes
Rules of Diet; he commands unusual things, prohibits things common: he extols
with great arguments what he offers himself; what others bring he utterly
condemns; on the one side threatening ruin, on the other hand promising life.
If he doubt of the event, he persuades the Patient to call a Council of
Doctors, desires an assistant, to proceed more warily in the Cure, for fear
lest any one coming alone, should perform a Cure, and take from him the glory
of the business. If any thing fall out amiss with the Patient, or that he has
killed him by his most signal want of skill; then he excuses himself, by
pretending some sudden deflux of Rheum, or some other chance, neither to be
helped nor avoided; or else he accuses the Patient for not observing his
directions, or else blaming those that tended for want of care; or else he
blames his associates; or else throws all the blame upon the Apothecary:
thereby endeavoring to prove that no diseased person ever died but through his
own fault, nor that ever any was cured but by the help and art of the
Physician. But that Physicians are Knaves for the most part, we shall prove by
Witnesses. For their own Reconciler, Peter Apponius, writes, That the Art of
Physic is ascribed to Mars, which is the most odious of all the Planets, as
being the author of Ingratitude, Quarrelling, and all wickedness. Therefore are
Physicians the cause of many mischiefs, both by reason of the influence of Mars
and Scorpio, as also because they had their original from a low and barren
beginning; growing proud and haughty, as they grow rich. This perhaps he learnt
from the example of Aesculapius, whom Antiquity fables to have been the
Inventor of Physic, the son of Jupiter, and sent to the Earth through the way
of the Sun. Celsus confesses him to be a man, but received into the number of
the Gods. Others assert that he was the Incestuous offspring of Coronidis, a
handsome Harlot, with whom the Priests of Apollo lay in the Temple, who
therefore gave out that he was the son of the God. But all agree in this, that
this God was so wicked, that Jove was forced to curb and chastise him with his
Thunder. Concerning which, Lactantius thus writes to Constantine the Emperor:
Aesculapius the son of Apollo, a vicious person, what other thing did he do
worthy divine honors, saving that he cured Hippolytus? His death was more
remarkable, in that he merited to be struck with thunder. To say the truth,
Physicians are the most wicked, quarrelsome, envious, lying persons in the
world: for so they quarrel one among another, that there is not a Physician to
be found, who shall approve one Remedy prescribed by another, without
exception, addition, or alteration: whence it is become a Proverb, The envy
and discord of Physicians. For what one approves, the other laughs at. There is
nothing certain among them, but all their promises are mere trifles, and airy
lies. Hence the common people, when they would set out a noted liar, they cry,
Thou lie like a Physician. For it is their chief study, to follow their own
new inventions, and neglect the wholesome precepts of Antiquity: and those few
things which they do know, they conceal, as if it did not consist with the
Authority of their Art to divulge their knowledge; and out of envy to others,
deprive our lives of the Remedies which other men's Labors have found out. They
are moreover superstitious, arrogant, unconscionable, proud, covetous; having
this Sentence always in their mouths: While there is pain, take. And if the
pain cease in one part, they take care that it increase in another, for fear
the Cure should be too soon perfected. As we read of Peter Apponi^s, who
professing Physic in Bolonia, was so covetous and arrogant, that being sent
for one time to a Patient out of town, he would not attend under less than
fifty Crowns a day: and being sent for by Honorius the Pope, he covenanted for
Four hundred Crowns a day. Besides, we find it related by Pindarus, that
Aesculapius the parent of Physic was struck by Jupiter with Thunder for his
Covetousness, for that he had practiced Physic with Extorsion, and to the hurt
of the Commonwealth. But if a sick man happen to recover out of their hands,
there is such an Applause, that the tongue of man can scarce suffice to express
the wonder of the miracle, as if Lazarus had been raised out of the grave;
claiming the life of the Patient to be their gift, and that they have brought
him back: ascribing to themselves what belongs to God, and believe that no
reward can suffice to recompense their desert. Some of um are so swelled up
with pride, that they suffer themselves to be worshipped as Gods, and be called
Joves and Jupiters; such as Menecrates the Physician of Syracuse, who is said
to have written in these words to Agesilous King of Sparta: Jupiter Menecrates,
to Agesilous, greeting. But Agesilaus lauging at his folly, thus answered him:
Agesilaus to Menecrates, health. But if any one unfortunately happen to die in
their hands, then they blame weakness of Nature, the strength and fury of his
disease, the unruliness of the Patient: that they are Physicians, not Gods:
that they can cure those that are to be cured: that it is not their business to
raise the dead: that they have nothing to serve the diseased with, in discharge
of their duty, but their Experience: and with such vanities as these they
maintain their pride. Others that die they accuse of intemperance: and when
they have killed a man, yet they demand satisfaction for their Bills, from
those, that might have been alive without um; depriving their Patients both of
money and life at once; and yet preserving a safe Conscience to themselves,
knowing their faults (as Socrates says) to be covered in the earth; as also for
that there is no returning from hell or the grave, to accuse them of their
unskilfulness, exaction, and homicides. There are some nasty stinking
Physicians bedaub'd with cast Urine and Ordure, more sordid than Midwives,
using themselves to behold obscene and beastly sights, with their noses and
ears to hear and smell the Belches, Farts, Stinking breaths, Steams and
Stenches of the sick, with their lips and tongues to taste the black and
loathsome Potions, with their fingers to search the Dung and Excrements.
Lastly, all their studies and discourse is only about the most sad, horrid,
and ghastly spectacles of Death and Diseases. Exquisite Judges of the Ordure of
men, which Hippocrates is reported usually to have tasted, that he might
thereby the better judge of the Disease: which Aesculapius also is said to have
done, who is therefore by Aristophanes called Scatophagus, or Excrement-eater,
a Name generally given to Physicians. Hence Scatomancy, Ouromancy, and
Dryniomancy, are said to be the Divinations or Prognostications of Physicians
taken from Ordure and Urine. Wherefore, among many Nations, those Mechanic
Doctors were formerly had in contempt, so that, as Seneca witnesses, it was
accounted a great piece of Infamy to exercise the Calling of a Physician: and
at this day, there are several people that forbid Physicians, Midwives and
Executioners from coming to their Tables; or else cause um to eat and drink in
Dishes and Cups by themselves: much more abhorring that detestable custom of
many Princes, who admit those Pestilential persons to their Chambers in a
morning, and admit them infected with the Visits and Vapors of Pestilential
people to their Meals, and at meat suffer their impertinent talk of Ordure,
Urine, Sweat, Vomits, and Menstruous Courses, Leprosies, Ulcers, Scabs, and
Plagues; and to be spew a noble Feast, furnished with choice dishes, with their
impure and obscene discourse. Than to admit a Physician to civil Consultations,
there is nothing more idle, or fuller of folly, seeing that the Art of Physic
neither treats of Virtue or Good-manners; and for that a Physician naturally a
good man, ought to b^ a person of ill Customs. And we know that in many Cities
by public Decrees Physicians are neither admitted to their Counsels, nor
suffered to bear any Office of Magistracy: perhaps not so much that they are
foolish, vain, or ill tutored, as for their Sordidness, and their spreading
Contagion, with the continual Visits of all sorts of Diseases; not only
infecting Men, but the very Seats and Stones, as Lucillus has very well said of
a certain Physician, in a Greek Epigram.

Alcon but touched Joves Statue, straight the stone,
Though Marble, feels the hot Contagion:
Whence from his ancient Temple they remove
The Marble-god, so much their healths they love.
Now when they meet together in Consultation, then there is a strict
examination what the Patient cack'd and pissed that night; and going about like
the Ephori of the Lacedaemonians, to pronounce sentence of Life and Death, it is
a strange, but sad thing to hear, with what Heats and Altercations, not one
agreeing in one thing, they brangle about the sick-mans bed; as if they were
hired not to Cure, but to Dispute; with no small trouble to the distempered
person, according to the Verse of Menander: A Prating Doctor is a new Disease
Unto the sick --
At length producing some Aphorisms, to show their Scholastic Learning, which
they have always ready for use, and invoking Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen, Ras^
Averroes, Apponius their Conciliator, and the rest o^ their Deities, whose
Names only give them the credit of their Learning; when they have sufficiently
conten^ded and disputed about the Causes, Signs, Affection^ and Critical days,
at length they come to the applica^tion of some Remedy, which ought to have
been the head and tail of the whole business; but that they pass over with some
impertinent Order: for out of Envy to one another, they will not communicate
their Secrets one to another; as if that would be lost to them, which they
discover to others: and therefore they have recourse to the Common Method,
which if it fail um, then they flee to the Empirical part, as to a sacred
Anchor, by Rashness to help what Reason resists; affirming it to better to try
a Doubtful Remedy, than none. Or else they leave the Patient, if their
courtesy be less toward him, to future Prognostics, saying for excuse, that
Hippocrates forbids Remedies to be given to those who are in a desperate
condition. Or else if they be any thing Religious, they cast the fault of the
Disease upon some of the Saints; or else prescribe this their last Antidote:
one Proctor, Witnesses in number seven, one Priest with Holy Water and Oil, and
dispose of thy estate, for thou art a dead man. Hence Rasis, conscious to
himself of the great stupidity of sick people, as also of the contentious
stolidity of the Physicians, giving advice both to the Patient and to the
Physician, persuades in his Aphorisms to take only one Physician: for the
Error of one, brings great shame; and the advantageous Success of one, is
equally praised: but he that makes use of more than one Physician, commits the
greatest error. Thus Rasis. This is confirmed by that ancient Inscription in
the Monument, A Tro^p of Physicians was his bane; and by the Greek Proverb, The
admittance of many Physicians lost the Patient: as also by that saying of dying
Adrian; Multitude of Physicians has killed a Prince. Therefore there cannot be
more profitable or more wholesome, Counsel given for the preservation of Health,
than to abstain from Physicians: for we owe our Health to God, not to the
Physicians. Therefore was Asa King of Ju^ah reprehended by the Propher, because
he sought not the Lord in his sickness, but trusted to the skill of the
Physician; to whose directions they who give themselves over, can never be
well. For there is no life so comfortless, as that which is governed by, and
leans upon the confidence of their Art. Were it true that Physicians knew, and
I would they did know, of the virtues and efficacies of the Elements, Herbs,
Roots, Flowers, Fruits, Animals, Minerals, and of all things which Parent
Nature produces; yet would they be so far from making a man immortal, that they
would not be always able to cure a slight disease. How often has the Remedy
failed, that ought to have cured! that which the Remedy ought to have thrown
off, it has not; and at last, after great pains and cost, the Patient dies,
even in the presence of the Physicians. What hope then can we repose in the
Physicians, whose experience, as their own Hippocrates confesses, is erroneous?
What certainty can the Physicians promise us, if it be true that Pliny writes,
That there is no Art more inconstant than Physic, nor more subject to change?
Many Nations there were of old, and now to this day living without Physicians,
strong and lusty beyond the age of Decrepitness, exceeding an hundred years?
Contrarily, those more soft and delicate people who make use of Physicians, for
the most part grow old are they have lived half their years. And the Physicians
themselves we find more crazie and short-lived than other people. Hence one
answered Lacon, saying to him, Thou have no distemper. Because (said the other)
I am not a Physicians wife. Another saying to him, You are a true old man.
Because (said he) I never used Physicians advice. Showing, that there is no way
more certain to Health and Old Age, than to want a Physician. If any one shall
say, that many have recovered by the help of the Physicians; we answer, that
many more have di'd, toward whose relief the Physicians skill has nothing at
all availed. And let um remember this Verse in Ausonius: -- They escaped from ill
By help of Fate, not of the Doctors skill.


The Arcadians, as Pliny relates, used no other Medicaments than Milk in the
Spring, because then the Herbs were most full of juice: and they chose above
the rest Cows milk, as feeding most upon Herbs. The Laconians, Babylonians,
Egyptians, Lusitanians, as Strabo and Herodotus affirm, rejected all
Physicians: but they brought forth their sick into the streets and
Marketplaces, that they who had escaped the same disease, might advise them to
the Remedies they had tried before; believing, as Celsus delivers, that
nothing did more conduce to recovery than Experience, wherein we find the most
learned Doctors often overcome, by silly Country old women, one of which has
done more good with one single Herb or Plant, than the most famous Doctors,
with all their most elaborate Receipts: for they endeavoring the cure of
diseases by a compounded mixture of several Drugs, go more by Conjecture, than
by any true knowledge of the cause or reason of the distemper; rendering the
whole Art of Physic merely a thing of Chance and Guess: whilst the poor woman,
knowing the virtue and effect of her simple Remedy, more easily by a natural
force of a tried Receipt shall overcome and cure a distemper. On the other
side, the Physicians, by the help of Drugs and precious Gums brought from India
at great charge and expenses, promise great Cure; the poor Woman, by cheap and
easy Remedies that grow in her own garden, does not only promise, but restore
Health. Nay, the Physicians themselves confess that they have several of them
learnt more excellent Receipts from Women, worthy to be recorded in their
Works, and be made public to posterity; such as is the Receipt against the
pain in the Head, which Avicen so much extols. Now if Physic, which ought to
restore the temperament of Health, consist in proportion and temperament of
things both between themselves, and also with the bodies to which they are
attributed; and that it was the most diligent care of the Physician to
proportion and temper Medicaments, and to leave um so tempered by just and
harmonical weight and proportion to the bodies and tempers of the sick: what a
strange arrogance and impudence is it for others, not only to change, but to
add, sometimes to neglect, sometimes to know nothing thereof! Whence it
follows, that as the agreeing temperament of a Medicament brings Health; so the
disproportionate mixture causes Pain, increases the disease, and brings death.
And therefore a Country-woman shall cure more safely with a Garden-receipt,
than a proud Physician with all his prodigious costly and conjectural
Medicaments. Many most excellent Physicians were of opinion, that the best way
of Curing was by simple Medicaments. To which purpose having searched into the
qualities of Simples, and found them out, they have left us famous Volumes upon
those Subjects, as Chrysippus of the Colewort, Pythagoras of the Onyon,
Marchion of the Raddish, Diocles of the Turnep, Phanias of the Nettle, Apuleius
of Betony; and many others, of other Herbs and Roots. But your Shop-physicians
so little regard these things, that they contemn um, call them Simpletons, that
take notice of Simples. But those Physicians that make use of Simple
Medicaments, I aver, are the persons to be both followed and consulted: But for
your Shop Doctors, I wish all people to avoid um, as mere Hocus-pocus's and
Witches, living upon our deaths, by means of their prodigious Compositions, and
merely making a Lottery of our lives. For seeing that compounded Medicaments
must of necessity consist of such things whose qualities are altogether
disagreeing and repugnant; it is very difficult, if not altogether impossible,
to promise any thing of Certainty, but only by Thought, Conjecture, and
Opinion; and when there are innumerable things which singly might be
advantageous, the Physician only jumbles those together which Chance and
Fortune offer to his memory. Whence it happens, that that compounded Medicament
receives its efficacy not from the qualities of the Simple Ingredients, but
from the Fancy and Unluckie choice of the Physician, while he by some secret
and hidden motive, whether Natural, Celestial, Demoniacal, or Fortuitous, is
prompted to choose this or that thing before another. And indeed, this is the
vulgar Saying, and which they themselves confess, that one Physician is more
fortunate than another, and that many times the Ignorant proves more successful
than the Learned. I my self have known and seen a most Learned Physician, under
whose Cure very few have escaped: I have known another half-witted fellow, that
has happily cured not only his own Patient, but those who have been left in a
desperate condition by others. And I remember I have read of a Physician that
cured all Noblemen and rich men that fell into his cure; but all his Patients
that were of a mean condition, either died, or run very great hazards. Hence we
may easily see, that this Shop-physick, where the good Fortune rather than
Learning of the Physician prevails, is to be looked upon only as a piece of
Fortune-telling, and to be exploded and condemned only as an art of Murder
and Witchcraft. Which made the Romans when Cato was C^nsor to expel all
Physicians, not only cut of Rome, but out of all Italy, as abominating their
Cruelty and Lying, for that they killed more than they healed; and for that
being very dextrous at poisoning, by Hatred, Ambition, or Gain, they were
easily hired to administer Poison with their Physic, and for Reward to entrap
the lives of men. Thus the Physician of Pyrrhus, whether Timocharis, according
to Gellius, or Nacias, as others report, who promised Fabricius to poison his
Lord and King: but Fabricius detesting the fact, admonisht Pyrrhus in a Letter
to have a care of his Physician: of which Clandian thus writes.

The Romans for their virtue ever famed,
The traitor and his treason still condemned.
Fabricius nobly to his foe declares
What his own servant against his life prepares.
He fairly taught to vanquish, that his War
All acts of secret treason did abhor.
Cato in Pliny writes to his son about the Physicians of the Greeks: They have
sworn to kill all the Barbarians with their Physic; but this they do for
Money, to gain Credit, that they may make the quicker dispatch. And a little
after the adds: Whence then proceeded so many cheats in Wills, the same means
they have now to hide Adulteries; as by the example of Eudemus, in Livia wife
of Drusus Caesar. Socates also in Plato advises not to let Physicians multiply
in a City. It were very convenient for the Commonwealth, that there were none,
or very few; and that there were a Law to make their Unskilfulness and
Negligence capital. For it is a Capital crime; and it matters not whether a
Physician have endangered a man's life by Folly or Negligence, by Ignorance or
Malice, unwittingly or designedly: and that there should not be such an
Impunity for Physicians to destroy Mankind, who have only this common honor
with the Hangman, to be hired to kill men, and only to be rewarded for
Murder, for which all other men are condemned without mercy. This is the
difference between the one and the other, That the Hangman puts none to death,
but what have received sentence of death by the Judges; the Physician destroys
the Innocent, without any sentence past. Therefore the Pontifical Constitutions
forbid Clergymen to practice Physic, as if they might be as lawfully
Hang-men as Clergymen. Not imprudently also Cato prosecuted them, as being
such as strive to increase the Fame of their Art by Novelty; and when they have
nothing new, try their Experiments with the hazard of our lives, and learn
their Art by prolonging and increasing our distempers, to their own profit and
advantage also. Therefore to remedy this mischief, the Egyptians had a Law,
that the first three days the Physician was to cure the sick, with the hazard
of the Patients life; after three days, at the peril of his own.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
Of Apothecaries.
ANd now for their Cooks, whom they call Apothecaries, the Titles of whose
Boxes contain Remedies, the Boxes themselves Poison, or as Homer signs,
Compounded Medicines, many hurtful, many good.

For when they themselves will be a^ no loss, they compel us to purchase our
deaths at great prices; while they causing us to take one thing for another, or
mixing some old rotten Druggs whose virtues are quite lost, they many times
give us a deadly Drink, in stead of a Restorative Potion: while they buy old
Emplaisters, Unguents, Collyries, and Pill-messes, made for gain of the dregs
of the Druggs; and not able to discern otherwise, are cheated with the
Sophistications of the barbarous Merchants. I could here show their most
pernicious Quarrels about the simple Medicines which they use, and their
Errors about the Names of their Medicinal Druggs, by them misunderstood, and
worse made use of: all which Nicholaus Leonicenus has discovered in a large
Volume. I pass over their prodigious Compositions, their Mixtures of many
external Simples; which while they jumble together, thinking to make one
Medicament agreeing with all Constitutions, they effect nothing but what is
said of that Poetical Chaos: -- A rude and undigested heap,
A sluggish weight, and without form or shape.
The disagreeing seeds of things ill joined,
While to one Lump confined:
Cold fights with Heat, Drowth Moisture would deprive;
Soft things with hard, and light with heavy strive.
Grant that there be some Compositions invented by the ancient Physicians which
may have proved useful, and which by the Vote of Experience may be received;
yet are they far from the true Method, and condemned by the Physicians, by the
compulsion of their own Consciences, and every way exploded by Pliny,
Theophrastus, Galen, Plutarch, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Erasistratus, Celsus,
Scribonius, and Avicen; whose words to repeat here, would be too tedious. Nor
are they so much blamed by those ancient Authors, but also by many of the
Moderns; among which, Arnoldus de Villa nova thus asserts, in one of his
Maxims: When a man has Simples at hand, I doubt whether it be convenient to
use Compounds. But while Simples are either wholly neglected, or else not
known, all Medicaments are fetched from those two great Luminaries of the
Apothecaries and Druggists Treasuries, Mesues and Nicholaus, and the gilded
Pictures and Inscriptions of their followers. Hence it comes to pass, that
while Physicians for their own ease submit the lives of men to their Confidence
in the Apothecaries; and while they without Learning, without Knowledge,
trusting to the barbarousness of Merchants for their own profit, make a strange
and confused Medley in their Shops, that there is more harm got by the
Medicament than by the Disease. Now as concerning the Sophistication of costly
Druggs, which are sometimes counterfeited with so much Art, that many knowing
persons are deceived; it would be better for the general Health of men, and for
the Commonwealth, to forbid the use of all Exotic Medicaments, which are
brought in by Pyratical Merchants, at such Miraculous prices, to the bane of
the Inhabitants; to reduce the Physicians to a Method, and to bind up the
Apothecaries by such a Law, as once Nero is said to have made in Rome, when it
was better than now it is, by which they were compelled to use only those
Medicaments which the Country produces, as being most agreeable to the nature
of the Natives, as also fresher, of more choice, and to be gotten with less
cost and difficulty, and with less danger than those foreign ones, the
greatest part whereof are to be suspected as sophisticated, or damaged in the
Ship, or else not gathered in due time and place; from which arises eminent
hazard: for Coloquintida not ripe, causes Bleeding and Death; and that which
grows alone, is absolute Poison. So the Male Agarick is deadly, and by how much
the more old, the more Lethiferous. Scammony and Terra Lemnia are both
Sophisticated, and there is no Credit to be given to the Seals. Now I would
fain know what need there is to use these Foreign Medicaments, when our own
Country produces those which are of equal virtue and efficacy? Is it not an
egregious piece of Folly, to fetch those things from India, which we have
better at home? As if our own Soil and Sea did not suffice; but preferring
foreign things before the growth of our Country, Costly before Cheap, and hard
to be got, before easy to be obtained. Is it impossible to cure the Spleen
without Armoniack, or the Liver without Sanders? Is it impossible to cure the
Ulcers of the inward parts without Bdellium? or to give ease to the head
without Musk and Amber, or to the Stomach without Mace and Coral? Were these
Medicaments convenient for our bodies, Nature, that provides abundantly for all
things, would have provided um among us. Did not our forefathers live more
healthy without um? And therefore it is the Slothfulness of the Age, that
search not into the nature of our own Simples, but prefer the Trifles and
Inventions of Apothecaries, who consult not the Common safety, but their own
Profit; persuading us that there is no Health but in Costly folly: to whom the
Prophet Jeremy thus speaks: Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician
there? In all Lands and Regions, Nature produces Herbs, and appropriates them
to the Constitution, Age, and Climate wherein the people dwell. Should we grant
that some Druggs are of greater force and efficacy in some places, and at some
times, yet can we not believe um wholesome, but to the people in those
Countries where they were produced. But there are some Robbing Empiricks that
persuade us that none but strange and uncouth Medicaments are most available,
without which there can be no Health; trying their Experiments at the expenses
of the miserable; mingling the most hurtful Insects and Reptils in their
Medicaments; and as if all other Remedies were defective, using humane fat, and
flesh of men embalmed in Spices, which they call Mummy, which they cause men to
eat, as it were to atone Nature.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Of Surgery.
Surgery remains, another part, which cures the external Deformities and
Diseases of the body; whose Operation is manifest, and whose Remedies are
certain: for all other Physicians work under ground. Surgeons see and feel
what they do, and as occasion requires, change, apply, and remove their
Remedies. And this among all the Arts of Physic was first in use. For men
accustoming themselves to War, and to receive Wounds, it was necessary to seek
out for Cure. They found that the evil proceeded from Man, and therefore
expected the Remedy from him. Other Diseases and inward pains, as proceeding
from the anger of the Gods, they thought incurable by natural means. Therefore
the first Inventor of Surgery is said to be Apis King of the Egyptians, or,
as Clemens Alexandrinus records, Misria the son of Cain, Nephew of the great
Noah. Of the cure of Wounds Aesculapius was the first that wrote; after him,
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Parmenides, Democritus, Chiron, and Paeon, became
excellent therein. Pliny relates that Arehagatus the Peloponnesian was the
first that practiced Surgery in Rome; and that for his Cruelty in Cutting
and Burning, he was publicly named the Woundmaker; afterward the name was
changed into Hangman, or Executioner; at length they despised the whole Art,
and forbid it. Surgery therefore is no less famous for Faction among great
Authors, and the Authority of great men, than infamous for its bloody Cruelty,
and the Nastiness of its Practitioners.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Of Anatomy.
HOwever it is excelled by Anatomy in Cruelty, being the Slaughterhouse of
both Physicians and Surgeons, wherein they were formerly wont to cut up the
bodies of condemned persons yet alive and breathing, with most cruel Torments.
At this day, out of reverence to Christian Religion, they are grown more mild,
first suffering the body to die, then with their own hands, with all sorts of
Cruelty, raging, and dismembring the dead Carcass, to observe the situation,
order, weight, frame, nature, and all the secrets of the dead, thereby to
understand how the better and more effectually to cure the living. A cruel
kind of diligence, and a Spectacle no less horrid and abominable than impious!

CHAP. LXXXVII.
Of the Art of Curing Cattle.
THere is another sort of Physical practice which consists in the Cure of
Cattle, more certain and more profitable than the rest, invented, as they say,
by Chiron the Centaur, and wrote of by Columella, Cato, Varro, Pelagonius,
Vegetius, and other eminent Authors. But this your fine Physicians account so
great a shame to practice, that they are utterly ignorant thereof; so delicate,
that, like the Lapwing, they are never well, but when they are nestling in the
dung and ordure of men: so that if any one require a Remedy for his Beast, in
stead of a Cure, he shall receive nothing but ill words: As if it did not
belong to them, to cure not only men, but also other creatures, especially
those which are profitable to men. For which purpose Alphonsus King of Arragon
kept in pay two most expert Physicians, and commanded them diligently to
examine what Method of Cure, and what Remedies were most proper for the several
Diseases of Beasts. Which they observing, put forth a most excellent Treatise
thereof. The same of late years did John Ruellus of Paris, a person skilful in
both Languages, and the first Physician that compiled a Volume of the Diseases
of Horses, and their Cures, extracted out of the Works of most ancient Authors;
Apsirchus, Hierocles, Theomnestus, Pelagonius, Anatolius, Tiberius, Eumelus,
Hemerius, Africanus, Emilius the Spaniard, and Litorius the Beneventan: a Work
very profitable for all Parriers, and very advantageous to the Commonwealth.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
Of Dieting.
THere is yet the Dieting part of Physic, the first Author whereof was
Asclepiades, who altogether rejecting the use of Medicaments, reduced all Cure
to the Order of Diet, observing the quantity, quality, and seasoning of Meats;
from whom other Physicians do not much disagree, yet believing that the one has
want of the other, that Diet is assisted by Medicaments, and Medicaments by
order and course of Diet. Upon these grounds, they command, forbid, curse, and
discommend the Meats and Drinks that God has created, framing Rules of Diet
difficult to be observed; and those morsels which they forbid others to taste
of, they themselves, as Hogs eat Acorns, greedily devour; and those Laws of
living which they prescribe to others, they themselves either altogether
neglect, or contemn. For should they live according to their own Rules, they
would run not a small hazard of their Health; and should they permit their
Patients to live after their own Examples, they would altogether lose their
profits. But of these Diet-mongers thus S. Ambrose writes: The Precepts of
Physic are contrary to divine living; for they call men from Fasting, suffer
um not to watch, seduce um from opportunities of meditation. They who give
themselves up to Physicians, deny themselves to themselves. And S. Bernard upon
the Canticles, thus asserts: Hippocrates and Socrates teach how to save Souls
in health in this world; Christ and his disciples, how to lose um: which of the
two will ye have to be your Masters? He makes himself noted, that in his
disputations teaches how such a thing hurts the Eyes, this the Head, that the
Stomach; Pulse are windy, Cheese offends the stomach, Milk hurts the head,
drinking Water is hurtful to the lungs: whence it happens, that in all the
Rivers, Fields, Gardens and Markets, there is scarce to be found any thing
fitting for a man to eat. But grant these words of S. Ambrose and Bernard were
only written to the Monks, for whom perhaps it is not so needful to take so
much care of their Healths, as of their Professions: and that variety of dishes
and feasts may not be unlawful for civil men to use, with consideration of
their Health; the first the Art of Dieting performs, the second the Art of
Cookery, being the dressing and ordering of Victuals. For which reason Plato
calls it the Flatteress of Physic; and many account it a part of Dietary
Physic. Though Pliny and Seneca, and the whole throng of other Physicians,
confess that manifold Diseases proceed from the variety of Costly food.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
Of the Art of Cookery.
THe Art of Cookery is very useful, and not dishonest, so it exceed not the
bounds of Discretion. For which reason, very great and most temperate persons
have been induced to write of Cookery, and Dressing of Meat. Of the Greeks,
Pantaleon, Mithecus, Epiricus, Zophon, Egesippus, Pazanius, Epenetus,
Heraclides, Syracusanus, Tyndaricus, Sicyonius, Symonactides, Chius, and
Glaucus Locrensis. Among the Romans, Cato, Varro, Columella, Apicus: and among
the Moderns, Platina. The Asiaticks were so intemperate and luxurious in their
Feeding, that they were known by the Surname of Gluttons, which we therefore
call Asotae. Therefore we read in Livy, that after the Conquest of Asia,
foreign Luxury first ^ntred into Rome, and that then the Roman people began to
make sumptuous Banquets. Then was a Cook a most useful Slave among the
Ancients, and began to be much esteemed and valued; and all bedabled with
Broth, bedaub'd with Soot, with his Pots, with his Platters and Dishes, Pestles
and Morters, was welcomed out of the Kitchen into the Schools: and that which
before was accounted but a vile Slavery, was honored as an Art: whose chiefest
care is only to search out everywhere for provocatives of Appetite, and to
study out in all places for Dainties to satisfy a most profound Gluttony.
Abundance of which Gellius cites out of Varro: as, the Peacock from Samos, the
Phrygian Turkey, Cranes from Melos, Ambracian Kids, the Tartesian Mullet,
Trouts from Pessinuntium, Tarentine Oysters, Crabs from Chios, Tatian Nuts,
Egyptian Dates, Iberian Chestnuts. All which Institutions of Bills of Fare were
found out for the wicked wantonness of Luxury and Gluttony. But the Glory and
Fame of this Art Apicius above all others claimed to himself; that as Septimus
Florus witnesses, there were a certain Sect of Cooks that were called Apicians,
propagated as it were in imitation of the Philosophers. Of whom thus Seneca
has written: Apicius (says he) lived in our Age, who in that City, out of
which Philosophers were banished as corrupters of youth, professing the Art of
Cookery, has infected our Age. Pliny also called him the Gulf and Barathrum
of all Youth. At length, so many subjects of Taste, so many provocatives of
Luxury, so many varieties of Dainties were invented by these Apicians, that at
length it was thought requisite to restrain the Luxury of the Kitchen. Hence
those ancient Sumptuary Laws and Edicts against Riot; that is to say, Archian,
Fannian, Didian, Licinian, Cornelian, and the Laws of Lepidus, and Antius
Restio. Lucius Flaccus also, and his Colleague, Censors, put Duronius out of
the Senate, for that as a Tribune of the people he went about to abrogate a Law
made against the excessive prodigality of Feasts. In defense whereof, how
impudently Duronius ascended the Pulpit for Orations! There are Bridles, said
he, put into your mounhes, most noble Senators, in no wise to be endured: ye
are bound and fettered with the bitter Chains of Servitude. For there is a Law
made, that commands us to be frugal: Let us therefore abrogate that Command,
deformed with the rust of ghastly Antiquity: for to what purpose have we
liberty, if it be not lawful for them that will, to kill themselves with
Luxury? There were also many other Edicts, all now antiquated and abrogated; so
that no Age has been more indulgent to Gluttony, than this wherein we now live:
and for that cause, says Musonius, and after him our Jerome, we travel by land
and sea, to fetch Wine, and costly Cates to pour down our Gullets. So many
Taverns, so many Alehouses, so many Victualling-houses among us, where men are
destroyed by Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Luxury, that many times, to the
detriment of the Commonwealth, they consume whole patrimonies: so many
varieties of Sauces, so many Rules, Observations, and Table-ceremonies, that
the splendid Banquets of the Asiots, Milesians, Sybarites, Tarentines, of
Sardanapalus, Xerxes, Claudius, Vitellius, Heliogabalus, Galienus, and the rest
of those ancient Gluttons, whom History records to have exceeded all other
Nations and persons in the pleasures of the Kitchen, are but mere fordid, rude,
and rustic Junkettings, compared with the sumptuous Feasts of Great persons
now adays. A neat and handsome Entertainment will not serve turn, unless there
be an abundance, even to create Loathing, and to fuddle Hercules himself, who
was wont to drink out of the same Vessel that carried him; meat more than would
satisfy Milo the Crotonian, or Aurelianus Phago; the first of which was wont
to eat up Thirty loaves of bread, besides meat, at a meal; the other at the
Table of Aurelian devoured a whole Boar, a hundred Loaves, a Weather, and a
Porkling. He drank in a Bowl that held more than a Tun. These things are now
customary at our great public Country-feasts, and Dedications of Temples. You
would swear they were celebrating Orgia to Bacchus, they are so contaminated
with Madness, Quarrelling, Bloodshed, and all the Impieties attending Gluttony
and Drunkenness. You may there behold the Banquets of the Centaurs, whence none
return without a broken pate. Thus we find Ovid describing the Voracity of
Erisichthon.

Without delay, what Sea, what Earth, what Air
Affords, at his command they straight prepare:
Yet at full Tables he complains of Hunger,
And for a Feast of Feasts he calls in anger.
What a whole City or a Land supplies,
For the content of One will not suffice.
The more his guts devour, the more he craves,
As Rivers are exhausted by the Waves,
While the insatiate Sea, and thirsty Sands,
Drink up the Floods still rouling from the Lands.
Or as the Fire no nourishment refuses,
Burns all that comes, but neither picks nor chooses,
And still the more it is fed, it feeds the more:
Thus Erisichthon's profane Chaps devour
All sorts of food; in him food is the cause
Of hunger; and he still employs his Jaws
To whet his Appetite. --
Among the Greeks and Romans there were a sort of people called Wrestlers, men
of most greedy and voracious Appetites: but their Infamy was at length outvy'd
and exceeded by Consular Magistrates and Emperors. For Albinus, who formerly
ruled in Gaul, devoured at one Supper an hundred Peaches, ten Melons, fifty
large green Figs, and three hundred Oysters. And Maximinus the Emperor, who
succeeded Alexander Memmeas, ate forty pound of flesh in one day, and drank an
Amphora of Wine, containing 48 quarts. Geta the Emperor was also a prodigious
Epicure, causing his Dishes to be brought in Alphabetically, and would continue
feeding for three days together. Now what greater Impiety, when God and Nature
has provided Meats and Drinks for us, to preserve Health, and strengthen
Nature, for us to abuse them with various artifices for Pleasure, and to devour
them beyond the capacity of Humane nature? thereby contracting to our selves
incurable Diseases, whereby we find it apparently true what Musonius says,
That Masters are less strong, less healthy, less able to endure labor than
Servants; Countrymen more strong than they who are bred in the City; those
that feed meanly, than they who feed daintily: and that generally the later
sort live longer than the former. Nor are there any other persons more troubled
with Gouts, Dropsies, Colicks, and the like, than they who contemning a simple
diet, live upon prepared Dainties. Of which opinion is Celsus: The most
profitable diet for Man, says he, is simple; multiplicity of tastes is
pestiferous; and all spic'd meats are unprofitable, for two causes: Because
more is consumed because of Sweetness, and less concocted than ought to be.
Therefore many grave and wise men have utterly condemned this indulging to the
Appetite, as most pernicious. But as for those that under pretense of Religion,
neither hate pleasing their Palates nor Luxury, but only some sorts of meat;
abstaining from Flesh, they fill and feast themselves with all sorts of Fish,
and swill themselves with Wine; to which they bring their lips, tongues, teeth,
and bellies armed, but not their pockets: these are certainly worse than the
Epicureans themselves. But of these things enough. Let us now pass from Cookery
to Geberica, that is, to the Alcumists Cook-room, where there is no less
consumed than in excessive Feasting.

CHAP. XC.
Of Alchymy, or Chemistry.
ALchymy, or Chemistry, is an Art, if it may not be rather called a Fucus, or
Persecution of Nature, however of very great Fame, and the same unpunished
Imposture; whose vanity easily betrays it self in this, that it promises what
Nature neither can suffer nor perform: seeing that all Art is but an Imitation
of Nature, coming short thereof by many degrees; and that the force of Nature
is far short of the force of Art. But Chymistry's An Art which good men hate,
and most men blame,
Which her admirers practice to their shame,
Whose plain Impostures, easy to perceive,
Not only others, but themselves deceive.
While they seek to change the natures of things, and presume to find out the
blessed Philosophers Stone, as they call it, which, like Midas, is to change
whatever it touches into Gold: then they pretend to fetch down from the
inaccessible heaven a Fifth Essence, whereby a man shall not only gain the
Riches of Croesus, but perpetual Youth and Immortality.

But among all the undertaking Crowd,
Not one appears, whose Miracles allowed
The matter prove. --
However, they get a small Livelihood by some Physical Experiments, as also by
some Paints and effeminate Fucusses, which the Scriptures call the Ointments of
harlots; whence the Proverb, Every Alchymist is a Physician or a Sope-boyler.
They enrich the ears of men with vain words, but empty their Pockets of their
Money. Whence it appears to be no Art, but a Composition of Trifles, and
inventions of mad brains. However, they find out men so covetous of so much
happiness, whom they easily persuade that they shall find greater Riches in
Hydargyrie, than Nature affords in Gold. Such, whom although they have twice or
thrice already been deluded, yet they have still a new Device wherewith to
deceive um again; there being no greater Madness, than to believe the fixed
Volatile, or that the fixed Volatile can be made. So that the smells of Coals,
Sulphur, Dung, Poison, and Piss, are to them a greater pleasure than the taste
of Honey; till their Farms, Goods, and Patrimonies being wasted, and converted
into Ashes and Smoke, when they expect the rewards of their Labors, births of
Gold, Youth, and Immortality, after all their Time and Expenses; at length,
old, ragged, famisht, with the continual use of Quicksilver paralytick, only
rich in misery, and so miserable, that they will sell their souls for three
farthings; so that the Metamorphosis which they would have made in the Metals,
they experiment upon themselves: for in stead of Alchymists, Cacochymists; in
stead of being Doctors, Beggars; in stead of Unguentaries, Victuallers, a
laughing stock to the people: and they who in their youth hated to live meanly,
at length grown old in Chemical Impostures, are compelled to live in the lowest
degree of poverty, and in so much calamity, that receiving nothing but Contempt
and Laughter, in stead of Commendation and Pity, at length compelled thereto by
Penury, they fall to Ill Courses, as Counterfeiting of Money. And therefore
this Art was not only expelled out of the Roman Commonwealth, but also also
prohibited by the Decreed of the sacred Canons of the Church. And if now there
were a Law to forbid any of them to practice this Art without the special
favor and license of the Prince, upon the forfeiture of their goods, and
proscription of their persons, we should have less false Money made, wherewith
many are now deceived, to the great damage of the Commonwealth. For which
reason it is thought that Amasis King of Egypt made a Law, whereby every
Magistrate was compelled to give an account what Art or Science he most
favored; which he that did not, underwent a very severe punishment. Many
things could I say of this Art, of which I am no great enemy, were I not sworn
to silence, a custom imposed upon persons newly initiated therein, which has
been so solemnly and religiously observed by the ancient Writers and
Philosophers, that there is no Philosopher of approved authority, or Writer of
known fidelity, who has in any place made mention thereof: which has caused
many to believe that all the Books treating of this Art were made of late days;
to which the names of the Authors, Giber, Morienus, Gigildis, and the rest of
the whole Crowd, give no small confirmation; the obscure words which they use,
and the unaptness of their language, and their ill Method of Philosophizing.
Some have thought the Golden Fleece to be a certain Chemical Book written after
the ancient manner in Parchment, wherein was contained the way of making Gold.
Of which sort when Diocletian had got together a great many among the
Egyptians, (who were said to be very skilful in this Art) he is said to have
burnt them all, left the Egyptians, confiding in their Riches, and easy means
of obtaining Treasure, should at one time or other revolt from the Romans. And
therefore was this Art by a public Edict of the same Emperor rendered
infamous. It would be too long to relate all the foolish Mysteries of this Art,
and empty Riddles, of the Green Lion, the Fugitive Heart, the Volant Eagle, the
Dancing Fool, the Dragon devouring his Tail, the Swelled Toad, the Crows Head;
of that which is Blacker than Black, of Mercury's Seal, of the Dirt of
Foolishess, (of wisdom, I ought to have said) and a thousand other Trifles.
Lastly, of that one thing besides which there is nothing else, though as common
as may be, the blessed subject of the most holy Philosophers Story, not to be
spoken of without incurring Perjury; yet I will say somewhat of it obscurely,
and in such manner, as none but the sons of Art shall understand me. It is a
thing which has a substance, neither too fiery, nor altogether earthy; nor is
it a watery, nor sharp nor obtuse quality, but indifferent light and soft, or at
least not hard; not rough, but sweet in taste, sweet in smell, grateful to the
sight, pleasant to the ear, and delightful to think on. More I must not say,
nor greater things can I. For I think this Art, by reason of my familiarity
with it, worthy the same Honor as Thucydides gives to a good Woman, when he
says, That she is the best woman, of whom there is least discourse. I will
only add this, That Chemists are of all men the most perverse: for when God
says, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread; and the Prophet in
another place, Because thou eatest the labors of thy hands, therefore art thou
blessed, and it shall be well with thee: they contemning the divine Command,
and promise of happiness, endeavor to raise Golden mountains by Women's labor,
and Childrens play. I deny not but from this Art many excellent Inventions have
derived themselves: hence Cinaber, Minimum, Purple, that which they call
Musical gold, and the temperatures of other Colors, had their beginning. To
this Art Aurichalcum, the changing of Metals, Soders and Trials, owe their
first finding out. Guns are the terrible Invention of this Art. Hence sprung
the Art of making all sorts of Glasses; a most noble Invention, of which
Theophilus has writ a most excellent Treatise. But Pliny relates that the
temperament of Glass was found out in the time of Tiberius; but the Workhouse
was by Tiberius pulled down, and the Artificer, if we may believe Isodorius,
was put to death, left the Glass should detract from Gold, and Silver and Brass
lose their value.

CHAP. XCI.
Of the Law in general.
WE come now to the knowledge of the Law, that only pretends to judge and
discern between True and False, Equity and Iniquity, Right and Wrong. The chief
Heads nowadays are the Pope and the Emperor, who boast that they have all
Laws written in the Cabinets of their Breasts; whose Will is Reason, and who by
their own Arbitrary opinions rule and govern all Sciences, Arts, Writings,
Opinions, and whatever other Works of men. For which cause Pope Leo commanded
that no person should dare to dispute or justify any thing in the Church, but
by the Authority of the holy Councils, the Canons and Decretals, of which the
Pope is the Head. Neither is it lawful for us to make use of the
Interpretations of any the most holy and learned Divines, but only so far as
the Pope permits, and authorizes by his Canons. And the Canon further commands,
that no Book or Volume whatsoever shall be received by any Divine, but what is
first approved of by the Canons of the Pope. The same Authority the Emperor
claims over Philosophy, Physic, and all the other Sciences, giving no
countenance to any Art, till first all'owed by the skill of his Law, to which
all sorts of Arts and Sciences compared, are of no use or value. This makes
Vlpian say, The Law is King of all humane and divine things; whose Office it
is, as Modestinus says, to command, forbid, punish, permit; than which there
are no greater marks of Superiority. Pomponius defines the Law to be, the
invention and gift of God, and the Maxims of Wisemen. Because all the ancient
Lawgivers, that their Laws might gain the greater reverence among the Vulgar,
feigned that the Laws they wrote were clictated to them by the Gods. Thus
Osiris among the Egyptians seigned to have received his from Mercury,
Zoroastes among the Persians from Oromazus, Chariundas among the Carthaginians
from Saturn, Solon among the Athenians from Minerva, Zamolxis among the
Scythians from Vesta, Lycurgus from Apollo, Numa from the Nymph Egeria. Thus
you see how this knowledge of the Law arrogates to it self a Power and
Sovereignty over all the Sciences and Arts, exercising a Tyranny over them, and
advancing it self above all other Sciences, as the Firstborn of Heaven,
despises and contemns all the rest, being it self constituted out of the frail
and infirm Positions and Opinions of men, of all things the most slender, and
subject to alteration upon every change of State, Time, or Prince, and which
deduces its original from the sin of our First parents, the cause of all our
evils. From whence also the corrupt Law of Nature, which is called Jus
Natural, first descended; of which behold the chief Maxims: Keep off force by
force. Break faith with him that breaks faith. To deceive the deceiver is no
deceit. A deceiver is not bound to a deceiver in ought. A fault may be
recompensed by a fault. Those that deserve ill, ought to enjoy neither justice
nor faith. No injury can be done to the willing. He that buys may deceive
himself. A thing is worth so much as it may be sold for. A man may provide for
his safety with the damage of another. No man is obliged to impossibilities.
Thou or I are to be ruined, it is better that thou be ruined than I. With many
more of the same nature. Moreover, the Law of Nature is, Not to hunger, not to
thirst, to suffer cold, or destroy ones self with Watching and Labor: which
overthrowing all works of Piety and Penance, establishes Epicurean Pleasure for
Supreme Happiness. The first occasion of War, Bloodshed, Bondage, Separation of
Dominions, was also the first occasion of the Law of Nations: after that, came
the Civil or Popular Law, which every Nation appro^priates to it self; From
whence have arisen so many Contentions among men, that there are not words
enough to express the subjects and matter which they contain. For seeing that
men were so prone to quarrel, it was necessary that there should be an
observation of Justice according to Law, that so the arrogancies of Impiety
might be suppressed, and that Innocence might be in safety amongst the Wicked,
and that the Good might live quietly among the Bad: these are the grounds of
Law, of which there have been Legislators innumerable. The first whereof was
Moses, who gave Laws to the Je'ws; at which time Cecrops gave Laws to the
Algyptians: after whom, Pheroneus gave Laws to the Greeks: Mercury Trismegist
gave Laws to the Egyptians; Draco and Solon to the Athenians; Lycurgus to the
La^edemonians. Palamedes first made Military Laws for the governing of Armies.
Romulus first of all gave Laws to the Romans, which were called Curiatae. After
whom, Numa invented the Ceremonies of their Religion; and all the rest of the
succeeding Kings added their particular Laws, which being all written
afterward in the Books of Papyrius, were afterward called the Papyrian Laws.
After that came the Laws of the Twelve Tables, the Flavian Law, the Helian Law,
the Hortensian Law, the Honorarian Law, the Praetors Law; Decrees of the
Senate, Edicts of the People, Law of the Magistrates, and Custom, and the power
of Lawgiving given to every Supreme Prince. I pass over all those Lawyers, good
part whereof are repeated in the second Law of the original of Right. Among
those who endeavored to reduce the Civil Law into a Volume, the first was
Cneus Pompey, next Caesar; but both were prevented by Civil War and untimely
death. At length Constantine renewed those old Laws; and Theodosius the younger
reduced them into one Volume, which he called a Codex: and after him Justinian
set forth the Codex now in use. But all the authority of the Civil Law rests in
the People and Princes; neither is there any other Civil Law but what the
people establish by Common consent. Hence Julian avers, That the Laws bind us
for no other reason, but only for that they are received by the Common Consent
of the people, who by universal consent transferred the power and whole
authority upon the Prince; so that whatsoever is ordained by the consent and
approbation of the Prince and People, has thereupon, partly by Constitution,
partly by Custom, the force of a Law, though it be an Error or a Falsehood: for
Universal Error makes a Law, and matter adjudged becomes Truth. Which Vlpian
teaches us in these words: He ought to be taken for a freeman born, who is so
adjudged by Sentence, though he were only manumitted; because a matter once
adjudged, is to be taken for Truth. The same person tells, that one Barbarius
Philippus, who was a fugitive at Rome, demanded the Praetorship, and had it:
and when he came to be known who he was, yet was it taken for granted, that all
whatsoever he had done by virtue of his Office should stand good, though he
were but a servant. The same person confesses, that no reason can be given for
all the Decrees and Laws which were set forth by our Ancestors. Whence we
find, that all the Wisdom of the Civil Law depends upon only Will, and
Opinions of men; no other Reason urging, than the Regulation of Manners,
convenience of Converse, power of the Prince, or force of Arms. So that if the
Law preserve the Good, and punish the Bad, it is then a just Law; if otherwise,
the worst of evils, by reason of the evils ensuing, either through the
Toleration, Approbation, or Negligence of the Supreme magistrate. And it was
the Opinion of Demonax, That all unprofitable Laws were superfluous, as being
intended neither for the Good nor the Bad; since the former want them not, the
later are never the better for um. Furthermore, seeing that Cato confesses,
that there is no Law that can be adapted to all Emergencies, but such where
Equity and Rigor are at a continual variance; and that Aristotle also calls
Equity the Correction of a just Law, wherein that part is defective, which was
generally agreed to; does it not hence plainly appear, that all the force of
Law and Justice depends not so much upon the Law, as upon the Equity and
Justice of the Judge?

CHAP. XCII.
Of the Canon Law.
FRom the Civil flowed the Canon or Pontificial Law; which may to some seem a
most holy Constitution, so ingeniously does it hide and mask the precepts of
Avarice, and rules of Rapine, under the pretenses of Piety; though it contain
very few Decrees that regard either Religion, the Worship of God, o^ the
Ceremonies of the Sacraments. I forbear to make it out, that some are
altogether repugnant to the Word of God: all the rest are mere matters of
Strife, Contention, Pride, Pomp and Gain; and only Edicts of the Popes, not
contented with those already made by Holy men and Fathers, unless they may add
new Decrees, Chaffie extravagancies: so that there is no end or limit of their
Canons, which only proceed from the Pride and Ambition of the Popes, whose
Arrogancy has grown so bold, as to command the Angels, to rob Hell, and lay
violent hands upon the souls of the Dead: tyrannizing over the Law of God with
their Interpretations, Declarations, and Disputations; left any thing should be
wanting or diminisht from the fullness of their power. Did not Pope Clement in a
Bull, which is kept to this day at Vienna and several other places, command the
Angel to free the soul of one that was going to Rome for Indulgences, and dying
by the way, immediately out of Purgatory, and carry him to Heaven? adding, It
is our pleasure that the pains of hell be no farther inflicted on him: granting
also power to those that were signed with the Cross, at their own pleasures to
take three or four souls out of Purgatory. Which erroneous and intolerable
Boldness, if I may not call it Heresy, the Parisian School then utterly
condemned and reproved; repenting perhaps that they did not report that
hyperbolical Zeal of Clement as a Fable, that the Story might live rather than
die; seeing that for all their affirming or denying, there is nothing of injury
done to the Authority of the Pope, whose Canons and Decrees have so pinioned
Theology, that the most Contentious Divine dares neither dispute or think
contrary to the Popes Canons without leave and pardon* as Martial says of Rusus.

What Rusus says, Rusus has leave for all,
Although he laugh, weep, hold his tongue, or braul:
He sups, drinks, asks, denies; yet still the brute
Has your good leave; without your leave he is mute.
Out of these Canons also and Decrees we find the Patrimony of Christ to be
Kingdoms, Donations, Foundations, Wealth, and large Possessions; and that the
Priesthood of Christ is Sovereign power and Command: that the Sword of Christ
is Temporal Jurisdiction: that the Rock on which the Church is founded is the
Pope; that the Bishops are not only the Ministers, but Heads of the Church:
that the Goods of the Church are not Evangelical Doctrine, Constancy of Faith,
and contempt of the World, but Taxes, Tithes, Oblations, Collections, Purple,
Mitres, Gold, Silver, Gems, Manors, and Money. The power of the Pope is to
wage War, dissolve Leagues, absolve Princes from their Oaths, Subjects from
their Obedience, and to make the house of Prayer a den of Thieves. Well
therefore may the Pope depose Bishops, who can give away other men's rights,
commit Simony, dispense with his Oath, and no man be able to say to him, Why
do thou so? Well may he, for other weighty reasons, dispense with all the New
Testament, and send above a third part of the souls of the faithful to hell.
But the Office of Bishops is not nowadays to preach the Word, but to confer
Orders, dedicate Temples, baptize Bells, consecrate Altars and Chalices, bless
Vestments and Images. But they who are more ambitious than these, if leaving
those things to be performed by I know not what mean and titular Bishops, they
can procure themselves to be sent Kings Ambassadors, to be their Chief
Ministers of State, or to attend upon the Queen; such great causes may excuse
um from serving God in the Temples, if they can serve the King well at Court.
Out of the ^me Fountains arise those Equivocations and Shifts to avoid Simony
in selling and buying Benefices, daily in use; or for whatever other Monopolies
or Markets are made of Pardons, Indulgences, Dispensations, and the like,
whereby they set a price upon remission of sins which God has so freely
granted; and have found out a way to gain by the very pains of Hell. From this
Law they borrow that feigned Donation of Constantine, which is quite contrary
to the Word of God, seeing that neither Caesar can give away his own Right, nor
the Clergy usurp that which is Caesar's. To these we may add so many ravenous
Decrees, under the known Titles of Indulgencies, of Bulls, of Confessions, of
Testaments, of Dispensations, of Privileges, of Elections, of Dignities, of
Prebendaries, of Religious houses, of Sacred houses, of The place of
Judicature, of Immunities, of Judgments, and the like. Lastly, the whole
Canon Law is of all the most inconstant, more various than Proteus, more
changeable than a Chameleon, more full of perplexity than the Gordian-knot. So
that the Christian-Religion, by the Institution of Christ intended to put an
end to Ceremonies, is now more clogged with Ceremonies than the Jewish Religion
of old: the weight whereof makes the easy and sweet Yoke of Christ more heavy
and burdensome than that of the Law, while Christians are compelled to live
more according to the Prescriptions of the Canon Law, than the Rules of the
Gospel. To say truth, the Learning of both Laws is wholly busied about frail,
empty, and profane matters, Bargains, and Quarrels of the common people; about
Murders, Thefts, Robberies, Pyracies, Factions, Conspiracies, and Treasons,
Perjuries, Knaveries of Scribes, Abuses of Lawyers, Corruptions of Judges;
whereby Widows are ruined, Orphans destroyed, the Poor oppressed, the Innocent
condemned, and, as it is said in Juvenal, The Crows are pardoned, and the Doves
condemned. Thus blind men run themselves into mischiefs, which they thought to
avoid by the assistance of the Canons and Pontifical Decretals; because they
are no Laws or Canons ordained by God, or for the honor of God, but only
invented by the corrupt Wit of men, for Gain, and the supply of covetous
desires.

CHAP. XCIII.
Of Advocates.
THere is another Practice of the Law, which they call the Art of Pleading, of
which they would pretend a very great Necessity: an ancient, but most deceitful
Calling, only set out with the gaudy Trimming of Persuasion, which is nothing
else, but to know how by Persuasion to overruled the Judge, and to turn him and
wind him at pleasure; to know how by false Interpretations and Comments, to
wrest or avoid the Law, or prolong the Suit; so to cite and repeat Decrees, to
pervert Equity, and alter the sense of the Law, and the intention of the
Legislator: in which Art there is nothing sooner prevails than Bauling and
Confidence: and he is accounted the best Advocate, who intices most the people
to go to Law, putting um in hopes of recovering great matters; and stirs them
up by wicked and mischievous advice; who hunts out for Causes, and who is the
greatest Scolder and Brauler, to make the things which are just and true, seem
doubtful and unjust; and by such Weapons as those, to chase and overthrow
Justice: with whom Justice is nothing else but public Gain; and the Judge that
sits upon the Bench is forced to confirm, what Money makes appear just. Nay,
they expose those things which are not, even privations of things, and Silence
it self; seeing that as none will speak but for Gain, there is none will hold
his tongue but for Reward: after the example of Demosthenes, who when he asked
Aristodemus, a Compipiler of Fables, what Fees he had got for Pleading,
answered, A Talent. But I (replied Demosthenes.) have got more to hold my
tongue. So that the tongue of a Lawyer, unless fast bound in Silver chains, is
very mischievous and pernicious.

CHAP. XCIV.
Of the Calling of Public Notaries.
AMong these, Public Notaries are to be reckoned, whose Injuries, Falsities
and Mischiefs continually by them wrought, all are bound to endure, while they
pretend to have their credit, license and authority from the Apostolic and
Imperial power. Among whom they are to be accounted the chiefest, who know best
how to trouble the Court, perplex Causes, counterfeit Wills and Deeds, to abuse
and deceive their Clyents, and, if need be, to forswear themselves; venturing
at any Roguery, rather than be outdone in plotting and contriving Cheats,
Scandals, Quirks, Tricks, Quillets, Treacheries, Scylla's and Charybdis's, by
any other person whatsoever. There is no Notary can frame an Instrument, from
whence there may not be some cause of Quarrel picked out, if any person have a
mind to contest: for there will be some way or other found out, either to
find out a defect in the Writing, or to invalidate the faith of the public
Notary. These they call the Helps of the Law, which they teach the Contentious
how to fly to, and lay hold of. These are the effects of their Watching and
Labor, wherewith with they soften the rigor of the Law, when they find their
Clyents willing to contend: for he shall have so much Law, as he can by his
power maintain; the Law averring, that we cannot be equal to those that are
more potent than we are.

CHAP. XCV.
Of the Study of the Law.
TO this, those vast Giants have relation, who contrary to the Edict of
Justinian, have begot so many innumerable. Volumes of Comments, Glosses, and
Expositions, every one differing in their Interpretation. Besides this, they
have gathered together such Storms of Opinions, so many Woods of dark and
subtle Counsels and Cautions, wherewith the Iniquity of Advocates is furnished,
as if Truth did not consist more in Reason, than in confused Testimonies raked
together out of such a monstrous heap of Opiniasters, among whom there is so
much Dissension, so much Discord, that he that knows not how to differ from
another, to contradict the Sayings and Opinions of others, call in question the
justice of Adjudged Cases, and to wrest good Laws to their own Humors and
Interests, is not to be thought Learned among um. Thus is the Study of the Law
made a deceitful Net and Gin of Iniquity: these are the Crafts, and these the
Arts by which the whole Christian world is governed; the Foundations of Empires
and Kingdoms, and out of these Knaves are chosen Presidents of Parliaments,
Senators, and several great Officers of Popes and Princes: as if wicked
Advocates would prove just Judges, when they came to be the Heads of the
Nation! These, like the Titans to Jove, become formidable to their Princes
themselves. Out of these come the swag-belly'd Secretaries, and Purple
Chancellors of Emperors and Kings; who govern all affairs of State, dispose of
all Favors, Gifts, Benefits, Offices, Dignities and Patents of the prince; who
sell all Right and Justice, all Law, Equity and Honesty, and compel others to
purchase of them: According to whose will, such and such are to be Allies, such
Enemies to the Prince; with whom sometimes they join in Leagues, sometimes make
War according to their pleasures. And being raised from the lowest degree of
Poverty, and meanness of condition, to so high a pitch of Dignity, merely by
prostituting their Tongues, at length they grow so bold and audacious, that
without calling to answer, without order of Council, they will convict and
condemn men, and many times alter forms of Government; they themselves growing
fat with Thievery and Robbery.

CHAP. XCVI.
Of the Inquisition.
HEre we must not omit the order of Predicants, Inquisitors after Heretics;
whose power when it ought to be founded upon the holy Scriptures, yet they
derive it all from the Canon Law, and Pontifical Decrees, as if it were
impossible the Pope should err; leaving the Scripture as a dead letter, and
only the shadow of Truth, and reject it, as the Buckler and defense of
Heretics. Neither do they receive the Traditions of the ancient Fathers and
Doctors, because they may both deceive, and be deceived; but pretending that
the Roman Church cannot err, of which the Pope is the Head, and therefore the
Authority of his Court is the Rule of their Faith; enquiring no further in
their examinations, than whether men believe in the Church of Rome: which if
any person refractory do grant, then, quoth they, the Church condemns such or
such a Proposition, as heretical, scandalous, and offensive to pious ears; and
then compel the person to revoke and recant his Error. If the offender
continue to justify himself by Reason or Scripture, or both, straight with
great clamor and mouthing they interrupt him, telling him he is not before the
Chair of Doctors, or a Convocation of Scholars, but a Tribunal of Judges: he is
not to dispute there, but to answer directly whether he will stand to or abide
the Decree of the Church, or renounce his Opinion: if not, they show him
Faggots and Fire, saying, Heretics are to be convinced with Faggot and Fire,
not with Scripture and Arguments; and so compel a man not convicted of any
perverse obstinacy contrary to his Conscience, to abjure those things; which
if he deny, they deliver him over to the Secular power, as a deserter of the
Church, to be burnt; saying with the Apostle, Remove the evil thing from among
you. In ancient times, such was the lenity and meckness of the Church, that
they neither punished those that relapsed into Judaism nor Blasphemies: and
Berengarius revolting to a most damnable Heresy, was not only not put to
death, but continued in his Archdeaconship. But now, if a man slip into the
least Error, it is much more than his life is worth; and he shall be thrown
into the Fire by these Inquisitors for a trifle. Perhaps it is now convenient
for the Church to use such severe chastisement, for fear of losing its innate
piety. Sometimes Heretics are Inquisitors after Heretics; which was the
occasion of the Decree which Clement made. But Inquisitors ought not to hold
dark Arguments, and talk in wrangling Syllogisms, with Heretics; but to labor
to convince them by the Word of God, then to determine the matter according to
the Decrees and Canons of the Church, and either to reduce him to the Orthodox
Faith, or pronounce him a Heretics: for he is no Heretic, who is not
obstinate; nor is he a favourer of Heretics, who seeks to defend an innocent
person condemned of Heresy, left he should be delivered up by these cruel and
ravenous Inquisitors, to be butchered without a cause. And although it be
expressly provided in the Law, that the Inquisitors shall have no power of
Examining, nor any Jurisdiction over any suspicion, defense, or favor of
Heresy, which is not a Heresy manifestly expressed, and absolutely already
condemned; yet these bloody Vultures, going beyond the Privileges and
Commission of their Office, against all right, and contrary to the Canons
themselves, take upon them to meddle with ordinary things, arrogating and
usurping the power of Popes in those things which are not Heretical, but only
Scandalous or offensive to the ear; most cruelly raging against the poor
Country-women, whom being once accused of Witchcraft, and condemned without the
examination of any lawful Judge, they expose to most strange and unheard of
Torments, till having extorted from them what they least thought to confess,
they find matter to proceed upon to condemnation: and then they think they do
the Office of Inquisitors truly, when they never leave the business off, till
the poor woman be burnt, or else have so far gilded the Inquisitors hand, until
he take pity of her, as sufficiently purged: for an Inquisitor may alter the
punishment from penal into pecuniary, and convert it to the use of the Office;
by which there is not a little Money to be got: and some of these poor
creatures are forced to pay them an annual Stipend, for fear of being harassed
to Torment. And when the Goods of Heretics are confiscated, then the
Inquisitor gets no small matter. The very accusation, or highest suspicion of
Heresy, nay the very Citation of the Inquisitor, is enough to bring a woman's
credit in question, which is not to be salved without money given to the
Inquisitor; which is no small gain. Thus while I was in Millain, several
Inquisitors did torment many honest Matrons, and some of very good Quality, and
privately milk very large sums from the poor affrighted and terrified women;
till at length, their Cheating being discovered, they were severely handled by
the Gentry, hardly escaping Fire and Sword. When I was President of the
Commonwealth in the City of Mediomatricum, I had a very great Contest with an
Inquisitor, who being a loose fellow, had haled a poor Country-woman into his
Slaughterhouse, being a place of disrepute; and all for a very slight
Accusation; not so much to Examine her, as to Crucify her. This woman when I
undertook to defend her Cause, and found, and had made it evident, that there
was nothing of Proof to make out the Crime, the Inquisitor made answer, that
there was one proof not to be questioned, That her mother many years ago was
burnt for a Witch. Which Article when I showed how impertinent it was, and that
it was not for the Law to condemn one for the fact of another; presently he,
lest he should have seemed to have talked out of Reason before, produces this
Argument: That therefore it was so, and the Proof good, because Witches were
wont to devote their children to the devil; as also because they are wont to
Conceive by lying with the devil, and therefore there is an inherent Guiltiness
in the Offspring. Wicked Father, said I, is this thy way of Theology? Are
these the Fictions for which thou harriest silly women to Torture? are these
the Sophisms with which thou condemnest Heretics? Thou thy self, in my
opinion, art far worse than Faustus or Donatus. Grant it were as thou say,
do thou not hereby abrogate the grace of Baptism, if for the impiety of a
Parent the Offspring should be the devils due? And if it were true that Incubi
did generate, yet was never any one of that opinion so infatuated, as to think
those Spirits did mingle any thing of their own nature with the suffoced seed.
But I tell thee upon the true grounds of Faith, and by the true natures of our
Humanities, we are all one mass of sin, and eternal malediction, sons of
perdition, sons of the devil, sons of the wrath of God, and heirs of hell: but
by the grace of Baptism Satan is cast out of us, and we are made new creatures
in Jesus Christ, from whom no man can be separated but by his own sin: for far
is it from truth, that he should suffer for another man's sin. See thou not
now how invalid thy most sufficient Proof is, how vain in Law, and indeed how
absolutely Heretical it is? The cruel Hypocrite grew very wroth against me, and
threatened to sue me as a favourer of Heretics. However, I persisted in defense
of the poor creature, and at length by the power of the Law I delivered her out
of the Lions mouth; and the bloody Monk stood rebuked and shamed before um all,
and ever after infamous for his Cruelty; and the Accusers of the poor woman in
the Capitol of the Church of Metz, whose Subjects they were, were very
considerably Fined.

CHAP. XCVII.
Of Scholastic Theology.
IT remains that we discourse concerning Theology. I shall pass by the
Theology of the Gentiles, mentioned in Orpheus, Musaeus, and Hesiod, which all
men acknowledge to be Poetical and fictitious, and which Lactantius, and
Eusebius, and many other eminent Doctors of the Christians have convinced by
most strenuous Arguments. Nor shall we speak of the Religion of Plato or the
rest of the Philosophers, whom we have already showed to be the teachers of
nothing but Error. But we shall here discourse concerning the Christian
Religion. This only depends upon the faith of its Doctors, seeing that it can
fall under no Art or Science. And first of Scholastic Divinity, a certain
Hodge-podge, or Mixture, of Divine Precepts, and Philosophical Reasons; looking
like a Centaur; written after a new manner, far different from the ancient way
of delivery; diffused into little Questions, and subtle Syllogisms, without any
Elegancie of speech; and which has brought not a little profit to the Church in
the convincing of Heretics. The first Authors whereof, and who were most
excellent therein, were Thomas Aquinas, Albertus surnamed the Great, and many
other famous men; besides Johannes Scotus, a most subtle and acute Writer,
though a little more given to Contention. Hence Scholastic Theology sell into
Sophisms; while those newer Theosophists, and as it were Sutlers of the Word of
God, never worthy of the title of Divines, but for their money, of so sublime a
Study and Contemplation made a mere Logomachie; wandering from School to
School, starting little Questions, framing Opinions, forcing the Scriptures,
inducing a strange sense with intricate words, and more nimble to ventilate
than examine, presumed to erect Seminaries of Strifes, out of which litigious
Sophisters gain matter of Contention; distracting the Intellect, abstracting
the Forms, and misrepresenting Genus and Species; what they take from one,
adding to another; and every one striving to confirm their own Opinion:
exposing our holy Faith among the Wise of the Age (of which Thomas Aquinas
complains) to Laughter and Misbelief. For they neglect the Canonical Scriptures
of the Holy Ghost, and choose only hard Questions about Divine things, fit for
Dispute; wherein they exercise their Wit, and consume their time; placing the
whole Doctrine of Theology in those things only, wherein while they study to
contradict the Scripture, they may hear the Scripture saying, The letter kills,
is hurtful, is unprofitable. But they will say, We are to search out that which
lies hid in the Scripture. Then binding all their minds to expound, interpret,
make Glossaries and Syllogisms, they rather choose any other sense than that
which is most genuine. If you require Reason, or be earnest in apposing, you
shall receive ill language, and be called Fool. What is hid in the letter you
must not understand, but must feed like a Serpent upon the dust. So that none
are accounted Divines among them, unless they be such as ate egregrious
Branglers, and can give an Instance upon every Proposition, feign readily,
find out new Interpretations, make a noise with uncouth words, not so much to
be understood for the difficulty of the matter, as the strangeness of the word.
And then they are called Doctors, when they are come to that pass that they can
hardly be understood. These have a multitude of Followers, who whatsoever they
have drawn from those men, believe it fetched out of the hidden treasuries of
Theology: they swear to their Masters words, and believe it not to be within
the compass of thought, if any thing be unknown to him; and they are so
captivated with his Opinions, that they are not to be overcome with any other
reasons; will yield to no Scripture, but, like Antaeus, seek to renew their
strength, while they repair to the breast of their mother who brought them
forth, calling these Doctors to their aid.

The Vulture carcass leaving then behind,
Hastes to his own, and takes away the best:
This is the food the Vulture has designed,
To feast his Palate while he builds his nest.
Hence it comes to pass, that the sublime Study of Scholastic Divinity is so
subject to Error and Impiety; these evil Hypocrites and audacious Sophisters
have introduced so many Sects, and so many Heresies; who as S. Paul says,
preach Christ not for good will, but for contention: so that it is far easier
for Philosophers than Divines to agree: who have eclipsed the ancient glory of
the ancient Theology with humane Opinions, and new Errors; and professing a
detestable Doctrine consisting in false Titles, and Labyrinths of Dispute, have
usurpt the name of Sacred Theology by Theft and Rapine; and abominating the
Names and Institutions of the old Fathers, have increased new Factions, as it
was formerly said in the Church, I am of Apollo, I of Paul, I of Cephas;
pretending altogether to their Studies whose Works they first learnt, and
admiring only their own Masters, despise all others; not minding what is said,
but by whom it is said. And yet are these men very much divided among
themselves: for some of them, who are of riper ingenuities, and would be
thought more skilful than the Prophets and Apostles, believe that they can
find out and demonstrate those things which are only to be believed by faith;
Philosophizing in Divine things in most miserable Questions, and with a
prodigious confidence contend about absurd Opinions; as, when some distinguish
the Divine Essence, some by the thing it self, or others by Reason: others
constitute infinite Realities, as they call um, like Plato's Idea's; which some
again deny, and some laugh at. Then they frame to themselves so many monstrous
shapes of God, so many forms of the Divine Being, so many Idols and Phantomes
of their own Imaginations about divine things; and dismember their very Savior
Christ with the perverseness of their Opinions. Him they dress in so many
various Disguises of Sophisms, and like an Image of Wax, form and deform him
with their absurd suppositions into what shape or figure they please; so that
their Doctrine proves mere Idolatry. But those other, whose duller capacities
cannot soar so sublimely, these make Legends of the Saints full of godly lies,
feign Relics, make Miracles, invent plausible or terrible Examples; Number
Prayers, weigh Merits, invent Ceremonies, sell Indulgencies, distribute
Pardons, set to sale their Benedictions, and devour the sins of the people. As
for Apparitions, Exorcisms, and Answers of the Dead, they are very exact in um;
and being taught their lessons out of the Books of Tundal and Brandarius, they
act the Tragedies of Purgatory, and Comedies of Indulgences and Pardons; and
from the Pulpits, as from a Stage, with a Souldier-like impudence, and boldness
of Thraso, with confident eyes, countenance changed, extended arms, and more
sorts of gestures than are ascribed to Proteus, thunder out their Vanities
among the people. But those who pretend to be more Learned, and to understand a
greater Decorum of Elegancie; they, while they bawl, I should say declaim,
rehearse Poems, tell Stories, dispute Controversies, cite Homer, Virgil, Livie,
Strabo, Varro, Seneca, Cicero, Aristotle and Plato: in stead of preaching the
Gospel, and Word of God, making only an empty noise of words; spreading a new
Gospel, adulterating the Word of God, which they preach not to set forth Grace,
but for Gain and Lucre; living in the mean time not according to the Word of
God, but according to the pleasure of the flesh; and after they have in the
daytime made an erroneous Harangue or Exhortation in the Pulpits to virtue, at
night exercise their Buttocks in their lurking holes with nocturnal labor. And
this is the way by which they go to Christ-Lastly, when Vices are to be
reprehended, it is wonderful with what ill language they rail, with what
insolency of gesture they behave themselves, with what scurrilous language
their Choler rages, what loud Exclamations they make; as if Christ rather chose
to have the Preachers of his Word not Fishers drawing on the right hand with a
soft Net, but persecuting Hunters and Archers, shooting and wounding from the
left: or as if they themselves were not men, or not liable to the same faults,
if not guilty of greater. Thus those Fishers of men, whose tongues ought to be
a Net to draw sinners to salvation, become Hunters and persecutors of men to
their ruin: their mouths are Bows of falsehood, their tongues are wounding
Arrows. But let us now hasten to the Right Theology, which is twofold;
Prophecy, and Interpretation. Of the later first of all.

CHAP. XCVIII.
Of Interpretative Theology.
INterpretative Theologists believe, That as by the liberality of Nature,
Grapes, Olives, Wheat, Flax, and many other such things, increase and ripen, of
which afterward, by the wit and help of Man, Wine, Oil, Bread and Cloth, and
other works of Nature are completed by humane Arts: so the Divine Oracles,
delivered to us obscure and hidden, are to be explained by Interpretation; not
by the force of our own Wit or Invention, but by the help of the Spirit, who
distributes his good things as he pleases, and where he pleases, making some
Prophets, and some Interpreters. Therefore this Interpretative Divinity
consists not in Compounding, Dividing, Defining, after the manner of the
Peripateticks; neither of which belong to God, who neither can be defined,
divided, or compounded, but leads to Knowledge by another way, which is
indifferent between this and Prophetical vision, which is a kind of discovery
of the Truth to our purified Intellect, as a Key to a Lock: and this, as it is
the most covetous of all Truth, so it is the most susceptible of what things
are to be understood, and is therefore called Possible Intellect; wherewith
though we do not discover by a full light, what the Prophets mean, and those
who beheld the Divine things themselves; yet there is a door open to us, that
from the conformity of the Truth perceived, to our Intellect, and by the Light
which illustrates us, out of those open windows we gain more certainty, than
from the appearing Demonstrations, Definitions, Divisions, and Compositions:
and we read and understand, not with our outward eyes and ears, but with our
better senses; and extract the Truth flowing from the sacred Scriptures, which
the other delivered in dark sayings, and mysterious sentences; and thereby see
what is hidden from the wise and great Philosophers, yet apprehend them not
with so much certainty, as that all perplexity may be removed. And whereas
there is a manifold. Truth concealed in sacred Scripture, holy men have gone
about to try various and manifold Expositions of the same. For some gently
walking along the back of the Letter, and expounding one place by another, and
one letter by another, and making out the sense by the Order, Etymology, and
Propriety and Force of the signification of the words, hunt out the truth of
Scripture: which is therefore called Literal Exposition. Others refer all
things written to the business of the Soul, and works of Justice; whose
Expositions are therefore called Moral. Others remit them by various Tropes and
Figures to the Mysteries of the Church; whose Exposition is called
Tropological. Others given to Contemplation, refer all things to the Myitery of
Celestia glory; and this Exposition is called Anagogick. And these are the four
most usual sorts of Exposition; besides which, there are two more, of which the
one refers all things to vicissitude of Times, Mutations of Kingdoms and Ages;
therefore called Typick. Wherein, among the Ancients, Cyril, Methodius, and
Joachim Abbas did most exel: of Modern Authors, Jeremy Savanarola of Ferrara.
The other enquires into the nature and qualities of the Universe, the Sensible
world, and of the whole Fabric of the World and Nature: which Exposition is
therefore called Physical or Natural; wherein Rabbi Simeon ben Joachim
excelled, who wrote a very large Volume upon Leviticus, wherein discoursing of
the natures of all things, he shows how Moses, according to the congruencie of
the threefold World, and nature of things, ordained the Ark, the Tabernacle,
the Vessels, Garments, Rites, Sacrifices, and other Mysteries, for the
appeasing and worshipping God. Which Exposition the Cabalists follow,
especially those who treat of Beresith, or the Creation. For they who
discoursing concerning the Judgment Seat of God, by Numbers, Figures,
Revolutions, Symbolical reasons, refers all things to the first Archtype,
search for the Anagogical sense. And these are the six most famous Senses or
Meanings of the holy Scripture; all whose Expositors or Interpreters are by a
general word called Divines: among whom we find Dionysius, Origin, Polycarpus,
Eusebius, Tertullian, Ireneus, Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Athanasius, Basil,
Damascene, Lactantins, Cyprian, Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Gregory, Ruffinus,
Leo, Cassianus, Barnardus, Anselm, and many other holy Fathers which those
ancient times brought forth: and some of later years; as Thomas, Albertus,
Bonaventure, Egidius, Henricus, Gandavensis, Gerson, and many others. But now
seeing that all these Interpretative Divines are but men, they are subject to
humane frailties; sometimes they err, sometimes they write things contrary or
repugnant sometimes they differ from one another: in many things they are
deceived, all of um not discerning all things: for only the Holy Ghost has the
perfect knowledge of Divine things, who distributes to all men according to a
certain measure, reserving many things to himself, that we may be always
learning of him: for, as S. Paul says, All of us know and preach by art only.
Therefore all this Interpretative Theology consists only in liberty of
speech, and is a Knowledge separate from Scripture, whereby every one has the
liberty to abound in his own sense, according to those various Expositions
recited before, which S. Paul in one word calls Mysteries, or speaking of
Mysteries, when the Spirit speaks Mysteries; whence Dionysius calls this
Significative Theology, treated of by those holy Doctors in several Volumes.
Nor are we to believe all that they say, seeing that many hold very Erroneous
Opinions of Faith, which are exploded by the Church; as we may instance in
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, Victorinus Pictoviensis, Irenoeus Lugdunensis,
Cyprian, Origin and Tertullian, and many others, who have erred in the Faith,
and whose Tenets have been condemned as Heretical, though they themselves are
among the Canonized Saints. But this requires a deeper spirit of consideration,
to judge and discern which is not of men, nor of flesh and blood, but granted
from above by the Father of lights. For no man can utter any thing rightly of
God, but by the light which comes from himself; which light is the Word, by
whom all things were made, and who illuminates every man coming into this
world, giving them power to become the sons of God whoever shall receive and
believe. Neither is there any who can declare the things of God, but his own
Word: for who besides can know the mind of God, or whoever was made of his
council, but the Son of God, being the Word of the Father? But of this we shall
discourse no farther, till we have perfected the next Chapter of Prophetic
Theology.

CHAP. XCIX.
of Prophetic Theology.
AS Prophecy is the speech of the Prophets, so is Theology nothing but the
Tradition of the Divines, or men discoursing with God. However, not every one
that can remember or repeat a Prophecy, or interpret the meaning thereof, is
presently a Prophet, but he that in divine things is endued with the knowledge
of Piety, Virtue and Sanctity, who discourses with God, and meditates upon his
Law day and night. For so S. John Author of the Apocalypse, in the Letters of
Dionysius called The Divine, testifies from holy Writing; to whom the Truth it
self has said, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you despises
me. Which words are not spoken to contentious Theosophists, but to the true
Divines, Apostles, Evangelists, and Messengers of the Word of God, who say, I
dare not utter any thing which Christ does not work by me. Therefore the
Traditions of these Divines concerning Faith and Godliness, are truly
Theological. To the Writings and sayings of these men we give credit, as being
founded, not upon contentious Syllogisms, or Opinions of men, but, as S. Paul
says, being divinely inspired: not in defining, compounding, dividing,
contemplating, after the manner of Philosophers; but in an essential contact of
Divinity, apprehended through a clear vision in the divine light it self: of
which vision we find several sorts in the holy Scripture: as the Prophets had
several dispositions to receive. For we read how some saw God, or Angels in the
forms of men: others in the shape of Fire: others in the similitude of Air or
Wind: others in the shape of Rivers or Water: others in the form of Birds,
Precious Stones, or Metals: others in the forms of Letters or Characters:
others in the sound of a Voice: others in Dreams: others in a Spirit residing
within themselves: others in the work of the Understanding. And therefore the
Scripture calls all Prophets Seers. Thus we read of The Visions of Isaias, The
Visions of Jeremy, The Visions of Ezekiel, and the rest. And under the New law
S. John faith, I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day. On the wings whereof he
was carried, and beheld the Throne of God. And Paul witnesses, that he saw
those things which it is not lawful for men to utter. And this Vision is called
a Rapture, or Ecstasie, or spiritual death. Concerning this death it is said,
No man shall see God, and live. And in another place, Precious in the sight of
God is the death of his Saints. And it is more clearly expressed by the
Apostle, where he says, You are dead, and your life is hid with Christ. And it
is necessary for him to die this death, that will pierce into the secrets of
Prophetic Theology. Now there is a double sight of this Deifick vision: One,
when God is seen face to face; and then the Prophets see what S. Paul faith,
Things which are not fit for men to utter, and which no tongue of men or Angels
can express, nor Pen unfold. There is also a certain contact or union of the
Divine Essence, and an illustration or enlightening of the pure and separate
Intellect, without appearance of any shape or likeness. This Divines call The
Meridional Understanding. Of which S. Augustine upon Genesis, and Origin against
Celsus, largely dispute. The other sort of Seeing is that by which we see the
hinder parts of God; when the creatures, which are the hinder parts or effects
of God, are understood with a more exalted judgment; as by the knowledge
whereof the Creator, the chief workman, and the First Cause that moves all
things, is the better known: as the Wiseman faith, From the bigness of the
kind, and of the creature, may be known the Creator of things. And Paul also
about the same subject: The invisible things of God are known, being understood
by these things which are made. And it is an usual Saying among the
Peripateticks, that they who argue from the Effects to the Causes, are said to
argue a posteriori, from the hinder part. Moses enjoyed both these Visions, as
the Scriptures witness. Of the first, we read that Moses saw God face to face.
As to the other, we read what God spoke to him: Thou shall see my hinder parts.
And by the means of this later Vision, Moses made a Law, instituted Sacrifices
and Ceremonies, built a Tabernacle and other Mysteries, according to the most
elaborate Exemplar of the whole world, comprehending all the secret works of
God and Nature therein. This Vision is again twofold: for we either behold the
creature in God himself, which Divines call The Morning-vision; or else we
behold God himself in the creatures. There is also another Prophetic Vision in
Dreams: thus we read in Matthew, how the angel of God appeared to Joseph in a
dream. And in another place, that the Magi who adored Christ were admonisht in
a dream, that they should return another way into their own Country. There are
in the Old Testament many Examples thereof. Now what this Vision is, Job
expounds, where he says, In the horror of nocturnal visions, when sleep
falls upon men, and they sleep in their beds; then he opens their ears, and
teaching them, instructs them with learning. And this being a fourth species of
Vision, is called Nocturnal. There are also two other kinds of Prophecy: the
one received by word of mouth; and thus was Moses enlightened and taught in
Mount Sinai, Abraham, Jacob, Samuel, and many other Prophets under the Old Law.
Under the New Law, the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were taught by the
mouth of Christ, he being alive among them. There is another sort of Prophecy,
which consists in the agitation of the Spirit, while the soul ravished away by
some Deity, then joined to that, and abstracted from the body of man, is by the
same Spirit filled with Knowledge beyond humane strength or wit. Which
ravishment is not performed always by Angels, but sometimes by the Spirit of
God; as we read of Saul, that the Spirit of God came upon him, and he
prophesied, and was changed into a new man, and numbered among the Prophets.
And in the Acts of the Apostles, the Spirit of God came upon them that were
baptized, in flames of fire. Which Spirit also many times seizes upon men that
are liable to sin; so that there were many Prophets among the Gentiles; as
Cassandra, Helenus, Calchas, Ampharans, Tiresias, Mopsus, Amphilochus,
Polybius, Corinthus; also Galanus the Indian, Socrates, Diotyma, Anaximander,
Epimenides the Cretan. Also the Magi among the Persians, Brachmans among the
Indians, Gymnosophists among the Aethiopians, Druids among the Gauls, and
Sibyls among the Romans. To which Prophetic seizure of the Spirit, many times,
certain previous Ceremonies, authority of Function, and communion of sacred
Mysteries, do very much conduce, as the Scripture amply declares concerning
Balaam; and in other places by the application of the Ephod. And the Evangelist
witnesses concerning Caiaphas, that he prophesied, being high priest that year.
Hence the Mecubals among the Hebrews adventured to counterfeit their Artificial
Prophecy. I omit what the Hebrews have written concerning the Two and thirty
paths of Wisdom; and what S. Austin has touched upon concerning the Degrees; or
Albertus in his reception of Forms, of which he reckons up seven Apparitions in
Dreams, and as many waking. So we read in Plato and Proculus of Socrates, that
he was not inspired by an intelligible influx, but by voice, and familiar
speech. But these things come to pass more easily in Dreams. But let us return
to our purpose. Now therefore Prophetic Theology is that which by an
Intuitive Inspiration teaches the unshaken Word of God. But the Authority and
Arguments by which that Truth is confirmed, are not the Opinions of Men, not
Custom, nor the invented Fictions of the Wise: not the Magnificent Decrees of
Sects, not Syllogisms, Enthymems, not Inductions, not soluble Consequences; but
Divine Oracles consonant to one another, received by the Universal Church with
an unanimous and solid consent, approved by Miracles, Prodigies, Wonders,
Holiness of life, and testimony of Martyrdom. The Doctors of this Prophetic
Theology were Moses, Job, David, Solomon, and many other Canonical Writers and
Prophets. The Teachers of the New Testament were the Apostles and Evangelists:
but all these, notwithstanding they were filled with the Holy Ghost, yet all at
one time or other strayed from the Truth, and in some measure spoke untruly;
not that they did so wittingly, or craftily; for to say so, would be a greater
Error than that of Arius or Sabellicus, subverting the whole Authority of the
Scripture, in which Error notwithstanding the great and holy S. Jerome
persisted, disputing against S. Augustine about the reprehension of Peter: for
S. Paul, said that S. Jerome, told a lie craftily. Which should it be granted,
and that such an untruth should be admitted in the Bible, immediately, as S.
Austin says, the whole certainty of the Bible would fall to ruin. But S.
Jerome being thus admonisht, after many Contradictions and defenses, at length
acknowledged his Error, and confessed the Truth. But what I say, that the holy
Writers did secundum quid speak things not altogether true, I would have to be
understood so, as that they did not willingly err, but only stray through
humane frailty. Thus Moses failed, in telling the people he would bring them
out of Egypt, and carry them into the Land of Canaan: for though he brought
them out of Egypt, he did not carry them into the Land of promise. Jonas
failed in foretelling the destruction of Nineveh within forty days; intended,
but delayed. Elijah failed, in foretelling many things to come to pass in the
days of Ahab, which yet were not fulfilled till after his death. Isaiah failed,
foretelling the death of Hezekiah the next day, when his life was prolonged
fifteen years afterward. Many other Prophets also failed, and their
predictions are found either not to have come to pass at all, or else to have
been suspended. The Apostles also and Evangelists failed. Peter also failed
when he was reprehended by S. Paul. Matthew also failed, when he wrote that
Christ was not dead till the Lance had pierced his side. But this defect was
no defect of the Holy Ghost, but either of the Prophet not rightly delivering
what was suggested by the Holy Ghost, or the Vision did declare; or else
proceeding from some alteration of the event of the Command, the sentence of
the Oracle being either altered or deferred. Hence it follows, that all Prophets
and Writers in some things seem to fail and err, according to the Scripture,
which says, All men are liars. Only Christ, both God and man, never was, nor
shall be found to fail, nor shall his words be altered, or be defective; who,
void of Error, divulged his Oracles most immutable, as he said himself: The
heaven and the earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. Now
because all Truth is through the Holy Ghost, therefore only Christ possesses
this Truth firmly; nor shall it ever depart from him, but remains in him. But
it is not so with others: for the Spirit was with Moses, but when he struck the
Rock it was departed. It was with Aaron, but departed when he made the Calf. It
was with Anna their sister, but not when she murmured against Moses. It was
with Saul, David, Solomon, Isaiah, etc. but rested not constantly with them.
Neither are Prophets always Prophets, or Seers, or foretellers of things to
come; nor is Prophecy a continual habit, but a gift, passion, or transient
spirit. And whereas there is no man who does not sin; so there is no man from
whom the Spirit does not sometimes depart, and leave him; unless it be Christ,
the only Son of God, of whom it was therefore said to John: He upon whom thou
saw the Spirit descending, and remaining with him, he is the Son of God; who
Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, being also able to impart the same to others.
Therefore, as says Simonides, only God has this honor, that he is only
Metaphysical: so may we say of Christ, that only Christ has this honor, to
be a Divine. However, let no man think that the Writings of the Old Testament,
since the Gospel of Christ had its divine birth from them, are therefore
obsolete and dead; for they will ever live in high authority: for by them have
the Apostles proved their Tenets, and without their testimony they have spoken
nothing: and Christ refers us to the search of them; whose Gospel does not at
all abolish those Writings, but fulfilled the Law to the least tittle. This is
also to be noted, that many Volumes of the Holy Scripture are lost; which we
may easily gather from the Scripture it self: For Moses cites Books of The Wars
of the Lord; and Joshuah, The Book of the Just; Esther, The Book of memorable
things; and Macchabees cites the holy Books of the Spartiatae; and the Books of
the Kings cite Books of Lamentations, Books of Samuel the Seer, Books and
Writings of Nathan, God, Semeiah, Haddo, Ahia the Shilonite, of Jehu the son of
Ammon. Jude also in his Canonical Epistle cites the Book of Enoch. And some
Authors of credit have cited a Book of Abraham the Patriarch. All which are
lost, and never to be found. Nor are these which we have received, of equal
Authority: for Dionysius makes mention of A Gospel of S. Bartholomew; and S.
Jerome takes notice of A Gospel according to the Nazarenes: and S. Luke in his
Preface to his Gospel, says, that many did undertake to write Gospels, which
are all lost. And many others there are, which are either corrupted with
Heresy, or set forth without Authority; and so neither received by the holy
Fathers, nor approved by the Church. I omit false Prophets, who have come in by
the by, prophesying through vainglory things which the holy Spirit never
suggested, but unheardof lies, neither according to the Scripture, nor tending
either to unity of Spirit, or the peace of the Church, but for the introducing
of Schism; who rashly making themselves of Gods Privy Council, dare presume to
take the Word of God into their own mouths, and to write Scriptures and
Prophecies altogether Heretical or Apocryphal. Nor were the Canticles of
Solomon inserted among the Canonical Books, till they were corrected and
approved by Isaiah. From hence it appears, how that Theology it self, that is
to say, the holy Scripture, wants many of its Volumes, and may in a manner seem
defective; and few, of many that remain, are true and certain, really Books of
life, and Canonical.

CHAP. C.
Of the Word of God.
YE have now heard how doubtful, how uncertain, how ambiguous all the Sciences
are, and how, for any thing in them contained, we are generally ignorant where
the Truth rests, even in Divinity it self, unless we could find out any person
who had the Key of Knowledge and Wisdom: for the Armory of Truth is locked and
concealed under diverse Mysteries; and the way shut up from wise and holy men,
by which we might enter into so great and incomprehensible a Treasury. Now this
Key is nothing else but the Word of God: This only discerns the force and
virtue of all sors of words, and what Disputes proceed merely from the Cunning
of Sophistry, which discovers not the Truth, but only a mere shadow thereof:
and then distinctly shows you what communication sets forth the Truth, not in
outward appearance, and counterfeit Color, but in effect and reason. By this,
every Art of deceit and untruth is easily surmounted. Neither Arguments, nor
Syllogisms, nor any subtilties of Sophistry, can stand against it. He that is
not satisfied therewith, or is of an opinion contrary thereto, as S. Paul
says, is proud, and knows nothing. And there we are to try, by the words of
God, all Doctrines and Opinions, as Gold is tried by the Touchstone; and in
all difficulties to flee thither, as to a Rock of most safety; and out of that
only to search for the truth of all things; and from thence to judge of the
Doctrines, Opinions, and Expositions of men. For, as Gregory says, Whatsoever
derives not its authority from thence, is with the same ease rejected as
approved. Now as to the knowledge of this Word, there is no School of
Philosophers, nor the subtilest Wits of the most subtle Sophisters, that have
been able to teach it us; but only God, and Jesus Christ, through the Holy
Ghost, by means of those Scriptures which are Canonical; to which, according to
the command of God, nothing may be added, and from which nothing may be
diminished: for whoever shall do it, though he were an Angel of heaven, he is
abandoned to the devil, and cursed by the Law of God. So great the Majesty, so
great is the Power of this Scripture, that it admits no strange Expositions, no
Glosses of Men nor Angels; nor suffers it self to be wrested according to the
inventions of men's Wits: nor does it permit it self to be changed and
transformed into variety of Senses, after the manner of humane Fables, as it
were some Poetical Proteus; but is sufficient to expound and interpret it self;
and judging of all men, is judged by none. For the Authority thereof is
greater, as Austin says, than all the florid Subtilties of humane Wit: for it
has one, plain, constant, and holy meaning, in the strength whereof it both
combats and overcomes. All other Moral meanings besides this, as Mystical,
Typical, Anagogical, Tropological, and Allegorical, by the help whereof many
men do besmear and Fucus over the Truth with sundry strange Colors, may
rightly and truly persuade us something for the edification of the people, but
they can never prove or disprove any thing to confirm the Authority of the Word
of God. For let any person bring into controversy the opinion of any one of
these; let him quote any substantial Author thereupon, or let him allege the
Exposition of any of the holy Fathers; none of those things are so binding to
us, but that we may contradict um: but out of the letter of the holy
Scriptures, from the draught and order thereof, such indissoluble Bands are
made, which no man can break, nor no man escape through; but breaking and
shattering all Engines of Argumentation, enforces him to say and confess, That
it is the finger of God, That Man never spoke in that manner, That he speaks
not as the Scribes and Pharisees, but like one that has power. But the Authors
thereof, inspired from Heaven, have by their authority ordained us a Canon, the
magnificence whereof is such, that we ought to believe all things therein
contained: and whatever that Word has pronounced and taught, that without any
retraction is to be accounted holy and inviolable. Of which thus S. Austin has
spoken: That he gave this honor to those Books which be called Canonical, that
he most constantly believed that none of the Writers of them did or could err:
but to the others be would give no credit, how much learning and holiness
soever they had in them, except it be proved with evident reason out of Gods
Word that there is a probability for the truth thereof. Unto these Christ sends
us, teaching us that we should search the Scriptures. From hence the Apostle
commands us to try all things, and to stick to the things which are good; as
also, to prove the spirits whether they be of God; and by the help of them to
be able to give an account of all things, and to reprove them that shall vainly
go about to contradict; that so becoming spiritual, we may judge all things,
and be judged of none. Now the truth and understanding of the Canonical
Scripture depends upon the only authority of God revealing the same; which
cannot be comprehended by any judgment of the Senses, by most overreaching
Reason, by any Syllogism of demonstration, by any Science, by any Speculation,
by any Contemplation, or by any humane force; but only by Faith in Jesus
Christ poured out into the soul from God the Father, by the Holy Ghost: which
is so much the more predominant and stable than the Credulity of humane
knowledge, by how much God himself is superior to, and truer than Men. But why
do I say truer? Nay rather, God alone is true, and every man a liar. So that
whatever proceeds not from this Truth, is Error, as that which is not of faith
is sin, For God himself has in himself the fountains of Truth, out of which it
is necessary for him to draw it, whoever desires perfect knowledge; seeing
there is no knowledge can be had either of the secrets of Nature, of separated
substances, nor of God the Author of all, unless it be revealed from above. For
things divine are not to be reached by humane force; and natural things
oft-times keep at too great a distance from the inward thought: whence it comes
to pass, that what we believe to be the knowledge of these things, appears to
be Falsehood and Error. Which presumption in the Caldeans and other Heathen
Philosophers Isaiah reproves, where he says: Thy wisdom and thy knowledge have
deceived thee; thou have failed in the multitude of thy inventious. The
Grammarian is very wary that he offend not in talk, and that he utter not a
rude and barbarous word: but in the mean while he has no regard to the
dishonest courses, and sinfulness of his life. So likewise the Poet chooses
rather to halt in his Life than in his Verse. The Historian leaves to Memory,
and commits to Writing the deeds of Kings and Princes, and the transactions of
successive times; yet minds not his own behavior, or if he do, is yet ashamed
to confess his failings. The Orator more abhors the rudeness of his Language,
than the deformity of his Life. The Rhetorician will rather deny the manifest
Truth, than yield to his Opposer in the least Syllogistical Conclusion.
Arithmeticians and Geometricians number and measure all things, but neglect the
Measures and Numbers of their lives and souls. The Musicians are all for Sounds
and Songs, not minding the Discords of corrupt Manners: Therefore Diogenes the
Sinopian was wont to reprove them, that they would fitly make the Harmony and
Strings agree; but that there was neither measure nor harmony in their customs
of living. Astrologers behold the Heavens and the Stars, and foretell others
what shall happen in this world; but they never mind the evil which every
moment hangs over their own heads. Cosmographers describe the situations of
Countries, the forms of Mountains, the course of Rivers, and limits of distinct
Regions; but they make a man never the wiser nor better. Philosophers with
great vaunting dive into the Causes and Beginnings of things; while they
neglect, perhaps not so much as know God the Creator of all things. There is no
Peace among Princes and Magistrates, being easily drawn for small advantages to
seek the destruction one of another. Physicians cure the bodies of the sick,
and neglect the health of their souls. Lawyers diligent in observing the Laws
of Men, however transgress the Commands of God: whence it is grown to be a
Proverb, Neither physicians live well, nor Lawyers die well; Physicians being
the most disorderly sort of men, and Lawyers the most dishonest. Divines make a
great noise while they preach to us the observation of the Commands of God, and
holy Doctrine; but their words and conversations differ very much; being such
as had rather seem to know than love God. Now then, he which knows all things,
to speak and write well; he who understands the nature of Verse, the course of
Times, the ways of Reasoning, the ornaments of Speech, the colors of
Rhetoric; he that remembers all things, the proportions and sums of Numbers,
the harmony of Sounds, the measures of Dancing, the measures of all Quantities,
the inflexions, and reflections of the Sunbeams, the situation of the Earth and
Sea, the various ways of rearing all sorts of Edifices and Engines, the
ordering of Battles, the tilling of Ground, the taking, feeding, fatting of
Beasts, Birds and Fish, every kind of Country-trade, every species of
Mechanic Industry, Painting, Graving, Founding, Hammering, Hewing, Factoring,
Sailing; the course of the Stars, their Influences upon inferior Bodies; the
forebodings of Destiny; Divinations of all sorts; the hidden monstrosities of
Magic Art; the secrets of the Cabalists; the causes of all Natural things; the
reformation of Manners; the Governments of Commonwealths; Family-order;
Remedies for Diseases; virtues of Medicines, and skill in mixture; the delicate
Dressing of Meats: Let him know both Laws, all the Pleadings of the most
learned Doctors and Council, the wrangling of the Sorbonnists, the hypocrisy
of the Monks, with all the Learning of the holy Fathers: he, I say, who knows
all this, and more, if there be any thing yet remaining, yet he knows
nothing, unless he know the will of Gods Word, and perform the same. He that
has learned all things, and has not learned this, has learned in vain, and
all his Knowledge is in vain. In the Word of God is the Way, there is the Rule,
there is the Gole or Mark whither he ought to bend his Course, that will not go
astray, but drives to reach the Truth. All other Sciences are subject to Time,
and Forgetfulness; and not only these Sciences and Arts, but also the Letters,
Characters, and Languages which we use, shall perish, and others rise in their
places: and peradventure they have more than once been already lost, and have
as often come to light again. Neither has there been one manner of Orthography
in one Age, nor alike with all men. Nor is the true Pronunciation of the Latin
Tongue at this day any where to be found. The ancient Characters of the Hebrew
are quite lost; they which are now in use being found out by Esdras: for the
Hebrew Language was corrupted by the Caldeans; a Misfortune that has happened
well-near to all the Languages of the world; so that there is hardly one at
this day which understands its own Antiquity; new words growing into use, and
the old ones decaying. So that there is nothing fixed or durable. Finally, the
opinion of Terence is, That nothing is now spoken, which has not been spoken
before, And many there are, among whom Volaterrane is one, that would have it
that the Gun, which is by most accounted a New Invention of the Germans, was
used in ancient time: and this they endeavor to prove out of Virgil.

There Salmon lay in cruel torments bound,
Cursed Imitator of the Olympic Sound:
He born by four fleet Steeds, his Flambean shaking,
Through Greece, and Elis Towns his journey taking,
Triumphing went, and called himself a God,
Mad as he was, still thundering as he rode;
Thunder and Tempests seemed to fill the sky,
With so much noise his speedy Coursers fly.
Much to this purpose has Ecclesiastes spoken, when he says, There is nothing
new under the sun; nor can any man say, Behold, this is new: for it has been
in times past before us. There is no remembrance of things past; neither they
which shall be in the later days, shall remember the things which shall be
hereafter. And in another place he says, The learned and the ignorant also
shall die. What then shall we here say, but that all Sciences and Arts are
subject to death and forgetfulness? neither shall they for ever remain alive,
but together with death shall pass to death, forasmuch as Christ himself says,
That every plant which the heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
out, and cast into everlasting fire. So far are we to be from believing that
Knowledge avails to Immortality; but that the Word of God alone endures for
ever. The knowledge whereof is so needful to us, that he that despises it,
that esteems it not, and is not a hearer thereof, (as the Word it self
testifies in the holy Scripture) God will send upon him a Curse, Damnation, and
everlasting Judgment. Ye are not therefore to think that it belongs only to
Divines, but to every one, man and woman, old and young; so that every one,
according to the grace and capacity given to them, is bound to have the
knowledge thereof, and not of dissent a hairs breadth from the true sense and
meaning of it. For this cause, the Old Testament commands us in this manner:
These words shall be in thy heart all the days of thy life; and thou shall
declare them to thy children and grandchildren, and command them to keep and
observe them. Thou shall ponder them sitting in thy house, and going through the
street, sleeping and waking; and shall bind them as a token to thy hand: they
shall always be and move before thy eyes, and thou shall write them over the
doors of thy house. Thus Josiah read all the words, and all these things that
were contained in the Volume of the Law before all the multitude of men, women,
children and strangers. And Esdras brought the book of the Law before all the
multitude of men and women, and read therein openly in the street, before all
that could understand. And Christ commanded his Gospel to be preached to all
creatures throughout the whole world; and this not in the dark, not whispered
in the ear, not in secret, not in private chambers, not to some particular
Doctors and Scribes; but openly, upon the house tops, to the people, to the
multitude: for thus faith he to the Apostles: That which I speak to you, I
speak to all men: that which I speak to you in darkness, declare you in the
face of the sun: that which I tell you in your ears, publish you upon the
house-tops. And S. Peter in the Acts says, He has charged us to preach to the
people. And Paul commands us to bring up our children in the discipline and
doctrine of Christ. And, which is more, Christ himself blamed his disciples for
hindering little children to come to him; whose simplicity and humility, whose
minds are not passed up with vain Opinions, or swelled with humane knowledge,
teaches us how necessary it is for us to become as little children, seeing
that without being such, we are altogether unfit for the kingdom of heaven. For
this cause, S. Chrysostom in a certain Homily advises that children above all
things should be bred up in the knowledge of the holy Scripture, and that
husbands should discourse in their houses at home with their wives concerning
the Scripture, and make diligent search and enquiry into the sense and meaning
thereof. And the Council of Nice decreed that no Christian should be without
the Book of the holy Scripture. Know then, that there is nothing in the holy
Scripture so hard, so profound, so difficult, so hidden, which pertains not to
all the faithful in Christ; nor that ever was so committed to these our
Masters, for them to hide it from the people: but rather, all Divinity ought to
be common to all believers, and to every one, according to the capacity and
measure of the gift of the holy Ghost. Wherefore it is the duty of a good
Preacher, to distribute to every man as much as he is able to receive; to one
in milk, to another in strong meat; and to beguile no man of the food of
necessary Truth.

CHAP. CI.
Of Masters of Arts.
NOw at length, that I may recollect my self again, ye have heard from those
things which have been hitherto said, That Arts and Sciences are nothing else
but the Traditions of men, received by us upon the good esteem we have of them;
and that they all consist of nothing else but of things doubtful confirmed by
apparent Demonstrations; and that most of um are not so uncertain and doubtful,
as they are deceitful and wicked: and therefore it is also an evil thing to
believe that they can bring to us any heavenly advantage. It is true, that in
times past it was the superstition of the Gentiles, that gave Divine worship to
the Inventors of things, and to them whom they saw surpass others in any Art or
Science, and placed them in the number of their Gods, dedicating to them
Temples, Altars and Images, adoring them under several likenesses. Thus Vulcan
among the Egyptians being the first Philosopher, and referring the beginnings
of Nature to the Fire, was by them worshipped as the God of Fire: and Esculapius,
as Celsus says, because he more subtly practiced Physic, then rude and
imperfect, was for that reason made the God of Physic. And this, and no other
deification of Sciences, was that which the ancient Serpent, the type of these
Gods, promised to our first Parents, saying to them, Ye shall be as gods,
knowing good and evil. Let him then boast the authority of this Serpent, that
boasts in worldly knowledge. For no man can possess Knowledge without the
favor of this Serpent, whose doctrines are nothing but delusions, and the end
thereof evil. When it is a Proverb among the Vulgar, That the Learned are all
mad. To which Aristotle himself assents, saying, that there is no man of great
knowledge, without a mixture of madness. And Austin witnesses, that many for
the desire of knowledge have lost their wits. Neither is there any thing more
contrary to Christian Faith and Religion, than Knowledge; nor any two things
that less agree together. For we find in the Ecclesiastical Histories, and are
also taught by Experience, how Sciences went to wrack, when Christian Religion
waxed strongest; so that the greatest part of them utterly perished, and those
mighty Arts of Magic departed in such wise, that not the least sign of them
remains: many Sects of Philosophy vanished; very little of the Peripatetick
Philosophy known, and that imperfect. Nor was the state of the Church in more
quiet, than when these Sciences were reduced to the lowest extremity; when
Grammar was taught by one only Alexander Gallus, Logic only by Petrus
Hispanus, Laurentius Aquilegius was the only Rhetorician, a small Collection
of annual transactions served for a History, the Ecclesiastical Computation
served for Mathematical Instruction; and for the rest, one single Isidorus. But
now, after that knowledge of Tongues, Eloquence, and number of Authors began to
multiply as formerly, the quiet of the Church began to be troubled, and
Heresies arose. Neither is there any sort of men less fit to receive Christian
doctrine, than they who have their minds tainted with the knowledge of the
Sciences: for they are so stiff and obsti^ate in their self-opinions, that they
leave no place for the Holy Ghost, and do so assure themselves, and trust in
their own strength and power, that they will allow of nothing else for truth;
and they scorn and despise all those things which they cannot understand by
their own Industry. Therefore has Christ hidden these things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them to little children; that is to say, to the poor in
spirit, not enriched with the treasuries of humane knowledge; to the pure in
heart, not defiled with the vanity of Opinions; and to the peacemakers, not
followers of other men, not contentious overthrowers of the Truth with
wrangling Syllogisms; and suffer persecution for the sake of Truth and Justice.
Thus Socrates was poisoned by the Athenians, Anaxagoras condemned to die,
Diagoras accused, but escaped death by flight. Among the Jews, Isaiah was cut
to pieces, Jeremiah stoned to death, Daniel condemned to the lions, Amos killed
with a club, Micah cast headlong from a rock, Zachariah slain at the Altar,
Elias persecuted by Jezebel, who slew many of the Prophets. Thus also were the
Apostles and other Martyrs, witnesses of the Divinity of Christ, several ways
tormented to death: And all this for no other cause, but that they thought more
holily of God than the Wisemen of the world. Behold these, who in purity of
heart, poverty of spirit, and peace of Conscience, resemble the humility and
simplicity of little children, who are prepared to shed their blood for the
Truth. These are they to whom only the true Deifying wisdom is given, that is
to bring us to the heavenly Quires, and transforms us into Angels: As we read
in the Sermon of Christ, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God:
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God: Blessed
are they that suffer persecution for justice sake. It is therefore better, and
more profitable, to be Idiots, and without knowledge; to believe by faith and
charity, and to become next to God, than being lofty and proud, through the
subtilties of the Sciences, to fall into the possession of the Serpent. Thus we
find in the Gospel how Christ was received of Idiots, of the vulgar people,
and of the simpler sort, while he was rejected, despised, and persecuted even
to death, by the Highpriests, by the Lawyers, by the Scribes, by the Doctors
and Rabbis. For this cause, Christ chose his Apostles not Scribes, not
Doctors, not Priests, but unlearned persons of the vulgar people, void of
knowledge, unskilful, and Asses.

CHAP. CII.
A Digression in praise of the Ass.
BUt lest any one should falsely accuse me, that I have called the Apostles
Asses, it will not be from the purpose to discourse the Mysteries of the Ass.
For this creature the Hebrew Doctors expound to be the Hieroglyphick of
Fortitude and Strength, Patience and Clemency; and that his influence depends
on Sephiroth, that is, Hochma, which signifies wisdom. For his conditions are
most necessary for a Scholar of wisdom; for he lives by little food, and is
contented whatsoever it be. Patiently he endures Penury, Hunger, Labor,
Stripes, and all manner of Persecution; yet of so low and poor an
Understanding, that he cannot discern between Lettice and Thistles. Of a clean
and innocent heart, void of Choler, being at peace with all living creatures;
patiently carrying all burdens laid upon his back: as a reward whereof, he is
never troubled with Lice, or any diseases, and lives longer than any other
Beast. An Ass, says Columella, performs many and very necessary labors beyond
his share: for he is many times used in Plowing, and drawing heavy Carts: He
is also used in Mills, for the grinding of Corn. There is no Country but wants
so necessary a creature as the Ass is. How much the Ass is regarded and
esteemed in Augury, Valerius witnesses of C. Marius, who having conquered both
North and South, being at length declared an enemy of his Country, and pursued
by Sylla, by the advice and guidance of an Ass escaped all his threatenings; an
Ass being the cause of his flight and safety. Also in the Old Law God so far
honored the Ass, that when he commanded every first begotten to be slain for
Sacrifice, he only exempted Men and Asses; granting, that Man should be
redeemed for a price, and that a Sheep should be exchanged for the Ass. Christ
would that this Beast should be a witness of his Nativity, as is generally
affirmed: And by him he would be saved from the hands of Herod. The Ass was
consecrated by the touch of the body of Christ: for Christ ascending to
Jerusalem in triumph for the Redemption of mankind, as it is recorded in the
Gospel, rode upon an As; which was mysteriously foretold by the Oracle of
Zachary. And we read that Abraham the Father of the Elect rode only upon
Asses. So that the Proverb commonly repeated among the Vulgar, is not spoken in
vain, That the Ass carries Mysteries. Wherefore I would hereby advertise the
famous Professors of Sciences, that if the unprofitable burden of Humane
Knowledge be not laid aside, and that Lions borrowed skin put off, (not that of
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, but of the Lion that goes about roaring, and
seeking whom he may devour) whereby ye shall be turned into mere and bare
Asses, that ye will be utterly and altogether unfit to carry the Mysteries of
Divine wisdom. Neither had Apuleius of Megara's Ass been admitted to the holy
Mysteries of Isis, if he had not been turned out of a Philosopher into an Ass.
We read Miraculous actions of diverse Beasts; as, that an Elephant writ the
Greek letters: and Plutarch relates a Story of one, that being a Rival with
Aristophanes the Grammarian, loved a young Maid named Stephanopolides. And in
the same Author we read of a Dragon that loved a Virgin of Etholis. The same
also preserved his Nourisher, running to her assistance, as knowing her voice.
In Pliny we find that a Serpent called Aspis was accustomed to come daily to a
certain man's Table, who perceiving the son of her Host to be stain by one of
her young ones, she flew her young one in revenge of the broken law of
Hospitality; nor would ever after for shame come to that house again. The same
Gratitude is recorded of a Panther to a man, for helping her young ones out of
a ditch; for which she conducted him out of the desert, till she brought him
safe into the open Road. Histories also report that Cyrus was suckled by a
Bitch, and the founder of the Roman City by a She-wolf. I pass over the
Wonders related of Dolphins, and the Gratitude of Lions for benefits received.
Nor will I speak of the Bear of Daunia, nor of the Bull of Tarentum, both tamed
by Pythagoras. But that which surpasses all admiration is this, That Ammonius
of Alexandria, Master of Origin and Porphyrie, is said to have had an Ass one
of the hearers of his Wisdom, a Fellow-scholar with the rest. We find also in
sacred Story, that an Ass was endued with the spirit of Prophecy: for when
Balaam a wise man and a Prophet went to curse the people of Israel, he saw not
the Angel of the Lord; but the Ass saw him, and with the voice of a man spoke
to Balaam that rode him. Thus, I say, sometimes the simple and rude Idiot sees
those things oft-times, which a School-Doctor, blinded with the Traditions of
men, cannot perceive. Did not Sampson with the jaw bone of an Ass kill and slay
the Philistims? and being thirsty, when he prayed to the Lord, the Lord loosned
a tooth in the same jaw bone, and clean water sprang out immediately; which
when he had drank, his spirits were refreshed, and his strength recovered. Did
not Christ by the mouth of his silly Asses and rude Idiots, the Apostles,
vanquish and put to silence all the Learned Philosophers of the Gentiles, and
great Lawyers among the Jews; trampling under-foot all manner of worldly
wisdom; drinking to us out of the Cheek-bone of his Asses the water of wisdom
and everlasting life? By what has been already said, it is now as clear as the
Sun, that there is no Beast so fit and proper to retain Divinity as the Ass;
into which creature if ye be not transformed, ye shall not be able to carry the
Divine Mysteries. It was a name common to the Christians among the Romans, to
be called Asinarii; and they were wont to paint the Image of Christ with the
ears of an Ass, as Tertullian witnesses. Wherefore let neither Popes repute it
to their shame, if among those Giant like Elephants of Sciences, there may be
some Asses. Neither let Christians wonder, if among those Prelates and expert
Doctors, the better learned one is, the less he be esteemed: for the songs of
Nightingales are not proper for the ears of Asses; and it is a Proverb, That
the untuneable braying of Asses is not agreeable to the Harp. And yet the best
Pipes are made of the bones of Asses, the marrow being taken out; which as they
far exceed the harmony of the Harp, so these Religious Asses far surpass the
Brangling and Braying of idle Sophisters. Thus several Philosophers coming to
visit Antony, and to discourse with him, being by him answered in a few words,
returned with shame. We read also of a certain Idiot that convinced a most
learned and subtle Heretic, and forced him to turn to the Faith, whom the best
and most learned Bishops at the Council of Nice with a long and difficult
Disputation could not convince. Who being afterward demanded by his friends,
how it came to pass that he yielded to the Fool, who had resisted and withstood
so many and so great Learned Bishops, replied, That he had easily given the
Bishops words for words, but that he could not resist this Idiot, who spoke not
according to humane wisdom, but according to the Spirit.

The Conclusion of the Work.
YOu therefore, O ye Asses, who are now with your children under the command of
Christ, by means of his Apostles and Messengers, and Readers of true wisdom in
his holy Gospel, being freed from the foggs and mists of flesh and blood; if ye
desire to attain to this divine and true wisdom, not of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, but of the tree of life, set aside the Traditions
of Men, and every enquiry and discourse of flesh and blood, whether it concern
Reason, consideration of Causes or Effects; conversing now not with the Schools
of Philosophers and Sophisters, but with your own selves. For the Notions of
all things are trusted within your own breasts; which, as the Academicks
confess, the Scriptures themselves do testify, seeing that God created all
things very good, that is to say, in the best degree they could consist: He
therefore, as he created the trees full of fruit, so he created our souls,
which are like rational trees, full of Forms and Idea's; though through the sin
of our first parents, all things were concealed, and Oblivion took place, the
mother of Ignorance. But you that can remove the Veil from your Understandings,
who are wrapped up in the darkness of Ignorance, vomit up that Lethean Drench
which has made ye drunk with Forgetfulness: awake in the true light, you that
are drowned in the sleep of Irrationality; and then forthwith with an open
countenance ye shall pass from light to light: for ye are anointed, as S. John
says, by the holy Ghost, and know all things. And again, There is no necessity
that ye should be taught by any, because his Anointing instructs ye in all
things. For he alone it is that gives language and wisdom. David, Isaiah,
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel, John Baptist, and many other Prophets and Apostles,
were never bred up in Learning; but of Shepherds, Husbandmen, and Fools, became
thoroughly learned in all things. Solomon in a dream of one night was
replenished with the knowledge of all things, both sublunary and celestial; and
with so much prudence in the administration of Government, that there was never
any Prince equal to him. Yet all these were mortal men, as you are, and
sinners. You will say perhaps, that this has happened to a very few; and those
-- A few whom equal Jove
Would signalize by his transcending love;
Or such whose ardent zeal divinely fired,
With constant motion to the Stars aspired.
However, do not despair; the hand of God is not shortened to them that call
upon him, that give a true obedience to his will. Anthony and the Barbarian
Christian servant gained the full knowledge of Divine things by the help of
thrre days prayer, as S. Austin testifies. But you that cannot, like the
Prophets, like the Apostles, like those other holy men, behold those things
with a clear and unclouded Intellect, may procure Understanding from them who
have beheld these things with a clear sight. There is also another way
remaining, as S. Jerome says to Russinus, that what the Spirit has suggested
to the Prophets and Apostles, should be sought by you with diligent study, I
mean the study of that Learning which is delivered in the Bible, being the most
sacred Oracles of the true God, and received by the Church with an unanimous
consent: not of such things as have been invented by the Wit of men; for they
do not enlighten, but darken the Understanding. And therefore we must have
recourse to Moses, to Solomon, to the Prophets, to the Evangelists, to the
Apostles, who shining with all sorts of Learning, Wisdom, Manners, Languages,
Oracles, Prophecies, Miracles and Holiness, of heavenly things have spoken from
God himself, of inferior things above men; delivering all the things of God,
and secrets of Nature, distinctly and clearly to us. For all the secrets of God
and Nature, all manner of Customs and Laws, all understanding of things past,
present, and to come, are fairly taught in the Books of the holy Scripture.
Whither do ye therefore run headlong? why seek ye knowledge of them, who having
spent all their days in searching, have lost all their time and labor, being
unable to attain to any thing of certain truth? Fools and wicked men, who not
regarding the gifts of the holy Ghost, strive to learn from lying Philosophers,
and Doctors of Error, those things which ye ought to receive from Christ and
the holy Ghost! Think ye to draw knowledge from the ignorance of Socrates; or
light out of the darkness of An^xagoras, or virtue out of the Wells of
Democritus, and wisdom out of the madness of Empedocles? Think ye to lave piety
out of Diogenes's Tub, or sense out of the stupidity of Carneades, or wisdom
from impious Aristotle, or perfidious Averroes; or faith out of the
superstition of the Platonicks? Ye are in an Error, being deceived by them,
who were themselves deceived. But recall your selves: you who are desirous of
the Truth, descend from the clouds of men's Traditions, and adhere to the true
light. Behold, a voice from heaven, a voice speaking from above, and showing
more apparent than the Sun, that ye are enemies to your selves, and delay the
receiving of wisdom. Hear the Oracle of Baruch: God is, says he, and no other
shall be compared to him: He has found out all manner of learning, and has
taught it to Jacob his son, and to Israel his beloved; giving laws and
precepts, and ordaining sacrifices. After this he was seen upon the earth,
conversed with men, was made flesh, teaching us plainly with his own mouth,
what was mysteriously delivered in the Law, and by the Prophets. And that ye
may nor think the Scriptures relate only to Divine, and not to natural things;
hear what the Wiseman witnesses of himself: He has given the true knowledge
of those things which are, that I might know the situation of the earths
compass the virtues of the Elements, the beginning, ending, middle, and
revolutions of the Times, the course of the Year, the influences of the Stars,
the nature of Animals, Sympathy and Antipathy of Creatures, the force of the
Winds, Thoughts of Men, difference of Plants, and the virtues of Roots. In
brief, I have learnt whatever things are hidden and concealed: for the
Artificer of all things has taught me wisdom. The Divine wisdom fails in
nothing: nothing escapes it, there is no addition to it: for it comprehends all
things. Know therefore, that there needs not long Study; but Humility of
spirit, and Pureness of heart; not the sumptuous furniture of many Books, but a
pure Understanding, made fit for the Truth, as the Lock is for the Key. For
number of Books hinders the learner; and he that follows many Authors, erres
with many. All things are contained and taught in the only Volume of the
Bible; but with this Proviso, That they are not to be understood but by those
who are enlightened: for, to others, they are only Parables and Riddles, sealed
up with many Seals. Pray then to the Lord God in says, doubtful of nothing,
that the Lamb of the Tribe of Judah may come and open his Sealed Book; which
Lamb is only holy and true, who only has the key of wisdom and knowledge, wh^
opens and no man shuts, and shuts what no man opens^ This is JESUS CHRIST, the
Word, the So^ of God the Father, the true Teacher, made Man lik^ unto us, that
he might make us the children of God^ like Himself, blessed to all Eternity.
But lest (...) should declaim beyond my Hourglass, let this be the End of our
Discourse.

FINIS.

