THE PRESENT STATE OF THE United Provinces OF THE LOW COUNTRIES; AS TO THE
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory, OF
THE DUTCH.

IN THREE BOOKS: Collected by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre, betwixt the Middle Temple-
Gate, and Temple Bar, in Fleet Street, 1669.

THE PREFACE.
THe Netherland-Provinces have rendered themselves so conspicuous and
considerable amongst the other States of Europe, that the sole mentioning of
them might suffice to awaken the attention, and invite the regards of all
persons, whose more elevated Genius leads them to the contemplation of the
rise, growth, and grandeur of States and Empires; which affording the greatest
instances of humane wisdom and industry, as well as they are the most
remarkable Theaters of divine providence, are certainly the most adaequate
objects for rational and considering men: For which reason possibly few Books
less needed a Preface, than that which is now in the Readers hands; and The
present State and Government of the Netherlands in the Title Page, may seem to
carry invitation enough with it to render all other superfluous. Scarce any
Subject occurres more frequent in the discourses of ingenious men, than that of
the mavelous progress of this little State, which in the space of about one
hundred years, (for it is no more since their first attempts to shake off the
Spanish yoke) has grown to a height, not only infinitely transcendnig all the
ancient Republics of Greece, but not much inferior in some respects even to
the greatest Monarchies of these latter Ages. Nor is the wonder inconsiderably
augmented, in that the lesser Moiety has far exceeded even the Whole it
self, and seven Provinces are become greater than seventeen; with a manifest
verification of that Aenigmatical Aphorism, Dimidium plus Toto. To which it
may likewise be added, that for above sixty years of that abovementioned
hundred, they were continually engaged in a War against the greatest King of
this Western World, besides what contests they have since had with other
Neighbors: and nevertheless, that difficult exercise of their nonage not only
promoted their growth, by necessarily exciting the industry natural to that
Nation, but likewise contributed to render the Constitution of the State it
self more robust and athletick.

It Is the Portraiture of this flourishing Commonwealth which is here presented
to the Ingenious, drawn by the elegant Pen of a Virtuoso of the Royal Society;
who the more to gratify the Reader, and complete his Work, has collected out
of several Authors a summary Account of the Lives of the Earls of Holland,
down to the alteration of Government, which commenced about the year 1567.
which Lives compose the first Book, order of time requiring the same to be
prefixed before the Description of the Confederate Commonwealth, or Government
of the States General; whereunto is particularly annexed that of the States of
Holland and Zeeland, as examples of the rest. The third and last Book exhibits
the extent and nature of the Soil of Holland, the Manners, Customs, and Trade
of the Inhabitants, together with particular Descriptions of all the
considerable Cities and Towns of that Province, and an Appendage of diverse
Treaties of Alliance made between this and other neighboring States. Besides
all which the Reader will find variety of Politic Reflections and Discourses
interspersed throughout the whole Work, which concur to the accomplishment of
the same, in reference to the two principal ends of Books, Instruction and
Divertisement.

THE FIRST BOOK, Containing the HISTORY OF THE EARLS OF HOLLAND.
CHAP. I.
What passed before the Earls of Holland.

THere is all the probability in the world that this fair Province of Holland
has not always been as rich and as populous as we now see it; but quite
contrary, it was a kind of a Desert once, and full of great Forests. The first
People that inhabited it were a Colony of Germans, which came out of their
Country some time before the Birth of our Savior, and it is from thence that
it has the name of Batavia, if we believe the Roman History, and particularly
Tacitus, lib. de moribus Germanorum.

There is no doubt but the Batavi are the chief in strength and valor among
the Germans, and that this Nation which was formerly called Cattes, and which
upon a sedition at home invaded these Islands which the Rhene makes, and are
now become Subjects of the Roman Empire, are the noblest portion of the German
State, since History makes so much mention of them, and that it appears so in
their humors, customs, and manners, of which the chiefest are these
following. 1. That they pay no tributes. 2. That they are free from all
contribution toward the War. 3. That they are always reserved for the War. 4.
That they have the most honorable rank in the Army, as being esteemed the best
Soldiers, and the best skilled in lancing their Javelots. It Is by their help,
says Tacitus, that the Romans have extended their Empire beyond the Rhene.

The Romans in truth did think themselves happy to have them for friends and
companions; not that I deny but that they were in some way conquered by the
same Romans, whom they assisted much in their Wars against the Britains, or
English; witness the Britain Castle built by the same Romans; for as Tacitus
says, it was only by the force of the Batavi and the Tongri that the Romans
did overcome the Britains: besides the Emperors were so convinced of their
fidelity, that they used them as guards to their persons; but because the
Romans did begin to oppress them, they revolted from them, as it is reported by
Tacitus in the fourth Book of his History, in these words:

The Batavi having been used in the Wars of Germany, did furnish the Empire
with arms and men; their principal leaders were Julius Paulus and Claudius
Civilis of the Royal Blood; Paulus being accused of rebellion was killed, and
Claudius put in prison, but set at liberty by Galb(...) Civiiis, being a man of
parts, took notice of the disorder the Empire was in, and observing the natural
aversion the Bataves had for the Romans, because that in raising of Soldiers
among them, they aimed more to satisfy their avarice and foul luxury, than to
supply the legions; he fomented under hand at first their discontent, then
appearing openly, exhorted them to recover their liberty, and cast off the yoke
of slavery. We are not, said he, treated like companions, but like slaves;
remember the glory of your Ancestors, and look upon the disorders of the
Empire, and the Gauls your neighbors, who will join with you in the design of
recovering your liberty. Thus it appears by this Writer that the Batavi were to
have been the Romans companions, and that it was for the breach and
nonperformance of that promise that they revolted, and maintained a bloody
War, in which were performed many noble actions.

The end of this War was a peace, in which the Batavi were ca^l'd the brothers
and friends of the Romans, the title of companions seeming not kind enough,
since the Country was overrun by the Danes and Normans, who were long masters
of it, but in the time of Pepin King of France they recovered their liberties.

CHAP. II.
Therry of Aquitain, the First Earl.

THe most received opinion of the learned Antiquaries is, That Thyerry, or
Childeric, Duke of Aquitain, was made Earl of Holland by Charles the ball'd,
Emperor and King of France. He took possession of it in the year 863, and
tamed the fury of the Frizelanders; his Subjects growing weary of the long
peace which he did politickly keep with all his neighbors, conspired against
him, and drive him out of Holland; but, by the assistance of the Emperor's
Forces, he subdued them, and punished the authors of the rebellion. His Wife
was Jane, daughter to King Pepin of Italy. Having reigned forty years in
Holland, he dyed peaceably, leaving his State to his Son.

Thyerry, the Second.
Succeeding his Father, married Hulgard, Daughter to Lewis King of France. He
overcame the Frizelanders in two pitched Battles, and rebuilt the Monastery of
Egmont which they had burned. He died after he had governed eighty eight years,
and lies buried at Egmont.

Arnulph, or Arnout, the Third.
This Earl maintained a long War against the Frizelanders, in which he was at
last kil^'d, and buried at Egmont, having reigned five years.

Thyerry, the Fourth.
Thyerry the third was preferred to the dignity of Earl of Holland before his
elder Brother, and married the Daughter of the Emperor Otho. In his time there
appeared a Comet, which seemed to prognostic the War that happened with the
Bishop of Utrect; after the loss of much Nob^lity, the said Bishop was taken
and kept prisoner for a long time, because he did obstinately refuse all
conditions of peace. This Duke to revenge his Fathers death, overran and
ruined most of East-Frizeland, and at last gave it to Florent his younger Son.
After this he undertook a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and died coming back.

Thyerry, the Fifth.
Thyerry the fourth of this name, and Earl of Holland, being gone to Leege to a
public Turnament, and having in it killed the Bishop of Cullen, in revenge
thereof was pursued to Dort, and there killed.

Florent, the Sixth.
Florent the first of this name succeeded in his Brothers place, who died
without issue; he forsook Frizeland to come and govern Holland; he had W^r with
the Archbishop of Cullen, the Bishop of Leege, and the Earl of Louvain, whom he
defeated luckily by a stratagem invented by an old man, who advised him to
cause deep Ditches to be made upon his enemies way, and to cover them over with
straw and hay; this design succeeded, and his enemies falling in great numbers,
he charged them so smartly and at such an advantage, that he obtained a great
victory: the Archbishop nevertheless having rallied his scattered Army, came
again into Holland, and was again defeated. A little after the Earl Florent was
treacherously killed.

Gertrude of Saxony, the Seventh.
This Princess took the reins of the Government in hand after the death of her
Husband, and during the minority of her Son. She was married a second time to
Robert of Frizeland, and died, having governed in great tranquillity. She left
diverse Children by both her Husbands.

Robert of Frizeland, the Eighth.
This Prince is reckoned amongst the Earls of Holland, though he were but
Guardian to the young Thyerry; he acquitted himself with much integrity and
honor of this his employment, but he was driven out of his State by Godfrey of
Lorrain, who by the strength and assistance of the Bishop of Utrect, possessed
himself of his Country.

Godfrey, the Ninth.
Godfrey being in possession of Holland, built the Town of Delft, subdued the
Frizelanders, and after a happy Reign was at last treacherously murdered.

Thyerry, the Tenth.
This Prince, the true and lawful Heir, having at last recovered his own, made
it his business to clear his Country of the Bishop of Utrect's Forces; which
he did by making peace with him; after which he set upon the Frizelanders, and
having passed his Army over the Ice, he encountered theirs, and killed four
thousand upon the place: nevertheless they rallied, and coming up with new
Forces, challenged the Earl and his Army; which he bore so impatiently, that
immediately charging them with all fury, he routed them, and in pursuit of his
victory spared neither man, woman, nor child. This bloody execution made them
promise obedience. After which the Earl died in 1091. having reigned fifteen
years: his W^fe was of the House of Saxony.

Florent the Fat, the Eleventh.
This Flo^ent governed Holland for thirty one years, being a very tall
corpulent man, his inclination was peace, and was very charitable. He left four
Children by his Wife Petronella of Saxony, Sister to the Emperor Lotaire. He
died in the flower of his age, and left the administration to his Wife, during
the minority of his Children. All his Subjects had a great respect and
veneration for his piety.

Thyerry, the Twelfth.
Thyerry the sixth of that name was married to Sophia, Daughter to Otho Count
Palatine, by whom he had four Sons and three Daughters. He chastized the
Friz^landers, but they rallying again fell stoutly upon North-Holland, and
burnt the Town of Alcmaer, being in a way to make their anger still more
sensible to his State, if he had not resolutely opposed them. A little after
hearing that his Brother-in-law was taken prisoner by them, and that his Forces
were also defeated by the Bishop of Utrect, he immediately led his Army, and
sat down before the Town with so much resolution, that he had undoubtedly
taken it, had not the Bishop for a last shift put on his Pontifical habit, and
come out with the rest of his Clergy to excommunicate the Count. Thyerry then
fell upon his knees, and to avoid the excommunication, asked pardon and raised
his siege. He was at l^st killed by the Frizelanders, having reigned forty five
years.

Florent, the Thirteenth.
Florent took place after Thyerry, and married with great transport of joy the
Daughter of the King of Scotland, which Wibold Abbot of Egmond had brought to
one of the Sea-Towns. He had by her four Sons and four Daughters. He chastized
the Frizelanders, who had once again burnt Alcmaer, and died gloriously at
Antioch, after he had seen the Sarrasins defeated and driven out of the holy
Land.

Thierry, the Fourteenth.
Thierry succeeded, and had by his Wife Alide of Cleves two Daughters, whereof
one was married to Henry of Gueldre, and the other to the Earl of Loen. He made
War in Brabant, and took Boisteduc; but was at last taken prisoner by the Duke
of Lorrain.

Ada, the Fifteenth.
Ada Countess of Holland, and Daughter to Thierry, did not govern long; for
being married to the Earl of Loen, whom most of the neighboring Princes did
envy, there were many seditions fomented in her State, which at last broke out
with great effusion of blood.

William the Sixteenth.
William the first of the name succeeded his Brother Thierry, and his Niece
Ada. He had War with the Bishop of Utrect, and on both sides the Country was
much ruined; but by agreement at last he was to pay to the Bishop a thousand
Talents. Upon the news of the death of his Uncle the King of Scotland, he
immediately rigged out a great Fleet, to put himself in possession of that
Kingdom; which he thought was his right, and in pursuance of his design landed
in Scotland, and took diverse Towns; but hearing the Earl of Loen his Nephew was
come into Holland with an Army, he forsook the uncertain for the certain. He
had two Wives, Alide of Gueldres, (by whom he had three Sons and two
Daughters;) and Mary, Daughter to the Duke of Lancaster, who had no Children.
He died in the year 1223. having reigned nineteen years.

Florent, the Seventeenth.
Florent the fourth Son to William, was married to Matthild, Daughter of the
Duke of Brabant; who had two Sons, William and Florent, and two Daughters,
Alide Coun^ess of Hainaut, and Matthild Countess of Heneberg, that had at one
birth as many Children as there are days in the year. This Prince was extreme
valiant, which was the cause of his death; for the Countess of Clermont having
heard much of his valor, was so desirous to see him, that she entreated her
Husband to publish a solemn Turnament; Florent failed not to be there, and by
his noble carriage so charmed the Countess; that she could not hold praising of
him before her Husband; who thereupon conceived so much jealousy, that he
caused him to be barbarously murdered in the flower of his age. His Body was
transported into Holland, and buried at Rinsburg.

William, the Eighteenth.
William the second, being yet under age, succeeded to his Father, under the
Guardianship of his Uncle the Bishop; his Wife was Elizabeth of Brunswick, by
whom he had Florent. This Prince was of a very warlike temper, and by reason of
his valor was chosen King of the Romans, at the age of twenty years. He first
held a Court at the Hague, to hear the complaints of the Hollanders and
Zelanders; in the protection of whom, he sent his Brother with an Army against
the Flemmings, who were entered the Island of Walkeren in Zeland. There was so
stout a ^encounter between the two Armies, that the ground for a great space
was all covered with the blood of the Flemmings. The King upon the news
^astened into Zeland, and saved the lives of the rest of the Flemmings, but
sent them away stark naked. After this he went into Germany, where he was
received with great honor and joy; coming back, he overcame the Frizelanders
in one Battle, and a little before the second he was killed, having governed
twenty one years. It was he that founded the College of the Heemrades, where a
Diikgrave presides.

Florent, the Nineteenth.
This Prince was two years under the Guardianship of his Uncle and his Aunt,
Alide Countess of Haina^t. To make up the difference between the Hollanders and
Flemmings, he married Beat^ix of Flanders, by whom he had five Sons and three
Daughters, the youngest of which, Margaret, was Queen of England. To revenge
his Fathers death he fell upon the Frizelanders, whom he worsted, and recovered
the dead Body of his Father, which he caused to be buried with royal
obsequies. In his old age he corrupted the Wife of one Gerard de Velsen, a
Gentleman of his Court, whom he had much lov^^; and it was rather to affront
him, than out of a desire to satisfy his lusts; but Gerard and Herman de
Vourd, his Fatherin-law, resolved to be revenged, and by conspiracy seized the
Earls person, and carried him to the Castle of Mude; where, hearing of the
Preparations made in Holland against them, they made the Earl get on Horseback,
thinking to convey him into England; but being too hotly pursued, Gerard gave
him twenty two wounds with his Sword, and left him dead in a Ditch. This murder
remained not unrevenged; for some Authors write that Gerard being taken, was
put into a Hogshead full of sharp nails, and so rolled up and down the Streets
at Leyden till he died.

John, the Twentieth.
John the first of that name, being in England at the time of his Fathers
death, there was some trouble in Holland, which was soon appeased by his
presence. He married Elizabeth, Daughter to Edward King of England, by whom he
had no Children. In his time there was a Giant in Holland, named Nicolas, to
whom other men compared were but Dwarfs; his Shoe was so wide that four men
together could set all their feet in it. The said Earl John died at Harlem,
having reigned three years, and made room for the House of Hainaut.

CHAP. III.
The House of Hainaut.

John of Hainaut, the Twenty first.
JOhn the second of this name, Son to Alide Countess of Hainaut, Sister to King
William, succeeded his Cousingerman in 1299. and took in marriage Philippine,
Daughter to the Duke of Luxemburg, by whom he had three Sons and four
Daughters. He was five years Earl of Holland, and did defend with much vigor
his Brother, who was Bishop of Utrect, against those who endeavored to deprive
him of his Bishopric. It is said, that in those days there was seen in the
Air an armed Knight, who with a loud voice animated the people to War, and that
the Sea also was seen full of Ships, which vanished before the eyes of them
that curiosity had brought upon the shore. These apparitions were taken as
prognostics of the War, that a little after happened between the Hollanders
and Flemmings in Zeland; in which the Flemmings were defeated by the valor of
William, Son to the Earl John; but he outlived his victory a very small time,
and lies buried at Valenciennes.

William, surnamed the Good, the Twenty second.
William the third, by reason of his good nature and virtuous disposition, was
called the Good. He had diverse Children by his Wife Jane of Valois, viz.
William, Lewis, John, Margaret Duchess of Bavaria and Empress, Jane Countess
of Juliers, Philippine Queen of England, and Elizabeth. In his time Holland was
much aff^^cted with plague and famine. In the year 1328. Philip King of France
gave a great overthrow to the Flemmings, being assisted by the Forces of this
Earl. He reigned thirty three years.

William, the Twenty third.
This young Prince led an Army into Spain, to assist that King against the
Infidels, and got much honor in that War. Being come back into Holland, he
besieged Utrect, and being ready to take and sack the Town, he was prevailed
upon by the Gentry to give the Citizens their lives, upon condition that five
hundred of the best qualified should come barefoot and bare-head, and fall
down upon their knees before him, and crave his pardon for their faults. After
this he went against the Frizelanders, where fighting too boldly, he was killed
near Staveron. He left no Children by his Wife Jane of Brabant.

Margaret August, Countess, the Twenty fourth.
This Princess was Daughter of William the Good, and Wife to Lewis of Bavaria,
Emperor. She came with a great retinue into Holland, and having took
possession gave the Government to her Son William, reserving for her self a
Pension every year. She sold all the Estates the Frizelanders had in Holland,
to revenge her Brothers death. She died in the year 1355. and in her ended the
House of Hainant.

CHAP. IV.
The House of Bavaria.

William of Bavaria, the Twenty fifth.
William the fifth, Duke of Bavaria, and Son to the Empress Margaret, governed
three years, and had no Children by his Wife, who was of the House of
Lancaster. He ran mad, and killed a Gentleman of great quality; whereupon his
Subjects gave him a Guardian, who was

Albert, the Twenty sixth.
Albert, his Brother governed as Guardian for the space of thirty years; after
which time the right fell to him, and he reigned sixteen more. He had by his
first Wife, William, Albert, and John, afterward Bishop of Leege, Katherine
Duchess of Gueldres, Mary of Burgundy, Jane of Austria, and Jane Queen of
Bohemia. In second marriage he took the Daughter of the Duke of Cleves. The
Frizelanders felt the effects of his just anger.

William, the Twenty seventh.
William the sixth, Son to Albert, was twice married, first to the Daughter of
Charles King of France, who died without issue; secondly to the Daughter of
Philip the bold Duke of Brabant, by whom he had a Daughter called Jacqueline.
He made War with the Duke of Gueldres; but after he made not only peace but
friendship with him. A little before he died he made an assembly of the States,
in which his Daughter was by common consent proclaimed his Heiress. He died in
the same year, which was the thirteenth of his Reign.

Jacqueline, the Twenty eighth.
Jacqueline being sixteen years old, was married to the Dolphin of France, Son
to Charles the sixth, who died the first year of their marriage, and left her
at liberty to marry John Son to the Duke of Brabant; but this marriage being
void, by reason of the proximity of blood, they being Cousin-germans, before
the cause could be decided at Rome; she went into England, and there was
married anew to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Brother to King Henry: but this
marriage being likewise made void by the Pope, she married Francis de Borsales,
who was taken prisoner by the Duke of Burgundy. In her time there were many
civil Wars; and by her death her State fell to Philip of Burgundy, and in her
ended the House of Bavaria.

CHAP. V.
The House of Burgundy.

Philip the Good, the Twenty ninth.
PHilip of Burgundy, Son to John of Burgundy, and Margaret Daughter of Albert,
Duke of Bavaria, added this noble accession to his Duchy. He had three Wives,
the first Michelle, Daughter to Charles the sixth King of France, who died
without Children. His second was Claudina, Daughter to Robert Earl of Heu, who
was also barren. His third was Isabelle of Portugal, by whom he had three Sons,
who died young, and the fourth named Charles Earl of Charolo^^ lived. He
governed thirty four years; he was a virtuous witty Prince. One day some body
telling him, that the inhabitants of G^^nt did much court his Son Charles; he
answered that they were much given to love their Masters Son, but that they
would hate him when he should be their Master. He received some injury from the
King of England, and in revenge, besieged Calais with a prodigious Army; but
the inhabitants of Ghent and Bruges forsaking his Army, because he did not act
according to their hasty expectations, were the ruin of his design. This
Prince was the first that instituted at the Hague the Order of the Golden
Fleece, and it has been since transferred to the House of Austria. His ordinary
stay was at Bruges in Flanders, where he died.

Charles Earl of Charolois, the Thirtieth.
Charles, surnamed the Warrier, succeeded to his Father. By his first Wife
Katherine of France he had no Children; but by his second, Elizabeth of
Bourbon, he had the Princess Mary. War was this Princes inclination, which he
begun against the King of France, Lewis the eleventh. He chastized the
inhabitants of Liege, and caused the Town to be laid waste. He was still
outwitted by Lewis, though he were assisted by the Constable de St. Paul, whom
Lewis beheaded. He drove the Duke of Larrain out of his Country, who recovered
it again by the assistance of the Swissers, against whom by his fault he lost a
great Battle, and in the hopes of revenge, having engaged them with a new Army,
he lost above sixteen thousand men. And at last (his ill fortune still pursuing
him) he went to besiege Nancy, and was there betrayed by an Italian, whom he
loved and trusted too much, his Army defeated, and himself killed upon the
place. It is thought that his design was to have extended his Dominions as far
as Italy, by Lorrain and the Swissers; and that he had often desired the
Emperor, to erect his States into a Kingdom. Never Prince was more courted by
foreign Powers than he; for he had one only Daughter, extreme handsome, and
who was to inherit all his Dominions; he promised her to none, but gave fair
words to all. His death was much resented by his Subjects, and hardly believed
by the Hollanders. Lewis King of France was very glad of his death, for he
stood much in awe of his power; and it is thought, that he prevailed with money
upon this Italian, to betray him.

Mary Countess of Charolois, Duchess of Burgundy, and Countess of Holland, the
Thirty first.
The loss of this great Warrior, brought a great consternation amongst his
people, and made them assemble the general States at Louvain, to take care for
the safety of those Provinces, and their Mistress. This young Lady was then
about fourteen years old, when the tragic news of her Fathers death, reached
her ears. The Emperor Ferdinand did desire her for his Son Maximilian; and
Lewis of France for his Dolphin Charles; and it seemed that the Ladies
inclinations were more inclined o the French: but they too hasty to seize the
prey, having entered Artois with an Army, the States gave her to Maximilian, the
Emperors Son; the Countess of Meguen her Governant having boldly said, that
the Princess was of age to bear a man, and therefore they should not give her a
child, such as the Dolphin of France was.

The French upon this marriage were so incensed, that they laid wast all the
Country of Artois; and from thence fell upon Hainaut. They tried also to annoy
these Provinces by Sea, but were beaten by the Hollanders. This excellent Lady
having lived some years in admirable union with her Husband, fell one day as
she was a hunting, and broke two ribbs; whereupon a Fever citing her, she died
in the year 1482. She left a Son called Philip, and Margaret her Daughter.

CHAP. VI.
The House of Austria.

Maximilian, the Thirty second.
THis Imperial Prince having married the Princess Mary at Ghent, was declared
Earl of Holland. His first care was to invite all his Nobility, to be revenged
of the French, for pillaging Mary's Territories: in effect he defeated them,
and took the Town of Tournay; and a year after he constituted for his
Lieutenant in Holland, Nun. de lalain seigneur de montigny, and Knight of the
golden Fleece.

After the death of Mary, the French pretended that the care of the Children
did belong to them; but it was judged for the Father. He was at last chosen
Emperor, and died in the year 1519. in January. Thus the Low Countries became
annexed to the House of Austria; and by the marriage of Philip, Maximilians
Son, to Jane of Castile, was framed that great House, which has so long given
subject of fears and jealousies to all Europe.

Philip of Austria, the Thirty third.
This Prince, firnam'd the Delight of Mankind, for his beauty and goodness, was
married to Jane, Daughter to Ferdinand of Castile. He brought her into the
Low Countries, and there she was brought abed of Charles, who was afterward
Emperor; as also of another Son, named Ferdinand. Then he returned into Spain,
and so won the hearts of all the Nobility there, that his Father-in-law
Ferdinand became jealous of him, but durst not trust any body with his
jealousy: nay such was his distrust, that he began to hate that great Captain,
D^n Gonsaloe. But Philip freed him from his fears, by dying in Spain, which
made many suspect poison. His Wife did love him so passionately, that she ran
mad, and died not long after him.

Charles the fifth, of Austria, Emperor, King of Spain, and Earl of Holland,
the Thirty fourth.
Charles was born at Gheat, in the year 1500. the twenty fourth of February.
His Father died when he was but six years old; and at fifteen, he was received
as Prince in the Low Countries; at eighteen he was acknowledged King of Spain;
and proclaimed Emperor at nineteen. He was very well bred up by his Aunt
Margaret, and his Tutor, Adrian of Utrect, whom he afterward made Pope.

He was solemnly crowned King of Spain at Valladolid; but while he was absent
in the Low Countries, the Spaniards revolted from him.

Francis the first, King of France, stood with him to be chosen Emperor, but
failed of his pretensions: thence sprung an animosity between them, which
caused many bloody Wars, wherein Charles his good fortune prevailed; for he
took Francis prisoner, and for his ransom, made him yield all his right to
Naples, Milan, and the Low Countries. In his time, and under his colors, Rome
was taken, and sacked, and the Pope kept prisoner. He bought the Lordship of
Utrect and Transylvania, and annexed them to the rest. Solomon the Emperor of
the Turks, had besieged Vienna; but hearing of Charles his approach, raised his
siege, and marched away. He overcame the Protestant Princes, took the Duke of
Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hessen. He passed over into Africa, and took the
Town of Tunis. These are courageous actions; but the boldest of all was, when
he trusted his person in the hands of his mortal enemy, Francis the first;
which was upon this occasion: The inhabitants of Ghent were revolted, and did
desire the French to protect them; Charles then in Spain, demands passage
through France; and safe conduct, which was ordered, and nobly observed by
Francis, who caused him to be sumptuously entertained all along his journey.
Being arrived in Brabant, he found his Rebels ready to submit; he received them
to mercy, but with very infamous conditions for them, by the advice of one of
his counselors, who was afterward banished Flanders, for being the author of
so severe a proceeding. After this, having made peace with the other Protestant
Princes, he came and laid siege to Mets, a Town in Lorrain, where he was
worsted, and forced by the valor of the Duke of Guise, who was within the
Town, to retire, having lost the greatest part of an Army of a hundred thousand
men.

This so much afflicted the Emperor, that he was diverse days before he would
be seen in public; and it is thought that from that time forward, he framed
the design of resigning his Crown. In pursuance of this resolution, he called
the States to Brussels, and there in the presence of his Son, having recited
his actions, and given account of his Government, he desired to be eased of the
burden in his old age, and so absolved them from their Oaths of Allegiance,
and disposed of all, in favor of his Son Philip.

I desire you, said he, to obey my Son, to keep peace and union amongst your
selves, to observe your old Religion, and to forgive me if I have offended you.
Then turning to his Son, he desired him to confer the love he owed him as his
Father, upon the people. His Speech ended with tears in his eyes, and drew
showers from his spectators, and old Servants.

Philip his Son having kissed his Fathers hand, commanded Cardinal Granvell,
because he could not speak French himself, to assure the States of his good
favor, and of the desire he had to follow his Fathers example and instructions.

Two months after he resigned all his Kingdoms to Philip, and sent the
Imperial Crown to his Brother Ferdinand. And then Charles who had been one of
the greatest Monarchs of the world, being become a private person, embarked
for Spain in the year 1556. and arrived there in a few days, passing the rest
of his life, which was just two years, in the solitude of St. Just. In this
retired place he died in 1558. having enjoyed the Empire thirty six years.

I have spoke a little more at large of the actions of this Prince, than our
method bears, for two reasons; First, Because he is the author of many fine
Laws and Constitutions, which are to this day observed in Holland. Secondly,
Because his memory is yet in great veneration amongst these Nations.

Some of the Citizens of Utrect, having carried themselves very insolently
toward him, he patiently endured the affronts, that he might give an example
to other Princes, how they are bound to observe themselves, the Laws they lay
upon their people; though in this case it were not he, but one of his Officers
that was in fault. It is said that he gave the Citizens of Utrect this
privilege, that their estates should not be confiscated, though their persons
were executed, and that for what crime soever, but that their heirs may enjoy
it, in paying five pound fine.

In all his Wars, he had no faithfuller Subjects than the Low Country people;
witness his own words at Ingolstat, where he had like to have been quite
oppressed by the Pretestant Army; he still cheered up himself and his
Soldiers, by saying, Courage, my Low Country Subjects will be here shortly:
And when he saw them arrive, he cried out with joy, We have now vanquished our
enemies.

In his life time, Martin Luther began his reformation, and had converted the
greatest part of Germany, to whom the Emperor was forced to grant a
toleration, in matters of Religion. John Calvin likewise writ against the
Church of Rome, and his books met with as favorable a reception in Holland, as
Luthe^s did in Germany. The Emperor endeavored by strict Edicts, to stop the
course of this change, and recommended to his Son Philip to do so likewise.

Philip the second, King of Spain, and Earl of Holland, the Thirty fifth.
In the year 1556. Philip took in hand the reins of Government in the
Low Countries, and made Philibert, Duke of Savoy, a great and stout Prince, his
Lieutenant and Governor in all the Low Countries. The truce that was between
France and Spain, being broken, by reason of the succor which the French sent
the Pope, Queen Mary of England declared War likewise against the French, at
the instigation of her Husband, King Philip. The Duke of Savoy comes into
Picardy, and defeats entirely the French Army upon St. Laurence day, with so
great a slaughter of Nobility and Gentry, that it astonished the whole
Kingdom. Paris it self being forsaken by its inhabitants, was in danger of
being lost, had the conqueror followed his victory. But the Duke of Guise
coming out of Italy, soon recruited, and set a new Army on foot; took Ca^ais in
seven days time, which had been so many hundred years in the power of the
English.

Fortune continuing still averse to the French, they received another overthrow
in Flanders, where the Earl of Egmont behaved himself as nobly, as he had done
in the first battle of St. Laurence, and was the cause of the winning of the
day. It Is true that ten English men of War, which happened by chance to be near
the shore, played with their great Guns upon the French Army, and much
disordered it. After this, Queen Mary of England dying, left Philip a widower,
and he took to his second Wife, Isabelle of France. Philip before he embarked
for Spain, being desirous to provide for the peace and tranquillity of the
Low Countries, made Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Parma, and bastard
Daughter to Charles the Emperor, his Regent and Governess over all the
Low Countries. The Earl of Egmont was made Governor of Flanders and Artois;
the Duke Mansfield, of Luxemburg; the Earl William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange,
was made Governor of Holland and Zeland.

CHAP. VII.
Containing the memorable Passages under the Government of Margaret of Parma.

KIng Philip having installed and settled this Princess in the Government of the
Low Countries, left her at Brussels with an ample power, and embarked at
Flushing for Spain. After his departure, that peace and tranquillity which he
left things in, lasted not long; for what with the discontent of great ones,
who thought themselves neglected, and the jealousies of the people, who were
afraid of being oppressed by the Inquisition, all men were ready and disposed
for tumults. Add to this the nonperformance of that promise, which the King
had made at his going away, which was to recall all Spanish and foreign Forces
out of the Low Countries.

The first appearance of sedition, was a Petition presented to the Princess, by
five hundred Gentlemen, dressed like beggars. To content them, the Spanish
Forces were withdrawn; and not long after Cardinal Granvell, whom they much
envied, was recalled. But still in every place there was execution done upon
those, whom they called heretics; who by their constant sufferings, so
animated the people, that at last they would no longer endure they should be
put to death, but rescued them out of the hands of the hang-men, by force.

The King having notice of all, ordered that the Council of Trent should be
published in the Low Countries, the execution of which caused more troubles,
and gave occasion to the Count Egmont, to take a journey into Spain, there he
was very well received by the King, soon dispatched; and in his return home, he
brought with him Alexander, Prince of Parma, Son to the Princess Regent. Prince
Maurice of Nassaw was born in this year 1565. in which was framed the league or
confederation of the Nobility, which was followed by the revolt and rising of
the meaner sort, who broke down Images, and Altars, invaded Monasteries and
Nunneries, and at last attak'd Towns. But their fury was stopped by the Country
people, called Wallons, who fell upon them, and routed them.

The Confederates made a new Assembly at Leege, and there the Regent sent to
them the Prince of Orange, and the Count Egmont, to desire them to forbear all
new designs. They sent her another Petition, which she deferred to answer, till
the general Assembly of the Knights of the Golden Fle^c^ should be holden.

In this very year, the Prince of Orange, the Count Egmond, Count Lewis of
Nassaw and Horn, met at Dondermond, to consider whether it were safe for them,
to let the King, who did threaten to appear with an Army, come peaceably in, or
oppose his passage by main force. Upon this Consultation, the Gentry and the
Merchants joined with them, and all resolved to maintain by force, that which
they had obtained by Petition from the Princess.

The Prince of Orange, his Brother, and Hogestract, met at Breda, and writ to
Fgmont, to know whether he would join with them; but he refused it.

In 1567. was struck the first stroke of War, between Beauvor for the Princess,
and the Lord of Tholoze for the Confederates, who were routed, and their leader
killed in the sight of the inhabitants of Antwerp, who stood upon their Walls,
and looked on for a while; till at last seeing their party worsted, they ran to
their Arms, but were app^ased by the Prince of Orange. The Princess* taking
heart at this, proposed a new Oath of Allegiance; but it was first refused by
Brederode and Horn, and then by the Prince of Orange himself, who forsook all
his employments and charges, and retired with his Brother into Germany. Before
he went he had a meeting with the Count Egmont, and he told him in the presence
of Count Mansfield; I foresee, said he, that thou will be the Bridge, over
which the Spaniards will march into the Low Countries.

This departure of the Prince of Orange, and his friends, did for a time so
^^artle most of the Towns, that they began to ask pardon and submit. The small
Army which Brederode had gathered together, was routed and dispersed, and he
forced to fly with his Family into Friezeland. This made Holland and Zeland
receive Garrisons, and drive away the Protestant Ministers, insomuch that all
was settled again, and obedience restored to the Prince. Hereupon the Princess
writ to the King, to come in person, and by his presence heal up a wound, which
else might open afresh; but Philip, glad (it may be) of this occasion, of
diminishing the privileges of his Low Country Subjects, sent the Duke of Alva
with an Army to execute his commands. The Princess soon perceived, that the
severe proud nature of the Duke, would undo all that her mild temper had made
up. In effect, as soon as he came, he clapped up the Earls of Horn and Egmont:
whereupon the Princess desired leave to be gone for Italy. Before her
departure, she took her leave by Letters of most of the Cities; and the
Nobility showed their respects, in waiting upon her to the borders of Germany,
where she left them, to their great sorrow, for the loss of so wise and
moderate a Princess.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing the Government of the Duke of Alva.

THe Duke D'alva having passed by Savoy and Lorrain, with an Army of 10000.
Spaniards and Italians, all old Soldiers, he was sent by the King, to punish
and chastize all those, that had any hand in pulling down Churches and
Monasteries; or that had any way favored the former Confederations. This he
executed by a Court of twelve, who were to judge soveraignly, and without
appeal, of all Delinquents. This was called the Council of blood, and so
frighted the people, that thousands of them fled with their Families, into
neighboring Countries, to the great detriment of those Provinces, as the
Princess Margaret had well foreseen. The Prince of Orange, and they that were
with him, had wisely avoided this storm, which they foresaw; but Henry of
Erederode, the Earls of Hooghstract, Culemburg, and Bergue, were cited before
this Council; but they ran into Germany, and implored the succor of the
Princes there. In the mean time the Duke of Culemburghs house was razed to the
ground, and Philip his Son taken from Louvain, and sent into Spain to be bred.

By this time the Princes had got an Army; and Hooghstract fell upon Artois,
and was there defeated by Davila.

Lewis of Nassaw, with his brother Adolfe, invaded Friezeland, and routed the
Earl of Aremberg, who opposed them: the Earl and Adolfe were both killed.
D'alva hearing this, resolved to meet them in person; but before he undertook
his journey, he made nineteen Gentlemen be publicly executed; and a little
after, caused the Earls of Horn and Egmont to be beheaded; no prayers nor
entreaties made in favor of so great a Warrior, being able to prevail with
his fierce temper. He valued as little the threats of vengeance, that were made
after their deaths; but in pursuance of his design, went and fought the Army of
Lewis, which he utterly ruined; and immediately turned head to the Prince of
Orange, who was got into Brabant with another considerable Army: him he
overcame by policy; for he refused to fight, knowing, that the Princes Army for
want of pay, would soon disband, which accordingly fell out.

After this, he demanded the tenth penny, through the whole Low Countries; and
that was the apple of division, which separated and divided the Low Countries,
and made two states of them, one part remaining under the Spanish domination,
and the other making up that powerful body of the United Provinces, now
acknowledged by Philip the fourth, to be Sovereigns. All the people were very
much shaken in their affection to Spain, by the former causes; but this last
did as it were, precipitate them into war and discord, which have at last by
the exactness of their discipline, produced that incomparable fruit of peace
and tranquillity.

This tenth penny was a new tribute upon all merchandises; besides there was a
twentieth upon immoveables, and a hundredth part upon all for once. But the
people concerned in this demand, chose rather to put hands to their swords,
than to their purses; and yet by a strange, but necessary effect of their
resolution, they have been forced to lay much heavier burdens upon themselves,
to enable themselves to maintain the War: but the desire of liberty made them
endure joyfully that, which they were so much afraid of from another hand.

In the mean time, the Council still proceeded to execution upon the guilty,
and those that refused to pay this new imposition: and though the States did
represent what damage would befall the Country, by the removal of Mark-lands,
yet he being jealous of his Authority, made them go on. But there happened an
accident, which much vexed the Duke, which was, that Queen Elizabeth of
England, stopped in her harbors, diverse Ships laden with money, destined to
pay his Army, and caused it to be transported into the Tower of London, where
i^ remained, never to be repayed.

This disappointment cooled the Dukes heat a little, and made him publish a
solemn pardon for the following year; but in vain, for by this time he was
become so odious, that all the people forsook, and turned to the Prince of
Orange, as it appeared not long after.

About All Saints day, there happened an unlucky presage of the following
calamities, and which was indeed a great one it self; for the Sea having broken
the dikes and sluices, over-flowed almost all Friezeland, with a great part of
Holland and Zeland; they say, that above 20000. persons perished in Friezeland
alone. This great misfortune made them represent to the Duke, the impossibility
of paying the Tax he required; who little satisfied with their Remonstrances,
was upon the point of dealing severely with some Citizens of Bruxels, when the
news came that the The name of a Faction.
Gueux d'eau, or water Gueux, or Beggars, had surprised the Bril upon
Palm Sunday. The chief of this Faction was the Earl of Lumee; who being cast
there with his Fleet by a storm, found occasion of surprising the place, and
there discharged upon the Churchmen, the hatred he owed the Spaniards. The
Count de Bossu hastening to its relief, was beaten off, and then seeking to
secure Dort, he was refused entrance.

Upon this news, all the Towns of Holland cast off the yoke, and joined with
the Prince of Orange, except Amsterdam and Schorhof: Flushing in Zeland
followed the example of the rest, being animated to it by a Priest.

The Province of Overissel changed likewise: but nothing so much troubled the
Duke, as the taking of Mons in Hainaut by the French, under the conduct of
Lewis of Nassaw. For fearing lest Charles of France should take this occasion,
of invading the Low Countries, he immediately turned all his Forces that way,
which gave time to the Hollanders, to frame their small Commonwealth, and give
it some foundation. He besieged Mons by his Son at first, and at last came
himself, and took it, in spite of Lewis and his Army; who endeavoring to
succor the place, were beaten, and forced to a retreat. Mons being recovered,
many other Towns yielded; and Malines for having received a Garrison from the
Prince, was sacked. The Dukes Son Frederick, following his Fathers footsteps,
recovered Overissel and Friezeland; from thence passed into Holland, and by the
bloody action he committed at Naerden, he fastened an indeleble hatred upon his
Nation. Harlem also was taken; but Alcmaer stood out, and much fortified the
Confederates.

The year 1573. was famous, by the Duke of Alvaes leaving the Low Countries. He
was recalled by Philip, who thought his absence might bring a calm in this
troubled Sea; but the agitation was too great to be so soon laid. He was a
cruel proud man; a very good Soldier, but inexorable in his chastizings: if
he had made a mixture of severity and mildness, he had without doubt better
fitted the humor of the Nations, he had to do with. He is to this very day in
great aversion among the Hollanders, who call all cruel men by his name. It is
said of him, that he bragged he had brought above 18000. to their end, by the
hand of justice: I know not whether it be true; but I know that the States have
founded the justice of their pretensions, upon his cruelties. He governed six
years, and left no body afflicted for his depart. It was said, and well said,
that either King Philip should never have sent him, or never have recalled him.

CHAP. IX.
The Government of Don Lewis, and the great Council of State.

LEwis of Requesens, high Commander of the Kingdom of Castilia, was sent in
the place of the Duke; and his famous Statue which he had caused to be set up
in Antwerp, was pulled down by his order, to the great satisfaction of the
States. His first care was to set out a Fleet, to succor Mondragonius, a brave
Captain, who had defended Middleburgh almost two years; but he was ignorant
that the Sea was the Throne, these Nations intended to settle their Empire in.
The Earl Bossu had been beaten the year before by the Hollanders; and now the
Zelanders burned and destroyed this Fleet, in the presence of Don Lewis, and
took Middleburgh.

The Count Lewis of Nassaw had worse fortune; for having brought a brave Army
out of Germany, he was met at Nimmiegue by Davila, and entirely defeated;
himself and his Brother slain. This victory was followed by a sedition in the
Spanish Army, which much weakened their power; but being appeased, were sent
before Leyden, in hopes of having the pillageing of that Town; but being there
shamefully repulsed, their indignation fell upon their General, whom they
detained in prison, till they had received their full pay. After that they took
Oudewater and Schoonhof. Many Propositions and Treaties were advanced; but none
taking effect, Don Lewis framed that famous enterprise, by many thought
impossible, of besieging Ziriczee. This Island was in the Confederates hands,
and the Royalists waded through the Sea up to the neck, to go and besiege it:
it is true, there was no hopes of a return, the Sea being increased by the
flowing water. Ziriczee held out nine months, after which it yielded. Vitellio
a great Captain died during that siege, and Don Lewis followed him shortly
after.

By his death, the Authority came into the hands of the Counsel of State; who
for want of union, ruined the Kings affairs, and gave occasion to a fourth
sedition of the Spaniards. A little after followed the pacification of Gand,
and the alliance of the Provinces, against the Spaniards; who seeing themselves
generally hated, and that the inhabitants of Antwerp, were about to divide the
Town from the Cittadell, by a Trench, agreed at last with the Governor Davila,
and sallying out, plundered the Town for three days together, which was a most
barbarous and detestable action.

CHAP. X.
The Government of Don John of Austria, and of the Prince of Parma.

DOn John of Austria was received Governor, upon condition that he should
subscribe to the pacification of Gand, which he did; but finding himself
without Authority, he surprised Namur; whereupon the States proclaimed him as
an enemy, and raised an Army. He was a Bastard of Charles the fifth, and had
made himself famous, by that immortal Battle of Lepanto against the Turks, in
which he was General. The States chose in the mean time the Archduke Matthias,
Brother to the Emperor Rodolf, for their Governor. Then having assembled
their Army at Gemblours, they faced Don John's Forces; who courageously engaging
them, obtained the victory, but lived not long after it, declaring Alexander,
Prince of Parma, for his successor. This was that famous Alexander, who by his
valor and conduct, reduced all Artois, Hainaut, Flanders, and Brabant, to
their obedience; who took Antwerp, Malines, Ipres, Brussels, and many other
Cities; and at last he had brought the Confederates to the necessity of
submitting to some foreign Prince for protection, if God had not raised up
Prince Morris to defend them. In the mean time the Archduke Matthias, finding
that the States had a mind to be rid of him, and were ready to call the Duke of
Alencon, and make him Duke of Brabant, left the Low Countries. The Duke of
Alencon went first into England, in hopes of being married to Queen Elizabeth;
but the match being deferred, he went into Brabant, and took possession of the
Duchy.

In the year 1582. the Prince of Orange was shot in the face with a Pistol,
which made the people take some jealousy of the French, and threaten to cut
their throats, and their new Dukes. He on his side did complain, that all the
Authority was in the Prince of Orange his hand; and thereupon framed a design
upon Antwerp, but failed when it came to the execution, so that they were
forced to leave the Town: and soon after Alexander made them quit the Country,
in which he did still advance, having taken Tournay, Oudenard, and Breda,
defeated Biron, and taken Dunkirk.

All this while, William Prince of Orange, was seriously employed in framing,
and giving Laws to this new Commonwealth; but being wakened by the progress of
Alexander, Duke of Parma, he made a Remonstrance to the United Provinces, that
now there was but two ways left, to provide for their safety; the one was, to
submit, and patiently yield to the Spanish domination; the other, to declare
the King of Spain to be fallen from, and to have lost his right to the said
Provinces; and thereupon choose another Prince, mentioning the Duke of Alenson.
The last of these was followed; and in a general Assembly at Antwerp, King
Philip was deprived of his right and power in those Provinces, and the Duke of
Alenson, as it has been said before, chosen in his place. It is to the great
wit and prudence of this Prince of Orange, that Holland owes its liberty; but
he lived not to enjoy the fruit of his labor, for he was assassinated at
Delft, the same year and day that the Duke of Alenson died at Chastea^ Thyerry.

Alexander having reduced Ipres and Bergue, resolved, against the opinion of
all, to besiege Antwerp; and though he met with inconceivable difficulties in
the execution, yet he achieved his enterprise with great glory.

But his noble actions, and the brave resistance of the United Provinces, with
all the series of the long War they have maintained, for the defense of their
liberties, have been eloquently written by diverse good Authors, to whom we
refer the Reader: our scope in this short Narration being only to instruct him,
how Holland and the other Provinces were governed before their union; which
having performed, we now come to our main design, which is, to give a
particular Account of this Union, of the Conditions upon which it was
concluded, and by which it yet stands, as it follows in the Second Part of this
Book.

THE SECOND BOOK, Containing the State and Government OF THE United Provinces
OF THE LOW COUNTRIES.
CHAP. I.
The League and Union of the Provinces.

IT was in the Year 1579. that some of the 17. Provinces formerly under the
Dominion of Philip King of Spain, began to be called the United Provinces,
because of the League and Union which they made to defend themselves against
the Spaniard their common Enemy; and though these Provinces be now in the
number of seven, yet at first they were not so many, but those that are
mentioned in the Annals are these following; Gueldre, Zutphen, Holland,
Zeeland, the Diocese of Utrect, Friezland, or that Country which is called
Omland, situated between the Rivers Ems and Larica, the Country about Nimmiegue
and Arnhem, the greatest part of the grietmans of Friezland, Antwerp, Ypres,
and Breda. The Provinces called Overyssel and Groningue followed their example,
and were admitted into the Union in the Year 1594. Here follow the Articles of
this Union.

1. That all the aforesaid Provinces shall be as straightly and intimately
united, as if they did all make up one entire Province and Politic body; and
that they shall never be capable of being dis-united by any will, codicil,
gift, cession, sale, contract, agreement, or marriage of any Prince, nor by any
other means whatsoever.

2. That every one of these Provinces shall inviolably keep and enjoy all their
Immunities, Customs, Privileges, and Statutes of their Ancestors; that they
shall help one another against all Enemies whatsoever; that if it should happen
that any contentions should arise between the said Provinces, that the de-bate
should be judged either by the ordinary Judges, or by Umpires friendly chosen,
and in the mean time they shall forbear troubling and offending one another
till sentence be pronounced.

3. The said Provinces shall be bound to defend and protect each other mutually
and freely, against all Princes and Lords either of their own Country or
Foreigners, who shall offer to invade them, or commit any act of hostility
whatsoever; and for this effect they shall raise such Forces, and such Money
and Contribution as shall be thought fit, and judged necessary by the greatest
and major part of the Confederates.

4. To the end that the said Provinces be always in a readiness, and provided
against all designs of their Enemies, the Frontier Towns shall be Fortified,
and provided with Men and Ammunition at the Public charge, by the consent of
all the Provinces; and that those whose Towns are already Fortified, shall
nevertheless contribute as the rest; and if there be found necessity of
building any new Forts, demolishing or changeing the old ones, that it be done
at a common charge.

5. And to the end that the necessary means whereby to answer all these designs
fail not, there shall be leavied and raised every where alike, and by the same
form and way, Taxes and Imposts upon all sorts of Wine, Beer, Wheat, Corn,
Salt, Cloths, Silks, Cattle, tilled and pasture Grounds, the weight of
Merchandises, weighed in public weights, etc. That those Regal Rights
belonging heretofore to the King of Spain, shall still remain and be converted
to the use aforesaid; that all the Money raised by these, or any other ways,
shall not be destined nor employed for any other use than for the defense of
the said Provinces; and the said Imposts shall be lessened or increased
according to public emergencies.

6. That the Frontier Towns shall be bound to receive or dismiss all Garrisons
by the command of the States, as likewise to pay them their pay out of the
public Money; and to the end the safety of the said Towns be the better
preserved, it is agreed that the Officers of the Garrisons shall be sworn, not
only to the States General, but also to the Magistrates of the particular Towns
they shall be in; that care be taken to make a Military Law, to the end the
Soldiers be not trouble some to the Inhabitants; that the Soldiers themselves
in Garrison be not freed from paying the Imposts, and there be a sum set apart
by the States to pay the Citizens for the lodging and quartering of Soldiers.

7. That a month after the publication of this Union, there be a general
review made of all those that have attained the age of 18. years, and are under
60. and that their Names be registered and declared to the States General, to be
employed as they shall think fit.

8. That there be made neither Peace, War, nor Truce, nor new Imposition
without the consent of all the Provinces, not one resisting or standing out;
and as for the other things, that concern the administration and execution of
the said alliance, that they be undertaken and performed by those that shall be
appointed by the greatest part of the Confederates; yet that all be called if
there be either Peace or War, or some other important business to be decided;
if the States cannot agree, then the business be put to the Arbitration of the
Governors of the particular Provinces, and that all may follow their decision.

9. That none of the said particular Provinces shall make League or Union with
any Neighboring Power, or strange and remote Prince or People, by their own
private Authority, and without the consent of the rest; and likewise that if
any Princes desire to come into the aforesaid alliance, that they shall be
received by common consent.

10. That all approve of, or reject the same coin, stamp, and money; and that
as soon as can be, there come forth a rule or settlement for coining, which all
shall follow.

11. As for the public exercise of Religion, whether or no any other ought to
be received besides the Protestant, let every Province dispose and ordain about
it as they please; provided still that they be all bound to let every man have
the liberty of his Conscience, without persecution for that subject.

12. If there should happen any contests between any of the Provinces, that
then those of them that shall not be concerned, shall have power to determine
about the debate of the others; but if in these divisions all were concerned,
then let the Governors of all the Provinces meet and decide the matter in a
months time, after which there shall be no appeal, exception, revision, or
nullity to be pleaded.

13. That the said Provinces and Members of this Union do take a special care,
not to give any occasion to Foreign Princes to make War against them; and
therefore that they carry themselves toward Strangers with the same equity,
justice and moderation, as toward the Naturals; and if any of the Members do
infringe and break this Article, it is the duty and power of the others to
constrain them to observe it by all means whatsoever.

14. The States and Governors of each Province shall not lay a heavier
Imposition upon those of their Subjects that shall travel to and fro, than upon
those that are found Inhabitants.

15. That the Government and public administration be well settled, as it is
agreed; that there be chosen in the Name of all the Confederates some
Plenipotentiaries, and that these Plenipotentiaries do assign the day and place
of the Assembly of the States of each Province; and that they send to them in
due time the Grievances, and Heads of matters they are to treat about. Yet if
there be such points as require secrecy, that then they reserve to declare them
in the Assembly General of the States; that all the Provinces being thus
advertised, do send their Deputies with their instructions and powers necessary
to the place of the Assembly General; that the preference be given by the
plurality of Votes, except in important affairs; that if some Provinces do
neglect to send their Deputies, that those that shall meet do nevertheless
debate and deliberate, and decree, as if all had been there; but if the things
to be debated will endure a delay, then the Provinces that have not sent their
Deputies shall be called upon two or three times, and those that have not
convenience of sending their Deputies, let them send their advice by writing.

16. If the States of the particular Provinces, have any knowledge of those
things that deserve to be examined and passed in the Council of the States
General, let them give notice to the Plenipotentiaries, who shall assign and
call together the Assembly of the Confederates.

17. If there should be any difficulty about the interpretation of these
Articles, or any doubt arise, let the sense of the major part of the
Confederates be taken for the true meaning of all.

18. If it be found necessary to abolish or change any Laws already made, or
make any new ones, let it be done by the Votes and consent of all.

19. Let all observe, and solemnly swear to keep inviolably these Laws; that if
any thing be done either directly or indirectly contrary to them, let it be
ipso facto void; and let it be lawful for the other Provinces to seize and
take the Cities, Possessions, and Goods of those that shall infringe them, and
persist so to do.

In short, if in these Constitutions there be any thing against the Right of
any particular Province now constituting, it shall not be sufficient to make a
general renunciation to it, except it be preceded by a particular renunciation
of each of the Confederates.

These are the Laws that have been the foundation and basis of this
Commonwealth, and are still exactly observed in all points, except in the 11th.
Article concerning Religion, which was altered by the States General in the
Year 1583.

And since by the Union of Utrect, it is free to amplify, change and shorten
any of the said Articles, when the safety of the Provinces should require it;
the States ordained, that no Religion should be henceforth received, but that
which is publicly taught in the United Provinces, which is the Reformed; but
that if any Members, Provinces, or Papish Towns would enter into this alliance,
that then they should enjoy the liberty of their Religion, in subscribing to
the rest of the Articles.

CHAP. II.
The rank and dependencies of the United Provinces toward one another.

HAving made a slight draught of the Commonwealth of these U^ited Provinces, we
must now consider what are these Provinces thus united; and to that end it is
observable, that all those Towns that do depend on the administration and
Government of the States, do send their Deputies to the Hague, and do share in
the Government; but that those Cities and Towns that have been added, and
subjected by the force of Arms, are as conquered Nations used to be with the
Romans. It Is true, that those Towns that by the happy success of the States
Arms have been with great cost and time conquered in Brabant, have often
solicited their admission and reception into the Body of the Commonwealth; but
because they have stood the State in so much blood and treasure, and that they
are incapable of assisting and being a help against the Enemy, by reason of
their long sufferings, and also because it is fit that they alone who first
conspired to this alliance, should enjoy it, they have not yet obtained their
request.

But to know whether those Towns of Brabant, to the number of eight, viz.
Bolduc, Breda, Berguenopsooun, Mastrect, Grave, Steenbergue, Heindove, and
Helmont, do deserve the privilege that the Country of Drent now enjoys, viz.
of having particular Treasurers not accomptable to the States General, is a
point which deserves a greater discussion than is here to be expected. However
within these few years the said Towns have a Court of Judicature, which does
Soveraignly and without Appeal judge and decide all controversies arising in
those parts. This Court sits at the Hague, and is made up of seven Counselors,
one Secretary, one Attorney of the Exchequer, and one Attorney General: The
Towns likewise conquered in Flanders have a Court of Judicature at Middlebourg,
determining all causes Soveraignly.

The Country of Drent has many great Privileges, as the power to choose a
Governor; to contribute to the public necessities as other Provinces do; and
it has also an ambulatory Court of Justice, which goes from Town to Town to
hear causes, and decree upon them without Appeal; besides it has the liberty of
naming Commissaries for the Treasury; but it has not yet the privilege of
sending Deputies called Pensionaries to the States General, because they did
not at first come into the League and Alliance made between the other
Provinces; and also because since that time there has been no occasion of
making any Articles with any of their Towns, except Couverde, which is disputed
too; there being in this Country scarce any place which has ju^ Civitatis,
except the little Town of Mepp^l, which would sooner attain its desire of
taking share in the Government, if by the consent of Drent it were united to
some of the neighboring Provinces.

To Drent is ordinarily joined the Manor or Demean of Rhun, which is an
ancient Lordship of the House of Munster.

But Gueldres, Holland, Zeeland, Utrect, Friezland, Overyssel and Groningue,
with Omlund, are of the first alliance, and have for Arms a Lion holding in
his paw seven Arrows, the symbol of their Union, and the States General do use
it as their public Seal.

This order which we have set down, though it were so at first, was
nevertheless disputed between Friezland and U^rect, they both pretending to the
precedence; but besides that Utrect is in possession, it has two strong
reasons: The first is, that formerly all Friezland was subject to the Bishop of
Utrect, as for the Spiritual Jurisdiction* ^ly. That a(...) Utrect had declared
for the Union, when diverse Towns of Friezland were yet in suspense.

CHAP. III.
What was the Form of the General Assemblies, till the time of the Earl of
Leicester.

FRom the first time that the Deputies met to make and ordain Laws, about the
settling and firm establishing of the Commonwealth, it was agreed by the 17th.
Article of the Union of Utrect, that as often as the Confederates should have
occasion to deliberate about any thing in a set place, they should send thither
their Deputies, and these Deputies were called the States General of the United
Provinces. But the States being not always in a capacity to meet, by reason of
diverse obstacles, and there being a great necessity of a perpetual Senate or
Council, it was found requisite to establish a Council of State, (den Raed van
Staten) which was made up of one President, of the Deputies of the Provinces,
of one Treasurer, and three Secretaries. There was in those days no set place
for the meeting of this Council, because that then the settlement was not
completed, and things were uncertain: but here are the Articles which this
Council was bound to observe, and which were to guide them in their
administration.

First, That in the exercise of their charge they should not so much endeavor
the benefit and advantage of those Provinces which they were Deputies for, as
the good of the whole Commonwealth.

2. That they should observe the Laws prescribed them by the Authority of the
States General.

3. That they shall take care of the public Treasure, and pay the wages to all
those to whom wages are due.

4. That they shall take care that the affairs of the Confederates do not
receive any disadvantage or trouble.

5. That they shall send every three months to the States of each particular
Province, a Compendium of all their Consultations, and the accounts of their
expenses and receipts.

6. That the States General shall consult and deliberate with them in affairs
of importance, and that they shall call them together, according to the 19th.
Article of the Union.

This last Article was to be understood of such affairs as could not be delayed
For their importance.

By succession of time, the Commonwealth continuing to prosper and advance, and
the Earl of Leicester being expected in these parts from England, to govern as
Lieutenant to Queen Elizabeth, there was reason to fear that which had already
happened, viz. that he or others sitting for him, in the States, should
endeavor to dive into the secret of deliberations; whereupon it was resolved,
to settle, besides this Council of State, the Sovereign Council of the States
General, who should always sit at the Hague, leaving to this Council of State
the care of smaller and less important business.

CHAP. IV.
In what consists the Superiority of the States General, and what sort of
affairs are determined by them, which cannot be determined by the States of the
particular Provinces.

SInce that time, that is, ever since the Year 1587. the Sovereign
administration of business has been in the power of the States General and
their Sovereign Council; and in it is not only all Majesty and Sovereignty, by
virtue of the Union, but they have also the power of deciding some business
which the particular Provinces cannot.

1. For in the first (...) lone that give Audience to the Ambassadors of
Princes and Foreign States, and do also send in their own Name Ambassadors
abroad for the good of all.

2. This Assembly alone proclaims War, and has the management of it both by Sea
and Land.

3. It is to them that the Officers and Soldiers are first sworn, and then to
the General that commands the Army.

4. Some Deputies of this Assembly are always appointed to accompany the
General in time of War, without whose advice he cannot lawfully begin any
enterprise of importance.

5. This Assembly has also its Envoys in the Meetings of the East and West
India Companies, because there are often deliberations of War and Peace.

6. It is this Assembly that has the power of chosing a General both by Sea and
Land, and of obliging him to take the Oath of allegiance to them.

7. They give Safe Conduct and Passes to all Strangers that desire to pass
through their Country.

8. They can pardon and forgive Fugitives, and those that have turned to the
Enemies.

9. They make Orders about the transport and entries of Merchandises.

10. They alone exercise the power of Sovereignty over the conquered Cities and
Towns of Brabant, Flanders, and other places reduced by force.

11. They ought to take care that all the Provinces remain in friendship and
amity one with another; but they ought to comport themselves rather as
Remonstrancers than as Commanders.

And in short, they are to take care of all that is directed and addressed to
them by Commissions; and whosoever shall well weigh these things, will not
wonder if they are honored with the title of Illustrious High and Mighty,
though the States of Holland enjoy only the quality of Noble and Powerful:

CHAP. V.
How far the power of the States General does extend.

THe States General are always upon the Guard, for the rest of the Provinces
safety, and for all public advantages. If therefore the Governor General, or
the Ambassadors and Envoys of other Princes, do make any Propositions, that
are of concern and importance to the Commonwealth, it is ordered, that the
Deputies do give account of it by Letters, to their respective Provinces; and
according as their answer is, it is determined by the plurality of Votes,
except in cases of contribution, for then there is required an unanimous
consent of all the Provinces.

From whence it appears, that the States General being the representatives of
those that send them, have no power beyond the extent of their Commission, and
in such things only as are mentioned by it; but do stand in need of new Orders,
when new business happens, and without them they cannot deliberate, nor give
their Vote in the Assembly. So that it appears, that they have but a fiduciary
and delegated power; their Decrees are of no force, if they are not agreed to
by the particular Provinces: and to them these Decrees are directed to be
published, rather in a precary and submissive way, the style running; We pray
and require our dear and beloved the States, Governors, Deputies, etc. of the
respective Provinces, etc. Besides this, every Province makes Laws at home as
they please.

CHAP. VI.
Who are those that are ordinarily chosen for Deputies to the States General;
and of the order which is observed amongst the Deputies.

THis high Council always sitting at the Hague, is composed of the Deputies
of the seven Provinces, in the order abovementioned. They are sent in
uncertain number; for some Provinces send two, some three, or one, or a greater
number; but all the Deputies of one Province, though never so many, make but
one Vote, or Su^^rage. The Provinces that send them, furnish them for their
expenses, and give them a considerable allowance. The time of their deputation
is not limited neither; for some Provinces send them for two years, some for
four, six, or more, some for all their life. Now all these Provinces are of
equal Authority in the States, though Holland, which is the strongest of all,
have the custom of drawing some others to its party, and particularly, when
Zeeland joins with it.

But that which is worth observation, and contrary to the opinion of some
strangers, is, that though the Provinces be very unequal in strength and
dignity, and that some contribute four times as much in peace and war, toward
the public; yet have they all equal right in deliberations, and none has an
authority over the other. Between the Deputies, they observe the order that is
received in their respective Provinces, for their precedence. In Gu^ldres the
Gentry goes before the Deputies of the Towns, and the Deputies of Nimegue
precede all the others. In Holland the Deputies of Towns yield to the Deputies
of the Nobles. In Zeeland the Deputy of the Marquess of Terveer, and of
Flushing, precede all the others, as representing the Nobility. In the Diocese
of Utrect, the Deputies of the chosen, or Eleu^, have precedence before the
Nobility, and before the Deputies of the Town of Utrect it self. In Friezeland
the Deputies of the Country, called (Goon end Wolden) do precede the Deputies
of Towns. In Overissel the Nobles Deputies carry it, before the Deputy of the
three great Towns; and the same precedence that Groeningue has upon Omland, its
Deputy has upon the Deputy of the other.

These things deserve to be taken notice of, because it is ordinarily the first
Deputy that presides; and he being absent, the next takes his place: but the
same does not preside always in this great Assembly; for the president is
changed every week, and the Deputies of the Provinces take it by turns.

Some strangers have been grossly mistaken, to write, that the Governor
General was the perpetual President of this Assembly; which is so far from
being true, that he has not so much, as the liberty of giving his Vote. It
cannot be denied indeed, that the States do often ask his advice, and hear his
Propositions; and by a received custom, the President does every day see him,
to know whether he has any thing to propose.

When the President takes the Votes, he begins by Gueldres, and goes on to
Holland, Zeeland, etc. and having the opinion of all, he concludes according to
the plurality of Votes; except it be an affair of great consequence, and that
the Deputies desire to have time, to advise with the States of their Provinces.
The Clerk or Secretary does at the same time, draw up the resolution of the
company, which the President signs, and the Secretary after him.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Orders that the States of Holland and West-Friezeland give to their
Deputies in the States General; and of the Oath they take.

SInce that the Government of Holland shall be hereafter proposed, as a pattern
of the other Provinces; it will not be amiss to produce here the Orders, that
the States of Holland and West-Friezeland gave upon the third of March, in
1643. to the Deputies they sent to the States General.

1. There shall be sent on the behalf of Holland and West-Friezeland, none but
capable and sufficient men, that shall not be beforehand engaged in another
employment, by Oath or Pension.

2. It is not lawful for the Deputies to go beyond the terms of the Treaty of
union at Utrect, and the Commands of their Provinces. They shall let pass
nothing, that shall be contrary to the privileges, immunities, and customs,
received by our Ancestors, without a special Order from their States.

3. The said Deputies shall not, neither in this Assembly, nor out of it, treat
of peace nor war, nor grant Patents or Privileges, that might be damageable to
Holland or West-Friezeland; nor levy or cashier Soldiers; nor change the
current Coin; nor forgive traitors: but whenever things of that nature shall
be afoot, they shall give notice to the States of Holland and West-Friezeland,
or in their absence, to the Council of State.

4. They shall neither sell, nor alienate the Dominions, Rights, and
Privileges belonging to the public, by virtue of their public union, without
a particular and special consent of the Provinces.

5. All the revenues and prerogatives that belong to the public, by virtue of
Treaties and Agreements made with foreign powers, shall be applied to the
benefit of the public union, and shall be put in the hands of the Treasurer,
and the Council of State, and the States General shall not dispose of them.

6. The Deputies shall not, neither by themselves, nor by others, exercise any
sort of Judicature upon any cause; but shall send the parties either to the
Council of State, or to the Admiralty, according as the affair is: but they
may pronounce sentence upon such Lawsuits, as are subject to be re-viewed.

7. They cannot by their Authority, hinder and suspend the execution of any
sentence, given by any Court whatsoever, either in criminal or civil matters.

8. As soon as the States of Holland and West-Frieze shall meet, they shall
immediately send them all the Deliberations made in the States General.

9. They shall communicate the affairs and concerns of these Countries, to none
but their States; or in their absence, to their Council of State: and if there
fall out any thing that may concern North-Holland, they shall immediately give
notice to the Deputies of that place.

10. The Council of State, and the College of the (...)iralty, shall leave
that very thing (...) the order so prescribed; and shall not change, either by
themselves, or others, any part of these Instructions.

11. They shall not dispose of the pri(...)pall military, and pol(...)ck
Offices, without the particular consent of the States of Holland; neither shall
they make such presents, as might lessen the revenue of the public.

12. They shall have six shillings a day allowed them for their wages.

13. The Deputies shall swear to observe all these Articles; of which, the
States of Holland and West-Friezeland, do reserve to themselves a more ample
interpretation.

This Order has been made and confirmed by the said States the ninth of March,
in the year 1643. Here follows the Formulary of the Oath.

I A. B. do promise and swear perpetual fidelity to the States of Holland, and
West-Friezeland, as being the Sovereign Lords of the said Provinces; and that I
will not assist neither by counsel, nor by deed, or any manner, in any thing
that shall be prejudicial to the aforesaid Authority; and that if I perceive
any such thing doing by others, I will immediately give notice of it to the
States, or in their absence, to their Council: likewise that I will defend to
my utmost, the prerogatives and honor of the said Countries; as likewise the
Reformed Religion, as it is now taught in those Provinces. In a word; that I
will further and advance, as much as in me lies, the interest of the said
Provinces, both in the States General, and abroad, as far as it stands with
the benefit of the public union. I do likewise promise to keep secret all
things, that shall require to be so kept; that I will receive no forbidden
presents; and that I will do all things according to those Orders I have now or
shall have hereafter.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Great Assembly Extraordinary.

BEsides the Assembly of the States General, always residing at the Hague;
there is besides a great Assembly, called in the language of the Country, De
groote Vergaderinge; which is also convocated to meet at the Hague, for affairs
of extraordinary importance. This Assembly never meets, till all the Provinces
have first given their consent; who do not only prescribe the time and place,
but do also examine beforehand, in their States, all the points that are to be
put in deliberation, that so they may be able to give positive and certain
Orders to their Deputies; and yet are these Deputies often obliged to write
back, and have recourse to those that sent them. The Order of this Assembly, is
the same with that of the States General, and they have the same power.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Council of State, which is the greatest after the Council of the
States General.

IT appears by what has been said before, that there is a Council of State of
more ancient standing, than the States General. But since the establishment of
this last, the first takes cognizance of smaller affairs; as of those things
that concern Taxes; or the Militia; or those that regard the Towns and
Fortresses conquered, and the visit of the fortifications of them. This
Council is composed of the Deputies of all the Provinces; and the General of
the Army, (when there is one) is perpetual President of it, and has his Vote.
There are twelve Counselors from the Provinces; two from Gueldres; three from
Holland; two from Zeeland; two from Friezeland; and Utrect, Overissell,
Groeningue, and Omland, each, one. And because the General is often absent,
therefore they choose a President, which ordinarily fall to them by turns.
Hereof every man makes a Vote, and they reckon by Pole; and then the greatest
number carries it. They sit as long, as it pleases the States that sent them.
Friezeland having always had a Governor apart, he has had the privilege of
appearing and sitting for them, and of appointing some body to do it in his
absence. This Council being (in effect) as a help to the States General, they
treat much about affairs of the same nature, and often do give an account of
what they do, to the States General; who upon their information, do Decree:
and then the Decree runs thus: By the Commandment of our Lords, the States
General of the United Provinces, upon the relation of the Council of State,
of the same Provinces. And besides the Secretary, the President (pro tempore)
in the Council, signs it.

This Council does ordinarily meet apart, and of its own accord; but sometimes
extraordinarily it joins with the Assembly of the States General. When that
happens, if the General of the Army is there, he takes place among the
Deputies of the States General, and he takes the most honorable place, at the
upper end of a long Table: and as it often happens, when the Counselors of
State are dismissed, he may keep his place, and assist at the other
Deliberations of the States.

Now every time that this Council meets alone, there are two Counselors
supernumerary, who have only deliberative voices, and not definitive Votes,
that do assist at it. The one is the Superintendant of the Treasury; and the
other is the Treasurer, or Receiver General himself. The first keeps account,
and controuls all public expenses, though he keep not the money; the other has
in his hands all the public treasure, of which he gives good account. He is
ordinarily heard after the Intendant, whose counsel they commonly ask first.

CHAP. X.
Of the Power of the States of every Province.

EAch Province has a sovereign power within it self, and may exercise all
supreme jurisdiction, except such as ought to be common to all by virtue of
their union. For example, that can make Laws obligatory to their Subjects;
choose Magistrates; punish Criminals; coin Money; set up Universities; make the
Dividends of general Taxes; and impose such as are necessary for the States of
the Province.

Yet this is not to be so understood, as if this Sovereignty of the States, did
exclude the sovereign jurisdiction, which many Towns do exercise within their
Precinct: for the end of the State^ being to preserve every ones liberties and
privileges, it is not to be thought they will take away any, that shall be
consistent with the Government. As for example, Dort, Nimmegue, Deventer, de
Camp, de Zwoll, and Gr^eningue, have many privileges, which we shall
elsewhere take notice of. Likewise the Country of Drent does exercise by its
States, a royal and absolute Authority, and does commit the administration of
it to its Deputies. Omland likewise has the power of imposing Taxes upon its
^nhabitants, though it make up one Province* with Groeningue. Now here are the
particular acts of Sovereignty, of which every Province* in particular is
barred, and which do only belong to them all united. For they cannot

1. Undertake a new War. 2. Make Peace or Truce. 3. Lay Impositions, which
concern the common Union. 4. M^ke alliance with Neighbors. 5. Set the value of
Money, or make Laws concerning the public. All these things cannot be done but
by common consent.

CHAP. XI.
Of the States of Holland and Zeeland.

IN Holland and West-Friezeland the States are composed of two sorts of
Members; viz. of the Nobles, and of the Deputies of Towns; the Nobles that are
famous not only by their ancient extraction, but also by the Lordships and
Castles which they possess, are the chiefest: they ordinarily meet to the
number of twelve or thirteen, and have the first voice.

The Towns which send their Deputies are these, Dort, Harlem, Leyden,
Amsterdam, Tergou, Rotterdam, Gorchom, Schoonhove, la Brille, Al^maer, Enchuse,
Edam, Monichdam, and Purmerent. If there be any difficulty about Tributes, or
if it be to declare War, or make Peace, then these following Towns are likewise
assembled by D^puties, Wo^rde, Geertrudenbergue, Naerde, Muden, O^de* watre,
Huesdam, Wesop, and Wourcom. The Deputies of Towns are ordinarily Bourgmasters,
to whom is ordinarily joined an Alderman or Counselor, who is called a
Pensioner.

The great Assembly, called (groot mogende) that is, Great and Mighty, is at
the Hague, and is vulgarly called, The Assembly of the States of Holland and
West-Friezeland.

Besides this Assembly which is held but from time to time, there is another
ordinary Assembly, which also sits at the Hague, and is a Representative of the
States of the Province, and in their absence takes care of the Treasury, and
all ordinary affairs; and, if there be occasion, it convocates the Great
Assembly: one Nobleman and the Deputies of Towns sit in this, and is called,
the Counselors Deputies of the Lords of the States of Holland and
West-Friezeland: The Advocate Pensioner of Holland is the Moderator of these
two Assemblies, and it is he that gathers the Votes, and performs the Office of
Speaker; and eight days after their separation, he is bound to send to the
Nobles, and to the Deputies of Towns, the deliberations and resolves made in
the Assembly.

Zeeland being also governed by States, there are two sorts of Members, viz.
the Nobles, and the Deputies of Towns; the Prince of Orange, as Marquess of
Treveer and Flessingue, represents the Nobles by his Deputy in the Assemblies
at Middlebourg, and has the first place.

The Towns that send their Deputies are Middlebourg, Ziriczee, Tergoes,
Tertole, Flessingue, and Treveer; these States meet as often as they think fit,
and in the intervals seven Deputies supply their room; one in the Name of the
Prince, who represents the Nobility, and in the Name of each Town one, to whom
are added the Pensioner and the Secretary.

Besides, Walachria, which is the principal Island of Zeeland, has the right of
holding a particular Assembly at Middlebourg, which is ordinarily called, the
Assembly of the States of the Isle of Walachria, and is composed of one Deputy
in the Name of the Prince of Orange, and of six others; three for Middlebourg,
Flessingue and Treveer, two for the rich Landowners of the Island, called (de
breed geerfde) to whom is adjoined a Secretary.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Governors of the United Provinces, until the Year 1650.

WIlliam Prince of Orange was the first Governor General of the United
Provinces; and since by the desert of this Family, this so great a charge has
been continued in it, it will not be amiss to set down their Titles and
Lordships here.

They are Princes of Orange, Counts of Nassaw, Catinilibogue, Viande, Die,
Lingue, Meurs, Bure, and Leerdam, etc. Marquess of Treveer and Flessingue,
Lords Barons of Breda, Grave, Cuych, Die, Grimbergue, Harental, Branendock,
Warneston, Arlac, Noseroy, Saint Vite, Doesbourg, Polan, Wilemstad, Nieuward,
Ysselstein, of the Fort Saint Martin Guertrude^bergue, Chasteanrenart of the
two Swal^es of Naddwick, Vicounts hereditary of Antwerp and Besanson, Governors
of Gueldres, Holland, Zeeland, West-Friezeland, Zutphen, Overyssel, and
Generals by Sea and by Land.

This first noble Prince having been wickedly assassinated in the year 1584.
brought such a consternation upon the United Provinces, that many Towns, nay
some Provinces, fell back under the Spanish domination. The Earl of Meurs was
Governor of Gueldres and Utrect. The Hollanders and Zeelanders chose by
provision the Prince Maurice, younger son to the deceased Prince William.
William Lewis Earl of Nassaw had been received General in Friezeland not long
before; the Earl of Hohenlo had the conduct of the Army, and the Council of
State the management of affairs.

But things were in so great a confusion, that the States m^strusting their own
strength, offered themselves to the French; who having used them ill, they
addressed themselves to 'Queen Elizabeth of England, with whom they prevailed
at last to send them Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester.

He came into Holland in 1585. with so absolute a power, that no Governor
before him ever had the like; for he had power to name one half of the Council
of State; and because he was a credulous easy man, he suffered himself to be
led by the Nose by some Strangers about him, who little intended the advantage
of the Low Countries; and himself being a particular Enemy to Prince Maurice
and the Earl of Hohenlo, at last the hatred against him became great, and all
the affections of the people and Soldiers turned to Maurice: the treacherous
actions of Stanly and York, English Commanders who had delivered Deventer and
Zutphen to the Spaniard, had much exasperated the States; and now a general
fear began to possess the Lovers of their Country, least they should either be
sold or oppressed: whereupon the States of Five Provinces gave all the charge
of governing to Prince Maurice, who being settled, did soon quash all jealousies
and suspicions which did already make people apt to sedition and tumults.

But since our design is not to write Annals, we need not here recite all the
glorious actions of Prince Maurice; it is only fit to observe, that William
Lewis Earl of Nassaw, then Governor of Friezeland, and since 1550. Governor of
Groningue and Omlande, was always in perfect intelligence with his Cousin
Maurice; and so this famous couple of the Nassavian Family advanced the affairs
of the United Provinces conjoyntly.

Maurice died the 23. of April in the Year 1625. he was a very great Captain,
and of incomparable conduct in War, and politic affairs.

Maurice being dead, and Spinola the Spanish General having then besieged
Breda, a Town of great importance for the States, they presently chose Henry
Frederick of Nassaw, his Brother, for General in his room, and not long after
Gueldres, Holland, Zeeland, Utrect and Overyssel accepted of him for their
Governor; Groningue, Omlande, and Drent, submitted to Ernest Lasimir of Nassaw,
Brother to William Lewis of Nassaw, who was also Governor of Friezeland.

Prince Henry was a worthy successor to his Brothers deserts, as well as
Honors, and carried himself with singular valor and prudence; his Cousin
Ernest was no small help to him and the Provinces, being a most excellent Field
Officer, and in that employment he died at the siege of Ruremonde in the Year
1632.

His successor to his Governments of Friezeland, etc. was his son Prince Henry;
the A^hilles of the Hollander; he was young, and by his beginnings did promise
so much as might make all men wish him a longer life; but he was killed in the
Year 1640. his very Enemies bearing witness of his noble valor; and the
Friezelanders much afflicted chose his Brother William Frederick of Nassaw, who
worthily supplied his Brothers loss. Groningue, Omlande, and Drent, coming back
to Henry Frederick Prince of Orange, who died likewise at the Hague in 1647.
the 14th. of March, having first forced the Spaniards to make Peace.

His only son William took the Oath of Allegiance to the States the same day,
as General of all their Forces both by Sea and Land.

A little after, six of the Provi(...)s chose him for their Governor, as they
had promised his Father; but Friezeland alone being already provided of Prince
William Frederick, made no change, but engaged that in case he should die, they
would then choose the Prince of Orange. But O unexpected misfortune! just as
all the Provinces were in hopes of living in a flourishing condition under the
protection of this William the second, he died at the Hague in the Year 1650.
and that in so short a time, that the noise of his disease did scarce fore-run
the news of his death; he left the Princess his Lady with Child of a son, of
whom she was brought abed eight days after the Princes death, who is the now
Prince of Orange, whom God keep and preserve, and give him his Ancestors spirit.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the charge of Governor.

IT is a hard matter to reduce the charge of Governor under certain Heads,
because hitherto the Provinces have given them such different instructions,
that they have had a hand in every thing. The States General have hitherto
communicated all their designs and counsils with the three Princes of Orange,
that have succeeded one another; as also the President of the States General
has always used to wait upon his Highness before the sitting of the Company;
besides, by reason of the great Estates they possess in Zeeland, and other
Provinces, they enjoy peculiar Privileges, and have in that consideration and
others, many advantages which the Provinces may either amplify or restrain at
their pleasure.

But leaving all this aside, and considering barely what belongs to the Office
of a Governor, we may particularly stay upon these six points.

1. The Governor General may pardon and forgive all capital crimes, that
deserve death; this Prerogative is called (trech van pardonneren.)

2. In those Provinces that have Courts of Judicature, he is always the
President of them, and his Name and Titles are in the front of all their Acts
and Decrees.

3. In certain places where that custom is received, he names the Magistrates,
either out of a certain number proposed to him, or absolutely as he pleases. It
is thus practiced at Nimmegue; every where in Holland, except at Horn,
Enchuse, Edam, and Monchenda^; in Zeeland every where, except at Tergoes; in
Utrect every where; in Friezeland the Governor does the like. This Privilege
is extended even to the nomination of (amptmans, or drostampen,) of the dignity
of Patricians, or (ra^ts heers-ampten) and many other which would be too long
to name here.

4. He may send Ambassadors to Foreign Princes for his own particular concerns,
and give private Audience to the Ambassadors of Foreign States, that are sent
to the States General.

5. It is his duty to see the States Orders executed in those Provinces in
which he is Governor.

6. By the 9th. and 14th. Articles of the Union of Utrect, he is made Umpire of
such contests as should arise between the Provinces, or between any Members of
one Province, or even between the States and some of their Subjects; touching
all which he alone can pronounce a Sovereign and definitive sentence; and if
the affairs be of very great consequence, then he may join with him some
Counselors of State, without exception of persons; and it is expressly enjoined
to all parties, to acquiesce and submit to his A^bitration. We shall speak
elsewhere of the other attributes of Governor, that have ^elong'd to him as
General by Sea and Land; for these two great charges are not, as some Strangers
do, to be confounded; and he that is Governor of the Provinces, is not always
General of their Forces.

CHAP. XIV.
Whether or no the United Provinces can subsist without a Governor.

SInce we have numbered up the Governors of the United Provinces, and declared
freely what is their Authority and Power, it is now fit to consider whether
they are so necessary to the States, as to make them incapable of subsisting
without them. Many Strangers are of opinion, that these Provinces cannot be
without a Governor General; and the same opinion has taken root in the hearts
of many Natives, who are not able to discern those things in the Treaty of
Utrect which are essential, from those that are mutable, and may be otherwise
disposed of, as the circumstances of time do vary.

But since the Sovereign Power has never been entirely resigned into the hand
of any one Governor, though some have had very many of the Prorogatives
belonging to it, it is evident, that they in whom the Sovereign Power remains,
can perform by themselves those Offices which they are pleased to trust a
Governor with: therefore if a Governor does nothing but by Commission, and
that because of the absence of those who empower him to act for them; why shall
not they, if they be present, take upon them the execution of those things that
were before committed to another care? And though Governors be often named
and mentioned in the Treaty of Utrect, yet was it not intended for a Governor
General, for even at that time Utrect had its particular Governor; and some
years after it was governed by the same Governor that Holland and Zeeland was.

It Is to as little purpose that some pretend, that it is necessary that each
Province should have its particular Governor, who may in fit season prevent
and calm all occasions of Civil commotions, as the Dictators did in Rome; but
in vain, for who sees not but that as hitherto the way of determining those
contests has been by referring them to the Governor, and some Deputies of
another Province; so they may, if they please, leave out the Governor, and
refer their debates to the Deputies of other Provinces alone: particularly
considering, that it has been hitherto observed, that no Governor ever
undertook the person of an Umpire, before he had consulted with the States
General; who being above any inferior Province, have the power of hindering
the progress and increase of any dissension.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Riches, by which the United Provinces do maintain themselves.

BY the Treaty of Union made at Utrect, it was ordained, that there should be
raised an equal sum of Moneys in every Province: but experience has taught
us, that such an equality was very unjust. For, for example; is it fit that
there should be no more laid upon an acre of Land in Holland, which is very
rich, and yields twice as much as in any other place, than upon an acre in
Gueldres, which is poor, and yields not half the revenue. The same difference
is to be observed in all other things.

It has therefore been judged by common consent, more just and profitable for
each Province to make a new Order every year; in which each should be taxed
according to the then abilities of the said Province, and according to the
public exigencies. So for example; if there be necessity of raising 10000.
pound, Holland alone shall furnish 4000. five hundred of it; Zeeland and
Friezeland a 1000. a piece; Gueldres Utrect, and Groeningue, 3500. and
Transisulania, or Overissell, the rest.

This order being once agreed upon, it belongs to the States of each Province,
to consider how it shall be levied: and this is the true reason why the Taxes
and Imposts are so different in the Dominions of the States General.

These Levyes thus ordered, are not always received in money, and returned to
the public Treasury of the States General, but are distributed by Tallies in
the Province it self, to those to whom the States do owe; which is a very wise
caution; for it is certain, that money still lessens as it passes through the
hands of many receivers.

2. Among these Levyes, it was thought fit from the very beginning, to give
leave to all to transport certain merchandise into the neighboring
Low Countries, still remaining under the Spanish jurisdiction; but there was
and is an impost laid upon them; for the receipt of which there are Officers,
and seachers upon the Frontier. But to the end this license might be no ways
prejudiciable to the affairs of this rising Commonwealth, they forbid the
transport of Arms or Ammunition, under pain of death. Yet at last when victuals
and necessaries for life grew dear among their enemies, and that there was an
evident advantage for the Confederates to furnish them with those things,
license was granted, and they drove such a trade with their enemies, as made
themselves grow rich and powerful.

3. There is likewise a great sum of money raised upon the granting of
Passports, to those in the Spanish Dominions, who desire to transport
themselves into the Territories of the States; for every Passport costs fifty
shillings of English money. And yet lest this also should prove prejudicial to
the State, they seldom grant any to those amongst their enemies, who are
either in military or politic employments: and to any others they scarce grant
them for longer than the time of six months.

4. The Contributions that are levied upon those Villages, and that part of the
Country which lies between the enemy and them, make another part of their
supplies; for these Bourghs pay as much to the States, as to the Spaniards; and
there are Treasurers upon the Frontier for the receipt of it.

5. The Imposts paid in the conquered Towns of Brabant and Flanders, make
another part of their revenue; for there is excise upon Wine, and Beer, and
Salt. A Tax upon Houses, and upon Lands.

6. They receive a part of the plunder made by the Soldiers upon the enemy.

7. They have hitherto had from the French and the English great sums of
money, as long as they have had War with the Spaniards. The French to make
diversion, did maintain in the service of the States, a body of 6000. Foot, and
2000. Horse at their own charges for many years. The serene State of Venice, in
virtue of a Treaty made in 1622. did promise 4000. pound a month in time of
War.

8. They have money at use, (that is) they keep a bank of such moneys as are
lent the State by particulars, and pay use for it; five in the hundred is the
use the State pays. All these great sums of money are by the Order of the
States, committed to the care of a particular Council, called, A General
Directory for the Treasury, which is composed of the Deputies of each Province.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the principal Forces which do maintain the Commonwealth of the United
Provinces.

THe greatest internal or defensive strength of these Countries, does lie in
their situation, which makes all their Towns easily to be fortified. As for the
external, it consists in their Leagues and Alliances with Foreign Princes. Let
us speak first of the situation.

That situation which is advantageous for the defense of a Country, the
exercising of commerce, and consequently growing rich, must needs proceed from
the neighborhood of the Sea, and the affluence of great Rivers and Channells;
thence comes the Proverb, The Hollanders are born for the Sea, and the Sea for
them: of which they are well convinced, and consequently spare no cost nor
industry to be the masters upon this Element; having long ago graven upon their
Coin this Motto, Imperator maris est terrae Dominus. If the Spaniards had been
so wise, as to have spent that treasure in hindering the Hollanders trade and
navigation, that he laid out upon attaking their Country, he had undoubtedly
ruined them; and he now perceives it, and does endeavor by all means, though
too late, to obstruct their commerce. Besides the Sea, there are the Rivers of
Rhene, Meuse, and Jud, that do make the Country almost inaccessible. Besides,
if any enemies be taken on this side these Rivers, there is a Law which is
exactly observed, which commands to hang them up immediately.

The strong Towns are upon the Borders, not only in Brabant, Flanders,
Gueldres, and Friezeland, but also upon the Confines of Germany, as Rhinbergue,
Wesel, and diverse places bordering upon the Duchy of Cleves. The reason
whereof is this: the War being kindled between the Spaniards and the United
Provinces, the Spaniards did first begin to seize, and put themselves in
possession of the Towns of the Duchy of Cleves, and of the Electour of Cullen,
that they might the better annoy the Hollanders; who foreseeing the mischief
like to arise from thence, sent an Army, and seized as many of these Towns as
they could, put Garrisons into them, and nevertheless still preserved the
Inhabitants in all their propriety, liberty, and privileges. Hereupon arose
great contests between the Emperor the Duke of Cleves, and the Electour of
Cullen on one side, and the Hollanders on the other; but the Hollanders kept
possession.

Besides the Garrisons they maintain in all Frontier Towns, they have also two
Magazines in each, one with Ammunition for War, the other with provisions for
life.

A Governor commands the Garrison: they that command in small Frontier Towns,
are called Commanders; and they that command in great strong Towns, are
qualified Governors. And for the greater safety of the said Towns, the Keys
are partly in the Governors, partly in the Bourgmasters hands. The Civil and
Military powers are likewise so distinct, that the Governor has nothing to do
with the Inhabitants, nor the Judges of the place any power over the Soldiers.

As for the Landforces, they consist of Strangers and Naturals; but the
Strangers do exceed the Naturals in number, who are more inclined to long
Voyages and Trade, than to War. Neither is the State endangered, by putting
the force and military power in Stangers hands; for they being of different
Nations, as English, Scotch, French, etc. have different inclinations, and
aversions, and so will hardly conspire to oppress their Masters, who do always
mingle them in their strongest Towns.

It is believed, that the number of Soldiers paid by the States, and sworn to
them, does come very near one hundred thousand. The Companies are for the most
part of a hundred men; some few excepted, who are either stronger or weaker, as
necessity requires. The Regiments are of ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen,
eighteen Companies. Each Regiment is commanded by a Colonel.

The Horse is much inferior in number to the Foot, because that in these
Countries, the greatest employment for Soldiers is besieging and defending of
Towns, in which the Horse are not so necessary, as in set Battles.

There are two sort of Horsemen distinguished by their Arms, viz. Cuirasseers,
that wear iron breast and back-pieces; and Arquebusiers, that carry short Guns
on Horseback. Their Horses ought to be sixteen handful high, measuring from
the hoof of the fore-foot, to the top of the shoulder.

The Infantry has about four shillings and six pence a week pay; and the Horse
about fifty shillings a month. They that are paid by the States money, are
soon and exactly paid, but they whose payment is assigned upon the money that
comes from France, wait a little longer for it.

It is very observable in these Provinces, that though there be no Money in the
Treasury, yet the Soldiers receive their pay every week or month; for every
Regiment chooses an Agitatour, who resides near the States to solicit the
payment of those he represents; and when there is no Money in the public
Treasury, he may confidently, and does borrow and take up Money for the present
necessity; and it is repaid him again with interest by the States order.

The hopes of the great profit there is to be made, engages these Sollicitors
to do thus; for when they advance their Money, it is at the rate of 10 per
Cent. gains, which they t^^e upon the arrears which the State owes to the
Officers. But this produces another inconvenience, which is, that the Officer
being forced to give so much to the Solicitor out of his pay, endeavors to
recover it again upon the States, and musters more men in his Company than he
really pays. Besides their pay, the Soldiers have likewise their Lodging free,
and the States do pay to the Inhabitants of all Towns upon that score, six
pence a week for each Soldier they lodge, and this is called Service-Money.

If the Enemies besiege a Town, and that the Money laid up in it for the paying
of the Soldiery come to fail, they make Money of Tin, Brass, Leather, or
Pastboard; which the Magistrates set a price upon, and such a one as exceeds
very much the price of the matter of which such Money is made. In the mean time
the Soldiers take it freely; for the siege being raised, or the Town yielded
up, there comes a Treasurer who gives them current Money for their other.

All sorts of Provisions that are brought to the Armies, are free from all
Imposts and Tributes, in favor of the Soldiers. In the siege of Towns the
Soldiers have likewise gratuity given them, some Provisions for their diet out
of the public Magazines.

The Soldiers and inferior Officers being made Prisoners, are at liberty in
paying their ransom, which by agreement between the States and the Spaniards,
is a months pay of the Prisoners. The Inhabitants or Citizens are not so
mildly dealt withal, for they are constrained to pay whatsoever the Enemy
demands, or to rot in Prison, till there be a general exchange made of
Prisoners, which is once or twice a year. The Women and Children under twelve
years old are not to be taken.

So much for the Forces in ordinary; In extraordinary dangers there are
extraordinary Forces raised, which they call Waertgelders; to encourage them
the more the States do promise them Ten pence a day: but because that many, in
hopes of so great a pay, do forsake the ordinary Companies, and take employment
in these new ones, it has been often thought fit to command out, instead of
these Waertgelders, the Trainbands of every Town, and to mingle with them some
old Soldiers, and so make them fit for service.

Every Soldier as well in the Army as in Garrison, is subject to the
Jurisdiction of a Council of War; which is composed in the Field, of the
General, and some high Officers; and in a Garrison, of the Governor and his
Captains; they judge according to the Articles of the Formulary prescribed and
printed by the States order.

The pay of Soldiers on Ship board is 12 s. and 6 d. a month, besides which
they have their diet, which he that commands the Ship is bound to find them,
and receives from the States 6 d. a day for each man.

At Sea there is no such custom as the ransom at Land; nay at first all
Prisoners were bound hand and feet, and thrown overboard; but because so great
a cruelty displeased both Spaniards and Hollanders, they agreed there should be
quarter given, but not at such easy rates as at Land. The Spaniards reason for
this his so great a severity, was that he might deterr the Hollanders from
venturing to Sea; but it produced only this, that it made them defend their
Ships with more courage and success than before. Ostend and Dunkirk were the
places from whence they made most incursions upon the Hollanders, which made
them every year put a Fleet to Sea, and come and besiege the Ports of these two
Towns.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Alliances of the United Provinces with Foreign Princes.

THe external Forces of the United Provinces are their Alliances, which they
maintain either by their Ambassadors, or by their Agents. They allow their
Ambassadors ordinarily a thousand pound; only he that is in this quality at
Constantinople is allowed more, that he may maintain the glory of his Nation to
the eyes of that ambitious people. Let us consider these Alliances one after
another.

With the Emperor of Germany there is no Alliance, but only a Friendship,
observed since these many years in appearance, though not in reality; for the
Emperor has often sent great succors to the Spaniards underhand, and the
Hollanders have done the same to the Princes of France and Germany. Yet the
Emperor has by diverse Embassies pressed the United Provinces to declare
themselves Members of the Empire, as their Princes were formerly; writing to
them in the style of Faithful and Well-beloved.

But the States have been so far from consenting to such a Proposition, that
they have often ordered that such Letters should be sent back again to the
Emperor, without being opened; saying, that theirs was a free absolute State,
which had never yielded to pay homage to any Prince. In the mean time, there
passes between them all Commerce and offices of Friendship.

There was likewise a League and Union made between the United Provinces, and
the Princes of Germany, to protect them from the oppression which threatened
them from the great Power the Emperor was got into; and in this they did
nothing but what the care of their Liberty did force them to, for had those
Princes been overpowered, the Low Countries might have feared the same fate.

Above two hundred years ago there was an Alliance between the Anseatic Towns,
and the Low Countries; and there happening to be amongst the United Provinces
some of these Towns, as Amsterdam, Middlebourg, Dort, which now make a part of
the Commonwealth, it was thought fit to renew the Alliance, which was
accordingly done in 1614. by a new Treaty, in which the States oblige
themselves to maintain the Rights and Privileges of the said Anseatic Towns.
This the Emperor took so ill, that he endeavored to make those Anseatic Towns
that were in the Empire, liable to the crimes of Treason and Rebellion against
his Imperial Majesty; but by their Ambassadors they proved, that time out of
mind they had the right and privilege of making such Alliances.

The Treaty of Alliance made formerly with the King of Denmark, concerns
nothing but a reciprocal liberty for Traffic, and Commerce; and yet these
States have often been forced to complain to their Ambassadors, of the
excessive Rates and Customs they did pay in passing the Sound. But the
necessity they stand in of venting their Commodities, makes them undergo this
hardship, and has produced of late a more strict Alliance for the maintaining
of Trade.

They are likewise in Friendship with the King and Commonwealth of Poland,
particularly for the great quantities of Corn that come from thence; though the
Imposts be there likewise very high, and such as have often made the Hollanders
think of changing their Market, and buying in Muscovy; which they would have
compassed by this means: The Country people in Muscovy are such slaves, their
Duke being the Proprietary of all their Lands, that they never trouble
themselves to plough or sow more Land, than just as much as will make such a
product, as can find them and their Families food. Thence it happens, that huge
Fields of good ground lie wast. Now the Hotlanders design was, to persuade the
Duke of Muscovy to force his Subjects to Till more ground, and so he would be
able to drive a great Trade; and to further this, they offered to leave
Overseers that should direct the work. While this was a treating, the Poles
fearing the consequence, bated their Imposts and Customs, and so things remain
as they were.

In the Year 1615. there was a Treaty made likewise with the King of Swedeland,
and Traffic was the ground of it. A little before the said King fell upon
Germany, the amity was renewed, and it was agreed, that the United Provinces
should give the said King 400. pound a month as long as the War should last
between him and the House of Austria; but since these few years, the succor
that has been given to the Dan^^, and the interruption of Trade in that Kings
Dominions, have almost changed this Friendship into War.

There has been likewise a very good Treaty for Trade, made with the Duke of
Muscovy, where, among other things, liberty is granted to levy Soldiers here
in his Name, and to transport Ammunition for War into his Dominions.

Trade has also made the States make Treaties with the Emperor of the Turks,
the Sophy of Persia, and the Pirates of Thunis and Algier.

In Italy the States have no Alliance, but with the Venetians; which is yet
maintained for the Honor of these two Commonwealths, which are the only
flourishing ones in Europe; and for certain reasons the Venetians do give five
hundred pound a month to the Hollanders, toward the maintenance of the War
with the Spaniards; as also the Hollanders have promised the like succor to
Venice, if it should be attaqued by the Spaniard.

In the first birth of the Commonwealth, there was a most advantageous Treaty
made with the English, under the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who maintained this
reeling State by the succors of Men, and great sums of Money, which she sent
over to them; though in such a way, that the Hollanders were bound to respect
her as if they had been her Subjects. Now that the Peace is made with the
Spaniards, there remains nothing of this Alliance, but the liberty of Trade and
Commerce, and the use of the English Ports.

There has been likewise many Treaties with the King of France, and the States
of the United Provinces have received from him great sums of Money toward the
carrying on of the War.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Admiralty, and care that is taken to maintain a Sea-strength.

SInce it is true, that a State is maintained by those means by which it is
first acquired, the United Provinces ought not to neglect their Maritine
affairs, because they have and do really get all their subsistence out of the
Sea.

This Sea-strength consists in a number of Men of War, part whereof belong to
the States, and part to particular men, and are called Privateers. The first
are set out at the charges of the public; the other borrow only the States
Banner and Commission, though to encourage them the States have proposed to
them a set price, according to the value of the thing they take from the Enemy.

The Men of War of the States, serve to convoy Merchantmen to and fro, and
preserve them from danger of Pirates and Enemies.

The Privateers are most employed to give chase to, and take the rich India
Ships of the Spaniards coming from the West Indies.

The High Admiral, who at present is the Governor General of the States,
commands over all Ships of War, but he seldom goes in person, because his
presence is necessary at home; his room is supplied by a Vice Admiral.

The Great Council, called the States G^neral, being as well obliged to look
after the Maritine affairs, as the Land business; and yet finding themselves
over-burden'd with business, they have discharged that care, by choosing some
others to compose a Body or Council, which shall order all Sea-affairs in the
Name of the States.

There are diverse of these Assemblies, and particularly in those three
Provinces which are near the Sea, viz. in Holland, at Amsterdam, Roterdam, and
Horn, this last is sometimes transported to Enchusen, which is a Town of
North-Holland; in Zeeland, at Middlebourg; and in Friezeland, formerly at
Do^cum, but is now transported to Harlingue.

Each of these Assemblies consists of seven Counselors or Senators, who being
chosen by the Members of each Province, are delegated and empowered by the
States General; they have a Secretary and a Treasurer.

The Governor General is the head of all these Assemblies, as High Admiral;
the Vice Admiral represents him in his absence; these Deputies did formerly use
to meet at the Hague twice a year, and do still meet there, when the affairs
require a conjoynt deliberation with the States, about the necessary means of
securing the Sea, and furthering Commerce.

They have a Treasury particular to themselves, and the Money which is in it,
is gathered from the Money that their own Merchants and Strangers pay for
Convoys; and likewise from the Imposts laid upon Commodities, that are
transported from one Harbor to another. There is likewise brought into this
Treasury all the Money that is raised by giving licenses to transport
Commodities to the Enemies.

The Deputies of these Assemblies are bound to give an account every quarter,
of all their expenses and receipts, to the Commissioners from the States
General.

They have also the power of naming Captains to the Men of War, but then the
Admiral chooses out of those that they have named. In a word, their charge is
so to secure the Sea, as there be no interruption neither from Pirates nor
Enemies of any other sort, in Trade and Navigation; to judge and determine all
causes between Seamen and Officers, and that Soveraignly and without appeal;
provided the sum in dispute exceed not fifty pounds; observing exactly all
brevity and expedition, not suffering long harangues in any Cause, or giving
leave to the parties to reply more than once or twice, and that because
ordinarily Sea people have occasion of departing upon long Voyages, and cannot
come again suddenly.

Last of all, it belongs to them to see that the States be paid their
proportion of what is taken. The fifth part of all prizes belongs to them; the
tenth to the Amirall; and the rest to those that have set out the Privateer; as
also to the Captain and Seamen. This is only to be understood of Privateers.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the particular Government of the Towns in Holland.

WE have seen hitherto what is the Government of the whole Body of the United
Provinces: now we may descend to the particular Towns.

The Towns are governed by a Bailif, a Senate, or Council, by Bourgmasters, or
Consuls, and by Aldermen.

There is but one Bailif in each Town, who to say true has no power of himself
to pronounce judgment; but in criminal Causes he is as it were an
Attourney-Generall, and manages accusations against offenders in the name of
the States. This is done before the Aldermen, who have power to examine the
heads of the accusation, and to pronounce sentence. The Bailifs have no
Sallary, and all the profit of their places rises from the Fines that are laid
upon the guilty.

The Senate, and the greatest, is that which is called (Den breeden ra^d^ or De
Vroedschap) in most Towns, as at Leyden, it is composed of about forty
persons, according to the number of the richest Citizens, more or less. The
ancient Laws admit none to be of this Senate, but such as are of the richer
sort. This Assembly seldom meets, but upon the occasion of choosing new
Magistrates; as also when the States of the Province are to meet, then the
heads of the Deliberations are examined in this Senate beforehand. They do
also control and correct their Bourgmasters, and Aldermen, if in the Assembly
of the States they chance to go beyond their Commission. And to the end they
may do it without fear, it has been ordained by our wise Ancestors, that the
charge of Senator should be perpetual, that so they may not fear to be
persecuted, for what they shall do in the defense of the public liberty.

The Bourgmasters and Aldermen are chosen from amongst these Senators, by the
plurality of voices.

In some places there are four Bourgmasters, and in some there are but two.
Their Office is to determine all that concerns the good order of the Town; as
also to inform themselves of all the fallings out of the Citizens, and bring
them either by themselves, or others, to an agreement: which if they cannot
compass, then their duty is to cite them before the Aldermen. They meet in a
common Chamber, and give audience to all Inhabitants without distinction.

In some places there are seven Aldermen, in others nine; They are the Judges
of the Town who meet three or four set times a week, and determine all civil
Causes between the Inhabitants, and judge all crimes proposed by the Bailif.
For the first cognizance of the Cause belongs to the Judge of the place, where
he that is cited dwells. Except they be privileged Causes, the Towns judge of
no greater sum than five pounds, and the Bourghs of thirty shillings; though
in very great Cities they may judge as far as thirty pound. The appeal is first
to the Court of the Province, and then to the great Council, where there is a
double number of Judges; they that are cast are fined for having appealed
without reason. In the Court of the Province the Fine is three pound ten
shillings; in the great Council, of six pound; and when the Process is
re-viewed, if the sentence be confirmed, the Fine is of twenty pound.

As for criminal Causes, the Judges are absolute, and there is no appeal from
them, neither in the Villages, nor in the Towns; except the Bailif require that
the criminal should undergo a severer punishment, and then the accused has
liberty to defend himself.

There are two sort of Laws in Holland; the first sort is the Customs,
Privileges, and Constitutions of the Country, and former Princes, and of the
States. The second is the Roman Law, called the Civil Law.

Moreover, that the course of justice be not retarded, nor the Judges time
taken up in petty businesses, there are chosen by the Aldermen, a certain
number of the richer sort of Citizens, who are called Commissaries of small
Causes. These take cognizance of all Causes that are not above five pound; as
also of all Actions for reparation of Honor; and of the Differences between
Masters and Servants, and such like. An Alderman presides ordinarily in this
Assembly, and is ordinarily a good Civilian.

There is also in the Senate, or Townhouse, and in the College of the
Bourgmasters, one who is called a Syndi^, or Pensioner, who ought to be
eloquent and learned, as being the Speaker of the whole Town, or Corporation,
in their most important affairs.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Tributes and Imposts; of how many sorts they are; and of the manner of
levying them in Holland.

SInce as Tacitus says, there is no War without pay, nor no pay without
tributes, and that that is the particular case of the United Provinces, who
have been long in War, to which they have all contributed their share; it is
fit to consider of the ways they use to levy them.

There are two sorts of Tributes; the ordinary, and the extraordinary. The
ordinary, which being once granted, are always continued; the extraordinary,
which are levied but for some certain time, and are then left off.

There are three sorts of extraordinary Tributes; viz. the Tribute by Head, or
Pole Money; the Chimney-money, and the Land Taxes.

The Pole Money is so levied, that the State has twenty pence for every Head;
they that are extreme poor are freed from this Tribute. To my remembrance this
was never practiced but once, and then too there was great murmuring, and many
refused to pay.

The Chimney-money is that Tribute, which is paid for every Chimney or Hearth,
which is twenty pence; and in this the Hollanders have imitated the Spaniards
in the Kingdom of Naples.

The third Tribute, called a Land Tax, may be properly called the two
hundredth penny, for out of two hundred pound a year, for example, is paid one
pound to the States. So out of four hundred, two pounds, or forty shillings.

To this may be objected, that it is a very hard thing, if not impossible, for
the perfect knowledge of the true value of men's Estates to be had. It is
answered, that the Magistrate does take his measure from the public voice, and
the general report, that any man has to have such and such revenues. And
because in this there is room for a mistake, the Law gives any man leave to
complain of the greatness of his Tax; and if he will take his Oath he is not
worth so much as the world values his Estate at, his Tax shall be moderated.

As for the ordinary Tributes, the chief are these following.

1. The Tribute from Salt, called in Dutch (Sonte geldt) it is levied after
this manner: The Magistrate of the Town visits each Family, and reckons every
head of it; then they guess at the quantity of Salt that they may reasonably be
thought to spend in one year; and thereupon they exact from them a sum of
money, proportionable to the quantity of Salt they are to have. And in some
Towns they set a price upon the measure of Salt, high or low, as they please.

2. The Excise upon Beer, which all the Citizens pay without distinction, comes
to twenty pence a Barrel; except the small Beer, which is not worth above half
a Crown a Barrel, paies nothing.

3. Another Excise upon Beer, paid only by Brewers, which comes to twelve pence
a Barrel. Besides, all Seamen, Mariners, and Merchants, pay Excise for all
English and German Beer they bring in.

4. The Victuallers, and those that sell Beer, pay other twenty pence for every
Barrel.

5. Every Hogshead of Vinegar paies nine shillings.

6. The Impost upon French Wines mounts to six pence upon every Stoop. Rhenish
and Spanish Wines pay twelve pence a Stoop. Brandyes of Wine pay ten pence. Of
Beer, five pence.

7. Butter pays six shillings a Barrel, which contains three hundred and
twenty pound. And for the little Barrells, called (Kops tuchen) there is paid a
Farthing a piece.

8. A piece of Oil paies six shillings; if* Fish. Oil then four shillings and
six pence.

9. Candles of Wax, and Tallow, pay ten pence a hundred weight.

10. The Impost of round measures, is that money which is paid for all those
commodities that are measured in round measures, as Corn, Seeds, Salt, Lime,
etc. And the Merchants that buy great quantities, do nevertheless pay this
Impost.

11. Turfs for fuel pay a penny halfpenny a Tun; and Coals from England and
Scotland pay thirty shillings for every hundred Tun. The Coals burnt in the
light Houses pay nothing.

12. The Impost upon hard merchandises, as five pence for every hundred of
Lead; three halfpence for every thousand of Lime-Stones.

13. For Wood to burn is paid the eight part of what it costs.

14. Silk and gold Stuffs pay, of twelve pence, one, in every Yard or Ell.

15. Woollen Cloths pay thus; every piece of English Cloth not being yet dyed,
pays three pound, if the said piece be worth sixteen Florins of Flanders, that
is nine pound, or thereabouts. Every piece worth twelve pound pays four pound,
etc. Hangings and other Household Stuff pay one penny in nine of what they are
worth. The way of prising Merchandise is to ask the Merchant himself, what he
values it at; if he undervalue it to save Custom, then the Master of the
Custom-house may take it, and pay to the Merchant the price he values it at.

16. The Impost upon all Corn that is ground in the Mills in Holland, which
every body pays without exception, comes to five pound, one crown, and twelve
pence for every quarter of Wheat; to half as much for the quarter of Rye; to
five and thirty shillings for Barley and Oats.

17. The Impost upon all Cattle, Sheep, or Hogs that are killed, comes to one
penny in seven of the money they are sold for.

18. There is also three pence a month paid for every Horned Beast above three
years old; as also two pence a month for every Horse above three years old.

19. The Imposts upon Herrings and Salt-Fish, brought to the Citizens houses to
sell, comes to twenty pence a Pannier.

20. The retail Fishmonger pays for S^urgeons and Salmons the 9th. penny of
what they cost.

21. Tobacco pays 10 pence a pound; the Barrel of Soap 11 shillings; every
Barrel of Pitch 16 pence.

22. Every Chariot and little Bark pays 20 pence a year; every Coach pays 10
shillings a year.

23. All Farms and Rack Rents pay the 16th. penny of the value they yield
yearly; and those Lands that the Proprietary keeps in his own hand, are valued
and estimated by the Magistrate.

24. All Lands that are sowed with any sort of Grain whatsoever, or whatsoever
Trees they are planted with, pay 4 pence halfpenny an acre, reckoning from the
month they were sowed or planted, to the month that the recolt is made in.

25. Every house pays about the 8th. part of the Rent it is let for; as if for
48 pound a year, it pays 6 pound to the States; but because the Rent of houses
is subject to rise or fall, the Magistrate sets a constant price upon them,
according to their bigness and convenience.

26. The Tribute for Servants and Maids comes to 20 pence a head, which every
Master or Mistress is bound to pay for them.

27. The Impost upon all Immovables that are sold, under which title great
Ships are comprehended, comes to the 40th. penny, that is out of the price of
the thing sold the State has the 40th. part, which is a very considerable tax,
for there is no place in the World where Immovables alter their property so
often as in Holland, it being a Proverb of Leyden, that every three year half
of the Town is sold or alienated.

28. The Tribute due for the Great and Little Seals, is a groat for every sheet
of paper where the Great Seal is applied, to two pence where the Little. To
understand the greatness of this Tribute, the Reader must know that the States
of Holland have ordained, for no other end than for this, that no Wills,
Contracts, or any sort of Writings that shall be produced before the Judges,
shall be written in any other paper than that which is sealed by the States,
else they shall be void; and hereupon they thought fit to have two Seals, one
for businesses of small importance, and a great one for important affairs.

There are many other sorts of Tributes, which it would be too long to relate;
besides, they have all been published together by the States order. Now let us
consider the ways of levying these Tributes, which that we may the better do,
let us consider those deliberations and opinions touching this matter, which
were had when it was first debated.

The Proposition of finding a way of raising these Revenues being made, some
were of opinion to give Authority to the Magistrates of Towns, or to some
persons whom the State should pay to gather these Taxes, and be accomptable for
them; thinking it neither safe nor profitable for the States to farm them out.
And here are the Reasons they relied upon.

1. Because public persons, and particularly Magistrates, have a greater
Authority with them, and so are fitter to keep the people more in awe.

2. Because many of these Revenues, as the Excise upon Beer for example, could
not be fixed and certain; for sometimes one Town consumes more one year than
another, so that there could be no measures taken with Farmers.

3. They represented, that it was dangerous to trust in Subjects hands the
public Revenue; for what if the Farmers should play the Knaves and break, and
hereupon they concluded that Farmers were not fit men.

Some of a quite contrary opinion did maintain, that there were certain Imposts
which ought to be Farmed out for so much a year; adding, that the Impositions
were laid upon two sorts of things, upon stable and constant ones, as Houses
and Lands which remain, and whose number and value were easily known; and upon
uncertain ones, as the consumption of Wine and Beer, etc. The first sort they
allowed to be raised by Magistrates, the other they desired to Farm out, and
that for diverse Reasons.

1. Because the people do by all arts and cheats endeavor to avoid the paying
of these Excises; that the Farmers for their own concern would be very exact
and quick-sighted in the discovery of such frauds.

2. These Farmers would have power enough, for they would be backed by the
Civil power.

3. That it was of consequence for a State to know precisely its Revenues;
which could not be if they were not farmed and stated. That without this the
State could not know how to frame designs, nor what to trust to in the
execution of them. That thus doing, that is, by Farming, the State would come
to a better knowledge of its true Revenue; for by enhancing of it every year,
they would at last raise it to the utmost. That it would be expedient to Farm
these Incomes to Citizens, only for one year, that so the condition of many
Citizens would be bettered, and they enabled to offer more to the Commonwealth.

4. Lastly, that there was no fear of their breaking, for they would require
from the Farmer such security as should secure the public; besides, that they
might be ordered to bring in every month a part of the money.

This opinion was followed, and this way of proceeding is observed to this day;
and this is the way they take of Farming them out.

The States by Proclamation publish, that such a day such Revenues are to be
Farmed, and that they will let those have them that shall bid highest. He that
obtains it, gives security immediately, and such as the State may lay hold on
if he fail.

There has been two things invented by the Farmers to hinder fraud, and
stealing of Custom and Excise; the one is, that all Porters do take every year
an Oath, to carry no Merchandise whatsoever into any Citizens house, without
giving notice to the Farmer, and taking a Pass from him. The second, that they
that are once discovered to have cheated the Farmers, are soundly fined,
because that faults that may be easily committed, and which are very profitable
to the offenders, cannot probably be hindered but by rigorous penalties.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the East and West India Companies.

THis methinks is a fit occasion to speak of these powerful Corporations; for
they do make a great part of the strength of these Nations, and are a source of
riches to them.

These Companies are Assemblies of particular Merchants, established and
confirmed by Authority in their Union. By which power they may, to the
exclusion of all others, raise Soldiers at their own charges; make Leagues and
Alliances with the Indian Princes; and to bring home certain Commodities from
the Indies, which none other must vent but they.

Two things particularly were the cause of this Enterprise, of sailing to the
Indies: the one was the strict prohibitions of the King of Spain, forbidding
the Hollanders all Trade and Commerce into Spain, the only place from which
those Indian Merchandises could be fetched. The other was the unreasonable
Rates that the Spanish Merchants did then sell their Wares at; with the
exorbitant Customs that Strangers who traded with them, were forced to pay.
Insomuch that Spain was become the only Magazine and Bank of riches in Europe,
having assembled all the treasures of the richest part of the world, whereby
they might subdue the rest.

There happened at this very time another accident, which much contributed to
the framing of this design. One Cornelius Houtman a Hollander, having diverse
years faithfully served the Spaniards and Portuguesses, in their navigation to
the Indies, was at last taken prisoner by the Negroes, and not like to come out
of captivity, except he could pay a ransom far beyond his riches and power: he
in this strait implored the help of some Merchants of Amsterdam, who redeemed
him, upon condition that he should reveal to them all the secret and profit of
the Spaniards navigation to the Indies. By this means it came to be known, that
their gain was for every five or six pound, a hundred.

One only thing did seem then most to oppose the Hollanders design, and that
was, that it was with some regret, that they did see that the Venetians Trade
would now fall to the ground. For whereas hitherto they had received the
Merchandises of the Indies by Persia, and so over-land to the Grand Caire, and
did then furnish the rest of Europe with them; it was easy to foresee, that
the Hollanders would be able to perform this Voyage by Sea with less cost. But
self-love, together with the desire of being revenged of the Spaniard,
prevailed against this obstacle. But let us consider the first rise of this
Company.

The first Company or Association of Merchants, (for at first they were not
authorized, as they now are by the States) chose for Curators or Directors,
these following; Henry Hudd, Reynier Paw, Charles de Oude, Jean Poppey, Henry
Duick, Theodore de Os, Silvard Petrisein, and Arnould ten Grooten Huyle.

These considering that the way by the Glaciall Sea, though the shorter by
2000. leagues, and the safer from enemies, was nevertheless the more dangerous,
because they were not sure of a passage; fitted out four Ships, and sent them
by the ordinary way, under the conduct of Cornelius Houtman, in the year 1595.
But being returned two years and four months after, with much less profit than
was expected, that did not hinder them from setting out a new Fleet. And as
they were busy about it, they had notice that some other Merchants of
Amsterdam had the same design; whereupon they proposed to them to join their
purses, which they did, and made up a Fleet of eight Ships, under the conduct
of James van Neck.

At the same time there was framed a company at Rotterdam, who undertook the
way to the Indies by the Straight of Magellan, and the South Sea; James Mahu
undertook the Voyage.

But before that the Fleet of eight Sail could be come back, the same
Associates sent out three more; and a little after returned back four of the
eight that had been sent first, with a very considerable lading, and much to
the advantage of the Adventurers. The noise of the great gains to be made this
way, made some other Merchants, for the most part Brabancons, compose another
Company, called the Brabant Company, and in the year 1599. this Company sent
four Ships, to which the first Company added four more.

The Spaniards in the mean time considering the great progress of these new
Enterprises, and foreseeing the ruin of their rich Trade by them, resolved to
use all possible means to crush them while they were yet in their birth.
Whereupon they fitted out a Fleet of thirteen strong men of War, who meeting
with five Hollanders, engaged them, but were at last constrained to fly, and
yield the Hollanders the victory. This check making the Spaniard sensible that
strength and open force were not like to prevail, they went another way to
work, and employed the Portuguesses, whose interest was very strong with most
of the Indian peoples and Princes: they endeavored by all means to make the
Dutch so odious to those Nations, that they should abstain from all Trade and
Commerce with them, representing them as Pirates and Rebels to their King. But
the States General being informed of this hard measure given them by the
Portuguesses, gave order to all their Subjects, to assault and take all Ships
that should any ways strive to oppose their navigation to the Indies.

Thus they struggled pretty well with this great obstacle. But the Merchants
themselves being divided into different Companies, and not acting all
unanimously, did spoil one another Trade; for either they would all come to
one Port of the Indies, and so enhance the price of the Natives Commodity, and
debase their own, or commit some other error, which made most of their Ships
return with much less profit than might have been otherwise expected. The
States considering these inconveniences, resolved to make up one certain
Company of all the different Adventurers that would come in, and to grant to
them alone the privilege of trading to the Indies, under certain Conditions.
This Order of the States being published, many out of hopes of gain, others out
of love to their Country, put in different sums, which all together made up
six hundred thousand pound, the first stock upon which this Company has built
its prodigious Increase.

All those that had conributed were called Partners, in Dutch (Participanten)
because they had part in all the profit and loss of the Company.

But all those that had contributed more than six hundred pound, were called
head-Partners, (hooft-Participanten) and out of these alone were, and are to
this day, chosen the Curators or Directors of the Company, with a very large
power.

All these head-Partners together, have the privilege of naming out of their
own number, the Curators, and then in some places the States of the Province,
in others the Magistrates of Towns are to choose them out of those that are
named.

The Curators are bound to give an account of all incomes and expenses, once a
year to the head-Partners. They manage all the business of the Company, and are
continued in their employment all their lifetime, or at least for one and
twenty years. They hold their Assemblies in the most convenient places of each
Province, and their Assemblies are called Chambers.

In each of these Chambers, there are a set number of Curators; at Amsterdam
there are twenty; in Zeeland twelve; upon the Meuse fourteen; and fourteen in
West-Friezeland.

Besides these ordinary Assemblies, there are settled in each Province some
extraordinary ones, upon occasion, to which the Chambers send their Deputies,
and all the Chambers of that Province are bound to stand to the Deliberations
of this that is made up of them all. This Chamber is settled at Amsterdam for
Holland, and at Middlebourg for Zeeland.

This extraordinary Assembly consists of seventeen Deputies, called (de
Vergaderinge van Seventien.) Each Chamber knows the number of Deputies that it
must send to this Assembly, some more and some less, proportionably still to
the first money that they put in.

This is the form of Government that this Company lives under within the States
Territories; and amongst all its Constitutions this is the principal, that the
Curators shall employ with all care and speed the sums that shall be
furnished to them, for the setting out of a strong Fleet well armed, to drive
the Portuguesses and Spaniards out of those Forts and strong places which they
hold; and in buying those Manufactures and Wares which we exchange with the
Indians, giving a yearly account of their receipts and expenses; that out of the
product something may still be laid aside, whereby to confirm and advance the
Companies Trade and Settlement in those parts; that the rest shall be equally
distributed to all the sharers, to every one according to the proportion of the
money first put in by them. And this Distribution is commonly called
Uytde^linge.

This noble establishment thus begun, failed not of a very happy success; for
now all interests being united as well as strengths, the work was carried on
unanimously: and by the exchange of some things, (of small value with us) as
Looking-Glasses, Feathers, Crystal, and Glass Rings, Bracelets, Babies, and
other such bables, made at Nurembergue in Germany, the Company received from
the silly Indians, Silk, Stuffs, Pearls, all sorts of aromatic Druggs, of
great value, and things of that nature. To this add, the taking of diverse
strong places and Forts from the Portuguesses and Spaniards, who at first
little dreamed of being invaded so far off, by those whom they thought they did
put so much to it at home.

By these means, in six years time, viz. from the year 1602. to the year 1608.
the Company came to see their capital sum of six hundred thousand pound,
increased to almost three millions of English money, besides all the gain that
had been distributed among the partners. And besides, their Conquests are such,
and their Dominions so enlarged in the Indies, that they have under their power
or protection diverse great Kingdoms and Countries; besides many others who
have granted to them alone, exclusively to the Spaniards and Portuguesses, the
liberty of Trade amongst them.

Things being brought to this flourishing condition, it was thought fit to lay
the foundation of a new Commonwealth; and for this purpose they chose a Town
which they called Batavia, which is so well fortified and encompassed with a
strong Wall of Bricks, that it was able these late years, to hold out before
all the Forces of the great Emperor of Java, who besieged it with an Army of
two hundred thousand men.

It was ordered that the Governor General of the Indies for the Company,
should here reside, and keep a Royal Court; where he enjoyes the same power
that the Governor General does in Holland; he keeps a greater equipage, and
marches with more state than some Kings of Europe, that he may the more be
respected by his own Subjects, and the barbarous Nations round about. At first
this dignity was for life, but because it seemed dangerous to let so much power
reside in one man so long, it was resolved to follow the Spaniards custom, and
limit the time of their Government to three years.

In this Town are likewise established two Sovereign Courts, in one whereof
fits the Governor with his Associates, to treat of the public affairs of the
Society, as Peace, War, Alliances, Trade, etc. the other is a Court of Justice,
where causes are tried between particular men.

Besides this, there are in all Provinces and Islands depending upon the
Company, two Sovereign Magistrates; one of which commands the Militia, which is
quartered in different places, to be in a readiness to keep the Natives down;
and the other has the care of all that concerns Trade; and to the end that they
may not behave themselves dishonestly, there are adjoined to them certain
Officers called Censours, who keep a Register of all Occurrences, and give
account of them every quarter to the Governor and his Council. Out of these
Registers the Council picks the condition and posture of the Companies affairs,
and having drawn it up, sends it into Holland; and the Curatours thereby know
how to govern themselves in their supplies.

At the same time there was some project made for the better multiplying of
this Colony, that so at last they might equal the Indians in number, and not
need to drain Europe every year for men. To further this, they built a public
house, in which were maintained at the public charge great numbers of young
Maids, brought from Holland; and the Soldiers and Seamen had liberty to make
their addresses and marry them. But this did not succeed, for it was found by
experience that the children born of Dutch Parents in the Indies, were not so
lusty nor so long lived as those that were born of a Dutch Father and an Indian
Mother.

The Trade to the Indies is driven with ready money, or with Exchange; the
Japponeses take ready money; all the Indians exchange their Commodities for
ours, which at first were of so small a value, and theirs so rich, that for
every five pounds worth of ours, we had a hundred pounds worth of theirs. Some
of these Nations have given to the Hollanders alone, the privilege of Trading
with them; for example, they alone can buy Pepper, and by consequence set what
price they please upon that Commodity.

Every year in certain seasons the Fleets set sail for Holland, and every year
new Fleets go from Holland for the Indies. The Merchandises brought from India
to Holland, are publicly exposed to sale, and the money produced, distributed
among the Sharers; so for a hundred pound which a particular man* shall have
put into the common stock, he shall have rarely twenty, sometimes thirty, and
most commonly forty pound profit; so that the annual rent comes almost to half
the Capital.

This distribution is made either in Money, or Merchandise; the truth is, that
heretofore they did seldom use to deliver out any Merchandise, but of late some
Nations of Europe having gone about to set up the same Trade to the Indies, the
Hollanders to discourage and break them at their first beginings, did think fit
to make a distribution of Merchandise. Whereupon there coming abroad at once so
much, the price of all could not choose but fall, and so make these Strangers
not able to afford them at such easy rates. It Is true, that this did the
Company themselves much prejudice, but still it was a less loss to them, for
the greatest mischief that can befall them, is that other Nations find the way
to the Indies.

There is besides, this considerable advantage, that all the Sharers do not
only make a vast interest of their money, but their Capital increases every
day, as the Companies stock increases. So if he that has put in at first 400
pound, will sell (which they seldom do) his right to another, he will without
difficulty get 1800 pound for it; and it is to be hoped, that at last the very
annual distributions will be worth the Capital every year.

Some years ago the Company of the West Indies was established after the same
model; and a purpose to cross its settlement, the King of Spain demanded a
Truce of twelve years from the States; one of the Articles of which was, that
the Hollanders should undertake no Navigation to the West Indies: he obtained
it, and all that while the design was crushed; but shortly after the Truce
expired, it was again set a foot with more eagerness.

The Capital of this Company was seven hundred thousand pound, and the
Curatours having set out a brave Fleet, the Town of St. Sauveur, otherwise
called baia de todos los Santos, was carried and taken from the Spaniards; but
shortly after it was unfortunately lost again. In the mean time, the booty made
by taking and plundering the Spaniards and Portugu^ses Ships was so rich, that
the Sharers of the Company received five and twenty per Cent. at the first
distribution. A little after the Spaniards Silver Fleet, valued at twelve
hundred thousand pound, having been taken, the Sharers had half their Capital
refunded to them; but experience soon made appear, that in this the Curatours
were rather prodigal than liberal, because that the Company having then no
settled establishment in the West Indies, it had been better to have employed
that money toward a further confirmation of their affairs, particularly having
undertaken so smart a War against the Spaniards and Portugueses.

For this reason, their Capital being exhausted by following misfortunes, the
Curatours were fain to exact a new Contribution from the Sharers, viz. the
moiety of what they had given at first, which made up twelve hundred thousand
pound, to which were added four hundred thousand pound more, and resolution was
taken to pay interest of six per Cent. for all the money advanced to the
Company. Their Treasury thus recruited, gave them courage to undertake a new
Expedition, upon the great Town of Fernambove; after this they invaded some
borders of Africa, from whence having driven the Portugueses, they got into
possession of the Trade with the Africans, who sell their young Negroes. This
is the sinew of the West India Trade, for they being of a strong robust
constitution, are able to endure those hardships in the Sugar Mills and Mines,
that no Indians or Europeans are able to undergo.

Though things have since succeeded pretty luckily, yet have not the Curatours
made any dividends amongst the Sharers; not but that they have brought from
thence twice or thrice every year vast quantities of rich Ladings, which they
have well sold; but because they have always been forced to maintain War, till
the Portugueses revolted from the Spaniards.

The Orders and Constitution of this Company, are conformable to those of the
East Indies, except that there are always some Deputies from the States
General, that do preside in their extraordinary Assemblies; and this because
the States have contributed a great sum of money toward their first
establishment.

The Sovereign command both by Land and Sea, is in the hands of a Captain
General, that resides in Brazeel; it is now Prince Maurice of Nassaw. There are
added to him as his Council, two or three of the Curatours of the Company;
there is also a Sovereign Court of Justice to hear and determine causes between
particular men.

This Company has other designs, and does not resolve to keep within the
straight limits of Brazeel, but endeavors to open a passage to those rich
M^nes of Silver which the Spaniards and Indians are at present in possession
of; this enterprise seems likely enough to succeed, particularly since the
Chilians, an Indian Nation that inhabits the Seaside, is in War with the
Spaniard, and wants nothing but Arms and Discipline; which the Hollanders will
be easily induced to furnish them with, it being so much their own advantage.
The Soldiers of this Company and Officers, are sworn not only to the
Curatours, but also to the States General, and to the General of the Army;
because it is not safe that private men should have an Army at their command.

These two Companies have the privilege of Trading alone into both the Indies,
not for ever, but for twenty or thirty year, more or less. And it was wisely
ordered so for two reasons: First, because it may be the necessity of affairs
might have been such, as to have obliged the States to make Peace or Truce with
the Spaniards; which it may be would not have been obtained, without
relinquishing the Trade to the Indies, which they could not do had they granted
a perpetual privilege to these Companies. Secondly, that whenever they
demand the renewing of their Privileges, the Commonwealth may take occasion to
demand a round sum of money in acknowledgement of the favor they receive.

In a word, these two Companies are so well established, as to be upon all
occasions a very great prop to the State; for they are a Nursery of Soldiers
and Seamen, out of which in time of War the States may upon a sudden be
provided with Ships, Arms, and some thousands of Men, and by which in time of
Peace, many thousands got a very handsome livelihood.

CHAP. XXII.
What Judgment may be made of the lasting or decay of this Commonwealth.

CArdinal Bentivoglio, who was for some time the Popes Nuncio in the
Low Countries, has writ the History of their Wars, and in his Book has given me
occasion of adding here this Chapter. For he has propounded the same Question,
and after he has brought some Reasons, which seem to conclude in favor of the
perpetuity of this Commonwealth, he does produce some others to show that a
contrary opinion is more likely.

It Is certainly a great vanity to go about to dispute about futures; yet the
Form and Government, and present felicity of a State, may give us leave to give
a guess at its future happiness.

And first, if we consider the cause of the founding of this State, we cannot
think that it will ever be dissolved: For that was the recovering of lost
Liberties, and the preservation of them when recovered; two things mightily
prized by all mankind, but particularly by the Northern Nations of the world.
Besides, not only by this the Liberties of all its Subjects are secured, but
none of the neighboring Nations can stand in fear of losing theirs, by the
increase of this; so that it will be no bodies Interest to procure a change;
for the people cannot be more easy than they are already: add to this the
mutual aversion between the Spaniards and the Hollanders, that it is natural to
fear, and not to trust those that we have offended.

Besides, let any body cast back their eyes upon the first change, and they
shall find it such as no body is offended at. It Is most certain, that when in
Government men pass from one extremity to the other, there are many whom a
desire of the first Government does solicit and possess; but here it was not
so, for except the change that was made of the person of the King of Spain, for
the States General, there was no change made in the Laws, Constitutions, and
Customs of these Provinces. Since therefore that the ancient Laws, and
Magistrates, and all other Privileges do remain, it is easily agreed, that the
change was scarce sensible to the Inhabitants. And upon this we may found this
maxim, that Those States that have suffered least in their change, are like to
last longest.

The inequality of strength and riches in these Provinces, is one of the ties
of their perpetuity, though ordinarily it be the cause of ruptures and fallings
out in these cases.

If we consider the riches of these Provinces, and the industry of the
Inhabitants to acquire them, we may certainly conclude that they will not be
wanting to themselves in their Government; besides, without doubt as long as
the Spaniards power shall give occasion of jealousy to Europe, England and
France will never forsake the protection of Holland.

If we consider also the example of some Commonwealths of our time, as of the
Swizzers, who do not only maintain themselves free from neighboring Princes,
by the natural situation of their Country, but are a terror to many of them.
These are our reasons, but Cardinal Bentivoglio brings some against them as
follows.

Liberty begets license, that begets inequality, inequality begets Monarchy; so
the Romans having driven out Kings, gave themselves up to the enjoyment of
their Liberty; after that, they fell out by the inequality of Charges and
Honors, and at last fell under the domination of Emperors.

To this is answered, that it is in vain that this example is alleged,
because the change proceeded from the oversight in the constitution of the
Roman Government, in which it was not provided against inequality; but it is
not so with the Hollanders.

As for what he says, that the Authority of the Governor General is too
great, we do confess it; yet the Authority of the States is above it, for in
him lies only persuasion, in them the power of commanding.

If it be objected, that the charges of a War are here incredible and
excessive, and that the Treasury must needs be exhausted. I shall answer, that
our Enemies are not in a better condition, but there is this difference between
us, that our Enemies grow Beggars, and we grow rich under this oppression.

If it be further urged, that one Province, Holland, is much superior to the
others in strength and riches, and so may usurp the domination over the rest.
I shall answer, that in this inequality of power, all the Provinces are equal
in Authority, and do not meddle with one another affairs.

As for the diversity and plurality of Religions, it is so far from being an
apple of discord, that it is a tie of union and concord, every one being
pleased with the liberty he has to enjoy the freedom of his conscience.

CHAP. XXIII.
An Abridgement of the State of the United Provinces, by Paul Merle.

GErmany which is one of the noblest parts of Europe, is divided into two
parts, high and low. It is not our design to say any thing of the higher
Germany.

The lower, called the Eye of the North, by reason of its excellency, is
composed of seventeen Provinces. Those of them that lie upon the banks of the
River Rhin toward the North, were used to be reckoned among the Lordships of
the upper Germany; and the others upon the banks of the same River, toward the
East, were anciently esteemed dependances of Gallia Belgica. Each of them have
been governed till within these few years, by their particular Princes and
Princesses.

The Provinces of Brabant, Limbourg, Luxembourg, and Gueldres, were governed by
Dukes. Flanders, Artois, Hainaut, Zeeland, Holland, Namur, and Zutphen, by
Earls. Antwerp which bears the title of the Marquessship of the holy Empire, by
a Marquess. Friezeland, Utrect, Overyssell, Malines, and Groeningue, by Bishops
and particular Lords.

The Emperor Charles the fifth was the first Sovereign of all these rich
Provinces; to the possession of which he attained, by being Heir to the Branch
of Burgundy, and the Houses of Spain and Austria.

Philip his Son was his Successor in his time. The exorbitant punishments
inflicted on those that professed Protestant Religion, with the intolerable
severity of the Inquisition; the breach of the peoples privileges, made them
revolt, and endeavor to maintain by force, that which tyranny would extort
from them. Their Enterprise has been blessed with success; for seven of these
Provinces have cast off the yoke of obedience due unto him, and have made an
Union and League together for their defense, whence they are called the United
Provinces, and are Gueldres, Zutphen, Holland, Zeeland, Frieze, Utrect,
Overyssell, and Groeningue.

These are the Provinces, for whose service that incomparable Hero, Morice of
Nassaw, Son to William Prince of Orange, has waged and managed a War against
the most powerful Prince in Europe, with a success worthy his prudence and
courage. He was so accomplished a Prince, that it is better to be silent, than
to go about to praise one, whose merits can never be equaled with words; but
they are written in the hearts of all the Nations he so highly obliged by his
singular valor and conduct.

The Provinces abovementioned having occasion to treat of their public
concerns, send their Deputies to the Hague, some one, some two or more,
according as their rank and privilege is. They are ordinarily chosen among the
most sufficient, able, and pious men, and such as deserve to be admired for
their experience. They are commonly called the States General, and have the
power of treating and concluding the most important affairs of the
Commonwealth, as Peace, War, etc. In a word; their duty is to answer all the
ends of Government, that they may preserve the Commonwealth flourishing, and
safe. But I have undertaken to give a particular account of the Government of
the Hollanders, and I think fit to give the Reader notice, that whatsoever is
said of them, may be applied to the other Provinces, only things are done in
Holland with a greater apparatus, and more solidity.

Thyerry of Aquitain was the first Earl of Holland; thirty Earls or Countesses
have succeeded him in this dignity, all upon condition to preserve the
privileges and immunities of the people; which having been exactly observed by
them all, were first violated by Philip the second, King of Spain, for which he
was deposed, and from that time forward the Sovereign Power devolved to the
States. The States are a public Assembly of the Nobles and the Deputies of
Towns. The Brederodes have the first rank among the Nobles; the Wassenars were
more ancient; the Egmonts the powerfullest; the Scages follow the Brederodes;
then the Assendelf; the Douses; the Warmonts; the Podgeests; the Matenesses,
and others. The Reader must forgive me if I am mistaken in this account.

Three Nobles and no less are used to sit in the States of Holland. The Towns
that send Deputies, never send fewer than two. There are six principal Towns
who have this right; Dort, Harlem, Delf, Leyden, Amsterdam, Tergou. There are
also some others, as in South-Holland, Rotterdam, Gorchum, Schiedam,
Schoonhoove, the Brill; in North-Holland, Alcmaer, Horn, Enchuse.

It is likewise practiced to call the Nobles to ordinary Assemblies; but when
there is an extraordinary Deputation for making of Peace or War, etc. then the
other smaller Towns may likewise send their Deputies.

The States of Holland meet ordinarily every quarter once, and sometimes
between while, and that at the Hague, as the States of Gueldres at Nimmegue, or
Zutphen. The Provincial Advocate presides in these Assemblies, and takes care
that they be held with order, and things managed with prudence. He resides
ordinarily at the Hague, and does no other Office but this; he is to show
himself impartial and just even to the least Borrough or Corporation; he must
take care that nothing pass that is contrary to the Customs and Privileges of
the Province. The first day of the Assembly he is to perform the Office of
Speaker, and to break the matters to the Deputies, to ask their advices, and
take their Votes, and declare for those that are the major part. He is also to
keep a Register of all that is done, and to send a Copy of it to all the Nobles
and Towns, within eight days after the rising of the Assembly.

The States being solemnly assembled, and having all taken an Oath of fidelity
and secrecy, do deliberate about the Propositions made by the Advocate, which
are ordinarily reduced to heads. Their ordinary matters are Subsidies,
Contributions, etc. Changes in State and Government, Peace, War, Leagues; of
alienating, giving, and otherwise disposing of things belonging to the
Province; of granting Privileges, Patents, and many other things, which for
brevity I omit.

As for the order observed in giving their Votes; the Nobles begin, then the
Towns follow in the order they are set down above; every one says his opinion
and reasons with leisure, and quietly, no body interrupting him, and that which
the major part carries, is the Law.

The States as it has been said, meet but once every three months; therefore
because there may be extraordinary business, they choose certain Deputies, who
sit always to deliberate of such matters as happen between the Meeting times,
and which cannot be deferred. By the care of these all Land and Sea-affairs are
governed, and all ministered. The Deputies are called Colleagues, and they that
take care of the Sea-affairs, Counselors of the Admiralty.

They are six in the College of Deputies, and are most commonly chosen for one
year, out of the Nobles and Citizens of Towns, and are bound by Oath to observe
carefully, and without interest, all that shall be commanded them, to take
neither bribe, present, nor pension from any person or persons. They are to
confer Notes with the Governor of the Province, and to give him good and
faithful counsel.

They are also to take great care, that the Resolves and Orders of the last
Assemblies be put in execution; to deliberate of all such things as are not
left to the Governors care; to call together the States upon such occasions as
will admit of no delay.

They are also to provide, that the Towns and Villages of the Province do live
in peace and union one with another; and that there be no violation of the
States Orders, either by force or fraud; to solicit punishment against riotous
Soldiers and Officers that commit Exactions and Extortions.

They are also to keep a Register of the Arms that are in the Magazines; that
the ordinary proportion of Ammunition be delivered to the Garrisons; that from
time to time there be made Fortresses and Forts in Holland, and those kept in
repair. It is not to be forgotten, that it is to them at last that comes all
Exchequer Suits about the public revenue and receipt of Customs, etc.

In the absence of the Governor General they determine all Causes concerning
Prisoners of War, touching Plunder and Booty, etc.

Here follows the method they use in all their affairs.

1. They do the business that concerns the whole Province.

2. Those affairs that regard Towns and Corporations.

Last of all, They decide the Controversies between private persons.

The Counselors of the Admiralty who are six in number, ought to be very
careful, and to act conjoyntly with the Admiral, the States, and their
Deputies, to have always a convenient Fleet ready, to secure the Sea from
Pirates, and that all Merchants and Passengers passing to and fro upon Rivers
and Channels, be duly provided of Pasports. They are also to find out the
ablest Pilots and stoutest Captains, and when they have sworn them, give them
their Orders. They are sovereign Judges of all abuses and frauds committed in
falsifying and counterfeiting Pasports; as also of all quarrels and suits
between Seamen and Soldiers aboard the Ships. In a word; they have all the
power that Admirals do enjoy in England, France, or any other Country.

I have not time to show here by what Agents and Officers the States do
administer justice to their Subjects; keep accounts of their treasure; give
Livings and Fees to be held from them; and many other things, which would
require a greater Volume.

It remains to satisfy some Politicians curiosity, who would know it may be,
whether our State be Monarchy, Aristocracie, or Democracie; or of which of
these it participates most. To which I answer, that I think the Government of
Holland to be a fit mixture of them all.

In the person of the Governor General, who commands the Armies both at Land
and Sea with an absolute Authority, is seen Monarchy; the States represent
Aristocracie; and Democracie is seen in the Government of the Cities and Towns,
for nothing is done without the consent of the meanest Inhabitant.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Proclamation of the States of Holland and West-Frieze, touching the
ancient Right of the Commonwealth of Holland.

THe Knights, Nobles, and Towns of Holland and West-Frieze, representing the
States of the said Provinces, after a mature deliberation and communication of
the business with the Nobles and Senates of Towns, and carefully weighed their
advice and answer, have in discharge of their Oath and duties, thought fit to
publish and make known to all the world by a public Edict, the State of
Government of the said Provinces, being persuaded, that all Readers will be
inclined to pity and favor the deplorable estate of our Country.

It is most certain for that in past ages, for the time of 800. years, the
Sovereign Administration of the Provinces of Holland, West-Frieze, or Zeeland,
was committed to the care of Earls or Countesses, who had received this power
from the States, and that upon certain Conditions.

These Earls did govern with so much moderation and prudence, that they did
never undertake either to declare War, or make Peace, or lay Imposts or Taxes,
without asking the advice and consent of the Nobles, and of the Magistrates of
Towns, though they had their own Privy Counselors, men of great capacity and
abilities; but they did much yield to the Authority of the States, for any
business that concerned these Nations.

This Government thus founded upon equity and justice, could not choose but
attract the blessings of Heaven upon its Lords; and indeed it did, for no
Princes ever performed more glorious actions, or received more demonstrations
of honor from their Neighbors, than they. William the second, Earl of
Holland, was chosen Emperor in the year 1247. And that which is yet an addition
of glory for these Princes, is, that they have maintained many bloody Wars,
obtained many famous victories, and always so defended the very borders of
their States, that their enemies have not been able to get any ground upon them.

We may also protest with truth, that in the space of 800. years, Holland and
Zeeland were never conquered nor subjected by any Strangers whatsoever; neither
did they pass under the power of any Foreign Prince, which is an advantage that
we believe no State in Europe, except it be the Republic of Venice, can brag
of.

We do ingeniously confess, that the firm Constitution of this our Government,
does consist in the union and good intelligence which is between the States and
the Prince; for the power of these Earls was very inconsiderable without the
help of the States, they having nothing but their own Demean or Revenue to live
upon, and uphold the splendour of their Court. We have also observed, by what
means and Authority they have often made their Courts remember that duty, which
some evil counselors had persuaded them to forget, and that not only by
Remonstrances and Petitions, but often by chastizing and personally punishing
those, who wickedly abusing the Princes Authority, did lead them so much out of
the way of justice and moderation.

We find likewise in our Histories, that the States have chosen Guardians for
their Princes under age; and that William the Fifth being run mad, they created
a Lieutenant-Governour in his room. In a word; it is a thing questioned by no
body, that the Sovereign power was always in the States, whenever their
Princes came to die, or were otherwise disabled from performing the Functions
of their Charge; and in those Cases they did appoint a Governor, whom they
called Guardian, or (Ruwarde.)

Under the Domination of the Dukes of Burgundy this Right was also maintained;
for a little after the death of Charles their Duke, and his Daughter the
Duchess Mary, Maximilian of Austria having undertaken to introduce some
novelties, and oppress the Authority of the States, was so opposed, that had he
continued he had without doubt undone himself.

The Emperor Charles being yet minor received Guardians, and the Provinces
received Governors from the said States; and though their liberties had
suffered some diminution under the Dukes of Burgundy, yet did the said Emperor
always respect and honor them, as being persuaded that without their
assistance his power could not stand. Upon this Subject he gave many grave
admonitions to his Son, wishing him to govern with all moderation; and not by
any means to exasperate that power, whose consent he must have to enjoy his
Prerogative.

And indeed he now knows to his own and these Provinces great cost, the truth
of what his Father did foretell; for there can be no other cause alleged of
the troubles and revolutions of the Low Countries, than his going about to
infringe their Privileges, and fasten the yoke of servitude about their necks.
Though these things be as clear as day, yet we have thought it necessary to
publish them to the world; because that many being yet in suspense and
ill-inform'd, do think that the States are only a tumultuous Assembly of some
Deputies, who being men concerned in the quarrel, do carry on things more
according to their own ends, than to the public good. But they that will open
their eyes, and consider the noble actions performed in Holland and Zeeland
within these fifteen years, will easily see that they cannot be the effect of
some few persons passion, but they must necessarily be seconded by the
unanimous consent of whole Nations.

Therefore that none may any longer have the least pretext for their doubts, we
will give such evidences of our power, as shall show whence it is der^v'd.

The Princes that heretofore governed, were not only possessed at first of this
honor, by the consent and agreement of the States, but have also been
continued in this their dignity, by the same, means that all those bodies of
which they were made heads, did remain in the same entire state of liberty; a
thing which it may be we should not now be able to brag of, had not the States
always had a vigilant eye upon the actions of ambitious Princes, and the
malice of ill Counselors, and applied present remedies upon all occasions, and
so stopped up the way to tyranny, as to make it not worth their while to
endeavor it.

These States are divided into two bodies; the Nobility, and the Towns.

The Nobility, by reason of their ancient extraction, their rich possessions,
and their gallant actions, do justly compose the first body, and meet with the
Deputies of Towns in public Assemblies, to provide for the Commonwealth.

The Towns have almost all the same Government.

The College of Senators of the Towns is chosen from among the Patricians, who
in some places are forty, in others thirty four, twenty, more or less. Being
once raised to this honor, they enjoy it as long as they live, or as long as
they have Jus Civita^is: when they die or remove to other places, others are
chosen in their place by the common consent of the Citizens.

These Colleges alone have the power of deliberating and determining the
affairs of the Towns, and that which is resolved upon in these Assemblies, is
by the people received and obeyed.

In this College are every year chosen the Magistrates, viz. four
Bourgemasters, three, two, or seven Aldermen, (for so it is they call the
Judges) to administer justice for one year. In some Provinces these Magistrates
are chosen absolutely; and in others there is a double number chosen, and out
of them the Governor chooses those that are to be Judges.

The Bourgemasters duty is to take care to make good orders be kept throughout
the City in all things, and to provide that the public be no ways dammaged.
The Aldermen determine Causes, and punish Crimes. The Colleges have the
super-intendance over all these in Holland, Zeeland, and West-Frieze; insomuch
that the Princes of these Provinces had not reserved to themselves any other
power, than to create one to preside in these Assemblies. This is the true
state of these Countries; whence may be inferred, that the Magistrates, the
Senates, and the Nobility joined together, do represent the whole body of these
Nations, and that their government is so equally tempered, as to subsist as
long as it has done, and with as much if not more felicity.

When public affairs require that these Colleges of the Nobility and Towns
should meet, they are advertised of it by their Deputies, who do call them
together by express Writs sent to them, in which the heads of the matters to be
deliberated upon, are inserted. These having been discussed and weighed in the
Assembly, Deputies are sent to the States General, with power to consult and
determine such things, as shall be found necessary for the good of all the
Provinces.

The Nobility is present in a competent number. The Towns send one
Bourgemaster, with some Senators. Their duty in general is to treat and
decide, concerning all that has any relation to the welfare of the State; and
particularly they are bound to provide for the maintaining of the Immunities
and Privileges.

These assembled are called the States; not that they are, but because they
represent a nobler and more powerful Assembly which sent them thither. Neither
is it to be imagined, that one can easily by favor and faction attain to this
degree of honor; for besides that naturally the common people are averse: for
those that seem to desire the choice of such a one, is void of its self.
Besides, who would be so mad in the age we live in, as to purchase ambitiously
an employment, which carries with it nothing but cares and afflictions; and
which, by the malice of those who study to defame and black the most unspotted
reputation, is a place of danger, rather than a degree of elevation? Certainly
they that are well acquainted with our Commonwealth, will witness how many
artifices, nay what threats and constraints we are fain to use, to get the
Deputies to accept of their charges.

When these Assemblies are dissolved, the Deputies are bound to give an account
of the Resolutions to those that sent them.

This is that foundation upon the which our Commonwealth was first built, and
has stood for this 700. years, as it appears by our Histories. It Is by this
union that we have maintained a War for these many years, without the loss of
any of our members; and that since our League, no Towns have revolted, nor none
of our Armies divided into parties: for which no better reason can be given,
than that we have proceeded in all things justly, according to the Constitution
of our Government.

For this reason that every one might share in the Government, we have granted
to many small Towns, who formerly did not use to be called to the general
Assemblies, the privilege of sending their Deputies, and taking part in the
administration of all affairs, that so they may the more willingly support the
paying of Taxes, which they themselves shall have thought fit to impose.

Upon the same score the Nobility has the liberty of assisting at these public
Assemblies, in such numbers as they please. Provided still they be of the body
of the great Assembly, except those that are priviledg'd.

If any body can prove that any of the Nobles or Deputies of Towns has gone
beyond his Commission, or has come short of it, or any ways failed in the
trust put in him, he shall be bound to come in the presence of those that did
depute him, and justify himself; and in case he refuse, he shall be punished
according to the rigor of the Law; and we shall think our selves obliged to
those that shall accuse him, and bound to thank them, as true and faithful
lovers of their Country.

But as for those that do cast aspersions, and forge calumnies against the
States, it is fit they should know that they are much mistaken, if they think
to deal with the Nobility and Deputies of Towns, as with private men. For
though they may be led away, and induced to deride their actions and
resolutions, innocently, and only to make sport; yet do we here declare, that
those we shall find doing so maliciously, and with a design of subverting our
State, by vilifying the Governors thereof, we shall hold as enemies, and punish
accordingly.

Therefore be it known to all, that we that do here declare that the Sovereign
power is in the States, do not mean that it is in the Deputies, but in those
that sent them, whom they represent by virtue of their Commission.

This is a truth which many Princes, and particularly her most Serene Majesty
the Queen of England, as also his Excellency the Prince of Orange, when he was
sworn Governor, did both acknowledge. Neither do we think that any body can
dispute so constant a verity; for else it would follow, that the States have
not, now they are free, so much power as they had before: and not only the
contracts made with the English, and the creation of the Governor General,
would be invalid, but all that the States have so nobly performed, since these
fifteen years, would be unjust, which no body but our greatest enemies will, or
dare say.

From what has been said, it appears how great a necessity there is of keeping
inviolable the Authority of the said States, as the foundation of all the
safety of our Commonwealth, and of letting every body know, that the Sovereign
power is no less in them now than it was under their former Princes. Decreed at
the Hague, and ordered to be published by the common consent of the States.
Made at Har^^m^ the sixteenth of October, in the year 1587.

THE THIRD BOOK Containing the DELIGHTS OF HOLLAND.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original of Holland.

SOme Writers say, that the word Holland is derived from the G^rman word
Holtlandt, which is as much as to say, a Country of Wood; and they found this
their conjecture upon the names of many Villages, which have been named from
their Woods. Our Annals likewise do say, that formerly this Province was full
of Forests, and the Seaside all bordered with Trees.

There was not above a hundred years ago a large Forest in the Island of
Texel, (which does as it were make up the tail of the Lion, which the seventeen
Provinces put together do represent.) And to this day there are bodies and
stumps of Trees, which do often hurt Ships, and entangle their Cables about
their roots, which in a storm is often the cause of the loss of diverse Ships;
for that reason the Fishermen never cast their Nets there, for fear of tearing
them.

Some others say, and that probably enough, that the word Holland does denote
the property of the Earth, which in most places seems hollow, and quakes as if
it swam upon the top of the Water. To this purpose Guicciardin tells a Story of
a Cow, That passing in a Meadow half a mile from Harlem, fell into a Ditch, and
was drowned, and ^^re^ days after was found in a Lake hard by the Town, on the
East Side of it, which had no communication with the Ditch.

The third opinion, and that which is most likely to be true, is, that these
Provinces having been conquered by the Normans, they gave them the name of the
Provinces they came out of. And in effect, not only whole Provinces, but many
Towns and Villages have the same names here, and in Denemark, as Zeeland,
Oland, besides the Kingdom of Norway; the Towns, as Schagen, Bergen,
Valkenburg, and many others, which it is needless to set down.

In all antiquity it is observable, that when ever a Nation did enlarge by
Conquests or Colonies, the same custom was put in use. So the French having
entered Gallia drive out the Romans, and called the Country France. The
Spaniards do the same in the West Indies. And to go no further, the Dutch
themselves have given the name of Batavia to that great Town in the Indies,
which they have made the seat of their Trade and Empire in those parts.

These Northern Nations, not content with their having deluge-like overrun
these Countries, passed into Neustria, and called it Normandy; and to this day
the people of that Province have an accent much resembling that of the Danes in
their tongue, which is not a small conjecture that they are come originally out
of the North. Our Authors do not agree about the time that these Nations did
invade Holland, and whether they were again driven out by the French or no.

CHAP. II.
Of the length and breadth of Holland; the number of its Towns and Villages.

UNder the name of the Low Countries are comprehended the seventeen Provinces,
and before these troubles Flanders was esteemed the best of them; but now
Holland may more justly claim that title, as being the richest Country in the
world for its bigness.

Holland is encompassed almost on three sides by the Ocean, viz. on the West,
the East, and the North; it has Brabant, the River Meuse, and Utrect, to the
South. It may be said of this Province as an Ancient said of France, that there
is no desert, solitude, nor empty place in it; for there has been such an
affluence and concourse of people by reason of the Wars, that it is almost too
little to hold them. The Circuit of Holland is only a hundred and fourscore
miles, and in this compass are comprehended great Lakes, and a part of the
South Sea. Its length is taken from the Island Schelling, in the North, to the
River Scheld, and Zeeland in the South. The breadth is not above twenty four
miles, if we take it in a straight line in the middle, from Catwyck by the
Seaside, to Woerden, a small Town upon the Frontiers of Utrect.

The chief and principal Towns are six in number; Dort, Harlem, Delft, Leyden,
Amsterdam, Goude. The others that are less Towns, but who do send their
Deputies to the States General, are these; Rotterdam, Gorcum, Schiedam,
Schoonhove, Briel, Alcmaer, Horn, Enchuyse, Edam, Monnickendam, Medenblick, and
Purmerend. The other Towns are not admitted to the same privileges, either
because they are built upon the conquered Country of Brabant, as
Gertrudenbergh, Heusden, Workum; or because they have particular Lords, that
will not have them belong to the States, as Vianen is owned by the Brederodes,
and Yselsteyn is claimed by the States of Utrect; or else because they are
poor, and cannot bear the charges of Deputies, as Woerde, Audewater, Heukelom,
Asperen, Leerdam, Naerden, W^sop, and Muyden, of which mention shall be made
hereafter.

The principal Buroughs which have the privileges of Towns, though they be
not walled, are, the Hague, Vlaerding, Grav^sant, Delfs-haven, Beverwyck,
Schagen, Nieuport.

There are in Holland above two hundred Villages, which if you consider for
their building, trade, and riches, they may take place of many Towns in other
Countries; but the fairest of them are Nortwic, Reensburg, Worbury,
Maeslant-s^^ys, Egmond, Ryswyck, Geervliet, etc.

Vlaerding Re^nsburg, and Bev^^wyck were in former ages reckoned amongst the
strongest and fairest Towns of this Province; as also Geervliet. But Holland is
much changed since its troubles, and many Towns are risen by trade and their
situation, which before were very inconsiderable. I have heard old Women say,
how they could remember that Lootwyck was as big again as it is now, and that
it has been by little and little eaten away by the Ocean, its too powerful
Neighbor.

In the year 1574. at Schevelinge, near the Hague, the Sea broke in, and
carried away 121. Houses, as any body may see it recorded upon a Picture in the
Church. In a word, the ruin of the neighboring Provinces, and the great a
version of the people to slavery, has made them all resort to this, and there
produce that plenty and abundance of all things, which commonly follows great
numbers of people, particularly being so situated, as to take the advantage of
three great Rivers, and the Sea.

CHAP. III.
Of the division of Holland, and the nature of the Soil.

HOlland is divided into the South or Meridionall part, which reaches from
Zeeland, Brabant, and Utrect, to the Dike at Sparendam, and that is above half
Holland; and into North-Holland, or West-Frieze, which reaches from Amsterdam
to the North Sea: and the people though penned up as it were in so small a
compass, does nevertheless differ very much in manners, customs, and Clothes,
in these parts.

The Kennemaers, which the Annals speak so much of, did live between Harlem,
Alcmaer, Beverwy^k, and Purmerend. There is a little Mountain between these
Towns, which carries the name of St. Albert, and there the Earls were installed
Lords of the Kennemaers; and near that place they kept their Courts, as well
because of the beauty of the Country, as for the convenience of many fair
Castles that are built there, such as Cleves, Brederode, Velsen, Egmond.

Waterland is so called, because of the abundance of waters, on the top of
which it seems to swim. There are in it but three little Towns, viz. Edam,
Monnicken-dam, and Purmerend.

That part of Holland which is nearest the North, has a soft moorish Soil, not
at all fit to be tilled. From the Downs to the Frontier of Brabant, it is
nothing but Meadows, which toward the end of October begin to be covered with
water, and which increases by continual rains and storms, and that lasts all
Winter, insomuch that in most places you see nothing but some Steeples and
Houses, which look as if they came out of the Sea; all these fine Meadows being
then covered with Boats, and the Dikes with Passengers. This Water does
mightily fatten the ground; and in the beginning of February, (provided the
Frosts do not hinder it) begins to be emptied, by the admirable invention of
those Wind-mills, which drive away these deluges of Water, and confine them to
certain Channels. The Earth being dry begins about March to look green, and
then the Cattle come out to grazing.

Now it is to be observed, that the favorable Wind for Holland is the
South-East, and the worst is the North-West.

To prevent the dangerous effects of so much Water, this Country is full of
Banks, raised by the industry of the Inhabitants, and which have cost vast
sums of money to make, as they do still to maintain and keep in repair. The
chief is the bank of the River Issel, that of the Meuse, of Sparendam, and of
Medenblick. The care of them belongs to the Dyckgraves of each Hundred, and to
the Heemrades, who are Gentlemen of the Country.

In the year 1638. the Dike of Issel broke by the thawing of the River; for the
Rhyne carrying huge mountains of Ice, they eat into it, and made (...) breach
of many foot, not far from Utrect; whereupon almost all Holland was overflown
with clear water, which did little hurt: the breach was soon made up, and the
water drained by the help of the Wind-mills.

The Earth produces all sorts of Fruits and good Corn about R^^nsbourg and
Nortwyck, as also near Vooerschote and Warmont, but not enough for the vast
multitudes of people that swarm in this Country, therefore the great supply is
from Poland and Moscovy. There grows besides here Hemp and Flax, for fine
Linen, and Sayls, etc.

There are incomparably more Meadows than arable grounds, which feed a world of
Cattle; particularly a large sort of Cows, which give great store of Milk, of
which is made excellent Butter, and rare Cheeses, which are sent all the world
over. In some places there are Cows that yield three great Pales full of Milk a
day.

Every Spring there comes great store of ^ean Cows and Oxen from Dannemark,
Jutland, and H^lstein, which are within three weeks time fa^^ed upon these
excellent pastures. In some places they ^owe the Grass twice a year; and the
Hay is much better than in any other place; it is for that reason, that the
Horses and Cows are bigger and taller than in any other place.

The Earth of which the Turss are made is called Veens, which being cut out of
the Ditches, and exposed to the Sunbeams, grows hard, and then being kept some
time in a Barn or Garret, grows dry, and fit for fuel. The best are those
that come from Friezeland, and they use them in Brewing and Baking. They have
all much sulphur in them, and being mingled with Wood, make an excellent fire.

The mountains of Sand called Downs, serve as a bar to the fury of the Ocean;
and though they seem barren, yet have they an advantage, which is, that they
are full of Rabbits, which are both a pleasant diversion, and a good provision
for Passengers.

The Seaside from the Meuse to the Texel is about a hundred miles in length;
and there is so plain and smooth a way between the Mountains and the Sea, that
it is a great pleasure to travel in it either afoot or on Horseback. When the
Sea is calm, you may see the Ships under sail; and if there be a storm, it is
with a kind of terrible delight, that you may perceive the threatening Sea come,
and spend all its fury upon this even shore.

There are some pleasant Forests standing yet, as that of the Hague and
Harlem. There is likewise a Wood at Sevenhuyse, a fine Village five leagues
from Leyden, where the Scholars go twice a year to take the sport of shaking
the Trees, and making a great sort of Bird that builds in them fall at their
feet.

It is most certain that this Province was anciently full of Trees, which
(according to the opinion of some Authors) were destroyed by that horrible
storm, which happened in the year 860. and which shut up the mouth of the River
Rhene near Lat^i^, made it take another course, and mingle with the Meuse,
after a great devastation of Woods, Lands, and Houses. In proof whereof you see
that the Channel that comes from U^rect, and passes through Leyden, retains
yet the name of the Rhyne. The Country people in digging do find to this day
in the Veens, and other places, great bodies and branches of Trees,
particularly toward the South. Nay they have found Nuts entire and well
preserved in the bottom of the Water, though there has been no Trees to bear
them since this hundred years.

And indeed it is no wonder that a Country formerly overrun with Wood, should
now be so empty of it, since we know that Germany which is now so full of Towns
and Cities, was anciently one great Forest almost.

The Air is pretty well tempered in Holland, though cold do a little
predominate, there being continual winds and frequent rains; but the
inconstancy of the Climate is such, that the seasons seem to be in a perpetual
confusion. It rains ordinarily in the Dog-dayes; and sometimes in July it is as
cold as in December. Likewise in Winter it is sometimes so warm and mild
weather, that one can hardly endure a fire: but as the heat is never violent,
so the cold is seldom lasting, according to the Proverb that says, that
rigorous Masters do not govern long; yet is there no such general Rule but
admits of an exception; for there has been long and hot Summers, and violent
cold lasting Winters: the Annals speak of some, as of the year 1149.

When the Channels are frozen, they slide upon them with a certain sort of
Shoes called Skates, which have a long, shining, narrow, crooked Iron, that
stands out before. They that are perfect in this exercise turn their Feet
inwards, that the Iron may take the more hold of the Ice, upon which they fly
like Birds in the air with that swiftness, that one can hardly follow them with
the eye. The Women too use this as a diversion, and many do very pretty tricks
upon the Ice; but most are content with a straight course, as much as needs to
get heat and ground. Every Sunday after Sermon all the people of the Towns come
out upon the Ice, some to slide and others to look on. I knew a young Clown of
ten year old, who did brag that he had gone eighteen miles or six leagues in an
hour upon his Skates. The same laid a Wager with a Peasant his neighbor, that
he would sooner slide three leagues, than the other should ride one and a half
with the best Horse he should get. It is ordinary for these sort of people to
go from Leyden to Amsterdam in an hour and a quarter, if the Ice be even, and
yet that is near eighteen miles.

There are besides things called Traisneaur, like our Sledges, that are of two
sorts, some that are drawn by Horses, and others that a man drives before him
as he slides upon the Ice. There are also Boats, that having a great Iron under
them, sail along, and go sometimes fifteen leagues an hour; but that is seldom
practiced, because there is danger in it, and because that often the Ice is not
even.

When it has snowed and frozen together, they use great Sledges to go across
the Meadows, and not follow the ordinary way. Some wonder to see the Country
people carry great Poles upon their Shoulders; but the reason of it is, that if
the Ice should break, they might by the favor of their Poles, (both ends of
which would lie upon the two extremities of the cracked Ice) get out again. The
temerity of the Hollanders deserves to be blamed; for many will venture upon
one nights Ice, and thence happen many sad accidents.

Holland is so flat and even a Country, that you see not a Mountain nor a
Hill, except those Sand-hills that keep out the Sea. It is almost all Meadows,
cut into a thousand Channels, which in Summer by their delicate green, and
their variety of Flowers, are a pleasant object to look on. It Is true, that in
some places the Earth produces Corn, Beans, Pease, and all sorts of grains; the
Mountains of Sand are full of Rabbits; the Waters of excellent Fishes; and the
Air supplies them with Fowl from the Northern parts, viz. with Woodcocks,
Snipes, Hernes, etc. insomuch that Holland may be called very justly, the
Marrow of the Low Countries, as well for its fertility, as for the delights and
pleasures that may be enjoyed in it. It seems a terrestrial Paradise for its
Meadows and pleasant Fields, the Channels and Rivers so ingeniously contrived
for Trade, and the noble magnificence of its Buildings. We must needs confess
that there are very few plowed grounds, considering the vast numbers of people
that must be fed; and yet there are no where greater Storehouses, nor better
furnished than here: nay Holland may with reason be called the Storehouse of
Europe, considering the vast transportation of all sorts of grains that are
made from hence into Italy, Spain, England, France, and Brabant, when their own
Corn has failed them by any accident of War or Famine.

That great Man Scaliger speaking of the Wonders of this Province, says, that
here grows no Vines, and yet here is more Wine than in any one place in Europe.
In effect, the Wines of the Rhene, the Mosella, and the Mouse, come to Dort,
and from thence into all the other places of these Countries. The Wines of
France, Spain, and Greece, come to Amsterdam and Rotterdam.

There grows very little Wood, and yet there are no where to be found more
Carpenters and Joyners than here. And it may be there is not in the rest of
Chrystendome, so many Ships and Boats as in this one Province: there is scarce
a Peasant but has his Boat to bring his Commodities to the Towns. To be short;
says he, we live amongst the waters, and yet we drink not of them. There are
no Flocks of Sheep, and very little Flax; and yet where is made more Cloth and
Linen than here? I add, that there are no Mines in Holland, and yet all sorts
of Metals are more abundant here than in any part of the world, as it appears
by the rich Furnitures and Ornaments of the Houses of our Citizens, whose Wives
delight in that more than in any thing else.

Strangers cannot easily conceive these wonders, or at least they alone amongst
them that understand the secret of Trade, and what vast advantages the
Hollanders have reaped from that War, which they so long and so generously
maintained against Spain, and which at last ending in an honorable peace, has
left them Masters of the Trade of the world, fetching by their Ships from the
remotest parts of it all that is good and precious, and to be had for money.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Manners and Dispositions of the Inhabitants.

THe old Hollanders were formerly despised by their Neighbors, for the
grossness of their temper, and the simplicity of their life. They were used to
be called Block-heads, and eaters of Cheese and Milk: but as they formerly had
the reputation of silly, so now they are esteemed as subtle and understanding a
Nation as any is in Europe; as may be well evidenced from their Treaties and
Alliances made with Strangers. This I think proceeds from that Commerce they
drive through all the world, and from the mixture made amongst them by diverse
Strangers that have settled in these parts; for above half those that do inhabit
the Towns are either Strangers, or descended from them.

They all love their Liberties, even those that have made but a few years stay
in the Province, as if the genius of it had a secret power over men's
inclinations. It is not lawful to beat nor strike any body. Servants have as
great privileges as their Masters, who dare not abuse them with blows. And if
any body chance to be so far transported by their passion, as to (...)t their
Man or Maidservant, and (...) come to the hearing of the Magistrate, they are
fined for it, and often forced to pay them their whole year of wages, though
not due, and so turn them away.

There are no Slaves in Holland, but any man in that condition is free as soon
as he sets his foot on that ground. The Hollanders are very constant in their
resolutions, and seldom desist till they have obtained their end.

They are not so much upon the punctilio of honor, as the other Nations, but
are rather given to Trade and getting, and they seem as if they had sucked in
with their milk the insatiable desire of acquiring. They never complain of the
pains they take, and go as merrily to the Indies, as if they went to their
Country Houses. They are of a strong Constitution, tall proper men, and very
capable of whatsoever they undertake.

Those amongst them that prefer the study of Liberal Arts to the desire of
growing rich, do succeed as prosperously; for without doubt or flattery,
Holland has produced as many learned and ingenious persons as any Province in
Europe. Others follow the Art of Painting, and transport themselves into Italy,
where are the best Masters of the world; and by these means good Pictures are
very common here, there being scarce an ordinary Tradesman, whose House is not
adorned with them. If there be any body that has any new invention or
discovery, he shall be sure to find money for it here, if it will yield any.

Above all things the Hollander, hate all Quarrels and Duels; as likewise they
abhor all treacherous actions, blasphemy, swearing, etc. They are no ways
bloody-minded, but much more inclined to compassion than their Neighbors.

I pass to their way of living. And first of their Winter-Provision.

In the beginning of Autumn when the Turfs are dry, they lay in their provision
of them. Toward November they buy an Ox, or half a one, according as their
Family is, that they salt and smoke for Summer, eating it with Butter or
Sallet. Every Sunday they take out a great piece out of their salting-Tub, upon
which they dine: this piece comes every day after upon the Table all the week
long, with some other Dish of boiled Meat, or Milk. They do not love Pottage so
much as the French; neither do they much esteem Leek, or Garlic, or Onion.
They are not nice in their Diet, and none amongst them, but the very rich, do
eat after the French fashion.

They have that common custom of all Northern Nations, which is, that they
delight much in drinking and feasting with their friends; if any chance to be
quarrelsome in his drink, he is presently driven out of the Company. Here we
must not omit a certain custom, which has for drift, peace, amity, and
concord: All the Towns are divided into diverse Quarters, called Neighbourhoods;
every one of these has a Master, and he has his Counselors; if there happen
any quarrel, the parties appear before him, who endeavors to agree them; if
he cannot, then they may go twice a week before the Commissioners for hearing
of quarrels, and keeping peace amongst Neighbors; if they cannot bring them to
take or give satisfaction, then they may go to Law.

The Treasurer of each Neighborhood receives the Fines, which are these
following: If any one has not waited upon a dead body of the Neighborhood
going to be buried, he is fined three halfpence. The Heirs or Kindred of the
dead person are bound to make a Present, according to their quality, though
there be no set Tax. For a Child they give not so much as for a person of age.
The gift that is made for a married person, is called in the language of the
Country a fat Dish. When a Citizen purchases a House, he is bound to a Present
proportionable to the value of his House.

When there is a pretty round sum of money got together by six or seven years
gathering, the Master and his Counselors meet at the desire of the Neighbors,
and appoint a day for a Treat, which lasts ordinarily three or four. It Is most
commonly in Autumn, and there every one comes with his Wife, but without either
Children or Dogs, under pain of being fined. Before they sit down, the Laws of
the Feast are publicly read; amongst which the chiefest are, that you must not
blaspheme, nor start any discourse about Religion, for fear of falling out.
Then the Master sits down with his Wife, and the Counselors next to him of
each side; the others draw lots for their places. If any one press another to
drink more than he is able, he pays a Fine; if he strike, he is banished the
company, and not admitted the next day without asking pardon. At eight of the
Clock every one goes out, and waits upon the Master to his Lodging, where they
begin to drink afresh, till wine and sleep part them, and bring them to their
own homes. All the time is passed merrily, and without Ceremony, as if they
were all equal. The four days being ended, they sum up what they have
spent; and if the public purse cannot pay the charges, they supply it by an
equal contribution. I have recited this custom at large, that from it may be
deduced some knowledge of their humor. They are very patient, and not so hasty
as other Nations, and have a Proverb amongst them, which says, that Rich
people do not use to fight. They have going to Law; and as for affronts and
injurious words they are made amends for, by the recantation and confession of
him that is in the wrong; then they shake hands, and are made friends.

The married Women and Maids are very fair and chaste. They have a great care
of their House, and keep all their Cupboards, Cabinets, even the Floors,
extreme neat: some of them are so curious, as not to let you come into their
rubbed Rooms, without putting on a pair of Slippers, or making your own Shoes
very clean. The Women do enjoy as much liberty as their Husbands; and it is an
unpardonable fault to beat them. I have often heard them say, that if a Husband
does beat his Wife, he is bound to give his Neighbors a Gammon of Bacon; and
if she beat him, she is bound to give two. Every day they rub and wash the
lower Floors, and straw them with fine Sand, and make them so neat, that
Strangers often make a scruple of spitting in them. If the Citizens Wives are
thus neat, the Country people are no ways inferior to them in that point; for
they keep all even to their Stables very clean. The Household Stuff of the
better sort is very rich, of gold and silver, and carved work; good Hangings;
excellent Pictures; rare Cabinets, filled with China, etc.

I have observed one thing of the Hollanders by living long amongst them, which
is, that they do not easily give credit to such as tell strange Stories and
wonderful accidents, happened a great way off; and when, by their silence and
postures, they seem to admire it, it is then that they believe least of all what
you say, but they do not take pleasure in contradicting. They are not given to
swearing, nor robbing; but are tenderhearted, and inclined to pity, and will
not willingly see any body wronged in their presence.

They are a little too indulgent to their Children, and are punished for it;
for many of them rebel against their Parents, and at last go away to the
Indies, the ordinary vent of these Provinces. When any body tells them of their
fondness to their Children, they presently say, Does any body spoil their own
Face, or cut off their own Nose?

They are very laborious and industrious, and in the name of liberty and profit
undertake any thing. They love familiarity, and are much taken with people that
being of great quality do not refuse to eat and drink with them. Prince William
the first, Prince of Orange, won their hearts with that popular way, and did
the King of Spain more mischief by it, than if he had been at the head of an
Army against him. They despise and undervalue proud people; and to please them,
you must conform to their humor. They are very free, and open apparently, but
are indeed always upon their guard. They hate cheats, and are seldom deceived
twice.

Those amongst them that are descended from Strangers, do retain something of
their first origin, and are a good while before they become right Hollanders.

We have spoke already of their Diet; but this is only to be added, that Trade
having brought riches, sumptuosity has followed: so that the Hague may be
called a compendium of the most glorious Courts in Chrystendome, and Amsterdam
the magazine of all that is precious in Europe.

CHAP. V.
Of the Trade of the Hollanders; and the ways of getting a Livelihood.

IT is an ordinary saying in Holland, that He that will work can never want,
and it is a very true one; for there are so many Trades kept going by their
great commerce, that no body can want work. All Arts are here exercised; and
experience shows, that Manufactures are better made here than in the other
Provinces. All turns to account here; and even they that make clean the Kennals
with an Iron, and Nets at the end of it to bring up the ordure, may earn half a
Crown a day, if they will work hard. Children, as so on as they are bound
Apprentice, get their own bread. Amongst the Country people, some make Butter
and Cheese; others cut up Turfs; every Marketday they bring their Milk, and
Butter, and Whey to Town, which the Tradesmen and Journeymen live most upon.

Among the Citizens, some put out their Money, and live upon the interest;
others trade with it, and are called Merchants. Their chief Commodities are
Butter, and Cheese, and Cloth, and many other Manufactures, as we shall see in
the Description of Leyden.

The situation of this noble Province is such, as if Nature intended it for the
general Mart of Europe; for it has the neighborhood of the Sea, and is it
self full of navigable Lakes, Rivers, Channels, all which are night and day
loaded with Boats and Passengers. Many Channels have been made since the
publication of the peace with Spain, as that from Leyden to Harlem, and from
Amsterdam to Goude, which is called (Trech-Sch^ite^) because there the Boats
are drawn by Horses, that so they may come in at set-times. The said Channels
are made with the greatest ease that can be; for as soon as you have dug
three or four foot, you meet with the water.

The Herring-Fishing is properly the golden Mines of this Country, by the
great revenue it brings yearly to it. It is a hard matter to say how many
thousands of men are kept by it; for besides those that go to Sea, who are a
great number, there are employed as many more in making of Boats and Barrels to
pickle them up in.

Every Summer in June there sets out a Fleet of Fishermen from the Meuse; they
call them Busses. They cast their Nets near the English Coast upon
Midsummer-Eve, according to the ancient custom; they pickle them up in
Barrels, and serve all the rest of the world with them: the last Fishing is
most valued, and the Herrings of that Fishing are all carried abroad. Ten days
after Midsummer they may sell them publicly, but not before; then many go up
and down, crying, Fresh Herring, which are esteemed as a dainty by every body.
The name of the man that first invented the way of pickleing them, deserves to
be known; it was William Bueckeld, and he died at Bieverliet, in the year 1347.
Charles the fifth Emperor went one day to see his Tomb, in acknowledgment of
the service he had done his Country.

The Merchants do every day increase their Trade by making Societies and
Companies, and setting out men of War at their own charges to protect their
Ships home. They never want Seamen, for the Hollanders do delight in going to
Sea; nay I have heard many of them say, that they could never enjoy their
health but at Sea. There are many of these Companies; as that of Moscovy, for
Furrs, Skins, and Rye; that of Island and Groenland, for the fishing of Whales:
but the chiefest of all, and who with Force and Arms drive a prodigious Trade,
are the East and West India Companies, who have a Patent from the States.

The West India Company had made great profit by the taking of the Baia de
^odos l^s sanctos, and of the Silver Fleet which Jason Peter Hain brought into
Holland, in the year 1629. which also was the cause of the taking of Bosleduke
from the Spaniards. The taking of Fernambuco did likewise give hopes of
conquering the rest of Brasil; but after the depart of the noble Count Morice
of Nassaw, the Negroes and Portugueses joining together, revolted, and reduced
the Company to great extremities; since it has suffered another defeat, which
has almost made an end of ruining it. It has often been proposed to unite it
with the East India Company; but all in vain, for the one is too high and rich,
and the other too poor.

The East India Company has its principal Seat at Amsterdam. It Is this Company
that has Kings and Kingdoms tributary to it, and depending upon it. It Is this
Company that makes the Hollanders name famous in the remotest parts of the
Earth, and triumphs over the riches of the Orient, bringing home Pearls,
Diamonds, Gold, all sorts of Aromatic Druggs, etc. Besides Batavia, the
principal Town, the Company has a great number of strong Forts well in order,
to protect their Merchants, terrify Strangers, and keep the Indians in awe.
It Is thought that the Company pays above 10000 men; the places and employments
are much valued, and not to be come by but by the intercession of some great
friend.

Every Summer about August there comes in an East India Fleet of ten or twelve
Ships, which is esteemed to bring in the value of above a million of gold. The
prohibitions that Philip King of Spain made to the Hollanders from trading in
his Country, were the cause of this Enterprise. It Is said that the Ve^etians
did counsel and further it for a design, which succeeded otherwise than they
expected, and to their own loss. The Ships that go for the Indies are of
extraordinary bulk. Every one that has put in a thousand pounds may be a
Director; and every one that has a hundred pounds there, may have three hundred
for it; and every hundred yields forty and forty five, sometimes more,
sometimes less. The riches of this Company are inestimable; and to go about to
describe them, were to desire credit to a thing which to most people would seem
fabulous, though they are very real in themselves.

All the Channels render themselves into Lakes, and they into the Sea. There
are two chief overtures to the Ocean; the first is the mouth of the River
Meuse, which is at the Brill, and G^ree; the other from Amsterdam, and the
Towns of North-Holland, to the Texel.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Imposts and Customs.

THough Holland be both naturally, and by the greatness of its commerce,
abundant in all things; yet every thing is extreme dear, and that for two
reasons; first, because of the greatness of the Consumption, caused by the
affluence of people from all parts; the other, because of the Excise which is
upon every thing almost, and which is easily supported by the Inhabitants, by
reason of the great gains every one is able to make in his profession. These
Imposts are so laid and gathered, that they are willingly paid, though there
be nothing free from them. The Money that is thus raised, comes to a vast
sum, which added to the situation of the Country, has made all the King of
Spain's endeavors vain. But to show the greatness of this Tribute, I will give
only this example: A Cow of nine years old, if it be sold for five pound, will
have paid above six pound to the States. There is never a Dish comes to Table,
but has paid excise above twenty times. The States seeing the necessity of
having money to defend their liberties, did by little and little, and not all
at once, settle these Excises, so that the people bear it cheerfully enough. In
the time of the War, every one paid the two hundredth penny of their Estates;
they only that were not worth two hundred pound principal, were exempted from
this contribution. There are many other Imposts, which may be all seen in the
Second Part of this Book, in the Chapter of Imposts. All that is wonderful, is
to consider that that very thing for the fear of which these Nations revolted
from the Spaniards, has been put in execution in a higher manner upon
themselves, by their own consent, and proved the means of their preservation.

Let us now come to the description of particular Towns; and let us begin by
Leyden, which is to the rest, as the Spring is to the other seasons of the
year, the gayest, and most pleasant. Towns in other Countries are subject to
the injuries of time and revolutions, but here they spring up, increase, and
grow bigger every day. This Town amongst the rest, has had the good fortune to
be one of the most flourishing of the Low Countries. The Ocean is on the
West Side of it, and within twelve miles; Harlem on the North, within fifteen;
and Amsterdam within one and twenty; Utrect within thirty, toward the East;
Delft and the Hague on the South and South-West, and within nine miles distance.

CHAP. VII.
Of Leyden, in Latin Lugdunum Batavorum.

THis Town, the greatest and most pleasant that is in Europe, (if we consider
the magnificence of its Buildings, the breadth of its Streets, the
conveniences of its Channels, and the pleasing shade of the Trees planted on
each side the Channels) is situated upon the ancient River of Rhene, which goes
through it, makes many Islands, and then joins in one bed at the white Gate. It
is almost in the Center of Holland, and from it we will draw lines to the rest
of the Cities, which are as it were the circumference. It is a very ancient
City, as appears by the Burg, built either by the Romans or Saxons; whence many
derive the word Leyden from Legio, there being there a Roman Legion in
quarters. The opinion of some is that it was built by an English man, in the
year 1050. Plutarch and Ptolomy mention it; and Antonine calls it the Capital
of the Germans.

The Burg-graves of Leyden have taken their name from this Burg, which is round
and high, and from it one may discover all the adjacent Meadows, the sandy
Downs, and the Sea of Harlem. The ascent to it is by steps, and round about it
as well as within are Fruit Trees in abundance. It has about a hundred and
fifty foot in compass; and within these few years there has been bred up Hedges
all trimmed, and cut into Labyrinths, which in a short time will make it a very
recreative place.

In the year 1121. the great Church was consecrated to St. Peter; it is one of
the finest Churches in Holland, having three ranks of Pillars on each side
without the Quire. It is said that there was a high Tower, which served as a
Light-House to those that were at Sea, and passed before Catvic, but it fell
down in the year 1509.

In the year 1344. the Church dedicated to St. Pancratius, was blessed; it is a
stately Building, so much of it as is done. It is now the Church of the French
and Walloons; the great Scaliger lies buried in it.

In the year 1573. the Spaniards having taken Harlem after a long and tedious
siege, went and sat down before Alcmaer; but being forced to raise the siege
of that place, they came before Leyden; but hearing of Count Frederick de
Nassaw his coming, they retired. A little after having recruited their Army,
they came again under the conduct of their General Baldese, who judging that
it would be a hard matter to take the Town by force, resolved to starve them to
a surrender. The Inhabitants endured all the extremities of famine, and at last
the banks that kept in the Rivers Meuse and Issel, being broke on purpose by
the Hollanders, the Spaniards were forced to forsake their Trenches. The first
relief came into the Town the third of October, which is still made an
anniversary day of Thanksgiving. Every year there is a Play made in
representation of this siege, which draws great numbers of people to see it,
and the money gathered is given to poor Orphans. In the middle of the famine a
troop of Citizens being come to the door of one Peter Adrian de Verf, cried out
aloud, that they must either surrender, or perish with hunger; but he answered
them with an immortal constancy, Friends, kill me if you will, and divide me
between you; for it is the same thing to me to die by your hands, or by the
hands of my enemies. They made Paper-money, with this Inscription, H^c
libertatis ergo pugno pro patria, etc. which is to say, We endure all these
miseries for our liberty and our Country. I will add, that as Leyden has been
the second Town that sustained valiantly the Spaniards attacks, so the Sas of
Gand was the last place but one which fell into the States hands, and that by
the fault of the Governor, who was not able to make use of his Sluices, against
those who by water had driven the Spaniards from their Walls.

A year after this painful siege, was established the famous University of
Leyden, to recompense the Inhabitants for their constant sufferings. But many
other reasons might invite the States to choose this Town before any other; for
it is neat, finely built, delicate Walks, and a pleasant Country about the
Town, the Sea near it. The University was inaugurated the eighth of February,
in the year 1574. and every year upon the same day is declared Rector, he whom
his Highness the Prince of Orange is pleased to choose, out of three that are
named to him.

Here has always been very famous professors in all faculties; but
particularly the Civil Law and Physic have always flourished, by the
particular care of his Highness the Prince of Orange. The great Scaliger, and
the incomparable Salmazius, have been as the two great Lights among the other
Stars of this learned Firmament. There are besides Lectures of Divinity,
Mathematics; in all which the professors do excel, as being chosen with care,
and well recompensed for their labors. When any one dies, the three Curators
provide another of the same faculty; so the University is always supplied.

Those Students that are written in the University-Book do enjoy great
privileges. They that are above twenty year old, may have fourscore quarts of
Wine in a year, which pay no excise, and half a barrel of Beer every month
free likewise. They give a groat to the Servants of the University every
quarter.

The Rector or Chancellor has his Counselors, before whom are brought all
quarrels, and they endeavor to make the parties agree; if they will not, then
they may go to a trial before the University- Counsel, where the Rector
presides, and decides without appeal in civil matters. If any of the Students
have committed a crime that deserves death or otherwise, the Officers of
justice cannot take him before they have the Rectors consent; and then too they
may not carry him to a loathsome prison, but into the Townhouse Hall.

Duels are severely prohibited, ever since a Danish Student was killed in one.
Besides they are forbid to commit any riot in the night time, or break the
Citizens Windows, under pain of a considerable Fine, and often of being
bannish'd.

There is a Watch goes on purpose to hinder such disorders, which takes away
Scholars Swords if they be insolent, and carries them to prison, where next day
they are produced before the University- Counsel. There are also as good
Masters for all Exercises, as Riding, Dancing, etc. as any where, and the
Italian, French, and Spanish Tongues are taught excellently well. Here are
Students of all Nations of Europe, most of them Gentlemen of good Families; and
often Princes, and great Lords Sons, have been seen to come hither for their
education. They all have a dependence upon the Rector; and to this day never
any Member of the University was put to death, except a servant to a Prince,
who confessed himself to be the author of a murder that had been committed.

The University has Schools for the different Lectures; and on the Northside of
the great Court, is the famous Printing Press of John Elzevier, so well known
for his fair Characters. It is placed upon the Rapembourg, the fairest Street
of all the Town; for in the middle of it runs a large Channel, and of each
side is a row of tall Trees from one end to the other. The Pavy has a little
fall toward the Channel, so that it can never be dirty let there fall never
so much rain. There are five fair Bridges over this Channel, and abundance of
delicate Houses on each side. It Is not only this Street that is thus shaded,
but all the Town; so that he was in the right that desired to know, whether
Leyden was in a Wood, or a Wood in Leyden. We should never have done if I would
particularize all the singularities of Leyden: the great and most frequented
Street begins at the Gate of the Hague, and ends at Utrect Gate; it is the
broadest and highest Street of the Town. The most considerable next is Harlem
Street, which has a Channel called the old Rhene, into which all the other
Channels do fa^l, and which ends it self at Catvic. It is adorned with four
stone Bridges, one of which is the largest and fairest of all the Town: it is
called the Corn-Bridge, because that on every Market Day the Country people
take up their stations upon it with their Corn. There is another likewise
called the Fish-Bridge, because the Fishermen do there expose their Seafish to
sale. The best Fish comes from Catvic; that of Maeslantsluys is not valued, as
being ordinarily stale.

If this City had but running Water, a great Marketplace, and some fountains
of clear Water for drink, it would be the pleasantest in all Europe; but
nothing can be ex omni part beatum, accomplished in all points. There has been
lately built a Church in a circular figure, admired by all Strangers for its
incomparable Architecture both within and without. The first Sermon was
preached in it some weeks before Easter, in the year 1650.

The Town is so populous, by reason that poor people of the neighboring
Countries do seek a refuge here in time of War, that it is a hard matter to get
a Chamber in the new Town. Here is the great manufacture of that excellent
Cloths which are transported all the world over; they cannot make any such any
where else. The fine Wool comes from Spain, and the course from England, and
Pom^rania. All sorts of Nations work in the manufacture, where many other
Stuffs are made.

In Summer during the hot weather, these Channels do send forth a noisome
smell, particularly when the weather inclines to rain; the reason of it is, the
drying up of the Lake of Soetermeer, which did use to cleanse the Town by
flowing into it. To prevent this, the Magistrates have caused two large
Channels to be made, and two Mills to be set upon them, to drive the Water into
the Town at one end, and two other that drive or carry it out at the other end;
so that by this invention the City is freed from that noysom and infectious
smell, though often it fail too in the great heat of Summer, when there is a
great calm, and no wind stirring.

We must not omit to speak of the Anatomy-House; it being the place that ought
most to attract Strangers eyes, for the singular curiosities that are in it.
There you shall see Egyptian Mummiaes, Pagan Idols, Birds and Beasts brought
from China, and remoter places, whole Skeletons, and an infinite number of
other things, which cannot be here set down, no more than viewed, in a short
time. In the forepart of this Church, above the Fencing-School that was, and is
now the English Church, there is a fine Library full of all sorts of Books in
all Tongues; besides the Legacy of great Scaliger, which is a number of Hebrew
Books; all the Manuscripts of the Library of Bonaventure, Vulcan, and the Books
that Golias brought out of the Levant. There are other private Libraries, which
the civility of the owners makes public: and it is not only the Professors,
but even the Citizens that are curious in Libraries; insomuch that if Authors
were lost elsewhere, they would soon be restored by the Hollanders.

There are often Libraries publicly sold to them that give most for them; and
this way of exposing all sorts of Goods to public sale, is very ordinary in
Holland, and they that buy them have credit for some months.

The City has eight Gates all new, with their Bridges. The Galleries beyond the
Town-Ditch are set with Trees, having on one side the Rampart, and on the other
are the Gardens and Meadows near the Town.

The City was very un-inhabited for a great while after the siege; the Grass
did grow in the Streets, and most of the Houses were thatched: but now they are
all covered with Tile, or blew Slate; and since the year 1636. this Town is
embelish'd, and grown better by half in half.

There is an Hospital for poor Passengers, and decayed old people; as also a
Bedlam or place for mad folks; all being very neatly kept, and the sick well
served. The Orphans Hospital is a noble Building, and of a great extent. In it
are ordinarily about 500. Children, who are taught to read and write, and bound
Apprentices as they grow up. Besides this, there are great numbers of
Almshouses for poor people; they call them Hoffies in Dutch: the fairest of
these is the Papegraft.

The care that is taken in Holland of such Families as cannot get their living,
is very remarkable, and deserves praise. In the Winter time there are delivered
to them at the public charge, so many Blankets, Sheets, so much Bread, etc. to
keep them from dying either by cold or hunger. They that are either
over-burdened with Children, or otherwise undone by any accident, go to the
Masters of the poor, and receive relief according to their necessities. But
this charity is not extended to the poor Catholics, though the gatherings be
made generally, and from all Religions. The number of those that have a share
in this charity mounts ordinarily to above 20000. in this City.

Every quarter the Magistrate goes through the Town, having beforehand given
notice to the Citizens, and makes a collection of what every one is pleased to
bestow. And thus all the poor are so supplied, that in any extremity they
cannot want Bread, and so cannot from their necessity take an occasion of
rising. This is practiced through all Holland; but no where so exactly as at
Leyden.

In the year 1629. the King of Swedeland having landed an Army in Borussia,
stopped all the Rivers, and hindered the coming of Corn from Poland; whereupon
Bread grew so dear of a sudden, that the common people not being able to go to
the price, began to mutiny, and some of them broke in upon a Baker. But
immediately the Citizens appearing in Arms, dissipated this tumultuous rabble,
and having whipped two or three of them, made the rest go quietly home. Then the
Magistrates gave out Rye to the Bakers, to distribute to such poor as should
bring such a mark in testimony of their poverty.

Every year in April the Magistrates go through all the Town, and every one
must set forth before his door his Fire-Ladder, Buckets, and Sail, to the end
that if Fire should happen any where, it might be readily extinguished. This is
a very laudable custom, and observed over all Holland. All night long in
Winter, from nine of the clock to four in the morning, there are men that go
through every Street with a Bell, singing the hours and half-hours. They are
bound to convey to their Lodgings all drunken people, and such as have lost
their way. They take care against Fires; give warning to those that have not
shut their doors.

In Summer they begin at ten of the clock, and retire at four in the morning.
They that set upon them or affront them, are severely punished; as was seen
lately at the Hague, where a great Lord having in drink killed one of them, was
notwithstanding all powerful intercessions, beheaded, to be an example to
every one else.

The Magistrates that administer justice are chosen out of the forty Notables,
all Protestants, and rich Citizens. Out of these are chosen every year four
Bourgemasters at St. Martins Feast in November, and seven Aldermen on St. James
day in July.

There is besides another Assembly, called the Masters of the Pupils and
Orphans; before whom such Men or Women that have Children, but desire to marry
again, must appear, and take their Oath that they have concealed no part of
their Estate, but that their Inventory is good and true; and then the Parents
are bound to breed them according to their quality, and to assign them a sum
of Money upon an immovable, proportionable to the principal.

The Towns has besides, its Overseers and Surveyors for Building; that when any
thing, as Bridges or Gates, etc. requires repair, it may be speedily done.

Every year there are two great Fairs at Leyden, during which time no man can
be arrested for Debt. The chiefest is held on Ascension day, and lasts eight
days. Upon the Monday the Citizens meet in the Dozles, a place full of Trees,
where every one may exercise in shooting with Cross-bowes, and Bows and
Arrows. It is a very pleasant place, by reason of the shady Walks, and of two
good Taverns that are in it; in the Windows of one of which are represented all
the Earls of Holland, down to Philip King of Spain. In most of the Towns of
Holland there are of these Dozles, which shows the warlike temper of these
Nations, so far as to be able to preserve their liberties.

In this place the six Companies of Citizens, which make near 2000 men, do use
to train. The most ancient Captain has the Van. They appear with great glory,
and perform their Exercises very well.

The other Fair is that which used to be held in memory of the deliverance of
Leyden, and was wont to last ten days; but it is now put down, and the Story
only represented in a Tragedy, to which there is great flocking.

Now let us say something about their way of selling Houses, Gardens, etc.

It Is ordinarily about the end of November till February, that Houses are to be
sold. There is a note set up declaring the situation of the House, the Owner,
the Neighbors, the name of him that lives in it, and his Trade; and lastly,
the House where the Bargain is to be driven on a set day. The day being come,
all those that have a mind to it come to the House appointed, which is
ordinarily a Tavern. And thus the business is managed:

An Attorney with a Crier goes through all the Chambers, where there is
Company, reads the Conditions upon which it is to be sold, and declares whether
there be any Rent charged upon it or no. The Crier asks them if they have all
heard, and observed well what has been read, and who amongst them will se^^ a
price upon the House. For example, a House shall be worth 600. pound; and in
the first Chamber there will be offered 320. then the Crier goes to the second
Chamber, and tells them that the House has been already valued at 320.
thereupon it may be some body offers 20. more. Then he goes to the third, and
so to all; and it may be the House is raised to 400. pounds. Then he comes back
to the first, and tells them, Gentlemen, the House is valued at 400. then it
may be some body adds 20. more. The Crier goes back to all the Chambers, and
if no body offer more, he goes to the seller, and tells him what is offered for
his House; if ^he does not like the price, he bids the Crier (...), that if
there be any body that will speak to the seller, he may come to him. And if he
be very desirous to be rid of his House, then he sends a Duccatoon or two, with
this condition, that he that will raise 50. pound in the price, shall have the
money. The Crier goes back and tells the company; then he that says first (to
me) has the money. Then the Crier goes back, and his Master gives him more
money: for example, if the first were two Duccatoons for 50. pounds, the second
money shall be two Duccatoons, and two Angels in gold, for him that shall bid
30. pound more. If that be taken, then he brings a greater sum still, till
there be no body left that will take any more money; and all those that do take
any are obliged to declare their names. This being done, it may be does not yet
make up above 500. pound; then the Crier tells them, Gentlemen, my Master would
fain make 600. pound of his House. I will bate the other 100. pound by degrees;
then he begins, 90. 80. 70. 60. 50. 40. 30. 20. 10. till there be some body
that speaks; and then the House is sold for 500. pound, and so much odd money
as has been taken. If he bate all, and no body speak, then he that took the
last money is the buyer, and must give in security the same night. If it happen
that some body has drawn money, under hopes of being out-bid, with intention to
keep the money, if unluckily for him no body does out-bid him, he must take the
House; if he can give no security, he is carried to prison, and publicly
whipped, to give example to the rest. The House thus sold, and security given,
the buyer is to pay all the charges, which come to 10. pounds at least, so that
they that have been there, are scot-free.

The Gardens and Tombs are sold ordinarily after the same manner; the money to
be laid down in three payments, and of every 40. Crowns, the City is to have
one, which is a great revenue to it. Thus I have described at length the way of
selling, because it is almost the same thing in all the other Towns of Holland.

In the year 1635. and 36. it pleased God to visit Holland, and particularly
Leyden, with a great Plague, insomuch that the Churchyards could not hold the
dead, but the Bastions were taken to bury them in.

At the same time, or a little after, the Plague being somewhat over, War was
proclaimed between the two Crowns of France and Spain, that made many people
who before lived upon the Frontiers, come and seek refuge at Leyden; they
filled up the empty Houses. Seven years after by the command of the
Magistrates, the Churchyards were levelled, the dead bones transported
elsewhere, and Trees planted, which now do begin to grow.

There are many other particularities; as the Prison where the Count William
was born. The Count Florent was also born at Leyden.

In the Chamber of the Bourgemasters, there is a Picture of Luke of Leyden's
making, which was so valued by the Emperor Rodolf, that he offered to give as
many pieces of gold for it, as would cover it. It represents the day of
Judgment.

John of Leyden, a Tailor, was in the first change of the Roman Religion, made
King of the Anabaptists; and having seized Munster, he made himself be treated
as a King, wearing a Crown of gold; and when he did go abroad, had always two
Boys before him, one of which carried a Sword, and the other the Bible. All
that did not fall down and worship him were immediately condemned to die, and
executed. He kept 14. Wives, and caused one to be killed, because she despised
his inspirations. The Bishop laid siege to the place, and John made the people
endure as much as ever Saguntum or Jerusalem endured, assuring them still of a
sudden deliverance. But at last the Town was taken, and the King with his
accessaries taken and punished as they deserved. They keep yet at Leyden the
Table upon which this Tailor did use to sit and work. May all those that
disobey their Magistrates come to as bad an end.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Territory about Leyden.

THe Territory about Leyden is called Rhinlant, where is made the best Butter
of all Holland. It is full of many fine Villages, which for the nobleness of
their Buildings might be reckoned small Towns.

I will begin with Rinsbourg, which was anciently a well fortified Town. About
a league from it, Petronella, Sister to the Emperor Lotair, founded an Abbey
for Nuns of quality; and by its ruins it ap(...) have been a fine structure.
The(...) many ancient Epitaphs; one I have seen of a Nun in the year 1218. It
did depend for the spiritual on the Bishopric of Utrect, and so did all
Holland, there being in it never a Bishops See; but not for the temporal, as
some have writ. The Earls of Holland and their Ladies did use to be buried here.

A league further is Nortvic, within a mile of the Sea. Because of the
pleasantness of the place many Gentlemen live in it. Valkenbourg next is a
famous place for the Horse-Fair held there every month of September; I have
been told, that before the War there did come to it Merchants from all parts of
the world. It is a very pleasant place, as well as Catvic, where live many rich
men that live of their revenues. The Rhene did anciently enter the Sea here;
and there was a square Castle built at the mouth of the River, but it is now
buried under water. We find it written, that there were the Romans Magazines
and Storehouses against the English. Of late when the Sea has been very (...)
^y a constant South Wind, the (...)ndations have been seen.

In Summer the Scholars and Citizens go to wash there, and eat fresh Fish; as
also to breathe the salt Air of the Sea, which is held very wholesome. They
that hire Horses may go all along the shore by the two Catvicks, and
Walckembourg, and return by Nortvic, Rinsbourg, and Oestgeest. Wassenaer is
situated just by the sandy Downs; it did formerly belong to the Prince de Lime,
but now it belongs to the honorable Family of the Wassenaers.

Warmout is a league and half from the Town on Harlem-side. By the way are two
or three very fine Farms; and particularly one near the Channel: when you have
passed the Bridge, you leave upon your right hand Lochorst, and then you come
into the most delicious Village in the world; the Lord of it is Mr. James
Wassenaer, whose Father was Admiral, and has eminently served the public in
military and civil employments. The Arminians have a Church here; the Church is
on the outside of the Village; as also the Lords House, which is a fair
Castle, with a Moat round about it.

Oestgeest is a Village in the Sands, which belongs to the Corporation of the
City of Leyden. I my self have seen the Sand taken away three foot deep,
carried to the Town and there sold; and an Acre of that ground which before was
not worth 20. pound, made worth fourscore. Soutervoude is to the South, at a
leagues distance from the Town; the way to it lies through Lam, leaving on your
left hand the Castle of Cronestien, a fine House, and Gardens. This Village is
little, but it is in a fine Soil, and has the best pasture grounds about Leyden.

The Magistrates have bought the Lordship of it; as also that of Leyderdorp, a
Village that has more Palaces than Country peoples Houses. It Is here where we
must admire the magnificence of the Citizens; for one would think that there
were an emulation between them, who should show most marks of riches by their
expenses. It is built on both sides the Rhene, that goes through it; and
behind the Houses in the Meadows is a Church, behind which there was formerly
a Monastery. Between Leyden and Ferrie there was another Nunnerie, which was
built upon a clayish ground, out of which Bricks are made now. In the year
1616. the Workmen found in digging two Meddals of gold, representing the
Emperor Nero to the life; I have seen them both. Woorschoten is another fine
Village, belonging to Monsieur de Duvenvoord, whose Father was Keeper of the
Great Seal. Hereabouts the Country is so delicious, that it is a kind of
Paradise upon earth; as well because of the diversity of Fields, Meadows, and
Woods, as of the prospect of so many stately Edifices, and neat Gardens.

The Country people wear very good Clothes, ordinarily of black, but without
Cloaks. Their Wives have gold Rings on their fingers. It is not very rare to
meet with Peasants here worth 10000. pound; they enjoy as great a liberty as
any Citizen. Every Village has its Bailif, Secretary, Bourgemaster, and Judges;
and besides a certain sort of Countrymen that they call Welboremans, that is,
men of a good Family, and well descended.

Alphen is half way to Word, and takes its name from a Roman Knight. There
are very few Antiquities to be seen in Holland, because that all the Country
has been changed and new peopled, and the Towns and Villages new built; so that
there are no footsteps of what it was, it is so increased in riches and beauty.
I come now to Caudekerk, where there is a fair Castle belonging to Monsi^ur de
Podgeest. All these Villages have their Fairs once a year, which anciently were
never kept without some skirmish at Back-sword. The stoutest did use to hang up
a Back-sword, and he that did come and touch it, was engaged in a combat,
which was to be performed after this manner: First the parties break off the
points of their Swords; then they take their Hats in their left hands to defend
their faces, and nevertheless they often pare off a Cheek, or a Nose, or so.
But these Duels are strictly forbidden, and severely punished, if attempted.

This Country is so finely diversified, that it wants nothing for a perfect
prospect. For though Vines do not naturally grow in it, yet by the industry of
the Inhabitants, there are many which produce Grapes enough for their eating.
And as for Wine, they are sufficiently furnished by Sea.

Now I come back to the Town, and observe, that it is the Garden of all the
adjacent Province for Lettice, Parsley, Carrets, Pease, Beans, Parshley, etc.
which are transported to Zeeland and Utrect. At Amsterdam you shall hear them
cry, Leyden Parsnips. And indeed the Gardiners industry is most admirable, for
they have five or six crops in a year upon the same ground. I was desirous to
know how much an Acre of ground might be worth to be sold; and it was answered,
that Meadow was about sevenscore pound an Acre; Corn grounds about 200. but
Gardenage about 250. and sometimes 300. pound an Acre.

Every day at six of the clock goes off the first Boat for Amsterdam, and at
twelve a clock the last; at eight and at eleven for Harlem; at twelve for
Utrect. There are eight Barks for the Hague, and as many for (...) elft. And so
from these two Towns for Leyden; from the Spring to October they go out at five
a clock; and after, at half an hour past five. The Arms of the Town are the
Cross Keys.

The Citizens are governed with so much moderation by the Magistrates, that
since the beginning of the Commonwealth to this day, there has been no tumult
nor rising by reason of Taxes, Impositions, or the coming of Strangers, or for
any other cause.

But now let us come to that powerful City, from which Neptune seems to take
his Orders; I mean Amsterdam.

CHAP. IX.
Of Amsterdam.

THis Town which has not its like in the whole world, if we consider its
Commerce, the convenience of its Harbor, and the means it has of setting out
powerful Fleets, takes its name from a Castle built upon Ye, belonging to the
Lords of Amstel. It is seven leagues distant from Leyden, and you may go to it
four different ways; the most ordinary is that of the great Lake; the next by
Harlem, and by the Channel made lately; the third in a Wagon, or on
Horseback, by the Veenes; and the fourth by the night-Boat, that you meet at
Leyderdorp. Since the late Wars, this Town is increased above two thirds; and
therefore we shall inquire into its Antiquities.

Many think that at first it was but a little Village for Fishermen, which has
increased by little and little. In the year 1296. the Lord of Amstel was one of
the Confederates of Gerrard de Velsen, who killed the Count Florent.

1470. the Town was walled with a brick Wall, to resist the invasions of those
of U^rect, who had often brought the Town into great danger. Not long after it
was almost all consumed by fire; then built again, and according as Trade
increased, it grew bigger still, and richer. The Emperor Maximilian in
acknowledgement of the good services they had done him, and as a testimony of
their industry and Trade, added an Imperial Crown over their Coat of Arms,
which are three Crosses, almost like St. Andrews.

There was formerly in it three Monasteries for men, and thirteen Nunneries,
which are all now employed to other uses.

The Factions of the Houcs and the Cabelians have often afflicted this noble
City, like those of the G^elphes and Gibelins in Italy. But that which brought
it nearest its ruin, was the attempt made by the Anabaptists.

In the year 1525. that wicked King of Munster desiring to strengthen his
party, by the addition of some considerable place, sent one of his Emissaries,
named Golen; who passing through Friezeland raised great tumults and seditions
there: which being quashed, he fled to Amsterdam, and there lurking for a
while, struck in at last with a man of his own principles, called Groet Belite,
and they two together resolved to make a party, and set upon the Town at some
unexpected hour. They got together the chief of their Sect, and made a
resolution to fall on at midnight by the sound of a Bell; but this wicked plot
was discovered just upon its execution, and with much ado hindered: for a young
man of their side went and told the Magistrates, that the Anabaptists to the
number of 600. were marching to seize the Town. While they were yet in
deliberation, they heard the sound of Drums, and found that the Anabaptists had
already gotten into the Marketplace, and invaded the Townhouse. In this
confusion a Citizen had the foresight to carry away the Rope of the Bell,
which the seditious did intend to ring, as a signal to all theirs to unite,
and a terror to the sleepy Citizens, that did luckily contribute much to the
saving of the City. For by this time, the Magistrates having sent about, and
got many Housekeepers under Arms, resolved to stop up all the Avenues to the
Marketplace with Hopsacks, and make a strong Barricado behind them. The
morning come, gave the Townsmen leave to see the greatness of the wickedness
intended, and the inconsiderable number of the seditious; who seeing themselves
exposed to be pelted in that wide place, took sanctuary in the Townhouse, but
thither they were pursued and cut in pieces, some few scaping by the favor of
the night that came on. This conjuration thus quelled, the Magistrates forbid
the Citizens under great penalties, to lodge any Stranger that should be
infected with such dangerous principles. Yet in the year 1515. there were more
of these Fanatics, both men and women, that running naked through the Streets
with horrible cries, had like to have surprised the Townhouse, but they were
suppressed and punished. The Anabaptists of this age do renounce them, for they
do not hold it lawful to fight at all.

All this great Town is built upon Pilotis, which are great Trees driven by
main force into the ground, which is all moorish, to be as a foundation to
build upon; and ordinarily it costs as much laying, as all the rest of the
Fabric does building up. The Town is like a Crescent, or half Moon, which ere
it be long will fill up its round. In the Port there are so many Vessels, that
we may say that he that has not seen Amsterdam, has not seen a Harbor: for in
the Spring, from one end to the other of it, there is such a forest of Masts,
that Strangers are struck with wonder, and do believe, with reason, that all
the Harbors of the world together cannot make so many Sail.

Every year in April there goes out a great Fleet for the Baltic Sea; I have
heard many say, that in that Fleet in the time of War do go above 1500. Sail of
Ships: then reckon all those that go for France, and elsewhere, and all the
Barks that are upon the Channels in the Town.

The finest Streets are the Fosses, the Imperial, the Royal, the Cingel, the
Street of Harlem, which is all newly built There are also three prodigious
Sluices; and all the Bridges that were formerly of wood, are now of stone, with
iron Vails and Balasters.

The Town house which is now a building, the foundations of which have cost
many hundred thousands of pounds, is to be a Masterpiece, and a miracle beyond
the seven that Antiquity bragged so much of.

In the year 1595. the Monastery of Sancta Clara was changed into a House of
correction, called the Tucht Huyse, for those Children that will not be
obedient to their Parents. At the coming in, there are two Lions upon the door,
bridled, as an emblem to the wild youth of the Town. They make them work; some
saw Brasil-wood, others do harder things, according to their faults and
dispositions. If they refuse to work, they are put into a low Cellar, and water
is let in upon them; if they will stand still and be drowned, they may; if they
will pump and deliver themselves, then they are helped out again.

Some are put in for their life, others for a certain time. As lately there is
a Law, that whosoever draws his Knife to strike another, shall either pay 10.
pound fine, or work three months in the House of correction. Some are put in
by their rich Parents, not to work, but only to put a stop to their extravagant
expenses, and they come out when they give testimonies of their repentance, and
desire to mend.

The same year there was a like House set up for young Maids, that should live
in a licentious way. Every year in August it is free for all people to go in,
and see the miserable condition of these offenders.

The great Hospital has above 4000. pound a year; besides, it is thought that
every year there are distributed many thousands of pounds to poor Families.

The East India Company has a noble House, full of rich treasure; as also the
Bank-Generall, in which are always many millions. This Company is grown so
powerful, that they can set out a Fleet of men of War if need be; and in the
Indies they make nothing of waging War with Kings, as lately with the King of
Java, and yet drove on their Trade too.

There are here many fair Churches; but I shall mention only that of St.
Katherine, burned down in 1645. and is now built again better than before. Hard
by the said Church are laid the foundations of a Tower, which is to be
exceeding high; 6000, 300, and odd great Trees have been driven into a piece of
ground of about a 100. foot square, to be Pilotis for the foundation of the
Tower. In the Church the Ministers Pulpit is contrived with great art, with the
four Evangelists, and a Tower above it. In the Glass-windows is the good
Emperor Maximilian his Picture.

There are two great Suburbs or Fauxbonrgs, one upon the way to Utrect, and the
other that goes to Overtom, a Village where the Boats that come from Leyden
pass upon Rowlers. There is built a fair Pesthouse.

It Is commonly said that this City is very like Venice; for my part I believe
Amsterdam to be much superior in riches: though the most serene State of
Venice can bragg of having maintained a War for this twenty year, against the
whole force of the Turks, without assistance from any but the Pope. This Town
is exceedingly well governed; every ones liberty preserved, and safety provided
for all: and even in the nightime you may go any where, without fear of being
robbed or killed.

The Air is not quite so good as at Leyden, by reason that it is environed with
Marshes, which make it in accessible; but it is better seated for Trade, which
is its life. Let us go to Harlem.

CHAP. X.
Of Harlem, and some Villages round about it.

I Shall speak very little of the Antiquity of this pleasant Town; for in the
darkness of past times it is so hard to distinguish fables from truth, that it
will make any wise person forbear from obtruding old Stories upon an ingenuous
Reader.

The first time we find any mention made of the valor of its Inhabitants, is
in the year 1245. when Pope Innocent at the Council of Lions made St. Lewis
King of France, and William Earl of Holland undertook the relief of the holy
Land. For the Army being come before Damietta, a great Chain did hinder the
approach of the Navy: this the Harlemmen undertook to break, and did execute
their design, giving entry to the whole Fleet; in memory of which the Town has
for Arms, a Sword with four Stars, and a Cross at the end of it.

William King of the Romans gave the Inhabitants many great privileges. But if
the victory carried in Palestina made them famous, the Art of Printing here
invented has made them as remarkable: though Me^ts an Electorall Town does
claim the same honor, but not so justly; for it was by a Prentice who upon
Christmas-Eve run away from Harlem, with the Letters and Instruments serving to
the Art of Printing, taking his time when all the people were at Church.
Laurent Coster was the name of the man that invented this Art.

In the year 1292. the Faction of the Casembrots seized upon the Town, and
plundered the Houses of most of the considerable Citizens; but it was crushed
by Albert Duke of Saxony, and the Town condemned to a Fine of 27000. Crowns,
and to the loss of its privileges.

In the year 1574. the Spaniards under the conduct of Frederick, Son to the
Duke of Alba, having taken Sutphenen, and cruelly cut the throats of all the
Townsmen of Naerden, came and laid siege to Harlem: the Garrison was 4000.
strong, and refusing all conditions of a surrender, made brave sallyes upon
them, hanging the Spanish prisoners upon the Walls; and in derision of the
tenth penny which the Spaniard would levy, throwing over to them eleven Heads
of their prisoners. But the Spaniards were sufficiently revenged, for they
forced them to yield at discretion, though the very Women fought valiantly for
their liberty.

This Town is rather long than square, and is washed by the River Sparen.

In the Marketplace is the Townhouse, a stately Building; and over against it
is the great Church, dedicated to St. Bavon: it is looked upon as the finest
Church in all Holland.

There are many Meadows about the Town; and on the Seaside mountains of Sand;
and there is a Wood toward Leyden, about half a mile from the Town, which is a
great diversion to the Citizens, not only of Harlem, but of Amsterdam. Toward
the North there are Suburbs and great Gardens. Harlem is pretty populous, and
holds a perpetual communication with Amsterdam and Leyden by Boats, which go
and come at all hours. In the year 1657. was made a Channel between Leyden and
the said Town.

The greatest Trade of Harlem is in Linen; for there is the finest and whitest
Holland. There are likewise many Weavers: I remember I was told that once all
these Weavers forsook their Trade, and turned Tulip-Merchants, at the time when
the fancy for Tulips did reign over all the Low Countries and France. Besides,
they do brew excellent Beer in this Town, which being transported into
Friezeland grows better there than in Harlem it self.

The Villages round about are Hemstede, Sparenvow, Tetrode, etc. There are also
the Castles of Brederode, Harlee, and Velsen; of which there remains little but
the ruins. Monsieur Adrian Paw, Lord of Hemstede, etc. has compiled there a
fair Library of Books, of all Languages and Sciences, and such a one as will
hardly be matched by any private person. He is a very eminent man, employed as
Plenipotentiary in the Treaty at Munster; though some do endeavor to cast
aspersions upon him, as if he had had a hand in the troubles of England.

Between Harlem and Leyden there are many fair Villages; amongst which Helegon,
Lys, and Tassum, are three of the best, not above a league distant from one
another. Not far from them is the House of Feiling, now belonging to his
Highness the Prince of Orange; and a noble Castle that Monsieur Dalmade has
caused to be built of late. In coming from Harlem to Leyden, you have the Downs
or sandy Hills on the right hand, and on the left the great Lake of Harlem
which is always covered with Boats, going and coming with Merchandises.

CHAP. XI.
Of Delft, and its Villages.

THis Town is situated in a Plain amongst pleasant Meadows, and was built by
Godfrey the Crooked, Duke of Lorrain, who had conquered Holland by the
assistance of the Bishop of Utrect. I find nothing in our Annals concerning
this place that is memorable, except that after a siege of six weeks, the Town
was taken by Albert of Bavaria, because they had received the Faction of the
Hoves: the Town was dis-mantled, the Castle pulled down, and the Inhabitants
fined 10000. Crowns to the Duke.

In the year 1536. in the month of May, the Town was burnt down by accident;
and it was observed that a -- not being able to save her young ones, because
they were not fledged, flew her self into the flame, and died with them: but
out of the ashes of this rose a much more noble Town.

1584. The Prince William of Orange was traitorously killed by a Bourguignon,
and there lies buried in a pompous Monument, in acknowledgement of the great
actions he performed for the public liberty.

There are two fair Churches, which have each a very high Steeple; and a
Townhouse at the end of the Marketplace, with an Inscription in Latin upon
it, to this purpose:

This House hates, loves, punishes, conserves, and honors,
Wickedness, Peace, Crimes, Laws, good men.
Haec Domus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, Pacem, Crimina, Jura, bonos.
They have here a great Trade of Beer, which they brew very well. The Town is
not so big as Leyden, but it has a fairer Marketplace; and though there be not
so much Trade, nor the Houses so richly adorned on the inside, yet are there
very rich Citizens. The Country about lies lower than about Leyden; therefore
in certain seasons, as when the Wind is North-East, if they should open their
Sluices, all the Meadows about Delft would be overflown. Delft is but four
leagues from Leyden, and you have the convenience of a Wagon. Between these
two Towns lies Lordsendam, a great and fair Village, which grows rich since the
Channel of Leyden was made. There are two great Sluices to preserve the
Country about Delft.

Voorburg is a little on one side the Channel, and is the ancientest Village
in Holland. There are yet to be seen some foundations of a strong Castle built
by the Romans, as it appears by the Inscriptions of the Stones that are every
day taken from among the ruins. It being so near the Hague, and upon the
passage of so many people, seems rather a Town than a Village. It is but two
leagues and a half from Leyden, and one league from the Hague.

Losdun is a Village near the Hague, in which was a Nunnery for Gentlemen, and
Noblemens Daughters, and no others; founded by Margaret, Countess of Holland,
whose Daughter Machtilde was brought abed of 365. Children at once, as many as
there are days in the year; who were all baptized by Otho, Bishop of Utrect:
the name of John was given to the males, and that of Elizabeth to the females,
who all died the same day with their Mother. The Story says that this Princess
refused Alms to a poor Woman, that had Twins in her Arms, saying, that they
were not of one man's getting; whereupon the poor Woman finding her self
unjustly suspected, wished her as many at a time as there were days in the
year. In memory of this History there is a Picture hung up in the Church, with
an Inscription to this purpose; Here is a monstrous and memorable thing, which
has not had its like since the beginning of the world: Reader, having perused
this Story, go away and admire it.

Near the Meuse there is a Castle with 365. Windows, which are the names of the
said Children; and yet there are many people that do not believe this Story at
all. This Village has a sandy ground on one side of it, and on the other a
fertile Corn-Countrey, called Vestland.

CHAP. XII.
Of Dort.

THis Town is very ancient, and rich, by reason of the great abundance of all
sorts of Merchandises that come down the Rhene. Its situation is incomparable;
for it is environed with the Waters of the Rhene and Meuse, which make it a
place of great Trade. It is called the Maiden Town, because it was never taken,
though often besieged, and once particularly by the Duke of Brabant, in the
year 1304. For he having conquered a great part of Holland, and committed all
sorts of inhumanities upon that Nation, sat down at last before Dort; but the
Citizens unexpectedly sallying out upon him, routed his whole Army, and pursued
him to Bosleduke; and in their way home, obtained a victory over the Flemmings
at Isselmond.

In the year 1421. upon St. Katherines day, the Banks broke near Dort, and
about threescore and ten fair Villages were swallowed up by this unmercifull
Element of Water; and above a 100000. men died miserably with their Wives and
Children. It is said, that a wicked Countrey-Boor being envious of his
Neighbors prosperity, made one night a Hole in the Bank, that he might drown
him and all his Family in their Beds, with a design of stopping it again: but
the Tide coming in with a strong Wind, broke quite through; first drowned this
perfidious Rogue, and then overwhelmed all that stood in its way. Since the
Water having by little and little been driven away by the industry of the
infatigable Inhabitants, they have drained most part of that which lay under
Water, and discovered some Villages. There is hopes of getting all, during this
peace; but it can only be done in the great heat of Summer.

As it happens often, that when we are ignorant of the cause of a thing, we are
apt to attribute it to some invisible supernatural power, or to our sins, that
provoke Gods anger; so some have said, that these Villages were drowned,
because they did make ill use of their great riches; that they would not wear
any other than golden Spurrs, and lived in a great magnificence.

But let us return to the Town, which by an unlucky accident of Fire had like
to have been quite destroyed; there were burned above 2000. Houses, with the
Townhouse, and Cathedral-Church.

1618. the National Syn^d was held in the same Town, under the Authority of the
high and mighty Lords the States General, to decide those Controversies that
were risen concerning Predestination. There were present many learned men both
from France and other parts; amongst others, the most Reverend Father in God
the Archbishop of Canterbury, who since was beheaded in the troubles in England.

Dort was the place where was born that factious Preacher, Brother Cornelius
Adrian, of whom the people to this day tell so many pleasant Stories. For my
part, I have heard worthy persons say, that he was really a very eloquent
person, who did ravish his hearers with admiration; but that he did handle some
points, that were a little too free in those days; but he feared no body. He
died at Bruges.

It is to be observed, that when the Earls of Holland were to be inaugurated,
that is, acknowledged for lawful Princes, they did first come into Dort, and
there did swear to the States to observe all their liberties and privileges,
from whom consequently they did receive an Oath of Allegiance. In the Assembly
of the States of Holland, the Dort-Deputies have the first place, and speak
first.

Before the Town are taken great quantities of all sorts of Fish, and
particularly of Salmon; for in one year there were sold in the said Town 892.
Salmons: and it is commonly said, that Servants put it in their bargain, that
they shall not eat Salmon above twice a Week.

There is a very convenient Port for ^ll Merchandises coming down the ^hene;
and it is in this City that all the Rhenish Wine is first unloaden. But this is
enough of the first Town of Holland in dignity; which besides the beauty of its
Edifices, is placed in a fruitful Soil, and a temperate Air. Leyden is distant
ten leagues from Dort, and the ordinary way is by Water.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Goude.

THis is the sixth and last of the great Towns, five leagues from Leyden. It
lies upon the River Yss^l, upon the conjunction of two Rivers, of which the
Waters are clear, and full of Fish. There are many delicious Gardens for the
Citizens diversion; and the Air is exceeding good.

In the year 1272. it was built by the Count Florent, and adorned with many
privileges; a 100. years after it was burnt down to the ground; as likewise in
the year 1420. in the War between Jacqueline of Bavaria, and Philip of Burgundy.

There is a fine Marketplace, in the middle of which is the Townhouse; and
near it is the great Church, which has been twice burnt. Before the Wars it
used to be much admired for its Bells; as also for the Glass-Windows, which are
very curiously enameled.

The Air is so good here that the Plague is never in the City; there being no
standing Waters near it; and yet the situation of the Town is such, that there
is no bringing any Artillery to beat it, for the Inhabitants can by their
Sluices drown all the Country round about. Besides, it is environed with so
deep a Ditch, that it strikes terror into a beholder. The Citizens are most of
them people that search a retreat from the World, and love quiet and peace.
After Leyden, it is the prettiest and wholesomest Town in Holland.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Rotterdam.

THis Town which is now one of the greatest and most Trading-Towns of Holland,
is nevertheless but the first of the small Towns.

In 1270. it was first walled; and 27. years after it was taken by the
Flemmings.

In 1418. Brederode, head of the Faction of the Hoves, surprised it. It is a
place that does every day augment, and grow bigger, by reason of the great
resort of Shipping to its Harbor. There is made the best Beer in all Holland.
When the Prince of Orange was in the Field, he did use to drink no other than
Rotterdam-Beer. Some years ago there was an English man of War cast away in the
Harbor; and since there has been spent a great deal of Money to get it up
again, but all in vain.

The great Erasmus, so well known, (...) his Learning and Books, was born (...)
in 1467, and died at Fryburg in Alsatia; there is his Statue in Copper, upon
the Bridge, with his Book in his hand. This Town is the next to Amsterdam for
Trade; and here are to be met with, Ships for England, Scotland, France, Spain,
and the Indies.

CHAP. XV.
Of the small Towns of Holland.

WIthin half a league of Rotterdam, there is a pretty Borough, called
Delfs-haven; so named, because that the Duke Albert of Bavaria, in
acknowledgement of the services he had received from those of Delft, granted
them the liberty of making a Port from Overschia, a Village that is about half
way between Delft and Rotterdam. The Inhabitants are most of them Seamen, and
send o(...) very year great numbers of B(...) for the fishing of Herring. Its
(...) on is such, that with small cost it might be so fortified, as to be made
impregnable. Upon the same River, a league off, is Schiedam, a famous Town for
Fishing. Vlarding is hard by, a small Village, but formerly a strong Town; the
Meuse being a little too near it, has devoured a great part of it. Masanluys is
a fair Borough, two leagues lower; the Inhabitants whereof are most Fishermen.
They that take shipping at the Bril, go through this Borough.

Having crossed the Meuse, which is above a league broad in this place, you
come to the Briel, which is at the mouth of the River, and all Ships that come
from Rotterdam, pass before it. This Town was taken by onset by the Count of
Lumay, in 1572. and it was the first place that the Water- Gueux took from the
Spaniards; and here were laid the first foundations of that Commonwealth, which
now flourishes in the Netherlands. The Town is populous, and the Territory
fruitful in Wheat; but the Air is thick, and thence proceeds the extreme
rudeness of its Inhabitants, a vice common to all Sea-Towns.

But let us cross the Meuse again to go to the Hague; and in our way see St.
Grave-sant, a place where formerly the Earls of Holland did use to keep their
Court. The Country round about is very fruitful in Corn and Pasturegrounds.
Here are made those green Cheeses which the Hollanders do so much value.

Not far off is Hontslardick, where the last Prince of Orange of glorious
memory built a most stately House, adorned with Walks and Galleries, and much
visited by Strangers.

Riisvick is another fair Village, where the said Prince has another House, in
a very pleasant situation among the Meadows, and being full in the eyes of
those that come from Delft. It is full of excellent Pictures of the best
Masters of Europe. And now let us enter the Hague, the delicatest Borough in
the whole World, as all those that have seen any thing abroad, do willingly
confess.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Hague.

THis place, which by the breadth of its Streets, the nobleness of its
Buildings, the pleasant shade of its Trees, and the civility of its
Inhabitants, may justly claim the title of the most pleasant place in the
World, and make all men envy the happiness of those that live in it, has on
Delft-side an extent of lovely Meadows; and on the other side over against them
the sandy Hills, that keep in the Sea, which is but half a league distant from
the Town. And upon the shore is Scheveling, which furnishes the C^tizens with
fresh Fish.

That side which is toward Leyden, is a great Wood of Oaks, where there is a
Park full of Deer; the Earls of Holland did formerly reside here, and now the
Prince of Orange does keep in it a most splendid Court. On one side o^ this
Wood is a great Pond, round about which of late are built many noble Houses.
The Dozles make the corner; Prince William laid the first Stone of them
himself. Behind the Court, over against the other corner, is a House built by
Prince Maurice of Nassaw, in which are the Pictures of most of the Kings of
Europe, with many rarities from America.

The Voorhout, with the House toward the Princes Palace, on the Ponds, make
the finest part of the Hague. Here every evening are seen many Lords and Ladies
taking the Air, some in their Coaches, and some afoot.

The Jacobins Cloister is still called the Cloister-Church. There is another
Church lately built in a round figure, and there is not a fairer outside in
all the 17. Provinces; within there is never a Pillar, insomuch that the
Minister in his Pulpit may be seen and heard by all those that are in the
Church. The Chapel of the Earls of Holland is now the Fr^nch Church.

There are two very fine Piazzaes, one before and the other behind the Princes
Palace, where all the Houses are like so many Palaces themselves; there live
the Deputies of the States General. The Towns have each of them built Houses
for their Deputies; and that which is for Leyden, is to my liking the best, and
most advantagiously situated. The Ambassadors of Princes have also their Houses
here.

The Marketplace is before the great Church, which has a very high square
Steeple, and may be seen a great way off. There is another fine Street, though
not finished, called Le fosse du Prince; here live many Strangers, some for
business, and others for their advantage. There are many French; they have a
Quarter to themselves. Besides, there are many people of quality that keep
their Coaches, and contribute much, to make the Court at the Hague one of the
gloriousest Courts of the World.

Now let us return to Leyden by the Wood, on the right hand of which is a very
fair Castle, belonging to the Princess Dowager. From this Wood to a league
within the Town it is all Sand, full of Rabbits and Coneys. And here we may
admire the Hollanders industry, that diggs and carries away the Sand, and makes
a good arable ground.

From Leyden to Werden there are six leagues, either upon a Bank, or by the
Channel; and beyond the Sluice of Goude are Suamerdam and Bodegrave, the latter
of which is one of the fairest Villages in all Holland.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Voerden.

THis Town was built in 1374. by the Bishop of Utrect, to keep the Citizens of
Utrect in awe. It has been the occasion of great Wars between these two
Provinces; but at last by the conspiracy of Heman de Voerden with de Velsen, it
was reduced under the Hollanders obedience. The Rhene goes through it, and in
its Fauxbourgs are made great quantities of Bricks. There is a Castle formerly
held impregnable, in which the Admiral of Arragon was kept prisoner a great
while, after the Battle of Flanders.

From Voerden we will turn our backs to Utrect, and our side to Montfort, and
come to Undevater, and so follow the borders of the Province. This Town is upon
Issel, within a league of Montfort; it is but little, but very pleasant. In
1579. it was taken and sacked by the Spaniards, to revenge the affront they had
received before Leyden, and in payment of their arrears. From this place you
may go to Goude, and by the Meuse to Rotterdam. All along the said River are
nothing but fair Villages, and pleasant Countrey-Houses.

Now let us cross the River Lec, and see the Towns lying upon it. It is
properly one of the Branches of the Rhene, upon which are situated Aulembourg,
and Viane, a small Town which belongs to the Brederodes, and is not reckoned
among the Towns of Holland. In it every thing is cheap, for there is little or
no Excise paid, and all those that do break in Holland, may sow themselves
here, and have a protection from the Lord of the place.

There is in it a fair Castle, in which ordinarily Monsieur Brederode resides.

Four leagues lower is Schoon-hoven, which takes its name from the beauty of
its Gardens; for Schoon signifies fair, and Hoff Garden, or Court. Some by
reason of its Harbor have called it Schoon-haff.

The River is here very broad, and there are many Salmon and other delicate
Fish taken in it. The Town is small, but very pleasant, and there are fine
Walks about it.

An Earl of Holland caused a Bank to be raised from Ameron to the said Town, in
favor of the Bishop Otho.

In the year 1424. the said Town was delivered to Jaequeline, Countess of
Holland, by the treachery of the Citizens; but the Castle held out, though
there were but a Garrison of 50. stout men in it: at last they yielded, and had
all quarter and their liberties, except one Albert Beiling, whose virtue and
loyalty is as much to be prized, as that of the Roman Regulus; for having
obtained leave to go home and settle his Estate, and having given no other
security than his Parole, he failed not upon the day appointed to come and
render himself prisoner.

Between L^c and Vahal there is another little River, called Lingue, upon which
are three small Towns, which the curious will do well to see before they come
to Gorcum.

Asperen, a small Town upon the same River, which was anciently a Fee of the
noble House of Arkel, as well as Heukelom. There was a very ancient Castle.

Leerdam is in the middle of these two little Towns, and belonging to the same
Family: it is almost square, and there are many Gardens. Frederick, Count
Egmond, having married Mary, Daughter to the Lord of Arkel, was the first Earl
of Leerdam. It belongs now to the Prince of Orange, for the Prince Philip,
great Uncle to this Prince, had it from his Mother, Anna of Egmond.

Gorcum is now one of the strongest places of the Low Countries, being
regularly fortified according to the modern way. It is upon the Meuse, about
five leagues above Dort. It was first built by a Gentleman of the House of
Arkel, who had a fair Castle here. The River Lingue runs through it, and brings
in all Commodities to the Inhabitants. This Town is one of the Keys of Holland,
together with the strong Castle of Louvestein, situated a little higher, upon
the confluence of the two Rivers. It is famous for having been the prison of
many Arminian Ministers; and amongst others of that learned Hugo Grotius, who
was since Ambassador from the King of Sweden to the King of France. He got out
by a very witty stratagem, fled into Brabant, and from thence passed into
France. He endeavored at last to reconcile all minds about Religion; but the
Politicians on one side, and the Churchmen on the other, frustrated his good
intentions. He died at Rostoc in Ruckelbnrg, coming home, and his body lies
buried at Delft.

To go to Heusden you must go out of the limits, and pass by Bommel, though it
be not altogether necessary, for there is another way. Bommel is an Island
which defends Holland, and is about two leagues from Bosleduke, most admirably
fortified.

But let us come to Heusden, which is below Bosleduke, upon the Meuse, and let
us consider it, not for the controversy, that is, whether it be of the Duchy
of Brabant, or of Holland; but for its admirable Fortifications. It is
environed with seven or eight Bastions, and some half Moons. This with the
breadth of the River secures it from all danger, and Holland from all fear on
that side.

There is likewise a Fort in the Island of Hemert, upon the Vahal, which
defends Heusden; a thing to be seen before you go down the River, and follow
the borders of Brabant, upon which lies Voroum, a small Town, with four
Bastions between Louvestein and Gorcum.

This little place, with the Lordship of Altena, was sold to the States for
10000. pound, and is now a Rampart to the whole Province. All the Towns
fronting upon Gueldres are very well fortified, and in a better Air than the
Towns of Holland, as having better Waters; but they are much inferior in
beauty, neatness, and riches.

Iselstein is a small Town situated upon Yssel, which they of Utrect have often
laid claim to, and there has been War between the Bishops of Utrect and the
Earls of Holland for it; the place standing in a fruitful pleasant Soil. It is
rather long than square, and adorned with fine Gardens; the Prince of Orange is
Lord of it. Now let us follow the Frontier of Brabant, to the West.

As soon as you come out of the Lordship of Altena, you meet with the strong
Town of Gertrudenbergue, divided from Holland by a great Lake that the Rhene
and the Meuse make before Dort. It is almost a half Moon, of which two thirds
are bathed with the Water of the Lake, and has excellent Bastions. Besides,
there are Forts with Sluices, which can drown the rest of the ground which lies
low.

In the year 1321. the Castle was built; and a 100. year after both the Town
and the Cathedral Church were both burnt down by those of Dort, who took it
after a long siege. It belongs now to the Prince of Orange, having often
changed Masters by the chance of War. There is taken before it great quantities
of Salmon; but I have heard a Citizen relate, that in the time of the War their
Fishing failed, because of the great noise of the Canonadoes, that frighted all
the Fish away.

To go from Gertrudenbergue by land to Clundert, you must leave Breda on the
left hand, and pass by Sevenberg, a Lordship which depends on Brabant. Clundert
has eight Bastions, and some Ravelins, and was first walled by Prince William
the first, whose it was, and since fortified. It has a fine Church, and good
Bells.

Willemstradt is hard by, a Town which bears the name of its founder. It has
seven Bastions, a double Ditch, and a fair Harbor. It has Brabant on the
South, and Zeeland on the North, which seems to communicate to it something of
the courseness of its Air; for here are bred Fevers, very hard to be cured,
insomuch as those that have them seem as if they were bewitched. The Citizens
of Leyden can testify it to their cost; for many of them were in Garrison
there in the War time, and when they came home, some died, some lingered a great
while, and in all, I know not above three that escaped being very sick.

I have spoke of these little Towns, only for their Fortifications; let us now
see the Islands that are over against Zeeland. The first is Overslac; you must
land at Ol^rens Plact, a Village where the Fleet of Shallops was to have
landed, 1631. In the said Island which is very fertile in Corn, is a fair
Village, called Sommerdi^ke, the Lord of which was Governor of Nimmegue.

At the end of this Island is another, in which is the Town of Gouree, the
Harbor of which is now stopped up with Sand.

Between Gouree and Helwetsluys there is a great depth of Water, where the
greatest Ships may ride. Now we are come to the Island of Vorne, the chiefest
place of which is the Briel, then Geervliet, where there was a College of
Canons; and Huervliet, a fine place belonging to Mr. de Kerchove, high Huntsman
of Holland. The rest of this Island which ends at Dort, is called Beyerland,
and the other part Stryac, where there are many rich Villages, the best of
which is Isselmond.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Towns that are in Goylant, near the South Sea.

WE have seen the borders of this Province toward Gueldres, Utrect, Brabant,
and Zeland; we have now a journey to take South-East, before we go directly
North, to see three small Towns. From Amsterdam you go by Sea to Naerden, the
chief Town of Goylant. It has been destroyed, and then built up again; the old
foundations are yet to be seen in the South Sea, when a certain Wind blows and
drives out the Sea.

The Citizens of this place acquired great reputation, by taking that Traitor
Gerrard de Velsen, who was carrying the Earl Florent prisoner into England.

In the year 1355. the second Town was built, and adorned with privileges by
the Duke William of Bavaria.

In 1481. they of Utrect having given the Hollanders a great overthrow,
surprised the Town of Naerden by an ingenious stratagem; for they dressed a
good number of young Soldiers like Countreywomen going to Market, who being
let in, seized a Gate of the Town, and gave entrance to the enemies: the
Citizens redeemed themselves from fire and sword by a great sum of money. But
a little after they were revenged; for falling upon the Bishopric, they killed
1500. of their enemies upon the spot, and in memory of that advantage, built a
high Tower, with this Inscription, Utrect hold thy peace.

In 1486. the said Town was almost all burnt down; and this misfortune seemed
to be a forerunner of that which befell them about a 100. years after: for
Frederick, Son to the Duke of Alva, having taken Zutpheen, fell upon Naerden.
The Citizens not expecting so sudden an alarm, were not so provident as to send
Ambassadors to mediate for them; but seeing the Army at their Gates,
surrendered their Town into the victors hands, and trusted to his discretion
and mercy: but he participating much of the cruel humor of his Father,
commanded all the Inhabitants to be assembled in the public Marketplace, and
there sent them Monks to confess them, and pronounce to them their sentence of
death. The poor creatures who thought to have heard their pardon proclaimed,
were immediately set upon by some Regiments, and cruelly slaughtered. This
barbarous execution brought so great an odium upon the Spaniards, that it made
the people of Leyden rather resolve to starve, than yield to the mercy of so
cruel a Nation. That which is most remarkable too, is, that they were most of
them Catholics; and I think it is from thence that comes that deriding Proverb
in Holland, Art thou a Catholic, that is good for thy soul.

Mude is hard by Naerden, upon the River Veckt, and at the mouth of the
South Sea. It is a little Town, which has a very ancient Castle, in which was
kept prisoner the Count Florent.

Hard by is Wesop upon the same River, famous for its good Beer, whereof much
is brought to Leyden, where it is called, for its excellency, the Flemmings
Physic.

All the Country from Amsterdam, taking by Voerden to Leyden, shut in by the
Sea of Harlem, is very low; it is all Meadow, or Turf-ground; as also between
Leyden, Goude, and Rotterdam, there are dug great quantities of Turfs: nay
the Earth is so cut in many places, that it is inaccessible otherwise than by
Boat, which is a Subject of great admiration to Strangers.

The Boats that go in the nightime from Leyderdorp to Amsterdam, pass through
the Lake of Brassmermeere, and stay about two hours at a Village called
Bilderdam; then in the morning they arrive at another called Ouderkerk, which
is a league from Amsterdam. There are Wagons that go by land; and it is
particularly the Earth of this Country that is observed to tremble and quake.
When it has rained, the ways are all drowned, and become like a Marsh.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Lakes and Rivers.

OF all the Rivers that come from Germany and Water-Holland, the chiefest is
the Rhene, which divides into two branches; one retains the name of Rhene, and
the other is called Vahal, and that receives the Meuse, which comes from
Lorrain, and goes through the Town of Leege. These Rivers meet all before
Gorcum, and flow gently into the Sea, near Dort and Rotterdam, making all the
Islands we have spoke of. The Country lying low, there are abundance of Lakes,
into which enter a great many Channels, made by Art. The greatest of these
Lakes is Harlem-Lake, which begins to extend it self between Leyden and the
Village of Kague, which stand in at Island at the mouth of the said Lake, into
which the Boats enter here. Those Boats that go to Harlem, keep on the left
hand, and they that go to Amsterdam, on the right, and pass by Alsemeer. This
Lake is very broad, but not deep; between Harlem and Amsterdam it grows
narrower, and is called Sprin^smeere: there is a Dike or Bank with prodigious
Sluices, which are opened according as the Wind ^its, to let out some of the
Water into the River Ye. Here the Harlem Boats stay, and the Passengers land,
and see a fair House, built by the noble College of the Heemrades.

On Amsterdam-side it grows still narrower, till you come to Overtom, a fair
Village of the Jurisdiction of Harlem, which keeps the passage shut by a Dike,
over which the Boats which go from Leyden to Amsterdam must pass, by the means
of certain wooden Rowlers, and other Instruments. This obstacle is to force the
great Boats full of Merchandises, to go by Harlem, to the profit of the said
Town.

This Lake before the Wars was not half so big; and I have heard old men say,
that from their remembrance it had increased the compass of above four miles.
Every year it eats away some of the Land that borders upon it, insomuch that
the neighboring Corporations have often met to consult about the drayning of
it, but as yet without effect. It would require above 500. miles, and the cost
would amount to above 200000. pound; but the bottom being partly Veenes, and
partly good Land, would sell well, and defray a good part of the expense.

This Lake is very full of Fish, and breeds Eeles of a prodigious bigness, as
all ^^imy Waters do. But I shall not speak any more of this nor other Lakes,
nor of the holes which the Country people make every day by digging up Turfs,
which if at last by some rupture they should meet, would go near to drown all
this lower Region, and swallow up these fine Meadows. Now let us go to
North-Holland.

CHAP. XX.
North-Holland, commonly called West-Frieze.

THis part is so called, because it has Holland on the South, and Friezeland on
the East, from which it is divided by the South Sea, which some Authors affirm
to have been formerly so narrow, that it might have been passed over with a
plank. This Country is likewise called Waterland, by reason of the many Lakes
that it abounds with; some of them have been drayn'd, viz. Beemster, Ziip, and
Schermer, which are now rich grounds, where the chief Citizens of Amsterdam
have Houses and Gardens. Every where here there are Dikes; that of Mede^bliike
is made of a certain matter which the Sea casts up, this Element preparing thus
a bridle to its own fury.

This Country has on the North the Ocean and the Texel, and on the South the
River Ye, and is joined to the South-part of Holland, by a small neck of Land
on Harlem-side.

This people drives a great Trade, by means of the Water they are environed
with, which at the same time does so fortify them, as to secure them from all
acts of hostility. They keep their old fashions and customs; and yet they are
not so simple as they appear, but are indeed very sincere, and more to be
believed upon their simple affirmative, than other Nations upon their oaths and
blasphemies. The Women are equally chaste and fair, and often a young man shall
sit a whole night by his Mistress, and never hold any discourse any ways
offensive to her honor. They have most of them red Hair, and their locks
gilded upon their foreheads. They wear not Handkerchiefs, but a velvet Whisk,
with a golden Hook and Clasp. That which I think very undecent, is, that they
wear their Petticoats so short, that they scarce come below their knees. The
men wear plain Bands, square Beards, have a grave behavior, and are of a
strong complexion, and tall stature. All their business is Commerce, which they
have with all the Northern Countries; and particularly Herrings are their great
Commodity.

Between Harlem and Alcmaer there is a pleasant Village, whither anciently
people did use to go in pilgrimage. It is situated upon the Sea of Wiie; the
bank that begins there is called St. Agaths bank; and the other which goes to
Sardam is called Assendelftdike. At Sardam are continually built great Ships
for the Indies. But let us take our way to Alcmaer.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Alcmaer and Medenbliic.

ALcmaer is not only one of the finest Towns of Holland, but also of all the
Low Countries, for the beautiousness of its Buildings, and the neatness of its
Streets. The Wars that it maintained against the Friezelanders, bear witness of
its antiquity.

It is very rich, and has a great Trade. Many of its Inhabitants live
pleasantly, having very fine Gardens, and a fine Country.

In 1328. it was burnt; the Friezelanders have often besieged it: and in the
year 1517. it was taken and plundered for eight days by those of Gueldres.

The Earl Florent the fifth made a Dike to the very extremities of the
Country, to hinder the Friezelanders incursions. There are fair marks to shoot
at, for the exercise and diversion of the Citizens; and next to Leyden, it has
the reputation of being the cleanliest Town in Holland. The Spaniards after the
taking of Harlem laid siege to it, but in wain; they were forced to quit the
Town, partly by reason of the ill Airs and partly because of the stout resist,
ance made by the Townsmen. Thy Town is near the Schermer, the greatest Lake of
this Septentrionall part.

At some leagues from Alcmaer upon the North-Sea-side, is the Hontbos, where
there are monstrous Dikes, made in a most singular manner, to resist the fury
of the Ocean, which here does most desperately threaten the ruin of all
Holland. Therefore there is a double bank, that so in case one should break,
the other might give the people time to repair the first. From thence you may
go to the Texel, or take your way to Seay n by the Ziipe.

Seayen is a great Village, situated in a fat Country, where Land is as dear
again as in any part of Holland. There has been Trees, the Fruits of which have
been sold for 10. pound in one year. It has a very large Marketplace. The Lords
of Seayen are descended from the House of Bavaria. It is the midway between
Alcmaer and Medenbliick.

Medenbliick is an ancient Town; all Authors agree that it was formerly the
Metropolis, before Horn and Enchusen were built. Some derive its name from the
River Medem^lack, of which there remains no marks; neither is it probable that
the famous Prince R^^lbold did live here.

It was taken by the Kenemars in the year 1426. and in 1514. they of Gueldres
burnt it down to the ground. It has high and strong Dikes to keep out the
South Sea, for the Land lies a great deal lower than the Water. When there is a
great storm, and that the Sea beats with that violence, that it does threaten
the utter ruin of all that opposes it, the Inhabitants clap Sails all along
between the Dike and the Water, and so hinder it from piercing into the body of
the bank: a pretty invention, and to which they owe the safety of their whole
Country. There is an old Castle which some suspect to have been the Palace of
the Princes of Friezeland. Here live most of your Wood-Merchants, that drive a
great Trade to Norway, and in the North. Let us follow the Seaside, and come
to Enchusen.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Enchusen.

THis Town is environed on three parts by the Sea. It is like a Half Moon, and
makes a point or neck of Land, which advances into the Zuyderzee. It is said
that in 1394. Albert, Earl of Holland, set sail from hence with a Fleet of 300.
Boats, to transport his Army into Friezeland; an argument that then it was a
famous Port. It Is true, that as time changes all things, so has it done this
Harbor; for now the Sands that are got into the mouth of it, do much hinder
the entrance of great Ships; yet are there often built here great Ships for the
Indies, and great Fleets do sail from hence to the Baltic Seas.

It was not yet walled when it was burnt by John of Arkel, and Nicholas Putene
in 1279. In 1426. it was assaulted by the Kenemars; and the same year, some
Soldiers of the Countess Jacqueline, coming in upon a sudden, surprised about
a 100. of the principal Citizens at dinner, and cut off all their Heads; a
barbarous action, which does come near the cruelty of our Age.

In 1514. a part of the Rampart, and many Houses, were destroyed by an
Inundation.

1537. the Gueldreses having denounced War to Holland, had like to have
surpised the said Town; but the Water being low, they failed of their design.

This was the first Town that revolted from the Spaniards in North-Holland. In
the year 1591. the Town was enlarged, and it now drives a great Trade in
Her^ngs and Salt-Fish. It has strong Dikes, and it needs them, being built upon
the Sea; which is the reason why it has no good Water to drink, the Country
lying so low. By the complaints of its Inhabitants we perceive that it decays
in Trade, and has formerly had a greater Commerce, which appears by many empty
Houses.

There is a very good Almshouse; and the Steeple is considerable for its
height, being built in so moorish a soft ground. These three Towns, Enchusen,
Horn, and Medenbliick, have equally, but successively, the privilege of
coining Money, each for the space of seven years, and then they begin again.
Horn now calls upon us to admire its beauty and Trade, with the convenience of
its Harbor.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Horn, and the small Towns of North-Holland.

THis Town is the second of North-Holland. It is built upon the South Sea, and
has the best Harbor of all that Coast. There was in this Town a famous Faction
of the Kennemars; but they were routed by the Citizens after a long combat.
They took likewise the Fleet of the Osserlins, by the help of those of Enchuse,
and so ended that troublesome War in 1441.

In 1557. the Dikes being broke, so much Water got into the Town, as had like
to have drowned it; but by the industry of the Inhabitants, the banks were soon
repaired again.

There is but a little arm of the Sea to be passed to come to Edam, two leagues
from Horn. It is a small Town, built triangular-wise upon the River of Ye, in
the fattest part of Holland. Here is made the best Holland Cheese with red
Rind, so much sought after by all Nations; and indeed it yields not to the
Parmesan.

In the year 1430. we find in our Annals, that the D^kes being broke, and
having overflowed the Meadows, some Maids of Edam were in a Boat, going to milk
the Cowes at Purmerend, and it being low Water, they perceived a Sea-Nymph in
the Mud; they were at first frighted, but at last taking courage, drew nearer,
got her into their Boat, and brought her to Edam, where she was washed and
clothed; she did eat our diet, and had learned to spin; but still her instinct
did carry her to her natural Element, the Water, in which she did much
delight: they could never teach her to speak. She was transported to Harlem,
where she lived many years. A certain Author says, that they had infused some
knowledge of God into her, and that she did use to bow before the Crucifix.

Monickendam is hard by Edam, upon the River Monic, which signifies Monk, and
it has for Arms, a Monk. The Town is very little, and situated upon the
Seaside. In 1426. it was taken by the Kenemars. It has been twice burnt down
all, except the Church, and the Carmelites Monastery.

Purmerend was walled in the Wars, 1573. There is a C(...)e which did belong to
the House of ^gmond; but it has been bought by the States in 1590.

North-Holland is almost quite environed with Water, and joined to the rest of
Holland by a neck of Land, from Bevervic to Vic, about a league broad. This
small Province which is not in all above 20. leagues in compass, deserves that
Strangers should take the pains to come to it, if it be but to see those
prodigious Dikes and Banks, which preserve the Country from an infallible
Inundation.

There are three or four little Islands in the South Sea, besides the Texel,
the Ulic, and some others, that are toward Friezeland, and do break the first
fury of the North-Sea. But we will leave them, to return to Leyden by the
Honsbos; and having once again admired the Dikes, go afoot by that lovely sandy
shore, which is from the Honsbos to Beeve, a sandy mountain at the mouth of the
Meuse, for the space of 24. leagues. It is the finest way in the world; for on
one side are the high sandy Hills, and on the other the Sea, which is not deep
near the sh^re; insomuch that in calm Weather one may go in a great way without
being ^ut to swim: and it is upon this s(...)re that most Ships are forced to
run, when they cannot in a storm get out to Sea; particularly in Winter, when
the nights are dark and long.

When a Ship is thus cast away, and some body scapes, the Goods aboard here are
preserved for the owners; but if all be drowned, then what the Sea casts up
belongs to the Country. It happens often likewise that after a great storm, a
sort of Whales called by the Inhabitants, Potwisch, are found sticking upon
these Sands; these likewise belong to the County: and I saw one that was sold
for 50. pounds; they make Oil of the Flesh, and use the Bones for other uses.
The Sea likewise does cast up great quantities of Cockle shells, which are
gathered to make a sort of Quicklime, much whiter than that of France, but not
so good to make Mortar with. Sometimes there are some very fine sorts of
Shells, but seldom; for those which are kept as rarities, come most from the
Indies.

You may see in your way Egmond, a Village, from which came the noble Family of
Egmond. All these sandy Hills, from the Honsbos to Beer, are full of Rabbits,
which you may see in thousands; it is forbidden to kill or take any of them,
under a certain Fine; and to hunt them, you must have leave from the high
Huntsman of Holland, or be one of the Nobles of the Country. There you may see
Eagles, that endeavor to prey upon the Connies.

The Peasants hard by have a pretty way of catching them undiscovered, which
is, that in Winter the poor Beasts finding no green thing upon the ground to
eat, all being covered with Snow, draw near the Houses, in most of which there
is a little hole that goes into the Cellar, in which are green Cabbageleaves;
the Rabbits emboldened by hunger, creep in by a board set there on purpose, and
no sooner are they entered, but the Peasant pulls away the board, and the Rabbit
falls into the Cellar. But the Peasant does not brag of his good fortune, nor
invite his Neighbors to the good cheer.

These Du^es, or sandy Mountains, are full of physical Herbs, which the
Students of Leyden do much seek after, particularly in the Springtime, in the
company of their Professors; and such Plants as cannot endure the cold, are
transplanted into a Gallery which looks to the South, in which are three
Stoves, for their conservation all Winter long. This Academy has also another
Gallery, in which are many curiosities, as Pagans Idols, Indian Serpents skins,
little Chips, and Cloths and Shoes of the Indians. The Gardener gives to the
curious a little Paper, in which is contained the explication of all these; and
the Book-binders sell a little Book, in which are all the names of the Plants
that are in the said Garden.

This Academy was formerly a Nunnery, out of which the Nuns being driven by the
great revolution of Europe for Religion, had each of them a small Prebendary
for their life assigned to them; and I remember two that did use to come from
Boyslednke to Leyden, to receive their Sallary.

In the Divinity-School are kept all public acts, and all Degrees are taken.
They that take them publicly are honored with the Magistrates Presents, who
ordinarily send them in some Presents of Wine, after the custom of Germany;
then they make a Feast to the Professors, and are very merry. They that cannot
afford to be at so much charge, are received privately, and under the Chimney,
as the Proverb says. The Commencements are ordinarily in Summer, about the
Dog-dayes.

Upon the said Academy is built a high Tower, on purpose for Astronomers to
make observations. There are likewise many rare Instruments of a new invention,
serving to the same end; here being excellent Professors in all the parts of
the Mathematics.

The Princes House is upon the Rappe^bourg, and has a fine square Court, with a
Garden. It was a religious House for Women, who it is said had purchased the
place the House stands on with spinning. The lower part of the Church is a
magazine for Ammunition, and the upper a Storehouse for Corn. This I have
added, as omitted in the first Description of Leyden, with which I have
perfected my intended Account of the Cities, Towns, and Villages in Holland.
Now I will say something of their Religion.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the different Religions in Holland.

I Will not here undertake to dispute, which is the best of all those Religions
that are here tolerated, knowing that it is too ticklish a matter to be
handled, without giving offense to some body. I shall only relate barely, how
many sorts of Religions there are within the limits of the United Provinces.

They being at their first revolt opposite to Spain in all things: resolved to
give as much liberty as that King would deny, and to tolerate all Religions,
because he would suffer but one. In order to this, the State thriving in their
Wars, took upon them to drive out the Priests, Monks, and Nuns, as so many
Emissaries of Rome, and stiff maintainers of one only Religion. The chief Model
and Reformation was made according to the Churches of Geneva, and the high
Palatinate; and to this day they that pretend to any Charge or Office, must be
of this Religion, if they desire to be admitted.

They that follow the Doctrine of Martin Luther, have all freedom in Holland,
and liberty to build Churches among the Houses, to distinguish them from the
other Reformed. The Anabaptists have likewise theirs, and are divided into
diverse Sects. They that have the great Assembly are called Drec Wagens. And I
will say this to their praise, that in their Meetings they expound Scripture,
without making any invectives, or railing upon any body else.

In the beginning those of the Reformed Religion in Holland, were called Geux,
or Beggars; as in France, Huguenots, a name which the vulgar yet retain with
joy, bragging, that they were neither Papists nor Martinists, but Geux. This
was the occasion of their being thus named: In the beginning of the troubles,
500. Gentlemen being come to Brussels, to present a Petition to the Princess of
Parma, then Governant, came of a sudden into her Palace; she being at the
Window, talking with the Earl of Varlemont, was frighted with so sudden and so
great an appearance, and asked him if he knew what it mean'd; who answered,
Madam, Do not trouble your self, they are but Beggars; Ce ne sout que des Geux.
This being told these Gentlemen at Supper, they all agreed to dress themselves
in Beggars Cloaks, and take wooden Dishes in their Hands, with this Motto, We
are all the Kings faithful Servants, even to Beggary.

We must not forget the Arminians, who have made a Schism among the Reformed
about Predestination. The Gomarists or Counter-Remonstrants opposed the said
Articles of Predestination; they were thus named from their two Heads, who were
both professors of Divinity in Leyden, Arminius and Gomarius. Their Division
had such influence among the people, that the Towns did already beg^n to take
in Gar^^sons, to maintain each their opinion by force. Prince Maurice by the
Order of the States applied a remedy to these Disorders. Barnevelt was taken
and beheaded, some Magistrates of Towns deposed, and many Ministers of the
Arminians imprisoned, their Doctrine being condemned by the Synod of Dort.

But the Arminians have never been at quiet, till they have obtained a free
exercise through most Towns of Holland, as Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and the Hague
it self, but not at Harlem, nor Leyden; in the last of which places, they have
often met in the open Streets, sung their Psalms, and preached, but have still
been disturbed by the Magistrate. At last seeing they could not gain a Church
in the Town, they have been glad to obtain leave to meet at Warmont, a Village
hard by it, which the Lord of the place has willingly granted, for the benefit
that arises to his Village by it.

The Jews are publicly tolerated, and have their Synagogues in Amsterdam.

The Catholics are the only excluded from this liberty, though they be in
great numbers, and most of them natural Hollanders, whose Ancestors have
contributed both their bloods and money, to the driving out of the Spaniards;
but all that is forgotten, and they enjoy nothing but a liberty of conscience,
in which they rest quietly. Many Politicians of our Age have thought, that the
reason why they are thus kept under, was, because the King of Spain, the
professed enemy of the States, was of their Religion; and that if peace were
once concluded, there would be more indulgence showed. But I think our
Politicians mistaken in their conjecture, and do rather look upon the
Hollanders, as people that have imitated the Romans; who having once driven out
the Tarquins, and tasted the sweetness of liberty, did not spare Collatin
himself, who had been one of the great opposers of tyranny, not because there
was cause, but because he was of the Royal Race. So I do not dispute, whether
the Papists have given Subject to distrust them; but I say, they have given
occasion to fear them, because they are of our enemies Religion. It Is true,
that in some Towns, where the memory of the actions performed by the
Catholics, in order to the public liberty, is yet preserved, they have the
freedom of meeting in private Houses. The Country people do persevere very
constantly in the said Religion, and are not so constrained as in the Towns,
though they are derided by all Sects whatsoever.

Their Ceremonies in Burying are the same all over Holland; and since '^is a
Religious Worship, we shall here describe the form of it.

The Catholics and Lutherans suffer not their Dead to be buried any where, but
in Churches and Churchyards. The Reformed are not so scrupulous, and say, that
one Earth is not holier than another, neither do they use much Ceremony.

As soon as the person is dead, the Neighbors sewe the Body up in a
Winding Sheet, and they are treated with a Collation, and a Cup of Sack; then
they make a Note of the names of those they intend to invite. The day appointed
being come, they meet about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, in the House of
the deceased; there their names are called over, and they go out two by two,
the Kindred next the Body, and the Friends after them, every one according to
his quality. The Body being buried, they come back to the House, where he that
goes first invites the company in; then they are presented with Wine, and every
one drinks as much as he pleases, and goes away when he thinks fit. The richer
sort are buried in the Church, and the company has Rhenish Wine given them. The
poor give Beer.

The young Men and Maids are carried by young people. The Body is all covered
with Flowers, and the Bearers have a branch of Laurel or Rosemary in their
Hand. If it be a person of quality, all the Bearers are presented with a sum
of Money, which they go and spend in a treating-House. There is always a
certain sum to be given to the purse of the Neighborhood. And such as have
not a burying place in the Church, must pay very dear for it, if they intend to
have one. They for whom the biggest Bell rings, pay ^0. shillings at least. The
Papists are very observant of that Ceremony; but the Reformed laugh at it, as a
piece of Superstition, and instituted for the Churches profit. However these
Buryings without Prayers or Ceremony, cost as much as the Obsequies of the
Catholics in France. After the burying of a Professor, there is a Speech made
in honor of him. If the Body be not in the Church at half an hour past two,
there is a Fine of 20. shillings to be paid; if it be not there till after
three, then there is the double due.

Some are so ill-bred, as to drink themselves drunk at these Buryings; and when
they go home in their long Cloaks, you shall find them in the mire; but the
people of quality come not to that extremity, but after two or three Glasses of
Wine, return quietly.

Besides all these Religions, there is a certain Assembly held at Rinsbourg,
ten or twelve times a year, where every one that will has the liberty of making
an Exhortation; it is called the Assembly of the free-minded. There are many
others that sit at home reading the Scripture, and never come to any Church,
except it be out of curiosity. The Arianisme has those that profess it. In a
word, any body may follow his own opinion, but not profess it with a public
Worship. There are Atheists enough too.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Nobility.

HOlland has for Arms a -- with this Motto, for Liberty. It is observable, that
almost all the Provinces of the Low Countries have a Lion for their Arms; which
made Charles their Duke desirous to make one Kingdom of them, called the
Kingdom of the Lion; but while he was adding to it Lorrain and the Swizzers,
he died, and left the title of Duke only to his Successors.

The Emperor Charl^s the fifth had the same design; but he met with so much
opposition in the privileges, and the diversity of humors and tongues in the
different Provinces, that he was fain to give over the design of it; he being
besides busied with continual Wars.

There are also many Gentlemen in the Low Countries, that bear a Lion in their
Coat. But since my design is only to speak of Holland, I shall mention no other
than the Nobility of that Province, as well to publish their antiquity, as to
stop the mouths of some Strangers, who either by an absurd ignorance, or
maliciously, do publish that there are no Gentlemen in Holland. It Is true, that
the length of the Civil Wars has been the death of many of that courageous
Nobility, who seeking Honor have died in the bed of it, and so some Families
of ancient extract are quite extinguished. But there are yet many remaining,
who may contend for antiquity and splendour with most Families in Europe.

It Is commonly said, that the Italian Nobility do not scruple to trade. The
French indeed are nicer, and think it a degenerating from their birth; yet do
they not make any difficulty of marrying a Citizens Daughter, if she be rich,
and can by her means repair the luster of their decayed Nobility.

But the Germans do not only abhor Traffic, but think it a greater baseness,
to mingle their blood with one meanly born.

The Hollanders seem to be in the middle between these extremes.

For first, The Dutch Nobility does not trade. They love War, for the defense
of their Country; are not Duellists, nor quarrelsome, like the French; love
Learning, particularly the Mathematics; live pleasantly in their
Countrey-Houses; and may without degenerating marry whom they please.

The Gentlemen in Holland have always enjoyed great privileges; for the
ancient Earls did never undertake any thing without their advice, as it is now
observed in Denmark and Poland.

The three principal Families are the Brederodes, the Wassenaers, and the
Egmonds; of whom the Proverb is,

The Noble Brederodes.
The Ancient Wassenaers.
The Rich Egmonds.
The Brederodes are descended from the Earls of Holland; and the Story is, that
Sitfrid, the youngest Son of Arnold of Ghent, and Grandson to Didier, second
Earl of Holland, being fallen under his Fathers indignation and hatred, was
afterward pardoned; and ^he Earl to show his kindness and reconciliation,
caused Land to be measured out to him with larger Roods: thence he was called
Brederode; and from him is descended this Family, by his eldest Son Didier; and
from his younger, Simon, Lord of Teling, are descended the Lords of Toll and
Lecke.

The Wassenaers fetch their origin from a Village between Leyden and the
Hague; and their name is derived from the right they had in former Ages to the
Waters, Ponds, and Lakes, in Holland. They pretend to be descended from that
famous Captain, Claudius Civilis, of whom Tacitus makes honorable mention.
They have been Burg-graves of Leyden, and are yet highly esteemed. From them
are descended the Duvenvords, the Warmonts, the Bouchorts, the Polanes, the
Matenesses, all the Flower of the Dutch Nobility.

They that represent the Nobility of Holland in the States General, are these
following; whereof some are dead:

John Wolfard, Lord of Brederode and Viane.

John de Wassenaer, Lord of Duvenvord, etc.

Vesele de Boteselaer, Lord of Asperen, etc.

James of Wingarde, Lord of Benthuise, Soctemeer, etc.

Albert de Scagen, Baron of Scagen, Harengbuisen, etc.

James of Wassenaer, and Duvenvord, Lord of Warmont.

Henry de Raphorst, Lord of Raphorst, etc.

James de Mateness, Lord of Mateness, Rivier, Opmeer, etc.

Francis Arsen, Knight, Lord of Sommersdiick.

Besides these, there are diverse other Families, as those of Arquel,
Kenembourg, Haserson, Alquemade, Opdam, Gaudriaen, Sevenhuysen, Vanderlaen,
Benthuse, Asmal, etc. who are all by Alphabeticall order, in the Book
entitled, The Theater of the Towns and County of Holland, by the Learned
Monsieur Boxhorne; together with the noble actions of their Ancestors.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Liberty.

THere is no Province in the World, where the Inhabitants enjoy more liberty,
than in Holland. Nay, as soon as any Slave coming from a foreign Country, sets
his foot upon the Dutch shore, he is free. The Gentlemen are Princes and
Fathers of their Families. The Country people when they have paid their
Rents, are as free as the Citizens. If a Gentleman abuse or kill any of them,
he is in great danger of losing his life, if the crime deserve it. Here is no
partiality; and let every one know, that the Laws are here in their force.

The Magistrates are bound to maintain the Citizens Privileges, and preserve
them from all Oppression. The Masters may not beat their Servants, nor the
Mistresses their Maids. But above all, every one is Master at home; and it is a
capital offense to offer violence to a man in his own House.

One may travel freely through all Holland, by day and by night, without fear
of being robbed. Highway men are never pardoned; Thieves are sometimes, but not
those among them that break into Houses, or steal Sheep in the Pasture-grounds.

No body is forced to stay here any longer than he thinks fit. Here is liberty
of Conscience, and no body is forced to go to the Protestant Churches. The
liberty of speaking freely, even of Magistrates themselves, is too great; and
that which elsewhere would be a crime, is here laughed at.

The German Students, I remember, were once about to set up a custom, which is
in use in most of the German Universities, by which the new comers are very ill
treated for the first year; but the Magistrates opposed it, and threatened all
those that should go about to introduce such a slavery, in a free Country.

Here are never made any Rules about what people onght to wear; every one wears
what he pleases. Nay any body may transport as much Gold and Silver as he
pleases, and no body shall hinder him, as they do in England, and France. In a
word, all that is reasonable, is lawful.

They that say that the Nobility are not respected in Holland, are very much
mistaken. For those amongst them that do govern themselves with moderation, and
are familiar with their Inferiors, are infinitely beloved; but the proud and
haughty are despised and hated.

Here is the greatest Equality in the World. It is ordinary to hear a mean
Fellow in a dispute with a Citizen, say, I am as much as you; if you be richer
than I, it is well for you. But the wiser sort avoid such quarrels, as it is
easy to do, by keeping a fit distance between them and the common people.

Certainly when I do reflect upon the miserable condition of some Christians in
Europe; as of the Peasants in Lytuania, and almost all over Poland, where the
Lords have the power of hanging them, when they run away from their tyranny; in
Bohemia, and some other places of Germany; in Denmark, and Sweden, where the
Gentlemen do ^ighly abuse the Commons; I cannot choose but cry out, O happy
Holland, that have preserved that precious jewel of Liberty; preserve it well,
for with its loss, goes that of thy happiness!

CHAP. XXVII.
Of some Voyages undertaken under the Banner of Holland.

I Do not intend to speak here of the ordinary Trade that is driven by
Shipping, to the Northern parts of the World; nor of that which is carried on
in England, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, etc.

My design is to speak of those Voyages undertaken within these threescore
years to the Indies, which were undertaken upon this occasion:

The King of Spain having seized upon, and confiscated some Ships belonging to
the Hollanders, that did trade in his Ports, which were then the Mart of
Europe, for the East India Merchandises, made some Merchants resolve to set out
a Fleet of eight Sail for the Indies; whereof four were to go the long way, and
four others to go by the North, and endeavor to find out a passage to China,
by the North-Sea; it being the shorter way to the Indies by half in half.

These four last set sail from the Texel the fifth of June, 1594. and the
eighteenth they came to Kildus in Lapland; and some time after they discovered
the Island of Nova Zembla, between mountains of Ice.

In this journey they met no Pirates nor enemies, but great white fierce Bears,
which would follow them upon the land, and in the Sea; as one particularly did,
for leaping into the Sea, to follow their long Boat which they had ma^^d out,
they shot him, and hurt him; but he nevertheless following still, they threw a
Rope about his neck, thinking to carry him away alive after them to Austerdam;
nevertheless this furious Beast had the force to leap with his two fore-feet
upon the Boat, and so frighted the Seamen, that they were all ready to leap
into the Sea, had not the Rope by good luck entangled it self about the Rudder;
whereupon one run him through with a Pike, and killed him.

They met besides with a sort of great Fish, as big as Oxen, called Valres;
their Head is like an Oxes, and they have two Teeth that come out like Boars
Tushes.

At last seeing the season of the year far spent, they went back, and some
days after met with the other Ships which had left them, and learned from them
that they had been in the Tartarian Ocean, which they had found full of Whales.
That they had landed, and discovered a Cross upon a Mountain, near which they
had found some Sacks of Meal, and something written upon the Cross in Russian
Characters. At last they all arrived at Amsterdam in September, having been
hindered by the Ice to go any further.

The chief of these was one William Barenson, who having made the recital of
their journey, there was a second Voyage resolved of, under the conduct of the
said William; but they met with the same obstacles again, though it were in
August. They met with a Shallop laden with Barks of Trees, and Geese, and such
other Merchandises, which waited for the Russian Fleet, which every year goes
that way. They that were in the Bark did say, that within a few days the Sea
would be so frozen, as that one might go over the Ice into Tartary. The
Hollanders invited them aboard, and presented them with Butter and Cheese,
which they refused, saying, it was fasting-day, but took some Herrings. Having
left them, and seen the Country of the Samoctes, which they found to be a
barbarous people, wearing Buff-skins, they steered their course to the States
Island, a place which they found full of Hares, whereof they made provision.
Some passed into the Continent, not far from the Island, and there a furious
Bear killed two, and routed all the rest of the company, though twenty in
number, and well armed with Pikes; at last with succor from the Ship, the Bear
was killed. After which they set sail for Holland, running much hazard in the
Ice, but arrived without any other loss than of those two men.

The small success of this Voyage, could not discourage the undertakers from
venturing once more, under the conduct of the same William Barenson, to whose
Ship James Heemskerke was aded, as Commissary. Two Ships set sail the
eighteenth of May, and met with the first Ice the fifth of June. They sailed up
and down till the eighteenth, without being able to meet with any passage.
Wherefore one returned into Holland; Barenson having steered to Nova Zembla,
and endeavoring to leave it behind him, was surprised by the Ice, and his
Ship frozen up. In this extremity, some having landed, found abundance of
Timber, about a league within the shore; with that they built a little House,
which they covered with the Boards of their Ship, and had Wood enough left to
make fire with. The Sun forsook them quite from the fourth of November, to the
twenty fourth of January. Till the Sun forsook them, the Bears tormented them;
but they had great relief by a sort of Foxes which they did use to catch and
roast, and make warm Caps of their Skins. Their Beer and their Sack being
frozen, they were fain to break them with an Axe, and thaw them upon the fire;
and when their Beer was spent, they were fain to melt the Snow, and drink it.
At last the Sun came again, but with him the Bears, who did persecute so as
they were not able to stir out; of them they killed many, and used their fat in
stead of Oil to burn in Lamps. Twelfthday being come, they resolved to be
merry, and choose King and Queen, making their King, King of Nova Zembla, and
the Islands about it. After some time they begun to think of returning home,
not in their Ship, for that they could not stir; but in their Boat, which with
much ado they fitted up, and set sail the fifteenth of June, among shoals of
Ice, the Bears still following them upon the Ice, and into the Sea. The f(...)h
of July they came to the Cross Island, and the eighteenth they met with two
Russian Boats, who gave them some refreshments, and at last they came to
Amsterdam, in October, 1597. having lost Barenson, and four more.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Containing diverse Curiosities.

IN the general recital of so many delicious Wonders, we have it may be
omitted some, which we here add by way of Supplement.

North-Holland had formerly a great Lake, near Purmerend, which has been
drained with great pains and charges; it is now a most fertile spot of ground,
about 20. mile in compass. The Cattle there is the biggest and fattest of all
the Low Countries.

It is confidently reported, that in the general contribution of the Provinces
toward the War, Holland gives 57. in a 100. and Amsterdam alone gives above
27. of the 57. from whence may be inferred, what are the riches of that Town.
The revenue of the said City comes to above 4000. pound a day, according to the
Treatise that has been Printed of it. This year, 1650. the Excise of Beer,
Meat, and Corn, being farmed out to them that bid most, was let at a 150000.
pounds. Besides these, there is the Wine-Excise, the Taxes upon Houses, the
eighth penny, and a thousand others.

There is a Square-house before the Townhouse, where all things are weighed;
it yields above 10000. pound a year.

There is a Glass-house, in which Chrystall-Glasses are made, not inferior to
Venice-Glasses; as also excellent Looking Glasses, which do attract all men's
admiration.

The Rhetoricians or Po^ts-house deserves to be remembered, it being a laudable
custom, practiced almost all over the Low Countries; which is, that people
given to Poetry have a House at Amsterdam, where they may represent Plays.
They are distinguished into different Chambers, and make Aenigmes, which if
unridled carry a prize with them for the Oedipus.

I shall end by the public Library, to show that our Merchants have not forgot
Learning, amongst the hurry and noise of their Trade.

It is hard by the South Church, and very well stored with all sorts of curious
Books. The Epigram that is at the Door gives people warning how they are to
behave themselves, when they are within.

There is added to it a Physick-Garden, which increases every day, by the care
that the Magistrates take to furnish it with rare Plants, at great charges.

But let us leave Amsterdam, for fear we lose our selves in the confusion of so
many remarkable things; and come and rest our selves at Leyden, the Garden of
Holland. Our nearest way will be by the Lake of Harlem, for with a fair Wind
we may arrive in four hours; but if the Wind be contrary, we may go by Harlem
in two hours by the Channel, and then take a Chariot for six and twenty pence,
which will carry us in two hours more to Leyden. When the Wind is strong, and
contrary, the way by the Sea of Harlem is troublesome, for it makes those sick
that have often been upon the Sea without inconvenience; and though in many
places it has not above six foot Water, yet not long ago a Boat with Passengers
was over-turn'd, and they drowned.

Though there be many tempests and storms upon it, yet within this 25 years I
do not remember any ill accident but this I have now mentioned; and that great
misfortune which befell the unfortunate Queen of Bohemia, when she received the
terrible news, how the King her Husband had saved himself with swimming, but
that her eldest Son was drowned in this unmercifull Element.

The King had left Harlem in November, 1629. toward the evening; the night
proved very dark and tempestuous, and the Lake much agitated by great Winds,
when unfortunately in the obscurity, another Boat fell foul of his, and sunk it
immediately. The poor young Prince was heard to cry out, Ab Sir, dear Father,
pray save me! but all in vain, for the darkness of the night hindering the
distinguishing of objects, it was impossible to relieve him, and so he perished
in the flower of his youth, to the unspeakable affliction of all that were
acquainted with his forwardness in all Arts and Sciences.

The two famous Cities of Holland are Leyden and Amsterdam; one is the Market
of all foreign Commodities, and the other of Manufactures of all sorts. Neither
is there any City that has so great a Revenue, next to Amsterdam, as Leyden, as
it appears by the last years Excise only upon Beer, Corn, and Cattle, which
came to 50000. pound.

There is wanting to Leyden a good Harbor to the Sea, without passing by other
Towns, and it has been proposed to make one at Caetvic, which is but two
leagues from it. Nay, the Mathematicians and Engineers having been advised
with, do say the thing is feasible; others say that it cannot be, and that
either the Sea would choke up the Harbor with Sand, or it may be if let in,
drown all the Country. To which it is answered, that the securest way would be
to go by Wass^naer, and make the overture between two Mountains: but this
design is now buried in oblivion. Being one day in the company of a
Mathematician at Catvic, he told me, that the Sea being calm is about half a
foot higher than the Meadows about Leyden; so that if in the Spring-tides, or a
storm, the Sea should make way through those Mountains of Sand, infallibly the
Country would be all lost.

The most dangerous Wind for Holland is a North-West-Winde, toward the
Equinox, with a storm; but God Almighty by his providence hinders these three
so dangerous enemies, from assailing us all at one time.

Holland is so populous, that you can hardly go a stones cast without meeting
with Houses or Villages.

The Hollanders Diversions are these: In Summer a Citizen shall hire a Boat for
himself and his Family, to go and eat Fresh Water Fish. In Winter he shall hire
a Sledge upon the Ice. They are not given to gaming at Dice or Cards, but will
play at Bowls and Tables. They are not quarrelsome, nor apt to strike, but
will scold and call one another all to naught, before they come to blows.

Toward Autumn, and in Winter, the Students pastime is to go and shoot at the
wilde-Ducks and Geese; and if they shoot at the Countrey-peoples, as they will
often out of roguery, then follows a scuffle, in which the weakest goes to the
Wall.

Their industry is most admirable for inventing, and improving other peoples
inventions, witness Printing, and Telescope-Glasses. The Art of Navigation is
better understood here than in any place of the World: so is Fortification, and
all military Discipline; in so much that a Low Country Soldier, when he comes
to another Kingdom is presently made much of, and advanced. The Hollanders are
the best in the World at Draining, witness what they have done in England and
France, at Bourdeaux, and in Britany.

But their Fishing is a thing which in ^ll manners deserves admiration. But
they have one odd diverting way of it, which I shall here relate.

There are three Islands which serve as a bar to the Ocean: The first is the
Texel, where are made excellent Cheeses. The second is the Ulic, where are
taken great quantities of Muscles. The third is Schelling, the Inhabitants of
which last are much given to Fishing, and the way that they use to catch the
Fish, which they call a Sea-Dog, is very pleasant. They disguise themselves
like Beasts, and at certain hours that these Fishes are used to come out upon
the shore, they leap and dance before them, and by a thousand antic tricks
make them follow them, and leave the shore: in the mean time those that are in
Ambushcade set their Nets; then the dancers throw off their Masks, and taking
their humane shape upon them, come upon the poor Sea-Dogs, who endeavoring to
re-gain the Sea are entangled in the Nets, and made a prey to those that had
diverted them.

The Hollanders transport salt-Fish all the World over.

There is not any season in the year that does not produce some particular
pleasure. For what is more pleasant, than to see the Meadows covered with
Flowers all the Spring and Summer. Autumn produces an abundance of Fruits. The
Winter is more pleasant here than any where else; for in so sad a season, the
diversion of the frozen Channels, full of people, sliding upon them, is no
small one. Wood is not dear here; and you shall have more for 10. pound at
Amsterdam, than at Paris for 15. If the Water be not to be drunk, in recompense
there is very good ^eer to be had. It Is true, that the Winds and the Rain are
very frequent, by reason of the Neighborhood of the Sea; but the inconvenience
is recompensed by the convenience of traveling; for if the ways be broke and
bad, you may go by Water. A Merchant never misses of an opportunity of
transporting himself and his Goods, the Channels being loaded night and day
with an infinite number of Boats.

But as there is nothing absolutely perfect, Holland has its Clouds, its
North-Windes, its Rains, and its foggy Mists, which do much bate of the beauty
and pleasantness of this famed and renowned Province.

The Treaty of Peace Concluded the thirtieth of January, of the present year,
1648. in the Town of Munster in Westphalia, between the most Illustrious and
most Potent Prince, Philip the fourth, King of Spain, etc. on one side, and the
High and Mighty Lords, the States General, of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, on the other.
IN the Name of God. Be it known to all, that after the bloody Wars, that have
for so many years afflicted the people, and Subjects, of the obedience of the
King of Spain, and the States General; they the said King and States being
moved with Christian compassion, and being desirous to put an end to all the
calamities, and deplorable consequences, which the farther continuance of the
Wars of the said Low Countries might produce, and to change them into the rest
and tranquillity of a firm peace, have, to compass so good an end, Deputed and
Commissioned fit persons on both sides, viz. on the side of the said Don Philip
the fourth, King of Spain, Don Gaspar de Bracamonte, Y de Guzman, Count of
Pigneranda, Lord of Aldea seca de la Frontera, Knight of the Order of
Alcantara, perpetual Administrator of the Commandery of Damyel, of the Order
of Calatrava, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, of his privy Counsel,
and his Ambassador Extraordinary toward his Imperial Majesty, as also first
Plenipotentiary for his Majesty in the Treaty of the general Peace. Monsieur
A^tony Brnn, Knight and Counselor for his Majesty, in his supreme Counsel of
State for the Low Countries, and his Plenipotentiary in the general Peace.

On the sides of the States General, Bartold de Gent, Lord of Looven and
Meynerswicke, Senechal and Diikgrave of Bommel, Fieler, and Brommelerweerden,
deputed by the Nobility of Gueldres, in the Assembly of the States General.
Jean de Mateness, Lord of Mateness, Riviere, Opmeer, Souteveen, and Deputy in
the ordinary Counsel of Holland and West-Frieze; as also Deputy in the States
General, from the Nobles of the said Province; Councellor and Heemrade of
Shieland Adrian Paw, Knight, Lord of Heemsteed, Hogersmilde, and first
President, Counselor, and Master of the Accounts of Holland and West-Frieze;
as also Deputy in the Assembly of the States General, by the said Provinces.
Jean de Knu^t, Knight, Lord of Old and New Vosmar, representing the Nobility in
the States in Counsel of Zeeland, as in the Admiralty; first Counselor of his
Highness the Prince of Orange, Deputy in the Assembly of the States. G^dart de
R^^de, Lord of Nederhorst, Uredelant, Cortcho^f, Overmeer, Horstwaert, etc.
President in the Assembly of the Nobles of the Province of Utrect, and by them
Deputy in the Assembly of the States General. Francis de Doma, Lord of
Hinn^ma, Hiclsum, Deputy in the Assembly of the States General, by the
Province of Frizeland. William Riperda, Lord of Hengeloo, Boxbergen, Boculoo,
and Sussenbergh, Deputy by the Nobility of Overyssel, in the Assembly of the
States General. All Extraordinary Ambassadors in Germany, and
Plenipotentiaries of the said States, for the Treaty of the general Peace. All
being sufficiently empowered and assembled in the Town of Munster in Westphalia;
have by common consent, and in virtue of their respective powers received from
the said King, and the Lords, the States General, Concluded and Agreed upon
these following Articles.

1. The said King does Declare and Acknowledge, that the said Lords, the States
General, of the United Provinces, and their Provinces, Countrey-Towns, Lands,
and Appurtenances, are free and Sovereign States, Provinces, and Countries:
upon which, nor upon their Towns, etc. the said King neither does, nor shall
henceforth, or his Heirs and Successors, pretend any thing. And that in
consequence of this his Declaration, he is content to treat with the said
States, as he does by these, and conclude a perpetuated peace with them, upon
the Conditions here following.

2. To wit, that the said peace shall be firm and inviolable; and that all acts
of hostility, of what kind soever, shall cease both by Sea and by Land, in all
the Kingdoms and Countries of the obedience of the said King, and the said
States; as also between all their Subjects, of what quality soever they be,
without exception of places or persons.

3. Each shall remain in peaceable possession, and shall keep and enjoy all the
Countrey-Towns, Lands, Places, and Lordships, that he now enjoyes, and that
without being any ways molested directly or indirectly. And in this is
comprehended the Buroughs, Villages, and Country, appertaining and belonging
to that which each shall possess; and by consequence all the Mayorship of
Bosleduke; as also all the Lordships, Towns, Castles, Buroughs, Villages, and
Champain, thereunto belonging; the Town and Marqueship of Bergues upon Zoom;
the Town and Barony of Breda; the Town of Maestrict, and the extent of its
jurisdiction; the County of Groonhoff; the Town of Grave; and the Country of
Luychuist; and the Bayliship of Hulst, and Hulster-Ambact, and Ambact: as also
the Forts which the said Lords the States do possess now in the Country of
Waes; and all other Towns and places which the said States do hold in Brabant,
Flanders, or any where else, shall remain in the power of the said States, with
all the Right of Sovereignty, in the same manner as they hold the United
Provinces: but all the rest of the said Country of Waes, except the said
Forts, shall remain unto the said King of Spain. As concerning the three places
on the other side the Meuse, viz. Falquimont, Dalem, and Rodeleduc, they shall
remain in the condition they are now in; and in case of dispute, the business
shall be decided in the (Chamber mipartic) to be mentioned in the following
Articles.

4. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries of the said King and States,
shall live in good union and correspondency together, without any resentment
for past injuries; and they shall have liberty to go and stay in the
Territories of each other, and to exercise their Trade and Commerce in all
surety, both by Sea and Land.

5. The Navigation and Trade to the East and West Indies shall be maintained,
in conformity to those Grants or Patents given or to give by the States: for
surety whereof shall serve this present Treaty, and the ratification of it; and
under this Treaty shall be comprehended all Potentates, Nations, and Peoples,
with whom the said States, or the East and West India Companies in their name,
within the limits of their Patent, are in amity or alliance. And the said King
and States shall respectively remain in possession of all those Lordships,
Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Commerce and Trade, in the East and West Indies; as
also upon the Coasts of Brasil, Asia, Africa, and America, that the said King
and States do now hold. And in this Article are particularly comprised all
those places and Forts, that the Portugueses ever since 1641. have taken from
the States; as also are comprehended all those places, that the said States
shall hereafter take, conquer, and possess, without infraction of the present
Treaty. And the Curators or Directors of the East and West India Companies of
the United Provinces; as also the Officers, Agents, Soldiers, Mariners, being
at prefen^ at the service of the said Companies, o^ having been formerly
employed by them; and all such as being now out of their service, do live
within the jurisdiction of the said Companies, shall remain free and
unmolested, in all places under the obedience of the said King in Europe, and
may travel, trade, and frequent in all places, as all other Inhabitants of the
States. Besides, it has been Stipulated and Agreed, that the Spaniards retain
their Navigation to the East Indies, in such manner as it is now for this
present time, without the liberty of extending themselves any further. As also
the Inhabitants of these Provinces shall abstain from frequenting the places
that the Castilians do possess in the East Indies.

6. And as for the West Indies, the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms
and Countries of the said King and States, shall respectively abstain from
Navigation and Trade in all the Harbors, places, Forts, Castles, possessed by
either: to wit, that the Subjects of the said King shall not navigate nor trade
in those that belong to the States, nor the Subjects of the States in those
that belong to the said King. And in the places of the States, shall be
comprehended all those that the Portugueses since 1641. have taken in Brasil,
upon the said States, and all those that they now possess, as long as they
shall remain in the possession of the said States. In all which there is
nothing contrary to the precedent Article.

7. And because a long space of time is necessary, for the giving notice to
those that are now abroad with Ships and Forces, that they may defist from all
acts of hostility; it has been Agreed, that within the limits of the Patent
granted, or to be granted, by continuation, to the Company of the East Indies
of the United Provinces, the peace shall begin no sooner than a year after the
date of the present Treaty. And as for the limits of the Patent, granted
heretofore by the States General, or to be granted by continuation, unto the
Company of the West Indies, the peace shall not there begin till six months
after the date of the present Treaty. Provided still, that if the notice of the
said peace be arrived by public Order of each side to the said limits, before
the said time be expired, that then immediately all acts of hostility shall
cease. And that if after the term be expired, there be yet committed some acts
of hostility, the damages shall be repaired without delay.

8. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries of the said King and States,
trafficking in one another Country, shall not be forced to pay any greater
Impositions or Customs, than their own Subjects respectively; so that thereby
the Subjects of the said States shall be freed and exempted from the Imposition
of 20. per cent. or any other whatsoever, which the said King did levy during
the truce of 12. years, or would hereafter raise directly or indirectly upon
the Inhabitants of the said States, or any ways charge them further than his
own proper Subjects.

9. The said King and States shall not raise any Contributions or Imposts out
of their limits respectively, upon any Merchandise, passing either by Land or
Water.

10. The Subjects of each shall respectively enjoy all freedom of Peages is a
word that signifies the right of levying such sums upon Merchants, in such
and such places or passages.
Peages, that they were in possession of before the beginning of the War.

11. The Trade, Commerce, and Frequentation, shall not be hindered, between the
Subjects of the said King and States; and if it should chance to be obstructed
any ways, the obstacle shall immediately be taken away.

12. And after the day of the conclusion and ratification of this peace, the
said King shall no longer enjoy, upon the Rivers of Rhene and Mouse, those
Customs or Peages, which before the War were under the jurisdiction of any of
the United Provinces; particularly, the Peage of Zeeland, which shall not be
levied for his Majesty, neither in the Town of Antwerp, nor any where else:
upon condition that from that day forwards, the States of Zeeland shall take
upon them to pay the annual Rents, to those to whom the said Peage was
morgaged, before the year 1572. which also shall do the Proprietors of all
other Peages, if they be charged with annual Rents.

13. The white boiled Salt coming from the United Provinces into those of his
Catholic Majesty, shall be received and admitted without any higher Impost,
than upon Bay Salt: and likewise the Salt coming from his Majesty's Countries
shall be admitted in those of the States, upon the same conditions.

14. The Rivers of Scheld, as also the Channels of Zas and Zwin, and other
entries into the Sea thereabouts, shall be shut up by the States General on
their side.

15. The Ships and Goods coming in and going out of the Harbors of Flanders,
shall be taxed at the same rate as the Ships and Goods going upon the Scheld,
and the Channels named in the above-written Article; and it shall be agreed of
the proportion between the parties hereafter.

16. The Anseatick-Towns, with all their Citizens and Inhabitants, shall enjoy
as to Navigation and Trade in Spain, and all the Kingdoms and States thereof,
all the Privileges and Immunities granted at present, or that shall be
hereafter given to the Subjects of the United Provinces. And reciprocally all
the Subjects of the said Provinces shall enjoy the same Rights, Franchises,
Immunities, Privileges, and Capitulations, as well for the establishing of
Consuls in the capital Towns or Seaports of Spain, as for their Merchants,
Factors, Masters of Ships, Mariners, or others; and that in the same manner,
that the said Anseatick-Towns in general, or in particular, have heretofore
practiced or obtained, and shall hereafter obtain, for the safety and advantage
of Navigation and Trade of their Towns, Merchants, etc.

17. Likewise the Inhabitants of the Countries of the said States, shall have
the same liberty in the said Kings Dominions, that the Subjects of his Majesty
of Great Britain do enjoy, by the Articles in the last Treaty of peace made in
secret, with the High Constable of Castile.

18. The said King shall as soon as possible assign a place for the honorable
burying of the bodies of such of the States Subjects, as shall die in his
Dominions.

19. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the said Kings Dominions, coming into the
Territories of the States, shall as to the public exercise of Religion,
comport themselves with all modesty, without giving any scandal, or proffering
any blasphemy, and the same shall be observed by the Subjects of the United
Provinces.

20. The Merchants, Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, their Ships, Goods, and
other things belonging to them, shall not be arrested nor detained, by virtue
of any Order, either general or special, nor for any cause of War, or
otherwise; nor under the pretext of using them for the preservation of the
Country. Hereby nevertheless are not meant all seisings and arrests of Ships,
by the ordinary proceedings of justice, by reason of Debts, Obligations, and
Contracts, of those whose Goods are seized, who shall be left to the course of
the Law.

21. There shall be framed a Court of equal number of Commissioners on both
sides, who shall sit in such places in the Low Countries as shall be thought
fit; sometimes under the obedience of one, and sometimes under the obedience of
the other State, as it shall be agreed by common consent; and according to
their Commission (which they shall be sworn to observe) they shall take care to
maintain a good correspondency on both sides; shall also have a regard to the
Taxes and Impositions laid on both sides upon Merchandise; and if they perceive
that on either side there be excess committed, they shall immediately redress
it. Besides, the said Judges shall examine all questions touching the
non-observancce of this Treaty of peace; as also the contraventions or failings
against it, not only here, but in distant Provinces and Kingdoms of Europe,
and shall decide them by a short way. The Sentences and Decrees of which Judges
shall be put in execution by all Underofficers, living upon the places,
against the person of the transgressors, as necessity shall require; and the
said subordinate Officers may by no means fail in this at their peril.

22. If any Judgment or Decree should pass between persons of different
parties, either in civil or criminal matters, they shall not be put in
execution, neither against the Goods nor against the persons of the said
parties; and no Letters of Reprizall shall be granted, but with cognizance of
cause, and according to the Imperial Constitutions, and the Order by them
established.

23. It shall not be free to enter or stay in the Harbors, Ports, Bays, and
Rodes, of each other, with men of War, or armed Ships, in such numbers as may
give occasion of jealousy to any, without the leave and permission of that
State to whom the said Ports, etc. do belong; except in case of a storm, or
that there were some other necessity of avoiding danger at Sea.

24. They whose Estates have been seized upon, and confiscated, by reason of
the War, or their Heirs, Executors, etc. shall enjoy the said Estates, and may
enter into possession of them by their own authority, by virtue of this present
Treaty, notwithstanding all Alienations, Incorporations, into the public
Treasury, Gifts, Treaties, Agreements, and Transactions whatsoever, though they
contain Renunciations of the parties to whom the said Estates do belong. And
all such Estates once restored, may be sold by the Proprietors, their Heirs,
etc. without a necessity of a further or more particular leave. And in
consequence of this, the Proprietaries of such Rents as shall be constituted by
the Treasury, in lieu of the said Estates thus sold, may dispose of the
propriety they have in them by Sale, or otherwise, as of any part of their
Estate.

25. This shall take place to the profit of the Heirs of the deceased
Illustrious Prince, William, Prince of Orange; even for the right they have in
the salt-Wells of the County of Burgundy, which shall be restored to them; as
also the Woods that do depend on them, that is, so much as shall not be found
to have been bought and paid for by his Catholic Majesty.

26. In which are also comprised the Estate and Lands lying in the Counties of
Burgundy and Charolois; and all which has not been restored as it ought to have
been, by the Treaties of the ninth of April, 1609. and the seventh of January,
1610. These I say shall be restored to the Proprietaries, their Heirs, etc.

27. As also are hereby understood such Lands and Rights, as after the
expiration of the Truce of 12. years, were by sentence of the Council of
Malines, judged in favor of the Count John de Nassaw; which Sentence by virtue
of this Treaty is made void, and any other acquisition of possession is also
annulled.

28. And as for the Suit in Law about Castle- Beliu, begun in the life of the
late Prince of Orange, against the Attorney-Generall of the King of Spain.
Since the said Cause has not been determined in the time of a year, as it was
promised by the fourteenth Article of the Truce for 12. years; it has been
agreed, that immediately after the conclusion and ratification of the present
Treaty, the Treasury shall desist from all demands touching the said Suit in
Law; and that the Prince of Orange, and his Heirs, shall freely enjoy without
molestation, the Lands and Chattels in question, as his own for ever: upon
condition likewise, that the Treasury shall not be forced to refund for the
past possession of them.

29. If in any place there arise difficulties touching the restitution of Land
and Rights, the Judge of the place shall without delay cause the execution, and
in this shall proceed the shortest way work.

30. The Subjects of the said King and States, may reciprocally in the
Dominions of each, use such Lawyers, Attorneys, Sollicitors, etc. as they shall
think fit.

31. If the Treasury has caused any confiscated Estates to be sold, those
persons to whom they belong shall be content to receive the payment of them at
16. years purchase, to be paid them every year; or else they shall have liberty
to distrain upon the Land, in what hands soever they find it. Provided, they
have Patents from the (...) to serve them for a title, with the Assignation of
the annual payment, upon some receiver of the Kings Revenue, in that Province
in which the thing shall have been sold; which receiver shall also be named in
the Patent, and the price of the thing sold calculated, and summed up,
according to the first public sale of it: the first year of which payment
shall end a year after the ratification of this present Treaty.

32. But if the sale was made for good and lawful Debts, of those to whom the
said Estates did belong, before the confiscation, it shall be lawful for them
or their Heirs to redeem the said Estates, paying the price of them in a year;
after which time they shall be excluded from this privilege: but having once
redeemed, they may sell and dispose of such Estates as they please.

33. Yet under this are not understood such Houses as have been sold in Towns;
for by reason of the many changes and reparations made in them, it would be too
hard a matter to settle and determine their just value.

34. And as for all reparations and improvements made in all other redeemed
Estates, the Judges shall examine them, and have a regard to them; yet shall it
not be lawful for the possessors to retain those Estates till they be
re-imbursed, but such Estates shall be bound and morgaged for their payment.

35. All Estates, Claims, Rights, etc. that have been kept hidden; all
Movables, Immoveables, Rents, Actions, Debts, etc. which shall not have been
seized upon by the Treasury, with good cognizance of cause, before the day of
the ratification of this Treaty, shall remain in the free disposition of the
Proprietaries, their Heirs, etc. with all the Fruits, Revenues, Rents, and
Profits of them. And those that have so hid the said Estates, Rights, etc.
shall not be any ways molested by the Treasury, but shall enjoy and dispose of
them as of their own.

36. The Trees cut down after the day of the conclusion of this Treaty, or such
as shall be cut down the day of the conclusion; and those not being cut down,
are nevertheless bargained for, shall remain to the Proprietary,
notwithstanding the sale of them.

37. The Fruits, Farms, Rents, Leases, Tenths, Fishing-Houses, etc. of such
Estates, as according to this Treaty, shall be restored to the right owners; if
they fall after the conclusion of this Treaty, shall remain for the whole year
to the Proprietaries, and their Heirs, etc.

38. All Farms and Leases of confiscated Estates, though made for many years,
shall nevertheless expire and be at an end, in the year of the conclusion of
this Treaty; and the Farms or Leases falling after the day of the conclusion of
this Treaty, shall belong to the Proprietaries; with this caution, that if the
Farmer of the said Estates, has employed any of his stock toward the said
years crop, he shall be re-payed by the Proprietary, as the Judges of the place
shall value the said disbursement.

39. All sale of confiscated Estates made after the conclusion of this Treaty,
is void; as also the sale made before the conclusion, if it be against the
Capitulations and Agreements made particularly with certain Towns.

40. The Houses of particular persons that are or shall be restored, shall not
be made Garrisons on neither side; neither shall they pay any higher Tax or
Contribution, than the Houses of other Inhabitants.

41. None on either side shall be hindered directly or indirectly, from changing
the place of his abode, so he pay the ordinary Taxes.

42. If any Fortifications or Works have been made on either side by Authority,
in such places as are to be restored, the Proprietaries shall be content to
value them at the rate the Judges of the place shall put upon them; as also the
Proprietaries shall receive satisfaction, for so much of their Estates as shall
have been made use of, either in Fortifications, public Works, or pious uses.

43. As for Church-Revenues, Colleges, and other pious places, situated in the
United Provinces, which were members and dependances of the Benefices,
Colleges, etc. now under the obedience of the King of Spain; so much of them
as has not been sold before the conclusion of the present Treaty, shall be
restored, and the owners may take possession of it by their own Authority; but
for those that have been sold, or otherwise disposed of, they shall receive a
yearly Rent to the value of them, after the rate of 8. in the 100. The same
shall be observed on the side of the said King.

44. As for the p^e^ensions and interest that the Prince of Orange may have in
such things which he is not in possession of, there shall be made a Treaty by
it self, to the satisfaction of the said Prince. But as for the Lands, Goods,
etc. that the said Prince is in possession of, by the gift of the said States,
in Bay(...)f ship of Hulster-Ambacth, and elsewhere, they shall all remain in
his free possession as his own, excluding hereby all pretensions to the
contrary by this Treaty, or any other.

45. Touching certain other 'points, which besides the contents of the
preceding Article, have been agreed upon, and signed in two different Writings,
one of the 8th of January, the other of the 27th of December, 1647. in the name
of the said Prince of Orange; the said Writings shall be observed,
accomplished, and executed, according to their contents, just as if all the
said points in particular were all inserted into this present Treaty; and this
notwithstanding all Clauses or Articles of this Treaty, any ways contrary; for
if there be any such, they are declared void in that point, by this present
Article.

46 Those to whom confiscated Estates are to be restored, shall not be bound to
pay any Arrearages, Rents, Charges, etc. specially assigned upon the said
Estates, for the time they did not enjoy them; and if any pursuit or
molestation do befall them, they shall immediately be relieved.

47. Judgments given upon confiscated Estates, between parties that did
acknowledge the power of the Judges, shall hold; only the condemned parties may
seek relief by the ordinary course of justice.

48. The said King does quit and renounce all pretensions of Redemption, or
other, upon the Town of Grave, the Country of Luych, its Appurtenances,
Dependances, and the ancient Barony of Brabant, engaged heretofore to the
Prince of Orange, and which has been since converted as propriety to the use of
Prince Maurice of Nassaw, in December, 1611. by the States General, as
Sovereigns of the said Town of Grave, and Country of Luych. In virtue of which
concession, the Prince of Orange that now is, his Heirs, etc. shall enjoy for
ever the propriety of the said Town of Grave, etc. with all its Dependances,
etc.

49. The said King does also renounce to all Right, Claims, etc. either of
propriety, or cession, etc. to the Town, County, and Lordship of Lingen, and
the four Villages, and other its Dependances; as also to the Towns and
Lordships of Bev^rgarde, Cloppenberge, that they may remain for ever to the
said Prince of Orange, his Heirs, etc. confirming by this Treaty all the said
Princes other Titles to them.

50. The said King and States shall each of them separately, and for
themselves, place Judges and Officers in such Towns and strong places, as by
this Treaty are to be restored to the Proprietaries.

51. The high part of Gueldres shall be changed for an Equivalence; which if it
cannot be agreed upon in this Treaty, shall be decided by the Chamber of equal
number of Judges on both sides, and that in the time of six months after the
ratification of the Treaty.

52. The said King does oblige himself to procure effectively, the continuation
of the neutrality, friendship, and good neighborhood, of his Imperial
Majesty, and the Empire, with the States; to the observation of which, the
States do likewise oblige themselves: and the confirmation of the said
neutrality shall be made in the space of two months, by his Imperial Majesty,
and in the time of a year by the Empire, after the ratification of this Treaty.

53. The Fruits, Movables, confiscated and received before the conclusion of
this Treaty, shall not be subject to be restored.

54. They that during the War were retired into Countries that did stand
neuters, shall enjoy the benefit of this Treaty, and may stay where they
please, or return to their ancient homes, there to live in all quiet and
tranquillity, in the observation of the Laws of their Country, without danger
of having their Estates or Chattels seized on, by reason of the stay they make
in any place whatsoever.

55. There shall be no new Forts made in the Low Countries of neither side;
neither shall there be made any new Channels, or Trenches, by which any of the
parties may be dammageed.

56. The Lords of the House of Nassaw, as also the Count John Albert of Solms,
Governor of Maestric, shall not be pursued nor molested neither in their
persons nor Estates, for any Debts contracted by the late William, Prince of
Orange, 1667. to his death, nor for any Arrears due during the confiscation of
such Lands as were charged with the said Debts.

57. If there be any infraction made in the Treaty by private persons, without
the Authority of the said King or States, the damage shall be immediately
repaired in the place where the offense was committed, if the persons be there
taken, or in their Domicile; but it shall not be lawful to pursue them
elsewhere either in their persons, or Estates, or to take Arms, and break the
peace; but in case of denial of justice, to proceed by Letters of Reprisall.

58. All Exheredations made by reason of the War, and aversion of parties, are
made void; and in this are comprehended all Exheredations made for such causes
as were causes of the War.

59. All prisoners of War shall be delivered on both sides, without distinction
of persons, and that without ransom.

60. The payment of the Arrears of Contributions on both sides, shall be
decided by the Supervisors of the said Contributions.

61. All that during this Negotiation shall be said or alleged either by word
of mouth, or by writing, shall not be a prejudice to the Authors; but the said
King and States, and all the Princes, Counts, Barons, Gentlemen, Citizens, and
all Inhabitants, shall enjoy the benefit of this Treaty.

62. The Subjects of the said King and States respectively, shall enjoy the
benefit of the 15th Article of the Truce of 12. years, and of the 10th Article
of the Agreement that followed the 7th of January, 1610. and that because that
during the time of the said Truce, the parties did not enjoy the effect of
those Articles.

63. The limits in Flanders and other places shall be set out so, that the
parties may exactly know under what jurisdiction they are.

64. On the side of the said King of Spain, shall be demolished near the Sluice
these following places and Forts, viz. the Fort of St. Job, St. Donas, the
Star-Fort, the Fort St. Terese, St. Frederick, St. Isabella, St. Paul, the
redoute Papem^ts. And on the side of the States General, shall be demolished
the following Forts; the two Forts in the Island of Lasant, called Orange and
Frederick; the two Forts de Pas, both upon the River of Scheld, on the
East Side (except Lill^) and the Fort a Kieldrect, called Spinola, touching
which Demolition, it shall be agreed between the parties to set out an
Equivalence.

65. All Registers, Charters, Letters, and Papers, concerning Lawsuits, or
otherwise, that do any ways regard or concern any of the United Provinces,
their Towns and Members, being in the Courts and Chambers of the obedience of
the King of Spain, shall be delivered bonafide, to such as shall have
commission from the Provinces to receive them. And the same shall be done by
the States, for the Provinces and Towns that are under the said Kings obedience.

66. The jurisdiction of the Water shall be left to the Town of Sluice, as it
has of right belonged to it.

67. The Digue traversing and stopping up the River Zout, near the Fort Donas,
shall be taken away, by making a Zas, touching the Guard, of which Zas it shall
be agreed upon, as touching the Demolition of the Forts.

68. In this present Treaty of peace shall be comprehended such as before the
exchange of ratifications, or three months after, shall be named on both
sides; in which time the said King shall name those that he shall think fit:
but by the States are named these following; the Prince Landgrave of
Hesse-Cassel, with his Countrey-Towns, etc. the Count of Oostfrieze, the Town
of Embden, the County and Country of Oostfrieze, the Anseatick Towns, and
particularly Lubec, Bremen, Hambourg. And the said States do reserve to
themselves, to name such others as they shall think fit in the time prescribed.

69. As for the pretension of Count of Flodrof, touching the restitution made
to him of the Castle of Leat, and its Dependances, and all other Villages that
may depend on it, and were seized by the said King; the said restitution is
confirmed to him, with this reserve, that it shall be resolved between this and
the conclusion of the Treaty, about the entertaining of a Garrison for the said
King, or demolishing the Fortifications made since that the Castle was taken.

70. As for all that was agreed upon the 8th of December, 1646. between the
Plenipotentiaries of the said King and States, touching Roger Huygens, in the
name of his Wife, Anna Margarita de Stralem, it shall have its effect, and be
of force, as if it were here set down word for word.

71. And to the end that this present Treaty be the better observed, the said
King and States do promise to employ all their power and force, to make all
passages free, and all Seas and Rivers navigable and safe, against the inrodes
of Pirates and Thieves, and to punish them severely if they can take them.

72. They do promise besides to do nothing contrary to this present Treaty, nor
to suffer that any thing should be done either directly or indirectly; and if
any thing be done, to repair the offense and damage without delay. To the
observation of all which, they do here bind themselves; and the more to
strengthen the Obligation, do renounce all Laws and Customs contrary to this
promise.

73. This present Treaty shall be ratified and approved by the said King and
States, and the Letters of ratification shall be delivered and exchanged on
each side, within the term of two months; and if the said ratification do come
beforehand, then all acts of hostility shall cease, without staying for the end
of the two months. Still it is meant, that after the conclusion and signing of
this Treaty, hostility shall not cease, till the ratification of the said King
of Spain be delivered in good form, and exchanged with the ratification of the
States.

74. So that affairs on both sides shall remain in the same posture and
condition, as at the conclusion of this Treaty they are, and this till the
ratifications be exchanged.

75. This Treaty shall be published in all places that shall require it,
incontinent after the exchange of the ratifications, and then all acts of
hostility shall cease.

The Treaty of Navigation and Commerce, Concluded at the Hague in Holland, the
17th of December, 1650. between Messire Antony Brun, Extraordinary Ambassador
for the King of Spain on one side, and the Deputies of the Lords, the States
General of the United Provinces, on the other side.
WHereas since the conclusion of the peaee at Munster, between the King of
Spain, and the States General, there has happened some disputes about the true
sense of the separate Article, concluded the 4th of February, 1648. in the said
Town, touching Navigation and Commerce; the said King and States have thought
fit, for the more sincere and perfect observation of the said Treaty of peace,
to give a better explanation of their meaning: to which end the said King has
on his side Deputed and Commissioned Messire Antony Prun, Counselor in his
High Council of State for the Low Countries, near his person, and his
Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Munster, as his Ordinary Ambassador to the
said States; who on their side have likewise Commissioned these following,
Rugzer Huygens, Knight; Banninck Cock, Knight, Lord of Purmerlant and Apendam,
Bourgemaster and Counselor of the Town of Amsterdam; Cornelius Ripera,
Bourgemaster, Regent of the Town of Horn; James V^th, Counselor and Pensioner
of the Town of Middlebourg in Zeeland; Giisbert de Hoolk, old Bourgemaster of
the Town of Utrect; Joachim Andree, first ancient Counselor in the Provincial
Court of Fri^zeland; John de la Beech, of Dorvick and Crystenburgh,
Bourgemaster of the Town of Deventer; Adrian Dant a Stedum, Lord of Nittersum,
all Deputies of the body of their Assembly.

The said Ambassador and Deputies having held many Assemblies and Conferences,
have at last in the name of the said King and States, agreed upon and concluded
this present Treaty, all its Articles and Conditions.

1. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the United Provinces may with safety and
liberty trade with all those Kingdoms, States, and Countries, that are or shall
be in peace, amity, or neutrality, with the said States of the United Provinces.

2. And they may not be molested or troubled in this freedom, by the Ships or
Subjects of the King of Spain, by reason of the hostilities that are or may be
hereafter between the said King, and the said Kingdoms, States, etc. that are
in peace, etc. with the said States.

3. This shall extend it self as to France, for all sorts of Commodities that
were used to be transported, before the said Kingdom was in War with Spain.

4. Yet shall not the Subjects of the United Provinces furnish France with such
Merchandises as come from the States of the said King of Spain, and may serve
the French against him and his States.

5. And as for other Kingdoms, States, etc. that may be in War with the said
King of Spain, and are in neutrality or friendship with the States, their
Subjects shall not carry to those Kingdoms, etc. any forbidden Goods, or
Merchandises of Counterband; which to hinder, the said States shall forbid it
by express prohibitions.

6. Besides, to prevent the dispute that might arise concerning the
Merchandises that are of Counterband, and those that are not; it is agreed,
that under that name and quality are understood these following, all Firearms,
and things belonging to them, as Canons, Muskets, Mortar-Peeces, Petards,
Bombes, Grenadoes, Cereles, Squibs, Carriages, Forks, Powder, Match,
Saltpeter, Bullets. All other Arms likewise, offensive and defensive, as
Pikes, Swords, Casques, Helmets, Back and Breast-pieces, Halberds, Pertuiscens,
and other such. Besides, under the same name are understood the transport of
Soldiers, Horses, Harness, Metal, Pistols, Belts, and all other Implements of
War.

7. Further to avoid all dispute, it is agreed, that under that name of
forbidden Merchandise, are not comprehended Wheat, and all sorts of Grains,
Salt, Oil, Wine, nor in general any thing that is nourishment and sustentation
to men's bodies, which shall be free, as all other Goods and Merchandises, not
specified in the foregoing Articles, and may be carried to all Towns, except
to such as are besieged and blocked up.

8. And the better to hinder that the said forbidden Merchandises do not pass
into the hands of the enemies of the said King; and that under pretext of
hindering the said transportation, the safety and liberty of Trade and
Navigation be not hindered, it is agreed, that the Ships belonging to the
Subjects of the United Provinces, being entered in any Port of the said Kings
Dominions, and being from thence bound for the Ports of his enemies, shall be
obliged only to produce and show to the Officers of the said King, their
Pasports, containing the particulars of their lading, sealed and signed by the
Officers of the Admiralty of such places as they come from, with declaration of
the places they are bound for, the whole in ordinary form; after which they
shall not be molested, searched, nor detained, under any pretext whatsoever.

9. Likewise the Ships of the States Subjects being at Sea, or coming into some
Bay without entering the Harbor, or coming in without unlading, shall not be
bound to give an account of their lading, except they be suspected to carry
Merchandises of Counterband.

10. And in case of a violent suspicion, they shall only be forced to show
their Pasports, as has been said.

11. If they are met at Sea, or near the Shore, by any Ships or Privateers of
the said King, then to avoid disorder and plunder, the said men to War may send
their Boat with two or three men in it, aboard the Ship of the States, to which
men shall be showed by the Master, the Pasport abovementioned, with a
particular Letter, showing the quality and place of residence of the owner of
the Ship, and Master in the said United Provinces, and to these shall be given
credit without further enquiry; but that there be no counterfeit Letters, the
said King and States shall agree of particular marks, not easily to be imitated.

12. And in case there should be found in the Ships belonging to the States
Subjects, by the foresaid means, some of those Merchandises, called of
Counterband, they shall be seized upon, and confiscated before the Judges of
the Admiralty, or other competent ones; but the said Ship and the rest of the
lading shall no ways be detained, or seized upon.

13. It has been agreed besides, that all Goods whatsoever that the Subjects of
the States shall lade in the bottoms of the said Kings enemies, shall be
confiscated without reserve or exception.

14. But also all that shall be found in the bottoms of the Subjects of the
said States, though part or all of it do belong to the enemies of the said
King, yet it shall all be free, and not seized upon, except they be
Merchandises of Counterband.

15. The Subjects of the said King shall enjoy all the same liberties in Trade
and Navigation, as is by this Treaty accorded to the Subjects of the United
Provinces, with the same equality: and though some Kingdoms or States should
have friendship or neutrality with the said King, though they were enemies of
the States, yet shall his Subjects enjoy all the benefit granted in the like
case to the Subjects of the United Provinces.

16. This present Treaty shall be as an explanation to the particular Article
concluded at Munster, the 4th day of February, 1648.

17. This present Treaty shall have the same force, as if it had been inserted
into the original Treaty at Munster; with this reserve, that if for the time to
come any frauds or hindrances of Navigation be discovered, for which this
Treaty has not provided a remedy, it shall be lawful to add to it such
Cautions as both parties shall agree upon: till then it shall remain in force.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters.
The First Book.
CHap. 1. What passed before the Earls of Holland. page 1. Chap. 2. Thyerry of
Aquitain, the first Earl. p. 5. Chap. 3. The House of Hainaut. p. 18. Chap. 4.
The House of Bavaria. p. 21. Chap. 5. The House of Burgundy. p. 24. Chap. 6.
The House of Austria. p. 29. Chap. 7. Containing the memorable passages under
the Government of Margaret of Parma. p. 39. Chap. 8. The Government of the Duke
of Alva. p. 44. Chap. 9. The Government of Don Lewis, and the great Council of
State. p. 52. Chap. 10. The Government of Don John of Austria, and of the
Prince of Parma. p. 55.
The Second Book.
Chap. 1. The League and Union of the Provinces. p. 60. Chap. 2. The Rank and
Dependencies of the United Provinces toward one another. p. 70. Chap. 3. What
was the form of the general Assemblies, till the time of the Earl of
Leicester. p. 74. Chap. 4. In what consists the Superiority of the States
General, and what sort of affairs are determined by them, which cannot be
determined by the States of the particular Provinces. p. 77. Chap. 5. How far
the power of the States General does extend. p. 80. Chap. 6. Who are those
that are ordinarily chosen for Deputies to the States General, and of the
order which is observed amongst the Deputies. p. 82. Chap. 7. Of the Orders
that the States of Holland and West-Friezeland give to their Deputies in the
States General, and the Oath they take. p. 86. Chap. 8. Of the great Assembly
Extraordinary. p. 91. Chap. 9. Of the Council of State, which is the greatest
after the Council of the States General. p. 92. Chap. 10. Of the Power of the
States of every Province. p. 95. Chap. 11. Of the States of Holland and
Zeeland. p. 97. Chap. 12. Of the Governors of the United Provinces until the
year 1650. p. 100. Chap. 13. Of the charge of a Governor. p. 106. Chap. 14.
Whether or no the United Provinces can subsist without a Governor. p. 109.
Chap. 15. Of the Riches by which the United Provinces do maintain themselves.
p. 111. Chap. 16. Of the principal Forces which do maintain the Commonwealth of
the United Provinces. p. 116. Chap. 17. Of the Alliances of the United
Provinces with foreign Princes. p. 125. Chap. 18. Of the Admiralty, and care
that is taken to maintain a Sea-strength. p. 131. Chap. 19. Of the particular
Government of the Towns of Holland. p. 136 Chap. 20. Of the Tributes and
Imposts; of how many sorts they are; and of the manner of levying them in
Holland. p. 141. Chap. 21. Of the East and West India Companies. p. 153. Chap.
22. What judgment may be made of the lasting or decay of this Commonwealth. p.
173. Chap. 23. An Abridgement of the State of the United Provinces, by Paul
Merle. p. 178. Chap. 24. The Proclamation of the States of Holland and
West-Frieze, touching the ancient Right of the Commonwealth of Holland. p. 189.
The Third Book.
Chap. 1. Of the Original of Holland. p. 203. Chap. 2. Of the length and
breadth of Holland; the number of its Towns and Villages. p. 206. Chap. 3. Of
the Division of Holland; and the nature of the Soil. p. 210. Chap. 4. Of the
Manners and Dispositions of the Inhabitants. p. 222. Chap. 5. Of the Trade of
the Hollanders, and the ways of getting a livelihood. p. 232. Chap. 6. Of the
Imposts and Customs. p. 238. Chap. 7. Of Leyden, in Latin Lugdunum Batavorum.
p. 241. Chap. 8. Of the Territories about Leyden. p. 263. Chap. 9. Of
Amsterdam. p. 271. Chap. 10. Of Harlem, and some Villages round about it. p.
280. Chap. 11. Of Delft, and its Villages. p. 285. Chap. 12. Of Dort. p. 289.
Chap. 13. Of Goude. p. 293. Chap. 14. Of Rotterdam. p. 295. Chap. 15. Of the
small Towns of Holland. p. 296. Chap. 16. Of the Hague. p. 299. Chap. 17. Of
Voerden. p. 303. Chap. 18. Of the Towns that are in Goylant, near the
South Sea. p. 312. Chap. 19. Of the Lakes and Rivers. p. 316. Chap. 20. Of
North- Holland, commonly called West-Frieze. p. 319. Chap. 21. Of Alcmaer and
Medenbliick. p. 322. Chap. 22. Of Enchusen. p. 325. Chap. 23. Of Horn, and the
small Towns of North- Holland. p. 328. Chap. 24. Of the different Religions in
Holland. p. 336. Chap. 25. Of the Nobility. p. 345. Chap. 26. Of Liberty. p.
350. Chap. 27. Of some Voyages undertaken under the Banner of Holland. p. 354.
Chap. 28. Containing diverse Curiosities. p. 360. The Articles of Peace between
the King of Spain, and the Dutch, in 1648. p. 379.
Books Printed for, and Sold by John Starkey, at the Mitre betwixt the Middle
Temple-Gate, and Temple Bar in Fleet Street.
Folio's.
1. THe Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. Containing a
Complete History of those Countries; Whereto are added, The Travels of
Mandelslo from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finished in 1640.
The whole, Illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures: Written
originally by Adam Olearius, ecreta ry to the Embassy. Englished by J. Davies
of Kidwelly. Price Bound 18. Shillings.

2. The World Surveyed; Or the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc
of Marseilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco,
Guinny, and through all Africa, and the principal Provinces of Europe. Price
Bound 10. Shillings.

3. A Practical and Polemicall Commentary, or Exposition, upon the third and
fourth Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy, by Thomas Hall,
B. D. Price Bound 10. Shillings.

4. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious persons of that
Nation. Englished by G. Havers. In two Volumes. Price Bound 30. Shillings.

5. A Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and Number of
them, of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their
Books: Written in French by David Blundell. Englished by J. Davies. Price Bound
7. Shillings.

6. The History of Barbado's, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight,
in Two Books; containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands,
illustrated with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
Rarities therein described. Englished by J. Davies. Price Bound 10. Shillings.

7. The State of the Ottoman Empire, in Three Books; containing the Maxims of
the Turkish Policy, their Religion, and Military Discipline; Illustrated with
diverse Figures: Written by Paul Rycaut Esquire, late Secretary to the English
Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. Price Bound 10. Shillings.

8. Bentivolio and Urania, a Religious Romance, in Six Books; Written by
Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D. The second Edition: To which is added, the
Interpretation of the hard Names Imprinted in the Margin, throughout the Book.
Price Bound 12. Shillings.

9. I Ragguagli Di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus, in Two
Centuries, With the Politic Touchstone; Written originally in Italian, by
Trajano Bocalini: and Englished by the Earl of Monmouth. The Second Edition
corrected. Price Bound 8. Shillings.

10. An Abridgement of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles, by Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law;
Published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges. Price
Bound 40. Shillings.

11. The Reports of Sr. George Croke Knight; In Three Volumes, in English:
Allowed of by all the Judges. The Second Edition, carefully corrected by the
Original. Price Bound 45. Shillings.

12. The Second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England; containing the
Exposition of Magna Charta, and many ancient and other Statutes: Written by the
Lord Chief Justice Coke. The Third Edition; with an Alphabetical Table added.
Price Bound 14. Shillings.

13. The Third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning High
Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown and Criminal Causes. The Fourth Edition;
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. Price Bound 6. Shillings.

14. The Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts: Written by the Lord Chief Justice Cok^. The fourth
Edition; with an Alphabeticall Table, not heretofore Printed. Price Bound 9.
Shillings.

15. Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records
to, the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. By William Prynne Esquire. Price Bound 12. Shillings.

16. Action upon the Case for Slander; Or a Methodical Collection of thousands
of Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not. By William
Sheppard Esquire. Price Bound 6. Shillings.

17. Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts
of Judicial Writs in the Common-Bench; together with their Returns. By Rich.
Brownlow. Price Bound 10. Shillings.

18. Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved Forms of Original and
Judicial Writs in the Kings Bench; with their special Directions. By J. C.
Price Bound 6. Shillings.

Quarto's.
19. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of William
the Conqueror. By Sylas Tailor. Price Bound 3. Shillings.

20. Andronicus Comnenius, a Tragedy. By John Wilson. Price Sticht 1. Shilling.

21. Heraclius Emperor of the East, Tragedy. By Lodowick Carlel, Esquire Price
Sticht 1. Shilling.

22. A brief Account of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, the famous Stroker, and
diverse of the strange Cures by him lately performed. Written by himself to the
Honorable Robert Boil. Price Sticht 1. Shilling.

Octavo's.
23. The History of Algiers, and its Slavery; with an account of that City, and
many remarkable particularities of Africa: Written by Sieur d' Aranda, sometime
a Slave there. Englished by J. Davies. Price Bound 3. Shillings.

24. La Picara, or the Triumphs of Female Subtlety, originally a Spanish
Relation, enriched with Three pleasant Novels. Englished by J. Davies. Price
Bound 3. Shillings.

25. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country, and
River of the Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of
French. Price Bound 1. Shilling 6. pence.

26. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Mountague Esquire Price Bound 1.
Shilling 6. pence.

27. Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral. Translated into English. Price Bound
1. Shilling 6. pence.

28. The Works of the famous Mr. Francis Rabelais, treating of the Lives of
Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel; to which is newly added the Life of the
Author. Translated out of French into English, by Sr. Thomas Urchard Knight.
Price Bound 5. Shillings.

29. The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced. Written in French by P.
Thybault, Chemist to the French King, and rendered into English by W. A. Fellow
of the Royal Society. Price Bound 3. Shillings.

30. A Relation of Three Embassies from his Sacred Majesty Charles the Second,
to the Great Duke of Moscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark,
performed by the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the years 1663,
1664. Written by an Attendant on the Embassies. Price Bound 4. Shillings.

31. Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews, from the time
of Sixtus the Fourth, 1471. to the death of the last Pope Alexander the
Seventh, 1667. Englished by W. A. Price Bound 3. Shillings.

32. An Exact Abridgement in English of the Cases reported by Sr. Francis Moor
Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of Law therein by the Judges: by W.
Hughes. Price Bound 2. Shillings 6. pence.

33. Plowden's Queries, or a Moot-Book of choice Cases in the Common Law,
Englished, Methodized, and Enlarged; by H. B. Price Bound 2. Shillings 6. pence.

34. An Exact Abridgement of all the Statutes in Force and Use, made in the
16th, 17th, and 18, of King Charles the First, and in the 12th, 13th, 14th,
15th, and 16th, of King Charles the Second: by William Hughes Esquire Price Bound
2. Shillings 6. pence.

35. Tho. Hall Apologia pro Ministerio Evangelico. Lat. Price Bound 2.
Shillings.

36. -- Translation of the Second Book of Ovid's Metamorph. Price Bound 1.
Shilling.

37. -- Treatise against the Millenaries. Price Bound 1. Shilling.

38. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles
of the Art of Physic; with the insufficiency of the Vulgar Way of preparing
Medicines, and the excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation; by
Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. Price Bound 1. Shilling.

Twelves.
39. The present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy; Written
originally in English, by J. Gailhard, Gent. Price bound 1. Shilling.

40. The present State of the Republic of Venice; with a Relation of the
present War in Candia: by John Gailhard Gent. Price bound 1. Shilling 6. pence.

41. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of
the Highways, Treasurers of the County-stock, Masters of the House of
Correction, Bailiffs of Manors, Toll-takers in Fai^s, etc. showing the extent
and power of the several Offices; Collected by George Meriton. Price bound 1.
Shilling. 6. pence.

42. Accidence Commenc't Grammar, and supplied with sufficient Rules; or a new
and easy Method for the learning the Latin Tongue; the Author, John Milton.
Price bound 8. pence.

43. The present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors; by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society. Price bound 2. Shillings 6. pence.

Books in the Press this 24th of August, 1669.
Il Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa, or the History of the Cardinals of the Roman
Church in three Parts; Written in Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo dj
Roma, or History of the Popes Nephews; and faithfully Englished by G. H. in
Folio. This Book will be published in Michaelmas- Term next.

Two Chemical Treatises, viz. Praxis Chymiatrica, or Practical Chemistry;
Written in Latin by John Hartman. And Basilica Chymica, or Royal Chemistry;
Written in Latin by Oswald Crollius. Both faithfully translated into English,
in Folio. This will be published in Michaelmas- Term next.

The Jesuits Morals; faithfully extracted from their own Books which are
Printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their Society.
Written by a Sorbon Doctor. In Folio. This Book will be published in Hilary-
Term next.

FINIS.

