Hic erit ille pius Chiron justissimus omnes
Inter nubigenas, et magni Doctor Achillis.
Germ: in Arat Printed for Tho Howkins in George yard in Lombard street


Mythologia Ethica: OR, Three Centuries OF AESOPIAN FABLES.

In English Prose.

Done from Aesop, Phaedrus, Camerarius, and all other Eminent Authors on this
Subject.

Illustrated with Moral, Philosophical, and Political Precepts. Also with
Aphorisms and Proverbs, in several Languages. And adorned with many Curious
Sculptures, Cut on Copper Plates.

By Philip Airs, Esquire

Cervius haec inter, vicinus garrit aniles
Ex re Fabellas. Nam fi quis laudat Arelli
Sollicitas ignarus opes, sic incipit: Olim
Rusticus urbanum Murem Mus paupere fertur,
Accepisse cavo, etc. --
Hor. 2. L. Sermon. 6. Sat. LONDON* Printed for Thomas Howkins, in George-Yard,
in Lombard Street. MDCLXXXIX.

Licensed,

Sept. 27. 1688. Rob. Midgley.

TO MY HONORED and LEARNED KINSMAN and FRIEND Mr. LEWIS MAYDWELL.
SIR,
THE Dedicating of Books to Noblemen, is either Ambition in the Author, to
adorn the Front of his Work with Illustrious Titles; or a counterfeit begging
their Patronage and Protection; or else an acknowledgment of Favors received
from them. I am not guilty of the first, nor have I flattered my self with the
second, but I have made use of the last, to express in some measure, a sense of
the many Obligations I have to you. I confess I have been quarrelling with my
Studies, that they have not afforded me something of more value than a
Translation, as a Present to my Friend, who is so great a Master of Originals;
yet this Anthology of Fables, for the Pains I have taken, in gathering and new
modelling them, together with my Notes and Observations on them, deserving a
Title somewhat above that, cannot, I hope, be thought improper to be submitted
to your Judgment. I intended them for the benefit of such as have not the Skill
to search for them in their several Languages, from whence I fetched them. The
representing of which pleasant Ideas, to the Readers Fancy, being like the
placing of Pictures before their Eyes, whereby more firm and lasting
Impressions of Virtue may be fixed in them, than by plain Rules and Maxims.
This was Horace's Opinion, who in his Art of Poetry, says, Segnius irritant
Animos demissa per Aurem,
Quam quae sunt Oculis subjecta fidelibus.


I have also been very careful that the Subjects of my Fables should be modest,
grave, and accommodated to the best Precepts of Virtue and Wisdom; wherein I
have exploded all manner of indecencies, too imprudently used by I. Poggius the
Florentine, and some others; that so they might be more proper for Instruction
of Youth, whose minds are commonly delighted with such Fancies as these. And,
in a plain Style have I dressed this Work, to their Advantage particularly,
whose Parents either cannot or will not, be at the Charge of having them bred
to Learning, but will leave all to the strength of Nature, as their only
School-Mistress. For these Seeds of Virtue naturally sown in them, will
degenerate, unless by some wholesome Precepts, stirred up, and made to exert
their latent Qualities. Thus the generous Vine, if not timely pruned and
dressed, becomes Wild and Unfruitful.

Now as certain Medicines are used, as well for keeping Men in Health, as for
Curing the Sick; so, to excite and preserve Virtue, as well as to cure the
Diseases of the Mind, good and sound Precepts of Morality are requisite, which
are always esteemed its properest Medicaments. It Is the Knowledge and Practice
of this Morality, which makes our Lives happy; by whose Rules, Violence and
Oppression are separated from Justice and Equity: They show clearly the
difference betwixt what is Virtuous, and what Vicious: without which
Distinction, as Isocrates says, there could be no Society amongst Men. These
are the sober Guides, which call back Fools from going astray, and even
admonish and secure the Wise in the right Paths. Wherefore the Greeks very
Significantly called such Instructions (...), because they settle our Thoughts,
and constitute our Understandings. Youths raised to this pitch are preferred to
others, being pronounced by Plato, to be qualified for the good of Mankind, as
having their minds adorned with such useful Knowledge, (...), says he, (...).

But I shall fall into the same Error with him, who read a Lecture of War to
Hannibal; since no Man knows the Genius of Youth better than your self; under
whose Vigilant Care, Prudent Discipline, and diligent Culture, so many Noble
Plants have been already, and others are now raising, for the Service and Glory
of their Country. Your Experience, Sedulous Reading, and quickness in all
manner of Learning, have justly rendered you, in the Opinion of the best Judges,
the most Complete Master for Educating Youth, in this our Age. Your School for
its easy Methods, for the large Acquirements there to be had, and for its
Regularity, may more properly be termed a College; where you keep up to a
Wonder the Formality of a Master, without the Pedantry; and have happily joined
the Gentleman, with the Scholar; by which you become a proper Governor, for
the Sons of the most Eminent Families of this Kingdom. Amongst whom you
dispense your Precepts, so full of Truth, Wisdom and Honor, that the being
within your Walls, should be an Incitement to the worst of Tempers, to be in
Love with Virtue and Learning. Your Employment, carried on as it is, ought to
be as Honorable as it is Laborious, and import its Rewards, as it exports its
Cares. And with the Satyrist, in respect of the Labors of Learned and
Indulgent Masters; I must wish well to all that pay Gratitude to them.

Dij Majorum umbris tenuem, and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque Crocos, and in urna perpetuum ver,
Qui Praeceptorem sancti voluere Parentis
Esse Loco.
Juvenal. Sat. 4. SIR, I am Your most Affectionate Kinsman and Humble Servant,
Philip Airs.

The Preface.
SOme Ancient Philosophers have written, that every one of us partake of two
different Natures or Qualities; the one of a Man, and the other of a Beast. The
first of these is ever enclining us to Virtue and Honorable Actions: and the
latter alluring us to things more Brutish, and unbecoming Humanity. Therefore,
have the Poets feigned that Achilles, and many other Princes were committed to
Chiron the Centaur, to be brought up under his admirable Discipline; who being
half a Man and half a Beast, and having a perfect understanding of both these
Natures, might instruct them by Wise Precepts, to make their proper Advantages
of the one, and avoid the continual Allurements of the other. And though this
Centaurs Methods of Instruction, were probably by Fables or Hieroglyfics, as
was much of the Learning of those Ancient Times; and his shape so very
preposterous; yet his Scholars, of which number were Apollo and Aesculapius,
had a due respect both to his Person and Precepts, as even Achilles himself
had, which Iuvenal thus hints in his Seventh Satyr. -- Metuens virgae, jam
grandis Achilles
Cantabat patrijs in Montibus: Et cui non tunc
Eliceret risum Citharaedi cauda Magistri?
Let none therefore despise my two Principal Authors, Aesop for his
Deformitity, or the Thracian Phaedrus for his Barbarous Country, nor yet for
their obscure Births; or meanness of their Conditions, having both been Slaves:
Neither let any think that these Fables were invented only for the pleasing of
Children, as some weak and Indiscreet Persons have fancied; since he that reads
them with a Prudent Consideration, will find not only very useful Precepts of
Morality, but also many of the most admirable notions of Philosophy, and solid
Maxims of Policy contained herein. For who can imagine that our incomparable
Philosopher Aesop should have undertaken any thing, that was not Excellent and
Mysterious, seeing the Gods concerned themselves in the Vindication of his
Virtue; and that the Divine Justice doomed those to an Ignominious Death who
conspired to take away his Life.

But methinks there should need no great matter of Argument to gain a Credit to
this our Mythology, which has been approved by the most Learned Men of past
Ages, reverenced by all Nations, and esteemed even by Sovereign Monarchs. Such
will therefore but betray their own Ignorance, as shall condemn these Pleasant
Apologues, alleging that they rather become the Mouths of mean Persons* Women
and Children, than Men of eminent Parts, and such as bear any considerable
Office in a Commonwealth; whereas it is evident that the greatest Statesmen of
all Nations, in their most supreme Councils, as well as on diverse other
Occasions, have made frequent use of them. Do we not read that Demosthenes
found no better means to overcome the Obstinacy of the Athenians, than by
entertaining them with a Pleasant Fable: The Divine Plato has inserted them
amongst his Laws, as excellent Flowers. The Ancient Poets have enriched their
Works with them, and have dexterously used them to make the Barbarous People
receive with more delight, the Sacred Mysteries of their Theology. Mennenius
Agrippa, with a Fable, pacified the Mutineers against the Roman Senate. And
Phalaris of Agrigentum, though a fierce Tyrant, had been chosen by the Himerenses
for General of their Army, if the Poet Stesichorus, by the Fable of the Horse
and the Stag, had not affrighted them from it.

Kings themselves have not disdained to speak in this Language. Cyrus the Great
refused, for some time, to grant the Ambassadors of the Ionians and Aeolians,
the Pardon they were sent to sue for, after their ill success, when forced to
truckle to him, whose Government they had formerly rejected; the King answering
them with the Fable of the Fisher, who expected to have made the Fishes Dance
ashore, out of the Water, to the sound of his Pipe. And Theobaldus, King of
Austracia, now Lorrain, as Gregorius Turonensis relates, intending to punish an
Officer, who had enriched himself by Extortion, and unlawful Exactions on the
People, assisted himself with the same Prudence. A Serpent, said he, slipping
into a Vessel of Wine, so filled his Body with that sweet Liquor, that he could
not possibly get out again at the Hole through which he entered, until he had
first emptied himself of all the Wine he had drank. Nor did that great Man
Julius Caesar, less honor Fables; for when the Inhabitants of Cuidus had
Revolted from his Party, to side with Pompey, he pardoned them, only for the
sake of Theopompus the Orator and Historian, who had industriously made and
Published a Collection of choice Fables.

But what would some Ignorant People say, should I tell them of the Thistle,
that sent Ambassadors to the Cedar which was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy
Daughter in Marriage to my Son; and that to punish this Arrogance of the
Thistle, a Wild Beast of the Forest coming thither, trod it down and destroyed
it. Or should I relate what passed among the Trees, when they assembled
together for choosing a King to rule over them; yet these are both taken out of
the Holy Scriptures. And was not the Prophet Nathan sent from God to King
David, after his Adultery with Bathsheba, and Murder of her Husband Vriah, to
make this good King sensible of the double Crime he had committed; giving him
this Relation? That there was a Rich man, the Master of many Flocks and Herds,
and a Poor man who had but one Ewe Lamb, which he loved and bred up with his
Children, feeding it at his own Table, and cherishing it as his Child; and that
when a Traveller came to the Rich man's House, he spared his own Flocks, and
took the Poor man's Lamb out of his Bosom, which he killed and dressed to feast
the stranger. These were Mysterious Words dictated by the Holy Ghost, which
touched, and wounded the Heart of that incomparable Monarch, opening a way to
his Repentance.

And our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ whilst he was here on Earth, conversing
among men, did he not also express himself in Parables? Which were no other
than Fables, prudently invented, for convincing a stubborn, and unbelieving
People. And without a Parable spoke he not. In one place he makes mention of a
Grain of Mustard Seed, which being very small, grew up higher than the tallest
Trees. And in another, he tells of a man that sowed his seed upon a Rock, where
the Birds of the Air came and eat it up. Now these things being full of
Mysteries, and Jesus Christ being the Truth it self, we must believe that
Fables, which he thought convenient to make use of, were the proper Characters
of Truth; and that it could no way be more nobly, and more profitably
represented, than by them. And St. August. says, Falsa illa quidpiam
significantia, ac sensum absconditum involventia, ea non esse Mendacia sed
Figuras Veritatis, quibus sapientissimi, and Sanctissimi quique usi sunt.

But if some unsatisfied Person, to justify his ill Opinion of Fables* should
think he had sufficient reason to slight and disesteem them for the meanness of
their subjects: I shall answer, that a man would be accounted but very weak,
that should have a Fancy to cut down a Tree, only because its body was crooked,
without having any regard to the excellent Fruit which it might bear in its
proper Season. Nor would any but a very unskilful man throw away an unpolished
Diamond, because its splendor and sparkling Beauty was hid under the roughness
and deformity of an ordinary Stone. So Fables though they may seem ridiculous
for their introducing Beasts, Birds, and Trees talking together, yet are they
to be highly valued for the Learning and profitable Instruction they contain
within them.

The Arabians, as the Learned Huetius affirms, in his Book De Origin
Fabulaerum Romanesium, were so great Lovers of Fables that their Prophet
Mahomet has filled his Alcoran with them; And as he boasted himself to be the
Messenger of God, who speaks to men in Parables, he would there seem to imitate
Him. These Arabians Translated Aesop's Fables into their own Language; by whose
Pattern they also composed diverse others. And that Locman so famous over all
the Eastern Countries, is by many supposed to be no other than Aesop, whose
Fables these People collected into one large Volume; adding many of their own
to them, and they valued themselves very much, upon their knowledge of them;
because in one Chapter, which for that reason is inscribed to the name of
Locman, the Alcoran does highly extol his Wisdom. The Lives of all the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles of this Nation, are full of such Fables. And
they have amongst them a certain Sect of Philosophers, who, that they may lay
down their Precepts to the Capacity of the Common People, do them under the
familiar way of Fables.

The Persians were not at all behind-hand with the Arabians, in this pleasant
Art of lying, although none more detest a lie in their Civil Conversation than
they, nor more reproved their Children for it. Yet it is a wonder to think how
much they were pleased with a Lie (if such Inventions or Figments may be called
so) in their Books of Morality, and for the Propagation of their Learning.
Witness the Fabulous Exploits of their great Lawgiver Zoroaster; and Aesops
Fables were so delightful to their Pallats, that they boasted, the Author of
them was their Countryman. Now he being the same Person with Locman, in the
Alcoran, so much reverenced by all the People of the East, they endeavored to
take from Phrygia the Honor of his having been Born there; and establish it
among themselves. And whereas some Arabians would make his Descent to have been
from the Hebrews, the Persians deny it, and affirm him rather an Ethiopian,
which the Etymology of his Name seems to confirm, but that he lived at
Cassuvium, which City many suppose to have been the ancient Arsacia in Media.
Hence some Critics in History, when they compared Locmans Life, written by
Mircondus, with Aesops, done by Maximus Planudes, find them to have a great
resemblance. For as the Angels bestow Wisdom on Locman in his Author Marcondus,
so do these Critics observe Mercury to impart Fable to Aesop, in his Authors
Philostratus and Planudes. Which brought into their minds that the Greeks might
have taken this Locman from the Eastern Nations, and so from him feigned (as I
may say) their Aesop. But I shall leave this Controversy, knowing the
Grecians, as well as the Eastern People, are too much addicted to mix
Inventions with their History and Chronology. Yet to the first is attributed
the greatest credit of Faith and Industry. For the likeness which the Locman of
Mircondus; has with the Aesop of Planudes and Philostratus, does not any more
make Locman to be Aesop, than Aesop to be Locman

The Persians honored Locman with the Surname of Wise, and so is Aesop always
ranked in the number of the Wise. They report of him, that he found out the
most abstruse Secrets of Physic, and had such profound skill therein, that he
could even raise men from the Dead. His Fables were so illustrated and enlarged
with such Variety of Expositions, that the Arabians made out of them that great
Volume, which is now to be seen at Rome in the Vatican Library. His fame was
spread abroad overall Egypt and Aethiopia, where his Name and Learning was had
in so great Veneration, that many have supposed him to have been born there.
Nor do the Turks less honor him at this Day.

Mircondus and the Arabians make him to have lived in the Reign of King David,
so that if this be supposed the true Aesop, and any credit be given to the
Greek Chronologers, those Eastern Writers have mistaken no less than four
hundred and fifty years, which is no unusual thing with them. But by this
computation the Character of Locman might more properly agree with Hesiod, who
flourished in Solomon's time; and who, as Quintilian and Plutarch affirm, was
the first that might boast he laid down the Designs of those Fables, whose
Inventions were attributed to Aesop.

This Name of Locman for his admirable book of Fables, is so renowned, that it
has reached even into India, where he is celebrated in their Songs, and by them
said to be the brother of Ram, or Ramus, their excellent Lawgiver, whom they
adore as a Deity. Which Ram is reported to have been a very Holy Person, a
great Warrior, and a most powerful King, reigning in the Northern parts of
India.

The Americans also are said to be great Lovers of Fables, and to reward those
who can relate them; being much delighted to hear of Dogs, Horses, and other
Creatures, talking together.

But I shall forbear, at present, any further discourse of Aesop, intending
speedily to publish his Life at large, with another Volume of Fables, already
prepared for the Press, if these answer my Booksellers expectation. Yet I must
acquaint my Reader, that these run not according to the common method of the
Greek or Latin Fables used in Schools; for being a mixture of diverse Authors,
which I englished out of several Languages, I have Polished, and Methodized
them to my own fancy, calling them Aesopian, from the Resemblance the rest have
to his. Not that Aesop (as some have imagined) was the first Inventor of these
Apologues or Moral Fables, for Homer, Hesiod and Archilochus were before him,
but he as Aphthonius says of him, (...). has writ the best Fables. Hence
Quintilian observes, That those Fables commonly reported to be Aesops though
they were not all really his, for Hesiod seems to have been the Author of many
of them (as I have before hinted) yet were they chiefly Celebrated under Aesops
name. But I shall conclude my long Preface with what Phaedrus says of his work
in his Prologue to it. Duplex Libelli dos est; Quod risum movet, and quod
Prudenti vitam consilio monet. That there is a double gift or advantage in this
Book, It both excites Laughter, and gives wholesome Instructions for the Prudent
Government of our Lives.

Mythologia Ethica: OR, AESOPIAN FABLES. The First Century.
FAB. I. The Cock and the Precious Stone.


A Dunghill Cock scratching in a Heap of Dirt, espied a Precious Stone, on which
casting a scornful Eye, What a glittering thing, said he, art thou? Had a
Jeweller, who knew thy value, been so happy to find thee, he would have
rejoiced, for thou might have made him rich: But since thou art of no
Benefit to me, I despise thee, and should rather have found a Grain of Barley,
than all the Sparkling Gemms of the World.

By this Precious Stone may be meant Wisdom and Arts, and by the Dunghill Cock
an Ignorant man, who has no Love for Knowledge, because he understands not its
Value. Again, The Cock may also signify the Covetous and the Luxurious man,
both which spend their Lives scratching amongst the Dirt of the World: The
former in a search after Riches, the latter in satisfying his Brutish Lusts:
And tho they have opportunities of acquiring Wisdom, are yet of so depraved a
Nature, that they had rather gratify their sordid Appetites, than be
possessors of that inestimable Jewel. But it is probable the Author of this
Fable might more particularly allude to those who scorn this kind of Learning,
which in former Ages has been held in great esteem. Such men know not the value
of these Precious Gemms, but raking in the Dunghill of unprofitable Books, had
rather find some piece of Filthy Debauchery, than suck the Honey out of these
fragrant Flowers. Optima saepe despecta: The best things are commonly despised.

FAB. II. The Heart, the Sheep and the Wolf.
A Heart claimed of a Sheep a Measure of Corn she owed him, and brought a Wolf
to justify his demand. Tho the Sheep was innocent of the thing, yet being
affrighted at the presence of the Wolf, she readily acknowledged the Debt, and
proposed a day of Payment. At the prefixed time the Heart came for his Corn, but
the Sheep denied what she before had owned; and excused herself, alleging she
had done it for fear of the Wolf, her Capital Enemy; and that Promises so
extorted by force, ought not to be kept.

Fraud should be repaid with fraud; and he who studies to cheat others, must
not wonder when paid in his own Coin.

FAB. III. The Nightingale and the Wolf.
MAny Days and Nights successively, had a Hungry Wolf followed a Nightingale to
make her his Prey, still guided in his pursuit by her loud singing. At last he
had his ends in part, for he seized the poor Bird; but having eat her, Well,
said he, by the Noise thou made, I expected thou had been some great
Creature, with which I might have satisfied my Hunger, but I have found thee a
Voice only, and nothing more.

Many Persons, after a long dependence on others, being fed with large
Promises, find at last all their Hopes, and tedious Expectations, paid in
Words. Vox and praeterea nihil.

FAB. IV. The Parrot and the Cat.
A Man that had bought a Parrot, brought it home, and put it into a Cage;
where, according to its Custom, it began to talk and sing pleasantly. Which
the Cat observing, asked, What art thou? and whence came thou? I am a Bird,
answered the Parrot, my Master bought to day, and just now brought me in
hither. O thou Bold Creature! said the Cat, that being but newly come within
these Doors, have the Impudence to make so loud a noise: When I, that have been
born and bred within this House, beginning but to call on this manner, My
Master and Mistress are so far from suffering me to go on, that they set the
whole Family about my Ears, to the very Hazard of my Life, whilst thou thus
confidently make a bauling, and fear no Contradiction. By your favor,
Mistress Puss, replied the Parrot, my voice is not so ungrateful to my Masters
Ears, as yours.

Against Foolish Men, making improper Comparisons.

FAB. V. The Rose and the Amaranthus.
THe Flower Amaranthus, or Princes Feather, called by many the Life
Everlasting, growing by a Rose-bush, began this Discourse to the Rose, O thou
Beautiful and Excellent Flower! thou art happy both in thy Lovely Color, and
thy most fragrant Smell, for which thou art beloved not only of Men, but of the
Gods themselves. O Amaranthus! said the Rose, I live but a short time, and
though none pluck me off from the Tree, I soon fade and drop to the Earth,
whilst thy small Flowers, in spite of envious Time, keep fresh, and never lose
their native Beauty.

It Is better to be contented in a settled mean Condition, than for a short time
to live in Honor, and suffer some unhappy change, or loss of Life.

FAB. VI. The Mountain and the Mouse.


THere once happened an Earthquake, which rending a Mountain, caused a Rumor
to be spread abroad, that the Mountain was in Travel: This brought thither a
great Concourse of people, who staid there in no small fear, expecting some
strange and prodigious Birth. Nay certain Persons began to apprehend the Titans
would have once more appeared in the World, and renewed their War against the
Gods. But at last they were eased of their Fears, for this Mountain was
Delivered, and there only came forth a little Mouse; which ridiculous Sight
moved all the Assembly to Laughter.

This Fable, taken from Antonius Campanus, is to expose the Folly of such as
raise Men's expectations with a pretense of doing great Things, and are able to
perform very little: Whence that of Horace grown into a Proverb.

Parturiunt Montes nascetur ridiculus Mus. Spesse volte, says the Italian, e
piu grave il timor del Pericolo. We are often more afraid than hurt. And the
Spaniards say, El que amenaza mucho, haze poco. He that threatens most, does
least.

FAB. VII. The Fly that was drowned.
WHen a Fly, that had fallen into a Pot of Broth, perceived she must inevitably
be drowned, having spent her strength with struggling to get out; Since, said
she with an undisturbed Look, I have drank with so much Goust, feasted so
plentifully, and bathed my self with such Delight, I can freely leave this
unquiet World, and dye contented.

A Prudent Man suffers that patiently which he cannot avoid.

FAB. VIII. The Magpye and the Eagle.
GReat application did a Magpye make to an Eagle, to be entertained in his
Service as one of his Domestics; and in her own favor was not backward in
setting forth her Merits, the Beauty of her Person, and Fluency of her Tongue
for Messages, and Dispatch of Business. I would gladly, answered the Eagle,
receive you into my House, were I not assured, you would be chattering of
whatsoever I do in my Family, and make it public to all the World.

We should beware of Tale-bearers, who can keep no Secret, but must be
divulging all they know, to as many as they meet.

FAB. IX. The Ass that found no end of his Labors.
IN Winter time, an Ass was grieved at the coldness of the Season, and that he
was forced to live only on Straw, often wishing for Spring, that the weather
might be more temperate, and he so happy to feed on fresh Grass. The Spring
came, but he was then employed to fetch in Earth for making Bricks and Tiles.
This made him cry out, O ye Gods! would the Summer were here, that my Master
being busy at his Harvest, I might have time to get a little Rest. When it was
Summer, they made the poor Beast constantly Work in carrying Corn into the
Barns; which Labor was no sooner ended, but the Autumn was come, and he
constrained to bring home the Wines and Fruits; This made him renew his Grief.
Alas! cried he, It would be better for me, were it Winter again, for then my
Master could not Work by reason of the Severity of the Weather, and I might
hope for some respit from all this Drudgery.

This Paints out the Miserable Lives of many poor Men; the Pinching Wants they
sustain, and continued Labors and Hardships they are forced to undergo, during
all the Seasons of the year.

FAB. X. The Wolf and the Porcupine.
A Good inclination had a hungry Wolf to set upon a Porcupine, but durst not
for fear of his Quills; he therefore cunningly told him, he wondered he should
trouble himself with all that load of Darts at his back in times of Peace;
advising him, rather to imitate the Good Soldier, who only carries Arms when he
goes to the Battle. We should always, answered the Porcupine, be prepared for
fighting when we see a Wolf.

A Wise man ought ever to be on his Guard when his Enemy is present.

FAB. XI. The Mice and the Cat.
THe Mice seeing from their Peep-hole, a Cat sit in a Room, with a grave
Countenance, and Eyes fixed on the ground, said amongst themselves, surely this
Creature cannot be so fierce as she is reported; for that modest look plainly
shows her to be of a sweet and harmless Temper, and that she should rather be
inclined to Devotion than Cruelty; what ill Character soever we may conceive of
her. I Will sally out, said one of them, and discourse her, to try if I cannot on
your behalves, contract with her a league of Friendship. To which noble
Adventure they all encouraging him; he boldly went out, but as he was advancing
toward the Cat, she turning that way espied him, and leaping on him, quickly
devoured him. When the rest of the Mice beheld the sad Catastrophe of their
Ambassador, they in an affright withdrew, and durst no more venture out of
their Sanctuary.

Men are not to be judged by their Looks, but by their Actions; for many times
ravenous Wolves are concealed under Sheeps clothing.

FAB. XII. The Brother and the Sister.
A Man had a Daughter very hard-favoured, and a little Son extremely beautiful;
these, as a Looking-glass stood in their Mothers Chair, playing about it as
Children are accustomed to do, and observing one another Faces in it; the Boy
began to boast that his was handsomest: The Girl at this was heartily vexed,
and not able to endure the scorns of her Brother, for she took all he said to
heart, and spoken to her disparagement: She therefore running to her Father in
a passion, accused her Brother as of a heinous Crime, That he, being a Boy,
should meddle with a Looking-glass, which was only proper for Women. But the
tender Father, embracing them both, and kissing them, thus equally sharing his
Fatherly affection between them. I will have you both, said he, see your Faces
in this Glass every day. You my Son, added he, because you may not soil your
Beauty by the ugliness and filthiness of Vice: and you, my Daughter, that you
may cover the Defects of your Face by the Purity of your Manners and Virtue.

Remember this, says Phaedrus, and consider it often by your self. The Morality
is plain, and needs no explanation. Sat pulcher, qui sat bonus. Which our
English Proverb answers very aptly: He handsome is that handsome does.

FAB. XIII. The Crow and the Fox.


UPon a Tree as a Crow sat with a great piece of Cheese in her Mouth, she was
espied by a Crafty Fox, who designing to make himself Master of the prey, came
under the Bough where she was just about to dine, and deceitfully complemented
her on this manner: Good morrow Madam, said he, I have frequently heard that
Fame is seldom to be credited, and now find the saying true. For at some
distance, being so happy to espy you pearched on this Tree, I came hither, out
of Curiosity, to satisfy my self concerning a malicious Calumny I have often
heard thrown on you; which is, that you were blacker than Pitch, and now I here
find, that you may vye with the very Snow for Whiteness. Truly you excel, in my
Judgment, the Swan in the purity of your Color, and were you but as admirable
at your Singing, as you are renowned for your Auguries, and ennobled by your
Milky plumes, your Virtues and Merits might justly claim a Sovereignty over all
other Birds. The Crow thought he had spoken in earnest, and going to show the
excellency of her Voice, let fall the Cheese out of her Mouth; which the Fox
quickly snatched up, not without a hearty fit of Laughter, and eat it in her
sight: Whilst the vainglorious Bird was both troubled, and ashamed she had
listened to that gross Flattery, whereby she lost so valuable a prey.

This Fable reproves those who are so greedy of Praise, that, setting aside all
Modesty, they give up themselves and all they have, as a Prey to Flatterers and
Parasites. The Spaniards say, Los que dessean y han gozo en ser alabados,
arrepientense dello quando se veen enganados: They who delight to hear
themselves praised, repent at last when they find themselves deceived. Amici
adulantes pervertunt: Flattering Friends undermine those who listen to them.

FAB. XIV. The Apes and the Bird.
MAny Apes in a Cold Night, were got together under a Tree, where one of them
happening to espy a Glowworm that shines in the dark, cried out that he had
found Fire, and showed it to his Companions; who also thinking it a Fire-Coal,
gathered small sticks of Wood, and piling them upon it, blew and fanned it,
expecting to have made it burn. This, a little Bird observing as she sat upon
an opposite Tree, called out to tell them their mistake; but they not regarding
her, kept to their business. The Bird supposing they heard her not, flew down
on the ground, and coming nearer, advised them not to lose their time so
foolishly. Whilst she was thus earnestly employed, one of the wisest of the
Apes, who stood by laughing at the sport, calling to the Bird, bad her not
strive to take up Water in a Sieve, and kindly cautioned her to beware, that
while she gave good advice to others, she neglected not her own Safety. But the
officious Bird was so intent to make them understand her Admonitions, that she
minded not another of the Gang, who leaping on her, killed and eat her.

It Is impossible to inculcate good Precepts into heedless Fools.

FAB. XV. The Hunter and the Lion.
IN a Forest, a Hunter who had great dexterity in throwing Darts, was
searching about for Game; of which the Wild Beasts had no sooner notice, but
they were all preparing to save themselves by flight, except a valiant Lion,
who alone resolved to encounter this bold Adventurer. The Man seeing him
approach, at some distance, aimed a Dart at him, and threw it so exactly, that
it pierced into the Lions Body, and at that instant calling to him, This, said
he, is my first Messenger, whose Errand if you entertain not as you ought, I Will
send more of them, till I come my self. The Wounded Lion feeling the Anguish,
fled, and overtaking the other Beasts, I shall venture him no more, said he,
for if the Messengers he send be so irresistible, how, when he himself come,
shall I be able to withstand him?

There is no provoking him who is able to hurt at a distance.

FAB. XVI. The Do and the Fawn.
ON this manner was a Do discoursing to her Fawn: Nature, my dear Son, said
she, has given thee Horns, and now endowed thee with a competent strength of
Body; and yet I know not how, thou art seized with a Cowardly Fear, and runnest
from the Dogs, whenever they approach thee. Of which timerousness I would fain,
if it were possible, reclaim thee. While the Mother was expecting his answer,
they heard a pack of Hounds afar off, making with a full Cry that way. This so
alarmed them, that the Mother who had been encouraging her Son to stand his
ground, was the first that fled from them.

It Is an easy matter to advise the performance of the most difficult
Enterprises.

FAB. XVII. The Charitable Hedghog.
AESop pleading in defense of a certain Nobleman of Samos, who was accused by
the people, and arraigned by them for his Life.

There was, said he, a Fox, who having crossed a River, was climbing up the
Bank on the other side, but by chance slipped down into a miry hole, where he
stuck fast in the mud for a long time: And when he had tired himself with
struggling to get out, he was persecuted by a multitude of Stinging Flies;
which a Hedghog seeing as he passed by, and taking compassion on him, asked
him, if he would not have those vexatious Flies beat off? But he refusing the
kind offer, was by the Hedghog, in great admiration, demanded his reason for
it. Because these Flies, answered the Fox, being almost filled, a little more
of my Blood will satisfy them; whereas if you drive away these, others will
come that are more hungry, and suck all the remainder of my Blood which these
leave.

So, continued Aesop, O ye Men of Samos, this Officer now grown wealthy, will
not do you much more harm; but if you put him to death, other hungry
Blood-suckers will succeed in his place, who with Griping Arts shall drain this
City of its Riches, and leave ye in a worse condition than he is now capable of.

Aristotle gives us this passage of Aesop and the Fable, in his Second Book of
Rhetoric: To show that it is safer to commit the great Offices of the
Commonwealth, into the hands of Rich and Wealthy Men, than into such as are
Poor. And this reason induced the Emperor Tiberias not easily to change the
Governors of his Provinces. Grave est in pejus mutari: It is a grievous thing
to be changed for the worse. Sed minima de malis: But the least of Evils is to
be chosen.

FAB. XVIII. The Fox and the Wolf.
NEar a Wells brink as a Wolf was passing, he heard a voice calling out for
help, and when he looked down, he saw a Fox, who by msifortune had fallen into
that Well, where he was almost drowned. The Fox entreated him to fetch with all
the speed he could, a Rope to pull him up: Which the Wolf promised to do, but
staid to ask the manner, How he fell in? Afterward, answered the Fox, will be
time enough to tell that: First help me out of this Danger, and then I can give
you the whole Relation at leisure.

When a Man is in any great Exigency, or Hazard of Life, we ought not to spend
time in frivolous Questions, nor stay to upbraid him with imprudence or
neglect, but give him the speediest assistance we can.

FAB. XIX. The Countryman and the Serpent.
LOng had a Countryman entertained a Serpent in his House with the scraps from
his Table, and had all that time prospered in his affairs: But between these
two, there arising on a time some difference, the Man wounded him, and forced
him out of his Doors. After which this Man falling into Poverty, thought his
misfortunes happened to him for the Injury he had done the Serpent; therefore
entreated him to come back to his House, and pardon his unkindness to him. Ay,
said the Serpent, I do pardon you, but will not go back: for I cannot think my
self safe, with one who keeps so sharp a Hatchet in his House; which I should
never see, without renewing the Thoughts of my Wound.

Take heed of giving him Credit who has broke the Bonds of Friendship with you,
and attempted your Life: Forgive the Injury you should out of pity; but
Prudence requires you to look to your self. The Italians say, A un Mancator di
Feed, non haver feed: Perdonar l' ingiuria e cosa di Misericordia, ma haversi
cura, e cosa di Prudentia.

FAB. XX. The Tempest.
CErtain Men going to Sea, had not Sailed far from their Port, before they were
surprised by a violent Tempest, which in a short time had so miserebly battered
their Ship, that they were in great danger of sinking to rights, if the Storm
should much longer continue its fury: This induced many of the Seamen and
Passengers to invoke the Gods of their several Countries, to assist them in
that exigency, promising to make considerable Offerings for their Safety; when
on a sudden the Winds ceased, and the Sea became calm. At which happy sight,
they fell to Feasting and Revelling, being overjoyed that they had escaped
such imminent Peril, beyond all expectation. But the Prudent Master of the Ship
calling to them, My Friends, said he, let us be so moderate in our Rejoicing,
as if we foresaw the Tempest were about to rage again as before.

We should not be too much puffed up when Things happen to our desire; but as
this Fable advises, we should be mindful of the inconstancy of Fortune.

FAB. XXI. The Trifler.
TO a Forest went a Poor man to gather Wood for his Fire, where though he saw
enough, he thought none of that worth his pains of bringing home, but sought
for better; and gazing thus idly about him, would not fix on any. At last, as
he rambled on, he happened to meet a Company of Wolves, from whom running to
save himself, he came to a River, but there found neither Bridge nor Boat to
cross it; and perceiving the Wolves at his heels, ready to devour him, he threw
himself into the Water, where, before he could get half way over, not being
active in Swimming, he was carried away by the force of the Stream, and sank to
the bottom: From thence he was quickly taken in some Fishermens Nets, who drew
him ashore, and after draining the Water out of his Body, they left him lying
under an old Wall, in appearance, more dead than alive: But he had not been
there long e're he came to himself, and then when he might have gone home, he
staid relating to such as passed by, the Story, at large, of all his
Misfortunes, that had in so short a time happened to him. And as this talking
Trifler lay thus repeating his Tale, the Wall fell down and buried him in its
Ruins.

This shows that one Misfortune or other is always attending Foolish Triflers.
It also teaches us that a Man may be miraculously preserved from some great
mischiefs, and yet unhappily perish in a moment. Moreover it hints to us the
danger of spending our time in idle Talking: For as Euripides says, (...). The
End of prating Tongues is Unfortunate.

FAB. XXII. The Eel and the Serpent.
AN Eel and a Serpent discoursing together, the Eel lamented her unhappy
condition, that was subject to so many Dangers; Man, the implacable Enemy of
all their Species, having always so many cunning Snares and Stratagems prepared
for their Destruction. Whilst thou, added she, being so like me, that we seem
Twins, art in Danger of none of this Treachery to be practiced upon thee; but
enjoying a long life, do pass it securely without hazard. It Is true, replied
the Serpent, nor should thou wonder at it: For whosoever presumes to disturb
my rest, and make any bold attempt against me, I let not the Injury go
unpunished.

Do not rouse the sleeping Lion. Ultio fructus est irae. Tertul. -- Rabido nec
perditus ore,
Fumantem nasum vivi tentaveris ursi. Martialis.

FAB. XXIII. The Fox and the Grapes.


THE Fox had espied a high Vine well loaded with plump Grapes, which he
coveting to taste, endeavored with all his industry to leap up to, but when by
no Skill he was able to gratify his longing Appetite, all his Agility proving
in vain, he went away seemingly satisfied. Those Grapes, said he, are scarce
ripe; they would but set my Teeth on edge, and Gripe my Body; I Will even let
them alone.

It Is Prudence to obey Necessity, and to abstain cheerfully from what we cannot
acquire. Un Huomo prudente deue fingere non voler quelle cose, che non puo
conseguire. Ital. And an Ingenious Frenchman said, Il y a une sort de
Dissimulation qui ne nuit a person, mais qui sert en quelque chose au
Dissimulateur, ascavoir, lors que nous nions d'avoir eu une Entreprise, apres
que nous la voyons inutile. There is, says he, a sort of Dissimulation which
injures no man, but yet, in some respect, is of advantage to the Dissembler;
and that is, when we will not acknowledge the undertaking that thing which did
not succeed to our expectations. Non cura il savio quel, c'haver non spera. A
Wise man troubles not himself, after that which he cannot reasonably hope for.

FAB. XXIV. The Mole rebuked.
WHen a Mole that was a Well-wisher to the Mathematics, and particularly to
Geography, brought amongst an Assembly of Beasts a large Map, wherein, she
said, she had made a most accurate Description of all the Provinces and Towns
of Greece; she entreated them to accept that Work, which for the general good
of the whole Republic of Beasts, she had undertaken: And Apologizing for her
self, added, She hoped they would please to look favorably on it, and pass by
what errors might possibly have been committed by her in so great an
undertaking, in regard she wanted her Eyesight, as they were all sensible. To
whom the Fox is reported to have said, Since it is so, why had you not still
continued at your Digging Trade, which is most proper for you, and then you
would have needed no Apology?

Against bold undertakers of those things wherein they have no Skill. To the
same purpose others relate the Fable following. The Woodworms, on a time,
coming to visit a sick Fox, showed him certain Herbs and Leaves they had
brought, thinking to have used them for his Cure: But he told them, He would
not admit of Carpenters for his Physicians.

FAB. XXV. The Lion, the Mouse and the Fox.
IN Summer time, as a Lion lay sleeping in his Den, he felt a Mouse run cross
his Neck, at which he rose up startled, and as he was looking angrily about
him, he perceived a Fox at the Caves mouth laughing at him: He then walking
gravely toward the Fox, I was not, said he, affrighted at the Mouse, but I
would have put her out of that Road, and broak off an ill custom.

We ought not to give Liberty to ill customs, for if they once take Root, they
may be cause of great inconveniences, and hard to be removed.

FAB. XXVI. The Wolf and the Lamb.
A Lamb in danger to be snapp'd by a Wolf, fled for shelter into a Temple; to
whom the Wolf calling, told him he had taken a wrong Sanctuary, for he would be
there detained by the Priests for a Sacrifice. I had much rather, said the
Lamb, dye here a Victim to God, than serve for a meal to thy ravenous Jaws.

To him that must necessarily dye, the most Glorious Death is best. And so the
Greek, (...).

FAB. XXVII. The Mouse and the Kite.
A Charitable Mouse seeing a Kite taken in the snare of a Fowler, had
compassion on him, tho her Enemy, and going to him, gnawed in pieces the
strings which held him; by which she gave the Kite an opportunity to fly away.
But no sooner did this ungrateful-Bird see himself at Liberty, but being
hungry, he forgot the benefit he had so lately received, snatched up the too
kind Mouse, and eat her.

Thus Wicked men are accustomed to reward such as do them good Offices. Perit
quod facis ingrato.

FAB. XXVIII. The Boy and the Scorpion.
IN the Fields as a Boy was at play catching Flies and Grasshoppers; he, wanting
Wit to distinguish, was about to lay his hands on a venomous Scorpion, who
perceiving his simplicity, and holding up his threatening Tail, Foolish Boy,
said he, forbear, and draw back thy hand, if thou would not suffer immediate
Death.

A Wise Man knows what he ought to follow, and what to avoid: And the Italians
say, Un Astuto conosce quel che dee seguire, and quel che dee fugire.

FAB. XXIX. The Fowler and the Partridge.
A Fowler had taken a Partridge, and being about to kill her, Dear Sir, said
she grievously weeping, let me go, I beseech you! and in requital of the
favor, I will bring into your Nets whole Coveys of other Partridges, much
fatter and bigger than my self, that you shall have no cause to repent this
days work. Now, thou false Bird, said the Fowler, will I certainly kill thee,
because thou would thus treacherously betray thy own Acquaintance and
Relations.

He that betrays his Friends, is hated of every body.

FAB. XXX. The Bear and the Fox.
WHen in a great concourse of Beasts it was argued, what should be the reason,
they should all be so easily brought to slavery and oppression by Man, whose
strength was so much inferior to theirs, and yet they were taken and disposed
of at his pleasure? The Fox told them, It was his opinion that the Wisdom and
Reason of Man was so great and admirable, that no strength was capable to
resist it. This set the Bear into a rage: Nay, said he, it is rather our
Cowardice that ruins us, and our voluntary Tameness and Submission that gives
them the Mastery over us: For, to say nothing of the Horse, whose strength and
vigor is sufficiently known, is not the Elephant a most valiant Creature, and
yet he is rid by Men, and obeys them, nor does he in any respect refuse their
Dominion over him. But if we would resolve to fight it out with them, as we too
often do foolishly amongst our selves, and would rather choose to lose our
Lives by their cunning Tricks, than basely submit to our Enemies, or let any
Commerce be between them and us, we might by these means reasonably think to
preserve our Liberty. When the Bear had roared out these words he held his
tongue, expecting their Resolution herein* but after a general murmuring, the
Assembly broke up and dispersed. Not long after, this very Bear happening into
a Toil, was caught, had Rings put into his Nose, and suffered himself to be led
about by Men; He was taught to Dance, and perform the usual tricks done by tame
Bears, and all this with a steady patience, and without grumbling.

This shows that Men change their Manners with their Fortunes. It also teaches
that experienced and thinking Men are seldom known to be Hectors: But on the
contrary, when those who threaten such great things, fall into Poverty; none
are more humble, nor express more meanness of Spirit than they. And Aeschylus
most excellently says, beginning (...), etc. in Latin thus rendered: Vexatus est
quicunque Calamitatibus,
Is scit Homines omni de Fortunae impetu,
Perterritos plura mala semper metuere.
Eosdem ubi Sors affluit confidere,
Aura secunda usuras res semper suas.


FAB. XXXI. A Countryman and a Be.
A Countryman happening to be stung by a Be, which he had beat off from a
Flower, How is it possible, cried he, thou Cruel Be, that from thee, who
affordest us so sweet and pleasant a sustenance, there should come so severe a
sting? The more sweetness answered the Be, I yield when pleased, the more
sharpness and severity do I show, when provoked to anger.

Of how much more generous temper any Man is, so much the less can he suffer an
Injury to be done to him.

FAB. XXXII. The Fox and the Carved Head.


THE Fox going into a Statuaries Shop, saw there a Bust, or Head of a Man, very
curiously cut, which after he had a while admired for its excellent
Workman-ship, Thou art, said he, a beautiful Head, and there was no small Art
used to make thee appear with all this advantage; but alas, the main thing is
still wanting, Thou have no Sense, nor Understanding.

This hints at those who have Riches, Honor and Beauty, but want Wisdom and
Knowledge. To many now a days, who make so splendid an outward show, may this
aptly enough be applied with which the Fox upbraids the Bust* They are of a
Glorious appearance but want Brains. Non in forma, says Lactantius, sed in
Cord sapientia est.

FAB. XXXIII. The Boy and his Bird.
MOst entirely did a Boy love a Bird he had long kept in a Cage, which finding
one day its Door, by neglect, left open, flew away. The Boy seeing her make
such haste to escape, followed and calling after her, desired her to return to
her Cage, and promised her great kindness, which she altogether refusing: He
asked her the reason of her obstinate denial, Because, answered she, I have a
mind to live after my own mode, and not after yours.

Freedom of Life ought to be preferred before all the Delights of the World.

FAB. XXXIV. The Physician that would have excused himself.
VEry unexpectedly did a Physician meet, what they of his Profession strive to
avoid, to wit, The Dead Corpse of a Patient of his, as his Friends were
attending it to the Grave; dead by this Physicians ill conduct and neglect. The
Doctor expecting to be blamed, began to cry out first: Alas, said he, Had this
unhappy Man been ruled by me, abstained from Wine, and now and then breathed a
Vein, he might have lived yet many a fair day. One of the Friends of the
Deceased, stepping toward him, Doctor, said he, You should have given him this
advice, and kept him to it, when it might have done him good, for now all your
pity comes out of Season.

We should stick close to the assistance of our Friends in time of their
Exigency, while there is opportunity of supporting them, and not come with
false pretenses of Kindness when too late.

FAB. XXXV. The two Men amongst the Apes.
TWo Men, of which one was addicted to Flattery and Lying, but the other very
sincere, and whom nothing would corrupt to speak against his Conscience. These
traveling the World together, came into a Country of Apes: Of whose arrival so
soon as the Prince or Chief of them had advice, he gave order to have them
brought before him. They, when come to his Court, were conducted into his
Presence by a strong Guard of Apes, Monkeys and Baboons; where they beheld the
Prince sitting on a high-raised Chair of State, after the manner of a Throne,
and surrounded with a great attendance of other Apes. At the strangers
approach, after diverse Questions, he asked them, What the World said of him and
his Subjects, and what they thought of his Greatness. The Flatterer speaking
first, told him, That the World rang of his Magnificence and Power, but that he
found Fame was short in all her relations concerning him: being now sensible he
was a mighty Emperor. And when demanded, What he thought of those about him?
He answered, That by their noble appearance, he presumed they were his great
Lords, valiant Captains, and prudent Magistrates, suitable Attendants on so
potent a Monarch. The Prince of the Apes hearing himself thus highly extolled,
generously rewarded him for this gross Flattery. All which being observed by
the virtuous man, If this Liar, said he to himself, who has no bounds to his
Tongue, be thus beloved, honored, and rewarded; how much more shall I, that in
all things love to tell the plain truth! While he was in this thought, the
Chief Ape asked him, And what think thou of me and these about me? He who
was accustomed to speak truth, and ever hated Flattery, Thou, said he, art but
an Ape, and so all these about thee are but a company of Apes, Baboons, and
Monkeys, nor does the World esteem ye otherwise. The Prince of the Apes hearing
this, in a great Passion commanded his Guards to take away this upright
virtuous man, and tear him in pieces with their Teeth and Nails, which was
immediately put in execution.

On this manner are false men and Flatterers too often rewarded, whilst many a
good man shall suffer even for his Truth and Virtue. Por la Malicia de los
Hombres el Bueno es mal trattado: y el Lisonjero y Mentiroso es regalado. Sp.

FAB. XXXVI. The Lion in Love.


WIth a very handsome Maid, the Daughter of a Husbandman, was a Lion fallen in
Love, and demanded her of her Father for his Wife. The Man with scorn rejected
the offer, telling him he might forbear any further Courtship, or troubling him
on that subject, for he would make no Affinity nor Alliance with a Beast. Which
surly refusal so much incensed the Lion, that he threatened to devour him. The
Husbandman was then glad to change his proposal, letting him know, that he
would consent to the Marriage, provided the Lion would suffer the sharp nails
of his paws to be pared, and his Teeth to be filed, that his Daughter at her
Nuptials might approach him with safety: To which the Generous Lion (not
suspecting the intended Malice) readily yielded. But this treacherous
Countryman seeing his Enemy, thus deprived of the use of his Paws and Teeth,
arming himself with his Sword, fought with, and slew the Amorous Lion.

A man should not put himself into the hands of his Enemies, unless he be sure
he is able to bring himself out again at his pleasure. Diodorus Siculus tells
this Fable, speaking of Antigonus, who on this manner held his Enemies in play
till he had raised an Army, and then he conquered them. Prudentis proprium est,
examinare consilia, and non cito facili credulitate ad falsa prolabi. Seneca.

L'huomo, che brama col nemico Pace,
Non lasci may quel, che lo rende audace.
The Man, that over his Foes, would rule as Lord,
Must never to them, deliver up his Sword.
FAB. XXXVII. The Dog that feared the Rain.
THere was a Dog that whenever it rained was afraid of going out of doors. Of
which another Dog asking him the reason: I was once, answered he, scalded with
hot Water, which falling upon me, fetched off not only the Hair, but the Skin
also from my Buttocks: This makes me fear even cold Water ever since.

Those who have suffered some great Evils, will retain a dread even at the very
appearances of any thing like them. From which the Italian saying differs not
much: Chi ha patito Mali Gravi, teme ancora i Leggieri.

FAB. XXXVIII. The Cat and the Cheese.
TO prevent the Mice gnawing his Cheese, a Man put a Cat into his Cupboard, but
she not only killed the Mice, but also eat up the Poor man's Cheese:

This reproves the Inadvertency of those, who to remedy small mischiefs bring
upon their own heads far greater.

FAB. XXXIX. The Jay stripped.
WIth great Art had a Jay tricked up herself in Peacocks Feathers, and growing
proud of her new dress, thought scorn to be seen amongst those of her own kind;
she therefore associated herself with the Peacocks: But so soon as they
discovered the Cheat, they stripped her of all her stolen Bravery, and beat her
out of their company.

This points at such prodigal Fools, as scorning those of their own rank, must
needs move in a higher Sphere; intruding themselves amongst their Superiors,
where they soon spend their small Fortunes, and afterward live in shame and
misery. It also teaches us, that we ought not to boast of what is not justly
ours; but rather be content in the Estate which is proper for us; lest striving
to adorn our selves with gay Feathers, to which we have no real Title, we be at
last stripped of our gaudy Plumes with disgrace.

FAB. XL. The Hawk and the Dove.
TO her Masters House for shelter, flew an innocent Dove, to save herself from
the swift pursuit of a Hawk; into which being eagerly followed by her fierce
Adversary, he was there taken by the Countryman: To whom when he would have
excused himself, begging his pardon, and alleging that having done him no
wrong, he hoped he would spare his Life. Nor had this Dove, said the
Countryman, offended you, whose Life you would so fain have taken away.

They deserve the severest punishment who go about to injure the innocent, that
have never offended them. And very excellently says the Italian Poet.

'E la giustitia il vindicar il torto,
Che l' innocenza dal' huom empio sent;
Ne' merita da gli altri haver perdono
Chi fa senza ragione ad altri offesa.
It Is Justice to revenge the Offense
That Is done to injured Innocence;
Nor Favor can he think to find,
Who, unprovoked, has been unkind.
FAB. XLI. The Spider and the Gout.


TWO Friends, the Spider and the Gout, traveling together, came to a little
Town called Tyche, and there took up their Lodgings. The Spider got into a
Noble man's Palace, where so soon as she had spread her Nets, they were
immediately pulled down, which obliged her to remove to another part of the
House; but wheresoever she began to settle, she was presently swept off again.
And the Gout, happening into a Poor man's Cottage, was also miserably
entertained with a hard Bed, Course Sheets, mean Diet, and even a scarcity of
that too. Which Inconveniences, next Morning when the two Fellow Travelers
meeting, had well considered, they resolved to try their Fortunes another way.
So that coming at Night to a City; the Gout entered into the House of a Rich
Magistrate, where she was quickly entertained, with Honorable Attendance, Down
Beds, and Soft Couches to lie on, Variety also of the best Meats and choicest
Wines; nor was there any Pleasure she could wish for, which she enjoyed not.
Whilst the Spider in a Poor man's House, weaved all the Gins, Snares and Nets,
which she could contrive necessary for the catching her Game; without any
Interruption; and there she lived in great Quietness and Plenty, free from the
fear of Brush or Broom. When they had spent some time in this Felicity; the two
Friends met again, and after mutual Salutations, they enquired of each others
good Fortunes, where both extolling their Admirable Success since their last
parting; they made a Resolution that from thenceforward, which way soever they
should happen to Travel, the Gout by consent, should turn into the Rich and
Noble men's Palaces, and the Spider into the Cottages of Poor men.

This excellent Apologue, taken from Nicholaus Gerbelius, shows that Great Men's
Houses, where there is little Exercise, and much Luxury, by continual Eating,
and extravagant Drinking, are the chief Receptacles of Diseases; and that we
live with more Quiet and Freedom amongst Persons of meaner estate.

FAB. XLII. The Shipwrack'd Man and the Sea.
TIred, and half Dead with Swimming, came a poor Shipwrack'd Man to Shore,
where he had no sooner laid him down, but he fell asleep; and at his waking
found the Tempest ceased, and the Water calm. This moving his Patience, he
began to accuse the Sea of Treachery, that alluring Men with its smooth Looks,
tempts them to venture on it, and then swallows them up in its insatiate Waves.
But the Sea taking the Shape of a Woman, thus answered him: Be not,
Inconsiderate Man, so ready to accuse me, but rather blame the Winds; for I am
naturally what thou see me now, till they come rushing violently upon me,
raise my Billows, and make me commit these Outrages.

We should not Quarrel with such Persons for doing us Injuries, as but obey the
Commands of others; but we should rather blame those who set them on work to
wrong us. It also may serve as a Caution to those who without being compelled
by Necessity, expose themselves to the continual Dangers of the Sea. The old
Poet Antiphanes very well said, (...).
In Terra egenum satius est te vivere,
Quam navigare possidentem plurima.
It Is better living safe at home, and poor,
Than cross the raging Sea to increase thy store.


FAB. XLIII. The Hungry Dogs.
CErtain Hungry Dogs seeing a raw Hide just thrown into a River, which they
were not able to pull out, resolved together to Drink up the Water, that they
might get to it: But before they could effect what they aimed at, the River
receiving a continual supply, they burst themselves and died.

Foolish Enterprises, for the most part, not only fall short of their desired
Effects, but commonly tempt their undertakers to Destruction. Stultitia
plerumque exitio est.

FAB. XLIV. The Beasts, the Fowls and the Fishes.
THE Four-footed Beasts, finding themselves necessitated to Declare a War
against the Fowls, who on diverse occasions had broke the ancient League made
betwixt them: They sent and made an Alliance with the Fishes, that they might
assist them in this War. But at the time of Battle, when both Armies were in
the Field, and the Beasts expected to be joined by the Fishes, they sent an
Excuse, That they could not come to help them fight by Land.

This admonishes us to implore the assistance of him, in time of our Necessity,
who is able to give it, namely, In God alone, and not expect it from such as
are not in a condition of helping us.

FAB. XLV. The Gourd and the Pine.
AT the foot of a tall Pine, appeared a young Gourd, which suddenly sprouting
up very high, by the fall of some late showers, extended its Boughs all about
the Pine, with abundance of broad Leaves, gaudy Flowers, and large Fruit. This
so much swelled her with Pride, that she began to stand in Competition with the
Pine. Do thou see, said she, stretching out her self, How nimbly I advance to
overtop thee? I have endured, answered the Pine, many a Cold Blast, and many a
Scorching Heat, yet still continue here safe and sound. But thou, Poor Fool,
with the first Nipping Frost that comes, shall lose thy strength, thy Leaves
shall fade and come to nothing, and thou be seen no more.

Let no man be too much exalted in time of Prosperity. This Fable is taken from
the Second Book of Petrus Crinitus de Honesta Disciplina.

FAB. XLVI. The Fox that changed his Wishes.
THE Cackling Noise of Hens in a Room, invited a Fox to creep through a little
Hole to get at them; in which attempt finding some difficulty, he wished the
hole larger, for his more easy access. But having obtained his prey, which
with trouble he drew out at the same hole, and hearing the noise of a Dog
barking on the inside, as coming to pursue him; I wish to the Gods, cried he,
the hole were streighter, that the Dogs might not be able to get through, and
so may be hindered following me.

Men are often changing their wishes and desires, as their profit or advantage
guides them. Seneca says, Non turpe est cum re mutare votum aut Consilium.

FAB. XLVII. The Covetous Man and his Apples.
MAny fair Apple Trees had a Covetous wretch in his Orchard, well hung with
excellent Fruit, of which he would allow himself none but the Fallings: Which
his Son observing, who was a liberal youth, He, in his Fathers presence, having
invited some of his Companions into the Orchard, on purpose to expose his
Fathers Avarice; Pray, said he to them, gather what Fruit you please, but
meddle not with any of that which is blown down on the ground, for that my
Father reserves for his own eating.

None are more miserable than the Covetous Man, who knows not how to make a fit
use of what God and Nature bestows upon him.

Quis Dives? qui nil cupit. Et quis Pauper? Avarus.

Ven. Beda. He Is rich who never covets worldly Pelf;
He poor, who has enough yet starves himself.
FAB. XLVIII. The Dog and the Vulture.
A Dog scratching in the Earth to get up the Bones of Dead men, found a
Treasure; and because he had in this offended the Gods Manes, they imprinted in
him a violent Passion, or Covetousness after Riches; that by this Punishment,
he might make satisfaction to the Religion he had profaned. For they made him
so carefully watch this Gold, that he lost all thoughts of eating; and by
degrees consuming away, pined himself to Death. On whom a Vulture afterward
standing, said thus; O Dog! here thou lie as thou deservest, that born on a
Dunghill, and bred up with scraps, could on a sudden covet to enjoy the Riches
of a King.

This may not improperly be applied to Covetous Men; and to those, who without
regard to their mean Birth and Education, aspire after great Riches and
Dignities, not knowing how to use them. Avarus suus sibi Carnifex est: The
Covetous Man is his own Hangman. By the Gods Manes, Phaedrus is supposed to
mean, The Souls of the Dead, separated from their Bodies. Hence we see on old
Roman Monuments Diis Manibus inscribed. Others conceive them to be the Genii
which those Heathen thought did not forsake the Bodies, even when in their
Graves. Virgil in his 3. Aeneid. says, Quid miserum Aenea laceras, jam parce
Sepulto; Parce pias scelerare manus.

FAB. XLIX. The Fly and the Ant.


BEtwixt the Fly and the Ant, there once happened this Contest: I, said the
Fly, am Noble, thou a Clown; I raise my self by my Wings, am carried aloft into
the Air, and view the spacious Regions of the World; whilst thou creepest on
the ground, and only movest about thine own home. I enjoy my self sporting
amongst the best Company; But thou lie sculking in Holes and Caverns of the
Earth: On poor grains of Corn thou feedest, and cold Water is thy most
comfortable Liquor. In Palaces I with Princes feast, there quaff the choicest
Wines, and there I spend my time in Ease and Pleasure. On the other side, the
Ant modestly answered, I boast not of my high birth, but am well satisfied with
my extraction: Thou, exposed to danger, rovest about the World; I in safety
keep within my narrow limits. With Water and Corn I please my Appetite, better
than thou can with all thy delicate Food. I live contented with my condition,
and provoke none to be my Enemies, but am kindly looked on by all ranks of
People, being allowed of them to be the very Pattern of Laborious Industry.
Thou as a vexatious Creature live in continual Fears, for as a common Enemy
thou art hated of all. In Summer I remember to lay in a Stock of Provisions
against the Winter: The want of which provident Care, makes thy life but of a
short date, for at the first approach of ill Weather, thou dyest of Hunger and
Cold.

We should modestly live contented with what Providence has bestowed on us,
without despising others; who, tho they seem to move in a lower Orb, enjoy
perchance more solid happiness, being content in their Stations, than the
greatest Princes, who are continually subject to Cares and Vexations. The
Spaniards say, El que vanamente se alaba, su vana alabanca se torna en nada. He
who foolishly praises himself, his vain Praise turns to nothing. But very
proper is the Latin Adage: Qui quae vult dicit, ea quae non vult audit. He that
speaks what he has a mind to, shall hear what he has no mind to. And Seneca
says, Non esse in parvis commodis, sed sine magnis incommodis vitam beatam.
That a happy Life does not consist in having some small Conveniences, but in
being free from great Inconveniences. And the Wise man says, Vade a Formicam, o
Piger. etc.
Prove. 6.6.

FAB. L. The Sheep and the Dog.
IT IS Reported that when all Creatures had the use of Speech, the Sheep thus
argued with their Master: We admire Sir, said they, that to us from whom you
still receive the Benefits of Wool, Lambs and Milk, you should be so unkind to
allow nothing but what we can pick up, with trouble, from the Earth; whereas to
the Dog, who affords you nothing of all these advantages, you bestow a Liberal
share of Meat from your own Table. When the Dog heard this, looking with
indignation upon them, Am not I, said he, your Guardian, who defend and protect
you, ungrateful Creatures, that Men steal you not, nor the Wolves tear and
destroy you? For should I neglect my Care of you, you could not go out to feed
in your Pastures, but in fear of perishing by your Enemies.

This Fable is related by Xenophon, in his 2 d Book of the Memorable sayings of
Socrates, to show that the Sheep cannot feed in safety when the Shepherd is
wanting. And that the People are void of Security, and fit for nothing, where
they are not Governed and kept in good Order by the Authority of a Prince. It
likewise hints at the unthinking and ignorant Rabble, who are often murmuring
at the idle Lives of their Governors.

FAB. LI. The two Kinsmen going to Law.
A Dispute arising between two Kinsmen about a sum of Money, which both laid
claim to, and neither of them willing to yield to the other, they resolved to
decide the matter by Law. So after great Threats on both sides, how much they
would spend rather than lose their Rights, they applied themselves to the
Lawyers; and then the War was soon declared. But e're their Advocates began to
plead, one of the Clients considering with himself, called his Adversary aside,
and whispering in his Ear, It Is not at all, said he, for our Credits, that we,
who are by Nature so straightly bound to each other, should by Money be
divided, and made Enemies. Pray consider that the Event of Law is as uncertain
as that of War: It Is in our power to begin it, but not to bring it to an end.
Our whole difference is about a hundred Staters of Gold, and if we proceed on
in our Suit, we may spend double the sum before we shall have concluded it,
amongst our Advocates, Solicitors and Clerks, also in procuring the assistance
of Friends and Witnesses. All these must be waited on, complemented, and fee'd;
Besides we must be continually trotting about with innumerable Cares and
Vexations attending us. And then at last, he who shall get the Victory, let him
sit down and make the best Reckoning he can, he shall find himself a Loser. Is
it not therefore better we should open our Eyes in time, before we put our
selves into the Clutches of these Vultures? And that we should divide the Money
that would fall to their shares, who will never thank us for it? Resolve
therefore to quit half your pretensions, and I will do the like; Thus shall we
both be savers, and preserve our Friendship, which otherwise would soon expire,
and thus shall we shift off an unspeakable Trouble from us both. Which proposal
if you still refuse to accept, I will leave the whole matter to your own
Conscience; use me as you please; for I had rather my Friend should have my
Money, than these unsatiable Harpyes; and shall gain enough in saving my
Credit, keeping my Friend, and avoiding all the Troubles and Vexations
dependant on such a Lawsuit. The Truth of the thing, together with the
Frankness of his Kinsman, so much took with the Adversary; that they soon put
an end to the Difference by themselves; To the great displeasure of all their
Lawyers, who were heartily vexed to lose so good a Prey.

I wish such men would study to imitate the Prudence of these two Kinsmen, as
are ready to go to Law on every frivolous occasion; since most of our Lawsuits
bring more Trouble and Charge than Profit, even to the Victors themselves.
Better is it therefore for any Man to lose some part of his Just Right, than
for the Expectation of a small advantage, to pull on his own Head such endless
Troubles and Vexations.

FAB. LII. The Sick Kite.
THE sick Kite seeing her Mother express great sorrow for the danger she
appeared to be in, Suppress dear Mother, said she, your Passion, and rather
pray to the Gods on my behalf, that I may be restored to Health. Alas, my
Child, said her Mother, How can thou expect Favor from the Gods! For which
of them is it, whose Altars thou have not defiled, and impiously snatched from
them their Sacrifices?

God listens to the Zealous Devotion of Good Men, but slights and rejects the
Prayers of such as are hardened in their Wickedness, and have contemned him. A
French Author says, Qu' il arrive difficilement, que celuy qui n' a fait aucune
chose que vivre mal, ait l' advantage de bien mourir. It rarely happens, that
he who has always lived an ill course of Life, should make a good End.

O quam falluntur sua qui juvanda Tonanti vota putant; cum sint pectore nata
malo.

FAB. LIII. The Ass and the Boar.
WIth very reviling Language a Boar being provoked by an Insolent Ass, Thou
dull Animal, said the Boar, looking disdainfully on him, thou deservest a
severe chastisement for thy ill Tongue; but I scorn to give it thee; Therefore
Scoff on, since thy Sottishness allows thee this Liberty, and makes thee
beneath both my just indignation and revenge.

We should strive when we hear things that displease us, and spoke by
contemptible Persons, so to moderate our Passions, as not to make returns in
scurrilous Language, because it may be of greater Credit for us to pass them by
with Scorn.

Non Mostrar tuo valor con gente vile.
Use not thy Valor on an ill-bred Clown.
FAB. LIVE. The Wood and the Countryman.
IN those times when Trees could speak, came a Countryman into a Wood, desiring
liberty of the Trees to let him make a Handle or Helve amongst them, for a new
Instrument he had invented, called a Hatchet; which the Wood courteously
granted. But the Man having completed his Hatchet, first began to cut with it
the Boughs and Shrubs, and then to hew down tall Trees. But when they perceived
this Destruction come upon them by their own free leave, they all were
troubled. This, said an old Oak to the rest, is but a just punishment fallen
upon us, who by our rash and inconsiderate Gift to Man, have pulled this
Mischief on our own selves.

When an Enemy asks a Favor of us, we should consider whither or no the Thing,
if granted, may not be used by him to our prejudice.

Non dar favore a chi puo farti oltraggio.
Give not to him thou know to be thy Foe,
Lest by thy Gifts he work thy overthrow.
FAB. LV. The Heart and the Vine.


TO escape the close pursuit of the Hunters, a Heart hid himself under the thick
Branches of a spreading Vine, where he lay lurking till the Hunters were passed
by; and so soon as he thought himself secure, he began to eat the Vine Leaves,
with which making a rustling noise, it raised in the Hunters a Curiosity of
searching what it might be; imagining it some Wild Beast hid under those
Leaves; and hasting back to the place, they discovered the trembling Heart, whom
they with their Spears killed: But as he was dying, I most justly, cried he,
suffer this Death, that so ungratefully abused and tore my kind Preserver.

Those who against all sense of gratitude injure their Benefactors, and violate
the Rules of Hospitality, deserve no pity when they suffer a due Punishment of
their Crimes. Plerosque homines esse videmus, says St. John. Damascene, qui
postquam beneficiis affecti fuerint, eos a quibus ea acceperint, perinde ac
Mancipia contemnant, superciliaque adversus eos attollunt. We see most men of
that temper, that after they have had favors conferred on them, look upon
their Benefactors as Slaves, and behave themselves scornfully toward them.

Divina ingratos homines ulciscitur ira.

FAB. LVI. The Worm and the Fox.
A Contemptible Worm that pretended to Physic, appearing out of the Earth in a
great Assembly of other Creatures, boasted on this manner; I, Noble Auditors,
by my long Study and Search into the Secrets of Nature, and by the great
knowledge I have acquired in my Travels into the Subterranean Parts of the
World, as well as here above, do understand the true Virtues of Minerals, Roots
and Stones; as also of all Herbs, Plants and Flowers, so that I am able by my
Catholic Medicine, which I prepare according to Art, to Cure all Diseases,
Maims, and Imperfections whatsoever. In a word, I may without Vanity say I
should be sorry to be thought of less Skill than the Famed Aesculapius himself.
Whosoever therefore would reap the benefit of my Labors, let him make have
hither, before I leave this place, to make some other Country happy by my
Practice therein. To the boasting Harangue of this Vainglorious Quack-salver,
the Fox with great attention listened, and it being finished, he looking on him
with contempt, made this Answer: Which way, said he, thou Ignorant Emperick,
will thou be able to do these Wonders to others, who art thy self both Blind
and Lame, and can supply neither one nor other of these thy own Defects?

This aims at the impudent Boasts of many Pretenders to Physic; and shows that
what cannot be proved by good Experience, ought to be but of very little
Credit. And thus our pretending Chemists will undertake to make Gold by the
Philosophers Stone, whilst they at the same time are clad in Rags, and perish
with Hunger.

FAB. LVII. The Wolves and the Sheep.
AFter a long War between the Wolves and Sheep, they made a Solemn Truce for a
Term of years, and gave Hostages on both sides for the keeping it inviolable.
The Wolves sent their Young ones on their parts, and the Sheep, in exchange,
delivered into their Custody their Dogs, who were to remain with them till the
Expiration of the Truce. But the young Wolves being separated from their Damms,
began to howl and cry, which the old Wolves hearing, took thereupon an occasion
most perfidiously to break the Truce, yet pretending the Sheep were the
Aggressors by their ill usage of the Hostages in their hands, and then falling
on the innocent Sheep, committed all manner of Hostilities and Depredations
amongst them. For they, in this Distress, wanting the Dogs, who had ever been
their faithful Guards to defend their several Flocks, were in a short time all
miserably destroyed by the Wolves, their inveterate Enemies.

It is a madness in any men to deliver up their Guards as Hostages, or to put
their Castles, and Cittadels, into the hands of their Enemies, who no doubt
would never cease spoiling them, when they should see them thus deprived of all
manner of Safeguard.

FAB. LVIII. The Wolf, the Fox and the Apes.
A Wolf almost famished after a three days fasting, met in his progress up and
down the Woods a Fox, whom seeing so fat and sleek, he admired, asking him how
in such terrible weather, being the depth of Winter, he could find such plenty
of Food to keep him in so good plight. The Fox pointing toward an Apes Cave,
Thither, said he, am I often invited, and there always welcome, when I fail of
good success in my hunting for Prey. And saying this, he offered the Wolf some
Fragments of his Meat brought from thence, which the Wolf soon devoured; but
they only serving to whet his Appetite, in order to a better Meal, he begged
the Fox of all Loves, to tell him by what means he might insinuate himself into
the favor of this Ape? That, answered the Fox, requires no great Art to do, if
you can but frame your self to Lying. He thinking this no difficult matter, ran
eagerly to the Den, where he was no sooner entered, but his Nose being Saluted
with a very unsavory smell. O insufferable, cried he, What a stinking place is
this? And looking forward, he saw the Old Ape fondly hugging her deformed
Young. Here forgetting the Crafty Foxes advise, Well, said he aloud, in all my
life time did I never behold such ugly Creatures as these. And as he was going
nearer to them, they all at the same moment leaping violently on him, with
great fury tore him; one hanging on his Nose, another on his Neck, the rest on
all sides Persecuting him, that the wretched Wolf with much difficulty got
clear of them, and escaped with Life. At his return he found the Fox, to whom
he gave a full account of his reception. I do not wonder at it, said the Fox,
because you speak truth at your very going in, when I so straightly charged you
to lie. Do you not think I have the Senses of Smelling and Seeing, as well as
your self? And yet I told her at my first visit, that I was infinitely pleased
with that comfortable Odor, and sat me down, as if in some room made sweet
with delightful Perfumes. Then called her Beautiful Lady, Mother of a lovely
and hopeful Offspring. Besides, I was careful all Supper-time, not unwarily to
let slip from my mouth any imprudent Truth. Which method had you been as
careful to have observed, you would not have been so ready to perish for Hunger
as you are at this moment.

The Ape in this Fable does naturally enough express such as are Lovers of
Flattery; but methinks more particularly two sorts of men, both of them much
addicted to Vainglory, and delighted in hearing their own praise, yet
otherwise persons of great Desert, these are men of Learning, and men of Arms;
to many of whom, as my Author observes, nothing is more uneasy and unpleasant
than to hear the Truth freely spoke of them.

E di giudicio assai manca e fallisce
Chi suol feed prestare a finta loda.
Ital. He must want Sense, and Eyes to see,
Who Credit gives to Flattery.
FAB. LIX. The Sow and the Wolf.
WHilst a Sow was in the Pangs of her Travail, she was thus civilly accosted by
a Wolf; You may securely, Dear Sister, said she, bring forth your young, for I,
out of the due respect I owe you, will be your Guardian in this time of
Necessity, and take care both of your self and young ones. The Sow told her she
had no need of her officious assistance: But if, added she, you will show your
Civility to me, I entreat you in Modesty to withdraw, for the greatest service
you can do me is to be gone, since I have ever esteemed the Wolf's friendship
to be best at a distance.

We ought not to accept every plausible offer of kindness, for many are ready
to Complement us with their officious services, not for our Profit but their
own. Fictae amicitiae non est fidendum.

FAB. LX. The Thief and the Dog.
BY the barking of a Dog, was a Thief disturbed in his work, as he was breaking
into a House, he therefore to quiet him, offered him a Piece of Bread: Ah
Treacherous Thief! said the Dog, would thou bribe me with that, to make me
cease my barking? No, I Will not betray my Master, should thou now feast me
here to night: For all thy bounty to me, is but to stop my Mouth till thou
robst our House, and then where shall I dine to morrow? And who shall relieve
me hereafter when I shall be starving for Hunger?

This gives us a Caution, that for a small profit, we lose not a considerable
benefit: And to beware of giving credit to every one that speaks us fair, for
many such there are, who at the same time are only designing to cheat us. Non
Facta, sed Consilia spectanda, We are not only to consider men's Actions, but
their Drifts. To which also alludes that saying of the Civilians.

Toll voluntatem nec erit Discrimen in actu. Which Sentence is explained in
Plato 's Banquet, but more at large in A. Gellius. Lib. 17. Cap. 20.

FAB. LXI. The Frogs desiring a King.


WHether under an Anarchy or Democracy, I will not positively affirm, The Frogs
in a great Lake grown wanton, resolved unanimously to Petition Jupiter to give
them a King to Rule over them: Which request seeming ridiculous, he at first
hearkened not to it, but they not discouraged, persisted in their Devotions,
still begging a King. Till Jupiter tired with their importunity, cast down
amongst them a Beam of an extraordinary bigness; the fall whereof into the
Lake, struch such a terror amongst the Frogs, as caused them to make their
first approaches with Fear and Trembling; but seeing him continue mild and
peaceable, they made, with more assurance, their next Addresses toward him,
paying him all due Honor, at a less distance. At last, when they found it to
be only a Log, they threw aside all manner of respect, leaped upon it, and made
their King their sport and scorn. This caused the Frogs to renew their Prayers
to Jupiter, to send them a Valiant and Active King: He to answer their desire,
gave them a Stork, who with great Majesty walking about the Lake, soon curbed
the unquiet Spirits of those his unsatisfied Subjects; which obliged them
privately to complain to Mercury, beseeching him to implore on their behalves,
the favor of Jupiter, in this their distress, but he would not hearken to
them. Under this Tyranny therefore have they ever since groaned, for Jupiter
would never grant them any redress, which constrains them to keep up in their
holes all day, seldom stirring out till evening, that the Stork takes Wing to
fly to his Nest, and then they appear abroad with hoarse Voices, renewing their
old Complaint (...), but to no purpose, for Jupiter has resolved, that they who
cannot be content with a Merciful King, shall suffer by a severe one.

When the Athenian Commonwealth had long flourished, under a Democratique
Government, by the Laws of the Wise Solon, the People on pretense of Liberty,
threw off their old Bonds; Then being divided into Parties and Factions,
Pisistratus the Tyrant set up himself by his cunning Arts; for so soon as he
had made himself Master of the Citadel, he held the Government for the space
of three and thirty years. Of whose Tyranny when the Athenians complained,
Aesop spoke this Fable to them. Which also shows, that the Common People are in
their Humors like these Frogs, for when they have a Mild and Gracious King,
they are murmuring against him, as too easy and remiss in his Affairs: And the
Vigorous and Active Prince, they esteem a Tyrant. The true reason of which is,
because they are soon weary of things present, and still restless till they see
those which are new. (...). Res violenta Turba est non habet autem Mentem. A
Multitude is an unruly thing, without all manner Prudence and Foresight.

FAB. LXII. The Thief and the Sun.
THE Neighbors of a certain Thief were about to recommend a Wife to him, but
Aesop observing their intention to gratify so ill a Man, dissuaded them by
this Example: On a time, said he, the Sun falling in Love with a Beautiful
Woman, had a mind to Marry her; at which the several Nations of the World
finding themselves aggrieved, resolved to prevent it, and to that end sent
Ambassadors to Jupiter, beseeching him he would not suffer the Sun to Marry,
for as they alleged, it would be to their great detriment. Jupiter in a
passion asked them, Wherein this Match could result to their inconvenience? To
whom one of them, with humble submission, answered, We have now, Great Sir, but
one Sun, and he alone, in Summer time, heats and scorches us to such a degree,
that we are almost burnt with his Fiery Rays; what then would become of us,
should he have Children like himself?

Ill men ought not to be encouraged, but rather expelled from the Society of
the Good. Multi sunt ita amentes ut malis propriis gaudeant.

FAB. LXIII. The Gamester and the Swallow.
THere was a dissolute Young man so great a Lover of Gaming, that he had
consumed all his Patrimony, his ready Coin, and his Goods, at Play, leaving
himself nothing but a threadbare Suit, and an upper Garment, to defend him from
the Cold. This Man seeing on a time a Swallow, that was come much earlier than
ordinarily they do, the Winter not being quite past; and having no other
Movables left to venture at play; Well, said he, since I see the Summer come,
I Will sell this superfluous Garment for Tools to work with, which he did, and
quickly played off the Money. But the Cold Weather afterward returning, this
miserable Gamester, when almost starved to death, seeing the same Swallow, who
was likewise ready to perish with the Cold; Curse on thee, said he, thou
Mischievous Bird, whose unseasonable coming has ruined both thy self and me.

Things done out of their proper time, are not of long continuance. Alceator,
quanto in art est melior, tanto est nequior.

Though of his Trade a Gamester best may be,
Amongst Good Men the worse esteemed is he.
Maturo consilio ac deliberatione qualibet in re opus est, nihilque temerario
animi motu attentandum.

FAB. LXIV. The Pigeons and the Hawk.
BEing tormented by the frequent Assaults of a Kite, upon their Young ones, the
Innocent Pigeons chose a Hawk for their King, but he exercised his Regal
Authority over them more like a fierce Enemy, than a Father of his Subjects.
For under pretense of punishing some of them for their faults, he most cruelly
devoured both old and young, that they soon repented them of their Election.
And complaining amongst themselves, Alas, said they, It had been better for us
to have endured the slight vexations of the Kite, than to have pulled this
inevitable Destruction on us all.

No man should be so displeased with his Condition, as striving to mend it, he
should endanger the making it worse. The Emperor Justinian says, Licet Lex
imperii juris solemnibus Imperatorem solverit, nihil tamen tam proprium imperii
est, quam Legibus vivere: quapropter Tyrannorum contra Tyrannos solicitanda non
sunt auxilia. Lib. 6. C. tit de testam.

FAB. LXV. The Cuccow and the Small Birds.
A Cuccow asked the small Birds why they made such haste from her, sheltring
themselves in Hedges and Bushes whenever she appeared? Because, answered they,
you are so like the Hawk, our Mortal Enemy, whose sight we always dread: For by
your Shape, you must needs be of that Species, and therefore we cannot but have
a suspicion of receiving Mischief by you.

Plutarch tells us this Fable speaking of Licias, the Tyrant of Megalopolis.
And advises to beware of those who are descended from a Bloody Family, and
whose actions give us a suspicion that they would be exercising Cruelty over
others.

FAB. LXVI. The Fox and the Dragon.
A Fox digging in the Earth, to make his several Appartments and Salleys,
pierced one of his Holes so deep, that he came to the Den of a Dragon, the
Guardian of a hidden Treasure there, whom so soon as the Fox saw, Sir, said he
to him, I beseech you, in the first place, pardon my Inadvertency and Rudeness,
and then, if you can but conceive what small occasion I have for Money in the
course of my life, I beg you would not take it ill if I ask what profit you may
reap of all this Trouble? and what great reward can tempt you thus to deprive
your self of sleep, and to pass all your days here in the horror of Night and
Darkness? Alas, I have none at all, answered the Dragon: But Jupiter, the
greatest of the Gods, has given me this in charge. Do you then, demanded the
Fox, make use of none of this Treasure? nor dispose of any part of it to your
Friends? No, replied the Dragon, for so it has pleased the Destinies to order
it. Then give me leave to tell you, proceeded the Fox, and pray be not angry
with me; He that is of your temper, and under your Circumstances, was born, no
doubt, with the Curse of the Gods on his Head.

Since thou must go in a little space of time thither, where so many are
already gone before thee, Why, through a strange blindness of Spirit, art thou
so industrious continually here, to disquiet and torment thy self? It Is to
thee, O Covetous Man, I direct my Discourse; To thee, I say, who art the Joy of
thy Heirs and Relations, who grudgest the Gods their Incense, and thy self thy
proper Nourishment. Who art sad and Melancholy when thou hear the sweet
sound of the Viol, and grieved at the Harmony which other Musical Instruments
bring thee. From whose very Heart the charge of Necessary Food fetches troubled
Sighs and Groans. Who, to augment thy Wealth penny by penny, do daily provoke
Heaven to thy Destruction, by thy Thefts, Cheats, and impudent Perjuries. And
who take a provident Care to reduce into a small Compass the Expense of thy
Burial, lest Libitina, Goddess of Funerals, should get any thing by thee.

FAB. LXVII. A Sheep and its Shepherd.
WIthout noise or murmuring did an innocent Sheep suffer herself to be dragged
away by a Wolf, from whom, by great fortune, she after a while escaped: But
being another time seized by the Dog, she cried out so loud, that the Shepherd
hearing, ran in haste and rescued her from him. Of which clamor the Shepherd
asking the reason, she having endured the Wolves outrage to her with all that
patience? I was more troubled, answered she, to be seized by the Dog than by
the Wolf; for the Wolf is naturally our Enemy, but the Dog is the pretended
Guard both of your Flocks and House, and for that reason I took it so ill of
him.

This shows how heinous the Injuries are, which we receive from the hands of
those, from whom we expect Friendship and Protection.

FAB. LXVIII. The Lioness and the Fox.
A Lioness being upbraided by a She-Fox, that she was not Fruitful, bringing
forth but one young at a time; answered, It Is true, but what I am then
delivered of, is a Lion.

Excellence consists not in Quantity, but Quality.

FAB. LXIX. The Old Man and Death.


GRoaning under the weight of a heavy burden of Wood, which he was bringing
home from the Forest, came a poor Ancient Man, whose strength and spirits
being almost spent with the tediousness of the Journey, and greatness of his
load, he threw it down in the middle of his way; and sitting on the ground, in
the very anguish of his Soul, he called often on Death to come to him; when
behold Death in an affrightful shape appeared, asking what he would have, that
he called so earnestly on him? The good man trembling with fear, thought fit,
at that time, to dissemble the matter; I only wished, answered he, for your
coming to help me up with my heavy Faggot.

Many dare wish for Death, and seem to contemn it, who are yet affrighted when
it is represented to them in imminent Dangers. Plerique inter mortis metum, says
Seneca, and vitae tormenta miseri fluctuant, and vivere nolunt, and mori
nesciunt. Many wretched Men struggle between the Fear of Death and the Torments
of an unhappy Life; they are unwilling to live, yet know not how to dye. Benche
stia vn' Huomo in gran pericolo, say the Italians, non may vorria morire. Tho a
Man happen to be in great affliction, yet will he not be content to dye. Melior
est canis vivus, Leone mortuo.

FAB. LXX. The Ass, the Ox, the Mule, and the Camel.
FOur slavish Beasts, an Ass, an Ox, a Mule, and a Camel; all under the same
Circumstances of Misery, were making their Complaints one to another of the
hard fortune, to which they, above all other Creatures, were subject in this
World, being compelled almost to a continual Slavery. But afterward they
comforted themselves as well as they could, with what they hoped would come to
pass: And to this purpose, the Grave Ass, having a while conferred with the
Mule, expressed himself; it being supposed therefore to be the sentiment of them
both: After all these Labors, my Friends, said he, I doubt not but to see the
day, when I shall have this Pack-saddle thrown off my back, and shall end my
life in ease and pleasure; thus from a Porter I shall become a Gentleman. The
Camel and the Ox having considered the Gifts, Nature had bestowed on them, and
how well they had deserved of their Master: Surely, said they, we shall no
longer be made to drudge as we have been; for we have sufficiently purchased by
our past Labors and Sweat, all the Meat wherewith we shall be sustained to the
end of our Lives, so that we may well hope to pass the rest of our days in
Plenty and Felicity.

Let none admire too much at this Ass and his three Comrades, for they have
many Brethren amongst us Men, so great Lovers of Idleness, that forgetting they
were born to an industrious Labor, can have no thought but how they may avoid
all manner of Trouble, and spend the remainder of their Days in Sloth and
Luxury. The meeting together of these four dull Animals in my Fable, brings to
my memory the old Adage, Similes cum similibus facillime permisceri, atque
eosdem nullo negotio convenire. But I must put all those of their Lazy
Inclinations, in mind of the saying of a Wise man, (...). Laborare necesse est
eos, qui volunt esse felices.

He who ever hopes to thrive,
Must by industrious Labor live.
FAB. LXXI. Prometheus and Epimetheus, Peopling the World.
WHen the Gods had given directions to the Sons of Iapetus, for their making
Men of Clay, to People the Earth, it is reported that Prometheus applied himself
to his Business, with great Care and Circumspection, diligently considering
every thing he did, till he had perfectly completed the Frame of Man; in which
important work he proceeding thus slowly, his number of Men was but small.
Whilst Epimetheus made quicker dispatch, huddling up a great multitude in a
short time, for he used neither study nor care in his Works, whereas in those
few which the diligent Prometheus formed, no industry was wanting, nor any
prudent forethought for the contriving all things, as I may say, with proper
Symmetry, and in a perfect Harmony. Of which Men thus finished by him, are all
those admirable Heroes, so highly celebrated by Antiquity for their Wisdom and
Virtue. But of those numbers which came out of Epimetheus's Workhouse, the
most part were Lame, Weak and Defective, in some or other of their Faculties.
They wanted Prudence, Constancy, Moderation, Justice, and even Humanity too.
And as Children do very often retain some of their Parents Infirmities, so may
you observe in these, a Precipitation in all their Actions, and a Hurrying of
their Words, without consideration of what they do or say, and then perchance
they grow sensible of their Error, and strive to correct themselves. Which are
Periphrasis's of Epimetheus's Name.

This Fable shows that the greatest part of Men are Foolish, Wicked, and
Inconsiderate. It also verifies the old saying, Omnia esse preclara rara, that
all Excellent Things are scarce.

FAB. LXXII. The two Cocks.
FOR the Sovereignty over the Hens of a Village, two Cocks fought briskly
together, till one of them finding himself not able longer to resist the Power
of his Enemy, ran away and hid himself, whilst the Conqueror flew upon the top
of a House, to proclaim his Victory over all his Dominions. But an Eagle by
chance hovering thereabouts in the Air, and perceiving so fair a Mark, stooping
suddenly down, seized him in her Tallons, and carried him away. The vanquished
Cock thrusting accidentally his Head out of his Hole, was a Spectator of his
Adversaries Catastrophe, at which he heartily rejoicing, came forth among the
Hens, and had the sole enjoyment of them without Rival.

Let no man be too Arrogant after he has had good Success in his Affairs,
because there is nothing certain in this World, and we often see Men high and
prosperous one day, and the next thrown down into the lowest Pitch of Misery.

FAB. LXXIII. The Bees and Jupiter.
THe Bees presented to Jupiter a Vessel of Honey, with which he was so well
pleased, that he bad them ask him what they would, and it should be granted
them. Most mighty Jove! said the Bees, we humbly beseech you to grant us that
power against our Enemies, that when men shall attempt to rob our Hives of the
Honey, we gather with so much pains and industry, that if we wound them with
our Stings, they may dye without remedy. Jupiter hearing this unreasonable
request, and having a greater love for Mankind than for the Bees, No, answered
he, very angrily, but if when Men come to your Hives, you shall dare to sting
them, you your selves shall presently dye; for losing your stings, that shall
also prove the loss of your Lives.

We often find, that the Mischief we wish to our Enemies, falls on our own
Heads. This Fable also shows, that the Gods are not pleased with too
unreasonable punishments afflicted on Men, according to that Sentence of
Herodotus, in his Melpomene. (...). Quod scilicet nimis vehementes
animadversiones a Dijs odiosae sunt. And another Author says excellently,
Injuria sanctiss. pientissimique fit Numinis Majestati, Sceleratis precibus;
easque in maliciose Precantibus capita retorquet.

FAB. LXXIV. The Oak and the Reed.


THere happened once a dispute between the Oak and the Reed, of their Honor,
Firmness and Constancy; in which many unbecoming Speeches passed on both sides,
till the Oak growing angry; Thou Despicable Weed! said he, Thou poor Upstart!
that have the Confidence to Word it with me, who with a strong unshaken Body,
for many years, have stood here firmly planted, with my Root deep in the
ground, whilst thou sprouting out of the Mud, there stickest with thy feeble
Body, obliged to bow with every blast of Wind, nay, with every breath of Air;
and then for all this presumption, thy haughty Head is made to stoop and kiss
the Dirt. The proud Oak boasting on this manner, put to silence the Modest
Reed, who had no mind to prosecute this imprudent Quarrel, but waited a fitter
opportunity to upbraid him. When straight a violent Storm arose, making great
Destruction wherever it came, which the sturdy Oak bravely resisted a great
while, but was at last forced to give way, and was torn up by the Roots; while
the humble Reed by its submissive yielding endured the whole fury of the Storm.
And afterward would often laugh at the great Insolence of his Presumptuous
Adversary.

Wise and Virtuous men should establish such an equality in their Souls, as not
to suffer themselves to be torn up by any Storm of Adversity, when by a small
yielding they may be able to endure the shock. Nor should they be carried above
their due Limits of Modesty and Sobriety, when their Affairs succeed to their
Desires. But by the Allegory of our Fable, we are advised to bow and yield
every way to what we cannot certainly oppose. When Phocion councelled the
Athenians not to resist Alexander, but give place, for the present, to the
violent Torrent of his Conquests, he could not justly be blamed for want of
Valor or Manly Resolution. For how could he be taxed with Cowardice, who
suffered Death with so much slight and scorn of it? He therefore that would
live safe, must thus bend and suit himself to the occasion, like the Reed, by
which he shall continue his Root firm and durable, when the Storms shall blow;
whilst the proud stubborn Oak that refuses to be plyant, shall be torn up, and
his place no longer known. Let the Examples of this Tree and this Reed teach us
not to oppose an over-powerful Enemy, but to avoid with all our Art his several
Attacks, by which we may continue firmly rooted in our several stations.
Potentiori non reluctari expedit. Faern.

FAB. LXXV. The Lamb and the Wolf.
A Lamb looking out of his Window, and seeing a Wolf pass by, called him Cruel,
and Murderous Beast, and gave him other reproachful Language. Ah poor Wretch!
said the Wolf to him, I am not offended at thy Abuses; nor is it thou, but that
secure place wherein thou art, that injures me.

Time and Place do often give very inconsiderable Persons courage to insult
over their Superiors. Fortes and Magnanimi sunt habendi, says Cicero, Non qui
faciunt, sed qui propulsant injuriam. They are to be esteemed truly Valiant and
Magnanimous Men, not who do an injury, but who pass it by.

FAB. LXXVI. The Ape and the Fox.
SOme discontented Beasts, in a great Assembly, consulting together to make
them a King in opposition to the Lion, preferred the Ape to that Dignity,
because of his admirable Activity in Dancing. But the malicious Fox, envious of
the Honor was done the Ape, and having seen a piece of flesh in a Toil, Sir,
said he to him, Be pleased to go with me to a certain place, and I Will show you
a Treasure, for to you, being our King, justly all Treasure-troves belong: Then
carried him to the Net, where he immediately entangled himself, whilst the Fox
standing at a convenient distance, was safe, and in scorn, laughing at him: O
thou fool! said he, Because Fortune favored thee, and Fools flattered thee,
thou had thought thy self fit to have the rule over all other Beasts, but
thou see how thou art mistaken, that want Sense to govern thy own self.

Many Men rashly undertaking great Things, run themselves into Misfortunes, for
which they are despised, and perhaps ruined. But some think this Fable was
designed by Aesop, to expose the Folly of the Vulgar, who many times in their
Elections, will have a greater regard to one man for his Graceful Personage,
than to another for the most excellent Endowments of his Soul.

FAB. LXXVII. The Grasshopper and the Owl.
ALmost all Day had a Grasshopper with his chattering noise disturbed a sleepy
Owl, whose Nature is to search abroad by Night for her Meat, and sleep from
Daybreak till Twilight, in some hollow Tree. The Owl civilly entreated him to
forbear his singing, or remove farther off, but he regarded her not. She then
desired him a second time, not to give her that disturbance; But he still
continuing cross, rather made the louder noise. When the Owl saw no Arguments
could prevail, and that he slighted all she could say, she used this Stratagem
to revenge herself on that vexatious Insect. Since you will not let me sleep,
said she, with your Pleasant Tunes, which methinks are so melodious, they
resemble those which Apollo plays, when he charms the Gods with his Harp; I
have a mind to indulge my self with some of that Nectar my Mistress Pallas
lately bestowed on me. If you care to taste it, come hither and we'll remember
her good Health together in it. The Grasshopper who had sang himself dry, and
heard his sweet voice so much commended, hopped briskly toward the Tree; but
when the Owl saw him so near, slipping out of her hole, she flew upon the
affrighted Creature, and killed it. Thus he by his Death gave her the silence,
which in his life time, he so scornfully refused her.

They who are not courteous toward others, receive sometimes a just reward of
their ill temper. Humanitas, and gratior, and tutior.

FAB. LXXVIII. The Fisher that played on his Pipe.
A Fisher not very expert in his Trade, that had observed many great Shouls of
Fish in the Sea, taking his Net and a Pipe, he went to the Seaside, where
sitting on a Rock, he played upon his Pipe with his utmost Skill, expecting by
his Music to have allured the Fishes out to him. But finding that did him no
good, he laid aside his Pipe and threw in his Nets, in which as he drew them to
the shore, he perceived a great number of fishes leaping. You may leave off
your capering, said he, ye perverse fishes, for when I Piped to you before, and
would have had you Dance, you then refused, and now I have done, you begin your
Jig.

Those things are best done, and are most acceptable, which are timed in their
proper Season. This Fable was made use of by Cyrus ( as in the first Book of
Herodotus) when he pardoned and took into his protection the Aeolians and
Ionians, whom he had formerly solicited against Croesus in vain, and they came
afterward of their own accord, submitting themselves to him, under those Laws
by which they had before been governed.

FAB. LXXIX. The Cuckoo and the Nightingale.
WIth great Arrogance was a Nightingale scorned and derided as an ill Singer,
by a Cuckoo, who had the confidence to vye with her for the Mastery, appealing
for Judgment in the Case to an Ass, who happened to be present, and readily
offered himself to decide the Difference. So soon then as the Challenge was
accepted, the Cuckoo first began, and long continued his repeated Note: But the
Nightingale, not doubting of the Victory, only gave a short Specimen of her
Voice and Skill, wherein she showed a most admirable and delightful variety;
and then they both waited the Asses Determination, who quickly gave his
Suffrage in favor of the Cuckoo, she having sung longest and loudest.

Such admirable Judgments may we too often see, where the worst things please,
and the best are rejected. And thus are many Ignorant and Unworthy men for
their confidence and noise advanced to places of Profit and Honor, whilst
those of far greater Virtue and Merit, are for their Modesty, slighted and
perish unregarded.

FAB. LXXX. Death and an Old Man.
DEath coming to kill an Old Man, was desired by him to forbear a while, till
he had made his Will; but Death angrily told him, He would give him no longer
time, since he had been so often forewarned to prepare himself for this stroke.
The Old Man protested he had never seen him before, and that he had not given
him any notice of it. When I killed, said Death, your Companions, nay so many
Young Persons, and Children, and that you felt your strength and vigor fail
you, then was your Summons, then should you have fixed your Thoughts on me, and
then made a fit Preparation of all things, and kept them so in order till my
coming.

This advises us always to be prepared for Death, since we know not the Day nor
the Hour when he will come.

FAB. LXXXI. The League between the Wolves and Sheep.


THE Wolves on pretense of settling a Peace with the Sheep had a Conference
with them, wherein they urged this cunning Discourse to them. That both You and
We, said they, may for the future make our Lives Happy, we come to propose a
means of living peaceably and amicably together, without any of our accustomed
Fears and Jealousies one of another. To this end let us make a solemn League
betwixt us, which that it may be kept firm, and by no private Injuries
violated, it will be necessary that you take off, or banish from amongst you,
those Wicked Dogs, the Incendiaries that are always troubling our Peace, and
embroiling us in Mischief. For they create in you a Jealousy of us, that we
cannot walk civilly by your Folds, but they are sallying out to molest us, by
which rough usage they provoke us, when, alas, we never intended it, to give
you disturbance, merely out of revenge to their affronts: So that we would fain
know what need you have of these Pernicious Creatures, the sole cause of all
our Misunderstandings. By this plausible Harangue the poor Sheep, full of
Simplicity, being easily deluded, put away in all haste their Dogs, with great
Disgrace, from amongst them, admitting the Wolves in their stead, and then
being destitute of all Succor, they were soon miserably devoured by their
merciless Adversaries.

This cautions us not to give credit to the deluding words of our Enemies, nor
to yield up our Guards into their Hands. For Alexander proposing to make Peace
with the Athenians, on condition they should deliver to him Eight of their
principal Citizens; of which number Demosthenes was to be one. Demosthenes
spoke this Fable, meaning by the Wolves, Alexander; by the Dogs, those Persons
who managed the Affairs of the Commonwealth; and by the Sheep, the People of
Athens.

FAB. LXXXII. The Covetous Man and his Money.
AS a very Rich, but Covetous Man, lay at the point of Death, he ordered all
his Money-Bags to be brought before him, and made this Discourse to them: O my
Ungrateful Money! said he, with what intolerable pains have I scraped you up
together, and yet you have never given me any Pleasure, but rather a continual
Vexation, Fear, and Melancholy. What can you do for me now at this last
Exigency? Can you prolong my days beyond their appointed date? Or can you
purchase me a good Conscience when I shall appear in the other World, to render
an account of all the Actions of my Life? No, answered the Money, we are able
to do you no good in these respects, but we can give you the satisfaction to
assure you, that your Heir shall soon consume us all, in Whoring, Drinking and
Gaming; and that for our sake, your Soul shall go to the place of Everlasting
Torment.

We ought not to take such pains in gathering Riches here on Earth, which can
be of no advantage to us when we dye, and shall perhaps be soon spent by our
Heirs in Rioting and Debauchery. Non dobbiamo far Tesoro qui in terra, dove non
e la nostra patria, ma nel Cielo, dove eternalmente goderemo.

(...)
(...)
Theog. A Rich Man cannot, with all his Money, stave off
Death, neither any grievous Sickness, nor Old
Age when it comes upon him.
FAB. LXXXIII. The Parrot.
WHen a Parrot, that had been brought from the Indies into a Country where they
never use to breed, was asked by some other Birds, why she was in greater
esteem here, than at home; for here, added they, you have a stately Cage or
House, made of Ebony, adorned with Ivory and Silver, and are daily fed
carefully with the choicest Meats, and made much of by all sorts of People. You
need not wonder at it, answered the Parrot, for few have the Honor in their
own Country which is justly due to them.

Learned and Excellent Men, have seldom the Credit and Esteem in their own
Countries, which they have in another.

FAB. LXXXIV. The Stag, and a Wounded Greyhound.
A Stag that bore chiefest sway in a large Forest, had the pleasure, without
incurring any danger, to see a brace of Greyhounds course a Hare over a
spacious Field; where one of the Dogs leaping eagerly through certain brambles
broke his Leg. Now this Stag being of a generous Spirit, seeing the Hare safe,
(for the other Greyhound wanting assistance had quitted her) came out of his
stand, or sheltring place, and made it a scruple of Conscience to suffer a
Creature to perish, that had shown so much briskness in the Chase; out of mere
compassion therefore, he offered to carry this Cripple to the next Village. The
Greyhound was jealous at first, and would gladly have excused the Complement,
but convinced by the kind Expressions of the Stag of his sincerity, who stooped
down to give him the advantage of getting on his back, the Greyhound was taken
up, and by him carried toward the Town. As they were thus on their way, they
related to each other their several Adventures; and the Stag was just saying,
how happy he and his Brethren should be, if the Hounds would not maliciously
hunt them by the scent, and make continual War against them. At which moment,
they were overtaken by a Fox, who listening, had heard some of their Discourse,
and Smiling, told the Stag, It was very strange, he was not sensible that he
carried his greatest Enemy on his back. I have no Enemies, answered the Stag,
but the Hounds, and this is a Greyhound, a Creature of another Species, whom I
carry. Both Hounds and Greyhounds, replied the Fox, are at open Hostility with
all your Race: And I can assure you, that if your life were in his Power, as
his is now in yours, you would find no mercy from him. The Stag then began to
be angry, and would have thrown him off his back, but remembering he had given
him his promise: It Is no matter, said he, though his Companions should be so
ungrateful to attack me, after doing him so good an office, I Will acquit my self
as well as I can of them; but I shall do my utmost endeavor to leave him in a
place of Security, in Discharge of the Faith I have given him.

Too much eagerness or precipitation ruins many a well-laid Design. When a
Generous Enemy is known, he may be trusted freely. We must not break our Faith
with any man, though his Associates be our Enemies. E Contrasegno d'una grande
generosita, e d'esser Padrone di se stesso, quando havendo un Nemico nelle
proprie mani un' Huomo e cosi religioso di voler mantenergli la sua parola.
It Is a sign of great Generosity, and of a Man's being Master of himself, when
having an Enemy in his power, he shall be so just to assist and protect him,
for the keeping his Faith with him. A remarkable Instance hereof amongst many
others which I could produce, happened of late; the History in brief is this,

That a Wounded Man came running into a Ladies House, and up into her
Bedchamber, begging her protect on from his Enemies; she promised it, hid him
in her Closet, and had no sooner dressed his Wounds, but saw certain Officers
rushing into the House to look for him. These had her free leave to search for
him every where, but in her Closet where he lay; and after these, she saw her
own Son brought in dead of three mortal Wounds, given him by the Person she had
so carefully concealed. Then alas! did two violent Passions struggle within her
Breast, but at last Pity overcame her Revenge, so she went and threw her self
upon the Dead Body of her Son, bathing it with her Tears; and after the
Searchers were gone, she ran to the Assassin, Go Bloody Murderer of my Son!
cried she; be gone thou Cruel Wretch! that have robbed me of what was most dear
to me in this World. Make haste from my House, since I have given thee my Word
for this time, but when I shall have discharged my self of my Trust, and put
thee in safety, take care I never see thee more, for if I do, I am resolved to
revenge this thy Cruelty, with the greatest rigor of Justice. When she had
said this, she caused him to be secretly conveyed away in safety, by one of the
most trusty of her Servants, without letting any of the rest of her Family know
it.

FAB. LXXXV. The Birds that would have had a Commonwealth.
CErtain Rebellious Birds that were met together, proposed the Erecting a
Commonwealth, because the Eagle, their King, as they pretended, was
insufficient to govern so vast an Empire, and oppressed them with great Taxes.
But a Politic Jay dissuaded them from their purpose, hinting to them, that it
was easier filling one Sack than many.

The more Lords any People have over them, the greater are their Exactions, and
heavier their Oppression.

FAB. LXXXVI. The Servant and the Ass.
A Malicious Servant that had a grudge against his Masters Ass, pushing him
down a steep Place, killed him, and the persuaded his Master that the Ass fell
by Accident. His Master being a Poor man, and wanting Money to buy another,
made the Servant carry the Burdens which the Ass was wont to do; This Fool
then, when almost harrassed to Death with the continual Drudgery he underwent,
said within himself, I very justly suffer this misery, that killed the Ass
which would have eased me of all this Slavery*

Thus some Men striving to be revenged on others, at the same time ruin
themselves.

FAB. LXXXVII. The Boasting Lamp.
A Lamp well dressed with Oil and Cotton, which was lighted, and burnt very
clearly, grew so Insolent, that it presumed to compare its Splendour with the
Suns bright Beams; but being thrown down by a sudden blast of Wind, it was put
out; which a Passenger, that was present, observing, hung up again, and
lighting it, said, Now, thou Lamp, shine as clear as thou can, but be silent,
and boast no more, for know, that none of the Heavenly Luminaries were ever yet
extinguished.

Let no Man be so vain at the Consideration of his Riches, and the Dignities of
this World, that he despise the real Felicity we hope to enjoy in Heaven: For
whatsoever is acquired here below, may also be lost again, and is so uncertain,
that it can scarce be called our own.

FAB. LXXXVIII. The Swallow and other Small Birds.


WHen the Husbandmen were beginning to Sow Flax Seed, a Swallow counseled the
other little Birds to eat it up; because Men, when it should be grown to
Maturity, would make of it all their Snares, for the Destruction of Birds. This
advice they derided, calling her Foolish Prophetess, and bad her take care for
her self. Yet, so soon as the Flax appeared above ground, she repeated her
Persuasions; which they again slighted and scorned. And when the Flax was fully
ripe, she exhorted them afresh to spoil it; nor yet would they listen to her.
The Swallow then leaving the Company of those foolish Birds, flew to the
Villages amongst Men, and entered into a League of Friendship with them, by
which Articles, she was peaceably to dwell amongst them, and entertain them
with her Music; but the other Birds were, in a short time after, taken in
Nets, and Snares made of the Flax; whilst the Swallow, enjoying her liberty,
flew where she pleased.

Some people are so inconsiderate, that they are neither capable of acting
Prudently, nor of receiving good Counsel, but despise those who offer it;
running on in their Extravagancies, till they are beyond all possibility of
being saved from utter ruin. Qui bonum consilium respuat, eum accersere
perniciem sibi. And the Italians say, Un' Ostinato Cor merta ogni male.


FAB. LXXXIX. The Image to be Sold.
IN a Market, an Artist that had a Wooden Mercury to sell, had been long
expecting a Chapman; but seeing none come, he called aloud to invite Buyers,
Who Will purchase a bountiful God that will make him Rich? Of whom one that was
passing by, asked, Friend, said he, Why, if your God have this admirable
Quality, would you part with him for Money, since you may gain enough by
keeping him? Because, Sir, answered the Carver, it is ready Cash I want, and he
does not enrich us but with time.

Against such as are greedy of Gain, and Irreligious.

FAB. XC. The Fishers that caught great Fishes.
CErtain Fishers throwing their Nets into the Sea, caught many great Fishes,
which they drew out upon the Shore; but the little ones slipped through the
Net-holes and escaped.

Easily may the Men of small Fortunes, save themselves in some eminent Calamity
which befalls a Country, whilst the Men of great Estates seldom escape
Scot-free.

FAB. XCI. The two Frogs.
TWO Frogs dwelt together in a Pond, which in Summer time drying up by the Suns
heat they went to another, and that also growing dry, they found a Well,
whereat rejoicing, Come, said one of them, let us go down into this Water: No,
answered his Comrade, For how should we get out from hence, should this
likewise happen to be dry?

No man should engage in any Affair, without a due Consideration of it
beforehand. Ut Labyrinthos non oportet ingredi sine filo quo securius possis
redire: ita non est suscipiendum negotium nisi prius perspecta ratione qua te
possis inde rursus explicare. Nequid inconsulto fiat. Do nothing rashly.

FAB. XCII. The Wolf and the Bear.
A Wolf asked a Bear, why he carried his Head hanging down on that manner? I
know not, answered the Bear, unless it be by reason of the stifness of my Neck.
Then why do you not arm your Head with Horns, demanded the Wolf, as you see the
Bulls-heads are, since your Forehead stands as proper for such Weapons as his?
Ay, said the Bear, but who is able to do that? Men, replied the Wolf, can do
many things, to whom Nature has been so liberal in her Gifts of Wit and
Industry. With little inquiry you may find, I presume, amongst them, an Artist
that will perform this thing to your satisfaction. The Credulous Bear did as
the Wolf advised him, and having found a Man that would undertake the Work, he
asked him what recompense he expected for his pains? Give me, said the
Operator, your Cropped Ears, for I can see nothing else about you fit for me to
ask, or you to give. With all my heart, answered the pleased Bear, I Will be
content to part with them, to have my Head adorned with a stately pair of
Horns. And so suffered the Torment of having his Ears cut off. Now, said the
Workman, I must bore two holes in that part of your Head, where you have a mind
the Horns should grow. How! cried the Bear, make holes in my Head? I should be
mad indeed, should I let you do that. Then it is impossible, continued the Man,
for me to graft them on. I had rather choose to want these Horns, said the Bear
in a passion, for whose sake I have so foolishly lost my Ears, than endure all
that Misery for them, and so went vexed away.

The Ambition of dull Fools, affecting great things, never wants its due
Punishment.

FAB. XCIII. The Fig Tree and the Hawthorn.
A Fig Tree that was plentifully hung with green Fruit, growing by a Thorn
Bush, that happened to be then in its Flowers, was asked by the Thorn, in
Derision, where were its blossoms? Pray, said the Fig Tree, where is your Fruit?
Nature, answered the Thorn, has not bestowed on me any that is considerable:
Why then, demanded the Figtree, Do you in scorn require blossoms of me, when
you see me thus stored with Fruit, which is so much better than Flowers?

Honor can never be wanting to Virtue, though it may not at all times be so
conspicuous, as on some particular occasions: And so may base and contemptible
Things happen to appear in some Splendour for a time.

FAB. XCIV. The Cock, the Dog, and the Fox.


WEll pleased with each others Company were a Cock and a Dog, taking a Journey
together, and at Evening the Cock flew up into a Tree, whilst the Dog slept in
the bottom, which was hollow. But when the Cock crew in the Night time, as his
Custom is, a Fox that happen to hear him, came running thither, and standing
under the Tree, desired him to come down, that he might embrace him for the
good Music he made. The Cock perceiving his drift, entreated him first to wake
his Fellow-Traveller, who slept there underneath, and he would prepare to wait
on him. The Fox called aloud, supposing it another Cock, and with his noise
alarmed the Dog, who rushing out upon the Fox, soon killed him.

Wise men, when in danger of their more powerful Enemies, engage them by
subtilty with others, who are better able to deal with them.

Fallite fallentes: ex magna part profanum
Sunt genus: in Laqueos quos posuere cadant.
And the Italians say, Chi con fraud camina in fraud intoppa.
He who practices Deceit, suffers by it.


FAB. XCV. The Deer and the Lion.
HOping to avoid the Hunters, an affrighted Deer fled for shelter into a Cave,
in which there happened to be a Lion reposing himself, who seeing so good a
prey, quickly seized her; the Deer crying out, Oh unhappy Wretch! that to save
my self from falling into the hands of Men, am run into the Mouth of the most
merciless Creature in the World.

Many striving to avoid one Danger, run themselves into another.

Incidet in Syllam, capiens vitare Charibdem.
FAB. XCVI. The Tortois and Jupiter.
ABout the beginning of the World, when Jupiter was graciously bestowing on all
Creatures the Gifts which they could desire of him, the Tortois entreated him
to grant her the Benefit of carrying her House along with her, wheresoever she
should go. Jupiter asking her why she had a mind to be always troubled with so
heavy a Burden? I had rather, answered she, carry such a Weight, than having
an ill Neighbor, not be able to remove from him on occasion.

We should make haste from bad Neighborhood, though we suffer a prejudice by the
removal. The poet Hesiod says, (...).
Damnum malus vicinus, ut bonus magnum adjumentum.


FAB. XCVII. The Hog and the Horse.
AS a Horse, equipped in all his richest Caparisons, was marching on his Journey
into the Wars, he was thus in scorn called to by a Hog, lying in a muddy hole,
near the Road: Oh, thou Fool! said he, why do thou make such haste to thy
Destruction? Do thou not consider that thou may, perhaps, be slain in the
Battle, to which thou art going? Then stay thou here, said the Horse, and grow
fat, wallowing in the Mire, and in thine own beloved Nastiness; but know for a
certain, that e're long, thy Throat shall be cut with a Knife, and thou shall
so dye at home without Honor.

This Apologue, upbraids those Sloathful Persons who rather choose to live at
home, wallowing in all manner of Luxury and Vice, than go abroad to acquire
Honor.

FAB. XCVIII. The Pensive, and the Cheerful Traveller.
TWO Men traveling together, one of them was in continual Thought how he
should do to live, whilst the other still went on cheerfully, in hopes of
better Fortune. This latter was told by his Grave Comrade, That he wondered how
he could be so light-hearted; For I, said he, am hourly perplexed with Cares
and Troubles, to think with my self which way I shall steer, to my advantage,
the course of my life. But I have long since, said his Companion, settled that
matter. And being demanded how? I shall ever, replied he, faithfully and
diligently proceed on in those Methods wherein I have always been hitherto bred
up, and leave the Event to God, to dispose of all things as he shall best
please. The Grave Man hearing this, told him with a scornful smile, He had
known many, who relying on God, had found themselves at last short of their
expectations. And then falling upon the Subject of his Doubts, and of the
Incertainty of the things of this World, began to have a Dreadful Apprehension
of his being Blind; when with a sudden kind of Horror, O Immortal Gods! cried
he, what would become of me, should I lose my Sense of Seeing? In which
Imagination, he had a mind to try how he could be able to go, in case of such a
Calamity: And advancing a little before his Companion, he shut his Eyes very
close, walking on blindfold, but with great caution, for fear of stumbling;
thus going he happened to miss the sight of a Purse of Money, lost by some
Person Traveling that way, which was soon espied, and taken up by his Comrade
following him, who passed the rest of his Journey more pleasantly than till that
time he had done.

This Fable blames not a Prudent Consideration and Industry, it condemns only
those anxious and perplexed Counsels, from whence seldom any good Actions
result; but rather such as are afterward repented of. The Heathens of Old,
attributed to Fortune the disposal of all human Affairs; and of this Opinion
was the Author of this Adage.

(...).
Malo Fortunae Guttam, quam Mentium Dolium.
A Drop of Fortune, is better than a Tub full of Care.
Tribullus says, Non opibus mentes Hominum curaeque levantur,
Nam Fortuna sua tempora lege gerit.


And a great Philosopher says, Omnes Reges ex Servis, omnes Servi ex Regibus
oriuntur. Omnia ista longa varietas miscuit, and sursum, atque deorsum Fortuna
versavit.

FAB. XCIX. The Lion grown Old.


A Lion, who while he was in his prime strength and vigor, had created himself
diverse Enemies, was sufficiently punished for it in his feeble Old Age; Many of
those Beasts then coming to gratify their Revenge on him, for the several
Injuries they remembered to have received of him. The Boar wounded him with his
Tusks; the Bull with his Horns goared him; the Ram gave him violent blows with
his Head; And lastly, the very Ass, willing to quit his Epithete of dull, and
either to express his resentment of some old unkindnesses, or after the Example
of several others, treated him not only with rude and insolent Language, but
with diverse severe kicks. Which cruel usage, extremely afflicting the Royal
Lion; Many of these, said he, who have thus beat and abused me, have done it,
perchance, but to take satisfaction for some Injuries, whereby I may, by my
Ministers, have incensed them against me: But there are others here, to whom I
have often been kind, and have obliged by very considerable Favors, and yet
they not only refuse to assist me in this Exigency, but put themselves into the
number of those who persecute me; so that I find, I have been to blame, for
having provoked so many to be my Enemies, and more to blame for having confided
in such false Friends, that basely desert me in my greatest Distress.

This Fable is a Caution to such as have attained to some great Offices and
Power, that they demean themselves therein with Prudence and Moderation, and
not strive to make themselves great by the ruin and spoil of Poor Men, lest by
some turn of Fortune, they happening afterward to be thrown down from that
Greatness, should be exposed to the Mercy of those whom they have injured, and
so be treated as they have been accustomed to treat others. For this reason,
Namertes the Lacedemonian, when a Courtier was persuading him that he had many
Friends, I cannot tell what to judge of it, answered he, but must expect till
Adversity make the Trial for me; than which nothing can make a truer
distinction of Friends. Very well has a French Poet expressed himself on this
Subject.

L'on ne se souvient que du mal,
L' Ingratitude regne au Monde;
L' Injure se grave en Metal,
Et le Bienfait s' ecrit en Onde.
Of Good we no remembrance have,
Yet love Ingratitude and Spite;
On Brass our Injuries Engrave,
And Favors still on Water write.
FAB. C. The Fox and the Ape.
AN Ape meeting a Fox, and observing him to be in good plight, having a plump
Body, and his Coat lying smooth and sleeck, Ah! How much more bountiful, said
she, has Nature been to thee, than to me, for she seems to have mademe, as it
were, in spite, with a kind of exquisite Deformity. The Prudent Fox willing to
convince her of her Error, invited her to walk on a while with him. I Will wait
on you, answered the Ape, tho I confess I am ashamed to be seen on the Road,
thus ragged, lean, and half naked as I am, with you, who are so handsome and
well clad. They had not gone far, before they met an Elephant that had lost his
Teeth; of whom the Fox enquired, what force was able to break Teeth of that
mighty strength, which his, by the roots seemed to have been? It was the
Covetousness of men, answered he, who having long pursued me with fury, being
greedy of such a Booty, I therefore thrust them in betwixt the Trunks of two
Trees growing near to each other, and at the Expense of what they so earnestly
sought after, I ransomed my Life. Going a little further, they espied coming
toward them, a Beaver bleeding that had newly lost his Testicles. The Fox
asking the occasion of his misfortune, understood by the poor Creature, that he
himself had bit them off, being sensible that for their sakes, Men hunted him,
and would have taken and killed him, Walking on, they were met by a Peacock,
whose Wings and Tail having been stripped of their Feathers, it was a hard thing
to know what Bird he was: For which loss the Fox pitying him, desired to be
informed who had, on that manner, plundered him? Men, said he, taken with the
Beauty of my Glorious Plumes, caught me, and tore them off, to adorn their own
pride with them. When they had left him, they went forwards and found a
Vulture, whose Breast was all naked and raw, having had his downy Skin thus
barbarously flee'd off alive; whom the Fox commiserating, entreated to tell how
he had been brought into that deplorable Condition? Certain Curious Men, said
he, coveting my soft Down, surprised me by their subtle Tricks, and used me as
you see. They had scarce lost sight of the Vulture, when they met a Man loaded
with several Bundles, followed by a small Troop of Children, ill clad, and his
Wife bringing up the rear. He was courteously saluted by the Fox, and asked
whither he was going, and whence he came with that Train. Alas! answered he,
whither I go, I know not, but I come with this my distressed Family from a
Conquered City, lately most flourishing; abounding in Riches, and flowing in a
plenty of all things, which now by the fury of a Powerful Enemy is utterly
destroyed, and in which Calamity, I, from a Wealthy Citizen, have been reduced
to Beggary. Do thou see? said the Fox to the Ape, that Riches and Plenty
which are wont to raise their Minds, and so much please those who enjoy them,
could not make their Possessors happy* Wherefore I advise thee so to dispose
thy self, that thy Poverty may neither grieve thee, nor make thee ashamed.

Archilochus the Parian, that Celebrated Lyric Poet, of all whose Works we have
only some small Fragments remaining, and (who lived in the time when Gyges
Reigned in Lydia, that Murdered his Master King Candaules, for the enjoyment of
his Queen, whom he afterward Married.) This same Archilochus, I say, writ
Fables of this kind in Verse, and first incroduced the Fox speaking in them,
And there is the beginning of a Fable of his related by Ammonius, the
Philosopher of Alexandria, in his (...) which might possibly have been to the
same Effect, with the fore-recited Fable of the Learned Joachim Camerarius;
which shows that in Wealth and Abundance, there are generally more Mischiefs
attending, and more Dangers, than in Poverty and Want. It was this Archilochus
that wrote so sharply in Iambic Verse against Lycambes, whose Daughter he had
Espoused, tho her Father afterward refused to deliver her to him. This was the
occasion of that Satyr, which made Lycambes hang himself.

Hence Horace says, Archilochum proprio rabies armavit Jambo.


The end of the First Century.
The Table.
1. THE Cock and the Precious Stone. 2. The Heart, the Sheep, and the Wolf. 3.
The Nightingale and the Wolf. 4. The Parrot and the Cat. 5. The Rose and the
Amaranthus. 6. The Mountain and the Mouse. 7. The Fly that was drowned. 8. The
Magpy and the Eagle. 9. The Ass that found no end of his Labors. 10. The Wolf
and the Porcupine. 11. The Mice and the Cat. 12. The Brother and the Sister.
13. The Crow and the Fox. 14. The Apes and the Bird. 15. The Hunter and the
Lion. 16. The Do and the Fawn. 17. The Charitable Hedghog. 18. The Fox and the
Wolf. 19. The Countryman and the Serpent. 20. The Tempest. 21. The Trifler. 22.
The Eel and the Serpent. 23. The Fox and the Grapes. 24. The Mole rebuked. 25.
The Lion, the Mouse and the Fox. 26. The Wolf and the Lamb. 27. The Mouse and
the Kite. 28. The Boy and the Scorpion. 29 The Fowler and the Partridge. 30.
The Bear and the Fox. 31. The Countryman and the Be. 32. The Fox and the
Carved Head. 33. The Boy and his Bird. 34. The Physician that would have
excused himself. 35. The two Men amongst the Apes. 36. The Lion in Love. 37.
The Dog that feared the Ram. 38. The Cat and the Cheese. 39. The Iay stripped.
40. The Hawk and the Dove. 41. The Spider and the Gout. 42. The Shipwrack'd Man
and the Sea. 43. The Hungry Dogs. 44. The Beasts, the Fowls, and the Fishes.
45. The Gourd and the Pine. 46. The Fox that changed his Wishes. 47. The
Covetous Man and his Apples. 48. The Dog and the Vulture. 49. The Fly and the
Ant. 50. The Sheep and the Dog. 51. The two Kinsmen going to Law. 52. The Sick
Kite. 53. The Ass and the Boar. 54. The Wood and the Countryman. 55. The Heart
and the Vine. 56. The Worm and the Fox. 57. The Wolves and the Sheep. 58. The
Wolf, the Fox, and the Apes. 59. The Sow and the Wolf. 60. The Thief and the
Dog. 61. The Frogs desiring a King. 62. The Thief and the Sun. 63. The Gamester
and the Swallow. 64. The Pigeons and the Hawk. 65. The Cuckoo and the Small
Birds. 66. The Fox and the Dragon. 67. The Sheep and its Shepherd. 68. The
Lioness and the Fox. 69. The Old Man and Death. 70. The Ass, the Ox, the Mule,
and the Camel. 71. Prometheus and Epimetheus Peopling the Earth. 72. The two
Cocks. 73. The Bees and Jupiter. 74. The Oak and the Reed. 75. The Lamb and the
Wolf. 76. The Ape and the Fox. 77. The Grasshopper and the Owl. 78. The Fisher
that Played on his Pipe. 79. The Cuckoo and the Nightingale. 80. Death and an
Old Man. 81. The League between the Wolves and Sheep. 82. The Covetous Man and
his Money. 83. The Parrot. 84. The Stag and a Wounded Greyhound. 85. The Birds
that would have had a Commonwealth. 86. The Servant and the Ass. 87. The
boasting Lamp. 88. The Swallow and the Small Birds. 89. The Image to be Sold.
90. The Fishers that caught great Fishes. 91. The two Frogs. 92. The Wolf and
the Bear. 93. The Fig Tree and the Hawthorn. 94. The Cock, the Dog, and the
Fox. 95. The Deer and the Lion. 96. The Tortois and Jupiter. 97. The Hog and
the Horse. 98. The Pensive, and the Cheerful Traveller. 99. The Lion grown Old.
100. The Ape and the Fox.
FINIS.
Mythologia Ethica: OR, AESOPIAN FABLES. The Second Century.

The PREFACE TO The Second Century OF FABLES. Taken from Aphthonius the
Sophist's (...).
WE owe the first Invention of Fable to the Poets, but it is commonly made use
of by the Orators, for inculcating their Arguments into their Auditory. A Fable
is an invented Speech or Tale, which represents the Truth by some pleasant
Image. These Fables were anciently called either Sybaritic, Cilician, or
Cyprian; Names taken from the Inventors of them, or Countries where they
Inhabited; but because Aesop far out-did all others in Writing Fables, he got
the Credit to have them called Aesopian, or Aesopic. Fable is said to be
threefold, Rational, Moral, and Mixed. Rational, is when some thing is feigned
to be done by Men: Moral, is when Men's Manners are imitated, by Creatures
wanting Reason. Mixed, is that which introduces both Rational and Irrational
Creatures. But the Admonition or Morality, for sake of which you invent the
Fable, if you begin with it (as we often see it done by Phaedrus) it is called
(...), or Antefabalatio: But if the Moral come after the Fable (as in Aesop,
and most other Mythologists) it is called (...), or Adfabulatio.

Mythologia Ethica: OR, AESOPIAN FABLES. The Second Century.
FAB. I. Aesop, the Interpreter of a Will.


A Man dying, left three Daughters; One of which was very Beautiful, and loving
Gayety, that so she might entice Gallants to admire her. The second a good
Huswife, extremely delighting in a Country-life. The youngest unhandsom, and a
great Wine-drinker. The Old Man made his Wife Executrix of his last Will and
Testament, but on Condition, that she should distribute his whole Estate, real
and personal, among his three Daughters equally, and yet in such manner, as
that neither of them should possess or enjoy what was given them; and that so
soon as they should cease to have the proportions which fell to their
respective shares, they should pay to their Mother a hundred Sertertia. The
Rumor of this thing was spread over all the City of Athens; for the careful
Mother consulted the most eminent Lawyers, but none could tell which way they
should not possess their several Legacies, and yet receive the Benefit of them;
and then, how they could pay such a sum to their Mother, when they could not
come to meddle with any thing. After much time was spent, without being able to
dive into the true meaning of the Will, the Mother called Witnesses, and waving
the Critical Interpretation of the Words, she undertook to dispose things on
this manner: She gave the Amorous Lady the fine Clothes, the Women's Jewels and
Toys, the Plate belonging to the Bathes, and the like; also the smooth-faced
Eunuchs to wait on her. To the good Huswife, she distributed the Country House,
the Fields and Flocks, the Laboring Servants, Oxen, Horses, with all the
Necessary Furniture and Implements, proper for a Country Life. And for the
Drinker, she reserved the Cellers well stored with good Old Wines, a
Magnificent House, with noble Gardens, Arbours, and Summer-houses, to drink in.
When she would have Confirmed this Distribution, in presence of her Friends and
Acquaintance, Aesop, on a sudden, crouding in through the midst of them, Ah!
said he, Were it possible for the Father to have a sense of this, after Death,
how sorry, and how much ashamed would he be, that in all Athens there should
not be a man able to explain the meaning of his Will? He then being desired by
them to unriddle it, began thus to clear it before them all: Give, said he, the
City-House, Gardens, Orchards and Wines, to her that is inclined to a Country
Life: The Rich Clothes, Jewels, Plate, etc. let the Bowsing Lady have: And to
her that delights to spend her Life in Luxury and Wantonness, order the Fields,
Vines, Flocks, Shepherds, and Plowmen. On this manner, neither of them will
enjoy what is suitable to their Humors. The unhandsom Daughter, that loves
good Liquor, will sell all her Jewels for Wine. The Wanton Lady will part with
her Lands to buy Gaudy Clothes. And she that delights in Good Huswifery, and
Country Affairs, being dissatisfied with her Splendid City-Dwelling and
Furniture, will dispose of it. Thus none of them will possess what was given
them, so that when they shall have sold their several shares, they may pay
their Mother the sum appointed her by her Husbands Will. Thus the Prudence of
one Man discovered what was a Mystery to so many.

It often happens, that we find more Wit in one Man, than in a great Company.
Homines non numerandi sed ponderandi. Men are not to be reckoned by their
Number, but by their true Weight and Value. Un seul homine a sou vent plus de
Lumiere, que tout un Peuple.

FAB. II. The Apes going to build a City.
Heretofore, the Apes at a general Assembly of them, took Counsel together
about the building them a City: But when they had prepared all things requisite
for so great a Work; one of the most ancient and grave of them all, advised
them to desist from their Enterprise, and made them sensible that they should
be in far greater Danger than they were now of being taken and destroyed by
Men, their Mortal Enemies, if once they were enclosed within Walls.

We must have a care of doing that at present, which may be of great mischief
to us hereafter. It also admonishes us to take Counsel of the ancient and
knowing Persons, whose Prudence may be able to carry us with safety, through
that, which the rashness of those who are unexperienced, might cause us to
miscarry in.

FAB. III. The Tree drawn by Oxen.
THe Trunk of a great Tree, drawn by Oxen, complained to them on this manner: O
Ungrateful Oxen! How often have I fed and nourished you with my tender leaves,
and sheltred you as well from the rigorous Colds, as scorching Heats, with my
late spreading Boughs, and yet you now cruelly drag me through the Dirt, and
over the sharp Stones? Is this the reward of all my kindness? Have I ever
deserved this ill usage from you? Alas! answered the Oxen, we are constrained
to do this, by the Goad which drives us on against our Wills. The Tree, with
this reason, was satisfied of their Innocence, and forgave them.

We should not be angry with those who offend us, when they are compelled to it
by others.

FAB. IV. The Dog and the Crocadile.
IT is reported, that the Dogs which drink at the River Nile, are forced to lap
running by the bank side, for fear that by the Crocadiles they should be pulled
into the Water. On which manner, as a Dog began both his Career and Draught, he
was thus called to by a Crocadile, Be not afraid, said she to him, but stay
and drink at your own leisure. That I would, with all my Heart, answered the
Dog, did I not know you have a Months mind to be making a Meal of my sweet
Flesh.

Whosoever gives ill Counsel to Prudent and Cautious Men, both loses his
Labor, and hecomes also ridiculous for it. Si Prudens esse cupis in futurum
prospectum intend. Seneca. If you desire to become Wise, have an eye to the
danger that may befall you.

FAB. V. The Asses Embassy to Jupiter.
THE Asses sent Ambassadors to Jupiter, beseeching him to ease them of their
continual Labor and Misery. Jupiter willing to let them see it could not be
granted, promised he would answer their Desires, so soon as they, by pissing,
should be able to make a continual running Stream. The Asses were so well
satisfied with this return of their Embassy, thinking the Deity had spoke
seriously, that they have ever since observed it as a general Rule amongst
them, when any Ass sees where another has pissed, he makes a stop to do it also
in the same place.

This Fable is to be used to those Lazy Persons, who without real cause, will
be lamentably complaining of their hard Labor. Si quando Fatuo, says Tully,
delectari volo, non est mihi long quaerendus, me rideo.

FAB. VI. The Pigeon and the Magpy.
WHen a Pigeon was asked by a Magpy, what could induce her still to make her
Nest in the same place, knowing that her Young were always taken away from
thence? She answered, It Is my Simplicity.

An Honest Man is easily deceived; for he meaning others no harm, goes plainly
on with his Affairs, and considers not that cunning Knaves are often lying in
wait to surprise him.

Yet Horace says, Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
Non eget Mauri jaculis nec arcu, etc.


FAB. VII. The Frogs that feared the fighting of two Bulls.


A Frog seeing two Bulls fight: Alas, cried she, what Calamity do I foresee
impending over our heads. And being demanded by another, whence she apprehended
this ill Omen? Since they were striving for the dominion of the Heard; and that
they, with the Cows, would live far enough off from them. It Is true, answered
the first Frog, they are a People whose Territory lies remote, and are of a
separate Species from us. But he of the two who shall be expelled the Empire of
the Woods, will certainly fly, and may possibly take our Lake for one of his
lurking places, and here tread and squeeze us to death with his hard Hoofs. On
this manner does the Quarrel relate to us.

Humiles laborant, ubi Potentes dissident: The Common People feel the smart,
when great Princes are at variance. Mala publica in Plebem recidunt: Public
Calamities fall on the common People.

FAB. VIII. The Father and his two Daughters.
A Father having two Daughters whom he had Married; one to a Gardener, and the
other to a Potter, went on a time to the Gardners Wife, and asked her how she
did? Very well, answered she, if God would be graciously pleased to send some
seasonable Showrs to raise our Herbs and Plants, that are almost scorched up
for want of Rain. From thence he went to the Potters, and asking that Daughter
how all things went with her? She told him, very well, if God in his Mercy
would be pleased but to continue the Fair Weather to dry their Pots. But Child,
replied the Father, if thou desire Sunshine, and thy Sister Rain, with which of
you shall I join my Prayers?

Who undertake two contrary things at the same time, do justly deserve
disappointment in both.

FAB. IX. The Serpents Tail and other Members.
NO Arguments could prevail with the Tail of a Serpent, but it would needs have
its turn of Superiority, for sometime to precede and lead the others Members.
They rationally urged the impossibility of it, the Tail having neither Eyes nor
Nose to guide it, as other Creatures had: But nothing would satisfy till it
had its will. The tail then governed, and led the whole Body, but being blind,
draged it till it fell into a deep Pit of Stones, cutting and bruising all the
rest of its Members. In which distress, the afflicted Tail after this humble
manner begged of the Head. Good Sir, be pleased to help us, for I have
undertaken a presumptuous thing, and by my ill Conduct plunged my self into a
Misfortune, from whence, without your prudent assistance, I shall never be able
to redeem my self, nor those whom I have drawn into the same Calamity with me.

This Fable points at arrogant Fools who are often murmuring at the Government,
and boasting what politic Measures they would take, were they at the Helm.
Plutarch relates a Fable to the same purpose, in the History of Agis and
Cleomenes.

FAB. X. The Cuccow and the Sparrow-Hawk.
IN a scornful manner was a Cuccow upbraided by a Sparrow-Hawk, that not being
inferior to him in size of Body, nor unlike him in Color, he should content
himself to feed on Worms and Mice, and not rather choose to feast on other
Birds, as himself did. But it happened a few days after, that the Sparrow-Hawk
following a Pigeon, was taken by a Countryman, who hung him up to scare away
other Birds of Prey; whom when the Cuccow espied, come to that ignominious end.
Ah! said he, how much better had it been for thee to have been feeding now on
Worms and Mice, than by feasting on Birds, brought this Calamity on thy self.

He who honestly and industriously lives on what is his own, is more happy and
secure than he who preys on the spoils of others.

FAB. XI. The Shepherd the Wolf and the Fox.
ON a time a Shepherd observed that a certain Creature which he could not well
distinguish, by reason of the distance from him, danced to the sound of his
Bagpipe. Some few days after he perceived him in the same posture again, and
had not continued at it half an hour, but he perceived a Fox come toward him,
looking very pleasantly, and telling him, that he brought such News as would
(he doubted) scarce gain credit with him; and seeing the Shepherd listen to
him, I come to you, proceeded the Fox, in behalf of the Wolf, who on any terms
would be glad to see a Reconciliation of the Ancient Enmity betwixt the Sheep,
and those of his Race. He condemns his nearest Relations and Friends, that
cannot live with Creatures so peaceable and mild, that they may be justly
termed the very Pattern of Goodness and Innocence. And besides, he is so much
in love with your Bagpipe, that hearing the Harmony you make with it, though so
far off, he cannot forbear dancing; if therefore you please to permit him to
come to you, you will find him of a most sweet Nature, and will rejoice in his
Friendship. The Shepherd who knew well enough, the good understanding which for
a long time had been betwixt those two Beasts, thus answered him. Though I have
some small suspicion of the Messenger, yet I am content the Wolf should come
hither, that he converse familiarly with the Sheep, and dance quietly to the
Music of my Pipe: But on condirion, he first consent that I draw out his Teeth,
and pair his Nails, they not being at all necessary for Conversation, nor for
Dancing. The Fox perceiving his craft detected, quickly withdrew without
making any reply.

The Applause which comes from the Mouth of an Enemy is dangerous. An Enemy
that humbles himself too much, makes himself suspected. From the Messenger may
be conjestured the Goodness or Illness of the Person that sent him. A Man
should take care to prevent if he can his Enemies approaching him with a
greater strength than what he himself has. Kind Messages sent from an Enemy, if
listened to, are commonly more hurtful than profitable; so that it is most
secure not to give credit to them. La dolcezza de i Regali, e le belle parole
sono sonniferi con quali^ s' addormentano li Nemici per sorprenderli piu
facilmente. Presents and kind Messages are Opiate-potions to lull our Enemies
asleep, that we may the more easily surprise them.

FAB. XII. The Jack-Daw that would have been a King.
JVpiter having an intention to establish a Kingdom among the Birds, gave them
a Summons to appear all before him; where signifying his pleasure, he raised a
great Strife and Emulation amongst them, who should appear at the Election day
the handsomest; for he promised to bestow the Diadem on the most Beautiful.
This put them all upon using their utmost skill, for their neatest adorning.
Straight to the Fountains, Ponds, and Lakes they repair, that there, as in
looking Glasses, they might see to place every Feather in its due order, and
all those which were not to their Minds, they pulled out and threw away.
Thither also went the poor Jack-Daw, tho with no great opinion of himself; but
finding a vast quantity of scattered Feathers about the Waters, he subtly
contrived to make his best Advantage of them, so gathered the choicest and
fitted them on himself in a most delightful order; and no sooner was he come to
the Election, but he drew on him the Eyes of all the other Birds, and those
likewise of the supreme Judge himself, admiring that Beautiful variety. The
Silver Swan gave place to him; the proud Peacock with his Glorious Plumes, in
comparison of him, seemed despiseaable: Nay the very Eagle with all his
briskness, was slighted by the rest, in respect of his Bravery, and scarce had
the confidence to stand in competition with him. But as Jupiter was about to
deliver him the Scepter, the Owl earnestly beholding him, espied some of the
Feathers he had thrown aside, and coming up to him, pulled them off; all the
other Birds, by his Example did the like, snatching away their own Feathers,
and left the miserable Jack-Daw to be the scorn, and laughing stock of the
whole Assembly.

He that usurps what is properly belonging to others, adorns himself with their
Goods, and glories in the Injustice, does seldom enjoy them long; and when
fully discovered, commonly suffers Punishment and public Imfamy for it. This
also may be fitly applied to those who by Impudent Pretenses, own the
performance of some great Work they never did, or assume the glory of an
honorable Exploit really due to others.

FAB. XIII. The Bees and the Drones.


SOme laborious Bees had industriously made their Combs in a hollow Tree,
which certain sluggish Drones having found, laid claim to: This Contest was
very high at first, but after their heat of Argument was over, it was resolved
on both sides to have it decided by Law, where a grave Wasp was Judge. Who
having prudently informed himself of the nature of both the Pretenders, offered
this proposal to them: Since, said he, your Bodies do resemble one another,
and your color is not much unlike, which makes the matter to be justly in
dispute; And lest I should imprudently err against the Oath, I have religiously
taken to administer equal Justice to all. Take Hives and therein make new
Combs, that by their shapes, and taste of the Honey compared with this, the
makers of these now in dispute may be known. Which condition being readily
accepted by the Bees, but by the Drones absolutely refused; the just Judge
pronounced this Sentence. It Is now very plain who cannot, and who really did
make these Honey Combs; I there restore to the Bees the fruits of their own
labors.

This Fable, says Phaedrus, I had passed over in silence, if the Drones having
appealed to the Law, had not afterward refused to submit to the Judges
decision. Opus Artificicem probat. The work shows the Artist.

FAB. XIV. Aesop and the Countryman.
A Rich Chuff, the Master of considerable Flocks of Sheep, had Ewes which
brought forth Lambs with Heads resembling Humane Shape, and being affrighted at
the Portent, he ran troubled to the Augurs to consult them about the meaning of
this Prodigy. One said, it pointed at the Masters life, and advised that
victims should be offered for appeasing the Divine Anger. Another affirmed his
Wife to be an Adultress, and that this signified his Children were
Illigitimate, but that great sacrifices might avert the impending Mischiefs; in
short, there were many different Opinions amongst them, which served but to
aggravate the poor Man's distraction about it. By chance in the crowd of
Listners after this Novelty, was Aesop an Old Man of an ill shape, but one
seldom mistaken in his Opinion of Natural things: O Countryman! said he, would
you have your Imagination and all your doubts cleared concerning this strange
Portent? Marry your Shepherds and you shall see no more such Prodigies.

A Learned Experience is better and surer than conjecture, and all the skill of
Southsayers. Experientia praestantior art.

FAB. XV. The tall Trees and the Shrubs.
MAny Trees grew together in a Wood, some of which being tall and straight
without knots, and others knotty, low, and crooked; these latter were often
derided by the former for their want of Beauty and Comeliness. But it happened
that the Master intending to build him a new House, caused all the handsome
Trees to be cut down, and left the ugly shrubs standing. Well, said they
modestly to those who had formerly insulted over them; How much better is it
now to be a low ill shaped Tree, than a Beautiful one?

This Apologue admonishes those who are not so handsome as they would be, not
to be troubled at it, since the Beauty of many Persons has been their ruin.

FAB. XVI. The Swan and the Stork.
NEar the very approach of her Death, a Swan sang more sweetly than ever she
was accustomed to do; whose charming Music a Stork admiring at such an
unseasonable time, asked her the reason of it? This I do, answered she, because
I have cleared my mind of all the Anxious thoughts of this Life, which way I
should dispose of my self; and I shall now finish all the Troubles I have so
long labored under, in searching after Food for my Nourishment, and avoiding
all the cunning stratagems of the Fowlers against my own Life, and the Lives of
my dear young.

We should not fear Death, by which all the Miseries and Calamities of this
World are dissolved.

FAB. XVII. The Fly and the Mule.
A Saucy Fly sitting on the Perch of a Chariot, called out to the Mule that
drew it, Why are you so Lazy? said he, will you not mend your pace? Take heed I
twinge you not by the Neck, and make you bestir your self a little more nimbly
than you do. Poor Creature! answered the Mule, I value not thy words a rush, I
only fear him, who sitting in the Box with his Whip in one hand, and in the
other holding the Reins, which being fixed to my Bit, now covered with my
Foam, guide me how, and which way he pleases; but as for thee, thou may cease
thy impertinence; for I know when to walk, run, or step, without thy insolent
directions.

This Fable shows how much such a one is to be despised, who having no ability,
will on every occasion be using his vain menaces and boasting of his mighty
Power. Graviter decipiuntur, qui putant se aliquid esse, cum nihil sint.

FAB. XVIII. The Lapwing and the Parrat.
'TWas mere Emulation to see the Felicity of a Parrat, who was kept in a rich
Cage adorned with Gold, and hanging in a Kings Palace, that provoked an
Arrogant Lapwing thus to accost her. My Plumes, said she, are no less Beautiful
than thine, and I, methinks, excel thee in the tuneableness of my Voice; but in
the real honor of our Persons, there can be no comparison: for I was certainly
born to Dignity, coming into the World with this Princely Crown on my Head; and
yet thou wantonest it here in Ease and Luxury, being daily fed from the Kings
own Table; whilst I am forced with a continual Anxiety to search about for any
living. I will therefore go to the King and offer him my Service, that I may at
least enjoy an equal Felicity with thee, and divert him with my pleasant
Harmony; she then flying to the King, was put into a Cage and kept. But after
she had thus lived a while, she grew sensible of her miserable Captivity, and
the narrow bounds she was confined to, the Thought whereof soon brake her
heart, and dying she sighed out these last words. O Dearest Liberty! which I so
long have wanted, thou art a Jem invaluable: For nothing this World contains
can make a fit Comparison with thee.

Liberty cannot be sold for Money. When Leonidas the Spartan General, with four
hundred Grecians opposed the mighty Army of Xerxes King of Persia, at the
straights of Thermopylae, which consisted of ten hundred thousand Men; the
valiant Leonidas advised his Soldiers to die bravely fighting, after his
Example, rather than lose their Liberty, and become Slaves to the Persians; and
to encourage them further, told them, they should all sup together that night
with Pluto.

FAB. XIX. The Fox and the Women.
AS Fox was running through a Town, and saw certain Women eating Hens. Surely
cried he, a miserable Creature am I; for should I but do, what you are now
doing, how many Dogs, and what a noise and uproar should I presently have at my
Heels? We, answered one of those Women, eat that which is our own, but thou
boldly live on what thou stealest from others.

We cannot expect to have the same Disposal of other Men's Goods, which the true
Owner have.

FAB. XX. The Wise Lion.
JUst as a Lion had killed a Heifer, a Thief coming up boldly to him, demanded
his share of it; I would give it you answered the Lion, were you not accustomed
to take what you can lay hold on, without asking leave; and so he put by the
Saucy Claimer. Presently after, an honest Man happening to come the same way,
and seeing that terrible Beast, was retiring back with Speed: But the Lion
having espied him, be not afraid, said he, speaking with all the mildness he
could. Come forward boldly and take the share, which is justly due to your
Modesty and Virtue. Then so soon as he had divided his Prey, he retreated into
the Wood, that he might give the Man liberty to draw near and take it.

This says Phaedrus was an admirable Example, and an Action worthy of great
praise; but now a days, bold Men and Thieves grow rich, while honest modest
Men are left to starve with Poverty. Sunt etiam sua Praemia laudi.

FAB. XXI. The Crow and the Swan.
A Crow observing the beauty of a Swan, was ambitious of attaining to so pure a
Color; and concluding it to be the effect of his continual Bathing and Washing
himself in the Brooks; This imprudent Crow left the Altars where he, on the
entrails of Beasts which were there Sacrificed, had always been nourished, and
thence forward spent his time by the Lakes and Rivers: But tho he was there
continually washing himself, he could by no diligence change the color of his
Feathers, and at last wanting his usual good Food, he pined away and dyed.

No manner of living can change Nature. Naturam expellas Furca licet usque
recurret.

FAB. XXII. The Wallet, or Jupiter and Momus.


TO examine into the Grounds and Reasons of Momus's quarrel against the Works
of the Creation; Jupiter on a time had all Creatures Summoned to appear before
him, commanding every one freely to declare what faults they could find in
their own Composures, which should immediately be remedied. And seeing the Ape
near him; Come, said Jupiter, let us begin with you. Look upon the Fabric and
Beauty of all your fellow Creatures; make a comparison thereof with your own,
and then tell me what you would have amended, and it shall be done. Sir,
answered the Ape, I am very well satisfied, not only with my own elegant shape
of Body, but likewise with the more noble faculties of my Mind; and have
nothing in me which can reproach me, as I may modestly enough presume to say,
before this Honorable Assembly. But, continued he, Here is my Brother the
Bear, who cannot much boast of his admirable Figure. I should be sorry he
should have an opportunity to see his Picture; I am sure he would scarce be in
love with it. For my part, said the Bear, I envy not the Shape, nor Beauty of
any Creature here present, being well enough pleased with my own. Then making
his Observations on the Elephant, showed it would be very necessary to have
some addition made to his Tail, also a great part of his Ears taken off, which
he might well enough spare; and that he being a large ill-shaped Bulk, without
any Comeliness, would require considerable Alterations. The Elephant hearing
this, gave him a grave repremand for the saucy Character he had bestowed on
him. But really it pitties me, added he, for our Friend the Whale, who has too
unweildy a Body, and which might therefore conveniently be reduced to a smaller
Demension. The Whale, in anger, protested he liked well enough his large size.
But, I must confess, pursued he, the Pismire is a Creature too little for its
Courage, Wit, and Industry; For so great Labors and continual Fatigue require
a stronger and more able Body to undergo them. You might spare your Remarques
on me, said the Pismire somewhat displeased; For the Symetry of my Body is, in
all respects, so completely adjusted to my Mind, that I desire it may remain
just as it is. And she further told them that in comparison of the Mite, she
seemed a huge Colossus. Jupiter then, after he had passed a pleasant Censure on
them all, for having so good Opinions of themselves, dismissed them.

Thus it is with us. Every one is a Linx to espy other Men's Faults, and a Mole
at finding out his own. We easily excuse every ill Action we our selves are
guilty of, but expose to all the World the Faults of our Neighbors. Jupiter
therefore is reported to have given every Man a Wallet, which he carries about
with him; In the back part whereof, we put all our own Follies and Errors out
of our Sights, but carry those of other men always before us. And hence it is
Catullus says, Non videmus id Manticae quod a tergo est. We look not into that
part of the Wallet which is behind us. And Phaedrus; Videre nostra mala non
possumus: Alii simul delinquunt, Censores sumus. We cannot see our own ill
Actions, but are quick Censurers of other Men, when we find them tardy. Suus
autem cuique attributus est error. But every Man must have his Faults laid on
his own back, therefore Persius, said well: Sed praecedenti spectutur Mantica
tergo.


FAB. XXIII. The Fable of Arion and the Dolphin.
ARion was an excellent Musician of Methymna in the Isle of Lesbos, greatly
beloved and admired for his Skill, by Periander King of Corinth. But he being
curious to see other Countries, left the King and traveled into Sicily and
Italy; where he not only acquired great Fame by his profound knowledge in that
Science of Music, and his exquisit performance thereof, but likewise gathered a
considerable stock of Money in his Progress. There he spent some time till
being desirous to return to Corinth, he Embarked on a Ship bound for that
place. But the Mariners longing to share the Treasure they knew he had on
board, resolved to kill him by the way. Arion perceiving their Design, for they
had laid violent hands on him, begged them to spare his Life, and he would
freely give them all he had; or at least prayed them to let him live till he
had sung one Song to his Harp, to lament the hardness of his Fortune; which the
Mariners, for sake of the Music, were content to grant. This excellent man
then taking his Instrument, went up to the highest part of the Ships Stern, and
sang aloud a Song in that Movement which the Greeks called Orthion, with
admirable Sweetness and Passion, like the dying Swan; hoping thereby to have
inclined the hard hearts of his Enemies to compassion. But when he had done,
and found them still obstinate; He threw himself immediately into the Sea with
his Harp in his Hand, where those Wretches left him to perish. But a very
strange and miraculous thing befell him; For a Dolphin, the Friend of Mankind,
swimming to him, took him on his back, and carrying him along upon the very
surface of the Water, landed him safely at the Promontory of Taenarus in the
Country of Laconia. From thence he went to Corinth, presenting himself before
King Periander, and told him all that had happened. The King not giving Credit
to his Story, sent him to Prison, till the Mariners of his Vessel, who were to
have brought him, were examined; But they confessed only, that they heard he
had been in Italy, much Honored and Caressed in all the Cities where he came;
and that he had there heaped up much wealth; which was all they knew of him.
When they would confess no further, Arion appeared to them, in the very same
Clothes, with his Harp, and all his Equipage, as he was when thrown into the
Sea. The sight of which so astonished the Mariners that they could not deny
the Fact, and soon after received the just punishment of their Crime. This
Fable was much talked of, both in Lesbos, and at Corinth, where they had the
Story most admirably represented in Brass, of a Harper dismounting from the
back of a Dolphin, on the Sea shore, near the Mountain Taenarus.

This Apologue shows us, that there is very often more Clemency and Pity to be
found among brute Creatures, than amongst some Men; who have no regard to any
thing, but to heap up Riches: Nor any other Testimony of Humanity in them
besides their shape. This is taken from the First Book of Herodotus, and the
Sixteenth Book of Aulus Gellius.

FAB. XXIV. The Man that desired his Corn should grow without Beards.
OF the Goddess Ceres, had a Husbandman obtained the answer of his Prayers,
that his Corn hereafter should grow without pricking Auns or Beards, that it
might not hurt the hands of his Reapers. But his Corn, so soon as it became
ripe, was eaten up by the small Birds, which made him repent of his imprudent
request. Alas! cried he, what advantage have I got by this, that for the
procuring a trifling convenience, have lost a fruitful Crop?

We may well bear with some small Inconvenience, especially when accompanied
with great Profits.

FAB. XXV. The Eagle, the Hawk, and the Kite.
THe Hawk and the Kite had a Dispute before the Eagle, which of them was most
Noble. The Kite very much insisted on the Bulkiness of his Body: and the Hawk
boasted of his strength, and the swiftness of his Flight. Now whilst each of
them expected the Eagles sentence in his particular favor; the Wise Judge thus
expressed himself. Go both of you, said he, abroad, and he of the two, that
shall bring home the best Prey, Him will I esteem to be the noblest Bird. The
Kite returned with a Mouse he had taken, and the Hawk presented a Pidgeon. It Is
plain now, said the Eagle, that the Hawk is so much more Noble than the Kite,
as a Pidgeon in goodness excels a Mouse.

Men are to be valued by their good Actions, and not by the Bulkiness of their
Estates. And the Italian saying is, Di ciascun l' Opra e dol valor il saggio.
Every man's Actions are the Test of his value.

FAB. XXVI. The Shepherd and his Dog.
A Shepherd had committed his Flocks to be carefully looked after by his Dog;
and that he might fairly discharge his Trust, fed him every day with good Meat.
But this ungrateful Cur, would frequently kill a Sheep, and privately eat it;
which when discovered by his Master, he seized him, and going about to kill
him. I beseech you Sir, cried the Dog, Spare my Life, Remember that I am your
Menial Servant; and rather kill the Wolf, who lies in wait continually to
destroy your Flocks. Nay, said the Shepherd, but thou more deservest Death than
the Wolf, for He is our Professed Enemy, and commits those Acts of Hostility
which we expect, and take the best care we can to prevent: Whilst thou being of
my Family, to whom I have entrusted so great a Charge, and who, under Color of
doing me good service, having basely betrayed me, do merit no favor at my
hands.

They more deserve to be punished who do us mischief under the Mask of
Friendship, than those who openly declare themselves to be our Enemies.

FAB. XXVII. The Father and the Son.
A Father exhorted his Son to apply himself more closely to his business; And
that he might leave off his vicious course of life, endeavored to paint out to
him, the Beauty of Virtue, and Deformity of Vice. Dear Father, answered the
ungracious Son, Pray spare your pains: for I have heard some Famous
Philosophers, as they were called, railing against Vice, and using their
cunningest Arguments to persuade to Virtue, and I would never believe them;
much less will I ever mind you, who are no Philosopher.

Those Persons who are naturally of Wicked Enclinations, will very seldom
forsake their vices by any Persuasions whatsoever.

FAB. XXVIII. The Camel, the Elephant, and the Ape.
THe Beasts going about to choose a King, the Camel and the Elephant stood
Candidates for the Dignity; hoping to carry it by the greatness of their Bulks,
and strength of their Bodies. But the Ape despising them, stood up, and
objected against both as unfit; the Camel because he had not Choler enough to
exercise against the unjust. And as for the Elephant, he laughing, said, we
shall be apt to suspect he carries about an Army of Pigs in his great Belly; by
which Speech they were both put by the Election.

The greatest affairs may be baffled* by the rediculous Objection of some
envious Persons.

FAB. XXIX. The Walnut-Tree.
NEar a Common Road grew a Walnut-Tree, whose Nuts the Passengers covering,
were continually pelting at, with sticks and Stones, whereby they miserably
tare and break its Boughs; the Tree being grieved at this ill usage, thus
lamented: Oh, wretched that I am, who, from those whom I most delight with my
Fruit, receive this ungreatful return!

This reproves those ungrateful Persons who repay Evil for Good.

FAB. XXX. The Lamb that danced, and the Wolf.
A Lamb which had strayed out of its bounds, being furiously pursued by a Wolf,
suddenly leapt, and turning to him, said. O Wolf! since I must be your Meal;
that I may die with some pleasure, pray be so kind to let me first hear one
Tune; for I know your Performance in Music to be very excellent. The Wolf began
to Sing, and the Lamb to Dance to it, which extremely delighted the Wolf, and
encouraged him to continue his Melody with great Eagerness and Vigor, till the
Dogs of the next Village hearing that Howling Noise, came running, and were at
his Heels e're he perceived them: Then turning to the Lamb, he had but just
time to say as he was seized; I am rightly served, that being by my Education a
Cook, must needs take upon me to be a Musician.

This Fable aims at those who leaving their Trades and Professions, to which
they have been bred, and wherein they are very well skilled, will undertake
others, of which they have no knowledge, and by them are deservedly ruined.

FAB. XXXI. The Vale and the Mountain.
A Vale lying Low, by the side of a High Mountain, that had long kept her in
Subjection, brake out at last into these angry Expressions against him. How
long, thou Combersom Hill, will thou persist to insult over me? Remove thy self
further off, and think not on this manner, ever to keep me a Slave to thee; for
if thou do, I will certainly revenge my self of thy Oppression. Since it has
thus, answered the Mountain, pleased the Almighty Creator of all things, to set
me over thee, from the Beginning; Be not angry at what connot be remedied, but
be patient under the Decrees of Heaven. The Vale not regarding the sober
Admonition of the Mountain, brought a great Army of Trees and Plants, who
advancing with Fury upon his sides, Fought valiantly against him; wounding him
in several Places; hoping by this means to have forced the Hill to remove, that
so she might have drawn her self from his Power. But he being provoked to
passion, Thou foolish Vale! said he, that have the Insolence to Rebel, and thus
to begin a War against thy Sovereign, thou shall soon feel the effects of my
Indignation, which thou have pulled on thine own head. And saying this, the
Mountain threw down great Stones, whereby he soon vanquished the Rebellious
Army, and so humbled the proud Valley, that she was quickly brought again to her
wonted Obedience.

Servants ought to obey their Masters: and Subjects to pay their just Duty and
Allegiance to their Sovereigns, and those who are set in Authority over them.
For we must remember that (...). The Prince is Gods Representative.

FAB. XXXII. The Ass and the Calf.
AN Ass and a Calf feeding together in a Meadow, they heard an Alarm given of
the approach of Soldiers marching that way. Let us run for our Lives, said the
Calf to the Ass, lest we be found here and taken by the Enemy. Run thou,
answered the Ass, that fear being killed. As for my share, I need not
concern my self; for to whose lot soever I fall, I am still sure of carrying
the Burden.

Men born to Slavery, need not be afrighted at changing their Masters, since
they are not sure, but that they may shift for the better.

Nulla e il loco cangiar con sort eguale.
FAB. XXXIII. The Wolf turned Shepherd.


IN a Forest, near a large Pasture stocked with diverse Flocks of Sheep, and
herds of Cattle, there shelted an Ancient Wolf, who by reason of his Age, was
not so able to fetch in his Prey from that Neighborhood as aforetimes; he
therefore contrived this subtle stratagem. He clothed himself like a Shepherd,
with a suit rightly fixed on his Body, a Hat upon his Head, and then walking
upright on his hind Feet, he carried his Crook on his Shoulder; nor wanted he
his Bagpipes at his Girdle to be complete in all respects. In this Equipage
went out the Traitor to the Pasture, where he found the true Shepherd with his
Dogs, and most of his Flock sleeping; Then wanting a Device to draw the Sheep
to the Woodside, he thought to have accommodated his voice to his Habit,
intending to imitate the Shepherds Call, but that break the neck of his whole
design; for his shril Howl made the Woods and Hills echo so loud, that it
discovered the Mystery, allarming the Shepherd and his Dogs, by whom our
Impostor was so vigorously pursued, that being hindered in his flight by his New
Accoutrements, he was soon taken and lost his life.

For him that is a Wolf, it is safest acting as a Wolf. And so the French saying
is.

Quiconque est Loup, agesse en Loup,
C'est le plus cartain de beaucoup.
For the Italians say, Non puo la falsita star sempre occulta. Falsehood cannot
always lie concealed.

FAB. XXXIV. The Woman that lamented her Husbands Death.
Extremely afflicted was a Young Woman at the Sickness of her Husband, whom the
Doctors had given over as a Dead Man; but the kind Father endeavored on this
manner to comfort her. Do not take this loss so much to heart, my Dear Child,
said he, for I have found out a handsome Man, to make thee another Husband; one
that I hope will soon Mitigate thy Grief, and blot this loss out of thy Mind.
Ah Father! answered this good Woman, let me entreat you not to mention another
Husband to me, for as often as I hear you but name that word Husband, it is like
so many Stabs of a Dagger to my Heart. Presently after, so soon as her Husband
was dead; Father, said she, Blubbering and Crying, when will you bring me the
handsome Husband, you told me you had found out for me?

This shows that a Woman's Grief for her Husband, lasts no longer than till the
Breath be out of his Body.

FAB. XXXV. The Countryman and a Horseman.
TO the City as a Countryman was traveling, with a Hare at his back to sell;
he met a Horseman, who under pretense of buying it, poised it in his hand: and
as he asked the price, claping Spurs suddenly to his Horse, he galloped full
speed away. The Countryman seeing him at some distance, and his Hare past
recovery, he called aloud after him, Ho Friend! do you hear; I present you with
that Hare, pray eat her for my sake, and be merry with her; but forget not to
drink my Heath, who so frankly bestow her on you.

It Is good sometimes when a Disgrace or Mischief happens to us, if it be past
all Remedy, to Dissemble and pass it off with a Jest, or with Laughter.
Ridicule haec Homines, nequunt quae vendere donant.

FAB. XXXVI. The Old Wolf that found a Prey.
SO feeble was an Old Wolf grown, by reason of his Age, that he was no longer
able to hunt for his Prey, nor were any of his former Comrades so kind to give
him a share of theirs, but all drove him away, when he offered to come near
them. This Distressed Wolf ranging alone about the Woods, found a dead Ox, on
which he falling with a keen Appetite, the smell of it soon reached the Noses
of the other Wolves, who came running to help him devour it. We, said they,
fawning upon him, are your Old Friends, and come to bear you Company. It Is
well, cried the Ancient Wolf, I have this Entertainment for you: For now ye are
all my Companion and Friends, but before, ye cruelly beat me, and would own
neither Kindred nor Friendship with me.

Wealth and Riches acquire us Friends, or rather Enemies under the Disguise of
Friends, who will stick by us so long as they can propose to reap any Benefit
or Advantage by us, but when that ceases, they shall not only desert us, but
our very presence is offensive to them.

Donec eris Faelix multos numerabis Amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit Amicus opes.
FAB. XXXVII. The Storks and the Kite.
TWo Storks had their Nest on a House Top, wherein they not only kept their
Young ones, but also their aged Father and Mother. These perceiving, first by
an extraordinary Smoke, and then by the appearance of Flame, that their House
was accidentally set on Fire, and in danger of being burnt to the Ground. One
of them took his Father upon his back, and carrying him down, left him in
security, whilst the other made on the same manner a Flight with her Mother;
for which they were angrily upbraided by a Kite, who called them Wicked and
Cruel, unworthy to have Children, and proceeded maliciously to tell them, they
unnaturally exposed their Young to the Flames, when it was in their power to
preserve them, while they were thus employed in carrying off those Skellitons
of their old Parents, who were now but a Burden to Nature. I love my Children
very well, replied the Stork, but I love those better who brought me into the
Light of the World, for I may in time have other Children, but can never have
another Father and a Mother.

It Is impossible to foresee all Accidents that may happen; and it is great
Prudence to endeavor to preserve what we have most value for, but especially
that, which if lost can never more be recovered. God and Nature oblige us to
prefer* our Father and our Mother to any other thing in the World. These Storks
are the great Example of Filial Duty to Parents; and are reported not only to
take care to nourish them in their old Age, but to pluck off from themselves
their softest Feathers to make their Nests easy for them. Cimon the Famous
Athenian, to ransom his Father, thrust himself into a Goal, where, when he was
loaded with Chains and Fetters, he boasted he had never before enjoyed so great
a pleasure. Another remarkable instance of this kind, is that of Alexander the
Great, who going to make War against Darius King of Persia, left Antipater an
Assistant to his Mother, to help her Govern the Kingdom of Macedonia in his
absence; but whether or no she managed affairs with the Prudence she ought to
have done, or that she inclined to favor some other Person more than himself,
Antipater was often writing long Letters to Alexander, complaining of the
Disorders which happened by her ill Conduct: But as that incomparable Monarch,
was on a time reading one of those Letters, in presence of his Dear Friend
Hephestion. Antipater, said he, (expressing great Tenderness) does not know,
that one Tear of my Mothers is sufficient to cancel all the Complaints, and
Accusations of every one of his long Letters. Words which ought to be engraved
in indelable Characters on the Hearts of Children, who have any pretense of
Complaint against their Parents. Li Padri, e le Madri non sono d' alcuna cosa
obligati a li Figliuoli, ed' essi per lo contrario tuto loro devono, poiche
devono loro la vita. Parents, says an Italian, are not for any thing obliged
to their Children, but on the contrary, Children owe their all to them, since
they owe them their Lives.

FAB. XXXVIII. Jupiter and the Tortois.
TO the Celebration of a great Wedding Jupiter invited all his Creatures;
amongst whom the Tortois was the Back wardest to make her appearance there.
Jupiter wondering at her slowness, asked her the reason why she came not sooner
to his Feast, having had such timely notice. I was very loath, answered she, to
leave my dear sweet House. At which expression Jupiter in anger condemned her
perpetually to carry her House with her on her Back.

Many men had rather fare poorly at home, than go abroad to the Invitation of
Great Persons.

FAB. XXXIX. The Wolf and the Sheep.
BLeeding, tired and almost dead with Hunger, lay a miserable Wolf, that had
been worryed by Dogs; from whom he at last had thus narrowly escaped with Life.
And seeing a Sheep near him, desired her for Charity to fetch him a little
Water; which, said he, if you will be so kind to do, I shall find victuals my
self. But the Sheep guessing at the mischief of his Heart. Ay, said she, if I
bring you Drink, you will make your Meal of my Flesh.

This shows how ready a Wicked Wretch is always to betray the simple and well
meaning Person.

FAB. XL. The Hares and the Foxes.
THe Hares not able to endure the continual Depredations which the Eagles
practiced amongst them, in times of Peace; resolved to declare war against
them; but sent beforehand to the Foxes to make a Confederacy with them, hoping
to bring in them to their Assistance. But the Foxes declined it, returning
their Answer, that they would gladly have joined with them in this War, Did we
not, said they, know very well who you are, and against whom you fight.

Those who fight against others more powerful than themselves, must valiantly
resolve to quit all thoughts of their own safety.

FAB. XLI. The Serpent that complained to Jupiter.
A Serpent having been trod on by several Persons, complained of it to Jupiter,
who thus answered him. Had you but stung the First that set his Foot upon your
Back, a Second durst not have offended you.

He who at first justly resents an injury, becomes respected afterward by
others, who will be careful not to offend him. Chi facile perdona, ingiuria
aspetta.

FAB. XLII. The Mouse, the Frog, and the Kite.


NOt being able to cross a Brook by any contrivance of his own, a Mouse was
forced to apply to a Frog for assistance in the enterprise, who readily granted
his request, promising him a safe passage, but maliciously designed to drown
him by the way; And that you may the more securely go, said the Frog, we will tie
your Foot to mine, and I swimming shall give you a gentle tow along, by which
you will soon get over. The Mouse giving Credit to his fair Words suffered
their Feet to be fastened together. But when they were got into the middle of
the Stream, the treacherous Frog began to dive, thinking to drown the unwary
Mouse, who there labored with all his strength to keep himself still floating
on the surface of the Water. Now whilst this Contention lasted, a Kite that had
espied them, came down suddenly on them, and caught the Mouse who was
uppermost, carrying him into the Air, together with the Frog hanging at his
Foot, and there tearing them in pieces, eat them both.

Many thinking to do mischief to others, happen at last to destroy themselves.

Tal' hor prima a se nuoce, un ch' altri offendi.
He hurts himself, who others does offend.
FAB. XLIII. The Hermit and the Soldier.
BY a pious Hermit was a Soldier exhorted to leave off Fighting, and that lewd
course of Life which he had so long followed, and for the future to attend the
service of God. The Soldier thanked him, and promised to take his good Advice;
For indeed Soldiers, said he, now in times of Peace, are but ill looked upon,
badly paid, and debarred the Liberty of Plundering; so that it is become a
Trade not worth the following.

Many leave off Vice, because they are not permitted the exercise of it.

FAB. XLIV. The Shipwrecked Athenian.
A Wealthy Merchant of Athens going a Voyage to Sea with many other Persons;
the Ship in a terrible Storm being forced on a Lee Shore, was stranded and
staved all in pieces; many of the Sea men and Passengers perishing in the
Wreck. But the Athenian invoking the assistance of his Goddess Minerva,
promised to Offer at her Shrine in her Temple, six hundred Staters of Gold if
she preserved him from the Threatening Danger; and seeing a Seaman by him, who
swam well, Friend, said he, pray be so kind to lend a hand also with Minerva
for the helping me to Shore.

They who are fallen into Distress, when they invoke God's assistance, must also
exert their own Endeavors.

FAB. XLV. The Horse, the Bull, the Dog, and the Man.
IN the sharpest time of all the Winter, a Horse, a Bull, and a Dog being ready
to perish with cold, came to a Man's House, who receiving them kindly made them
a Fire to warm and refresh them; Then fed the Horse with Provender, the Bull
with Hay, and to the Dog he gave Meat from his own Table. Which generous
Hospitality, they were so desirous to acknowledge, that they agreed to gratify
him with a part of their Lives, to add to his. The Horse bestowed on him his
first years; therefore is every one so precipitate, and haughty. The middle of
his Life the Bull presented him with, which makes him so laborious,
endeavoring to gather Riches. And the Dog was content to give him his latter
years, for which reason man toward the close of his Life, becomes so Morose,
and surly; loving none but those who are feeding him, and presenting him with
good things, and those only he caresses and flatters; but against such as are
not kind to him, he is continually snarling and barking.

So base and low spirited men when grown old, only love those who are feeding
and treating them.

FAB. XLVI. The Plowman and his Oxen.
ONe morning betimes as a Plowman was going into his Stable, he found his Oxen
very merry; Of which he asking the reason. It is, answered they, because we
dreamed last night, that you carried us out to feed in a large and Fruitful
Pasture. And I dreamed, said he, that I was to Plow with you all this Day. So
that my Dream will prove true, and yours false.

There is no credit to be given to Dreams, especially when they seem to thwart
the Designs of those Persons who have a full Liberty of Disposing of us at
their Pleasure.

FAB. XLVII. The Cock, the Ass, and the Lion.
THe Cock and the Ass feeding together, a Lion came to seize the Ass, which the
Cock perceiving, crowed aloud to give him notice of it, at which shrill noise,
the Lion being affrighted ran away, for so it is said the Lion always dreads a
Cock's Voice. But the Ass thinking he had fled for fear of him, pursued the
Lion, who ran very far, till looking back, and not hearing nor seeing the Cock,
turned furiously upon the Ass, and devoured him. The Ass crying with a
lamentable voice, as he was dying. O Fool and Unfortunate! that knowing my self
not to be of a Valiant and Courageous Race, should thus madly engage against so
powerful an Enemy.

Many men out of design, counterfeit Fear till they find an opportunity to fall
upon their Enemies and destroy them.

FAB. XLVIII. The Boar and the Fox.
AGainst a great Stone as a Boar was whetting his Tusks, he was asked the
reason of it by a Fox, since, said he, there is no Enemy nigh, nor any thing
whereon to exercise them. This I do, answered the Boar, that when I shall have
occasion to fight or any way to use them, I may not then be employed in
whetting my Tusks, but have them in a readiness.

This admonishes us to endeavor to be prepared against Accidents that may
happen to us.

Provedi anzi ch' ei venga, al tuo bisogno.
Provide against thy wants before they come.
FAB. XLIX. The Eagle and the Fox.
THe Eagle and the Fox had contracted a Friendship together, and to make it the
more lasting, they agreed to dwell near one another. The kind Eagle left the
Rock where she was accustomed to build, and made her Nest in a high Tree,
beneath which, the Fox had lodged her Cubbs among certain Bushes. But this
perfidious Eagle on a time wanting food for her Young, and knowing the Fox was
abroad seeking his prey, she without regard to her plighted Faith, and
Friendship, flew down to the shrubs, and seizing the Young Foxes, carried them
all up to the Nest; where she with her hungry Brood devoured them. The Fox
returning at night, and missing those for whom she had been making provision,
was infinitely afflicted, easily concluding they had been taken away by her
false Neighbor, and not able to revenge her self, she being a terrestrial
Creature, and her Enemy a valiant Towering Bird, she in the sorrow of her heart
for her loss, cursed her cruel Enemy and invoked the Gods to punish the
Treachery; turning from thenceforward all her Love into mortal Hatred. Now it
happened a few days after, that as they were sacrificing a Goat to the God Pan
in a Neighboring Village, the Eagle snatched away a piece of the Flesh from
the Altar, to which there hanging a Live Fire Coal, and she carrying it up into
the Tree; the Coal quickly set the Nest on Fire, being all made of Straw,
Sticks, and other combustible matter. So soon therefore as the young Eagles
began to feel the Heat, and not being yet perfectly able to fly, they fell down
to the Ground, where they were all seized with great eagerness by the Fox, who
without any pity, eat them in sight of their afflicted Mother.

Those who break Friendship and their Solemn Faith, tho the Persons injured
cannot revenge themselves upon them, yet they seldom escape the Judgment of
God. Nor could the Eagle, for this action, have any pretense, of Motherly
Charity, for preserving the Lives of her Young, since she should rather have
chosen to have died with all her Brood, than have committed so base a Breach of
Faith against a Friend. Thus we may see that Aesop in this Apologue, has made
Divine Vengeance to follow the Eagles sin of Perfidiousness. The Fox's Cries
moved the Anger of the Gods, who permit the very Nest to be burnt, and her
young ones striving to save themselves from the Flames, fall down into the Iaws
of their Enemy. The Italian says, Vindice e Dio del Guisto a torto offeso.
God will revenge the Innocent when wronged.


FAB. L. The Hares that were afraid without Cause.


A Tempestuous Wind rattling amongst the Trees of a Tall Wood, so affrighted
the Hares, Inhabitants of the Shrubs there; that in great Terror, they ran to
save themselves, till they came to a broad Marish or Lake, where their
Consternation was increased by their Danger of Drowning. But observing certain
Frogs on the side thereof, who at the Hares approach, leaped into the Water for
fear of them. One of the Antientest of the Hares, more prudent and of greater
experience than the rest, calling aloud. Friends, said he, let us take Courage,
since we see these Frogs are without cause afraid of us, as we perchance, with
as little reason are of the Wind. For I perceive all Creatures are subject to
Dangers and Troubles, of which they are always in fear. But we have nimble
Feet and Cowardly Hearts, Let us then return and despise these seeming Dangers,
for when we shall have just cause, it will then be time enough to run.

We should be of good Courage in all our Exegencies, for Virtue falls and dies,
without a proper Stock of Confidence, which is the Queen and Conductress of all
Virtues.

FAB. LI. The Old Dog and his Master.
IN vain a Dog grown very Old, was by his Master encouraged still to Hunt,
being by reason of the Feebleness of his Limbs unable to run as formerly, and
when with difficulty he caught a Hare, his want of Teeth gave her an
opportunity to escape from him; For which his Master chiding and beating him,
Alas Sir! cried the Dog, I hoped you would have pardoned me that am grown
Ancient, and would have called to mind the good services I have done, when
strong and Brisk. But I find nothing is regarded when it brings not in a
present Profit with it. You have loved me while I was vigorous and able to
serve you, why should you forget your past Friendship, and treat me thus
cruelly in my Old Age?

This Fable shows that only the present Advantage is esteemed, and former
Services soon forgot.

FAB. LII. The Crow and the Dog.
UPon a Solemn Day, a Crow offering Sacrifice to Minerva, invited a Dog to
Dinner, who falling into discourse with her, took occasion to ask her why she
would sacrifice in vain? For you know, said he, the Goddess hates you, insomuch
that she will not allow you any Credit with the Augurs. For that reason, said
the Crow, I Sacrifice, hoping to appease her Anger, that I may be reconciled to
her.

Many take occasion, and therein act prudently, to do Services to their Enemies
striving by that means to be reconciled to them. Qui vincere Adversarium ex
tuto cupit, beneficiis and gratia certet bona. The Italian, Poet says, --
Contra il Possent, il Debil perde,
E l' humiltade ogni durezza doma.
He wisely acts who with Great men complies;
The weakest, thus by yielding, gain the Prize.


FAB. LIII. The Master and his Servant.
ONe having a Servant not over quick-witted, was wont to call him King of the
Fools, who stomaching the Disgrace, I would I were so, said he once roundly to
his Master; For I should be a great King, over a Numberless People, and you
would be one of my Subjects.

Stultorum plena sunt omnia. The World is full of Fools.

FAB. LIVE. The Monkey and the Walnuts.
A Monkey seeing a Walnut-tree well stored with Green Nuts, was curious to know
the Name and Goodness of the Fruit, and being told that those Nuts contained
Kernels of an excellent and delightful taste, he began to be pleased with the
Thoughts of eating them, but was puzzled to find out a way to get to them, for
the Tree was large, and the Body high before there were any Boughs to lay hold
on. He was therefore at last forced to go to the next Village, where finding a
long Ladder, he with great labor, dragged it to the Tree, and with no less
Toil and Industry raised it, so that with infinite satisfaction, he climbed up.
There taking a Nut, he bit it entirely through the outward green Rind, the
shell, and the kernel, and tasting the Bitterness of the Peel, threw it aside
as Bad, or not ripe; but when he had tried several others, and found none of
any pleasanter taste, all proving as bitter as the first, he threw them down in
great anger, never troubling himself further in search of the Kernels. At which
disappointment, after he had a while vexed and fretted himself: Ah! cursed be
they, cried he, who first showed me these filthy Nuts, they who praised them to
me, and encouraged me to take all this Trouble to gather, and to eat them: For
in all the days of my Life, I never underwent so much Toil and vexation, and
yet have spent all my time and pains to no Profit. Thus the sweet they made me
believe I should find in this Fruit is in all respects turned to Bitterness.
And when he had for sometime vented, on this manner, his rage, he went away.

We must not leave off a Work well begun, though there appear some Difficulty
in the accomplishing it, but must withal well consider the End that is to crown
the Work, which if often thought on, will help us to undergo the Labor and
Trouble, with more Pleasure and Cheerfulness.

Dulcia non meruit qui non gustavit amara.
He tastes no Joy, who never sorrow knew.
And the Spanish saying is, Por la persuerancia en la virtud se alcanca el
Premio. By our Perseverance in virtue we gain the Prize.

FAB. LV. The Dog, the Ass, and their Master.


OFten would a little Dog be fawning and leaping on his Master, expressing also
with his voice a joy to see him, who kindly stroaked, and made much of him, and
the Servants also showed a tenderness of him; which mutual Carresses being
observed by an Envious Ass, he complained of the severity of his Fortune: For
it seemed to him an unjust thing, that the Dog with so much Affection should be
treated by all the Family, be fed at his Masters Table, and spend his Life in
that Ease and Pleasure; whilst himself must be kept in (...) Slavery carrying
heavy Burdens, and yet (...) by every Body. But when he (...) that the Dog by
his Fawning, had (...) his Masters Love, he intended also to practice the same
Art, which he saw was of so great Advantange, and might be so easily performed;
wherefore he resolved to (...), by the same measures the Dog had and to see if
the event would prove as successful as he conceited it would. So soon then as
his Master came home, he ran to him, and raising up his Body, he struck his
(...) upon the Good Man's Head, and began to bray, in imitation of the Dogs
noise; which forcing his Master to cry out, allarmed the Servants, who coming
in and seeing him thus assaulted, fell severely on the poor Ass with their
Cudgels, and discouraged him, for ever attempting to play the Courtier after
that bout.

No Man should undertake that which is not proper for him to do, and what he
knows is contrary to his Nature. This Fable was related by Galen, in the
Disputation against Julian. Ne affectemus ea quae Natura negavit, neve
obtrudamus invitis officia nostra.

Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius.
Every Clown is not fit to be made a Courtier.
FAB. LVI. The two Hogs.
IT angrying a Countryman to see his two Hogs often fighting together, he
killed one of them; Then was the Surviver pleased to see his old Adversary
dead; But soon after finding himself also carried to the Slaughter, all his
Mirth was turned to Sorrow. To what purpose alas, cried he then, did I so much
rejoice at my Enemies Destruction, since I my self must also now suffer the
same Fate.

No man should be glad at the Death of his Enmy, for Death is common to all.

FAB. LVII. The Rich Man and the Tanner.
NEar a Tanners Yard came a Rich Man to Dwell; but he, not able to endure the
ill smell of the Hides, urged the Tanner to remove further off; who often
promised to go, but still delayed it, and continued there so long, till the
Rich Man being accustomed to that ill Scent, it was not offensive to him.

Long Custom makes that easy to be born with, which at first seemed
insupportable. Usus secunda natura. Which the Italians express.

Uso si converte in Natura.
FAB. LVIII. The Shepherd and careful Dog.
IN the driving his Flocks into their Fold, a Shepherd had like to have shut up
a disguised Wolf with them, mistaking him for a Sheep; if the careful Dog had
not discovered the Cheat, and calling to his Master; How can you think, said
he, to preserve your Flocks, if you suffer this Wolf to be enclosed among them?

A Vigilant Servant may perceive a threatening Mischief, which a Prudent Master
may probably oversee.

FAB. LIX. The Dolphins, the Whales, and a Herring.
THe Dolphins and the Whales adjusting some differences betwixt them; a contest
arose by some of the most violent on either side, which. was carried to such a
Pitch, that there seemed eminent danger of a War like to break out between
those two powerful Marine Species. When a Herring who had observed the whole
Transaction, rising up where the Matter was in hottest debate, and putting her
self in the midst of them, endeavored with all her strongest reasons to
pacify both sides, and prevent the effusion of Blood. To whom one of the
Dolphins calling in a Passion, Cease thou contemptible Fish, said he, leave off
thy impertinent Discourse, for know that it were better, and less
dishonorable, for us all generally to perish in the decision of this
Controversy, than be made Friends by thy Mediation and Counsel.

Thus some inconsiderable Men will be meddling in affairs above their Sphere,
for which they often meet with a disgraceful reproof.

FAB. LX. The Cock that betrayed the Fox.
GReat Havoc was made by a Fox amongst a Country-mans Hens; who, to revenge
the Injury, set up a Snare wherein he caught the Fox. Now the only witness of
this his Enemies misfortune, was the Cock, as he was passing by him; the Fox
therefore beged him, to be so charitable to fetch a Knife, that he might cut
the snare, or prayed him at least not to declare to his Master this mischief
befaln him, till he had tried to gnaw in pieces the strings with his Teeth. The
false Cock promised to grant him his whole request, but with no intent to keep
his Faith with him, for he ran directly to his Master, and acquainted him with
the Foxes being taken. This News made the Man arm himself with a good Club, and
come in have to attack his old subtle Enemy; who seeing him aproach with all
that fury: Oh Wretch that I am! cried he, was I not a great Fool, to believe
the Cock would ever be faithful to me, after I had done him the injury to
deprive him of so many of his beloved Wives and Mistresses?

We should not promise our selves any good Offices, from those Persons whom we
have injured: Although some hold it for a Maxim, that he most obliges another,
who gives him opportunities of doing it.

FAB. LXI. The Hinds and the Panther.
CErtain Country Hinds finding a Panther, who had long frequented the
neighbors Woods and Fields, that by chance was falen into a Pit; they with
great malice joined together against this distressed Creature who had never
injured them, assaulting her with Clubs and Staves, and having poured down a
Shower of Stones on her, these cruel Men left her, expecting to find her dead
next day. But there happening to come by presently after, certain charitable
Shepherds; they had compassion on her, gave her Bread, and used their
endeavors to preserve her alive, finding her so miserably treated and ready to
expire: By which kindness, when at night she had recollected her languishing
Spirits, making a very brisk leap, she escaped out of the Pit, and with joy
hasted to her own dwelling. After some days, when she had recovered strength,
she sallied abroad out of the Forest, and made large Incursions into the
Enemies Territories, committing great slaughter amongst their Cattle, revenging
her self of those wicked Countrymen, and striking a terror where e're she
came. Then were the kind Shepherds also afraid, even those who had formerly
showed her pity in her Adversity; and would gladly have compounded with her,
at the loss of all they had, to have their lives saved. But she being discreet
and of a grateful nature; No, said she, I remember well enough who they were
that threw stones at me, and who fed me with Bread: Be not you therefore
afraid, for I am only an Enemy to those barbarous Hinds who treated me so
cruelly when I lay at their mercy, tho I had never injured them, but dwelt
peaceably amongst them, and always used them as my Friends.

Kind and charitable Acts to Persons in distress, seldom fail of a suitable
return; Solet a dispectis par referri gratia. And another Author says. Parce
miseris and in mala praecipitatis, ne fortuna instaurata, accepta damna and
contumelias ulciscantur.

FAB. LXII. The Countryman and the Flies.
IN Summer time a Country man that was vexed with abundance of Flies, snatched
up in anger a Fire brand, and with it went about all parts of his House to
kill, or drive them out. But whilst he thus eagerly pursued them from place to
place, he carelessly scattering some sparks, set on fire certain combustible
matter, by which the House was quite burnt down to the ground.

This shows that there are Men who striving madly to ease themselves of some
small grievance, run themselves headlong into inevitable ruin. According to
that of Plato.

(...).
Fumum fugients in ignem delabi.
To the same purpose, they relate another Fable; that a Servant seeing a Fly on
his Masters Forehead, and fearing it might be offensive to him, thought to
kill it with a Hammer which he had in his hand; and struck at it with so good a
Will, that with the blow, he dashed out his Masters brains.

FAB. LXIII. The Hound and the other Dogs.
THo a Hound that had caught a Hare was very hungry, he would needs carry it
home, to boast of it amongst his Fellows; and there as he was setting forth the
great swiftness of his running to catch her, the Mastifs, and other Dogs
belonging to the House, laid hold of this Boasters Prey, tare her in pieces
before his Face, and eat her.

It Is Prudence to keep our good things to our selves; Although he was in the
right, who said, Nullum esse usum occultae musicae.

But, Tacitus pasci si posset Corvus, haberet
Plus Dapis, and multo Rixae minus Invidiaeque.
Could but the Crow suppress his clamorus voice,
He Would feast less envyed, and with lesser noise.


FAB. LXIV. The Frogs and Flags.
ON the side of a Lake, there had dwelt for many years a Family of Frogs, among
certain Flags and Herbs, which they had carefully preserved as their Household
Gods and Protectors, and ever kept them entire. Now in process of time, the
Posterity of these Frogs being young, perverse, and wanton, began to crop the
tender Buds of the Flags, destroying those who had been their Lares. Which
injury the young Flags taking very heinously, often civilly entreated them to
forbear spoiling and ruining their Friends, who had been always so religiously
kept, and reverenced by their Ancestors. But when all entreaties could nothing
avail, and that the Frogs derided them, alleging, that tho their Ancestors
knew not how to make use of their own, yet we, said they, do. The Flags then
calling both the Divine and Humane Powers to witness, openly declared the
execrable violence which their Foster-Children the Frogs, had with confirmed
minds exercised against them. For which, the just vengeance of Heaven was not
long absent, and the wicked cruelty of this ungrateful Generation was quickly
turned upon their own heads; For the Flags were no sooner eaten up, and the
place become bare, but these Frogs were espied, and lay wholly exposed, as well
to the Birds and Fowls of the Air, as to the Serpents and Snakes inhabiting the
Lake, by whom they were all in a short time devoured.

The old Constitutions and Customs of Ancestors, are not despised and broken by
a foolish Posterity, but with their certain ruin. And therefore a wise Man
being asked, How such a great Commonwealth was so soon run down, and come to
nothing? Because, answered he, they set up Young and Rash Statsmen, who kept
not to the Wise Laws, and Methods, of their Forefathers.

FAB. LXV. The Lion, the Cow, the Goat, and the Sheep.


IN a Friendly manner did a Lion seem to invite a Cow, a Goat, and a Sheep to
hunt with him, voluntarily promiseing them, that what Game soever were taken,
should be equally divided amongst them. They went out to their Sport, ran down
a Heart, and quartering it, each of the Companions stood eagerly expecting to
receive his share, which put the Lion into a rage; I said he, with a terrible
voice, take the first part as your King; the second I claim as being strongest
and most valiant; the third is my due, as a small reward of all my Pains and
Trouble; and he that shall presume to refuse me the fourth share, I here
declare him my Enemy. His Companions hearing this, without dareing to murmur,
went hungry away.

This Fable advises every one who is to associate, or join in Partnership with
others, that it be with his Equals, and not with those that are too far above
him; for though the Labor and Toil may fall to the poor Man's share, it is the
Rich and great Person that shall receive the profit; Nor will he regard Honor,
or the keeping Faith with one who wants Ability to right himself. Multa
dissimulare, multaque tolerare eos necesse est, qui in Principum versantur
aulis; neque hos tantum, verumetiam tenuioris fortunae Homincs, qui Ditiorum
Consuetudine utuntur. They must dissemble many things, and suffer many, who
dwell in the Courts of Princes; and not they only, but such as are of slender
Fortunes, and frequent the Company of rich Men, they must also truckle, and
submit to the same. For the Poet gives good advise.

Pauper agat caute, caveat maledicere pauper:
Multaque Divitibus non patienda feret.
The Spaniards say, Nunca es fiel ni y gual la particion que se haze enter
mayores y menores. A true dividend can never be made between great Men, and
poor Men.

FAB. LXVI. The Shepherd, the Shepherdess, and the Worms.
A Shepherd and Shepherdess that for some years had lived together in a most
happy Union, and with unspeakable content, were separated in an instant by the
Death of that incompatable Woman; who sleeping on the Grass, was killed by the
biting of a Serpent. The sorrowful Shepherd having even to excess lamented his
Misfortune, built a Tomb wherein he laid her: On which he let not a Day pass,
without strewing the sweetest Herbs and Flowers: and took so great care of it,
that he suffered not any kind of Creature to come near it, for fear of defacing
it. One day as he was treading on the Worms, which crept out of the Grave, as
his custom was, he heard certain mournful Groans issuing out from thence; which
made him listen more attentively, and hear these Word. Courteous Shepherd, be
not so Cruel to Her, whom thou did once so dearly Love; Those Worms thou
killest, thinking to do a kindness to me, are a part of my self, which if thou will not believe, raise up with thy hand the Stone that covers me, and thou will be convinced of it. The Shepherd thereupon, lifting up the Stone, saw
innumerable Worms creeping from her Face and Body, and heard the same voice
continue to say; forget what I have formerly been: but remember that thou thy
self shall 'ere long be what thou now see I am He was so touched with those
her last Words, that neglecting his Flocks, he, for the future, ever fixed his
chiefest thoughts on Death, and from that Object would seldom remove them.

This shows that none are exempt from dying. That Death hides himself the
better to surprise us. That they may be said to love even after Death, who
loved truly when alive. That the loveliest Body will turn to Putrefaction, and
at last to Worms. The frequent thoughts we have of Death, makes it the less
dreadful, and us the less fearful of it. Our best Meditation is on Death, for
the thoughts of that, are capable to teach us how to live well. Francis the
first, Duke of Britany, finding himself near Death, in the very Flower of his
Age. My Dear Friends, said he, to his Courtiers. You saw me a few days since
clothed in Purple, sitting in Majesty on my Throne, reverenced by all the
Great Men of my Court, and loaded with all the Honors which could be desired,
and yet in a short time I shall be nothing but a little Dust; and therefore, I
advise you all to settle your Thoughts on that approaching day, which shall
ever long put a period to this our frail Life.

FAB. LXVII. The Flea and the Camel.
PRoud was a silly Flea on the back of a loaded Camel, to see the Laborious
Beast take such pains, as she supposed to carry her; And coming at Night to
their journeys end, the Flea allighted down in the Inn, and standing before
him. Now, said he, I have done kindly in coming from thy back, because I would
not grieve thee, by keeping thee loaded any longer time. No, answered the
Camel, but I rather think the Gods, that when thou gettest upon me I am not
more loaded, neither when thou dismountest from my back, I am at all the more
eased.

Many who are neither capable of doing Pleasure or Injury to great Men, will be
thus over valuing themselves; for which they afterward become despised.
Algunos no son nada y querense estimar en mucho. Every little fellow would fain
be thought great.

FAB. LXVIII. The Answer of Socrates to his Neighbors.
SOcrates the admirable Athenian Philosopher building himself a very little
House, was asked by some of his inquisitive Neighbors, How so great a Man as
He, could be content to dwell in so narrow a Place? I wish, answered the
Philosopher, I were able to fill it with true Friends.

Vulgar amici nomen, says Phaedrus, sed rara fides. The name of Friend is
common, but the Fidelity rare. And of Socrates further says, Cujus non fugio
Mortem si Famam adsequar, etc. Whose Death I could be contented to suffer,
might I acquire his Fame: And I could yield to the violence of Envy as he did,
to be accounted innocent after I am dead. Fidelem ubi invemias virum?

FAB. LXIX. The Dragon, the Leopard, and the Unicorn.
TO end an old Grudg, a fierce young Leopard resolved to try the hazard of a
Combat with a Dragon, but at the first brush found himself not able to cope
with him; whereupon he retreating, went to a Unicorn and beged his help. For
thou said he, art valiant and fightest with admirable skill; I therefore
entreat thee to vindicate me against this insolent Dragon that has so often
affronted me. The vain Unicorn being proud to hear himself thus commended; Thou
have given, said he, a true Character of me, who am an Experienced Warrior, and
shall soon revenge thee on thy Adversary; for when the Dragon shall open his
Mouth, I Will strike my Horn into his Throat, and kill him. Afterward when these
Enemies met, the Leopard giving the first Onset, was quickly worsted; but then
the Unicorn advancing, aimed to push his Horn into the Mouth of the gaping
Dragon, who moving aside his Head, the Unicorn missed him, and ran his Horn
into the Ground, from whence before he could pluck it out, he was slain.

It Is folly for any one to trust too much to his Manhood, and madness to fight
in a Quarrel that belongs not to him. Engage not, says a learned Man, to be
Second to another, neither blow thou the Coals amongst those who are at
Variance, but when Discord and Quarrels are begun by others, it is sure the
greatest Honor for thee, if Reconciliation come by thy means. `Tis a good
caution the old English Poet gives.

He that for odir men gladly will fight,
Is oftyn confondid tho he have great might.
FAB. LXX. The Lion and the Man traveling together.


TWo Fellow Travelers, a Lion and a Man chatting on the Road together, to pass
away the tediousness of their Journey, happened upon a dispute of their
Strength and Courage, wherein each boasted to have an advantage over the other;
till walking by the Ruins of a Magnificent Structure, they saw an admirable
piece of Workmanship on a large Table of Marble, where most skillfully was
represented in Basso Relievo, a Man strangling a Lion; the Man then turning to
his Companion, what think you now my Friend? said he, does not this plainly
convince you that a Man is stronger than a Lion. Your argument, replied the
Lion, seems I confess, to have some weight in it: But had the Lions their
Statuaries and Painters as Men have, you would see in Paintings and in Marble,
more Men killed by Lions, than Lions strangled by Men.

Every one will do what he can to favor his own cause; But methinks the
Allegory of this Fable, seems most to reprove the vanity of many Sculptures,
which contain far more flattery in them than Truth, and are too frequent even
in our Age, that we looking on those high Marks of Pride, might reasonably ask
with how much money were those Artists corrupted for their raising up such
Ostentatious Monuments? And what is said of Sculptures may likewise be
understood of Poets, Painters, and all others who undertake to transmit great
Men's Actions to Posterity. Oh! the Chymeric Exploits, the Imaginary Virtues,
and false remarks pompously displayed in some Men's Poems, and in the Paintings,
Statues, and ingenious Sculptures of others, which would astonish any to
consider them. Nor are these the only Persons who make it their Business to
enlarge upon Truth, but even the Historians who make Profession of the greatest
Sincerity, are not ashamed to stuff up their Volums with Panegyric Discourses,
and false Relations which are often too plainly visible, by their great
Discord, and clashing one against another.

FAB. LXXI. The Trifler, or Delayer.
AMong certain Guests at a Feast, one had placed himself so near the Fire, that
the lowest part of his Garment was beginning to be Scorched, which another
Person who sat by him observing. Sir, said he, I have some thing to tell you;
If, answered the first, it be any thing that is sad, I will not hear it, till
after Supper, where all things ought to be delightful and merry. It is not very
pleasant, added the second; When we rise from hence then, replied the first, we
may at leisure attend serious matters. After they had with great mirth ended
the supper; Now, said the Delayer, you may say what you please. The other told
him of the Damage he had suffered by sitting too near the Fire, and showed him
his Garment very much Burnt and Spoiled. This extremely displeased him, that he
had not had more timely notice of it. I had acquainted you, replied the
ingenious Guest, when it first began to be burnt, but you forbad me, because
your Method was (...). After Feasting, business.

This is intended for a Reproof to those Triflers, who had rather hear of any
idle Fancy, than of Business: and will rather hazard the loss of all they have,
than be interrupted in their Pleasures. (...). Unseasonable Pleasure ever
brings damage with it.

FAB. LXXII. The Ass carrying an Image.
THrough the streets of a City, as an Ass was carrying a Golden Image on his
back, he took notice that as many as passed by him, made their adoration
toward him on their bended knees; whereupon supposing all this honor paid to
him, he was puffed up with an insolent Arrogance, and resolved no longer to own
himself an Ass; till he felt the smarting blows of his Drivers Cudgel upon his
Buttucks, and heard him say. Oh ridiculous Fool! it is not thou that art the
God, but thou carriest Him on thy back whom they Worship.

He who obtains an Office, straight forgets he is a Man. Arrogancia oculum
mentis obnubilat, Says a learned Man, Vel excaecat, ut nec seipsum agnoscere
valeat. Pride does so much dazzle, or rather darken the Eye of the mind, that it
makes a Man not able to know himself.

Nec te collaudes nec te culpaveris ipse:
Hoc faciunt stulti quos gloria vexatinanis.
Cato. FAB. LXXIII. The Tortois and the Eagle.
TO a great Flock or Company of Birds of all sorts, was this generous proposal
made by a Tortois, who happened to be in the very middle of a place, where they
were holding a Conference. If any of you, said she, will take the pains to
carry me up into the Air, I Will make you Masters of an immense Treasure; for I
will discover to you the shells which contain rich Pearls in them, and the
places where all the precious stones lie ready to be picked up, that are of
inestimable value; but cannot do this thing of my self, by reason of my slow
motion. The Birds listening to this noble Offer, very joyfully accepted it,
with their general thanks; and begged the Eagle to carry her up; which being
consenting to, this dull Creature was mounted aloft into the Air as she
desired, and there was urged by him, to show where the Shells and all those
precious Gems lay, which she had undertaken to discover; but the Tortois not
able to perform her promise, was by the Eagle angrily griped in his sharp
tallons. She then lamenting, Ah, cried she, I had never suffered these
Torments, had I not been ambitious to be carried up out of my proper Element.
Which words when the Eagle heard, he loosing his gripe, let her fall down on
the Ground, whereby this Ambitious Creature was killed and broak in pieces,
whose body had been so strongly guarded and fortified by Nature.

We ought not to aim at things which are out of our Sphere, nor undertake by
idle pretenses to do what we are no ways capable to perform. A Spanish Author
says, Que cada uno sea contento del estado que la Natura le dio, porque la
sovervia pocas vozes va o lega a buen fin, mas antes para Cayda. Let every one
be content in the state which Nature placed him in, for Pride very rarely comes
to a good end, but for the most part has its fall. And their old Proverb says,
Agran Subida, gran Descendida. To a great Rise, must be a great Descent.

FAB. LXXIV. The Lark and her Young Ones


AT the near approach of Harvest time, a Lark that was breeding up her
unfledged young in a Corn-field, gave them this charge; That whilst she went
abroad to fetch home their Meat, they should carefully listen if they heard any
Discourse of cutting down the Corn; and give her an account of it, at her
return at night; for it concerned no less than their lives, to be very vigilant
therein. Soon after, the Master of the Field came, and showing his Son that the
Corn was ripe and fit for cutting; Go, said he, to morrow Morning by break of
day, and desire all my Friends to lend me their helping hands, for the reaping
and bringing in my Hearvest. The careful young Birds remembered to give their
Mother a punctual account of all they had heard and seen; who bad them never
trouble themselves, nor fear they should receive any harm; for nothing would be
done, while he trusted to his Friends. The next day, the Mother went abroad
again, and it proving good Harvest Weather, the Master expected those whom he
had sent to invite, but nothing was done, for no Friend came. Well, said he to
his Son, since my Friends are so negligent, go to my Kindred and Relations;
Entreat them to come to morrow Morning betimes to work at my Corn. The timorous
Birds were again careful to relate every circumstance to their Mother, which.
they had observed. Well, said the Mother, we are secure enough yet, you may
therefore set your minds at rest; but still be sure to note diligently how they
proceed, and what they conclude on. Next day the old Lark flew abroad as
before, but then came the Good Man looking, tho in vain, for his Kindred and
Relations, who likewise failing him. Well, to morrow said he to his Son, let
there be two sickles brought for us two, and we with the help of our own
Servants, will complete the Work; which resolution the Lark no sooner heard,
but calling her young about her; It Is time, said she, now to look to our
selves; I must immediately carry you to some other place, for this Corn will
certainly to morrow be reaped; when he whose business it is, undertakes himself
to dispatch it.

This Fable is eligantly written by A. Gellius, who as he there in his Noctes
Altticae acknowledges, took it from Aesop; It observes how backward and
negligent we are in doing other Men's business: Whosoever therefore would have
his Affairs dispatched with care and expedition, must Lay his own helping hand
to the Work, and then he may expect to have it well performed. Ne quid expectes
Amicos, quod tute agere posses.

FAB. LXXV. The Fox and the Ape.
THe Lion having obtained a Dominion over all the rest of the Beasts, issued
forth His Royal Proclamation, commanding all those on pain of Death to depart
the utmost limits of His Kingdom, who wanted the honor of their Tails. The
Fox affrighted at the severity of this Edict, packing up all he had, was
preparing to go into Banishment; which being observed by the Ape, who was upon
her Journey in obedience to the Kings Pleasure; she told him; that the Penalty
of the Edict could no ways reach him, who not only had a Tail, but was so well
furnished, that he was able to spare some part of it. That Is true, said the
Fox, and I thank you for your kind information; Yet how do I know, but that the
Lion may reckon me amongst those Beasts who want Tails?

He that is constrained to live under the Arbitrary Will of a Tyrant; tho
Innocent, yet happens very often to suffer amongst the Guilty.

Curi vita sub Tyranno agenda contigit,
Insons licet sit, plectitur saepe ut nocens.
FAB. LXXVI. Demades the Orator, his Tale.
DEmades an Orator, and Rhetorician, the great Antagonist of Demosthenes,
making a public Oration in Athens, and observing a vast Crowd of Auditors
attentively listening to it, desired they would permit him to tell them a Tale;
which they readily consenting to, he thus began. The Goddess Ceres, a Swallow,
and an Eel, having undertaken a Journey together, traveled till they came to a
River, and as they were consulting how to cross it, the Swallow flew away, and
left them; the Eel seeing that, slid into the Water, and was seen no more. At
which words he standing silent; Well, demanded some that were present, but what
became of Ceres? Oh! replied the Orator, she staid gazing about her, and
loseing her time there, as many of you do here now, who neglect your proper
business to listen after Tales, which concern you not.

Thus too many imprudent Persons are easily tempted to follow after vain Toys
and Pleasures, whilst their more necessary Occasions are totally neglected.

FAB. LXXVII. The Countryman and a Tree.
IN a Countrymans Garden grew a small Tree, which bearing no Fruit, only served
as a place of shelter for the little Birds and Grasshoppers to sit and sing in;
The Countryman therefore resolved to cut it down as unprofitable; and taking
his Hatchet began to chop it near the Root; which the little Birds and
Grasshoppers seeing, begged him not to destroy it for their sakes, that they
might still sit in it, and there delight both themselves and him with their
Melodious Songs; But he continuing obstinate in his first purpose, minded his
hewing more than all their Prayers and Entreaties, till he cut deep into the
body of the Tree; which he found was hollow, and therein discovered a great
nest of Bees, who had made in it a considerable quantity of Honey. This Prize,
so soon as he had tasted, caused him to throw away his Ax, and when he had
carried home all his Combs, he took an especial care to preserve the Tree,
which. he afterward adored as sacred, in hopes of more Honey in time to come.

Men generally are not so readily inclined to do a just and noble Action, out
of a Principle of Justice and Honor, as for the sake of some Profit or
Advantage that accrue to them by it. (...). Ubi lucrum, contra naturam
serviendum est.

FAB. LXXVIII. The Lion, and the Gnat.


THus arrogantly was a Princely Lion accosted by a brisk Gnat. Thou, said this
little Creature, who unworthily usurpest the Title of King of the Beasts, what
have thou to boast of, besides thy huge Bulk, thy brutish Strength, and thy
sharp Nails, and Teeth; with which thou fightest, biting and scratching like a
Woman; and on those generally show thy valor, who are weak and not able to
resist thee? Behold Me, a small Insect, yet of greater Courage and more true
valor than thou Art; and to make good what I say, I here challenge thee to the
Combat, nor will I fall on thee basely, as thou for the most part do
treacherously on those whom thou make thy prey; but I shall first bid thee
defiance by the sound of my own Trumpet. The Gnat had no sooner ended, but flew
briskly humming round the careless Lion, and got, e're he was aware, into his
Nostril, where she began to bite and torment him. Which smart, the Lion not
able to endure, tare with his Paws his own Nose; raging with great Fury, and at
last threw and beat himself on the ground, where he lay roaring. The Gnat then
looking upon him as conquered, came out, and with her Trumpet proclaimed her
Victory. But as she thus flew triumphing about, by mischance she happened into
a Spiders Webb; where finding her self ready to be devoured; Alas, cried she,
I, that have fought with, and vanquished the most noble and most valiant
Creature of the World, am now to suffer Death by a Spider, one of the vilest of
all Insects.

This shows, that tho some mean Men by their subtle Arts, may happen to be
victorious over great Persons; yet they may afterward be worsted by others, of
more inconsiderable degree than themselves. Non si puo haver l' occhio ad ogni
cosa. Says Petrach. We cannot foresee every Danger. Fraudis, insidiarum et
Perfidiae plena sunt omnia.

FAB. LXXIX. The young Lion that would fight with a Man.
AMongst other Precepts, which an old Lion taught his Son, he gave him an
express charge never to engage in fight with a Man; For he, said the Father, is
a Creature, subtle, and not to be conquered. The young Lion heard this, but
with no intention to observe it: For, some time after, when grown almost to his
full bigness, and become sensible of his great strength and vigor; he went out
with a resolution to encounter a Man; and seeing in a Field a pair of Oxen
yoaked together, he came up to them, asking them if they were Men? They
satisfied him, they were not Men, but that a Man had laid that yoke upon their
Necks. Leaving these, he espied a Horse well Equipped in all his proper
Caparisons, and tied to a Tree by the reins of his Bridle; Of him he demanded,
Art thou a Man? No Sir, answered the Horse, but I am subject to a Man and serve
him. Traveling on, he saw by the side of a Wood, a Carpenter cleaving a Tree,
to whom he running, Art thou, demanded the Lion, a Man? I am so, answered he.
Then, proceeded the other, will you fight me? With all my heart, replied the
Man. But first, pray do me the favor to help pull this Tree in pieces for me,
where you see the Iron Wedges sticking in it; and afterward we shall have
leisure enough to fight. This the Lion readily undertook, and putting his Paws
into the Clift, as the Man directed him, he began to pull with all his
strength, whilst the Man with his Ax forced out the Wedges; After which, the
Tree suddenly closing, held the Lions Paws so fast, that he was no way able to
get loose. The Man then whooping and hallowing, called to his Neighbors and
Fellow Workmen for help, to kill the Lion: who seeing himself in this
Exegency, recollected all his Forces, and giving a sudden spring, he drew out
his Toes, but left his Nails sticking fast in the Tree; Then running with what
speed he was able, home to his Father, and showing his bloody Feet. Ah Father,
cried he, had I followed your prudent Admonitions, I had not thus unfortunately
lost my Nails.

By this Fable Young Persons are advised not only to obey their Parents, but to
take the good Counsel of such as they are satisfied are of known Experience in
the affairs of the World.

FAB. LXXX. The Boy that would not learn his Book.
NEither Whipping, nor Encouragement could avail, to induce a little Boy to
learn his Book; nay, so dull was he, that by all the Art and Industry his
Master could use, he could not possibly teach him to know the first letter A;
for which when his School-fellows afterward derided him, that he could not do
so easy a thing as learn the letter A, being, as he always seemed to them, so
sensible a Boy in other matters. Do ye think, said the Boy, I could not learn A
if I would? Yes, easily enough, continued he, but when once I shall have learnt
A, I must come to B, C, D, and to all the whole Generation of them, that I
shall engage my self in an endless piece of Work, which I should never be able
to go through with, and therefore think it best to stop at the Beginning.

We should not undertake any great enterprise, without making a full resolution
to go through with it.

FAB. LXXXI. The Wolf and the Hog.
TOuched with remorse of Conscience was an old Wolf, for having a long time
preyed upon the Sheep and Lambs of the whole Neighborhood; wherefore as a
Penance for what he had done, he resolved to abstain from flesh a whole year,
and all that time to feed on nothing else but on Fish. Now there passed but a
few days before this Wolf repented him of his rash Vow, longing for his wonted
Food; And seeing, once about supper time, a Hog run by him; his chops watered at
him, that he could not forbear pursuing him, and asking, what Creature art
thou? Who in a fear, answered, I am a Hog, belonging to a Countrymans Yard of
the next Village. A Hog? said the Wolf, surely a Hog is Fish, and laying hold
on him, he devoured him.

A wicked Man can never persevere in an honest and virtuous Resolution. Male
facere qui vult, nusquam non causam invenit. He who has a mind to do an ill
thing, shall never want a fair pretense for it; and the Proverb says, Lupus
pilos, non Aminum mutat. The Wolf may change his Hair, but never his ravenous
Temper.

FAB. LXXXII. The Smith and his Dog.
IT heartily vexed an industrious Smith to observe, that all the while he was
laboring at his Forge, his Dog should lie and sleep, and yet would carefully
wake so soon as he heard his Master leave off hamering to go to eat; For the
Dog then expected a share of the Victuals as really due to him. But the Smith,
one day looking with displeasure on him, Be gone, said he, thou lazy Cur, that
art not fit to live; for whilst I painfully work to get an honest Livelihood,
thou spendest thy time sloathfully in some dark corner; and no sooner do my
chops begin to move, but thy sleepy Eyelids are open; thou waggest thy tail,
come fawning upon me, and expectest to share the fruits of my Toil.

Such lazy Persons as wholly depend on other Men's labors, and will not apply
themselves to some virtuous Exercise, Study, or course of Living, can scarce
deserve to have a subsistence amongst Men. Tale est Glutonum ac Lurconum genus,
qui ex aliorum sudoribus otiose vivere non erubescunt; illudque perpetuo
obgannant, -- Deus nobis haec otia fecit.


FAB. LXXXIII. The Wolf, and the fat Dog.


NEar the break of day, a Wolf meeting a Dog in the fields, asked him how he
came to be so Fat, and in such good plight as he was? I take care, answered the
Dog, to keep my Masters House every night from disturbance; and if I happen to
discover a Thief, and interrupt his intended Mischief, my Master and all the
Family make much of me, and give me my fill of good Meat and Bones. By these
means I feed plentifully, sleep in a warm place under shelter, want no Drink,
nor other Conveniences, and spend my days in Idleness; Ah Brother, said the
Wolf, would I knew how I might enjoy so happy a life! That, without taking
pains, I might lay me down at Night to sleep with my belly full. Well, said the
Dog, if you desire to live thus in ease, and can but suppress a little, your
ravenous Temper, come along with me and fear nothing, for I doubt not but to
procure you my Masters favor. On this manner as the two Friends jogged on
discoursing, the Day brake, and when it began to grow lighter, the Wolf
observing the Dogs Neck, saw the Hair, and in some places the Skin, to be
rubbed off. At this sight, his curiosity being moved, Brother, said he, what is
it you wear about your Neck that leaves these unseemly Marks behind it? To make
me the Fiercer, answered the Dog, they chain me within all day, and let me
loose at Bedtime, that I may go up and down the House and Yard in the Night,
or sleep, when and where I please. The Wolf hearing this, Much good may it do
you with your easy life, said he, but as for my part, I had rather enjoy my
Freedom, tho I suffer some small Inconveniences. For I go where I will, and
have no chain to restrain me; I take my ranges about the Fields, the Mountains
and the Woods without control. I feed on the choicest young of all the Flocks
and Herds, and by my art and subtilty can avoid the Fury of Hunts-men, and of
their Dogs. So fare you well, live in the happy enjoyment of your beloved
Slavery; whilst I go on in my old way, and still retain my old Freedom.

All the Treasures of the World are of no value, compared to a Man's Liberty;
for while he is in Servitude, or under Confinement, it takes away the real
comfort and pleasure of the enjoyment of them. And yet he who boasts of the
greatest Freedom, is subject in one respect or another. Who amongst us is not a
slave to some Passion, or corporal Infirmity? Every one submits to the Law of
Nature, and to the Laws and Customs of the Country wherein he dwells; and Death
exercises his Dominion over all the World, so that it may not improperly be
said; There is none of us exempt from servitude.

FAB. LXXXIV. The Fishes that leaped into the Fire.
A Cook going about to fry some Fishes in Oil, they unanimously agreed to jump
out all together, in hopes they might escape choking in that filthy Liquor,
but leaping out of the Frying Pan, they all fell into the Fire; then pitifully
lamenting, Alas, cried they, it had been a less cruel Death to have been
suffocated in the Oil, than to perish in this burning Flame.

We should take care that to avoid a present mischief, we run not our selves
into somewhat more terrible.

FAB. LXXXV. The Judge who gave sentence against himself.
AN unruly Bull of a certain Magistrate, breaking out of his Pasture, came into
another Field, and there killed a Countrymans Cow. The poor Man knowing the
Judges Coveteous Temper, and how difficult it was to get a just satisfaction,
from so unjust a Man, went to his House, and thus craftily put the Case to him.
Sir, said he, My Bull leaping over into your Pasture, has so gored one of your
Cowes with his Horns, that she is since dead; what Reparation will you please
to order? What less Reparation, said the Judge in a Passion, can you expect I
should have, than that you pay me the full price of my Cow, or at least, that
you give me your Bull to make good my loss? Pardon, I beseech you, my Lord, my
foolish Blundering, cried the Countryman, for I mistook the matter; it was your
Bull, I should have said, that killed my Cow. Oh then, said this unjust Judge to
the poor Man, The Case is altered.

There have been in the World such Ministers of the Law, as have set forth Men's
Crimes in the blackest dye, and prosecuted Offenders with utmost rigor, whilst
they themselves being guilty of the very same things, have passed unpunished:
Who thought they had done a great piece of Justice, in sending a poor pilfring
Wretch to the Gallows, when, in the mean time, they devour Widows Houses, and
eat up the Bread of Orphans: And who have gloryed in their zealous Execution of
the Laws, for having punished some small Criminal fallen into their Nets, yet
they themselves have lived by Rapine, tho the Laws of the Country durst take no
notice of them. They have punished Drunkards, and Adulterers, but wallowed
privately in those very sins, and sometimes publicly too. Surely these mad Men
never called to mind, that God judges none more severely than such as are
Judges of others, but omit to judge themselves for the same Crimes; That are
quick sighted to spy out other men's faults, but wink at their own: And that lay
heavy Burdens on others, which they will not touch with their own little
Fingers.

FAB. LXXXVI. The Mice and the Cat.


GReat numbers of Mice frequenting an Old House, were discovered by a Cat, who
geting within their Range, entertained her self for some time, in the happiest
manner her heart could desire, as well with the pleasure of Hunting, as
satisfying her Hunger; by which she destroyed many of them. But when the Mice
perceived their numbers much decreased, they took a resolution amongst
themselves, to retire into the holes of the Floors and Ceilings, where it was
impossible for her to come. The Cat seeing the Mice had left their old Haunts,
invented this cunning Trick to surprise them; she crossed her two hinder legs
about a peg in the Wall, and hung with her Head downwards, as if she were dead;
which an old Mouse observing from a corner of the Room. O thou false Cat! cried
she, that think to deceive us by this piece of Policy; for my part, should I
see thee so really dead, that a Purse were made of thy skin, I would not
venture to come any nearer to thee.

A prudent Man that has been deceived by another, should be cautious how he
suffers himself to be drawn any more into his Snares.

Quicavet ne decipiatur, vix cavet, cum etiam cavet,
Etiam cum cavisse ratusest, saepe is cautor captus est.
FAB. LXXXVII. The Flea and the Man.
SKipping from place to place, a vexacious Flea happened to fix on a Man's leg;
who feeling the smart, invoked the assistance of Hercules to destroy it; but
when it made its escape, the impious Wretch being in a passion to lose the
Satisfaction of his revenge. O Hercules! said he, since thus against a Flea you
have refused me your help, how can I ever expect it against a greater Enemy?

Men should not trouble God with every frivolous Request, but when there is
just reason and occasion it is then fit to implore his Divine Majesty.

FAB. LXXXVIII. The Fool that sold Wit.
UP and down a City ran a Fool, boasting to all People he met, that he of late
had acquired a large stock of Wit, and would be content for Money, to impart
some of it, to any that desired to be Purchasers. This fancy invited a Man to
him to satisfy his Curiosity, who asking to buy some of his Wit, offered him
Money; The Fool took it, giving him a long piece of Packthred, and at the same
time striking him a blow on the Face, which almost beat him backwards on the
Ground. Hence forward, said he, Remember to keep out of a Fools reach, but the
length of this Thread, and thou may avoid such another mischief by it.

Keep no Company with Fools: For the less you converse with them* the sooner
shall you acquire Wisdom. Bought Wit is best.

FAB. LXXXIX. The Fox going to his Execution.
AS they were leading a Fox to the Gallows, to suffer for the many Cocks, Hens,
and other Fowls which he from a certain Village, had most impudently, without
all fear or shame run away with and devoured; he earnestly beged one favor at
their hands before his Death; which. was that they would not carry him the common
Road to the place of Execution; but good Gentlemen, cried he, let me be led by
the back side of the Town. They, imagining he had some cunning stratagem in his
Head, asked him the reason of his request? Because, answered he, I know there
is good store of Poultry that way, whose sight, or pleasant Cackling at least,
may comfort my Heart, this last moment of my life.

This Fable shows the incorrigible Villainy of wicked Men, who not only take a
Pleasure and Pride in the vileness of their Actions, but even in their very
Thoughts and Wills toward them.

FAB. XC. The Original of Walls.
IN those times when Gods and Men lived promiscuously together, as the Poet
Hesiod relates, Mankind was kept secure from all manner of danger, under the
Safeguard and Protection of the Deities. People dwelt not then within Walls,
nor had they cause to fear the Attacks of any Enemy: But the Gods being driven
from amongst them, by their wicked Impieties and Contentions, they were glad to
defend themselves from one another Rage, with Walls and deep Ditches, and
never thought their Fortifications strong enough. Afterward, calling to mind
the benefits they had received from the Gods whilst present with them, they had
their Walls dedicated to those Gods, and for a Memorial of them, called them by
their Names, instituting Rites, Ceremonies, and variety of Divine Worship upon
them; but could never by all their Devotion induce them to be propitious to
them as at first they had been, before they left them.

We sometimes obtain a good thing with small trouble and care, which if we once
lose, it is perchance never to be recovered by any Industry.

FAB. XCI. The Proud Mule.


A Mule pampred up with too much Provender, and seldom put to work, was grown
so Fat, and became so Proud, that he was often muttering; My Father, said he,
to himself, was certainly a Horse of Noble Extraction, swift in his Course, and
beautiful of his Person, and I in eevery respect do resemble him: For I am
graceful in my Goings, of handsome Shapes, and swift in my Carrier; I am also
adorned with rich and glorious Caparisons, and have my head governed by a
gilded Bit. While he was puffed up with these Imaginations, his Master sent
for him, and equipped him for the Race, wherein he tireing by reason of his
Fatness, his Master stripped him of all his rich Furniture, and not thinking
him fit any longer for running, made use of him only to carry heavy Burdens, and
retrenched his Allowance. Alas! said he then, sighing, I had thought a Horse
had been my Father, but now I am better informed, I find I am but the Son of an
Ass.

Fools, when flourishing in their Prosperity, forget themselves: But Adversity
refreshes their Memories, and brings them to a better sense of what they are.
Sicut Fumus magis ascendendo deficit, sic superbus plus exaltatus, plus
evanescit.

FAB. XCII. Jupiter and Minerva.
IN Ancient times the Gods chose to themselves Trees, whereof each of those
Deities would have the particular Protection. Jupiter, chief of the Gods was
for the Oak; Venus liked the Myrtle; Neptune God of the Seas admired the Pine;
Apollo the Laurel; And Hercules the Poplar. But Pallas wondering why they
should pitch upon such barren Trees, when they might as well have made choice
of as many fruitful ones, Jupiter gave her this reason for it; Lest, said he,
it should be thought, when Men come to worship us, that we sell the Fruit of
these Trees, for the Honor they pay us. Well, added Pallas, you may use your
Pleasures, but I shall choose the Olive Tree, and that too for the very Fruit
sake. Jupiter then kissing his Daughter, My dear Child, said he, with great
reason have all Ages esteemed thee Wise, and with just merit art thou the
Offspring of my Brain; for whatsoever we do, if we aim at no profit in it, all
our Glory from thence is but foolish and vain.

This admonishes us to undertake nothing but what brings some Profit or
Advantage with it. But for the clearer understanding this Fable, it will be
necessary to know. That,

The Oak is said to be sacred to Jupiter; because, in Saturns time, Man lived
on humane Flesh, but Jupiter afterward coming to reign, forbad that Food, and
taught them to eat Acorns; which Tree being first shown by him, is, for that
reason, as is supposed, said to be sacred to him.

The Myrtle to Venus; because, this Tree commonly grows in sandy ground near
the Sea, where Venus was born. But others suppose it was because Venus was
adorned with Myrtle when Paris decided the Controversy between the three
Goddesses which was fairest, giving the Golden Apple to her.

The Laurel to Apollo; because, Daphne, with whom this God was in Love, was
turned into a Lawrel-Tree, flying from the violence he would have offered her,
and grew upon the banks of the River Peneus in Thessaly.

The Pine to Neptune; because, of them are made the Masts and Yards for
Shipping.

The Poplar to Hercules; because, he was decked with Poplar Branches, when he
went down to Hell, and brought back with him from thence the three headed Dog
Cerberus.

The Olive is said to be sacred to Pallas; because she was the Inventress of
Planting the Olive Tree. Martialis lib. 11. Epig. 77.

Quid petis a Phebo? nummos habet arca Minervae.
Haec sapit; haec omnes foenerat una Deos.
FAB. XCIII. The two Travelers and the Thief.
TWo Men traveling together, the one a Coward, and the other Valiant, were
surprised on the Road by a Thief; Who boldly with his drawn Sword in his hand,
demanded their Money: The brisk Man having only a Cudgel, bravely kept him off a
while, till nimbly getting within his Swords point, he gave the Thief so
violent a blow on the Head as brake his skull, with which mortal wound he fell.
When he had thus honorably acquitted himself by the Thiefs death, his faint
hearted Comrade throwing off his Cloak, drew his Sword, and running up to his
Friend; Let him come, cried he, I Will soon make him see who it is, he attempts to
rob. Then he that had so valiantly behaved himself, looking with scorn on him,
I wish, said he, you would even now have assisted me but with such words, I
should have been more encouraged, thinking them true: But now you may sheath
both your Sword, and your boasting Tongue, and endeavor to deceive others who
know you not. For my part, I that have experience of your nimbleness in running
away, know how far your great valor is to be relied on.

This Fable may be applied to one that when there is no occasion, boasts of his
Courage; but in danger betraies his Pusillanimity. Extra bella leo, lepus in
discrimine pugnae. That in time of Peace, is a Lion, but in Battle, a Hare.

FAB. XCIV. The He Goat and Brazen Statue.
FOr some time had a He-Goat fixed his Eyes on the Brazen Figure of a Goat,
admiring the largeness of its Horns; And after he had with Indignation nodded
his head at it, as bidding it defiance, he stepping a little back, ran against
it with all his force, expecting with that single stroke to have overthrown it;
But so far short was he of his intention, that he brake off both his own Horns,
and falling on the the ground, dyed.

This is spoken to those who imprudently contend with others more powerful then
themselves; and in related by Herodotus, in his Erato, of Cleomenes King of
Sparta. To whom, as one Crios of Aegineta was boldly speaking in behalf of the
Inhabitants of his Island; The King asked him his Name? and being told it,
(...), says Cleomenes, Then Oh thou Ram! (alluding to his name) thou art about
to break thy Horns against Brass, whereby thou will spoil thy self.

FAB. XCV. The Eagle and the Connies.
FRom a high Tree as an Eagle sat by her Nest, she espied not far off certain
young Connies feeding, which she flying to, seized, and carried to her Young
Ones. Of this the tender Mother being a sad Spectator, begged earnestly that
she would restore her, her Children: But the cruel Eagle, deaf to all
entreaties, killed them before her face. This Tyranous usage filled the poor
Cony not only with grief, but with resentment of the Injury, and not being able
to contrive any more expedicious revenge against the Eagle, she dug about
the Roots of the Tree wherein the nest was, and so much loosened it, that with
the next blast of Wind, it fell to the Ground and destroyed all the Young
Eagles.

None should be too confident of their own greatness, so as to take a Liberty
of exercising their Cruelty and Oppression upon poor Men, with hopes that they
can never be in a Condition to revenge themselves. To confirm which, many
Examples might be produced, of Emperors, Kings and Princes, as well as of great
Ministers of State, and Officers Military and Civil; but if we look about us,
we may see many fresh Instances every day at home amongst our selves. Which may
put us in mind of the Old French Proverb, Tossed on tard, pres cu ^^in, a le Fort
du Foible besoin. Brevibus percunt ingentia causis. Claud.

FAB. XCVI. The Woman that had sore Eyes.
TO cure her sore Eyes, a Woman had agreed with an Oculist to give him such a
sum of Money, but if he effectually performed not his Work, he was to lose his
Reward. Now it was this unconscionable Doctors custom, that coming daily to
visit his Patient, he constantly stole and carried away with him, some thing or
other from her House. That when the Woman's Eyes were cured, and he demanded the
performance of his Bargain, the Woman refused to pay him, though being brought
before the Judge, she could not deny the Agreement, yet thus evaded the matter;
She alleged, the Cure was not perfected, and made it appear by good
Testimonies, that at the contract making with her Physician, she had her House
well furnished with Goods, and now that her Eyes were cured, as her Doctor
pretended, she could see no such thing there. By which Plea, she was acquitted,
and the Oculist punished for the Thievery.

Those who are too Covetous, and grasping at all, do commonly the greatest harm
to themselves.

FAB. XCVII. The Camel and Jupiter.
THe Camel seeing in the Fields a great Heard of Cattle well Armed with Horns,
began to murmur against Nature that had made him so defective, and crying to
Jupiter, thus expostulated with him. Oh! what an unfit thing is it that a Beast
of so large a body as I am, should go up and down without any Arms to defend my
self from the affronts of every Insolent, and vexacious Creature; Whenas thou
have armed the Lion with sharp Teeth and Paws, the Elephant with a Probossis,
the Bull with Horns, the Boar with Tusks, and so all other Beasts with one
Weapon or other, even to the very Hedg-Hog who can guard himself with his
Prickles. Only I, go wandering about the Woods and Fields, without Arms,
destitute of any manner of defense, scorned and contemned of all. I therefore
beseech thee, O, mighty Jupiter! to bestow on me Horns, like the Bulls, that I
may vindicate my self, from the daily Affronts of other Beasts. Jupiter seeing
him so unsensible of the benefit of his Greatness and Strength given him at his
Creation, took from him almost all his large and graceful Ears, and laughing at
him; Because, said he, thou were not content with what Nature, by my direction
gave thee, I take from thee thy Ears, that thou may always bear in mind this
Correction of thy unthankfulness.

Thus, Many now a days endeavoring after things impossible to be obtained,
lose by their neglect what they enjoyed before. Nulli mortalium Dii certam
futurorum scientiam dederint, nec post homines notos invenias quemquam, eui
omnia ex animi sententia successerit, ita ut nulla in re Fortuna sit adversata.

FAB. XCVIII. The Man and his two Wives.


WHen turned of fifty years of Age, and his Head so hoary, that it was hard to
judge whither it contained most black or white Hairs, must a Man needs be
married, and that to two Wives at once; of which one was Old, and the other
Young. These dwelling together in a House, the Old Wife in hopes of making him
fix his Love on her, would be often rubbing and combing his Head, at which
times she took occasion to pick out the black Hairs; that he seeming older than
he really was, and their Ages being more suitable, he might oftenest solace
himself in her Company. The young Woman also projecting how to draw off his
affections from her Rival, and settle them on her self, endeavored to rid his
Head of the White Hairs; by which means the poor Man, between both, was left in
a short time quite bald, and became the sport and mockery of all his Neighbors.

It Is a great madness for Old Men to Marry, especially to Young Wives, unless
they resolve to live in continual Vexation and Torment. Thales one of the Wise
Men of Greece, being asked when a Man should Marry, answered, Young Men not
yet, Old men not at all.

FAB. XCIX. The Chaffinch and the Thrush.
IT pitying a Good-natured Chaffinch to see a Thrush feeding in the Woods on
the wild Berries and Fruits, Alas, poor Creature! said she, How can you
possible live on such course Meats as these? Come with me, and I will show you
Fruits more delightful to the Appetite, and of more wholesome Nourishment to the
Body than these. The Thrush gladly accepted her Offer, and following her kind
Conductress was brought into a Garden well stored with ripe Figs, Grapes, and
other variety of excellent Fruits; where, as they were admiring the great
Plenty of every thing, and beauty of the Place; the Thrush espied several Nets,
Snares, and Limetwigs, and many Birds taken by them, at which affrighted, she
bad her Companion Farewell: For I had rather, said she, live secure in the
solitary Woods, feeding on those wild Berries, than on these choice Fruits, to
pass my life in such continual Fears and Dangers.

It Is better to live securely in Poverty, than with Riches in Fears, Ielousies
and Troubles. This made the Divine Phocillides ( as he is styled by the
incomparable Don. Fr. de Quevedo) thus to inveigh against Riches.

(...), etc.
O Aurum, malorum Dux, vitae Corruptela, omnia convellens,
Utinam non esses Mortalibus malum desiderabile!
Tua enim causa Pugnae, Praedae, Caedesque sunt,
Infensi Parentibus Liberique, Fratresque Consanguineis.
To which purpose, I may also add.

Gold, Bane of Peace, and Nourisher of War.
Who 'ore the World does spread thy Venom far,
Laws are remiss where thou the Power do get,
All vices thou unpunished do permit.
Torrent of Mischiefs, source of Ills the worst,
The more we drink of thee, the more we thirst.
FAB. C. The River, and its Spring.
THUS arrogantly did a River revile its own Fountain, Why remainest thou idly
there, covered with Weeds and Brambles? whose cold Waters are of no Benefit,
for they permit not the Production of any living thing within them. Whilst I
abound with variety of Excellent Fish, and am daily increasig my clear Current;
I pass on delightfully creeping through the pleasant Valleys, many times
yielding a melodious murmur, grateful to all that hear it. And in my large
Carriers, I view a diversity of Famous People, Countries and Cities; all which
partake of the Advantages I carry along with me. The Spring displeased at these
presumptuous Words withheld its Waters, whereby this ungrateful River quickly
became dry, and all its Fishes perished.

This Fable is against those who attribute all the good they have, to
themselves, and their own Industry, and not to God, who is the Fountain of all
goodness. It also blames those who boast themselves to be the Authors of any
good things which they received from others: And shows that the Sin of
Ingratitude ought ever to be severely punished. (...). It Is better to be
silent, than to speak that which becomes us not:

The end of the Second Century.
The Table.
1. AESop the Interpreter of a Will. 2. The Apes going to Build a City. 3. The
Tree drawn by Oxen. 4. The Dog and the Crocodile. 5. The Ass's Ambassy to
Jupiter. 6. The Pigeons and Magpy. 7. The Frogs that feared the Fighting of
two Bulls. 8. The Father and his two Daughters. 9. The Serpents Tail, and other
Members. 10. The Cuckoo and the Sparrow Hawk. 11. The Shepherd, the Wolf, and
the Fox. 12. The Daw that would be a King. 13. The Bees and the Drones. 14.
Aesop and the Countryman. 15. The tall Trees and the Shrubs. 16. The Swan and
the Stork. 17. The Fly and the Mule. 18. The Lapwing and the Parrot. 19. The
Fox and the Women. 20. The wise Lion. 21. The Wallet, or Jupiter and Momus. 22.
The Crow and the Swan. 23. Arion and the Dolphin. 24. The Man that had his Corn
grow without Beards. 25. The Eagle, the Hawk, and the Kite. 26. The Shepherd
and his Dog. 27. The Father and the Son. 28. The Camel, the Elephant, and the
Ape. 29. The Wallnut-Tree. 30. The Lamb that danced to the Wolf. 31. The Vale
and the Mountain. 32. The Ass and the Calf. 33. The Wolf turned Shepherd. 34.
The Woman that lamented for her Husband. 35. The Countryman and the Hors-man.
36. The Old Wolf that found a Prey. 37. The Storks and the Kite. 38. Jupiter
and the Tortois. 39. The Wolf and the Sheep. 40. The Hares and the Foxes. 41.
The Serpent that complained to Jupiter. 42. The Mouse, The Frog, and the Kite.
43. The Hermet and the Soldier. 44. The Ship-wreckt Athenian. 45. The Horse,
the Bull, the Dog, and the Man. 46. The Plowman and his Oxen. 47. The Cock,
the Ass, and the Lion. 48. The Boar and the Fox. 49. The Eagle and the Fox. 50.
The Hares that were afraid without Cause. 51. The Old Dog and his Master. 52.
The Crow and the Dog. 53. The Master and his Servant. 54. The Monkey that
gathered VVall-nuts. 55. The two Hogs. 56. The Dog, the Ass, and their Master.
57. The rich Man and the Tanner. 58. The Shepherd and the careful Dog. 59. The
Dolphins, the Whales, and a Crab fish. 60. The Cock that betrayed the Fox. 61.
The Hinds and the Panther. 62. The Countryman and the Flies. 63. The Hound and
the other Dogs. 64. The Frogs and the Flags. 65. The Lion, the Cow, the Goat,
and the Sheep. 66. The Shepherd, the Shepherdess, and Worms. 67. The Flea and
the Camel. 68. The Answer of Socrates to his Neighbors. 69. The Dragon, the
Leopard, and the Unicorn. 70. The Lion and the Man traveling together. 71. The
Trifler, or Delayer. 72. The Ass carrying an Image. 73. The Tortois and the
Eagle. 74. The Lark and her young Ones. 75. The Fox and the Ape. 76. Demades
the Orator his Tale. 77. The Countryman and a Tree. 78. The Lion and the Gnat.
79. The young Lion that would fight with a Man. 80. The Boy that would not
learn his Book. 81. The Wolf and the Dog. 82. The Smith and his Dog. 83. The
Wolf and the fat Dog. 84. The Fishes that leaped into the Fire. 85. The Judge
who gave sentence against himself. 86. The Flea and the Man. 87. The Mice and
the Cat. 88. The Fool that Sold Wit. 89. The Fox going to his Execution. 90.
The Original of Walls. 91. Jupiter and Minerva. 92. The Proud Mule. 93. The two
Travelers and the Thief. 94. The He Goat, and a Brazen Statue. 95. The Eagle
and the Conies. 96. The Woman that had sore Eyes, 97. The Camel and Jupiter.
98. The Man and his two Wives. 99. The Chaffinch and Thrush. 100. The River and
its Spring.
FINIS.
Mythologia Ethica: OR, AESOPIAN FABLES. The Third Century.

The PREFACE. TO The Third Century OF FABLES.
FABLES are not only delightful, but very profitable to the Readers, if well
understood; for as the Bees will not be satisfied with the Beauty of the
Flower, till they have sucked out its Honey; so is not the Fable, or Tale, so
much to be valued, as the good Morality and Erudition which is to be drawn from
it. The Word Fabula, seems to be derived a Fando, from Speaking; for Fables are
supposed to be things spoken only, but not done. They were first Invented, that
by the Feigned Words, and Pleasant Tricks of Irrational Creatures, the ill
Manners and Actions of bad Men might be reproved, and the Virtues of good Men
encouraged. We read of diverse sorts of Fables amongst the Poets, but I shall
wave at present their several Distinctions, and only speak of those whereof
Aesop is generally supposed to be the Inventor. He, with the rest of my
Authors, have taught the use of Speech, as well to things Insensible, as
Sensible; and here, as in some Republic, they all Act in their several Sphers;
They summon their Councils, or Senates; Determine the weighty Affairs of State;
Deliberate of Peace and War, etc. And what is all this for? but to Instruct
Mankind by Moral Precepts and Examples, dressed up in these pleasant Tales,
that they may be more readily entertained by all sorts of People. By Fables may
even Children be taught by their Nurses, and that by way of Recreation, to be
in Love with Virtue, and Hate Vice; which way of Instructing Youth has been
recommended by great Men, but particularly by the two Princes of Philosophers,
Plato in his Second Dialogue, de Republ. and by Aristotle in his Politics. And
how indeed could vulgar Understandings be made capable of receiving such grave
and solid Rules of Virtue, if they were not by some Art fixed in their Minds,
by such Images, and Idea's, as these? Here are the Good and Ill Inclinations of
Creatures represented. Here you find Simplicity commended in the Lamb, and in
the Dove; Diligent Labor and Industry in the Be, and the Ant; Fidelity in the
Dog; Courage and Generosity in the Lion; which Virtues are likewise highly
applauded in Man. We also see a Hairbrained Fury, and Rapacity blamed in the
Wolf; a Sordid Dullness, and Slothfulness in the Ass; Fraud, Flattery, and
subtle Insinuation in the Fox; and all manner of Vices by some Creature or
other properly expressed, and then rendered Odious. The Intention of all which
is, that we seeing, as in a Glass, the Beauty of Virtue, and Deformity of Vice,
might prudently steer the Course of our Lives, by those Lines which are here so
Industriously laid down for our use.

Mythologia Ethica: OR, AESOPIAN FABLES. The Third Century.
FAB. I. The Quarrel betwixt the Members of a Human Body, and the Stomach.


IN those times when in Man, the several Members of his Body acted not as now
they do, all by a mutual consent, but every one did according to his own Fancy.
The Feet and Hands enviously accused the Stomach of Slothfulness; You, said
they, receive all our good things, and enjoy them: We take the pains, whilst
you reap all the Profit and Pleasure; whatsoever we acquire by our Labor and
Industry, you devour, living in continual Laziness: You therefore shall take
your choice of two things, either to learn some Art for your own Maintenance,
or else resolve to Perish by Hunger; and thus in a Passion these Members
deserted it. Now the Stomach knowing not how to subsist of it self, begged
several times, with great Humility, their Help and Favor; but they still
refused to listen to it. So that being for some days forced to live without
Nourishment, its natural heat was quite gone, and Thirst having dried up the
Throat, Nature had utterly lost all her Powers; And then alas! the Hands, when
too late, perceiving the Body ready to expire, offered it Meat and Food in
abunddance, with all sorts of Delicates; but it was to no purpose, for the
Stomach having been long empty, was become feeble, and could not perform its
Functions. Thus died the whole Body, by the Effects of the Envy and Dissension
of its Members.

The Society of the Members with the Stomach, are like Human Society, each
Member having need of the rest of the Members to be able to subsist: So does
every one want the (...) and Friendship of other Men; for Riches and Honor are
not sufficient here without Friends to stand by and assist us. But I cannot
pass by this admirable Fable, without giving a larger account of its History
and Allegory. Titus Livius tells us in his Decades, That the People of Rome
revolting from the Senate, had assembled together on Mount Aventine, resolving
no longer to pay Obedience to the Senate. But the Senate sent Menenius Agrippa,
a man of great Authority and Reputation in the City, who related to them this
Fable at large, letting them see by the Example of the Stomach, and Parts of
man's Body, the mutual dependence of the Senate and the People one upon another.
For do not think (said he) my fellow Citizens, that tho the Government or
Senate seem Idle to you, and that they keeping the People to their several
Trades and Occupations, are for that Reason the less necessary for your
preservation. It is the Government which dispenses the Heat to you, which fits
and distributes the good Nourishment to all its most remote Members. Nor
suppose that you work for them, but they much more for you. Do not then so
weaken this part of you, by your factious Mutinies, that it be made incapable
of serving you; for after some little time, Necessity will constrain you to fly
to the Senate for their help, when perchance it may not be in their power. Your
Seditions and Extravagancies may oblige them to take another course, and then
you will live without defense, void of all Counsel and Help, without Riches,
without Authority, and in one word, a Prey to your Neighbors. This, or the
like Speech, wrought so effectually with the Mutineers, that they all retired
home to their Houses. By which we may Judge how necessary it is, that there
should be a mutual Union of all the Members for preservation of the Body,
either Natural, or Politic: For it is impossible, that either the one, or the
other should subsist without Concord, which is the Chain that binds them
together. It Is therefore no wonder, that the Author hereof, proposed this Fable
of the Stomach and the other Members, to make us hate Factions and Divisions,
which often prove the Ruin and utter Destruction of Commonwealths, by exposing
them to the Fury of their Enemies. Concordia res parvae crescunt, Discordia,
vel maximae dilabuntur. Salust:

FAB. II. The Swallow and the Crow.
A Dispute was held with great obstinacy, between a Swallow and a Crow, which
of them was most Beautiful. Wherein, after the Swallow seemed to have gained
the Point of her Antagonist; But thou, replied the Crow, can only boast of
thy beauty in the Summer; whereas mine endures all the Year round.

Soundness of Body, as most durable, is of more value than Beauty, which is but
of a short continuance.

FAB. III. The Carter and his Horse:
IT was a Horses hard Fortune to serve a cruel Master, who allowing him scarce
half his due proportion of Meat, his Bones seemed ready to start through his
Skin. This poor Beast drawing a heavy load in a deep way, happened to be set
fast in a miry place, from whence not being able to stir, he, by the surly
Carter, was miserably beaten. The wretched Horse then considering the
difficulties he labored under, and that this unreasonable Man imposed a task
on him, which he had not strength enough to perform, was very sorrowful,
accusing his Master of too great severity and injustice. But the furious Driver
enflamed to a greater pitch of Rage, without any sense of pity toward him,
still lashed him more and more, and instead of cherishing him, gave him at last
this uncomfortable Sentence: I Will force thee, either to draw out this Cart from
hence, or here I Am resolved to make thee breathe thy last.

This Apologue paints out those Tyrants, who unreasonably wrack their Subjects,
their Debtors, Tenants, or others whom they have at their Mercy, and like
Horse-Leaches suck their very Blood, till they leave them barely nothing but
Skin, and Bone. Ite and operamini, Paleae autem non dabuntur vobis, and
reddetis consuetum numerum Late rum. I Will have my money or make Dice of thy
Bones.

FAB. IV. The Master and his Dogs.
MAny Dogs being kept by a certain rich Man for his Pleasure; one of them
without any Provocation, bit his Son that he dyed of the wound, at which the
Master was so much enraged that he was not content only to hang up the Dog that
did the Mischief, but made the rest of his Fellows for his sake, suffer the
same hard fate.

One Evil Companion may ruin a whole Society.

FAB. V. The Countryman at the Olympic Games.
A Husbandman that by chance had bent his Plow-share, seeing his Son who was a
lusty Fellow, with one forcible blow of his Fist, set it right again, as if it
had been, by the stroke of a Hammer; he was amazed at the Young Man's Prodigious
strength, and resolved to carry him to the Olympic Games, where he hoped he
might acquire immortal Honor. But when in the Lists, he was wrestling with an
Artist, he for want of skill, to add to his great strength, was at first
shamefully foiled: which his Father seeing, fretted at, and calling to him,
Son, Son, said he, remember the Plow-share blow. At that word, the Young Man
pulling his Adversary to him with his Left Hand, gave him so violent a bang on
the Pate, with his Right, as not only knocked him down, but left him half dead
on the ground. By which the Countryman won the Palm.

This Story is related by Pausanias, of one Glaucus Caristius; and may teach us
that those things are best done, which are performed after our old accustomed
manner. Pausanias tells us, that this Young Man's Fathers Name was Demylus, and
that he called to his Son (...), illam de aratro impinge.

FAB. VI. The Stag and the Oxen.


OUT of his closest lurking Places in the Woods, as a Stag was chased by
Hunters, being guided by his blind Fears, he fled for shelter to a near
Village, and it being Evening, there opportunely hid himself, in a Stable
amongst certain Oxen. Whom one of the Oxen courteously saluting, What safety
can thou here, said he, propose to thy self, wretched Creature, that come
posting to thy inevitable Destruction, thinking to save thy self among Men? Do
not I beseech you discover me, said the Stag, and I will be gone with the first
opportunity. When it was Night, a Servant came in to feed the Oxen, but saw him
not; next, several other Clowns went in and out, without espying him, who had
hid himself in the Hay. After these, the chief Servant looked in, and did not
perceive him. The Trembling Stag then began to take some Courage, hoping the
Danger over, and thanked the Oxen for having so kindly entertained him in this
Exigency. We wish you well, answered they, but lie close yet a while longer,
lest he who has a hundred Eyes should come, and then your Life would be in
great hazard. Whilst they were saying this, the Master himself newly risen from
Supper, came in, and having lately observed his Oxen to be lean and neglected,
looked into the Manger, where he found they wanted Hay, and that other things
were in disorder; He therefore taking care to put them as they ought to be,
espied the Stags Horns appearing aloft out of the Hay. Then calling his
Servants, he commanded them to kill him. Which being done, he possessed himself
of the Prey.

This shows that a Man shall see more with his own Eyes, than with other Men's.
It is the Master that can look most narrowly into his own Affairs. We also
observe by this Fable how hard it is for a Man to hide himself in time of
Distress; for Fortune beginning to persecute him, seldom leaves him till he be
destroyed.

FAB. VII. The Ape, and the Fox.
WITH the most pressing Arguments he could use, did an Ape importune a Fox to
give him a piece of his Tail to cover his Buttocks: For I want, said he, but
what you may easily spare, and have enough left for your self, for you cannot
chose but be sensible that such a great quantity is rather troublesome to you,
than of any convenience. No, answered the Fox, you should not have one Inch of
my Tail to cover your Posteriors, though I were so burdened with it that I
should be forced to drag it through the dirt after me.

Many are Rich, and some have a greater stock of Riches than they know well how
to dispose of; but there is no Rich Man will be content to give to one that is
Poor, all above what he has need of.

(...).
When thou art Rich, think to assist the Poor.
FAB. VIII. The Ape and the Dolphin.
IT was a Custom among the Athenians, when they went to Sea, to take with them
for their pastime, little Dogs, Monkies, or the like. Now it happened that as
some Merchants of that City were going a Voyage, having an Ape on Board them,
and sailing along the Attick Coast as far as the Promontory Sunium, there arose
a great Tempest, wherein the Ship springing a leak was about to sink to rights;
which forced the Passengers to expose themselves to the mercy of the Sea,
amongst whom, was the Ape floating on a Wave, and in danger of losing his Life;
but being espied by a Dolphin, the Friend of Mankind, he was by the Fish taken
upon his back, and carried toward the Shore. And when they were come within
the Haven of Athens, called the Piraeus, the Dolphin asked him of what Country
he was; The Ape answered of Athens, and descended of an Honorable Family
there. The Dolphin then demanded if he knew the Piraeus? which the Ape thinking
had been the Name of a Man, replied, Oh, very well Sir, he is my most intimate
Acquaintance, and particular Friend. The Dolphin hearing this impudent Lie, was
angry, and throwing him into the Sea, there drowned him.

This Fable is against Vanity and Lying, which we often find do not only bring
great Prejudice and Disgrace, but even Destruction too, to those who are
addicted to them.

Qui mentiuntur impudenter, hi suis
Refellere ipsi se solent mendaciis.
FAB. IX. The Halcyon, or Kings-fisher.
THE Halcyon, a Bird affecting Solitude, lives about the Sea Coasts, and for
fear of the Fowlers makes her Nest commonly in a Cliff. This Bird on a time
having hatched her young on a small Rock in the Sea, was gone abroad to seek
meat for them, but a Tempest happening in her absence, was so violent that it
tossed the Waves over the Rock, and washed away both her Nest and Young.
Which loss, when the troubled Mother perceived at her return. Alas! cried she.
A most unhappy Creature am I, that having forsaken the Land, expecting more
security here, in the Sea, do find that I have be-taken my self to a place of
greater Malice and Treachery.

Many Men, to avoid the Danger they apprehend from others, thrust themselves
into the Protection of such as they suppose are their greatest Friends, who
having them in their Power (as we see by daily Experience) treat them ten times
worse than their most violent Enemies could have done.

It Is observed that when the Halcyon lies still, the Sea is calm. As Ovid,
Metam. XI.

Tum via tuta Maris; ventos custodit, and arcet.
Aeolus egressu, praestatque Nepotibus Aequor.
FAB. X. The Sow and the Bitch.
SOme Discourse happening between a Sow and a Bitch, about their Fruitfulness
and Facility in bringing forth their Young. The Bitch told her, she admired any
Creature could have confidence to make a comparison with her on those Subjects.
Yet you may be pleased to remember, said the Sow, That all your numerous
Offspring are born blind.

A great Work is not so much to be valued for the quick finishing of it, as for
its Compleatness and Perfection.

FAB. XI. The Fox the Wolf and the Ape.


WITH very opprobrious Language a Wolf accused a Fox of Theft, which the Fox
utterly denied, protesting his Innocence. For determination of which
Difference, an Ape being appealed to sat as Judge betwixt them. Before him they
pleaded their own Causes with great subtilty, each using his best Oratory to
expose the others ill Courses of Life, to beget in the Judge an ill Opinion of
his Adversary, as it is a Custom amongst Pleaders; and neither of them was
sparing in publishing at large his own Honesty and Integrity. But the Ape a
most prudent Magistrate gave Sentence between them according to what he had
observed in the management of the Process. For he could not find out, that the
Wolf had lost what he accused the Fox of: But he believed the Theevish Fox, had
stolen something, tho he so stiffly denied it on Examination. So he advised
them to go and live peaceably together, yet always with suspicion one of
another, since you know, added he, that any one who is guilty of those ill
things of which ye have thus plainly taxed each other, ever ought to live with
caution amongst such as he knows to be as bad as himself.

Those who are known to live by ill Courses, lead Miserable Lives being hated
and avoided by all good Men, and have even a continual Suspicion and Jealousy
one of another. The Spaniards say, El que ha las sospe^has, ha las hechas. He
that is often suspected, has some guilt. Quicunque turpt fraud semel innotuit,
etiamsi verum dicit, amittit fidem. Phaed.

FAB. XII. The two Frogs that were Neighbors.
TWO Frogs being Neighbors, one dwelling in a deep Pond, at some distance from
the Highway, and the other in a shallow Plash which contained but little Water
in it, and lay close by the Road. She of the Pond made a Courteous Invitation
to the other, to come and reside with her, where she might feed well, and live
in greater security. Which kind offer was slighted by her of the Highway, who
returned her this Answer, That she for some time had lived happily in that
Place, and therefore cared not to remove. Not long after, when she little
thought of such a Misfortune, a Cart coming that Road, happened to squeeze the
imprudent Frog in pieces.

Those who have got ill Habits, and Customs, will sooner lose their Lives than
change them.

FAB. XIII. The Oak and the Elm.
MOST pernicious Council did the Favorite Elm give to the Royal Oak, That for
his more firm Establishment in his Empire, also for his Advantageous
Nourishment, and better Air, it was requisite that many of those lesser Trees
which were about him (against whom the Elm had some private Enmity) should be
pulled up by the Roots, and utterly destroyed. Which thing this great Minister
did not slightly urge, but with pregnant Reasons and Arguments was continually
endeavoring to persuade. At last the daily importunity of this dissembling
Elm, having tired the patience of his most gracious Prince, and provoked him to
a just Anger. What should I do, said he, (expressing a Majestic Indignation in
his Looks) when I am assaulted with violent Storms and VVhirl-winds, if I
should destroy these my nearest Friends, and Loyallest Subjects, who stand
always ready to assist and defend me? No they shall therefore be preserved and
cherished by me. When the wicked Favorite heard this, he withdrew in great
Confusion: The King threatening him with Death, or a very severe Punishment, if
for the future, he should ever counsel him to the prejudice of his good
Subjects.

The Oak expresses the true Affection, and tender Care which a good Prince has
for his Subjects; and how ready he is to preserve them from the wicked
Machinations of evil Counselors. In the multitude of his People is the
Strength and Dignity of a King; but in their want is his Shame and Destruction.
Tunc fore Respubl. beatas, si aut Docti eas regerent, aut qui regerent, omne
suum Studium in sapientia and benignitate collocarent.

FAB. XIV. The Horse and the Ass.
AS a Horse completely equipped in rich Furniture was traveling proudly on the
Road; he, in a dirty passage meeting an Ass loaded with a heavy burden. Thou
dull and sluggish Beast! said he with great Insolence; How dare thou thus
sawcily stand in my way? Get thee instantly from before me, or I shall tread
thee in the dirt under my feet. The poor Ass had not the Courage to answer him,
but so soon as he was able, gave him the Track. Not long after this, the Horse
being spoiled by overstraining himself, and observed by his Master to be out of
case, and never more fit for running, he took from him all his splendid
Ornaments, and sold him to draw in a Cart. Whom the Ass afterward espying at
work in this different Harness. Ah, said he, maliciously Laughing! What new
sort of Accoutrements are these? Where is now your Embroidered Saddle, your
rich Trappings, and your glistering Bit? Is all your Glory come to this? Thus
may it always happen to those, so Insolent as thou have been.

How many are there, who when advanced into some Office, or raised by some
means or other to Greatness, have so far forgot themselves, and all Modesty,
that their Pride would scarce suffer them to speak or look on a poor man,
without Insolently dispising him: and when Fortune has turned against them, as
nothing is certain in this World, they themselves have been Scorned by all. --
Tolluntur in altum, Ut lapsu graviore ruant.
Claudian.

FAB. XV. Mercury and the Statuary.
MErcury being curious to know how he was esteemed amongst men, took on him
human Shape, and went into a Statuary's Shop, where diverse Images of the Gods
were; and observing one of Jupiter amongst them, he first asked the Price of
it? The Artist told him a Hundred Crowns. And at how much, said he, do you
value that of Juno? The Price, replied the Man, is the same with Jupiters. At
which Mercury smiled, supposing them very cheap: and showing his own Statue,
which being not Inferior in Workman-ship to any there; he thought, that being
the Messenger and Interpreter of the Gods, he should be of great value and
esteem amongst men, so demanded its Price? If, said the Statuary, you buy the
other two, I shall give you that of Mercury into the bargain.

Thus many Vainglorious Men, who set a great value upon themselves, often find
that they are least esteemed by others.

FAB. XVI. The Apes Head.
AMongst other pieces of Meat which lay on a Butchers Stall, a Man observing
the head of an Ape there to be Sold, asked what kind of Taste it had? The
Butcher laughing, answered; Quale Caput est, talis praestatur Sapor. As the
Head is, such is the Taste it yields.

I suppose, says Phaedrus (speaking as I conceive of Aesop, who though deformed
of Person, yet of a Prodigious Sharpness of Wit, and Profound Knowledge) that
saying was rather intended as a Jest, than Truth; for I have known many men of
most (...) Shape, and Beautiful Aspect, yet very wicked: and many others who
have been unhandsome of Person, yet of great Virtue, and clear Understanding.
Mentem hominis Spectato, non Frontem. Look on Men's Minds, not their Faces. And
Ovid says; Si mihi difficilis Formam Natura negavit,
Ingenio Formae damna rependo meae.
Nature to make me handsome thought not fit,
But this Defect is recompenc*d in Wit.


FAB. XVII. The Swan and the Cook.


A Rich man who had many Geese which he kept for his Table, bought a Swan for
her admirable Singing, and suffered her also to feed amongst them: but
intending one Night to have a Goose killed for his Supper, the Cook by mistake
happened to catch hold of the Swan, which in the dark he could not distinguish
from one of the Geese; 'til she perceiving the danger she was in, began a most
sweet Song (as they are reported always to do, when they foresee they are near
their Deaths) by which excellent Melody she being discovered, her Life was
preserved.

The Intention of this Fable is to commend Music; for some Men, who have
attained to great Perfection in that rare Science, reap great Profit as well as
Pleasure, and such may happen to preserve their own Lives by it. But methinks
it should rather intend Eloquence, and readiness of Speech; for many men
expressing themselves with an admirable presence of Mind, have avoided some
great Danger, or violent Death. The Italian Proverb is; Un bell parlar a tempo e
gran Guadagno. A wise Word spoken in Season, is of great advantage.

FAB. XVIII. Aesop at Play.
WHEN an Athenian saw Aesop playing with Nuts, amongst a company of Boys, he
stood still, laughing at him, and jeering, as at a Fool or Mad-fellow. The good
old man, who was better able to scoff at others, than they at him, perceiving
him so well pleased at the sight, and at his own Wit, ran home and fetched a
Bow, which he unbending, laid down in the middle of the Street. Well Sir, said
he, you that are so wondrous wise, give me a reason for what you see I have now
been doing, if you can? The People then flocking about them, the man began to
consider, and beat his Brains for the meaning of the Question proposed to him;
at last he was forced to acknowledge his Ignorance. Old Aesop seeing himself
Victor; You, said he, would soon break this Bow, should you always keep it at
full bent; but if sometimes you suffer it to be thus slackened, you may make
fit use of it at your pleasure.

So should we sometimes give Divertisement to the Mind and Spirits, that they
being refreshed may return the more firm, and more vigorous to the performance
of their Functions. Otiare, quo Labores. Repose a while, that you may fall to
Work. This was no such Crime in Aesop to be found at Play; since many Learned
and Great Persons have frequently recreated themselves, for thus refreshing
their Minds. It is reported of Frederick the Second, King of Denmark, a Wise
and Learned Prince, that after tiring himself with the weighty Affairs of
State, he would call some of his Courtiers aside in a familiar manner, now,
would he say, That the King is absent, let us divert our selves a while; and
when it was time to leave off, he would tell them with a grave Countenance, Now
let us have done, for the King is returned.

But our Laughing Athenian may opportunely be put in mind of the Old Greek
Adage.

(...).
A Fool, when there is no real Cause, can Laugh.

FAB. XIX. The Dragon, the Countryman, and the Fox.
THE great overflowing of a River by some violent Rains, had carried away from
its Bankside a Dragon, who had long dwelt there; and the River falling on a
sudden, left him very remote on a dry Sand; from whence not being able to get
home, wanting Water, he was lamenting at the great distress he saw himself in.
But espying a Countryman, who was traveling that way with an Ass; the Dragon
called to him, entreating him to be so charitable to carry him home to the
River, not being able to get thither without help, and promised for the favor,
to give him great store of Gold and Silver. The hopes of such a reward made the
poor Man undertake the charge, who according to direction bound the Dragon,
laid him on his Ass, and carried him to his Cave; where so soon as he had
untied him and set him at liberty, he demanded his pay. How said the Dragon, Do
you expect Gold and Silver for tying and penioning me on that manner? I did it,
replied the Countryman by your own Order. Well, added the Dragon, cease your
impertinence, or I shall make bold to eat you, for I protest have a keen
Stomach at this very moment. Would you then reward me Evil for Good? demanded
the poor man. While they were in this dispute, a Fox came that way and enquired
the cause of their difference? The Dragon told him, that the man had tied and
abused him, carrying him on his Ass, and now expected money for the injury. Very
unjustly, said the poor man, has this Dragon abused me, for I found him far
from this place, left on dry Ground, whither he had been carried by this River;
and from thence at his earnest request, promising me a considerable recompense
of Gold and Silver, I brought him bound, as he directed me, safely home; and
now he ungratefully threatens to devour me. You did saucily, said the Fox, to
bind him so hard; but let me see how it was, and I shall the better Judge
betwixt you both. The man beginning to bind him, Did the Fellow, said the Fox,
bind you thus hard before? Not only so, answered the Dragon, but a hundred
times worse. Then said the Fox, draw the Knots straiter. The Countryman being
strong, tied the Cords with all his force. Was you thus cruelly bound? demanded
the Fox. Ay Indeed Sir, answered the Dragon. 'Twas barbarously done, added the
Fox, for now you have no power to help your self. Not any, said the Dragon.
Then said the Fox to the Man, thou may lay him again on thy Ass, and carry
him back to the place where thou foundest him; there leave him bound, and thou will be sure he cannot eat thee. The man rejoicing to be so well delivered
from, and revenged of this perfidious Dragon, did as the Fox had Judged, and
left him there to perish.

Those who think to recompense Poor Men Evil, for the Good Services they
received from them, do many times suffer a just Punishment for their wicked
Intentions,

FAB. XX. The Flies and the Honey.
CErtain Flies came to a place where Honey was spilt, which when they had
tasted, were so well pleased with its Sweetness, that they eat til they had
filled themselves with it. But thinking to go away, they found their feet
sticking fast and endeavoring to fly, fixed likewise their Wings, that they
were entangled in it, as with Birdlime; from whence not being able to remove,
they all shortly perished; and as they were expiring, cried, Alas! that we,
only for the pleasing a little of our Pallats, should thus miserably lose our
Lives.

This Fable hints at those Licentious Persons, who by Gluttony, Drinking, or
Debauchery with lewd Women, bring themselves to some great Misfortune, or
untimely End.

FAB. XXI. The Quarrelsom Young Man, and his Father.
MAny times was a Young Man accustomed at his coming home, to boast how briskly
he had behaved himself in certain Quarrels and Broils wherein he had been
engaged, and in what an ill condition he had left his Adversarys. To whom his
Father, as often as he heard him, was wont to say. It Is well, Son, but you have
not yet met with whom you seek. This was the young man's common practice, till
one night coming in miserably battered and mauled, he only muttered, and was
retiring to hide himself in a corner. But his Father espying him. Truly Son,
said he, you have now at last, met the Person you have so often taken pains to
find.

By this we are taught not to be puffed up with any success in things that are
neither honorable nor at all commendable: And that no man is so valiant, but
he may meet with another as Brisk and Desperate as himself, by whom he may
possibly be worsted.

FAB. XXII. The Liberal Man and the Thieves.
A Liberal man Traveling on the Road, fell into the hands of Thieves, who
after a consultation about him, was almost persuaded by the Arguments of one of
the Rogues to kill him, which another of the Gange would by no means consent
to; alleging, that he knew him to be a Charitable and Generous Man, and I my
self, added he, have been liberally assisted by him. By which Testimony of him,
the good Thief prevailed with his Comerades for the Travelers departing in
safety.

This Shows that Liberality works upon the Tempers even of the worst of men.

(...).
Sometimes to Fortune let small Gifts be spared,
For often they return, with great reward.
FAB. XXIII. The Dog that wrongfully accused a Sheep.
BY the malicious Accusation of a false Dog was an harmless Sheeps dragged away
to be tried for her Life before a Judge, for refusing to pay the Dog a Loaf,
which he affirmed he lent her. And upon the Sheep denying she had ever borrowed
any Bread of him, as was true; a Kite, a Wolf, and a Vulture, considering the
advantage that would accrue to them by the Sheeps Conviction, came into Court
to justify the Accusation; There, when without scruple of Conscience, they had
given in their false Evidence upon Oath, the innocent Sheep was found guilty,
and being Condemned, was by the Dog and his perjured Companions, carried away
and devoured.

The Dog in this Fable being made the Sheeps Accuser, from whom she rather
might have hoped for protection, shows, that those Persons whose Friendship we
have most reason to expect, do often prove our greatest Persecutors: And to
render our Calamities the more effectual, they can set up False witnesses
against us; Who are a sort of Vermin, the mere Disgrace of Mankind, for they
dare stand up with the greatest Impudence to justify their invented
Accusations, being Men who have no Principle in them of Morality, much less any
dread of the Divine Law, which declares, that the false Witness shall not go
unpunished. So that with them nothing is held sacred, nothing inviolable. These
impious wretches, before an Earthly Judge, dare call the great Creator, and
Judge of Heaven and Earth to witness their Perjuries, so to make their
Impostures be believed; by which they take away from the Innocent Person his
Life, Estate, or both; who then expecting but little favor in this World,
must make his appeal to Divine Justice for relief; The Magistrates all this
while being deceived by the appearance of Honesty and Probsity in these
Perjurers. Nor is Aesop to be blamed for thus roughly treating these false
VVitnesses, in comparing them to the Kite, the Wolf, and the Vulture, since
really considered, they are worse than Devils, who may be made to speak Truth,
tho against their wills, which is more than these Monsters can be compelled to
do. (...), is the Advice of Phocylides. Do not, says he, forswear thy self, for
the immortal God hates him that Swears falsely.

FAB. XXIV. The Geese and Cranes.
CErtain Geese and Cranes feeding together in a Meadow, the Fowlers came on a
sudden to surprise them; but the Cranes being light, quickly flew away, whilst
the Geese that were corpulent and unweildly, before they could raise themselves
upon their Wings, were all caught in the Nets.

At the taking a City by an Enemy* the poorer sort of People, with no great
difficulty may, escape, whilst the Rich are easily seized.

FAB. XXV. The Heart Drinking at the Fountain.


WIth great delight was a Heart surveying all the parts of his Body, as he was
Drinking at a clear Fountain; but most proud was he to behold his large
branching Horns, as the greatest Ornament of his Person; till fixing his Eyes
and Thoughts on the smalness of his Legs, he was ashamed of them, they not
bearing a due proportion with the rest of his goodly Fabric. Whilst he was in
this consideration, he heard the hallowing Noise of the Hunters, and Cry of the
Hounds, which made him betake himself to a speedy flight, with the Dogs at his
Heels, running swift as the Wind till he came to a thick Wood; but there being
hindered in his speed by the largeness of his Horns amongst the Bushes and
Brambles, he was quickly overtaken by his Enemies the Hounds. And as they were
about to tear him in pieces, he then blamed his late preposterous Expressions,
wherein he had despised his nimble Feet, which had so often preserved him, and
foolishly praised those spreading Horns, the cause of that his miserable Death.

Thus men too often despise the things which ought to be most valued by them,
and cherish those which bring with them, their ruin and destruction.

Non quel, che par; ma quel ch'e buono apprezza.
Prize not what seems, but what is truly good.
FAB. XXVI. The Countryman and Fortune.
IN digging the Earth, a Countryman found a Treasure of Gold; and for a
Memorial of the great Benefit there received, he daily brought a Chaplet or
Garland of Flowers, which by way of Gratitude he left on the place. But Fortune
appearing to him, asked him why he attributed her Gifts to the Earth? which;
said she, I gave thee on purpose to increase thy Riches; for I know that if
times should change, and this Gold go to another hand, thou would then accuse
Fortune for the loss.

This Fable admonishes us to acknowledge our true Benefactors, and to pay them a
grateful respect.

FAB. XXVII. The Ass's Shadow.
DEmosthenes the famous Greek Orator, pleading in Athens the cause of a certain
Man, who was there accused of a Capital Crime, and observing that the Judges
gave him but little attention; they being either half a Sleep, or Whispering
amongst themselves. And to this purpose, continued he (raising his Voice
somewhat higher,) O ye Judges! will I relate to you an admirable Story, if you
please, of the shadow of an Ass. At these words, the Judges ceased their
Discourse, and having commanded a general Silence: There was a young Man,
proceeded the Orator, who in Summer time, had hired an Ass, to carry goods from
thence to Megara; with which coming about Noon to a place on the Road, that
afforded no Shelter against the Scorching Beams of the Sun; and being tired
with walking, he took off the Load, and was about to have lain down on it, in
the shadow of the Ass; which the Owner, who went with him to bring back his
Beast, would not suffer, but forced the young Man away, and alleged that
though he had hired the Ass, he could have no pretense to the shadow of it. The
young Man on the other side, insisted on his right; for I having purchased,
said he, with my Money the use of the Ass for this day, he is only at my
disposal, and I, as his true Proprietor, during this Journey, ought to have the
sole enjoyment also of his Shadow. Heat of Argument betwixt these two, at last
produced a Quarrel, and from Words they fell to Blows. But after a fierce
Combat, which could not determine the right of one or the other to the Asses
Shadow; with bloody Noses and swelled Eyes, they were glad to leave off by
consent, and to proceed on in their Journey; both resolving that at Megara they
would join Issue, and try it out by Law. Demosthenes coming thus far, and
observing the Court very attentive to his Fable, made a sudden pause, and was
going from the Bar, but being called back by the Judges, and desired to go on
with his Story: Are you, said he, so ready to listen to a foolish Tale of the
Shadow of an Ass, and yet stop your Ears in a Cause wherein the Life of a Man
is in Question? Can you listen with pleasure to such idle Tales* and are you so
soon weary with hearing serious Matters? After this great man had on this
manner given a reproof to the Judges, he took up the subject of his Oration
where he left off.

Erasmus relates this Apologue in his Adagies: And I could wish (continues my
Author) that many of our Magistrates Ears now a days, were not more attentive
to such Tales of the Shadow of an Ass, I mean, to things triffling and
ridiculous, than to those whereon depend the Lives and Fortunes of poor men in
distress. This may also show us that the greatest part of our Quarrels, and
Lawsuits, are about the Shadow of an Ass, or Subjects altogether as frivolous.

FAB. XXVIII. The Wolf, the Fox, and the Shepherd.
AFter a plentiful Dinner a Wolf laid him down to rest before his Den; where
being found by a Fox, he was asked the reason of his lying there on that
manner? I am seized alas! with a sudden Fit of Sickness, answered the Wolf,
which I fear will quickly carry me out of this World, unless it be timely
prevented. If therefore, you have the Friendship for me, you sometimes assure
me you have, pray be so charitable to go and implore the favor of the Gods for
my Recovery. The Fox perceiving his Neighbors Dissimulation, and that all his
Grievance was, left in his absence, he should be robed of his great Stores laid
up against Winter, pretended to go, but went directly to a Shepherd, whom he
instructed where to find the Wolf; assuring him it was no hard matter to kill
him. The man running thither surprised the Wolf and destroyed him. After this,
the Fox with great Joy seized on all the Wolfs Stores which were left in his
Hole. But the triumph for this Conquest was but of short date, for the same
Shepherd came soon after to this Hole, and finding the Fox in possession of it
surprised him as he had done the Wolf; and being about to kill him, Surely,
cried the Fox, this is a Divine Judgment upon me, after having cuningly
circumvented another to his Destruction, who was my Neighbor, that I my self
should also suffer Death by my own Treasons.

Many times those Persons who out of Envy and Avarice have procured the Ruin
and Destruction of others* do happen to suffer likewise themselves, by their
own Plots and Machinations. Invidiae ipsissimum praemium est, alienae
Felicitatis perire.

FAB. XXIX. The poor Man that lost his Daughters Portion.
AN Ass, and a large pot of good Wine, was almost all the substance of a poor
Wretch, who marrying his Daughter, had promised for her Portion all the Money
for which he should sell that Wine and the Ass. But it unfortunately happened
on the very Wedding Night, that the Ass fell sick, and just before he expired,
as he was struggling for Life, he kicked out his Legs, brake the Pot, and spilt
all the Wine; by which the Bride was deprived of her Dowry.

This cautions us not to build our hopes on the things of this World, which are
so uncertain.

FAB. XXX The Basilisk and the Weasle.
WIthin a horrid Den, whose entrance was covered with Weeds and Brambles, dwelt
a venomous Basilisk, who there lay in wait to destroy the several Beasts, which
unhappily came that way. From thence he had cast his poisonous Eyes on a
harmless Weasel, whom he often observed to pass boldly within the Walks of his
Precinct, and expected to stick dead with his Looks as it went to drink: But
the little Creature by its Prudence, made impotent and void all the endeavors
of its wicked Enemy. For this Industrious Warrior being defended by his proper
Arms, durst face the dangerous mouth of that dismal Cave, knowing himself safe,
whilst equipped with a branch of Rue, which is said to be a Preservative
against all manner of Venom; for with this Herb he always girt his Body, still
expecting to meet his Adversary; and by this means preserved himself from the
mortal Contagion.

This admonishes a weak man to defend himself prudently against a stronger, and
one more powerful than himself: That he take good Advice, stand upon his Guard,
and depend not so much upon his own Strength, as Wisdom, in the repelling the
Violence, and subtll Stratagems of such Enemies. This may properly be said to
be, Confilio and viribus munita defensio. Resistite Diabolo and fugiet a vobis.

FAB. XXXI Cybele's Priests and the Ass.
THE Galli, who were Priests of Cybele, Wife of Saturn. were wont to carry the
Image of their Goddess with them from Town to Town, Singing, making Music, and
strange noises, with Drums and other Instruments; by which they picked up Money
in the several places where they came. These Priests had an Ass, whereon they
carried about their Luggage; which Ass being dead, with his daily hard Labor,
his continual Beatings and ill Usage by the Priests; they flayed him, and with
his Skin headed a Drum. Some People afterward asking them what was become of
their old Friend the Ass, whom they used to make much of? They were by the
Priests, answered on this manner: He had thought he should have been at rest
and quiet, at least when dead, but you see we still contiune beating him even
after his Death. Phaedrus says: Qui natus est infelix, non vitam modo
Tristem decurrit, verum post obitum quoque
Persequitur illum dura Fati miseria.


He that is born to be miserable, not only suffers his Afflictions during the
course of his life here; but the rigor of his cruel Fate pursues him, even
after his Death. This was the saying of a Heathen, who had no knowledge of a
Heaven or a Hell: But more remarkable was that of Aelius Adrianus, the Emperor
on his Death Bed.

Animula vagula, blaudula,
Hospes comesque Corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Palidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec, ut Soles, dubis jocos:
FAB. XXXII. Phoebus, Boreas, and the Traveller.


BEtwixt Phoebus and Boreas arose once a Dispute, which of them was of greatest
strength. The trial whereof, was at last agreed to be made on a Traveller, whom
they saw riding along the Road; And he of the two, that could soonest force off
the Travelers Cloak, should be acknowledged Victor. First then Boreas attacked
him with a blustering Storm, whilst the Traveller wrapping himself up well in
his Cloak, rode briskly on a long time, struggling with all his might and main
against it; so that the Tempest had not its expected effect upon him. Phoebus
next began to dart forth his Fiery Beams, which proving most violently hot,
soon made the Traveller Sweat, and melting him still more and more, he was at
last forced to pull off not only his Cloak, but his Coat also, and lay them
before him on his Horse.

Prudence and Policy are better than Strength; and he is most to be commended,
who by reason and fair means, rather than by force, shall bring others to
condescend to his desires. Duci voluat Homines non cogi. Men will do that by
Persuasion, which they will not be brought to by Compulsion. Moderata vis
impotenti violencia potior. And that of Sophocles, (...), etc.


Non enim ampli neque lato, dorso viri minime falluntur sed Sapientes recte
vincunt ubique.

FAB. XXXIII. The House Dog, and Hunting Dog:
CAreful had the Master of two Dogs been in breeding up one of them to Hunt,
but to the other he only gave the charge of his House; and of what Game soever
the Hunting Dog caught, the House Dog had always his share. This the Hunter
very much stomacking, could not forbear on a time, to express his Resentment of
to his Idle Companion. It Is very unreasonable, said he, that I should
continually be forced to take great pains in Hunting, while you stay lazily at
home, and after all, that you must on this manner be maintained by the fruits
of my Labor. You blame me wrongfully, answered the House Dog, who in this
thing cannot have deserved your anger; for you should rather quarrel with my
Master, who never bred me up to any pains taking, but thus to live on the
Labor of others.

Those Persons who have been bred up lazily, and to no manner of Business, are
not so much to be blamed as their Parents, whose Carelessness or Indulgence,
afforded them no better Education.

FAB. XXXIV. The Moor or Ethiopian.
STrangely was a man mistaken, who having bought an Ethiopian, or
Black-a-moor, imagined that that swarthy color came by the fellows
Slothfulness, in neglecting to keep himself clean; and with great Labor and
Industry would fain have washed him white, but it was Impossible; For all the
many changes of Water, and all the pains taken in rubbing and scrubbing him,
could not make the Ethiopian change his hue.

This shows the Impossibility of changing that which Nature has fixed in Man;
And exposes their Folly, who would attempt things which are impossible to be
done.

Non poteris rectum Cancris inducere gressum;
Nec leves horrentis Echini reddere sentes.
FAB. XXXV. A true History which happened in the time of Augustus Caesar.
Related by Phaedrus, in his Fables.
IT IS dangerous both to Believe, and not to Believe; which I briefly can make
out by Examples. For Hippolytus lost his life, because his Father Theseus
believed Phaedra, his Sons Mother-in-Law against him: And Troy was destroyed,
because the Trojans would not believe Cassandra their Prophetess. Therefore
must we carefully examine the verity of every thing; lest by taking wrong
Impressions into our minds, we be induced to give rash Judgments of them. But
for fear I should lessen this Truth, by these Fabulous Stories of Antiquity, I
shall relate to you a memorable Accident, that I knew in my time.

A Man who dearly loved his Wife, and had a Son to whom he was almost ready to
give the White Robe (which was for Youths of about Fourteen or Fifteen Years of
Age) had also a freed man, who plotting to become his Masters Heir, pulled him
aside, and whispered false Stories to him against his Son, and more against the
Honor of his Wife, who was really chaste: At last, he added that which he
thought would utterly destroy the Affection he knew he had for her; That she
frequently entertained a Gallant, who used to come to her in private; which
Infamous Correspondence of theirs, would blemish the Reputation of his Family
with Adultery. The Credulous Husband transported with rage against his Wife
falsely accused, pretended to take a Journey into the Country, but privately
staid in the Town where they dwelt, and coming home suddenly in the Night into
his House, went directly up into his Wives Chamber, where the Son lay a sleep
in the Bed with his Mother, who would have him near her, to take the greater
care of him at this Age. Whilst the Servants were running about to get a Light,
this impatient man not able to restrain the violence of his Jealous Passion,
stepped toward the Bed; where, as he groped in the dark, finding the Head of
somebody whom he felt had short Hair, he thrust his Sword through his Body, not
thinking on any thing but the satisfying his Revenge, for the affront done to
his Honor. By and by when the Light came, he saw his Son Murdered, and by him
his chaste Wife lying in the Bed, who being but in her first Sleep, heard
Nothing of what had happened: The Husband when sensible of the horrid Crime he
had committed; he, as a punishment for it, ran himself through the Body, with
the same Sword, with which his rashness and credulity had thus made him kill
his own dear Son. The Accusers afterward prosecuted this Woman, and brought
her to Rome, before he Centumviri, or Hundred Judges. There was her Innocence
blackned with scandalous Surmises, because she remained Mistress of the Estate:
But her Friends pleaded hard in her vindication; 'till the Judges at last were
forced to beseech the Emperor Augustus, that he would be pleased to help them
to acquit themselves of their charge, they not being able to determine so
ambiguous a Matter. This wise Prince having dispersed the Clouds of Calumny,
which had 'till then obscured the Ladies Virtue, and penetrated to the very
bottom of the Truth of this Affair, pronounced this Judgment; Let the
Freed-man, said he, who was the only cause of all this Mischief, suffer the
punishment he deserves: But as for the Woman, who has lost both her Son and
Husband, I rather think her worthy of Compassion than Condemnation. For had the
Husband taken good care to have examined these scandalous accusations against
his Family; and had diligently made search into the matter to discover its
Original, he had not committed so horrid a Deed.

Do not therefore slight any thing that shall be told you; and yet do not
immediately believe all you shall hear; for many times those are guilty, whom
you think most Innocent; and those most maliciously accused as guilty, who are
really most clear. The meanest Capacities may learn from this History, not to
pass a rash Judgment only from the insinuating Suggestions of another; for men
being pushed on by different Desires and Passions, do ordinarily act either by
aversion or by favor. So you ought not to think you know a man by any report
of him, 'till it be confirmed by your own Knowledge. I have been longer upon
this subject than ordinary, for the sake of those who are not so well satisfied
with short Stories. Ne sis credulus maxim Criminatori.

FAB. XXXVI. The Wasps, the Patridges, and the Husbandman.
CErtain swarms of Wasps met with some Coveys of Patridges, who being all very
thirsty, went together to a Countryman to beg of him Water to drink,
promising to make him a large requital of the Favor. The Patridges would
oblige themselves to dig his Vineyard so well, that his Vines should yield next
year an extraordinary plenty of Grapes: And the Wasps with large protestations
engaged to defend his Vineyard from Thieves; by their continual rounding it. I
thank you Friends, said the Countryman, for your kind offer, but I have a pair
of Oxen, which though they promise me nothing, yet perform all this work for
me: It Is therefore more fit I should with water gratify them, than you.

We are not obliged to maintain and encourage those who are Idle and
Unprofitable, whose only aim is to live by their boasting pretenses, but are
known to perform very little.

FAB. XXXVII. The Serpent and the Crab.
THere being a Friendship made between a Serpent and a Crab, they dwelt
lovingly together, till the Crab, who was of a plain and simple behavior, had
observed certain cunning Tricks, practiced by the Serpent upon him, which he
disliked, therefore admonished him friendly to leave off that malicious
subtility, and change those his ill manners. But the Serpent slighting this
wholesome Advice, the Crab watched an opportunity, and catching him asleep,
pinched him so strongly with his Claws, that he killed him; who as he was
dying, stretched himself out at full length. This the Crab perceiving, Ah,
cried he, Had thou when living, been thus straight and plain in thy Actions
as here thou lie, thou had not undergon this severe punishment of this
incorrigibleness.

Those Persons who run on in ill Courses, and neglect good Counsels of prudent
men, do most commonly happen to receive a just reward of their wickedness.

FAB. XXXVIII. The Countryman and the Stork.
FOr destroying Geese, Cranes, and other Fowls, which spoiled his Corn, a
Countryman had set up Nets, and in them took also a Stork, who earnestly
implored his Favor for the saving her Life; alleging she was no Crane, but an
innocent Bird, that did injury to none: And in one respect, which was the
performing her Duty to her Parents, far excelling all other Birds, because she
took a diligent care to preserve and nourish them in their Old Age. All this,
said the Countryman, is no Argument with me, for since you have been taken in
ill Company, you shall 'een suffer with them.

This Fable shows the danger of keeping bad Company; for whosoever associates
himself with ill men, that live by unlawful Courses, though he be innocent, it
often happens that he also shares their punishment. Improborum Contubernia
fugienda sunt, ne fors cum ijs deprehensi, alienae improbitatis cogamur poenas
luere.

FAB. XXXIX. The Hog and the Fox.
TO a Market, as a Man was driving an Ass loaded with a Hog, a Goat, and a
Sheep; the Hog cried and made a lamentable noise all the way: which a Fox
hearing, asked him the reason of? since his Companions suffered themselves to
be so carried without murmuring. Alas, answered the Hog, I have but too much
reason to afflict my self on this manner! For I know that the Sheep furnishes
my Master with Wool for Clothes; and the Goat with Kids for his Table, as well
as for increase of the Breed, and likewise with Milk to make Cheeses; But
wretched me, whom he knows fit for nothing else, I must expect he designs me
only for the Slaughter.

They are not to be blamed, who lament for some Calamity they foresee is most
certainly coming upon them. Non bisogna serrar la bocca quando parlar ti tocca.
Ital. Non opportet tacere, loqui ubi est necesse.

FAB. XL. The Drunkard and his Wife.


STriving to reclaim a Drunken Husband from that filthy Vice, a poor Woman
thought on this Contrivance; She finding him on a time asleep, and, in so
beastly a condition, Drunk, that he lay like a dead man; She had him taken up
and thrust into an old Tomb, amongst dead men's Bones, and there shutting him up
left him. Afterward, when she thought he might be come to himself, she
returned to the Monument and knocking; her Husband, who by this time was awake,
asked who was there, and what they wanted? I am come, answered the Wife,
disembling her Voice, to bring Victuals to the Dead. Prithee, said the Husband,
have thou brought any Drink, for I hate to hear of Victuals and no mention of
Drink. These words renewed the good VVomans sorrow, who beating her Breasts and
wringing her Hands, Alas Husband! cried she, I find I cannot reform thee by any
Art, thou art so confirmed in thy Vice by custom, that in thee now it is become
a second Nature.

This admonishes us not to accustom our selves to vicious Actions, because it
makes such men proceed on in them, and are hardly ever to be reclaimed.

FAB. XLI. The Cat and the Cock.
BY a quick surprise had a crafty Cat seized a Cock, whom he was about to eat,
but wanting a plausible pretense for it, he charged him with the insufferable
disturbance he gave to men, that they could not lie at quiet in their Beds for
him. To which the Cock for his Justification alleged, that he did it to call
them up to their Labor and necessary Occasions. But how, thou libidinous
Creature, demanded the Cat, can thou excuse thy self, that in spite of all
the Laws of Nature, do incestuously mix with thy Mother, thy Sisters, and thy
own Children? I study in all this, replied the Cock, to promote my Masters
Profit, that his Hens may lay him the more Eggs. When the Cat could fix no
Crime on the Cock, of which he did not clear himself. Well, but added this
unjust Creature, though thou can thus readily answer my Accusations, thou
can not satisfy my hungry Stomach, with thy pramatical Arguments; and saying
this, he tare him in pieces and eat him.

When a wicked man would injure poor men, whom he has in his power, he seldom
wants a fair pretense to do it: Or at least to whatsoever shall be objected
justly against him, he urges an unjust Force for the obtaining his will. Homo
malus millies plura mala, quam Fera facere potest, An ill man can do a thousand
times more mischief than a wild Beast. Cum in vitae officijs caespitare homines
incipiunt, ut utile honesto anteponant, facilem alterius nocendi occasionem
captant; atque quod jure nequeunt, per vim and nefas experiuntur.

FAB. XLII. The Gardener and his Dog.
IT was an Act of great kindness and charity in a Gardener, to venture down
into a Well, for saving his Dogs Life, that had fallen into it by chance. But the
foolish Cur insensible of his Masters wonted goodness to him, thinking him come
to assist in drowning him, bit and tare this kind man. Which usage angring the
Gardener, he made haste to clamber out, and leaving the Dog there to perish;
Art thou not, said the Man, an ungrateful Cur, that whilst I was charitably
endeavoring to preserve thee, would thus basely have murdered me?

This Fable blames Folly and Ingratitude. To the same Effect another Story is
told, of a man who riding on a dull lean Horse, upon the side of a high Hill,
and in a narrow Path, from whence was a very deep Precipice; he perceived by
the Horses going that he had got a Stone in one of his hind Feet, which while
his Master, being alighted, was endeavoring to pull out, the ungrateful Horse,
had with a kick, almost thrown him down the Hill. To revenge which malice and
stupidity, the man coming up by his Horses side, as if he would have mounted
again, gave him with all his force a violent push, which tumbling him to the
bottom, and breaking all his Bones; There said the good man in great passion,
is a trick for your trick, and the Stone in your Foot still. Horace speaking of
such dull Fools, as are painted out by this Dog and Horse says. Quis enim
invitum servare laboret?

FAB. XLIII. The Bear and the Fox.
TO a Fox was a Bear extolling his own good Qualities, and valued himself upon
this, that he scorned to feed on the dead Carcases of any Creature whatsoever:
Methinks, answered the Fox, it would be much more for your Credit and good
Reputation, to boast that you preyed not on the Living.

A Check to those who glory in that whereof they rather ought to be ashamed.

FAB. XLIV. The Oxen and the Axeltree.
AS a Team of Oxen were drawing a heavy Load of Timber, they often heard the
Axletree make a creaking and complaining noise. To which one of the Oxen
turning in displeasure; While we, said he, take pains to draw the Load, what
need you make all this outcry.

Amongst Laboring Persons, the Idlest, and such as take least pains, are
generally they who talk and complain loudest of their hard working.

FAB. XLV. The King and his Fabulist:
A Young Scholar, who much delighted in hearing Fables, importuned his Tutor
to tell him a very long one. Take heed, said the Tutor, the same happen not to
you, which once did to a King from his Fabulist. Good Sir, said the Youth, let
me know what that was? The Tutor then related to him the Following Fable.

There was a King who kept a Fabulist, or Composer of Fables, that when the
King was inclined to Mirth, was to tell him five Fables, Tales, or Jests, for
his Recreation. Now it chanced on a Night that the King being somewhat
indisposed, and not able to fall a Sleep, sent for his Fabulist, commanding him
to tell some other Tales, over and above the usual Number. He unwillingly
obeying, quickly told three: but the King complaining they were too short, bad
him think on others that were longer; after which he should go to Bed. The
Fabulist then began another on this manner. Once upon a time, there was a
Countryman, who having by his Industry and good Fortune got together a
considerable Sum of Money, went to a Market and bought with it two Thousand
Sheep; but in his Journey home, could not possibly get his Sheep over a River,
neither by the common Ford, nor the Bridge, by reason of a sudden Flood, caused
by some violent Showers of Rain, newly fallen there. The Countryman was
troubled to think what he should do in this distress; til at last he found a
little Boat, in which he could make shift only to Ferry over a couple at a
time. With this was he forced to begin to Row over his Sheep, by two and two;
and saying these words the Fabulist fell asleep. But the King calling, awaked
him, and bad him proceed on in his Tale. May it please Your Majesty, said the
Poor man, rubbing his Eyes; The River is broad, the Boat small, and the Number
of the Sheep very great; I beseech you let the Countrymans Sheep be all Ferried
over, and then I shall tell Your Majesty the conclusion of my Fable. With
which pleasant saying, the King who was such a Lover of Fables, was well enough
satisfied.

If therefore, my Child, said the Preceptor to his Pupil, you henceforward
trouble me with your Impertinency to tell you long Tales, I Will put you in mind
of this, to make you be contented with what I think fit to tell you. Tanto es
lo demas, como lo de menos. Sp. Too much of one thing is good for nothing.

FAB. XLVI. The Dog, the Ass, and the Fox.
DOubting his of own Ability singly to encounter a Wolf, a young brisk Dog
resolved to seek out a Companion, on whose Courage and Assistance he might
depend; and meeting an Ass, whom he concluded to be of sufficient Strength,
because he had often seen him carry very heavy Burdens; and having heard his
VVar-like Voice, sounding like a Trumpet, he could not but suppose him Valiant,
and a fit Companion to join in this Enterprise. Whereupon taking him for his
Assistant, away they went together to give the Wolf a Challenge, that they
might provoke him to the Combat. But so soon as the Ass saw him approach with
that grinning Fury toward them, he ran his way, leaving the Dog to Fight it
out alone.

We cannot Judge of any man's Valor, neither by the greatness of his threatening
Words, nor the strength of his Body. No todos los que estudian, son letrados,
Sp. Non omnes qui habent Citharam, sunt Citharedi. All those who bluster in Red
Coats and Scarves, are not fit to be made Generals.

FAB. XLVII. The Wolf and the Woman.


ROving about in search of Prey, a hungry Wolf came one Morning to a Country
Cottage, where he heard a Child cry, and the Mother endeavoring to quiet it,
often threatening to give him to the Wolves that should eat him. By this
saying, the Wolf was put in hopes of a good Meal, and waited there all day in
expectation of having the Child thrown out to him; but in the Evening the Child
was quiet, and his Mother making much of him: Thou art said she, my best Boy;
if any Wolves come for thee, we'll set the Dogs on them and kill 'um. The
Wolf hearing this, was sensible that he had all this time, been under a
Delusion; and turning him in anger; I Will be gone (cried he) from this House,
where they say one thing, and intend another.

This Fable may be told to those whose Actions and Words do not agree; who
make large Promises, whilst they think of nothing less than the performance of
them; Or according to a Spaniards Note upon this Fable of Avienus; El que no
quiere ser enganado, no deve dar credito a la fe^y inconstancia de las Mugeres;
and again, No deves de confiar en palabras de muger. Both which may be
explained by the Old Latin Saying; Mulieri ne credas ne mortuae quidem.

FAB. XLVIII. The Kid and the Wolf.
'TVVas a strict and prudent charge, that a She Goat left with her beloved Kid,
at her going abroad; That upon pain of her Displeasure, and at the Peril of his
own Life, he should on no pretense whatsoever suffer any one to enter within
the door of the House, no, nor open it, till her return. Which command a Wolf
over-hearing, went thither presently after the Mother was gone, and knocking,
counterfeited the Goats Voice, demanding entrance. But the wary Kid perceiving
the Deceit, preremptorily refused him: It Is true, said he; thou do cunningly
imitate the Voice of a Goat, but I can plainly see a Wolf through the Chinks of
the Door.

It Is a safe and profitable thing for Children to obey the Commands of their
Parents, who know by good experience, what is best for them.

FAB. XLIX. The Gods and Momus.
JUpiter, Pallas and Neptune, were heretofore striving which of them should
give the fairest Gift to the World; First the mighty Jupiter created a Man; In
the next place, the Goddess of Arts built a stately House; and lastly, the
Deity of the Sea made a fierce Bull. Then Momus the busy Judge was summoned
thither, commanded to view them well, and to give his opinion of them. He,
after surveying them, began to find fault with Neptunes placing the Bulls Horns
in his Forehead; alleging, that those Weapons of War, might more properly
have been fixed on his Shoulders, with which he would have been able to charge
his Enemies with greater Force. Next he began to Carp at the Mind and
Understanding of Man, that was shut up in his Breast, but might have been much
more conveniently placed without him, or be seen through a Window, that so all
the Thoughts of his Heart might be discerned. And as for the House he disliked
it, blaming the Contrivance because it did not move upon Wheels, that its
Master might be able to go about in it, and remove into other Countries upon
Occasion, to avoid ill Neighbors, or to shun some great Evil that threatened
him.

This Apologue exposes the rash and foolish Disparagers of good Things, because
they would have a great value put upon their own Judgments. Aristotle mentions
a Fable almost like this, in his Third Book De partibus Animalium, and shows
tho Folly of Momus 's Ridiculous Opinion herein. Damnari, carpique etiam
rectissima possunt. Faern. The most perfect Things may be carped at and
condemned: (...).

FAB. L. The Devout Seamen in a Storm.
WHilst a Ship was miserably tossed about by a violent Storm, the Seamen and
Passengers were zealously offering up their Prayers to their several Gods,
Demigods and Heroes; One to Cebele Mother of the Gods, Another to Castor and
Pollux, a Third to Hercules, Others to Saturn, Pan, Juno, Ceres, Venus, Neptune
and the other Sea Gods, etc. according as their Devotions inclined them;
beseeching them earnestly that they would interceed with Jupiter the great
Deity of Heaven and Earth, for their Preservation in this their Distress. Which
Error of theirs, a Prudent Officer of the Ship observing, Alas, my Friends,
said he, ye know not what ye do, for before these lesser Gods and Demi* Gods
can leave their several Occasions, go to Jupiter, and supplicate him on your
behalfs for our Deliverance: Our Ship may be left to perish in the Sea. Let us
therefore address to him, who is the supreme Disposer of all things, and
implore his Help, for he is best able to deliver us in this Exigency, is most
ready to hear us when we call on him, and needs not the Mediations of others;
for that methinks would be to derogate from his Almighty Power, and to give
Attributes to them, which belong to none but to their Sovereign only. This
discreet Advice they all followed, and in a little time the Storm ceased.

When the help of one is wanting, who is able to give it, is also ready to
admit of our Petitions, and willing to assist us, why should we fly to others
for it, who are not capable of affording it?

FAB. LI. The Peach Tree, and the Apple Tree.
BETWIXT A Peach Tree, and an Apple Tree, arose a Question, which bare the
best and fairest Fruit? each speaking in praise of her own, and dispraise of
that which her Opponent bare, in the most violent and passionate Terms she was
able to express: All which a Bramble in a neighboring Hedge hearing, he came
forth to them, and putting himself betwixt them; You have quarrelled enough,
said he, about nothing, For since each of you bear Fruit which is admirably
good, and beautiful in its kind, what need you thus carry on a needless
Brabble. Let me therefore advise you to be Friends, that you disturb not the
Peace and Quiet of us all, to engage us in your private Quarrels.

Mean Persons do often by their prudent Conduct, compose Differences betwixt
Men of considerable Rank and Quality.

FAB. LII. The Young Mole, and its Dam.
THE Mole is a Creature naturally blind. One of which calling on a time to its
Dam, Mother, said she, I smell a very strong scent of the burning of
Frankincense; A little while after, I hear, added she, a noise as of a Smith
hammering Brass; And a third time, I see, continued she, at some distance a
high Chimny. Her Mother hearing these Extravagancies, Daughter, said she,
gently reproving her, so far as I can perceive by thee, Nature has not only
made thee destitute of the sense of seeing, but likely of those two other
Senses of hearing, and smelling.

Boasters while they pretend to great Things, are for the most part discovered
and confuted in the smallest Matters:

Hoc lucrum mendacij Fabricatores consequuntur, ut nec cum vera dixerint fidem
inveniunt. Inventors of Lies obtain this Benefit, that when they speak truth,
they cannot be believed.

FAB. LIII. The She Goat, and the VVolfs VVhelp.
Ash Goat armed with indifferent large Horns, began to have good Thoughts of
her own Ability to encounter, or at least defend her self against, any of the
other Beasts which frequented those Pastures. And meeting once a Wolfs Whelp,
she was advancing briskly toward him: But he who knew himself not able to
resist her, by reason of his tender Age, began to flatter and praise her; by
which he so far insinuated himself into her favor, as to have the Confidence
of beging leave to Suck her Duggs, whose Milk he pretended to long for;
alleging that to him, who was so young and weak, and had been so long deserted
by his Mother, it would be a Cordial Nourishment, and of no great Prejudice to
her. This request was kindly granted by the Goat, who without considering it,
fed a most dangerous Enemy: But when she saw him grow up bigger, she began to
fear him; and tho she had before treated him as her Son, yet so soon as she
became sensible of the hazard her Life was in, she for the future avoided him,
considering she nourished her own Destruction.

It may be a charitable and prudent thing to lend assistance even to an Enemy,
upon some urgent Occasion; but not so as to incommode our selves, or to give
him a greater Power than we have; by which he may be able to offend us.
Insignis cujusdam Prudentiae est, ita Inimico necessitate urgente commodare, ut
tibiipsi non incommodes.

FAB. LIVE. The Old Man and the Three Cheats.
FOR a Sacrifice to some of the Gods, had a Zealous Old man bought a Kid; but
carrying it home, was espied in his way by three men, who took delight to put
cheating tricks on those they thought Ignorant; and guessing this man to be
such, they plotted together how they might become Masters of the Kid. To this
end they accosted him, one after another. The First, Saluting him, I wonder,
said he, that a Man so grave and sober, as you seem to be, should thus madly
carry a Dog on your Shoulders. It Is ridiculous enough, said the Second as he
passed by, to see a Man of your Years and Gravity find no better Employ meant
than thus to walk about with a Dog at his back. Father* said the Third, coming
up to him, is this Dog to be Sold, that you lug him about on this manner? The
good man hearing the first man's saying twice confirmed, believed it to be
really a Dog, and that himself all this while, by reason of his Age had been
mistaken; so that being ashamed of his Error, he let fall the Kid, and going
home, left it for them, who carried it away, and made merry at the eating it.

A false thing being confirmed by often Repetition, comes at last to be
believed, and to pass for a current Truth.

FAB. LV. The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox.


AGe and Sickness having Obliged the Royal Lion to keep within his Den; all the
other Beasts went to make him their Visits, except the Fox; which neglect being
ill resented, the Wolf laid hold on this occasion, and most maliciously
suggested to the Lion, that it was for want of respect to him who was their
King, that the Fox came not to pay him his Duty. Whilst the Wolf was thus
impeaching him; the Fox by chance entered the Cave, where he heard by the close
of the Speech, how vehemently he had been accused, and perceiving the Lions
passion to be extremely moved at this Information; he, with great presence of
mind, thus expressed himself. Who amongst all your Subjects, Royal Sir, has
shown that care and concern for the Life and Health of his King as I have done?
who have been traveling many Countries in search of a Medicine that might Cure
you; and now at last, by my great Industry, have, I hope, found out a present
and most effectual Remedy for your Distemper. The Lion over joyed at the News,
asked what it was? It is to take a Live Wolf, answered the Fox, strip off his
Skin, and wrap it about your back, where your chiefest pain lies. This must be
applied while the Skin is reeking warm; and in a short time it will give you
ease. The Lion hearing this, commanded the miserable Wolfs Skin to be torn off,
which was immediately done, and applied to the Lions back. And as the wretched
Creature lay gasping on the Ground, the Fox looked earnestly on him, and
speaking low, Let none hereafter, said he, presume to Incense his Prince to
anger, against another as great and politic as himself; but rather let him
endeavor to pacify him with fair words, by which he may prevent a mischief
falling upon his own head.

Who make it their Business to ruin others, are commonly observed at last to
suffer by their own Stratagems.

FAB. LVI: The Viper and the Fox.
UPon a Bunch of Thistles, as a Viper sat Swimming, which the Current of a
great River by chance had washed from the Shore, and was carrying away down the
Stream; a Fox espied him, and calling in Derision to him; (...), said he,
(...). Thou art even a fit Mariner for such a Vessel.

Against ill men, who miscarry in some dishonest Enterprises.

FAB. LVII. The Monkey, the Cat, and the Chestnuts.
MAny Attempts had a Monkey made for some Roasted Chestnuts, which he saw lying
in the Embers, and earnestly longed for, but could not come at them with safety
to his Fingers; nor could he reach any Instrument, that would serve to draw
them to him. At last he contrived to effect the business, by means of a young
Cat, who lay sleeping in the Chimney Corner. Her he caught up, and holding her
fast in his Arms, stretched out one of her fore Feet, and with it pulled out
the Nuts. The injured Cat afterward expostulating in Tears with the Monkey
about her burnt Claw, asked him how he could be so cruel to her, whom he must
needs think to be as sensible of the Fires heat as he was? And that from
himself he might take Example of the Infirmity of another. The Monkey in few
Words eluding her Complaint, I cannot said he, deny but that this Jest was
somewhat rough, yet ought you not to grumble at so small a matter because it is
a very wicked thing for any one to live so sloathful a Life as you do

Very much do those Men resemble this crafty Monkey* who in some affair of
great Difficulty, will for their own Advantage make use of others* even to the
hazard of their Lives; and by deluding Persuasions or downright Force, care
not what Mischiefs they plunge their Instruments into, so they may attain their
own Ends, and keep themselves scot-free.

FAB. LVIII. The Unjust Governor forced to refund.
THE Governor of a Province, who had exacted unwarrantable Sums of Money in
the Collecting of his Taxes, was called to account for his Extortion, and
afterward forced to make Reparation to the respective Persons concerned; which
he did with much Reluctance, Of whom one of that Province said, This our
Praetor Imitates Women; who when they conceive Children, do it with great
Pleasure, but their bringing them forth, is with incredible Pain and Torment.

We should not unjustly take away other men's Goods, lest we be forced
shamefully to return them again, to our great Sorrow and Trouble.

FAB. LIX. The Fox, the Cock, and the Dogs,
SHarp set with Hunger, came a Fox toward a Cock and his Train of Hens, who
espying his approach, Flew up into a Tree: Which sudden retreat the Fox
disliking, and seeing they were out of his reach, he changed his measures, and
drawing nearer them with respect, kindly saluted them, asking the occasion of
that disorder they seemed to be in; and if the happy News had not as yet come
to their knowledge? I hear no News, answered the Cock, nor know I what it is you
mean. It Is, replied the Fox, what you will be much pleased with; and I come
hither on purpose that you may share the Joy with me. You are to know,
continued the Fox, That at a general Conference which has been lately held for
the public Good, there is a perpetual Peace established amongst all Creatures,
in such manner, that from hence forward, being free from all Fears and
Jealousies, we shall all live together without doing one another any harm or
injury; you may therefore securely come down, and let us celebrate this happy
Day. The Cock perceiving the Fox's subtilty. You bring us, said he, most joyful
News: And at those Words he stretched up himself to raise his Head as high as
he could, seeming to look at something that was at a great distance. The Fox
therefore demanded what he looked so earnestly at. I see, answered the Cock, a
couple of Hounds come swiftly running this way, and Imagine by their Speed,
that their Errand is to Proclaim the Peace here. Then fare ye well, said the
Fox; For I must tarry here no longer, but take care to secure my self in time.
Why, demanded the Cock, what need you fear any harm since the general Peace is
made? Because, replied the Fox, these Dogs may not perhaps have heard of the
Ratification thereof, as yet.

On this manner is it necessary to answer one subtilty with another. Un engano
con otro se deshecha; say the Spaniards. One crafty trick may be defeated by
another.

FAB. LX. The Weasle, and the Man.
IN a Mouse Trap, a man happened to catch a Weasle, who seeing she could not
make any escape; Pray, said she, be so courteous to let me go; for you know I
have done good Service, in clearing your House of Mice and Rats. Had you done
this for my sake, answered the man, I would have spared your life, and given
you your liberty; but you killed those Vermin for your own ends, to eat of
them, and to keep for your Stores; and what Provisions the Mice left, you used
to spoil, or with them to feast your selves. So that you cleanse my House
indeed, but it is for your own Profit; and your Intention was to serve your
self, not me.

We should take notice of the Just Intention of every Favor done us, and not
barely the Pretense of it.

FAB. LXI. Mercury and Tiresias the Diviner.
MErcury being desirous to try whether or no Old Tiresias the Theban Prophet
who had been many years blind, was so skilful in the Art of Divination, as he
was famed to be. To this end, therefore the God took on him Humane Shape, and
having first driven away the Old Man's Oxon which fed in a Pasture near the
City, he came to Tiresias, as if he would consult him in some Affair. In the
mean time, an Account was brought of the loss of the Cattle. At which News, the
Prophet was troubled, and taking Mercury with him, he walked abroad into an
open Field, that by the flight of Birds, he might discover the Thief. He
therefore bad Mercury look about and tell him if he could see any Bird in the
Air; Mercury told him, he saw an Eagle, which flew from the Left hand toward
the Right. That does not do our Business, said Tiresias, therefore try if you
can see some other. A little while after Mercury, acquainted him, that he
observed a Crow sitting in a Tree not far off, which often raised her Head,
looking up toward Heaven, and afterward inclined it down toward the Earth.
Tiresias then Understanding the whole matter. This Crow, said he, swears by
Heaven, and by the Earth, that if you have a mind to it, I shall have my Oxen
restored safely to me again.

This Fable may properly be used to a Thief, before he knows he is discovered.

FAB. LXII. The Lion, and the Bear.
THE Lion, King of the Beasts, preparing to fight with the Birds, set his Army
in Order for the Battle, composed of all the several Species of Creatures under
his Dominions; None were excused from their Duties, the very Ass, and the Hare,
amongst the rest were drawn up in some of the Battallions; which a Bear
observing, asked the Lion of what advantage two such Creatures could be in that
Army; the one notorious for Dullness, and the other for his timorous Cowardice?
Oh, they are of considerable Use, answered the Lion; For the Ass with his
Braying, will serve as a Trumpeter to Encourage my Army to fight; and the
nimble Hare, as a Courier to carry abroad my respective Orders and Dispatches,
when Occasion shall require.

No one is so contemptible, but may serve us in some Employment or other. But
such a one, must always show his Desire and Readiness to serve; Servi Dominorum
sequantur imperia. And Q. Curtius advises well. Servo utilius est, says he,
parere Domino, quam afferre Consilium.

FAB. LXIII. The Swallow, and the Nightingale.


IN the Solitary Woods, as a Swallow for her Pleasure was by chance flying
about, she espied a Nightingale sitting alone, and sweetly singing; where she
was bewailing in most passionate Notes, her own Misfortunes, and the untimely
Death of her Nephew Itys. The Swallow coming toward her, and saluting her;
Dear Sister, said she, whom I am much rejoiced to see, this being the first
time I have ever been so happy since we left our beloved Country of Thrace: Let
me entreat you to leave these unfrequented Deserts, and come with me to the
Villages amongst Men; where we shall dwell together, and love each other as
Nature obliges us. For there thou may sing to those who will admire thy
Music, and not to Wild-Beasts, Deaf Trees, and Rocks. Pray give me leave kind
Sister, answered the Nightingale, to continue here in my Retirement. For alas,
the very sight of a House, or any Conversation with Men, brings to my Memory
all my past Calamities.

It Is better to live quietly in a Wilderness, than with Trouble and Vexation in
the most Magnificent Palaces. To those who have suffered some grievous
Misfortune, the very sight of the Place where it happened, renews their
Affliction.

FAB. LXIV. The River Fish, and the Sea-Calf.
BY force of the Stream, a fresh water Fish was carried down a River into the
main Ocean, where boasting of the Noble Race, from which he was descended, he
despised all the Seafish, that happened to converse with. Till a Sea-Calf, not
able to endure his Haughtiness and Folly, thus checked him. Should thou and I
be taken, said he, and carried into the Market together; thou would soon
change thy Opinion of thy own value, seeing me bought for a Noble Man's Table,
and thy self slightly disposed of for a Meal to some Peasant.

Great Boasters are commonly derided, and silenced, by Speeches which they are
grieved to hear.

FAB. LXV. The Fight betwixt the Birds and Beasts.
VEry bloody was the Battle betwixt the Birds and the Beasts, which being
maintained on both sides with great Obstinacy, the Event continued doubtful for
some time; during which, the Batt observing the furious Charges made by the
Beasts, their mighty strength, and the Greatness of their Bodies, she became
fearful of the success, quitted her Party, and sided with the Beasts. But the
Eagle having his Army strengthened by fresh supplies, pressed upon the Enemy so
vigorously, that after a considerable slaughter, the Beasts gave way, and were
constrained to run; leaving the Birds Masters of the Field. After this Battle a
Treaty being held, in order to a Peace between them; the Articles were agreed
on, signed, and ratified on both sides. Then was the treacherous Batt, brought
and tried before a Court Marshal, for deserting her Colors, all her Friends
and her Kindred, and Fighting against them, in service of the Enemy: For which
unnatural Crime, she was sentenced to have all her Feathers stripped off, and
that she should never dare to appear again in the Suns light, but fly about in
the Nighttime naked. And after this, she was ever-more had in contempt, as well
by the Beasts as Birds.

It is not reasonable that they who Desert their Relations and Friends in their
Adversity, should afterward partake of the Advantages they may come to enjoy
in Prosperity. It also stigmatizes such as basely renounce their Country, to
assist the Enemies of it. And though it may seem strange that Aesop should not
punish this treacherous Bat with Death; yet if we consider that he who is once
Executed, is for ever taken from the presence of the living, and in a short
time forgot: But our Traitor in the Fable, has a mark of Infamy set on him. He
is striped of his Equipage, and Condemned never more to appear in the Suns
light; whereby he is made a living Example, for ever, to deter others from
being Guilty of the same detestable Crime. Nor does the Bat get into favhr with
the Beasts, but they according to the Old Maxim, Love the Treason, but Hate the
Traitor; No es Buen Ciudadano el que tratta, con los Enemigos de la Ciudad,
como no pueda alguno serbir a dos Senores. He is no Friend to his own Country,
who assists the Enemies of it, on any pretense whatsoever.

FAB. LXVI. The Estridge.
THE Estridg, called Strutho-Camelus, is a Creature bred in Africa, partly a
Bird, and partly a Beast; It has but two Legs, and the Hoves of its Feet,
divided like those of a Heart; it is feathered also, and has Wings, but cannot
raise its self from the Ground. This Creature at the great Battle
aforementioned of the Birds and Beasts, had the Misfortune to be taken Prisoner
by the Beasts, who were about to treat him as an Enemy; but he showing his
Feet, asked them, if they supposed him a Bird? By which, the Beasts being
deceived, suffered him to remain with them in safety. Not long after, when it
was toward the end of the Battle, the Estridge was again taken by the Birds;
amongst whom, being in danger of losing his Life; he affirmed, he was a Bird,
and for Proof thereof, showed his Wings, Head and Bill. On this manner, he
imposed on them both, and preserved himself.

This Fable shows, that those who pretend to serve Two Masters, do on this
manner, play fast and lose with both.

Deficit ambobus qui vult servire duobus.
FAB. LXVII. The Ape and her Young.
THE Female Ape is reported to bring forth two young ones at a time; of which
she fondly loves one, and cares but little for the other. One of these Female
Apes, with her Twins, was running away to avoid an approaching Danger, having
that which she best loved, in her Arms, and the other hanging on her Shoulders;
But in her hasty flight, she chanced to strike the head of her Darling against
a Stone, of which bruise it dyed. Whilst the other for whom she had so little
Affection, hanging fast about her Neck, escaped without harm.

It often happens that the Son least beloved by his Parents, has better Fortune
than the Darling, who is too frequently spoiled by their over fondness of him.
When he must not, for fear of prejudicing his health, and killing him, he
exposed to the heat of the Sun, to the cold Winds, nor to the Rain, or any
unseasonable Weather; Is not this to make him effeminate? When there is such
Care to be used about the choiceness of his Diet, the feeding him by Weight and
Measure, and often Physicking him: Is not this the ready way to throw him into
some dangereus Distempers, and to hasten his Death? Why then should Childrens
Constitutions, be accustomed to that which may fail, and not rather to that
which they may scarcely expect ever to miss of? Is it possible, to make them
hate Idleness, and yet breed them up only in Wantonness and Pleasures? To teach
them Sobriety, and yet suffer them to go on in an uncontrollable Course of
Rudeness and Extravagance? And to take from them all Apprehension and Dread of
their Enemies, whilst they are made afraid of every cold blast, or shower of
Rain. And yet this excessive Fondness of Parents, has far worse Consequences,
since it corrupts the very Soul. For if good Instructions be a second Birth,
and if that depend on, and be improved by the checking of Vices, to which our
Nature is but too subject; Do not the Indulgent Mothers destroy their Children,
whilst they will not suffer them to receive a just Correction for their Faults?
If they be permitted to run on in a full Carrier of their Rage and Revenge; is
not this to encourage them hereafter to be Assassinates? If they be left to
execute their private Piques, and Malicious Tricks, on their Brethren or
Companions, is not this to make them become Traitors? If they be not chastised
for their loose, and obscene Words, and Discourses; Is not this to give them a
fair Encouragement to Lewdness and Dehauchery? And if they be commonly suffered
to eat to excess; is not this to make them Gluttons? So that I may say of such
Mothers; It had been better they had been Barren, than thus promoted the Ruin
of their Children. Hence I infer that Youths, the less they are Humored in
their own idle Fancies, and Extravagancies, and the less indulged by the
Fondness of their Parents; become afterward the more Sober and Virtuous. For
we find that by these means they attain to a strong Constitution of Body, which
makes them Generous and Adventurous Men; That Exercise makes the best Blood;
That Sobriety in their Childhood is confirmed in them, when at mature Age. And
in a word, that Youth not spoiled by Flattery, is capable of all Virtue.

FAB. LXVIII. The Fishers.
WIthout any Success had certain Fishermen been tiring themselves all day; but
in the Evening as they were Rowing empty homeward; a great Fish, was pursued in
the Water by some other, more powerful than her self, leaped for Refuge into
the Boat; and was taken by the Fishers; who carrying it into the City, sold it
for a great price.

What Art and Industry cannot effect, is sometime done by chance.

FAB. LXIX. The Archer and the Bear.
IN search of Game, as an Archer with his Crossbow and Arrows went prying
through a Wood, he espied a Dear, which he shot, and hanging it at his back,
was carrying it home. But in his way, he met a terrible Bear; This he coveted
also to make his Prize; wherefore laying down the Dear, he let fly a poisoned
Arrow, with which he pierced the Bear through the Body. The fierce Beast being
sensible of the mortal Wound he had received, made up to revenge it on his
Enemy, and seized the Archer, as he was just prepared to have seconded his
shot; Which forced him to let fall his Bow, ready drawn, and fixed with another
poisoned Arrow, and endeavor to resist the Bear's fury; But this was in vain,
for being soon wounded and miserably torn by him, they both fell down dead
together. Presently after a Wolf coming that way, and seeing such a stock of
Provision lie there on the ground, rejoiced; yet was so covetous, that though
he had a good Appetie he resolved to save it till another time, and content
himself at present with the Bow-string; which beginning to catch hold on with
his Teeth, he pressed down the Button of the Wrack with his Nose, and shot
himself through the Heart.

Unreasonable Avarice is the Occassion of many a Man's Death.

FAB. LXX. The Horse and the Wolf.


A Good Inclination had a fierce Wolf, pushed on by his keen Appetite, to
attack a Horse which he saw feeding in a Meadow; but doubting his own Ability to
master him by plain force; he resolvd to try what he could do by Policy, and
advancing toward him, began to boast of his admirable skill in Physic, and
Chyrurgery; kindly offering him his Service if there were Occasion. The Horse
perceiving his drift, Most opportunely, said he, has Apollo sent thee his Son,
another Esculapius, to assist me in my Distress; and counterfeiting a Lameness,
he told the Wolf, he had by chance struck a Thorn into his hinder Foot, and
extremely wanted his help, to ease him of the Torment, he then endured. Which
the Wolf readily promised, telling him, That since there appeared to be no
Tumor in the Place affected, he doubted not, but that having once drawn out
the Thorn, he should with the first Application, make a Cure of it; and
stooping to take up the Foot, the Horse gave him with all his strength, so
violent a kick, as left the counterfeit Physician for some time half dead on
the Ground, and then ran away. After a while, the Wolf recovered his Spirits,
and getting up as well as he was able: I have small Reason to complain, said
he, sighing; for this cursed Horse has made but a just Retaliation of Fraud,
and paid me home in my own Coin.

Every Enemy is to be feared, but especially he who pretends to be a Friend.
Fere fit ut qui de aliis circumveniendis ac supplantandis satagunt, simili aut
majori astu illusi suae Fraudis talionem reportent, and quod in Paroemia est,
In scrobem incidant, quam alteri effoderunt. Another Author says very well.
Insidiae Insidiatori insidiosae. Treachery for the most part proves Dangerous
to the Contriver. And the Italians have a Proverb, L' vfficio, in ch' egli
vale, ogni uno far' deve. Every Man should Exercise the Trade he has been bred
to.

FAB. LXXI. The Hen that laid Golden Eggs.
A Woman had a Hen which every day laid an Egg of Gold: She, therefore
imagining that her Hen must needs have a great Mass of that Noble Metal within
her, killed the Hen, but found nothing there, more than in other Hens.
Whereupon being grieved at the Loss. Ah wretched Woman! cried she, that through
the immoderate greediness of my Heart to obtain a mighty Treasure, have thus
deprived my self of a moderate Gain, which I so long enjoyed with ease.

We should be content with an Honest Gain, left striving after vain Projects,
we lose what might maintain us in Quiet and Happiness. Immodicas Cupiditates
and avidos Divitiarum animos Compescamus, ut sua quisque Fortuna Contentus
vivat.

FAB. LXXII. The Thief and the Hangman.
UPON the Gallows, as a Thief sat lamenting his Misfortunes. Alas, unhappy
Wretch! cried he, that am here to suffer Death, whilst my Master who taught me
this wicked Trade, must survive, and who by right ought to have been first
hanged. Nay, said the Executioner, but it is fit you should be punished, that
took no better Care for the thorough understanding of your Business. My
Confession, replied the Thief, showed that I was no bad Scholar in the Art of
Thieving. But, said the Hangman, you were short in the main point, which was to
have known when to leave off.

It Is a most commendable Thing; to be able quickly to leave off doing
Wickedness; for who in this Life sins not, and is not guilty of Offenses? But
he is best, who not only abstains from the least Faults, but from the fewest:
He, I say, is the truly Good Man, qui quod fieri non oportet, id facere cito
desinit; who soonest forbears that which he ought not to do.

FAB. LXXIII. The Thrush and the Swallow.
A Young Thrush boasting of the Friendship she had contracted with a Swallow.
Thou art a Fool, said her Mother, to make a Friendship with one of a different
Constitution from thine, and is, as I may say, of a different Clime; for she
Delights to reside in hot Countries, and thou in Cold.

We should not think we can make those our Friends, who are of different
Manners, and different Tempers from Ours.

FAB. LXXIV. The young Mouse, the Cat, and the Cock.


WIth great Care had a tender Mother bred up a young Mouse her only Son, and
chief Hopes of the Family; and till that day had been so fearful of his Life,
she would never suffer him to go alone, beyond the Mouth of her Cavern. But his
Courage being confirmed with the growth of his Body, and now become brisk, he
would no longer endure such close Confinement. So that having tired his Mother
with his continual importunity, she at last consented to let him venture beyond
his usual bounds; yet not to straggle farther than the next Room, or just to
cast an Eye into the Yard: And that in this Progress, he should move with
caution, not openly in the Light, but only peeping up at the Chinks of the
Floor, or through some hole of the Wall. The little Mouse rejoiced as if
released from Prison; Yet remembering his Mothers commands kept himself still
within his Limits. From whence, as he stood gazing through a Crevice, he beheld
a grave white Cat walk soberly to the Door, and thence into the Yard, where
sitting a while in the Sun, she put her fore-feet under her head, and lay down.
The young Mouse from the Wall viewed her, was pleased with her graceful Look,
and in his mind admired the Gravity and Sobriety of her Deportment. But whilst
he was considering her with this Pleasure, and about to go nearer her; a Cock
coming hastily that way, clapping his VVings and Crowing, struck so great a
Terror into our small Travellour, that forgetting his Design of courting the
Cats Favor, he ran back affrighted and trembling to his Mother; who hugging
and making much of him, My Child, said she, what is the matter? O dear Mamma!
cried he, what have I seen? What was it, demanded the troubled Mother, thou
saw? Oh Mamma, answered he, I saw a terrible Creature, with a piece of Flesh
on his Head like a Crown, and Horns growing on his Legs; who with Things like
Arms raised up himself, and beating his Breast, and Flank, made such a horrible
screaming noise, as almost scared me out of my Wits: Where I prithee, said the
Mother, did thou behold this formidable Sight? At the Door, replied he, just
as I was intent with my Eyes and Thoughts, admiring a Beautiful Creature, whose
modest Countenance, and humble Look, had so won upon me, that I was advancing
toward her, to have contracted a Friendship with her, had not that ugly thing,
come flying, and making that dreadful Noise, which put me into that affrighted
and trembling Condition you saw me in but now. The Old Mouse, perceiving who he
meant by the lovely Creature, he was so pleased with, and who, by that which
had scared him: My Dear, said she, be not afraid of that haughty thing
hereafter, which made the terrible noise, for he will never do thee harm: But
for all the Mildness, Silence, and Gravity, of the other Creature thou so much
admirest, Do thou avoid her as present Death; nor ever venture to look on her,
or the Place where thou saw her. In a word, take care to shun her, and all
others of her kind, as thou valuest thy own Life and Safety.

We are taught by this, not to Judge of Persons by their Looks, and outward
Appearance: Also that those blustering Sparks, who make the loudest Noise, are
not so much to be feared, as commonly the Sober Men of few Words are.

The Italian Proverb is, Non giudicar dal volto il buono, o 'l rio.
Judge no Man's Vice or Virtue by his Face.


FAB. LXXV. The Tanner and the Hunter.
TO a Tanner on a time, came a Hunter, offering to sell him a Bears Skin at a
cheap rate, provided he might have the ready money paid him down; and confessing
that he had it not in his Custody as yet, but engaged on the morrow to kill the
Bear, and bring him the Skin. Next Morning the Tanner desirous to see the
Sport, with him; climbed up into a Tree, whence he saw the Hunter go boldly to
the Caves mouth, and thence with his Dogs rouse a terrible Bear; at whose
coming out, the man missing his first thrust, the furious Beast came rushing
violently upon the Hunter, and threw him along on the Ground. Now he knowing
the Nature of this Creature, which is never to prey on dead Carcasses, held his
Breath, and counterfeited himself dead: The Bear smelling about his Face and
Ears, and not perceiving him breath, went away. When the Tanner saw the Bear
gone, and all the danger over; he came down from the Tree, and bad the Hunter
rise; who with the fright was almost dead indeed; But getting up and having
recovered his Spirits, the Tanner laughing, asked him what the Bear had
whispered in his Ear? He advised me, answered the Hunter, never for the future,
to sell a Bears Skin, till I had first caught, and killed him.

We are not to account of uncertain things, as of things certain. Nor are we to
Rejoice and Sing, as if we had Conquered, before the Victory be obtained,
knowing the uncertainty of War; According to the Old Greek Proverb. (...).

FAB. LXXVI. The Man that would count the Waves of the Sea:
UPon a time, a man sitting on the Sea shore, was endeavoring to number the
several Waves, which the Wind, or agitation of the Sea drove toward him; but
being put out of his account, by a multitude that came tumbling one upon
another; he was so much troubled that he burst out into tears, for vexation,
that he could not comprehend their Number. To whom a Fox coming, asked the
occasion of his Trouble? Alas answered the man, I had with great Industry taken
pains for my curiosity, to count the number of the waves, as they rolled this
way; but by misfortune have been put out of my reckoning, and am quite
confounded in the account. For those, past, answered the Fox, never trouble
your head, 'een let them go; and begin your Account again from this very
moment, with all the care you can.

This Fable shows that we are not so much to concern our selves, for the things
that are past, as for that part of our Life which is yet to come. Lucian in his
Dialogues, recites this Fable of Aesop, and calls it Fabula valde erudita, a
very Learned Fable.

FAB. LXXVII. The Ass the Ape and the Mole.
THe Ass was complaining how unkind Nature had been to him, in not adorning
his Forehead with a fair pair of Horns, as she had bestowed on the Bull, the
Stag, etc. And the Ape also lamented to him, her defect of a Tail, wherewith
she might cover those parts which Modesty required should be concealed. Which
two Complaints a Mole by chance hearing, arose out of the Ground, and putting
her self betwixt them. How, alas! said she, can you trouble your selves on this
manner for such slight Causes; you that are otherwise in all respects made
complete? Whereas I am for ever excluded from the Beloved light of the World,
and live unhappily Condemned to perpetual Night; but though I am thus deprived of
the greatest Blessing, that all Creatures enjoy on Earth, yet I make a Virtue
of Necessity, and live quietly without murmuring.

Let him therefore who thinks himself miserable, keep an even Temper in his
Afflictions, and submit himself to the will of God; which he may more easily
do, if he see, and consider that there are others more miserable than he.
Conforto e al proprio il maggior mal d' altrui. The Italians say, It Is some
Comfort to us, to see other men's Miseries greater than our own. Solamen
miseris, etc.

FAB. LXXVIII. The Fowler and the Lark.
WHilst a Fowler was busy in spreading and fixing down his Nets, for catching
the Innocent Birds; a Lark which sat beholding him, from the top of a Green
Tree, asked him what he was doing; I am, answered the man, laying the design of
a noble City, which I intend to Build on this place, for the Entertainment of
my Friends. But afterward, when he had finished his Treacherous Work; he, at
some little distance hid himself amongst the Bushes; Whilst the Innocent Bird
believing what he said had been true, flew from her Bough, down on the ground,
and settled near the Net, to view this pretended City, and to consider its
Contrivance, Situation, and Limits; and for her clearer Satisfaction in all
these Respects, she went nearer, till her curiosity drew her within the Nets;
where being entangled, she remained a Prisoner. The Treacherous Fowler then
rushing forth from his Ambuscade, ran to seize her, whilst she, not able to
suppress her Sorrow, seeing her self about to lose her Life by his Hands; Ah
false and cruel Traitor! cried she, if thou proceedest to build thy City on
this manner, for certain thy Streets will be empty of all manner of Inhabitants.

This unfortunate Bird would infer from hence, that the Insatiableness of
Avaricious Lords, and Governors of Cities or Provinces, who have no bounds to
their Appetites; whilst they suck continually the Blood of their Subjects, do
depopulate Cities and Countries, and ruin all before them. L'Avaritiade
Governatori Peste e de Regni. The Avarice of Officers is the Plague of a Nation.

FAB. LXXIX. The mad Lion and the Goat.
LOoking down a steep Precipiece, a Goat espied in the Fields below a mad Lion,
which ran with Fury and Extravagance, raving and roaring all about from place
to place. This dreadful sight struck an Astonishment, and Terror into the Goat,
not only for the Danger she her self was in, but all the other Beasts also,
with whom he should meet; That she was ready to drop down into the Valley, with
the very dread and Consideration of it: But having a little recollected her
Spirits, she broke out into such like Expressions. O Miserable Condition of us
poor Beasts! For if the Lion, our King, when in his sound mind and perfect
senses, be so fierce, that there is no power amongst us all, able to put a
check to his proud Will; what can we do for our safety, now that he is void of
Reason? And that he, who was endued with such a mighty Strength before, has
this Madness and Rage added to his Natural Valor?

This wise Goat teaches us how dangerous and insupportable a wicked Fury is in
a blind and ignorant Person, when it is also joined with an unlimited Power. A
doppia la Pazzia cresce le Forza. Madness doubles the Strength. Fulmen est, ubi
cum potestate habitat Iracundia. Rage is a Thunderbolt when it is assisted
with Power.

FAB. LXXX. The Eagle and the Crow.


FRom the top of an high Rock, an Eagle sharp set with Hunger, seeing a Flock
of Sheep below in the Valley, flew down, whence catching up a fat Lamb in her
crooked Tallons, she mounted with it into the Air, and carried it away; which
sight a Crow observing, became emulous of the generous Action, and resolved to
attempt the like. To which end, making first a triumphing noise, she took her
Flight down to the Flock, and stricking her Claws into the Fleece of a Sheep,
foolishly attempted what was impossible to effect; She then too late saw her
Error, and was striving to disengage her self from the Wool, wherein her
ackard Claws, unskilled in that trade, were entangled; but being espied by the
Shepherd, this bold Crow was taken, carried home, and given to his Children to
make sport with. After which, she having her Wings pulled, and her Feathers
torn off, became humble; and when at any time, being thus disguised, she was
asked what Bird she was? she always answered to this purpose; Heretofore, as
to my great Courage, I esteemed my self an Eagle, but now I am clearly
convinced, that as to my Ability and Performance, I am no more than what I was
born, to wit, a Crow.

Those Persons who attempt great Things, above their proper Sphere, and not
correspondent with their Courage and Power, do not only happen to fail in their
Enterprises. but commonly throw themselves into the greatest Miseries, and then
become a Laughing Stock and Scorn to all that see them. Ogni Opra tua, col tuo
Poter misura. Measure every work you undertake, with the Power you have to
perform it.

FAB. LXXXI. The Old Horse.
GRown Old and unserviceable for the Saddle, a poor Horse was at last sold to
Work in a Mill, where at his first Essay, being infinitely troubled, he
sighing, said within himself: From which of the many brisk Courses, that I, in
my Life time, have formerly run, have I here at last thrown my self into all
this misery?

None ought to be two proud of their Vigor and Strength of Body; or their
great Wealth and Honor; for their Old Age may happen to be spent in endless
Troubles and Misfortunes.

FAB. LXXXII. The Unskilful Physician Affronted.
AN unskilful Physician visiting a sick man, would have persuaded his Friends
about him, that he was past all hopes of recovery; notwithstanding they
affirmed, there was but little Danger of his Life; this being like one of those
Fits, he had formerly, been two or three times seized with; and therefore they
entreated the Doctor to endeavor the removal of it. But he still persisting in
his Opinion, advised his Patient to settle his Affairs in this World, and
prepare himself for another, because he could not in all probability live above
one day more; and saying this, the Doctor went his way. A little while after,
the Sick Man recovered, but continued very Weak and Pale; In which condition
his Physician meeting him, and being astonished to see him, asked what News
from the Shades below? They, answered the Man, are very quiet, quaffing Healths
in the Waters of Lethe. But of late Death and Pluto have been incensed against
the Physicians, threatening them with great severity, because they do not suffer
Sick Persons to Die. And Pluto's Counsel have made a Decree for the Banishment
of all those Physicians, naming each Man in it, by his particular Name. And
they were, added he, about to have banished you amongst the rest, had I not
stood your Friend, and presenting my self before them, excused you, swearing
you were no Physician, and that the Title had only been given you by your
Enemies, merely to calumniate and abuse you.

This Fable is intended as an affront to Ignorant and Impertinent Physicians.

FAB. LXXXIII. The Fox and the Countryman.
AFter a Fox had diverse times made a horrible Slaughter amongst a Country-mans
Hens; the mischievous Creature, for all his Subtilty, was at last taken in a
Trap, and then begged earnestly to have his own Life saved; promising the Man
never more to do him any wrong, in that, or in any other kind whatsoever. Were
thou ever, said the Countryman, known to be faithful to thy Promise, I would
willingly enough pardon thee; but thou art so very false and treacherous, I can
allow thee no Credit, and therefore thou shall now suffer the just punishment
of all thy Wickedness. And saying that, he killed him without further
Expostulation.

We are advised by this Fable, not to give Credit to an unfaithful man, nor to
pardon, when it is in our power to punish him..

FAB. LXXXIV. The Wolf and the Crane.


AS a Wolf fed too greedily on a Sheep he had worried, he was in danger of
being choked by a Bone, that by chance stuck in his Throat; for he could
neither swallow it down, nor force it up. This obliged the Wolf to search about
for an Artist to help him in that Distress, and meeting a Crane, he with fair
Words, and large Promises of a considerable Reward, persuaded her to undertake
it; who putting down her Long Bill into his Throat pulled out the Bone. But
when she afterward demanded of him the promised Recompense. Do thou think
it, answered the perfidious Wolf, but a small Recompense, that thou have been
suffered to draw back in safty thy Head out of a Wolfs Jaws, when it was in
his power, (had he not been kind to thee) to have bit it off? Be gone therefore,
thou Fool, and esteem it a Sufficient Reward, that thou still enjoyest thy
Life, which I could so easily have taken from thee.

This Fable is against such Persons as have been preserved from some great
Mischief or utter Ruin, and have proved afterward ungrateful to their
Preservers. Beneficium disce tum pessime collocatum, cum in Ingratum confertur.
A Benefit is merely thrown away, which is bestowed on an ungrateful Man.
Ingrati enim Fides tanquam Hybernalis glacies tabescet, and disperiet tanquam
aqua Supervacua.

FAB. LXXXV. The Hedg-Hog and the Viper.
AT the approach of Winter, a Hedg-Hog entreated a Viper to let him lodge one
Night in his Cave; which favor he kindly granted, and having admitted him in,
they lay down and slept together; till the Viper being weary with lying on that
side, would have turned himself; but could not by reason of the Caves
straightness, and the sharp Bristles of the Hedg-Hog, which pricked him: The
Viper therefore civilly entreating his Guest to remove a little closer to the
other side of the Hole. He, answered the Ungrateful Hedg-Hog, that finds
himself uneasy, let him quit the Cave; for my share, I will not give my self
the trouble to stir an Inch one way or other.

Take heed of making such a one thy Companion, who being more powerful than
thee, may thrust thee out of thy own House.

FAB. LXXXVI. The Man and Fortune.
HOW to become Rich in a short time, was the daily study of a Covetous Man, who
being told by one with whom he consulted, that by Merchandising was a very
probable way to effect it; He sold all his Goods and Patrimony, and with the
Money, bought a Ship, furnished it with variety of Merchandise, and putting to
Sea, he, by his Traffic in diverse Countries, made such considerable Profit,
that he returned home very Rich. Those who had known him before, admiring at so
strange a Change, asked him, by what means he had acquired all that Wealth? He
told them, 'twas by his Industry. After this, not being able to set Limits to
his Covetous Desires, he must needs venture out to Sea again, where meeting
with bad Weather, he, in a terrible Storm, lost his Ship, with all his Goods,
and narrowly escaped in the Wrack, with his own Life. Being then asked by his
Acquaintance, How he came to be reduced to that Low Ebb of Poverty? I may
thank, answered he, that Traytress Fortune for this Jadish Trick. Which
Reproach when Fortune heard, she was angry, and appearing to him: When thou,
said she, had got together a great Mass of Riches, thou gave thy self the
Glory of acquiring it; but layest on me the blame of this thy ill Success.

This shows how much Man is inclined to extol himself, still boasting of the
Riches, which God bestows on him, as if all were gained by his own Industry,
and remembers not, that all our Benefits come from him, who is the Fountain of
all Goodness. And whenever any ill befalls us, we are apt to lay the blame on
others, without looking at home, for the Cause of it: Nor are we willing to
acknowledge that any Miscarriage ever comes by our own Faults.

FAB. LXXXVII. The Lion and the Frogs.
Toward the Evening, in the Summer time, as a Lion had been roving, at some
distance from his Den; he heard the noise of a vast number of Croaking Frogs,
which resounding through the neighboring Woods and Fields, made him suspect
that some horrid Monster was come, and had taken possession of those Woods,
with intention to hold him at Defiance, and incite the Beasts to rebel against
him, and then by Force of Arms make himself Lord of all that Territory. These
jealous Thoughts roused up his Courage within him; and strait this Magnanimous
Warrior directed his steps that way, whence he heard the terrible sound
proceed. But when he appoached the Place, and beheld the clamarous Army of
little Animals, that were able to form so great a Noise, he admired, and
stopped his further progress. Then laughing at his own mistake and vain
Suspicion; Well, Said he in his Heart, I could not have believed, that so great
a Cry, could have come out of so small a Body. What could this infinite Number
of Little Creatures do, now, contemptible and unfit for all manner of Action,
who yet make so horrid a Noise, if they had Bulk, strength and Heart given to
each of them equal to mine? Whilst he was saying this, all that loquacious
Company, seeing so formidable a Creature amongst them, were struck with a
sudden Fear, fled, and hid thmselves in the impure Waters of their Melancholy
Lake.

Thus some inconsiderable Men giving their Tongues a Liberty of Blustering, and
Hectoring, do almost affright others with their great Noise, tho without any
Just occasion, for they can only injure with the sound of their voices, and no
more. A wise and Valiant Man should not therefore be concerned at the empty
words of any Blusterer, But the silent Man, whose Deeds are seen before he
expresses his Mind, He it is, of whom we ought to be most aware, according to
the Italian Poet.

-- Colui, che di Valor e ricco,
Non suol' dal van parlar acquistar Merto.
Of truly Valiant he deserves the name
Who not by words, but Deeds, accquires his Fame.
FAB. LXXXVIII. The Peacock and the Soldier.
FOR an Ornament, had a Soldier stuck his Helmet with Estridges Feathers; which
a Peacock taking notice of, I have here, said he, Plumes much Finer, and far
more beautiful than those you wear. The Soldier hearing this, compared them,
and finding his words true, caught the Peacock, and Striping him of his
Feathers, put them into his Helmet, instead of the others which he threw away.
When this Peacock saw himself, thus plundered of his rich Train, he lamented,
but could only blame his own Folly, as the Cause of all this great Loss.

Its dangerous boasting of our Riches, and showing our Treasure, for it is the
ready way to incite others to rob or deprive us thereof.

FAB. LXXXIX. The Man that hid his Treasure.
TO Secure his Money from Theives, a Man took and hid it in a Wood,
Communicating the secret to none, but one of his Neighbors only, whom he had
made his Confident, in some of his Chiefest Affairs; which treacherous Friend
soon after, going thither by Night, Stole it away. The Owner next day went to
visit his Treasure, and missing it, immediately concluded his Neighbor to be
the Theif. He therefore posted home, and thence to his Neighbors House, where
with a feigned Transport of Joy, embracing him; To morrow, my Friend, said he,
we'll to the VVood, and carry a Thousand other Staters of Silver, which I have
gained by Merchandising; and there I Will bury them with the rest of my Treasure.
At this News, his false Friend carried back the Money to the place whence he
had stolen it, hoping to get the whole: But the true Owner went, and finding
his Money, brought it all home with him. Then meeting his Friend, Base Traitor,
said he, and breaker of thy Faith, I have now in despite of thy Villainy, got
my Money again into my own hands, and there shall keep it safe from thy
fingering. His Neighbor being thus outwitted, and not able to deny the Fact,
confessed the whole Truth, begging his pardon and concealment of the matter.

He that grasps at all, holds fast nothing. Chi tutto abraccia niente stringe.
It.

FAB. XC. The Old Man, his Son, and his Grandson.
AN undutiful Son, having got all his Fathers Estate into his hands, drove him
out of Doors, and forced the good old man to retire into an Hospital. By which,
as the Son passed some time after, the Father espied him, and calling to him,
Son, said he, pray be so kind to send me one pair of Sheets, of all the Goods
you have of mine, and that cost me so much Pains and Industry to purchase for
your benefit. He then touched with Compassion, sent his little Son with the
Sheets, charging him to deliver them safe to his Grandfather. The Child took
them, yet carried but one; of which when his Father was informed, and chid him
for it, asking him angrily what he had done with the other Sheet? I laid it up,
answered the little Knave, to keep it for you, against such time as you shall
be in the Hospital, as he is now.

This Fable admonishes all Children to pay a just respect and duty to their
Fathers and Mothers: For it is impossible, but that on the same manner which
they treat their Parents, they themselves shall be treated by their Children,
be it well or ill. Good therefore is the advice of Phocillides. (...).
First worship God, and then pay thy just duty to thy Parents.

FAB. XCI. The Parrat and the other Birds
IN a Princes Palace hung a Parrot, which was had in great esteem, as well by
the Prince himself, as the whole Court. At which the other Birds admiring,
asked her, For what Reason they did her all this Honor? Because, answered the
Parrat, I imitate Man, and spoke as Man does.

We should labor to Imitate Man, and speak like Man; that is to perform the
Actions of the best of Men, and speak like the best of Men, by which we shall
acquire Honor and Respect amongst the greatest of Princes. (...).


FAB. XCII. The Ant and the Grass-hopper.


ON a Sunshine Day, after a rainy Season, at the beginning of Winter; a great
number of Ants or Pismires, marched in a long train out of their Hole; each of
them loaded with a grain of moist Corn, which they carried out to dry in the
Sun. This sight induced a miserable Grass-hopper, almost famished for want of
Sustenance, to draw near them, and in an humble manner beg for some relief
amongst them. Which one of the ancientest Pismires hearing, whose years and
experience had gained him a more than ordinary respect with the rest, asked the
Grass-hopper, In what he had employed himself all the Summer, that he should
already be reduced to such necessity? Truly I spent my time, answered the
Grass-hopper, in making a delightful Melody, for the Entertainment of such as
frequented the Fields. Then truly, replied the Ant, Laughing, If you could live
so Idly, in so plentiful a Season, only singing and making Music, without
taking care to provide for a time of Scarcity; you may even spend the Winter in
Dancing, to which your Body will be the more fitly prepared, not being
overcharged with eating: For as for my part, I cannot think my self obliged to
maintain one so lazy and unprofitable as you are, with the Fruits of my Labor
and Industry.

Young Men, you that are in the Flower of your Age, and wast your precious time
in Folly and Vanity, without thinking what will become of you, when you shall
be grown Old: Consider well this Fable; Open the Eyes of your Understanding,
and learn by this wholesome Instruction; That in the Spring time of your Youth
and Strength, you are offered a fair Opportunity of making a Provision for the
Winter of your Old Age; which if neglected, you may reasonably expect to end
your days in want and misery. The Italians say; Che l' antico Proverbio e cosa
vera,
La Vita il Fine, il Di loda la Sera.
The Truth's approved which these two Proverbs say,
The End shows the Life, the Evening Crowns the Day.


Propter frigus piger arare noluit; Mendicabit ergo Aestate, and non dabitur
illi.

FAB. XCIII. The Goat and the Bull.
TO escape a Lion, as a Bull was running in have, he met a He Goat, who
perceiving the occasion of this Flight, prepared to encounter him; which though
the Bull saw, he passed by, but looking back on him with Indignation; I am not
afraid, said he, of thy Impudent Nodding, but it is the pursuing Lion I fear;
who, were he not at my Heels, thou should soon know, what it was to affront
a Bull.

It Is the certain mark of a base Spirit, to Insult over any one in distress. L'
oppression del forte e' ardir del vile. The Downfall of great Men, is the
Triumph and Rejoicing of the Rabble.

FAB. XCIV. The Lion and the Elephant.
ALong the side of a Forest, were all the Beasts drawn up in order, by command
of the Lion; who with his principal Courtiers attending him, walked by to view
them; whilst they humbly kneeling on their Knees to him their Sovereign; thus
paid him their Duties, all but the Elephant, who having no Joints in his Legs,
from his Shoulders to his Feet, could not Kneel. This gave certain Beasts, who
were his Enemies, an occasion, enviously to accuse him to the King; that of
mere Pride, he had refused to pay him his Obedience: Which false Suggestion
incensing the Lion, he came to the Elephant, and looking on him with Fury; Why,
said he, is the Pride of thy Heart so great, that thou disdainest to pay me
that Honor, which all the rest of my Subjects do? My Sovereign Lord, answered
the Elephant, I pay you Honor and Allegiance as it is my Duty; but to Kneel,
is to me impossible, for I have no Knees. If thou honor me in thy Heart,
replied the Lion, it is sufficient, and thy Homage is acceptible; for no Man can
act beyond his Power. The just Lion then promoted the Elephant to great Honor,
and severely punished his malicious Adversaries.

A Judge ought to be careful that he give just Judgment, and not suffer himself
to be swayed by every public Report, or private Insinuation, but to give
Sentence according to the Truth of the thing: For he is not always Faulty, who
is accused, but he that is proved to be so.

FAB. XCV. The Peacock and the Crane.
ONE Evening a Peacock and a Crane Supping together, the Peacock boasted, That
he had more glorious Plumes than the Crane: I must allow you, said the Crane,
to be a more beautiful Bird than any other; but yet you can scarce Fly over the
top of a House, whereas I am able to soar up as high as the very Clouds.

Some are to be honored for one Excellency, and some for another.

FAB. XCVI. The Lion and the Countryman.
INto a Fold of Sheep and Cows, which by neglect was left open, a Lion slipping
on a sudden, intending to seize one of them for his Supper, was there by the
Shepherd shut in. The Lion immediately perceiving it, made several attempts to
have escaped out, but failing in all, he first fell upon the Sheep, tearing
many of them in pieces, and then made great Slaughter among the other Cattle.
Of all which the Countryman being a sad Spectator; at last bethought himself,
set open the Gate, and let out the Lion, who returned back into the Forest.
The Shepherd's Wife, after she was a little recovered from her fright, fixing
her blubbered Eyes on her Husband. Did you not well deserve this Mischief,
cried she, that when you might have let the Lion go off with a small loss to
us, must needs shut him in, and urge him to destroy us?

They who indiscreetly provoke great Men, with whom they are not able to Cope,
deserve no pity when they suffer for their Temerity.

FAB. XCVII. The Ass that had Three Masters.


Daily was a Gardiners Ass Importuning Jupiter by Prayers to give him a new
Master, for the Tyrant he then served was so cruel to him, he was no longer
able to suffer it. Jupiter, to answer his Request, gave him another, whose
Trade being to make Earthen Vessels, the poor Ass was continually employed in
carrying Pots about the Country, This tormented him worse than before: And made
him once more Invoke the the God's Favor for another change. Which after long
Solicitation, Jupiter laughing, granted, and gave him a Tanner for his Third
Master; A man in all respects far more severe than his two former, particularly
his hard working him, and short allowance of Meat; which the miserable Ass
having a while experienced, Alas! said he, groaning forth the very anguish of
his Spirit, How much more tolerable was my Slavery under my two first Masters,
than this; who will not care, I perceive, to break my Heart, for the advantage
of my Skin, when I shall be dead.

Servants are apt to wish for their old Masters, when they dislike their new
ones. And thus do Men wish for a return of their past Conditions, when they are
not satisfied with what they enjoy at present.

FAB. XCVIII. The Country man and his Son.
GO, said a Countryman to his Son, take your Spade and dig the Field, that we
may sow it. The Son went out, but when he had viewed and considered the
largeness of the Ground he was to work on, he was discouraged, thinking it
impossible ever to be finished by one Man; and therefore concluded it better,
to spare his pains than attempt an Impossibility. So laying himself down, he
spent the day in Sleeping and Idleness. The same thing he did the next, and the
third day; But when his Father came to see what progress he had made, and found
the Field as yet undigg'd, he asked his Son, in what he had been employed, all
that time. In nothing, answered he, for Alas! what could I alone do, toward
the Digging such a Field as this? The Father perceiving his Sons Error,
prithee, said he, try but to Dig eight or ten Foot a Day. In this, the Son was
content to obey his Father; and after a few days, seeing his Work go forwards
pretty well, he began to be pleased, and was encouraged to settle to it with
all his Endeavors, whereby he finished his Undertaking to the great
satisfaction of his Father.

It Is a difficult thing to make a just Computation of our undertakings before
hand: For some Works may be done with as much ease, as measured. The Greek
Proverb says (...), Principium dimidium totius. Incipe, dimidium qui caepit
habet. There is a great Difficulty in well disposing matters at first, for
oftentimes that seems hard to accomplish, which is done with Ease. This shows
also, that Men's Studies and Undertakings are much encouraged by a successful
Beginning.

FAB. XCIX. The Wolf, and the Horse.
RAmbling over certain Fields, a Wolf found a parcel of Corn, which being no
Meat for him, he left; traveling on further, but he met a Horse, whom he
conducted to that place; and there showing him the Barley: This I found, said
he, and reserved on purpose for you, to have the pleasure of hearing you crump
it between your Teeth. 'Twas kindly done, answered the Horse. But if Wolfs
could have eaten Corn, thou would not have preferred the Pleasure of thy
Ears, to the satisfaction of thy ever craving Stomach.

Those who are naturally ill, tho they do a good Act, cannot on a sudden be
supposed to have changed their Inclinations, unless by some Accident.

FAB. C. The Husbandman and Jupiter.
A Husbandman, about to rent a considerble Farm of Jupiter, refused to
undertake it, unless he had these Conditions granted him in his Lease, viz.
That he, at his Pleasure might govern all the Seasons of the Year, when it
should Rain, when Blow, be Hot Weather, Cold, Snow, or Frost, etc. This, after
much pressing, Jupiter was content to grant; and the Country Man had what
Weather soever he thought needful, at his Desire. But when the Harvest should
have come, there was neither Corn, Grapes* nor any other Product; for by the
imprudent Managment of the Husbandman, the Earth became Barren, and yielded no
manner of Fruit that year. The Poor Man at the Disapointment of his expected
Crop, and loss of all his Labors, lamented and was extremely sorrowful; which
Jupiter saw, and willing to show him his Folly and Vanity, who would pretend to
know that better than himself, who knew all things so pefectly well. Friend,
said he, you may, by this ill success, be sensible of your foolish Request, in
making me govern the Seasons after your Discretion. But go your ways; now,
Plow and Sow; order your Vines and Fruit Trees, and make all other
Preparations for the Year ensuing, which you were accustomed to do, leaving the
Government of the Seasons to me for the future, to dispose them as I shall
think fit; by which you shall see the difference betwixt your Conduct and mine.
This Advice the Man submitting to, had, the next Summer, a great Crop of Corn,
a fruitful Vintage, and plenty of all things else, even beyond expectation; and
seeing his own Folly, he left the care of Governing all future Seasons to
Jupiter; wisely contenting himself with what Weather soever happened; and all
his Husbandry succeeded well and prosperously with him.

So should every one of us have our Trust and Confidence in him, who is the
wise Disposer of all things, and not be continually troubling him with all our
impertinent Requests; for he who knows our wants better than we our selves do,
if we use an honest Industry, will in his due time, give us a convenient supply
of whatever is necessary for us.

The End of the Third Century of Fables.
The TABLE.
1 THE Quarrels of the Members and the Stomach. 2 The Swallow, and the Crow. 3
The Carter, and the Horse. 4 The Master, and his Dogs. 5 The Countryman at the
Olympic Games. 6 The Stag, and the Oxen. 7 The Ape, and the Fox. 8 The Ape, and
the Dolphin. 8 The Halcion or King-fisher. 10 The Sow, and the Bitch. 11 The
Wolf, the Fox, and the Ape. 12 The two Frogs that were Neighbors. 13 The Oak,
and the Elm. 14 The Horse, and the Ass. 15 Mercury, and the Statuary. 16 The
Apes Head. 17 The Swan, and the Cook. 18 Aesop at Play. 19 The Dragon, the
Countryman, and the Fox. 20 The Flies, and the Honey. 21 The Quarrelsom Young
Man, and his Father. 22 The Liberal Man, and the Thieves. 23 The Dog that
wrongfully accused a Sheep. 24 The Geese, and the Cranes. 25 The Heart Drinking
at the Fountain. 26 The Countryman, and Fortune. 27 The Asses Shadow. 28 The
Wolf, the Fox, and the Shepherd. 29 The poor Man that lost his Daughters
Portion. 30 The Basilisk, and the VVeasel. 31 Cybeles Priests, and the Ass. 32
Phoebus, Boreas, and the Traveller. 33 The House Dog, and the Hunting Dog. 34
The Moor or Ethiopian. 35 A true History, happened in Augustus's time. 36 The
Wasps, the Patridges, and Husbandman. 37 The Serpent, and the Crab. 38 The
Countryman, and the Stork. 39 The Hog, and the Fox. 40 The Drunkard, and his
Wife. 41 The Cat, and the Cock. 42 The Gardener, and his Dog. 43 The Bear, and
the Fox. 44 The Oxen, and the Axletree. 45 The King, and his Fabulist. 46 The
Dog, the Ass, and the Wolf. 47 The Wolf, and the Woman. 48 The Kid, and the
Wolf. 49 The Gods, and Momus. 50 The Devout Seaman in a Storm. 51 The
Peach-tree, and the Apple Tree. 52 The Young Mole, and its Dam. 53 The She
Goat, and the Wolfs Whelp. 54 The Old Man, and the three Cheats. 55 The Lion,
the Wolf, and the Fox. 56 The Vipers, and the Fox. 57 The Monkey, the Cat, and
the Chestnuts. 58 The unjust Governor forced to refund. 59 The Fox, the Cock,
and the Dogs. 60 The VVeasle, and the Man. 61 Mercury, and Tiresias the
Diviner. 62 The Lion and the Bear. 63 The Swallow, and the Nightingal. 64 The
River Fish, and the Sea-Calf. 65 The Fight betwixt the Birds, and Beasts. 66
The Estridge. 67 The Ape, and her Young. 68 The Fishers. 69 The Archer, and the
Bear. 70 The Horse and the Wolf. 71 The Hen that laid Golden Eggs. 72 The Thief
and the Hangman. 73 The Thrush, and the Swallow. 74 The young Mouse, the Cat,
and the Cock. 75 The Tanner, and the Hunter. 76 The Man that would count the
Waves of the Sea. 77 The Ass, the Ape, and the Mole. 78 The Fowler, and the
Lark. 79 The mad Lion, and the Goat. 80 The Eagle, and the Crow. 81 The Old
Horse. 82 The unskilful Physician affronted. 83 The Fox, and the Countryman.
84 The Wolf, and the Crane. 85 The Hedg-hog, and the Viper. 86 The Man, and
Fortune. 87 The Lion, and the Frogs. 88 The Peacock, and the Soldier. 89 The
Man that hid his Treasure. 90 The Old Man, his Son, and his Grandson. 91 The
Parrat, and the other Birds. 92 The Ant, and the Grass-hopper. 93 The Goat, and
the Bull. 94 The Lion, and the Elephant. 95 The Peacock, and the Crane. 96 The
Lion, and the Countryman. 97 The Ass that had three Masters. 98 The
Countryman, and his Son. 99 The Wolf, and the Horse. 100 The Husbandman, and
Jupiter.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Thomas Howkins, in George-yard, in
Lumbard-street.
FOur Books of Johannes Segerus Weidenfield, Concerning the Secrets of the
Adepts, or the use of Lully's Spirit of Wine, Quarto. Holwell's Key to the
whole Art of Dyaling, in Quarto. -- His Trigonometry, fitted to the meanest
capacity, in Octavo. Dr. Everard's Works, in Octavo. Mandy's Marrow of
Measuring, Illustrated with Copper Plates, in Octavo. The Rational way of
Teaching: Being a complete Spelling Book, by Thomas Osborne, in Octavo. The
Artless Midnight Thoughts; the Third Edition, with great Enlargements, by Sir
William Killigrew, in Octavo. Mather's Young Man's Companion; or a very Useful
Manual for Youth, in Twelves. The Pens most Easy and Exact Improvement,
Teaching to Spell, Read, and Write, true English, in a most compendious Method,
in Quarto, price sticht 1 s. The Experienced Instructor, in Octavo, Price 6 d.
Both Ingraved on Copper plates, and Printed in Red for the Learners Ease. The
Art of Short and Swift writing, without any Characters, or Charge to the
Memory, in Octavo. Price stitcht 3 d. Robert Barclay's Apology, in Quaerto. --
His Catechism, or Confession of Faith, in Octavo. The Spirit of Martyrs
Revived, by Ellis Hooks, in Quarto. William Penn's No Cross no Crown, in
Octavo. The Narrow path of Divine Truth, by F. M. Van Helmont, in Twelves. The
true Christians Faith, and Experience declared, in 12. Counsel to the Christian
Traveller, both by William Shown, in Octavo. E. Bathurst's Vindication, in
Octavo. Glorge Fox the younger's Collections, in Octavo. George Keith's Divine
Immediate Revelation, the Second Part, in Octavo. -- His Fundamentals of Truth,
in Octavo. Truths Principles, in Twelves. George Fox's Instruction, in Twelves,
price 6 d. Little Books for Children, price Three pence.
W(...)h Paper, and Paper Books of all sorts; Blank Bonds, and Release of all
sorts; with the best INK for RECORDS

FINIS.

