THE AGREEMENT OF THE Associated Ministers In the County of NORFOLK And City
and County of Norwich, Concerning Public Catechizing, and their resolutions to
revive it in their several Congregations. Together with some Explanatory
Discourses annexed, declaring the particular grounds, moving to the Agreement
expressed in the several Articles. To which is also subjoyned, An Exhortation
to the Members of their respective Congregations, exciting them to a submission
and mutual assistance of their Ministers in this method of Instruction.

1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren be not Children in understanding, howbeit in malice, be
you Children, but in understanding be you Men.

Ego etiam Theologus sum, qui mediocrem usum, and peritiam sacrae Scripturae
variis periculis sum consecutus, sed non ita efferor hoc dono quin quotidie una
cum pueris Decalogum, Symbolum, and december praecepta mecum orem, and intento
cord inspiciam non tantum verba transcurrens, sed etiam observans quid singula
verba significent: and sane cum hoc non facio and aliis negotiis occupor,
sentio inde certum incommodum.

Luther in Psalm. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, and are to be sold at his
Shop next door to the Castle, over against the Guild Hall in Norwich. 1659.

To the Reverend, our much honored Brethren, the Ministers of the Gospel
within the County of Norfolk, and City and County of Norwich, whether agreeing
with us, or dissenting from us in their persuasions, concerning Ecclesiastical
Discipline.
IT is an excellent Rule, prescribed by the great Apostle of the Gentiles, (in
case of Brethrens dissentings each from other,) that wherein they have
attained, they should yet walk by the same Rule, minding the same thing. By
virtue of which we presume, to offer our Brethren our Agreement in the matter
of Catechizing, being the first fruits of our long debates, and what we
persuade our selves, will meet with a desirable acceptance from them. We cannot
in the least doubt (Dear and Reverend Brethren,) but that many of you (however
of differing persuasions from us in some things of Ecclesiastical Order, or in
regard of your remoteness of Habitations, not Associated with us,) have with an
equal moving of Bowels with (if not exceeding any of) us, considered the sad
effects, which the want of a settled Discipline in the Church; the divisions of
Brethren in their Sentiments, concerning the things of Religion, and (we are
afraid) our own too great deficiency to our respective Duties, have produced in
several parts of these as well as other Counties in this Nation. If both we,
and our fellow Servants had not too long slept, the enemy (doubtless) had not
sown Tares, to such an unhappy advantage. The consideration of which, did at
last Alarm some of us (more conveniently situated for a correspondence each
with other;) to a serious consideration of what (in this dissetled estate of
the Church of God amongst us) might by a voluntary Association, and mutual
Obligation laid upon each other, be done to give a little check to that torrent
of confusion, which we saw every day like a stream of mighty waters rushing in
upon us, and upon the people for whom we must be accountable in the day of
Jesus Christ. Having therefore first agreed in some Rules of Order to be
observed by us, for the managing of more general, and particular meetings, for
the best advantage to so noble an end, as is the preserving amongst us the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; the first thing we propounded for the
Subject of our debates, was an uniforme agreement in the Administration of all
the Ordinances of the Gospel, of which the Lord had made us Stewards: that
having by a joint owning of the Doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith
and Catechismes, advised by the Late Reverend Assembly, declared our oneness of
judgment in the things of God, We might likewise agree in the same practice,
especially as to public Administrations, serving the Lord with one heart, in
one and the same way; and by this means taking away all stumbling blocks out
of the way of weak Christians.

Upon a survey of public Ordinances, we found that some (which we must look
upon as public Ordinances,) had been for a long time disused, and that some
began to question, whither there were any divine warrant for them: these were
public Catechizing, Reading of the Scriptures, and singing of Psalms in the
public Congregations. We resolved to begin with the first, in our debates. And
because it is questioned by some, whether there be any warrant for it in holy
Scripture, or any great need or profitable use of it; and others question,
whether any but Children be the Subjects of it? and others are again divided in
their fancies, concerning the particular form of Catechism, most fit to be
universally used: And lastly, (while the Magistrate pleases to interpose his
authority,) We perceived some at a loss to determine, what could be done by us
as Ministers, to promove it, amongst froward people, who should not be found
willing to submit themselves to this Method of instruction. We offered all
these things first to the more private debates of our Brethren in their
particular Associations, who being first agreed amongst themselves, were
desired to send in their thoughts to the general meeting; which results of
their more private debates, when we had obtained from them, and came to compare
them each with other, we found no difference in judgment amongst us concerning
the things, and very inconsiderable differences, in the Sentiments of
particular Brethren, relating to the uniforme practice and exercise of them.
What small diversities there were in the several Papers, were easily
reconciled, upon a debate in a general Meeting. And considering with our
selves, what a prejudice the world (this part of the world especially) has
entertained against this useful exercise, because it is represented to them as
a puerile exercise; and by reason of the scandal which others have brought
upon it, as tending but to a form of knowledge, or at most but to a form of
godliness, and (in their opinions) anticipating the teachings of the spirit,
(which many cant of in these days, but woefully betray themselves, that they
know not of what they speak, the spirit teaching men not by Enthusianismes, but
by and in the use of means, and much, (Secundum quod n^ctus est Organum) (to
use Erasmus his expression) not using now adays to teach men, to speak diverse
Tongues, without learning the Rudiments of the Grammar, nor yet the Principles
of the Doctrine of Christ, without means proportionate to that end. We say
considering these things, that we might (together with our Brethren in other
parts of the Nation,) bear a public Testimony, to the usefulness of this
ancient exercise, and let our people know, upon what grounds we have so
deliberately proceeded to the Agreement we are come to (through Gods blessing)
upon our debates, as to the reviving the prctaice of this exercise amongst us;
As also how far they stand obliged to a submission to it: We thought sit to
refer it to one of our Brethren, out of our several Papers to draw up, the
Sum of our Agreement in this thing, with some explanatory Discourses,
containing the Arguments which prevailed with us, to enforce such an Agreement
from us; and an Exhortation to the several persons, who are Members of our
particular Congregations, to a just submission and performance of their duty,
both in reference to us their Ministers, and more especially to their own
souls, and the souls of those who are committed to their domestical charge.
Which being done, and the draught (as is here presented to you, appproved by
us) we thought fit to publish it to the world, as a testimony of our unanimity
in this thing, and concurrence with our Brethren in other parts, and as a
witness, both against our selves, and our people too, if our people shall
hereafter perish, through want of such knowledge, as may this way (through the
blessing of God upon our endeavors) be communicated unto them. We hope our
Reverend Brethren will not conceive every person in our Association, responsall
for every particular passage in the Explanatory Discourses, or Exhortation
annexed, much less for every failer the Press may be guilty of; but only
understand, that we are jointly agreed in the Articles, declaring our judgment
and resolutions to practice in this thing, and to the substance of what is
contained in the discourses annexed, explaining the grounds of our agreement,
and the matter of the Exhortation, though we have not particularly examined
every Quotation, or accent; or (if we had thought it considerable) possibly
this or that phrase might have been altered by some one or other of us. The
sum of what we here present is the Agreement of four score and odd Persons
in Association with us, and that upon due and mature deliberation. And nothing
herein, having been imposed by us upon his Brother, by the Magisteriall dictate
of any one, but being first propounded and debated, freely consented to by all
present and concerned in it, as overruled by the dictates of their own
consciences, and force of Argument, we conceive it both will and ought to make
the deeper impression upon others; and will be conceived by all, who have
concurred in it, more highly obliging to a suitable practice, of what in these
debates they have either pleaded for, or at least by a silent vote consented
to, refusing the liberty granted them throughout the debates, to produce their
arguments, either against the whole, or any part thereof.

And we trust that we need not multiply words to our other (Dear and Reverend
Brethren) in these Countries, who have not been equally concerned with us, in
these debates, and this Agreement which comes forth as the result of them;
considering that we know they are sufficiently instructed, how much they are
concerned, Non est quod bonus dicat Pastor, quid mihi cum sordido coriario, aut
cum abjecto mendico, aut triobolari maliercula? Nulla nobis anima vilis videri
debet, pro qua dominus gloriae mori dignatus est. Erasmus in Ecclesiaste.
that the souls of all in their particular Congregations, should not perish for
want of knowledge. And for any to say, what have they to do with poor and
ignorant persons? (as Erasmus long since noted) cannot be the voice of a good
Shepherd; for no soul ought to appear vile in our eyes, for which the Lord
of glory vouchsafed to dye upon the Cross. We trust none of our Brethren will
take it ill at our hands, that they have not been called into counsel with us,
(upon which account we have only styled it the Agreement of the Associated
Ministers in the County of Norfolk, etc.) We trust the most of our Brethren
know, that the doors of our Association have been open to all those who were
willing but to declare, their consent to the substance of the Doctrine
contained in the Confession of Faith, Ord. 3d. Jan. 1644. Form of Church
government, 29th Sep. 1648.
and Catechismes, lately advised by the Reverend Assembly of Divines; and their
approbation (so far) of the Directory for Worship and form of
Church Government, so also advised and established by the Authority of
Parliament, as that they would Preach nothing contrary to the former, nor
practice any thing contrary to the two latter. So that we are not justly to be
charged with slighting of any of our Brethren, because as we conceive our
selves obliged to conform so far as might be, to the authority of the
Parliament, in things wherein our consciences were fully satisfied; So we
judging it reasonable (especially in such times of reproach and blasphemy as
these are) that some common Test, should be put upon those, to whom we gave the
right hand of fellowship in such an intimate degree of communion, could think
of none more fit, then what (agreeing with the judgment of most sober
Christians, and the best reformed Churches) had also the approbation of so
grave and Learned an Assembly, and the signature of public authority. Nor
would we have our Brethren interpret us as if we thought our selves the only
Ministers of the Gospel, in these Countries thus far agreed; We know and are
persuaded, that we are not, but are aware of many, who have been hindered from
this concurrence withus, only by their disconveniency of habitation, at such
distances from us and the place of our general meeting, that they could with
no conveniences personally attend these debates, and who we doubt not will
(though as to the debates they were absent in the body) yet as to the practice
evidence that they were present in spirit with us, and will rejoice in what we
here tender unto them. For any of our Brethren to whom this may be any rock of
offense that they have not been present with us; we shall only speak unto them
with allusion to the words by which Gideon once pacified the Ephraimites,
contending with him because they were not called to fight with the Midianites.
What have we done, in comparison of what you yet may do? If God shall put into
your hearts to practice with us what we have agreed. The gleaning of your
Grapes of that nature, will be better then the Vintage of our debates, in
reference to the end which we have pursued in all that we have done of this
nature.

The generality of our Brethren being (as we conceive) sufficiently with us
convinced of their duty in the reviving of this ancient and useful exercise.
We have nothing to do but only to stir up their pure minds by way of
remembrance. That as they believe so they would also speak and do. If any of
our Brethren shall think we have extended the obligation too far, in bringing
aged persons under a duty of submission to to this method of instruction, and
declaring our resolutions, to deny the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to such
as refuse such a submission; we shall (besides what we have hereafter produced
in our justification) mind our Reverend Brethren, That we are informed by a
Reverend Brother, who upon diligent search had found it in the Records of the
Bishops Courts, in the City of Norwich; That Ministers were anciently enjoined
to go from seat to seat and to require of their several Parishoners, as well
old as young, an account of their knowledge in the Principles of Religion, and
both Minister and People were presentable in the Ecclesiastical Courts, if
either the one neglected his duty in inquiring such account, or they omitted
their duty in giving it to them. It has been the constant judgment of all
reformed Churches, that ignorant persons ought not to be admitted to the Lords
Supper. Those Reverend Persons, who by command of King Henry the eighth, and
afterward of Edward the sixth, drew up that Book called Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum, determine that none ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper,
whose Faith was not perfect in all parts. Tit. de div. officis. cap, 7. Nam ad
sacrosanctam domini mensam nemo admitti debet, cujus fides omnibus partibus
perfecta non sit.
Our Brethren (we trust) will easily be persuaded, that in their spiritual
fishing, (to which God has called them) the little fishes are not those alone
whom their Nets are laid out for, he is doubtless a lamentable Fisherman, who
contents himself with enclosing the Fry within the compass of his Net. And if
any of our Brethren, can obtain so easy a discharge from their consciences in
the discharge of the great work of the Ministry, as to think the Preaching of a
Sermon or two in a Week, is a due fulfilling of the work of their Ministry,
toward all but Children, we shall but desire of them to confute themselves, by
taking account from some one or two of their People, (such especially as are of
the poorer sort, and have wanted like advantages of Education with others,) how
far they are profited in a distinct knowledge of the Principles of Religion,
by the many years pains, which they, or others before them, have spent
amongst them in Preaching the word of righteousness; yea even in those places,
where Preaching has been managed with the best tendency, and to the best
advantage for such an end, Oh! how dreadful is the work of the Ministry,
concerning which the great Apostle cries out, Who is sufficient for these
things? We cannot without trembling think of that passage of Chrysostom.

I speak (says he) no otherwise then I think, (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Acta.
homil. 3a.
and judge; I do not think that there are many Ministers will be saved: but
the much greater number of them will perish: The reason is, because the work of
the Ministry requires an extraordinary Spirit; for he will meet with many
things that will take him off from his Duty: and he had need of a numberless
number of eyes to see to the discharge of it. Do not you see (says he) how
many things are required of a Minister? he must be apt to teach, full of
forbearance, faithful as to the Word of God; how great is this difficulty? The
sins of others will be reckoned to him. I say no more, if but one poor soul
goes away not instructed, his whole Salvation is hazarded by it, for the loss
of one soul is so great, as cannot be compensated: for if the Salvation of this
or that individual soul, was judged by God of so great consequence, that for
its sake, the Son of God must become Man, and suffer so great things; how
great must the punishment be, which the ruin of one soul, will require for
satisfaction. And if that man who has contributed to the loss of his Brothers
natural life, deserves to dye for it; what does he deserve who contributes to
his Brothers deprivation of eternal life? Oh that this Meditation might so
far sink, both into our hearts, and the hearts of all our Brethren, who have
been called to this Sacred Office, and so far operate, as to engage both us and
them, To take heed to our selves, 2 Timothy 4.2.
and the flock of Christ committed to our and their charge, that we may neither
contribute to their ruin by example, Acts 19.41, 27.
nor yet by Doctrine, neither by the Commission of any thing unworthy of us, or
Omission of any duty incumbent upon us, but that we may Preach the Word, be
instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and Doctrine, not ceasing to warn every one with tears night and
day. Nor shunning to declare unto all the whole Counsel of God, warning and
instructing them from house to house, not counting our life, much less our
labors dear to us, So that we may finish our course with joy, and the
Ministry, which we have received of the Lord Jesus Christ, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God.

We know to whom we are speaking, and shall therefore forbear further to
multiply words, to press a confessed duty. We have only further to beseech our
Brethren, to consider, how conducible, to those glorious ends, which both they
and we aim at in the reviving of this exercise; an uniformity in our practice,
as to the exercise of it, will be: at least as to the forms of Catechism,
which we have agreed, in using that first, which is contained in the lesser
Catechism, advised by the late Reverend Assembly of Divines, and published by
Authority of Parliament, (as appears by the Order prefixed to it, dated the 15.
of September, 1648. What reasons have constrained from us an Agreement as to
the use of that form, Our Brethren will see in the following sheets; and we
hope they will appear as cogent to them, as they have been to us. The great
Apostle 1 Cor. 1.10. has taught us how conducible to the avoiding of divisions
amongst us, it is, that people speak all the same thing, in matters of this
nature, and our Brethren will easily conceive, with us, how much it will
gratify, such as are of weaker judgments and apprehensions, to say nothing of
the expediency of it, in reference to the removals of Families, out of the
precincts of one Congregation, into the Precincts of others. In which cases
(especially as to Children and Persons of weaker capacities) the work will be
toties quoties, to be again began, if different forms be used in several
places. Having premised thus much, we leave our Agreement in this thing with
the grounds of it, to the serious consideration of all our Brethren, and fellow
laborers in the work of the Lord, Commending both their and our labors herein
to the Lord, and the blessing of his grace, and assuring them, that we have
nothing more in our desires, then that we might all walk together knitted in
love, and preserving the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Though we
all ways judge, it would be as great an error in us, to sell the truths of
God, or part with the purity of Administrations in the worship of God; to hold
correspondency with men, as it was in the Romans, G. Cassander, De officiis pii
very.
to build their Temple of Concord, in the very place where their most seditious
outrages were committed. And we are so far of Cassanders mind as to think; That
alone to be true, and solid peace amongst Christians, which is conjoined with
the glory of God, and the obedience of his will, and is seioined from all
depravations of Heavenly Doctrine and divine Worship. In which we trust also
our Brethren are agreed with us.

ARTICLES Containing the AGREEMENT Of several Associated Ministers Of the
Gospel, within The County of NORFOLK, AND City and County of Norwich,
Concerning Public Catechizing.
I.
WEjudg, That Catechizing by way of Question and Answer is the most accommodate
way of teaching the Foundations of the Doctrine of Christ, and an Ordinance of
Christ, under the Gospel, falling under the more general Precept of Teaching;
necessary, highly useful, and expedient: and we unanimously agree to revive
the practice of it in our respective Congregations in conformity both the
practice of primitive and lately reformed Churches.

2. We judge, That the Subjects or Persons to be thus instructed, are the
ignorant, whither old or young, though a difference of age or quality, may in
point of prudence require a different Method, in dealing with them: We
(accordingly) agree to use all proper means to discover such in our
Congregations, as be ignorant, and accordingly to deal with them.

3. We judge, That the use of a form in this exercise (at least at first is
most expedient) and we (accordingly) resolve to practice, making use of that
form, which we find in the lesser Catechism, published by Authority of
Parliament, upon advice first had, with the late Reverend Assembly; yet we
shall not rest in that form: nor tie up our selves in that exercise, to those
Questions alone which we find there, but shall, as we see cause add others for
Explication.

4. We judge, That the most convenient time and place for this exercise, is the
Lords day, and the place of public Meeting for the Congregation; and we agree
to practice it, upon the Lords days, at least six Months in each year.

5. We judge it reasonable considering, the long disuse of this Exercise
amongst us, and the present state of our Congregations, that such as are above
eighteen years of Age, and cannot be persuaded, to come publicly to be
examined; be encouraged to submit to this instruction; by our gratifying their
infirmity, so far as to allow them a time for private conference; and we
agree, to allow them some proportion of time weekly, or ootherwise, when they
may come to us; or we will go to them for this purpose.

6. We judge it our duty, as to this exercise, to avoid all occasions of
scandal, and accordingly agree, to examine, no young Women privately, without
other witnesses, and to observe all tenderness, and prudence, toward others,
especially Superiors, having respect to every ones Capacity, Education, Age
and Quality.

7. We do agree, in case our people desire it rather, and be willing, by
conforming to it to inconrage us in such extraordinary labor, to set apart
some time weekly, upon some weekday for this exercise, so far as our other
necessary occasions will give us leave.

8. We do judge Catechizing to be not only a piece of the Ministerial duty,
but also of the duty of all such as are betrusted with the charge and
Government of others, as Parents, Masters, and Governors of Schools: and we
do agree accordingly, to press it, upon all such within the Precincts of our
Congregations.

9. In case there shall be found, within the Precincts of our Congregations,
any concerning whom we shall not have a reasonable ground, to presume them
competently instructed in the Principles of Religion) who, being in their own
power, or under the government of others, who shall refuse to be thus
instructed by us, or by those under whose government they are; We do agree in
our administrations of the Lords Supper, to deal with such, as persons that
are ignorant. Or in case there shall be found any trusted with the charge, and
government of others, who (being able) shall refuse, thus to instruct those
under their charge, and after admonition persist in such refusal, either
themselves to instruct them, or to send them to us to be so instructed. We do
judge it matter of scandal in such governors, and shall accordingly deal
with such (in our Administrations of the Lords Supper) as persons living under
the neglect of a known duty.

Having thus far expressed our Agreement in Judgment concerning Catechizing and
Resolutions, as to the reviving of the practice of this piece of our
Ministerial duty: That we may not seem to obtrude any thing upon our Brethren,
without just and sufficient reasons: We have thought fit (in the following
Chapters) to subjoyne, those reasons which have prevailed with us to the
aforementioned Agreement.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Nature of Catechizing. The Divine warrant for it. The
Expediency of that way of teaching. The Ancient usage of it in the Church of
God, and the present necessity of reviving it in our Congregations.
IT is a Rule fit to be observed in all matters both of Dispute and Treatise,
(...).
to begin with the Explication of Terms. The Term Catechizing is properly of a
Greek extraction. The Greek word from whence it is derived, properly signifies
to sound into a man's ear what we would have him to understand. Institutio quae
fit viva voce aures cir cumsonantes. Alsted.
The word is often used in the New Testament, Luke 1.4. Acts 18.25. and 21.24.
Romans 2.18 1 Cor. 14.19. Gal. 6.6. from the comparing of which Texts together,
it may be observed, that it signifies a teaching by a lively voice, opposed to
that which is by writing. And this signification of the word is evident from
all ancient Writers: thus the Translator of Clem. Alex. ordinarily interprets
it.

But the word taken in a more strict and proper sense, Ea institutio quae est
ex auditione.
has been used to denote a more peculiar kind of teaching, restrained both as
to the matter taught, and the manner of teaching. As to the matter taught, it
denotes instruction in the first Principles of any knowledge: And in
Ecclesiastical usage, an instruction in the first Principles of Religion,
which the Apostle calls the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. Heb. 6.1. For
as in every Art and Science, so also in Religion, there are the first grounds
and Principles, and then the larger deductions and more remote conclusions; The
Apostle calls the first, milk, the atter, strong meat, the first fit for those
whom he calls Babes in Christ: the second for such as are perfect (in his sense)
And accordingly there is a twofold teaching, the first, per modum, (...), which
we call Catechizing: the second, per modum, (...), by way of further
instruction, which Grotius thinks is employed by the two words (...), and (...),
used Mat. 18.20. Luke 1.4. (...). Clem. Alex. in Paedagogo. Vid. Erasm. praef.
in Lucam. Grot. in Luc. 2.18.
which distinction some of the Ancients seem also to have noted betwixt
Catechizing and Preaching.

As to the manner, Catechizing seems to imply such a kind of teaching, as is

1. By a lively voice, by word of mouth, not by writing. Thus the term is used
in Scripture, Luke 1.3, 4. (compared together,) Hence the Hebrew word
expressing it, comes from a root which signifies to hear. And those in the
Primitive Church who were thus instructed were called Audientes, Hearers.

2. It signifies such a kind of teaching as is by way of Dialogue, (...) Sonus
reciprocus, vox reciproca. Vid. Cypr Epist. ad Jovianum, etc. praem. Council.
Carthag.
or Questions, and Answers; after the manner of an Echo. Where there is a
double sound direct, and reflex. So Catechizing consists of two integrall
parts: The proposal of interrogatories from the teacher: and the return of an
Answer from the learner. Such was the examination of the Adulti in the
Primitive Church before Baptism. Of which Philip gives us a president, Acts
8.17. and that phrase which is used by Peter, The Answer of a good conscience,
1 Peter 3.21. is thought to refer to it.

It is thought the Apostles themselves ordinarily used this way of instruction.
It is certain, Apostolica Catechizandi ratio cujus speciem in mysteriis
Baptismi adhuc retinent Ecclesia interrogationibus and responsionibus
constabat. Vid. Praefat. ad Romans Catechism. Bp And. On the Commadments.
that this way of teaching was early used in the Church of Christ. (of which
more her easter.)

3. It signifies A teaching by frequent Repetition, and inculcation of the same
things, and thus fitly answers the Hebrew word, used Deuteronomy. 6.7. Hence Zepporns
makes the work of Catechizing to consist of a double act. Actus instillandi and
repetendi vel dictata reposcendi. Bishop Andrews cites out of Clemens this
description of it, (...).

By what has been hitherto said, sufficiently appears, what we mean by
Catechizing, viz. That kind of teaching by which the ignorant are instructed in
the first Rudiments of Religion, by the lively voice of him that teaches,
familiarly instructing them, by way of Question and Answer, in which the
teacher has a liberty frequently to inculcate and repeat the same things again
and again, for the advantage of those who are taught. And thus it stands
distinguished from Preaching.

1. As Preaching is by way of more dilated discourse upon particular Subjects,
that is, (...), (to use the expression of that Ancient Catechist of Alexandria,
this is (...).

2. As Preaching respects (...), those who are more grown, Catechizing (...),
those who are yet Babes in Religion.

3. As Preaching is as well to stir up the affections, as to inform the
judgment. This only respects the information of the judgment, and that chiefly
in the very principles of Religon, to which Preaching is not limited.

4. As Preaching is the continued discourse of the Preacher: this requires a
vocal account from the hearer.

Now concerning this exercise of Religion,. 2.
It is questioned, Whether it be a Gospel institution, yea or no? If we take
Catechizing in this strict notion, for the instilling of the Principles of
Religion by word of mouth, into the minds of those who hear us, and that by
way of Question and Answer, it may possibly be hard to prove it, Hunc adhuc
puerum initiatum fuisse affirmatur in libro Zohar. Jacob. Alting.
a Gospel institution, either by direct precept or practice from Christ and
his Apostles; but that, It was the will of God, even from the Creation of the
world, that people should be instructed in the Principles of Religion, appears
from the example of God himself, who read the first lecture of this nature to
fallen man, Genesis 3. And the very name of Enoch imports as much. Some of the
Hebrew Rabbis think, that Abraham's trained servants, mentioned Genesis 14.14.
were such as were trained up in Religion: Certain it is, that Abraham
instructed his Family, Genesis 14.14. And that God commanded that his Laws should
be whetted by us upon our Children, Exodus 13.8, 14. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Hence the Jews
had a Book, which they called their Book of Catechism: Jos. Antiqu. l. 4. cap.
8.
and Josephus tells us, they were exceedingly and above all things careful,
that their Children should learn the Law. It was an usual saying amongst
them, That the world would soon return again into its Chaos, if it were not
upheld by the spirits, and breathings of little ones, and such good persons as
learned the Law. Hence they cursed every Town which had ten (or as others
120.) Israelitish Families; if there were not amongst them an instructor of
little ones. (...).
To which custom it is very probable that the Apostle St Paul alludeth in that
phrase, Romans 2.20. However by that phrase in the 18. Verse of that Chapter, he
plainly confirms such an usage in the Jewish Church: (...) Luke 2.46.
We find under the Gospel our Savior Christ at twelve years of age, hearing
the Doctors, and asking them Questions. And several times after condescending
to Answer Questions in Religion propounded to him. And we think it not
improbable, that the form of sound words mentioned, Exodus 12.26.
2 Timothy 1.13. and that form of Doctrine, Psalm. 78.6.
Romans 6.17. may imply some such method of teaching the Principles of Religion;
used in the very beginning of the Gospel. But we conceive there needs no such
industry to prove the divine institution, 2 King. 12.2.
for that a teaching of Christians the things which Christ has revealed and
commanded, is a Gospel institution, none will deny. That Children ought to be
taught, appears, not only from the will of God revealed to the people of the
Jews, Genesis 18.19.
the examples of Abrahem instructing his Family (for which God admitted him of
his Privy Counsel in the business of the destruction of the five Cities,) and
of David instructing Solomon, Prove. 4.4. but also under the Gospel, Prove. 4.4.
Parents are enjoined to educate their Children, in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord. Timothy from a Child was instructed in the Scriptures by his
Mother, and Grandmother: 2 Timothy 1.13. Heb. 5, 6.1.
And the Apostle plainly speaks of milk, and teaching the first Principles of
Religion.

And thus much being granted, that the ministerial work lies as much in
Doctrine, as Application; as much in informing the judgment in the Principles
of Religion, as in stirring up the affections, and inciting to practice; and
that Children and Babes in Religion, as well as years, are to be thus
instructed; we think it will easily be evinced, that Catechizing (even in the
strictest sense) falls under the general precept of teaching, as a species of
it, and the most accommodate way of teaching such as are first to learn the
Principles of Religion, and not obscurely hinted in that ancient precept, Deuteronomy.
6.7, 8 especially considering we find our Savior setting us an example, Luke
2.46. and to his Disciples, Mat. 16.14, 15. to say nothing of Philip's dealing
with the Eunuch in this method, Acts 8. and the Apostolical general precept,
(however it might be calculated for a peculiar Meridian) that Christians should
be ready to give account of their hope to every one that asks them. 1 Pet. 3.15.


Besides that, it is yet disputable, Whether the office of Doctors or Teachers
in the Church, mentioned Ephesians. 4. and elsewhere, might not relate to this kind
of exercise; or at least whether the exercise be not there asserted, as a
distinct Act of the Pastors office?

Nor does the early usage of this method of teaching the Principles of
Religion,. 3.
in the Church of Christ a little confirm us in the opinion of its Divine
Institution. A Learned Prelate says, the Evangelist St Mark was the first
Catechist at Alexandria: Sure we are the orders of Catethisbae, and
Catechumeni, were very ancient in the Church. Eusebius tells us, Pantaenus bare
the office of Catechist at Alexandria, and tells us, this was of ancient usage.
(...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 9.
Origin succeeded him in the same School and Office. We have the (...), of
Cyrill of Jerusalem, and Clemens of Alexandria, his (...). The ancient usage of
Catechizing Converts before Baptism, is testified by so many Authors, that it
can (modestly) be denied by none. Durantus de rit. Eccles. Pareiedit. Vrsini
Cat. Andr. on the Commandments in Proleg.
Johannes Stephanus Durantus tells us, it began to cease when Children were
universally Baptized; Pareus (in his Edition of Ursine's Catechism,) tells us,
that Confirmation succeeded instead of it. Bp. Andrews tells us, that Hegesippus
says, that by means of this exercise, the most part of the world had within
forty years after Christ, received the Tincture of Christian Religion; And
Julian the Apostate never showed his spite more to the Christian Religion,
then in his destroying of these Schools. Canisius in Catech.
Canisius boasts of Augustine, Basil, Ambrose, and Cyrill, as his predecessors
in this work, and he therein speaks no more then truth (says Doctor Done.) It
is apparent also from the records we have of the practice of the Primitive
Churches practice, that they had two sorts of Catechumeni. The first, such as
were born of Christian Parents, who being Baptized, and of years capable of
such instruction, were entrusted to the care of some, who was to instruct them
in the Principles, and exhort them, to the practice of Christian Religion: to
which purpose we find a passage in Dionys. Areop. (an ancient Author doubtless,
Dionys. Areop. De Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 7.
though not so ancient as to be Paul's contemporary.) (...), etc. The other sort
of persons Catechized, were such as were converted from Paganism, Rabanus, l.
1. De institut. Cleri.
unto the Faith of Christ; and these again Rabanus Maurus divided into two
sorts; The first such as heard Sermons and had some desire to turn Christians,
but had not yet offerred themselves to Baptism, these they called Audientes.
The second, such as desired Baptism; these were called Competentes. For whose
Baptism two solemn times of the year, Easter and Whitsontide, (called
Pentecost,) were appointed. Which times approaching, those converts who desired
Baptism, Aug. l. De cura pro mortuis, c. 12. de fide and operibus, c. 6. Cyp.
l. 3. Ep. 22. Ego in juit Theologus sum, qui mediocrem usum, and peritiam
sacrae Scripturae variis periculis sum consecutus; sed non it a efferor hoc
dono; quin quotidie una cum pueris Catechismum Decalogum, etc. Luther t. 4. p.
57. in Psa. 126.
were for the space of forty days called Competentes. Augustine has left us
one Book directed to the Catechumeni, and another De Catechizandis rudibus; and
Cyprian makes mention of Optatus, under the notion of Doctor Audientium. And as
we find it of early usage in the Church of Christ; so neither was it quite
forgotten in the darkest times of Popery, as appears by the Master of the
Sentences: l. 4. did. 6. But no sooner was the work of reformation began by
Luther in Germany, and Calvin in France, but their first thoughts were to
revive this exercise: witness Luthers Catechism, which he delighted in above
all his works: And Calvin's Catechism, afterward by Tremellius translated into
the three learned Languages. Most commendable was the resolution and practice
of the Magistracy of Geneva in those days, witnessed by their Decree mentioned
by Beza in the life of Calvin to this purpose.

It is decreed, that not only the Ministers instruct their people by their
public Sermons; which many neglect to hear, others hear to little purpose;
but also that at a certain time of the year, a civil Officer, together with
one of the Elders shall go from Family to Family, and house to house, and
require of every one an account of their faith. The profit which followed upon
which practice (says Beza) is hardly to be credited.

And no sooner was that famous Synod of Dort convened, but having perfected
their debates concerning the Translation of the Bible, they fall upon debates
for the reviving of this exercise: what they decreed about it, may be read in
the acts of their seaventeenth Session; where we observe, that they conceive it
the duty of Parents, Shoolmasters, Acta Synodi Dordracenae, sol. p. 4.6.
Pastors, and Elders of Churches; and judge it reasonable that the Civil
Magistrate should be desired to interpose his civil authority, for the
promoving the practice of it.

Nor was it only the care of foreign Churches, in the beginning, of their
several resormations, but of ours also at home, witness that famous Catechism
of Edward the sixth, in the very dawning of reformation, and the several
Catechismes published by particular persons since, (it is too tedious to
rehearse them all.) And the act of our whole Church enjoining this practice by
her Canons. To which we may add the greater and lesser Catechismes, advised by
our late Reverend Assembly, and published by Authority of Parliament, agreed to
also by the Church of God in Scotland, as a piece of the uniformity desired in
the three united Nations.

Having therefore such a cloud of witnesses,. 4.
we cannot but look upon it as an institution of God, being a necessary and
most accommodate way of teaching. And as we conceive it exceeding useful in
any state of the Church (considering that when we shall know most, we shall but
know in part,) so we conceive it more especially necessary, and highly
expedient, considering the present state of the Church amongst us in England.
Judicious Mr. Calvin stuck not to say; that it could no where be omitted
without a public reproach and scandal. Iustitut, l. 4. c. 19.
And in an Epistle to the Protector of England, is so free as to bid him, be
assured the Church could not want this kind of exercise. Indeed it has a very
great influence both upon the preservation and propagation of Religion in any
place.

1. Catechismes being breviaries of those truths, which lie at large, dispersed
in the Scriptures, serve as a touchstone at hand to discover erroneous
opinions; as the balance of the Sanctuary, whereby the light notions of men
are discovered from the weighty truths of Christ. In all Sciences it has been
found advantageous, and necessary to have Systemes and Epitomes. The Physician
has his Aphorisms, the Mathematician his Elements, and what those are to
them, the same are Catechismes in matter of Divinity. The necessity which the
Church saw betimes of such abstracts of the Doctrine of Christian Religion,
produced the several famous Creeds, as Touchstones, to discern truth from the
errors in those times springing up: and the notice, which the Popish Doctors
took of the efficacy of Catechism for this end, was it, which made the Church
of Rome fall upon this course; and Canisius for them all, to bestow his pains
this way, and then to glory in it.

2. As the purity of Doctrine is hereby preserved, so the superstructure upon
this foundation, which is holiness in conversation is much advanced by it. It
is an old and certain saying of Augustine, A good faith and life are
inseparable: those who first make shipwreck of faith, will not long keep a good
Conscience. Without knowledge (says Solomon) the soul is not good. Catechizing
in the Judgment of Augustine teaches Christians not only what to believe, but
what to do. Male vivitur ubi non recte creditur, Aug.
It makes them eagle-eyed, and fit to discern the Lords Body in the Sacrament
of his Supper; it instructs every one in his place and teaches him how to
perform his general and Relative duties. A well learned Enoch will walk with
God. Aug. de cura pro mortuis, c. 12.
A well instructed Jacob will be faithful to an unfaithful Laban. The fear
of God is ordinarily taught by the knowledge of him; and though sometimes God
begins with the Affections, and makes his way by them to the head, yet as this
cannot be done without some degree of Catechisticall knowledge, so we believe
upon experience it will be as ordinarily found, that God makes his way to the
heart by the head, reflecting notions of truth (learned in youth) upon the
souls of persons, when they come to ripe years, and sanctifying their knowledge
to their conversion and eternal salvation.

3. If it be worth any thing to preserve Christians stable in the faith,
without which they are but like reeds shaken with every wind, the confessed
usefullness of Catechizing to this end will abundantly testify the necessity
of reviving of it.

It was the observation of King James, That the misleading of people into
Popery and other errors, was occasioned by their ungroundedness in the points
of Catechism. This made Dr. Donn so earnestly press the reviving of this
exercise, In a Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, Sep. 15. 1622. on Jud. 20.15.
and the Provincial Assembly of London, commend it as the proper Antidote
against the errors of these times. The neglect of it (says Bp. Hall) breeds
instability of judgment, mistakes of necessary truths, fashionableness of
profession, frothiness of discourse, obnoxiousness to all error, and seduction.
The soul that has a smattering of some knowledge without orderly Principles, is
like a tree without roots, soon overturned, especially in a wind. And it is no
wonder, if there have been and still are many such like reeds overborne with
every gust of wind; and whose souls are at the beck of every new upstart Fable
or fancy: the walls must needs be tottering, where the foundation is not laid
deep enough. How can they choose but be carried away with every wind of
Doctrine, who want the balast of sound information in solid and consistent
Principles? Had there been more Catechizing, it is probable there would have
been less Apostatizing in England.

2. Nor is this exercise of Catechizing less useful for the propagation, then
for the preservation of true Religion. We mentioned before the opinion of
Hegesippus, that by this means Christian Religion so early overspread the
world. Sr. Edwin Sands takes notice of it, as a great means, whereby the
Protestant Party enlarged its bounds. And the Prefatory Epistle to the Roman
Catechism, confesses the same, sadly complaining, that the Popish cause
suffered most by those Writings of ours, which we call Catechismes. Haec si
unquam alias sentit nostra aetas, quanta damna haereticorum filii: non modo
tartarea sua lingua, verum multo maxim pestilentibus scriptis, quae
Catechisinorum titulas ornare solent, Ecclesiae Christi inserant, Presat. ad
Catech. Romans
Bishop Andrews takes notice of the same success, by the same means, in our
first Reformers, and further adds, That if ever our adversaries get advantage
of us (which God forbid) it will be by our negligence, and their diligence
herein. And how can we expect either the enlargement or continuance of the
reformed Religion, but by the same experienced ways and means whereby it was
at first revived? Nor is there only a future good, forelaid for posterity, but
a present advantage also accrewing unto particular Christians, who are hereby
rendered more fit for Hearing, Reading, Prayer, discerning the Lords Body in his
Supper, etc. We cannot but look upon this, as one reason of our Preaching so
long to People, with so little profit, that (through the omission, or former
slighty performance of this duty, we do but build up Walls without a
foundation, and graff without a stock of Principles. Imitating (says Bp. Hall)
an indiscreet Schoolmaster, who too much affecting the thanks of an overweening
Parent, marres the Child by raising him to an higher form, before he has
learned his first Rules, from whence follows nothing but an empty ostentation,
and late disappointment. Yea so necessary did he (and not he alone) judge this
wholesome spoon-meat (which many now adays think themselves either too old, or
too good, to be sed with) that he could even quarrel with his Sermons, and
wish that a great part of them had been exchanged for this Preaching
conference. For the usefullness of it we need say no more, considering how much
has been already said by others. By the reviving of this exercise, we shall in
some measure know the state of our flock. Our Children shall be taught to know
the Lord: The heavy ears of our people will be made to hear: the knowledge of
the Gospel will be propagated: Our people armed against false Teachers: and
also against many dangerous temptations, founded in the ignorance of
Fundamental Principles; Christians will be taught to reduce what they read and
hear, to their proper heads: and a foundation will be fairly laid in the
understanding, for a natural conscience to conscience to build Application
upon, and to restrain much sin by; and as it were a Wall builded in the soul,
from which the holy spirit in his good time, may reflect saving beams, for the
healing the will and affections. The usefullness of it was suffiently
experimented by our Forefathers. Eusebius gives a Catalogue of seven or eight,
who commenced Martyrs out of Origen's Catechisticall School at Alexandria.

So much having been said of the usesullness of it at all times,. 3.
the particular expediency of it in our times is easily evinced. to say that we
have the ignorant always with us, and shall have so long, as it is the lot of
the best, to know but in part, were enough; but the slighty performance of this
duty in former times, and the long omission of it in later times, has caused a
greater degree of ignorance amongst our people, than either suiteth our
profession, or the means of knowledge indulged to this last age. And the hasty
and plentiful growth of the tares of error and most absurd opinions, is a too
sad evidence to the world, that we have too long slept, as to the performance
of this piece of our duty, and that it is more then time the practice of it
should be revived amongst us. To say nothing of the expediencie of it in
reference to the prosecution of the intended reformation, so far as it relates
to the admission of Communicants to the Table of the Lord; which is much
hindered through the ignorance and sinful modesty of a people not tutored, in
this Method of instruction. All these things evince it highly expedient in
these thimes, where many sleep under Sermons without knowledge, and the little
knowledge of others is overgrown with the weeds of error.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Persons, upon whom the duty of submission to this
exercise, is incumbent.
IT appearing from what has been said in the former Chapter, That Catechizing
is an accommodate way of instructing Persons in the Principles of Religion, we
suppose it will easily be evinced, that the ignorant are the persons thus to be
instructed: these are easily distributed into two sorts; 1. Such as are
Children in years. 2. Such as are Children in understanding. Though the latter
have Men's hairs, yet they have but Childrens heads.

1. That Children ought to be Catechized will be granted by all, not wilfully
blind, or maliciously stubborn: the fitness of their years to receive
instruction, and their engagement upon Baptism to listen to it, are arguments
strong enough to this cause.

Childhood and youth is the time, wherein Solomon advises the Children of men
should be trained up in the way wherein they should go. Prove. 22.6.
The lamentable experience that we have of the frowardness, and perverseness of
age, Men and Women who overslipped their golden time of youth, choosing rather
to hazard the eternal ruin of their souls by covering their ignorance, than
to submit to a gentle cure thereof, is a sufficient evidence that the twigg had
need be bended, while it is young. Nor is that the fittest time only to receive
Principles, but also to retain instruction. Old trees transplanted seldom
thrive, nor do Walls builded in Winter usually stand. A new cloth (on the
other side) hardly loses its first dye, nor the vessel the savor of that
liquor with which it was first seasoned. Timothy was trained up in the
Scriptures, from his infancy, and departed not from them in his age.

2. We conceive all Religious Parents, will be sensible, that by their
engagement for their Children in Baptism, they stand bound to God on their
behalf, to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Exo. 13.8,
14.
The Jews were to instruct their (hildren in the reason of the Passover. And
there is no doubt, but Abraham minded Isaac his Son of the Covenent made in
his slesh.

2. But we are sensible, That our greatest opposition to this practice, will be
from such as in years are no Children, but more than Children in understanding.
These, through a sinful loathness to discover their own ignorance, and
pretended modesty, will and do plead hard for an exemption from this useful
way of instruction. For our parts, as we are satisfied concerning their and our
own duty, So resolving (through the grace of God) not to be defective on our
part, we shall, as becomes those (who have the oversight of souls) require of
them a performance of theirs, of which we verily believe they are sufficiently
convinced in their own consciences; but that (without a fail of our duty to
God) we may gratify them as much, as may be, we shall (as we have said) be
content to deal with them in a more private way, having it not in our design
to discover their infirmities, but as much as in us lies, to hide them. To
this purpose we have resolved,

1. To allow some time on the week days, in which they may come to us, or we
to them, that we may discharge our duty in instructing them, and taking account
of their proficiency.

2. We shall be also content to gratify them in point of privacy, as to
company, and confer with each one apart (only here we except all young Women
for we are sensible how many scandals have beenraised, and may be raised of us
by such private examinations: but yet we shall allow sitch Women, what company
themselves shall desire to have with them.)

3. If any through too much pride, shall think himself above Catechizing by way
of Question and Answer, we shall be willing to deal with them by friendly
conference. All that we aim at, is a cognizance of their knowledge in the
Principles of Religion, and by what lawful means we attain it, we are not
solicitous, so they have it and we for the discharge of our consciences be
satisfied that they perish not for want of knowledge.

4. To take away all prejudice from our people. We have thought fit also
further to declare, That we are sensible of the distance which God has set
between Parents and Children, Masters and Servants: and far be it from us to do
any thing which may render Superiors contemptible to such as are under them;
we shall therefore carefully avoid, any such kind of Catechizing or conferring
with persons that have a preheminency in respect of years, and place, before
such as are young, or in any degree of subjection, or inferiority to them.

5. We are also sensible of differences betwixt the natural parts of several
persons; and which have arisen or may arise, through a disproportion of
education. We have therefore declared, That we will carefully avoid all rigor
and harshness, and in the performance of this duty conform our selves
according to that measure of prudence which God has given us, to the several
parts and capacities of those with whom we deal, so as to give all due
encouragement to the weakest, and not the least discouragement to any; our
design being to instruct and edify, not to confound or discredit them.

6. But yet we have thought sit to limit the age of such to whom we shall at
present indulge the liberty of a private conference, or addresses to us for
instruction. For although we judge such a course (however burdensome to us) at
present necessary, considering the long omission of this exercise; yet we
conceive a public Catechizing far more advantageou for the good of others,
and would gladly lay in for posterity, a better foundation to build upon, in
the Reformation of the Church, then we our selves have met with.

7. And lastly, As to the place, (for such persons, as will not be persuaded to
come into the open Congregation upon the Lords Day) to meet us, we are not
overmuch sollicitous. Whether it be in the Church, or some of our houses, or at
their own dwellings, we shall leave this to the prudence of each particular
Minister, and gratify the weakness of our People in that circumstance, as they
shall with any colorable reason desire at our hands.

CHAP. III. Concerning the form to be used in Catechizing, and why we have
made choice of that in the lesser Catechism, advised by the late Reverend
Assembly, etc.
WE are not ignorant, how much some in the world (through weakness) are
prejudiced against forms in matters of Religion. The Apostle hints the
possibility of men's being possessed with a form of Godliness, and denying the
power thereof. Yet doubtless a form of Godliness in any is more commendable,
then a course of profaneness. All know how much this part of the world in
these late years has been engaged against forms of Prayer. Though we hope
judicious Christians will distinguish betwixt the lawfullness of a form, and
the lawfullness of this or that form: and again, betwixt the lawfullness of
using a form, and the lawfullness of obliging Ministers and People constantly
to the use of one and the same form. The Apostle (who speaks slightly of a
form of godliness) yet speaks honorably of a form of sound Doctrine. 2 Timothy 1.13.
And however some ignorant people may be offended at the sound of the word, yet
we hope judicious Christians will judge, That as there were not much to be said
against the constant usage of the same forms of Prayer, a Tim. 2.3.
if they were always to pray for the same things, without adding and
detracting, (for surely God is not pleased with varying of phrases expressive
of the same thing.) So the same right reason will inform them, that the
Doctrine of the Gospel being sealed, (so that neither an Apostle nor Angel
from Heaven may add any thing to it,) a form of sound words, may be kept to
cxpress that, we have therefore declared our judgment.

1. To make use of a form, the lawfullness of it being evident, the expediency
of it constraines us to this. For besides the disproportion of Ministers gifts
and abilities, the capacity of our people does require this at our hands, how
shall they know what to answer? must we after every question expect a
satisfaction by Euthusiasme? Nor let any tell us, this is but to learn
Children by rote, and to nurse up a form of Godliness; that the teaching of
the Spirit is the Gospel teaching, etc. We would feign learn of these our
weaker Brethren, what it is that Children learn at first otherwise then by
rote? do they not learn to speak by rote? etc. Or why our Brethren suffer
their Children to learn to write by Copies, (which are forms in that art)
besides that some Children may be found so apprehensive, as to conceive the
thing expressed by the form of words. However this Argument lies as much
against Timothies being instructed from his infancy, 2 Timothy 3.15. as against
what we are driving at. And supposing that without the concurrence of the
sanctifying Spirit, the issue of this teaching, will be but a notionall
knowledge in the head, and a form of godliness in the life. May not as much be
said against Preaching as against this? nor do we intend, either to anticipate,
or justle out the teaching of the Spirit; we hope judicious Christians know how
to distingiush betwixt ministerial and effectual teaching. Our design is no
higher by this exercise, then to prepare the way of the Lord in the souls of
his People. But these Objections are too vain to be insisted upon: Having
agreed the lawfullness, and expediency, if not the necessity of using a form,
we come in the next place to agree the particular form. Where

2. We declare our resolution, to make use of that form which is found in the
lesser Catecbisme, advised by the late Reverend Assembly. We are aware, that
this Agreement of ours may be liable to the exeptions of some and more
especially three forts of persons.

1. Such who can allow nothing good, but what was established by (what they
call) the Church of England. These will possibly quarrel at our laying aside
the form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer. We are very far from
condemning those Reverend Persons, that had an hand in composing either of the
Lyturgy in general, or that form of Catechizing in particular: but verily
believe they walked up to their light, and did worthily in their generation.
But surely, God expects higher improvements from us, and we think any
(reasonable learned) Divines upon perusal of that form will find some
Questions inserted, not so proper for a Catechism, and several Fundamentull
Priaciples of Religion, very obscurely hinted, if at all touched: Which
together with the injunction of the Civil Power upon us to disuse that Book, is
sufficient warrant for us without condemning our Reverend Fathers, to lay aside
thoughts of using that.

2. A second fort are such, who for want of this form, when they entered upon
their charges, have for a long time inured their people to another form,
either composed by themselves, or some other Reverend Men: Or else who out of a
desire to conceal some opinions of their own in matters of Doctrine, choose
rather to make Catechismes of their own, then by the use of this to discover
their opinions to the world by entering a dissent unto the things contained
here. For these latter we have nothing to say it being very usual for men to
usher in (...), by, (...) to avoid which (as we shall more fully express by and
by) we have pitched upon this form. For the former, As we desire to reverence
those of our Brethren, who indeaved to supply the defect of former times, by
using their people to Catechismes, more full then that which then had the
signature of publickauthority, and judge it but just they should reap the
fruit of their own labors. So we hope, that ere this time they may have
brought up their people to such a proficiency, in that form, that they may
pass on to this, and keep Uniformity with us, which we persuade our selves they
will find more easy; because in matter they will find no difference. We have
nothing to say to such as out of design, or singularity, set up another
method, judging that those lusts ought to be mortified and not humoured, and
indulged. And for the opinion of some, that this form is too large; Experience
has taught some of us the vanity of it, it being no more then Children of
seven years of age, have with much facility, in a short time got through.

3. But there is a third sort, who have nothing to say against it, but that it
was agreed by that Reverend Assembly, and they are over jealous for us, as if
we would jurare in verba Magistri. To convince therefore our Brethren, that we
have more to say for the adhering to this then any other form extant, we shall
shortly satisfy our Brethren with our Reasons, why we have pitched upon it.

There are five things which we judge reasonable for us to attend, in making
choice of a form of Catechism. 1. Fullness of matter. 2. Purity of Doctrine. 3.
Brevity of Answers. 4. Plainnoss of phrase. 5. Orderliness. To which we may
add two others, which yet may be comprehended under the latter. 1. Uniformity,
and 2. Public Authority.

And we hope every reasonable Christian will judge with us, that in the choice
of a form to be used in Catechizing, if we can find any form, that has in it
a full Systeme of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and that in its native purity,
expressed plainly, and comprised in answers suited (for their brevity) to the
capacity of the meanest, and this form has also the countenance of Public
Authority, and be generally approved and used by other Churches of the same
persuasion with us in the things of God: this in all reason ought to be pitched
upon by us, and preferred before any other form, and may give a just
supersedeas, to any needless endeavors of particular persons, in compiling any
other Catechismes for their particular Congregations, especially considering
how suspicious such actions may be, and of what ill consequence in opening the
like door of liberty to others, who possibly may have less ability, or further
designs, and may too much affect a foolish singularity. Every understanding
Christian will discern, the reasonableness of these properties and adjuncts in
reference to the choice of a particular form.

1. Fullness of matter. The design of Catechizing being the instruction of
people in all the Fundamental Points of the Gospel, in reason we should choose
such a form as is a full Systeme of Doctrine.

2. Purity of Doctrine. Where the Doctrine of the Gospel is not dashed with
erronens Principles, but the milk is (as the Apostle calls it) (...), sincere
without mixture. That form of Catechism is doubtless best, which is not, as
many corrupting the word of God, but as of sincerity, as of God, as in the
sight of God speaking in Christ, (as the Apostle speaks of himself and his
Preaching, 2 Cor. 2.17.) One great end of Catechizing is the preservation of
the purity of Doctrine. The Devil himself grants his vote approbatory of
Catechizing by a form, as the probablest course to propagate errors, and
Doctrines of Devils, (witness the Racovean Catechism) and those of the Romish
Doctors, -- Habet and vespae suos savos.

3. Brevity of Answers. For it is a way of instruction, fitted to every
capacity, and the weakest memories, are to be considered in the exercise of it.

4. Plainness or perspicuity. Catechisticall Doctrine is called the Foundation
by the Apostle, Heb. 6.1. Men use not to bestow carving work upon foundation
stones. Truth needs no flourishes to adorn her, she looks best in her native
habit.

5. And lastly, Orderliness, is a thing not to be neglected. By which we
chiefly understand here, an orderly Connection of the Fundamental Principles of
Religion. This does not only make the whole more beautiful, but tends much
both to the helping of the memory, and the understanding also.

These things being chiefly desirable in the choice of a form, and all of them
(if we mistake not) evident to every judicious Christian in this particular
form, which we have pitched upon, we have from other two considerations been
overruled to this choice.

1. From the consideration of the general approbation which this form has
received in the Churches of Christ. It being that to the Doctrine of which the
Churches of God in New England have subscribed, and the whole form agreed
upon, by Brethren of different persuasions, (amongst our selves) in matters of
Church-Governement. It being also receive by the Church of God in Scotland, and
agreed to be used as part of the intended, and desired Uniformity betwixt the
two Nations, and that in which our Brethren of the Province of London, and in
other Associations in sever all Counties have agreed; And we are aware of how
much consequence it is, especially as to matters of Doctrine, in the things of
Religion, that Christians should learn to speak (...) the same thing: That
passage of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10. does in this thing lay a Law upon us.

Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you.

2. Nor lastly, Do we think the authority inconsiderable, with which that form
is more clothed then any other. If we should not allow that Reverend Assembly,
which composed that form to have had all the form alities of an
Ecclesiastical Synod, and consequently deny the obligation of their Acts, yet
it must be confessed, 1. That they were convened and directed to this work, by
Authority of Parliament. 2. That this was a work proper to them. 3. That there
were many of them, and those holy and Learned Men, Pastors of several
Churches, mighty in the Scriptures, furnished with all internal
qualifications, for the work to which the providence of God called them. 4.
That in the composing of it, it was set up like a Butt, against which any of
that Assembly (in which were also persons of differing persuasions) might shoot
their Arrows: and every parcel of it deliberately perused. That being thus
composed, it was openly read in the Parliament, by that Parliament Ordered to
be Published, and all due care taken, that it might be saithfully communicated
to the Nation from the Press.

We must profess, when we consider the matter, the form, the Composers, the
care taken in the Composure, and Publication, the intendment of the Assembly in
Composing, and of the Parliament in the Publication, we cannot but admire, the
designs of any, who since the Publication of that, has needlessly labored to
Publish any other Catechism of his own, at least with any design to use it in
the public Congregations, and for our own parrs, if we could allow our selves
such an humor, we should fear it would signify to the world that we had some
designs under some covert expressions, to innovate in matter of Doctrine, or
that we too much sancied our own methods, and singularities, or at least that
we were not so well wishers to Uniformity, in matters of practice in the things
of God, as we desire we may be found in our generations. And thus much we hope
may satisfy our Brethren for our resolutions concerning the choice of this
particular form.

CHAP. IV. Giving an account of the two last Articles of our Agreement
concerning Catechizing.
THe two last Branches respect our Agreement in judgment concerning the persons
upon whom this duty is incumbent, and our Agreement as to point of practice, in
order to the enforcing of it where there shall appear to us a wilful neglect
of it.

As to the first, We humbly conceive it a duty incumbent, upon all those who
have the charge of others, though in a different degree and manner.

1. Upon Magistrates, Qua Magistrates, to command the performance of it; and to
take care that those under their charge discharge their duty in it; we find an
honorable mention in Scripture, of those godly Princes, that commanded the
performance of those things, from their Priests, and Levites, and people, which
God had given them in charge to do. 2 King. 22.12.
Josiah commanded Hilkiah and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah to
go and enquire of the Lord for him: and again he commands the people to keep
the Passover. Asa commanded his people to seek the Lord, and to do the Law, 2
Chro. 14.4. 2 Chronicles. 29.21, 24, 27.
and Commandment. Hezekiah commands the Priest to offer Sacrifice and the
Levites to sing. Manasseth when he was turned to God commanded the people to
seek the Lord God of Israel. And we cannot think that the Schools of the
Prophets (of which we read so often in the Old Testament) were erected
otherwise then by public Authority. We are sure if the Magistrate be entrusted
with the custody of both Tables, this will follow. We will easily grant that
the Magistrate has nothing to do, to command that in the worship of God which
God has not first commanded: But that it is not his concernment (by the
interposition of his civil authority) to enforce the observation of what God
has commanded, is a piece of new Divinity to us, and we conceive calculated
only for the Meridian of some Atheistical Principles. We are sure those who
neglect these duties are evil doers, and to such the Apostle tells us the
Magistrate ought to be a terror. We conclude therefore with the suffrage of
that never enough renowned Synod of Dort. Acta Syn. Dord. sess 17a.
-- Ut omnes diligenter officium faciant rogandierunt Magistratus Christiani,
ut tam sanctum and necessarium opus authoritate sua promoveant. And we bless
God that we are not out of hopes of seeing our desires in this thing. We shall
beg of God, that as he has in the supreme Council of the Land, given
strength to conceive and to bring to the birth, something of this nature, so
that in his own time he would give also sttength to bring it forth: But we
shall proceed to such, whom the work more immediately concerns: Those are
suchas have the charge of others under their more immediate inspection. 1. All
Ministers of the Gospel, and Elders of Churches. 2. Such as are entrusted with
the education of youth in Schools. 3. Such as have an Oeconomicall charge,
either as Parents or Masters.

1. For such as are Elders of Churches, we conceive the case is plain enough,
not to dispute whether Pastor and Teacher be two distinct offices, or
exhorting, and teaching two distinct acts of the same office. We conceive it
the duty of all such as have a pastoral charge, under a larger or stricter
notion, this being common to both to feed the people with wisdom and
understanding, we know none will dispute this with us. As for such Churches
where are Ruling Elders, we cannot wholly exempt them from this concernment.
The secluding of the ignorant from the Lords Supper, being an act of
Jurisdiction, in which all that rule in the Church, in reason must be
concerned, and we cannot judge it reasonable, that they should be blindfolded in
judgment. Besides that we find this the express sense of the Synod of Dort, in
the place before mentioned, and the Decree of the Magistrates of Geneva,
(beforementioned) includes them.

2. For such as are entrusted with the education of youth in Schools, Vt
juventus Christiana a teneris annis, in fundamentis verae Religionis,
instituatur, etc. Triplex Catechizandi ratio, observare debet domestica a
Parentibus, Scholastica, a Iudimagistris and Ecclefiastica a Pastoribus,
senioribus, and Lectoribus, etc. Acta Synodi Dordrac. sess. 17a.
We conceive we have no obscura hints in Scripture, The Jewish Schools being
principally for instructing youth in their Law, and we conceive we have made an
ill exchange under the Gospel; if the design of our Schools should be merely
to acquaint youth with the style, and matter of Heathenish Authors, while in
the mean time there is no regard of the knowledge of God. Nor can we conceive it
ought to be neglected in petty Schools, for wherefore do Children learn to
read the Scriptures, but in order to the comprehending of the Doctrine
contained in them? for which we conceive Catechizing the most proper and
accommodate means: This has made us resolve to press this duty upon all
Schoolmasters, and Schoole-dames in our Parishes, and we hope we shall in it
approve our selves to the consciences of all such, as desire to know and fear
the Lord.

3. The third sort are such as are Parents and Masters, their duty lies in
reference to their Children and Servants. We have spoken so much before to
prove this their duty from the example of Abraham, David, Timothies mother, and
grandmother, the command of God, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and Exodus 12. that we need not
repeat any thing, how Parents (without instructing their Children in the
Principles of Religion, should according to the Apostles command bring them up
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, we cannot tell. Nor what account
Masters shall in the great day of the Lord, be able to give concerning their
Servants for whose souls they shall certainly have some account to make. It is
an honorable record, the holy Ghost has left of Cornelius, Acts 10.2. that he
was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much
alms to the people, and prayed always. We judge it a good old Principle, that
the Master of a Family, is there a Prophet, Priest, and a King? A Prophet to
instruct his Family, by Reading and Catechizing, a Priest to pray for them, and
a Prince to rule them, and to see to the execution of the will of God, by those
within his doors, and expelling such as will not: in this they have David's
president, Psalm 101.2, 3, 4, 6, 7.

As to the last thing mentioned in our Agreement, because it may possibly give
some cause of stumbling, we shall add a few words to convince our Brethren of
the reasonableness of it.

The Magistrate not pleasing yet to interpose his Civil Authority, enjoining
Parents and Shoole-masters, etc. to do their duty. We have been at the greatest
loss to consider, how those who are engaged to this duty, and whom no private
or more public admonition will quicken to the performance of their duty; may
be engaged to the performance, or deterred from the neglect of their several
duties in this thing: Corporal and pecuniary mulcts, being neither lawful for
us to impose, nor yet proper to the sohere wherein God has set us. We find the
Divines of Hassia, and Helvetia, and Breme, together with Reverend Diodate, and
Tronchinus, thus giving in their sense in their Papers presented to the Synod
of Dort concerning this Subject. Acta Syn. Dord. sess. 15a. Jud. Hassiac.
Ad Coenae Dontinicae usum, praesertim in pagie nemo admittatur nisi qui
Doctrinam Catechisticam proberteneat, and fidei suae rationem, coram tota
ecclesia publice-redd it. Sponsi non copulabuntur, nisi pastoribus suis in
Religione Christiana profectus, satis comprobaverint. The Helvetian Divines
thus,

Ut discendi studium accendatur and foveatur, quicunque Matrimonium suum
public consecrari volunt, tenentur se sistere Pastori suo, ut huic suum in
causa Religionis profectum probent. Estque penes pastorem, horum vel petitionem
admittere, vel suspendere, Helvetiorum Judicium. ibid.
certumque praescribere tempus, etc. -- Nemo etiam ex juvenibus ad Coenae
communionem admittitur; nisi prius examinatur an mysterium hoc sanctum probe
intelligat. -- Ex junioribus non admittitur test is Baptismi nisi prius
examinetur an mysterium Baptismi, and quodnam sit officium test is intelligat.

Qui Matrimonium meditantur, eique benedici volunt, privatim occasion,
Bremensuum Judic. ibid.
prudentor and amice eapta (quale apud August. de Catechizandis rudibus est
legere) de Religione seu occulte, and quasi aliud agatur, audiripossuni.
Similiter opportunum erit Christianum cum eo instituere colloquium qui infantem
suum tingendum offert, aut qui ad Baptismum test is adhibetur: In primis autem
ad Sacram Coenam, nemo sine justa fidei, ac vitae exploratione, ac religiosa
stipulatione est admittendus.

Pastores -- Omne open atque etiam pro authoritate sua id a juninioribus pueris,
and puellis exposcant and obtineant. Judicium Johannis Deodati and Theod.
Tronchin. ibid.


The Divines of Great Britain, insist only upon the Magistrates Authority.

Our Question being only concerning the power, which may be exercised by the
Officers of the Church until the Magistrate pleases to exercise his power. We
have only to consider what the other Divines thought in this case; Their advice
is reducible to these heads: 1. That Ministers should deny Marriage to such as
should not first give them account of their faith. 2. That they should deny, to
admit any as Sureties in Baptism, who should not first do the like. 3. That
they should before the Baptizing of the Children of any offered to Baptism,
take a Catechisticall account of the Parents, (in case he refuses they do not
advise the withholding Baptism.) 4. That they admit none to the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, but such as shall first openly give an account of their
proficiency in the knowledge of the Principles of Religion.


For the first of these, Marriage being an Ordinance of God, which concerns
men, as men, not as Christians, and Members of a Church merely, and the Act
being a Civil Act, and being not within the Ministerial commission, which the
Gospel Ministers have from Christ, (though an Act to which we conceive they
may be commissioned from the Civil Magistrate, and most proper for them to
perform by the Application of the general Acts of their Office exhoting and
prayer: they being persons most fit for those works, and Marriage the most
weighty action of our lives, and fit to be attended with exhortation and prayer
and so sanctified.) We cannot see clearly what power Ministers as Ministers,
have upon the solemnization of Marriage, to engage parties to be Married to a
submission to this duty, though we judge it necessary that Christians who are
concerned to marry in the Lord, and to carry themselves in their relations, as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, should be instructed in the Christian faith,
and know the relative duties which the Gospel requires of them.

As to the second, If we could suppose Sureties in Baptism in all cases
necessary, or expedient, we should judge it reasonable and necessary, that he
who admits them under that notion, for the education of a Child, in the true
Religion, should be first assured that they should be fit for such an
undertaking. But we cannot lay much stress there, because it neither appears to
us from Scripture-precept, or president, that such Sureties ought to be
admited; nor yet have we any record of any Compatres, for many hundreds of
years after Christ; Propatres indeed were allowed, in case the Parents were
unknown, dead, sick, or absent upon necessary occasions: and there is none
ignorant how grossly that usuage of the latter Church has been and is still
abused in the Church of Rome, and how absurdly it has been used in our own
Church.

3. Concerning Baptism, we do cleary agree, that it is a piece of prudence fit
to be exercised, when persons come to us to desire Baptism for their Children,
to try if we can get an account of their proficiency in the knowledge of
Religion, and we shall our selves (as we see occasion) practice it. But in case
any Parents be so stubborn, that they refuse to give us an account whether this
may be judged by us a sufficient warrant to deny, or withhold the
administration of the Ordinance to the Child, is not so clear to us. Our
Reverend Brethren in the Synod of Dort say no more, then opertunum tempus erit,
etc. it would be a fit time to deal with such Parents. It is true, that
Baptism belongs to the Child in the right of the Parent, and that the
unbelieving Parent has no such right, but it is as certain that the Child may
have a claim in the right of either Parent, and that not the immediate Parent
only.

As to the fourth, We are the more confident, that it is our duty to withhold
the other Sacrament from such refusers, not only because we find this the
Unanimous sense of the Churches of God, met in the Synod of Dort, and also of
several Divines in their particular writings, but because the Apostle plainly
tells us, that he who discerns not the Lords body, eats and drinks
unworthily, and so becomes guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eats
judgment to himself. And we being Stewards of the Mysteries of God (of whom it
is required that they should be faithful, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.) cannot conceive we
should be faithful in dispensing of that Sacred Mystery, to those concerning
whom we have no evidence, that they are able to examine themselves, or to
discern the Lords Body. We must therefore look upon such, 1. As Ignorant, and
upon that account unworthy. 2. As Scandalous, obstinately refusing instruction,
and upon that account also unworthy of that Communion.

And it being (as before) concluded from Scripture, from reason, and from the
Judgment of all the Divines in that famous (aforementioned) Synod, and by
diverse others in their particular writings, to be the duty of Parents and
Masters of Families, and such as have the education of youth in Schools, to be
a piece of their duty also; in not doing of it, they shall fail in their duty,
both to God, and to the souls of those committed to their charge, and therefore
will deserve the more private admonition of the Pastor, and more public
admonition of the Church, if that will not do; and being under such admonition,
we shall conceive it our duty to withhold the Administration of the Lords
Supper to them, as persons that are scandalous, until such time as we have
evidence of their submission and reformation: Only we think the case of these
may admit of exception in the case of such Parents and Governors as cannot
read, and some other special cases. We have therefore added, [In case they
refuse to instruct them themselves, or else to send them to us to be
instructed:] We hope we speak to persons, that know so well the Authority,
which God has give them over their Children, or Servants, that none of them
will say to us, what if we cannot make them come? surely the rod of Correction
is not only made, but also put into the hands of Parents and Master too for the
backs of such fools: And as none is fit to be trusted, with the government of
the bodies of Children or Servants, who if they should be so lazy that they
would not work, could not tell how to bring them to a better mind: So we judge
them every way as unfit to be trusted with their souls, who know not how to use
their Authority to them, to make them submit to the Instruction of their souls
in the things of God.

FINIS.
To all Christian People, Inhabitants in any Parishes, within the County of
Norfolk, or the City and County of Norwich, especially such as are under the
charge of any of the Associated Ministers in those Counties.
Dearly beloved in the Lord:
WE having (through the blessing of God upon our long debates) come to a settled
Agreement as to practice, relating to the reviving of an ancient and useful
exercise of Religion amongst you, (the particulars of which Agreement, with the
reasons moving us to a consent in them, we have before expressed) we have nothing
to do, but to beseech you, if there be any regard to be had, either to your own
immortal souls, or to the souls of those whom God has betrusted you with; if
any bowels and mercies in you toward them, if you put any value upon the
rooting, or establishing of souls in the Principles of Faith, That you would in
this thing submit unto us, as unto those whom God has set over you, and who
must be accountable for your souls in the day of the Lord Jesus; that our
account concerning you in that day, may be given up with joy, and not with
grief, for that will to us be grievous, (and we are sure) for you unprofitable.
What we desire from you we have already told you, and it is reducible to these
two heads;

1. A just account from you of your proficiency, under the means of grace, so
long continued to you: that you may fulfill our joy, while we shall have some
assurance from you, that we have not labored amongst you in vain.

2. A mutual assistance from you, Inabling us to discharge that duty which we
confess our selves to owe to those under your roofs.

As to the first: When you shall have duly considered, that we are those who
watch for your souls, and stand charged with them in Gods Book, we trust that
you cannot but judge our motion exceeding reasonable, considering that we
cannot perfect our accounts without conferring Notes with you; What a sad
account shall we have to give for those souls, for whom we shall be only able
to say, Lord! what they are, or how they have profited we cannot tell, for they
kept their souls reserved from us. How can you say that you own the Ministry
of the Gospel, or us as the Stewards of God, and yet refuse that instruction
which we are ready to give you, or that duty of submission which you own unto
us? With what satisfaction can we either Administer the Sacrament of Baptism to
your Children, or the other Sacrament to your selves, whenas you who address
your selves unto us, to demand the first in your right for your Children, or
the latter for your selves, refuse to give us any evidence, that you have his
warrant (whose Stewards we are) to require either the one, or the other, and we
(possibly) know not, whither you know any thing, either of the nature of that
God, to whose Ordinances you lay claim, or of those mysteries of which you
desire to be made partakers? We are sufficiently convinced, that those amongst
you in whose hearts we shall find such Principles of frowardness working, are
of the number of such as the Apostle calls Children in understanding; and stand
in most need of, what you will see no need at all of; at least we have no
reason to judge otherwise concerning you: for the gracious heart is willing to
be searched and tried: the knowing souls are always desirous of instruction;
and those who are awakened to a steadfast belief, that they must one day give an
account to God, will not only be frequently taking account of themselves, but
ready also to give an account unto such, as they judge faithful; not finding
it an easy matter to satisfy themselves concerning the state of their own
souls, or concerning a just improvement under the means of grace. Give us
leave therefore to treat you, under the notion of Babes in Christ, and to
entreat you to consider with us;

1. The excellenty of the knowledge of the things of God. All knowledge has
its proportionate goodness, but this a more eminent excellency, both in regard
of the excellency of the Object, and also the usefullness of the Act. It is the
homage which the understanding gives to God, and without it, though the
Affections may be laden with the fruit of good desires and zeal, etc. yet the
understanding will be barren and unfruitful. That God who has made the
Affections, has (doubtless) made the Understanding also, and expects an homage
from the latter, as well as the devotion of the former; be has made them both
for himself, and is uneavenly served, by any single power of the soul. Is it
dishonorable for him that pretends to any profession, to a practice in any
Mechanic, or intellectual mystery, not to know the principles of that Art or
Mystery, to which he professes; and is it not much more dishonorable, to him
who ownes the Reverend name of a Christian, to be ignorant in the Principles of
Christianity? Is light pleasant to the eye? and all knowledge pleasant to the
understanding, because its proper Object? and is there no delight to be found
in the souls comprehension of the things of God? Is that knowledge sweet, the
utmost issue of which is but satisfying an itch of curiosity, fitting us for
converse with Men, or the gaining of an estate or interest in the world? and is
there no sweetness in that knowledge, which prepares us for converse with
Saints and Angels, for a converse with God in duty, and for the enjoyment of
God himself to all eternity? The knowing Christian who is zealous also, is far
better than him, that is, zealous without knowledge; if knowledge and zeal lie
in the soul together, there will be heat; if zeal runs so fact that it
stumbles (as it did in Paul's case, and in the Jew; too) knowledge will lift it
up; if a temptation to errors or Apostasy prevail against zeal, if knowledge
be with it, those two shall withstand it, and the threefold cord of knowledge,
zeal, and sincerity, in any soul will not be easily broken.

2. Consider (we beseech you) the danger of ignorance in the things of God. 2
These. 1.8.
Christ will come in flaming fire, to take vengeance, as well upon them that
know not God, as upon them, who obey not the Gospel of Christ. The ignorant as
well as the disobedient, shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Besides how can you
believe on him, of whom you have not heard? or worship that God whom you do not
know? or perform that homage of holiness to him which you do not understand?
Knowledge is not only it self, a piece of the Tribute which we owe to God, but
the foundation, upon which every Altar built to the living God, must be
erected; an ingredient in every composition, from whence he can smell a sweet
savor. A mere nescience of things necessary to be known, pollutes us, and
makes way for our damnation. But

3. Consider (Brethren) that an affected ignorance is much more dangerous. The
soul that is without knowledge is not good, Prove. 19.2. But he that refuses
instruction (says Solomon,) despises his own soul; he is one who judges
himself unworthy of eternal life, making a covenant with darkness; and
subscribing his own damnation: and this (says our Savior) is the
condemnation. The poor Pagan gropes for the Wall, because he wants light, this
man falls into the pit because be shuts his eyes; The former knows not how to
get a knowledge of God, further then his invisible things are clearly seen from
the things that are made. These like not to retain God in their knowledge; they
are of the number of those of whom Job speaks, who say to the Almighty, depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. The wilful self-murder
is the greatest murder, and the wilful soul murderer is (doubtless) most
shut out of the hopes of eternal life. Give us leave therefore to beseech you
in the words os Solomon, that you would attend unto wisdom, and bow your ears
unto understanding. -- Lest you mourn at the last, when your soul and body
shall be consumed; and say, How have we hated instruction? and our heart
despised knowledge, and have not obeyed the voice of our Teachers, nor inclined
our ears unto those who would have instructed us? Lest any of you say; do not
we read the Word, and hear Sermons, in order to our instruction, what needs
Catechizing? We beseech you

3. To consider how many years some of you have sat under our public
Preaching, and yet how unskilful you are to this very day in the word of
Righteousness. What the Apostle says to the Hebrews, we fear may be applied to
you. When as for the time you ought to have been teachers of others, you have
need that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of
God, and are such as have more need of milk then of strong meat, Heb. 5.12. For
the demonstration of this, you need do no more then Catechize your selves,
concerning the nature of Original Sin, the Justification of the soul before
God, etc. things of highest concernment to your immortal souls; to say nothing
of that woeful ignorance which we daily find amongst you, concerning the
Natures and Person of Christ, and the great mystery of man's Redemption; and
daily experience shows us, how much this ignorance exposes Pious souls to the
temptations of Satan, both those which are to sin, and those which are for sin,
as also to every wind of Doctrine, and the errors of such, who go about to
deceive. Nor indeed can we reasonably expect less. The Principles of Religion
are in the bottom of our Sermons, but in those exercises, the truths of God are
but lightly insisted upon; now and then one of them passes by the soul, and it
receives a little thereof, but it is attended with many expressions, serving
only to stir up the Affections; for the crowd of which, those who are small
in stature as to knowledge, can hardly discern what the Principle is, which is
the Subject of our Discourse, (it is lost in the retinew) so that the fruit of
Preaching is seen rather in warming the heart, than in the information of the
judgment; There the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ are one by one, (and
that cursorily too) brought to the soul; but in these exercises they make a
stay at the door of your hearts, and knock once and again, besides that you see
them in their native dress, nor are they dismissed from you, until you have
viewed them in every part and got a full cognizance of them.

4. And lastly, Let us beseech our dearly beloved Friends to consider, The
vanity of their pleas for a non-submission to this exercise. We are aware, that
some of you will plead your Privileges, others their temptations, a third
sort, their natural infirmities, Give us leave to reason out the case a little
with you.

Those who think themselves privileged from this piece of their duty,
challenge to themselves such a privilege, either from their Age, or outward
quality of the world; or from their Married Relation, or lastly, from their
former Admission to the Supper of the Lord. But will any of these excuse an
affected ignorance, when the day of the Lords vengeance shall come to be
executed upon them that know not God?

1. For the first it is true, Days should speak, and the multitude of years
should teach understanding; and that it is a business of more difficulty, for
aged, than for younger persons to receive, or retain Principles of
Instruction, experience teaches; but we are yet to learn, that it is a
business of less duty for such. It had indeed been well, if in the morning,
they had not neglected to have sown their seed, but shall their hand be
therefore slack in the evening? shall one neglect excuse another? or is not the
difficulty that attends the work in aged persons, a just penance rather, for
their neglect in youth? Necessity will teach those to dig in their age, who
knew not in their youth how to do it; and will it do nothing to constrain
ignorant persons that are aged, to learn the things of God, that their souls
maybe saved in the day of Christ? Shall the danger of starving or begging our
bread, prevail further with us, then the danger of burning in Hell for ever?
will it excuse you to answer the judge of the quick and the dead, hereafter
calling you to an account for your ignorance in days of light, to say, Lord!
we were too old to learn? It was possible but your misery (through want of
good education) not to be instructed when you were young; we are sure it will
be a damnable sin unto you, to refuse instruction, because you are old; you are
nearest to eternity, it should be judged your greatest concernement to be
preparing for it, and John 17.3. It is life eternal to know God, and whom he
has sent, the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. For those who plead their Quality, in bar to this piece of their duty, we
trust they will desert their Plea, when they shall have seriously considered,
that these accidental differences betwixt pieces of the same clay, will not
hereafter be considered by the great Potter, with whom there is no respect of
persons. When the grave shall have stripped us of all our gawdry, and our
several honors shall be laid in the dust, and the resurrection shall again
present us before the great Tribunal of God; there will be no Heralds of
Arms, to distinguish us according to our several dignities, Lords and Ladies,
Esquires, Gentlemen, etc. will be all known, but under the common notion of the
Sons of Men; At that day the Kings of the Earth, the great, and the rich Men,
the chief Captains and the mighty men; as well as the poor Bondmen and
Apprentices, or ordinary Freemen, and Yeomens Children, if they have not known
God, and obeyed the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, (which without a pravious
knowledge of it they cannot do) will be seen, endeavoring to hide themselves
in Dens, and it in the Rocks of the Mountains, and be heard crying to the
Rocks, and to the Mountains to fall upon them, and to hide them from the face
of him that shall that day sit upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
before which none shall be able to stand. Besides it is impossible there should
be a greater Argument of ingratitude and disingenuity, than for us to plead the
favors of God toward us, in bar or abatement of our duty toward him, from
whom it is that we are made thus to differ from our Brethren, and who has
therefore done it, that we might be the more obliged to our homage. How
contrarily does that good Man Nehemiah argue in this case, should such a man as
I fly? says he, he makes his greatness an engagement to duty: we plead it in
excuse for duty. He argues from it, an engagement upon him, to be an example
unto others: We argue, that because of it, we should not be obliged to follow
the good example of others. God of old complained of his people Israel in this
Language: Jer. 2.2.
I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals; when thou
wentest after me in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown; Israel was
holiness to the Lord: and the first fruits of his increase, Verse 5. What
iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? and
have walked after iniquity, and are become vain? And again, I did know theee in
the wilderness, in the Land of great droughts. But Verse 6. Hos. 13.4.
According to their pasture, so were they filled; and their heart was exalted,
therefore have they forgotten me. Oh that it might not be said of any toward
whom God has set us in relation; when they were poor, and low in the world,
when they went after God in the wilderness of many streights, and difficulties,
then they were holiness to the Lord, then they seemed to delight to know and to
follow on to know the God of their mereies; they and their houses then served
the Lord. Themselves were not above Ordinances, (to use the improper phrase of
these sinful times,) nor their Children, above Catechizing. But God has blessed
them with increase upon Trading, or exalted them to some places of profit or
trust, and they are grown great in the world; and now According to their
pasture, so they are filled, and they have forgotten him that lifted them up.
This is indeed to become like the beast that perishes: while the wanton horse
is out of flesh, every Child can take him, every Rider rule him; but when he is
grown fat, he becomes unruly, and unfit for his Masters use. We read concerning
Saul, that God once said. It repents me that I have made Saul King, 1 Samuel
15.11. For he is turned back from following me. We are afraid lest God should
say concerning many, in this proud and licentious age; It repents me that I
have advanced such or such persons in the world, that I have given them
plentiful estates, titles of honor or dignity; for since that time they have
forgotten me.

3. There is a third sort, who think themselves privileged by marriage, The
Apostle indeed tells us, that marriage is an honorable estate, and it is a
shame to any to be under an engagement to the performance of duties, in which
he is ignorant; The Wife is commanded to learn of her Husband at home, and the
Husband to walk with her as a man of knowledge; but experience tells us, how few
there are to live up that this duty: yea that there are not many in a capacity
to perform it. We think it reasonable that persons in such relation, should
be prudently dealt with by their Ministers, but we cannot think them excused
from their duty, in the use of, and submission unto all means proper for their
instruction in things of God, without a knowledge of which, we are sure they
can never have eternal life.

4. For those who have been admitted to the Supper of the Lord in particular
Churches; We confess something more may be said. This exercise chiefly
intending the due information of Christians, in the Fundamental and more
necessary Principles of Religion, in which such should be competently
instructed, who are regularly admitted to that piece of Communion with God. But
yet in regard that all such Christians stand obliged to a growth in knowledge,
as well as any other grace, and we are sure those who know most know but in
part, and this (as we have formerly argued) is a most accommodate means in
order to such a growth, we are not satisfied that this is a sufficient plea for
any, unless both they, and their Pastors find that they have attained, some
more than ordinary persection in knowledge, before their admission into that
degree of Communion. We look upon Catechizing, as an exercise designed to an
higher end, than the mere preparing of Communicants for the Table of the Lord;
and though we presume that none admitted to that Table, by any conscientious
Minister, shall need be examined like Children, as to their knowledge in the
first Rudiments of Religion; yet we trust, this exercise may in a short time be
so far improved, that it will not appear a puerile exercise; we intend (God
willing) to begin with the short Catechism, (composed by the Assembly) and to
examine it throughout, Without the Scriptures annexed, then to examine the
Scriptures also, that it may appear to our people, that their faith is not to
be bottomed in the words of Men, but in the wisdom of God; and we would hope
that in time, we might bring some of our people beyond that shorter form, to
give us some account of the larger Catechism; we heartily wish all those in
Sacramental Communion with us, were thus far instructed: but we find by too
frequent experience, that even their knowledge is very disproportionate, to the
means of grace which they enjoy; and that few of them have a distinct and
orderly knowledge of the first Principles of Religion, and are much at loss, to
prove by Scripture, what they profess to know, and believe. Nor would we
willingly rest here, but would gladly bring up some of our people, to give us
account of our Sermons, and of such Questions, as we shall out of the read of
the Catechismes, propound for the further explication of the Answers found
there. Now if we can ever ripen this exercise to such a perfection, every one
will judge that here will be something more done, than can be expected from
Children; And we conceive that if any such who are in fullest Communion with
us, shall think fit to Answer us some Questions, in the face of the
Congregation, besides the advantage may redound to others, who may thereby be
encouraged to their duty, there may no small advantage accrue by it to their
own souls, whilst by this means, their knowledge will be perfected, and their
judgments settled concerning the things of God, and they will be enabled to
give a reason of their hope, to every one that shall ask it of them.

2. There is a second sort, who have nothing to plead but the force of a
temptation, from the scorn and reproaches of their Neighbors, or possibly
those that live in the same Family with them. Who so remembers Abraham's
Family, was not free from an Ishmael, and that a Michal was found in the bosom
of him, who was the man according to Gods own heart, cannot reasonably expect,
that the large family of God, (which is his Church) should be without some
profane Scoffers at those who are better than themselves. Nor is this a small
discouragement to those, who are not so well exercised in the things of God, as
to have tasted the comfortable advantages, which are the returns and rewards
of duty in this life. The Pharisees scandal, (John 7.49. Have any of the
Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him, but this people which knows not
the Law, and are cursed?) thrown in the face of these young Disciples, made the
generality of them turn head, and go every man to his own house. They had not
sat down before and considered, what it would cost them to become Christians.
We hear the whisperings of vain persons. What? will you go to be Catechized
like Children? will such as you go? do you see any but Children, and those the
Children of ordinary persons too that come there? etc. It being not in our
power to prevent the throwing of thosedarts, we shall only make it our business
to arm you against them.

1. In the first place. What is said of honor, That it is more in him that
gives, than in him that receives it, is (we are sure) much more true of
reproach and dishonor. It is a poison only hurtful to that soul which
spitteth it, and sticks not at all to the face upon which it alighteth. It is
that which comes out of a man, such as vain words and sinful actions, or lusts
within a man which defiles him, not what is thrown upon him from the hands of
another; It is, and ought to be a small thing to a Christian, to be judged of
Men; be should remember that its his lot to go through evil as well as good
report.

2. Suppose they be most of the poorer sort that submit to this method of
instruction, Yet Hearken our Beloved Brethren, James 2.58.
has not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom, which he has promised unto them that love him? The reason is not
because the richer should not submit to it, but because they are held captive
by their lusts, that they will not submit to this instruction; And there is a
more secret cause of that too. Not many wise Men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble, are called but God has chosen. The base things of the
world; and things which are despised has God chosen, That no flesh might glory
before the Lord.

3. It was a smart reply which David made to Michal, mocking him out of a
window, while he was dancing before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.20. How glorious (says
she) was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself in the eyes of the
Handmaids of his Servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth
himself? He replies, Verse 21. It was before the Lord, who chose me before thy
Father, and before all his house to appoint me a Ruler; therefore I will play
before the Lord, and I will be base in my own sight; and of the Maidservants,
which thou have spoken of, I shall be had in honor. Why should not the same
spirit be found in our Brethren, which was found in the Man according to Gods
own heart? why should not they answer the Michals and Ishmaels of this
generation, in the same dialect and say, It is for the Lords sake that I am
willing to submit to any method of instruction, for the Lords sake who has
commanded me to bow my ear to understanding, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for which St. Paul accounted, all things
loss and dung, that he might but win Christ? For the Lords sake who (I trust)
has chosen me to obtain eternal life through the knowledge of his truth, and
possibly has cast off your souls, and left you to your own lusts, lest in
seeing you should see, and hearing understand, and your souls should convert,
and be healed; It is for my immortal souls sake, that I do it (which I know
without knowledge cannot be good, Prove. 19.2.) If by any means I might attain
to the resurrection of the dead. I will therefore submit to instruction, is
this in your eyes to be vile? Nay sure (if Solomon may be judge) shame belongs
to them who refuse instruction. I will yet be more vile in this sense, I will
be base in my own sight, and not disdain to be accounted a fool, that I may be
wise to eternal salvation. My soul is infinitely more precious to me, than my
name amongst the Sons of Belial. Of all sober Christiaus, yea of all who are
but morally virtuous, I shall be had in honor. Yea those vain persons of whom
you speak that they will reproach me, shall honor me in the day of their
visitation. Mourning for sin, never destroyed beauty; kneeling at Prayer, never
spoiled a silk stocking; nor did a submission to Catechizing, ever hinder any
ones preferment in Marriage.

4. And lastly, (Brethren,) If we cannot get over so small a stumbling block,
as a scorners tongue in our way to Heaven, how shall we endure a Prison? how
shall we (if called to it) resist unto blood? The Apostle tells us, That all
who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecutions. Of all
persecutions that from the tongue is (doubtless) the least. We have read of
some who from this form of Catechumeni in Origen's School proceeded Martyrs,
but we never read of any that did so who stumbling at the threshold, would not
come into this School.

3. There is yet a third Plea, which some put in to excuse them from this piece
of duty, and that is from their natural infirmity. Which by a mistake, they
nickname modesty; this they say will not suffer them, to express their
conceptions, especially in a public Congregation. In this plea Women are
chiefly concerned, who make highest pretenses to this virtue, and would seem to
have monopolized it to their Sex. To which we answer,

1. That we conceive it is a plea insisted upon in this licentious age at a
far lesser advantage, than formerly it might have been urged upon. Heretofore
indeed such a modesty had possessed the female world, that a Virgin must not be
seen in a Congregation with a face uncovered, (Rebeccah would not meet Isaac,
before she had put on her veil) and the violation of this Law of modesty, was
such a scandal, Lacteas quid prae te fers sine linteo mammillas? Quid hoc est
nisi dicere, posce! posce! trado. Pontan.
that Tertullian calls her, that in his times was seen without her veil in the
Congregation, Caput nundinatitium, pudor ostentatitiae virginitatis. None but
Jezebel then would paint herself, and look out at a window; and the very Poets
would deride them, as presumed strupets, who made their breasts naked. We say
had this plea been insisted upon in that bashful age, it might have signified
something inreality. But when we consider the immodest liberty taken in these
duties, by too many of that Sex, in discovering their nakedness in the sight of
the world, yea even in the public Assemblies, for divine worship (without
regard to the Angels) stretching out their want on necks, and mincing it as
they go, conversing with wantons, in mixed dances, yea at public Taverns and
Innes, etc We are apt to think, that the guard of modesty, which nature seemed
originally to have set upon them, is long since dimissed, and wonder to hear of
it any more in the world.

2. Does not nature it self teach you, to make modesty give place in cases of
necessity, though of no higher concernment than bodily welfare? And have we not
demonstrated a necessity of being instructed in the things of God? or are soul
necessities less considerable than those which incumber bodily life or health?
may the bars of modesty be honorably passed for the latter, and lest for
stumbling blocks to the former?

Neither do we think true modesty in the lest concerned, as an hinderance to
this submission. Which of you who make this your plea, should any of us (though
before never so many witnesses) enquire of you concerning your health, the
welfare of your Parents, or other relations, or your other worldly
concernments, would be so overcome with modesty, as not to give us an answer?
and why should your modesty be pleaded only when we come to quaery you
concerning the things of God, and the concernment of your immortal souls?

4. To conclude this therefore, we can easily grant, that there may be a
shamefacedness in some, which may hinder their submssion to this useful
exercise; But as the Philosopher will allow nothing of this nature the name of
a morrall virtue; so much less is this (...), to be humoured, which is an
excessive shame, restraining us from what of it self is praiseworthy and
honorable. If therefore any plead this in earnest, we have nothing to do but
to tell them, that it is a lust not to be gratified, but mortified. And in very
deed, whatsoever of this is real in any, arises merely from a fear of
disgrace, which (as to this thing) will no longer abide in any, than until they
be raised to a confidence of their ability to satisfy their duty in it, and be
convinced of this as their duty, and the eternal concernment of their souls,
that they may not perish for want of knowledge. We have (we trust) said enough
to press the first thing which we had to request of you. The second was

2. A mutual assistance from you, as you are governors of others, enabling us
to discharge that duty, which we confess our selves to owe unto the Children
and Servants committed to your trust. And this in two things

1. Your more private preparing them for our work.

2. The exercise of your authority, in requiring their appearance to us when we
are waiting upon this service,

As to the first of these we do desire our Brethren to consider

1. That besides the common Obligations which arise from the bonds of natural
affection and common charity, and engages Parents and Masters, to take care of
their Childrens and Servants souls, as well as of their outward being and
welfare; they also lie under the obligation of a positive divine Law to the
performance of what we desire of them. The Israelites were obliged to take all
opportunities to whet the Law of God upon their Children, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. and to
cause their Children to understand the Passover, Exodus 12. Both Children and
Masters are charged (in the fourth Commandment) with the souls of their
Children, and of their Servants; to say nothing of the examples of Abraham,
David, the Mother and Grandmother of Timothy, etc. Elie's neglect of his Family
caused the ruin of himself and it. Whatever any of our Brethren may fancy,
there never comes a Child or Servant into any of their families, but he comes
with this warrant from the great Lord of Heaven and Earth. Keep the soul of
this Child, this Servant: for if it be missing amongst the number of my sheep
at the great day, through thy neglect in reproving, instructing, or timely
correcting, or restraining it, thy soul shall go for it.

2. We beseech our Brethren to cousider, That the duty, which we press upon
them, is within the compass of their power. You cannot teach your Children, or
Servants the fear of God, but you may teach them the knowledge of God, you
cannot convey grace into their hearts, but you may convey instruction into
their minds. You cannot bring them to Christ, but you may bring them to Church;
Doubtless the omission of no duties will be so severely revenged upon people,
as those which even in our lapsed estate we have a power to perform, if we
want not an heart to them, and refuse the performance of them.

3. We dare assure every one of you, that in the performance of this duty, you
will be like the Husbandman (of whom the Apostle speaks) who reapeth, first
of his own fruit. Those who know most of God will best perform their duty to
you; we cannot but look upon the undutifullness of your Children, and
debauchery of your Servants, as very much caused, from the neglect of your
duty, who should have taught them better things; and in your punishment in
their miscarriages you may many of you read your iniquity in this neglect of
them.

4. We are sure, That by this performance of your duty you would much
facilitate our work. The neglect of Masters and Parents, in the instruction and
gorvernment of their families, has almost made the work both of Magistrates
and Ministers unpracticable as to the latitude of their duty. Whence is it that
your Children or Servants, are either ashamed or afraid, to give any account to
us of their knowledge or proficiency under our Preaching to them, but because it
is a strange thing to them, to which they were never accustomed at home.

5. We might further add, That by the practice of this duty you would find no
small advantage arising to your own souls, and this not only in the
satisfaction you would have, while you should see their proficiency in the
knowledge of God, and you shall in the death, or miscariage of any of them, have
the testimony of a good conscience that you have not been defective in your
duty to them: But also in the further confirmation of your own souls in the
truths of God, stirring up your own minds by way of remembrance. It will be of
the same use to you, that the Jewish Phylacteries were to them, by means of
which the truths of God will be always kept in the eye of your minds.

The second thing which we have to beg of you is, The exercise of your
authority in commanding and requiring your Children and Servants to appear unto
us waiting upon this piece of our Ministry. And for this we must be the more
importunate, until the Civil Magistrate shall be pleased to interpose his
authority, (it being the only means we have to bring our wholesome design for
the good of their souls, to any comfortable issue.)

We would hope the persuading of you to this, should be the easiest part of our
work; In our first request we pleaded with you to put off something of your
selves, that you might put on Christ, perform (we mean) your duty to him. Here
we ask you but to put on your selves, clothing your delves with, and
exercising that due Authority, which God has given you, over those under your
roof. Those who will not put themselves to the inconsiderable trouble, once a
week or oftener, to propound a few Questions out of a Catechrsm to their
Children or Servants, in order to so great an end, as we have proved this
exercise conducible unto, will doubtless do very little to help them to Heaven.
But those who refuse this latter part of their duty, will do much less. We will
not suppose that any Master or Parents shall so little understand the
Authority, with which God has invested them, as to tell us, that they cannot
make them come. The Centurions Servants (of whom we read in the Gospel) were at
better command. And unquestionably if the Lord had not thought he had clothed
you with a sufficiency of power over your Children and Servants, he would never
have charged it upon you, to take care that they should keep his Sabbath holy.

We shall add no more, but commend you all to the Lord, and these things to
your serious consideration, imploring the blessing of his grace.

FINIS.
Reader:
Though all due care was used, to prevent thy trouble in the perusal of these
Sheets, yet the Printer must (besides failers in stopps, and accents,) beg thy
pardon for these following Errataes.

IN the Epist. presatory. p. 9. in marg. l. 4. r. (...). l. 5. dele (...). l.
10. r. (...). l. 12. r. (...). p. 10 in the Epist. l. 19. r. nor. In the Art.
p. 2. l. 3. r. to the. In the Book. p. 1. in marg. r. circumsonants. p. 3. in
marg. r. retinet. p. 3. l. 16. r. (...). p. 6. l. 9. r. Catechistae. p. 6. l.
13. r. (...). p. 14. l. 6. r. passover. p. 19. l. 1. r. endeavored. p. 25. in
marg. r. observari. p. 27. l. 20. r. parent. p. 28. l. 23. r. opportunum.


