THE SWEARERS. OR, INNOCENCE Oppressed and Sacrificed, In Consequence of
INDULGENCE To Perjurious Prostitutes.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.

THE SWEARERS. OR, INNOCENCE Oppressed and Sacrificed, etc.
IT shall be as little my Business, as it seems Necessary, or Practicable, to
draw a Panegyric upon the Perfections of those Matchless Worthies, Religious
Spies of Jerico; who, in Confidence that a Good Intention Hallows and Justifyes
a Dubious Action, to the Eminent Jeopardy of their All in Present and Future,
have Generously descended to Become, Say, and Do All Things to All Men,
(according to the very Letter) that by All Means they might Gain Something: And
Thus, under the Double Capacity of Secret Friends, and (Once) Open Enemies and
Traitors to the Established Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Kingdom,
equally to their proper Glory, and the Benefit of their Country, have wrought
about a Great and Mighty Deliverance, a New Reformation, or rather Salvation,
in This our British Israel; rendered a Single Puff of Breath the Absolute
Disposer of the Lives and Fortunes of all the Wicked in the Land; with the
Strong-Feeble Chosen Ones in the Psalmist, Bound Princes in Chains, and Nobles
in Links of Iron; and Advanced themselves to the most Just and Statutable Pitch
of Terror, and Compliance, that can be imagined. As to This Topic, let it then
suffice to say; That tho the Late House of Commons at Oxford, in Token of the
Esteem they had for the Person and Services of the Reverend Chief of the
Evidence Royal, and to enable him to Purchase, (of Col. D. or any Other) Lay
up, and Take his Ease with the Rich Man in the Parable, were only hindered
('it is (said by their Sudden (and in This Respect Unhappy) Dissolution, from
Voting him, persuant to Frank Promise and Engagement, Forty Thousand Pounds:
Yet will not I beat it out of my Thought, that any thing less than a
Still-higher Elevation, in This World, or the Abundances of Another, can be
sufficient to Balance the Bulk of such Unpresidented Deserts, as are
Conspicuous in the Web and Woof of That Illustrious Fraternity; whose Former
Littleness, and Human Frailties, ought not to be Objected to their
Disadvantage, for Fear of involving the (after a Sort) Parrallel Circumstances
even of the Blessed Apostles themselves in the Drift of the Reflection.

BUT now, on the Other side, upon casting back our Eye to Past Ages, and
particularly to the Reign of the Roman Emperor Tiberius; we shall scarce meet
with any thing else then the Agonyes, Cries, Shreeks, Tortures, Scattered
Limbs, and Mangled Bodies of Fathers, Brothers, Masters, Nearest Relations;
Princes, Nobles, Gentlemen etc. Who, through the Treacherous and Perjurious
Practices of a Mercenary and Miscreant Brood of Delatores, Enformers or
Swearers (Glanced at in the Title Page) [that utterly Ruined Trust and
Confidence among Men, Poisoned the Fountains of Earthly Comfort, Violated the
Bonds and Dictates of Society, and Good Nature, Placed the People in a worse
condition then the very Beasts that Perish, Ran them into a State of War by
advancing in every body a common Diffidence of his Neighbor, turned the City
of Rome into one General Shambles; and were encouraged and supported in all
This Villainy by that Jealous, Politic and Bloody Tyrant,] breathed out their
Last, under the hand of the Executioner, and in the utmost Extremities of
Cruelty and Torment.

Nay, upon a View of Later Doings, and nearer Home too, we may find even the
very Swagg-Belly'd Dutch exercising unspeakable Villanyes, Massacres, and
Barbarityes, against the Poor English in Amboyna, (in the Indies) and, by the
Affidavits of a Pack of Leathern-Conscienc'd Prostitutes, laboring to wash
their Hands of the Innocent Blood, when they had done.

WHEREFORE, Effectually to Brand these Hellish Enormities, of Old, and to
Complement our Present Condition, which, (though indeed Property at least, has no
reason to commend the Knights Errant in the Temple-Walks, yet) through Mercy,
Faints not (I hope) under any such Insupportable Oppressions, nor is fairly
liable to the Infamy of the like Odious Imputations; I have ventured, (because
Virtue never shines Brighter, then while Opposed to its Contrary, Vice,) with
much good Will, and and Meaning, to submit to the Modest and Prudent use of my
Countrymen, Honest Aesop's Eighty-First Fable, Of the Dog and the Sheep; the
Matter entirely his Own, only, for better Content, long since, by Mr. John
Ogilby, Englished, and Meeter'd, in the Stanza's Following.

ROUGH, with a Trundle-Tayl, a Prick-Ear'd Cur,
That had Nine Warrens of sterv'd Fleas in's Fur,
On whom was Manginess entailed, and Itch,
From his Sire Isgrim, and a Cat-Ey'd Bitch;
With These Endowments Rich,
And some Bold Vices Now we Virmes call,
He brought to the Judgment-Hall
His Accusation against a Guiltless-Sheep,
That he the Staff of Life from him did keep,
A Loaf he Lent him of the purest Wheat:
At the High Tribunal-Seat
At once he Charged, and at once Claimed the Debt.
THE Sheep denies that e're he had to do
With This strange Dog, whom no Good Shepherd knew;
Since he no Bond could Prove, defires Release.
Then, bawls the Cur, Behold my Witnesses,
Let Them the Truth Confess.
The Vulture, Fox, and Squint-eyed Kite appear,
Who God nor Conscience fear,
To whom he promised Equal Shares before,
For which ( as They Enstructed were) they Swore
They saw when He delivered him the Bread,
Refusing Bond, and Kindly said,
Without such Things, Brethren should Brethren Aid.
THE Beasts had Salvage Laws; Who could not Pay,
Convicted, at the Cred'tor's Mercy Lay:
Such was the Poor Sheep's Case; None could exhort
The Dog to save the Honor of the Court,
Since Cruelty was his Sport;
But at the Sheep with open Mouth he flew,
And, in the whole Benche's View,
Sucks his Warm Blood, and Eats his Panting Heart,
And to each Witness Quarters out Their Part.
When One did say, Thus Innocence (we see)
Was never yet from Danger Free;
As the Evidence, so must the Sentence be.
MORAL.
WHILE Oaths and Evidence shall sway the Cause,
Men of small Conscience little Fear the Laws.
What Trade are You? A Witness, Sir. Draw near;
There Is Coin, go Swear what I would have you Swear.
THE END.
An ADVERTISEMENT.
THere have been Newly Published by James Vade, at the Cock and Sugar Loaf,
near St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, several small Treatises, Relating to
the Times, that are generally pronounced worthy the Perusal of all True
Englishmen, Good Protestants, and Loyal Subjects; and bear the Titles
following.

The Field of Blood: Or, Rebellion Blazoned in all its Colors, in a Lively
Representation (grounded upon Fact) of Inhability in a Prince, Exorbitant
Ambition in the Nobility, and Licentious Insolence in the Commons.

The Keepers of the English Libertyes drawn to the Life, in the Qualifications
of Persons by Them declared capable to Serve in Parliament.

An Answer to a Popish Libel, Entitled, A Vindication of the English
Catholics, discovering the Chief Falsities and Contradictions in the Narrative
of Titus Oats.

A Paradox against Liberty. An Heroic Poem. By the Lords in the Tower.

A Seasonable Memento both to King, and People, upon This Critical Juncture of
Affairs.

The Nations Interest, with Relation to the Pretensions of his R. H. the Duke
of York. Discussed and Asserted.

A Paradox against Life. An Heroic Poem. By the Lords in the Tower.

The Imp^stor Exposed, in a Dissection of a Villainous Libel, entitled, A Letter
to a Person of Honor, concerning the Black Box.

The Mystery and Method of His Majesty's Happy Restoration, laid Open to
Public View; by John Price, D. D.

He has also now in the Press, (and just ready) an Excellent Ode, (by a
Barrister at Law) under the Title of

A Vote for Moderate Counsels; as the Readiest way to Heal our Breaches, and
bring Happyness to King and People.


