AESOP AT RICHMOND, Recovered of his late Illness.

A Poem in Burlesque.

Dedicated to His Royal Highness the Duke.

One for Sense and one for Rhyme,
I think's sufficient at a time.
Hudibr. LONDON, Printed in the Year, School.

To His Royal Highness Duke HUMFREY.
May it please your Grace,
GRatitude is as essentially necessary to a Poet as wit: For, of all Mankind,
they generally share the hardest Fortunes, and were they not sometimes relieved
by the generous Few, might utterly starve and perish: And since nothing can be
expected from them, but the poor Returns of Thanks, What Monsters were they,
should they neglect the paying so small a Tribute; and how odious must they
seem in the Eyes of all Men, stained with Ingratitude: It Is with them as with
Common Beggars, where the Donor may rationally demand not only Thanks but
Prayers, he has an unquestionable Right to 'em, and to wrong him of 'em, were
as heinous as picking his Pocket.

I need not tell the World, your Grace has for many years been the best Patron
of the best Poets, and that your Grace has the largest and truest Soul of
Bounty and Generosity of any Man living, that would be needless; it is like
showing Men the Sun at Noonday: Yet I hope I may so far presume upon your
Grace's Modesty, as to say, None has more largely tasted of it than my self: I
will not say, your Grace has fed me upon all Occasions; yet I must declare I
have dined at your Table when all the world besides have denied me a Morsel of
Bread. But your Grace's Bounty does not end here; Your Grace has not only
relieved the Poets in general, but the best and most learned part of the World
besides; for, not to reckon the vast Shoals of Debtors, Prisoners,
Stray-Apprentices, Bailiffs, Sharpers, Rooks, Pimps, Gamesters, etc. that daily
eat of your Bread and drink of your Drink; a great and vast Number of Divines,
Casuists, Projectors, Painters, Musicians, Rhetoricians, etc. are daily
maintained at your Graces Table; and it is this thing that singles your Grace
out from the rest of Mankind, and your Grace is more known by your Acts of
Hospitality than ever Alexander the Great was by all his Conquests. The Tables
your Grace does every Day support and uphold, are almost innumerable; for,
besides the most noted ones in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, Covent Garden, St. James's
Park, etc. Your Grace has several in Moor-fields, Goodmans-fields, Towerhill,
etc. and all so well furnished and set out, that your Grace's Bounty seems as
unlimited as the Sun; and if so, how impossible is it for us to be fufficiently
thankful.

May it please your Grace, then to accept this poor Trifle, a^ an hearty
Acknowledgement of the Author, for the many Favors your Grace has bestowed
upon him, and may your Grace live long and flourish, for the Support of all
decayed Persons, and particularly, of the sading Sons of the Muses, is, and
ever shall be the hearty and earnest Prayer of

May it please your Grace, Your Grace's most obliged, humble and obedient
Servant, Jacob Dash.

TO THE READER.
I Question not but thou will wonder to find Aesop has so suddenly crossed the
Water, and that he is now at Richmond, especially at the latter end of the
Season, when it might reasonably have been presumed he had before sufficiently
purged his Brain at Tunbridge: However, I can assure thee, here he is; nay, and
what is more, I have drank with him, and, upon my word, think him a very honest,
loyal, witty, good natured Fellow. He told me privately, he had been informed,
that some of his Works had been, directly against his Will, rendered disgustful
and obnoxious to the best of Kings and Governments: So, for the future, he
resolved neither to speak Fables, or talk Politics, but in harmless Doggrel,
by way of Satyr, (for be must show his Teeth still) point at lesser Follies: He
added, that he was beholden, not only to the Poets and Painters for
representing him to the World with such Charms, as a Scythe-Leg, Beetle-Brow,
Goggle-Eye, Blobber-Lip, swarthy Phiz, etc. when (says he) turning about, I Am
as well shaped as your Worship, or any Jack Pudding of 'em all; but I may
requite their Civilities, and with that, in a great Rage, he paid his Reckoning
and went away.

But setting all this aside (most dear and gentle Reader) I have n't one word
to give thee on behalf of what follows, nor one Reason for writing it (save
that the Toy took me in the Crown) and I care as little what becomes on it as a
Whore of her dropped Child, so thou may use it at thy Mercy.

AESOP AT RICHMOND.
SINCE nothing now but Dogrel Rhimes
Will please the Readers of our Times,
And every Scribler of the Town,
Of Little, Great, or No Renown,
Pesters the World with Frippery Stuff,
And thinks his Verses well enough.
Since Aesop stroles from Place to Place,
Like banished Tory in Disgrace,
And checks the Frenzy of the Age,
In Deathless and Immortal Page.
Since he at Tunbridge first appeared,
With lousy Head and mangy Beard;
And after that at Bath was seen,
With hideous Shape, and Face unclean.
Since after that, (and worst of all)
He took up Quarters in Whitehall,
And there, like Rochester of old,
Spoke Truth undauntedly and bold:
He crossed the Thames, and traveled strait
To Richmond-Wells, so famed of late,
Where soon the Air cleared his Reason,
He did no longer utter Treason;
Nor ever canvas or debate
The great Intrigues of Church or State;
Nor in his merry Vein make Sport
With Lords or Noblemen at Court:
He scorns, he says, so base a thing,
But wishes well to Kirk and King;
No longer is a Politician,
Or to the Frenzy-Times Physician.
With Fables now, of Cat and Dog,
He scorns to set the Mob a-gog:
Or with the Story of a Stallion,
Incite Phanaticks to Rebellion.
He Is heard it somewhere, that a Tale
Will strangely over Men prevail,
And wonderfully prompt 'em to,
What they before never thought to do;
And thinks it heinous and unjust,
He ever should betray his Trust;
And therefore like true Subject choose
On other Theams to employ his Muse;
And of a Pimp or Bawd to sing,
Rather than Church, State, Trade or King.
High, on a steep and craggy Hill,
Stands the renowned Richmond-Well.
Whose Waters Excellence and Force
Has often been proved by Man and Horse.
Hither great Gentry do resort,
From City, Country, Town and Court;
Nay, some from Holland, Spain and France,
And in promiscuous Order dance;
The Place no difference does afford
Between the Apprentice and the Lord.
Nor can a Chambermaid be known
From any Lady in the Town.
The Father, Daughter, Son, and Mother,
In Country Dances make a Pother,
And crowd and bustle till they sweat,
From Crown of Head to Sole of Feet.
The Citizen to make his Life
More easy, hither brings his Wife;
The Yeoman brings up Joan his Daughter,
To give the Room a Fit of Laughter,
And she in harmless sort and Guise,
Sucks Passion in at Ears and Eyes,
And with her old new-fashion'd Clothes,
Poor Creature! thinks to charm the Beaux;
She stares 'em wistly in the Faces,
And Eye's their whimsical Grimaces,
Observes their formal Bows and Congees,
Their low Observances, and Longees,
And finds so many pretty Features,
At last she dotes upon the Creatures.
But e're we farther do advance,
Let Us know the Order how they dance,
Describe the Room, Music, and Gallery,
Not in our wonted Style and Raillery,
But seriously, and in the way
Which Quakers Preach in, Poets pray.
With that I whipped my Muse, but still
The lazy Jade goes at her Will,
And though I jerk'd from Bum to Face,
Denies to stir or mend her Pace,
But like your true-bred drinking Sot,
Keeps jogging on in wonted Trot.
Impaled within an Oaken Wand,
Mounted aloft, the Music stand,
Composed of Bass and Violin,
Besides a Flute and Haut-boys sine,
And, that it might be truly such,
Each Fiddler stands upon a Crutch;
And when he screws or heightens Peg,
Breaths forth a Curse on aching Leg.
Behind 'em all does stand blind Jack;
With pocky Nose and lousy Back,
Who, on his broken, winded Flute,
Sets up a hideous squeaking Tute,
Which, joined in Chorus with his Voice,
Make a more formidable Noise
Than Hudibras's Herd of Swine,
In windy Weather when they whine,
These by a Wink, or Nod of Hand,
Play what the Company command.
But first our Gallants all stand ready,
Each Man attending on his Lady,
And at Green Sleeves and Pudding-pies,
Rig out a Dance, in Country-wise,
Cast off, and turn, and face about,
Now riggle in, and then hop out,
And by and by wheeled round again,
Begin at Place where they began.
But, Lord! it is wondrous strange to see
The Niceness of their Symmetry,
With what an artificial Pother
They almost stifle one another;
Dick has my Lady by the Hand,
And Doll a Squire at Command,
The Beau has Susan by the Paw,
The Crack a cully'd Man of the Law,
The Bawd a sneaking sniv'ling Cit,
The Country-Lass a Man of Wit,
The Alderman has Betty Frouze,
And Bully Rock his lawful Spouse,
The Poet has a senseless Drab,
The nice Sir Courtly Gammer Squab,
The Apprentice gets a common Whore,
The Fool a VVench untried before,
The Country Clown a Lady fair,
The Gentleman a Horsing-Bear,
The Citizen a strapping Ramp,
His Neighbor one of the self-same Stamp,
The Countess has, for her Support,
A Gentleman of the Inns of Court,
The Hen-peck'd Knight the Parsons Daughter,
The Jilt a harmless Country Carter,
The Rich the Poor, the Great the Small,
And frisk it in Confusion all.
But now we must suppose 'em weary
With Jumping to the new Vagary;
And for the Ladies sake a Dance
Is called for, Alamode de France,
In which B -- does most excel,
VVitness his dancing the Sybell;
When with such Grace he moves his Parts,
As softens all the Ladies Hearts,
So skilled is he in Cupid's War,
He conquers round him near and far,
And, like a General in the Field,
Can make the stoutest Beauty yield;
And this, they say, he takes Delight in,
But is a F -- l at real Fighting.
To match him, of the Female kind,
Is Mrs. Leer, as loose as Wind;
She trips with so demure a Motion,
You Would swear she was at her Devotion;
Nor could you, by her Phiz or Carriage,
Guess she had e're committed Marriage:
She looks as charming, young and gay,
As Flowers in the Month of May;
But, envious of her Beauty, Fame
Casts vile Aspersions on her Name.
Next her is Madam Merryton,
The Pride and Glory of the Town,
Phillis to every rhiming Fool,
And Theme to all the Boys at School;
Her, Wits, in Verse, proclaim the fairest,
'Cause she is a Beauty and an Heiress,
But being given too much to prattle,
Has got the Name of Madam Tattle.
Miss Micklewell comes next in Play,
More glorious than a Summers Day,
Young, vigorous, charming and discreet,
In all her Looks and Graces sweet;
But, Ah! what Tongue or Pen can tell,
How fine she dances the Sybell!
The Minuet! and Rigadoon,
The Bory-Versaille! and Chacune!
With what a killing Mien and Air,
She charms the Foplings to Despair!
And by the Magic of her Eyes,
Turns stubborn Hearts to Sacrifice!
What Victims daily fall before her!
What Crowds of Fopingtons adore her!
For her the Generous dare and fight,
The Frenchmen fawn, and Poets write,
And justly too, nor can a Muse,
In praising her, be too profuse.
Nor's Mrs. Freemer to escape,
If it is but for her taking Shape;
Her Neck's but short, but thick about,
Her Eyes like Sawcers straggle out
Of large Dimensions, and her Waste
Is near four Yards about at least;
And when she walks it is hard to know
Whether a Snail or or she is more slow;
However she is pleasant, and withal
Jocund, which makes amends for all.
To cope with her, is Captain Bluff,
Whom, all report, she loves enough
To wed; but he, like Man of Sense,
Still keeps the Damsel in Suspense,
Than which there is no greater Curse
To VVomen-kind, (as some discourse)
For Love, although it makes no Noise,
In Silence secretly destroys.
Next him is Mounsieur Addlesop,
That noisie, senceless, prating Fop,
A Prig, that all the Day in Glass,
Stands doting on his ugly Face,
He studies all the Ways and Arts
To overcome the Ladies Hearts,
And is more noted for an Ass
Than e're Sir Martin Marr-all was,
For, like that Fool, he spoils his Plot
Before it is to Perfection got.
The famous Noaks, or Tony Lee,
Were never so great a Nokes as he;
Nor could they with such Skill and Art
Play an admiring Coxcomb's Part;
For he is the very Fool in Fashion,
Within the Center of the Nation.
Draw-can-sir is the next in Story,
A fighting Coward and a Tory,
A Pentioner to Petticoat,
And known to every Whore of Note;
He bullies, kicks, and cuffs for Pay,
But in a Duel runs away;
He cocks and struts with Pride and State,
And does of naught but Battles prate,
And every Word that comes from Mouth
Is coupl'd with a daring Oath;
Yet when a Quarrel claims his Aid,
He hides his Head and is afraid,
Will rather choose to run than fight:
But when he should a Cully fright,
His Valor is as fierce and bold
As the famed Hercules of old,
Though now the Fool is so well known,
He Is beat by every Boy in Town.
Dapper is next, a sneaking Cit,
That strives to be esteemed a Wit,
A positive, conceited Fool,
Laughed at by every Boy at School;
He writes his Songs and Rondelays,
Of what he steals by Scraps from Plays,
And courts his Jilts by Name of Phillis,
Corinna, Cloe, Amarillis;
He aims at Raptures, Charms and Flights,
Describes heroic Love and Fights,
And doubtless is the greatest Ass
That ever was upon the Place.
To match with him, is Mrs. Score,
A Semstress, and a noted Whore,
A Yorkshire, goggle-grey-ey'd Jade,
But well experienced in the Trade,
She Will Kiss for very Cakes and Ale,
Or any thing rather than fail,
And is so very starved and poor,
She almost begs her Bread at Door;
Yet, with her haggard Face and Gown,
Confronts the Ladies in the Town,
And at a Masquerade or Ball
Shall take her Place amongst 'em all,
She serves for Theme to Dapper's Verses,
Which on her Virtues he rehearses,
And all her charming Graces shine
More bright in his heroic Lines.
These dance, and round about the Room
Sit all the Company that come,
On Forms and Buffets, Stools and Benches,
From Ladies down to Beggar-wenches,
From High to Low, nor can you see
Any Distinction of Degree.
Here sits a Lord, and there a Tailor,
A Justice here, and there a Jailer,
A Hector here, and there a Cully,
A Squire there, and here a Bully,
A Statesman here, and there an Oph,
A Witling there, and here a Soph,
Here a subtle Politician,
And there a maggotty Musician,
A Tradesman here, and there a Robber,
Here a politic Stock-jobber,
A Lawyer here, and there a Clark,
Yonder his Wife, and there her Spark,
Here a Fool, there a Wit,
Here a Gentleman, there a Cit,
Here the Giver, there the Taker,
Here the Cuckold, there the Maker,
Here Men, there Boys,
And People of all sorts and size,
Some to be seen, and some to see,
A Miscellany-Company.
Nor is here all, -- Besides these,
In Gardens, underneath the Trees,
Are Ladies and their Lovers walking,
And of their amorous Whimsies talking,
He thinks her Heart of Stone, and she
Taxes the Fool with Jealousy,
And vows that e're from him she would part,
Or to another give her Heart,
She Would be content, alas! to die,
And then puts Finger in her Eye.
Some to a Vizor-Mask address,
And, with a Passion, Love profess,
Tell with what Vehemence they adore
A Face they never saw before;
Swear Cupid's Arrow was so keen,
It forced a Love, unsight, or seen,
That by her Shape they well could guess
The Beauty of her hidden Face'
And humbly beg she would Command
Their Person, Pocket, Sword, or Hand,
For they are hers alone, and would
Continue so, by all that is good.
Others of these admiring Fops,
You Will find within the Raffling-shops,
Where with such Grace they throw the Dies,
As wins the Ladies Hearts and Prize,
And for the sake of charming Fair,
Traffic their Gold for China-Ware.
While the more needy Bully Rock
Ventures his Sise at Royal-Oak,
He minds the Motion of the Ball,
Yet Gamester-like he loses all:
At every Throw he vents a Curse,
And having now unlin'd his Purse,
In sullen Mood, he sneaks away,
And for a while forswears to play,
With such, and such like Sports as these,
Our modern Beaux their Fancies please;
Some come to game, and some to woo,
But most their Foppery to show.
This courts in Prose, and that in Chime,
And tags each Vow of Love with Rhyme,
Of nothing talks but Fire and Flames,
Cupid, Phillis, -- and such hard Names,
While Country- Bumpkin treats Sweetheart,
With Sugared Ale and Damson Tart,
And slyly by a Twich of Glove,
Lets Mopsa know, he is in Love.
In these Diversions they go on,
Until the Entertainment's done:
For now we must suppose it late,
The Moon is up, and honest Kate
Prepared for shutting up the Gate.
The weary Music cease to play,
And all our Gallants walk away.
Some at a place assigned to meet,
And some to serenade in Street,
Some to the Dog to suck Good Red,
One to a Miss, and one to Bed,
Another go's to meet his Dear,
And so, My Muse, let us leave 'em there.
FINIS.

