THREE BOOKS OF Occult Philosophy, WRITTEN BY Henry Cornelius Agrippa, OF
NETTESHEIM, Counselor to CHARLES the Fifth, EMPEROR of Germany: AND Judge of
the Prerogative Court.

Translated out of the Latin into the English Tongue, By J. F.

London, Printed by R. W. for Gregory Moule, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the three Bibles near the West End of Paul's. 1651.

The life of Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight.
HEnry Cornelius Agrippa, Descended from a noble Family of Netteshim in Belgia,
Doctor of the Laws and Physic, Master of the Rols, and Judge of the spiritual
Court, from his youth he applied his mind to learning, and by his happy wit
obtained great knowledge in all Arts and Sciences; afterward also he followed
the Army of the Princes, and for his valor was created Knight in the Field;
when he was by these means famous for learning and Arms about 1530. He gave his
mind to writing, and composed three Books Of Occult Philosophy; afterward an
Invective or Cynicall declamation of the uncertainty and vanity of all things,
in which he teaches that there is no certainty in any thing, but in the solid
words of God, and that, to lie hid in the eminency of Gods word; he also wrote
an History of the double Coronation of the Emperor Charles, and also of the
excellency of the feminine sex, and of the apparitions of spirits; but seeing
that he published commentaries on the Ars Brevis of Raymundus Lully, and was
very much addicted to Occult Philosophy and Astrology, there were those who
thought that he enjoyed commerce with devils, whom notwithstanding he confuted
in his published Apology, and showed, that he kept himself within the bounds of
Art, 1538, He wrote many learned orations, which manifest to all the excellency
of his wit; but especially ten; the first on Platoes Banquet, uttered in the
Academy of Tricina containing the praise of Love; the second on Hermes
Trismegistus, and of the power and wisdom of God; the third for one who was to
receive his degree of Doctor; the fourth for the Lords of Metz, when he was
chosen their Advocate, Syndice and Orator; the fifth to the Senate of
Luxenburg, for the Lords of Metz; The sixth to salute the Prince and Bishop
thereof, written for the Lords of Metz; the seventh to salute a noble man,
written likewise for the Lords of Metz; the eighth for a certain kinsman of
his, a Carmelite, made Bachelor of Divinity, when he received his regency at
Paris; the ninth for the son of Cristiern King of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden,
delivered at the coming of the Emperor; the tenth at the Funeral of the Lady
Margret, Princess of Austria and Burgundy; he wrote also a Dialogue concerning
man, and a Declamation of a disputable opinion concerning original sin to the
Bishop of Cyrene; an Epistle to Michael de Arando Bishop of Saint Paul; a
complaint upon a calumny not proved, Printed at Strasburg 1539. and therefore
by these monuments published, the name of Cornelius for his variety of Learning
was famous, not only amongst the Germans, but also other Nations; for Momus
himself carpeth at all amongst the gods; amongst the Heroes, Hercules hunteth
after Monsters; amongst the devils Pluto the king of hell is angry with all the
ghosts; amongst Philosophers Democritus laugheth at all things, on the contrary
Heraclitus weepeth at all things; Pirrhias is ignorant of all things, and
Aristotle thinks he knows all things; Diogenes contemns all things; this
Agrippa spares none, he contemns, knows, is ignorant, weeps, laughs, is
angry, pursues, carps at all things, being himself a Philosopher, a Demon, an
Heroes, a god, and all things.



An Encomium on the three Books of Cornelius Agrippa Knight, By Eugenius
Philalethes.
Great, glorious Penman! whom I should not name,
Lest I might Seem to measure Thee by Fame.
Natures Apostle, and her Choice High Priest,
Her Mystical, and bright Evangelist.
How am I rapt when I contemplate Thee,
And wind my self above All that I see!
The Spirits of thy Lines infuse a Fire
Like the Worlds Soul, which makes me thus aspire:
I am unbody'd by thy Books, and Thee,
And in thy Papers find my Ecstasy.
Or if I please but to descend a strain,
Thy Elements do skreen my Soul again.
I can undress my Self by thy bright Glass,
And then resume the Enclosure, as I was.
Now I am Earth, and now a Star, and then
A Spirit: now a Star, and Earth again;
Or if I will but ramasle all that be,
In the least moment I ingross all Three.
I span the Heaven and Earth, and things above,
And which is more, join Natures with their Jove.
He Crowns my Soul with Fire, and there does shine
But like the Rainbow in a Cloud of mine.
Yet there s a Law by which I discompose
The Ashes, and the Fire it self disclose,
But in his Emrald still He does appear;
They are but Grave-clothes which he scatters here.
Who sees this Fire without his Mask, His Eye
Must needs be swallowed by the Light, and die.
These are the Mysteries for which I wept
Glorious Agrippa, where thy Language slept,
Where thy dark Texture made me wander far,
Whiles through that pathless Night, I traced the star,
But I have found those Mysteries, for which
Thy Book was more then thrice-pil'd over with Pitch.
Now a new East beyond the stars I see
Where breaks the Day of thy Divinity:
Heaven states a Commerce here with Man, had He
But grateful Hands to take, and Eyes to see.
Hence you fond Schoolmen, that high truths deride,
And with no Arguments but Noise, and Pride;
You that damn all but what your selves invent,
And yet find nothing by Experiment;
Your Fate is written by an unseen Hand,
But his Three Books with the Three worlds shall stand.
To the Reader.
I Do not doubt but the Title of our Book of Occult Philosophy, or of Magic,
may by the rarity of it allure many to read it, amongst which, some of a crasie
judgment, and some that are perverse will come to hear what I can say, who by
their rash ignorance may take the name of Magic in the worse sense, and though
scarce having seen the title, cry out that I teach forbidden Arts, sow the seed
of Heresies, offend pious ears, and scandalize excellent wits; that I am a
sorcerer, and superstitious, and divellish, who indeed am a Magician: to whom I
answer, that a Magician does not amongst learned men signify a sorcerer, or
one that is superstitious, or divellish; but a wise man, a priest, a prophet;
and that the Sybils were Magicianesses, and therefore prophesied most clearly
of Christ; and that Magicians, as wisemen, by the wonderful secrets of the
world, knew Christ the author of the world to be born, and came first of all to
worship him; and that the name of Magic was received by Philosophers,
commended by Divines, and not unacceptable to the Gospel. I believe that the
supercilious censors will object against the Sybils; holy Magicians, and the
Gospel it self sooner then receive the name of Magic into favor; so
conscientious are they, that neither Apollo, nor all the Muses, nor an Angel
from Heaven can redeem me from their curse. Whom therefore I advise, that they
read not our writings, nor understand them, nor remember them. For they are
pernicious, and full of poison; the gate of Acheron is in this book; it speaks
stones, let them take heed that it beat not out their brains. But you that come
without prejudice to read it, if you have so much discretion of prudence, as
Bees have in gathering honey, read securely, and believe that you shall receive
no little profit, and much pleasure; but if you shall find any things that may
not please you, let them alone, and make no use of them; for I do not approve
of them, but declare them to you; but do not refuse other things, for they that
look into the books of Physicians, do together with antidotes and medicines,
read also poisons. I confess that Magic it self teaches many superfluous
things, and curious prodigies for ostentation; leave them as empty things, yet
be not ignorant of their causes. But those things which are for the profit of
men, for the turning away of evil events, for the destroying of sorceries, for
the curing of diseases, for the exterminating of phantasmes, for the preserving
of life, honor, fortune, may be done without offense to God, or injury to
Religion, because they are, as profitable, so necessary. But I have admonished
you, that I have writ many things, rather narratively then affirmatively; for
so it seemed needful that we should pass over fewer things following the
judgments of Platonists, and other Gentile Philosophers when they did suggest
an argument of writing to our purpose; therefore if any error have been
committed, or any thing has been spoken more freely, pardon my youth; for I
wrote this being scarce a young man, that I may excuse my self, and say, whilst
I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, but being become a
man, I retracted those things which I did being a boy, and in my book of the
vanity and uncertainty of Sciences I did for the most part retract this book.
But here happily you may blame me again, saying, Behold thou being a youth did
write, and now being old have retracted it; what therefore have thou set forth?
I confess whilst I was very young, I set upon the writing of these books, but
hoping that I should set them forth with corrections and enlargements, and for
that cause I gave them to Tritemius a Neapolitanian Abbot, formerly a
Spanhemensian, a man very industrious after secret things. But it happened
afterward, that the work being intercepted, before I finished it, was carried
about imperfect, and impolished, and did fly abroad in Italy, in France, in
Germany through many men's hands, and some men, whether more impatiently, or
impudently, I know not, would have put it thus imperfect to the press, with
which mischief I being affected, determined to set it forth my self, thinking
that there might be less danger if these books came out of my hands with some
amendments, then to come forth torn, and in fragments out of other men's hands.
Moreover I thought it no crime if I should not suffer the testimony of my youth
to perish. Also we added some Chapters, and we inserted many things, which did
seem unfit to pass by, which the curious Reader shall be able to understand by
the inequality of the very phrase; for we were unwilling to begin the work
anew, and to unravell all that we had done, but to correct it, and put some
flourish upon it. Wherefore now I pray thee, Courteous Reader, again, weigh not
these things according to the present time of setting them forth, but pardon my
curious youth, if thou shall find any thing in them that may displease thee.

To R. P. D. John Tritemius, an Abbot of Saint James in the Suburbs of
Herbipolis, Henry Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheym sends greeting.
WHen I was of late (most reverend Father) for a while conversant with you in
your Monastery of Herbipolis, we conferred together of diverse things concerning
Chemistry, Magic, and Cabalie, and of other things, which as yet lie hid in
secret Sciences, and Arts; and then there was one great question amongst the
rest, why Magic, whereas it was accounted by all ancient Philosophers the
chiefest Science, and by the ancient wise men, and Priests was always had in
great veneration, came at last after the beginning of the Catholic Church to
be always odious to, and suspected by the holy Fathers, and then exploded by
Divines, and condemned by sacred Canons, and moreover by all laws, and
ordinances forbidden. Now the cause, as I conceive is no other then this, viz.
because by a certain fatal depravation of times, and men, many false
Philosophers crep in, and these under the name of Magicians, heaping together
through various sorts of errors and factions of false Religions, many cursed
superstitions and dangerous Rites, and many wicked Sacriledges, out of Orthodox
Religion, even to the perfection of nature, and destruction of men, and injury
of God, set forth very many wicked, and unlawful books, such as we see carried
about in these days, to which they have by stealth prefixed the most honest
name, and title of Magic. They therefore by this sacred title of Magic, hoped
to gain credit to their cursed and detestable fooleries. Hence it is that this
name of Magic, formerly honorable, is now in these days become most odious to
good and honest men, and accounted a Capital crime, if any one dare profess
himself to be a Magician, either in Doctrine or works, unless happily some
certain old doting woman, dwelling in the Country, would be believed to be
skilful, and have a Divine power, that (as says Apuleius she can throw down
the Heaven, lift up the earth, harden fountains, wash away mountains, raise up
Ghosts, cast down the Gods, extinguish the Stars, illumnate hell, or as Virgil
sings, She Will promise by her charms to cast great cares,
Or ease the minds of men, and make the Stars
For to go back, and rivers to stand still,
And raise the nightly ghosts even at her will,
To make the earth to groan, and trees to fall
From the mountains --


Hence those things, which Lucan relates of Thessala that Magicianess, and
Homer of the omnipotency of Circe, whereof many Iconfess are as well of a
fallacious opinion, as superstitious diligence, and pernicious labor, as when
they cannot come under a wicked Art, yet they presume they may be able to cloak
themselves under that venerable title of Magic. Since then these things are
so, I wondered much, and was not less angry, that as yet there has been no
man, who did challenge this sublime and sacred discipline with the crime of
impiety, or had delivered it purely, and sincerely to us, since I have seen of
our modern writers Roger Bacon, Robert an English man, Peter Apponus, Albertus
the Teutonich, Arnoldas de villa Nova, Anselme the Parmensian, Picatrix the
Spaniard, Cicclus Asculus of Florence, and many others, but writers of an
obscure name, when they promised to treat of Magic, to do nothing but
irrational toies, and superstitions unworthy of honest men. Hence my spirit
was moved, and by reason partly of admiration, and partly of indignation, I was
willing to play the Philosopher, supposing that I should do no discommendable
work, who have been always from my youth a curious, and undaunted searcher of
wonderful effects, and operations full of mysteries; if I should recover that
ancient Magic the discipline of all wise men from the errors of impiety,
purify and adorn it with its proper luster, and vindicate it from the injuries
of calumniators; which thing though I long deliberated of it in my mind, yet
never durst as yet undertake, but after some conference betwixt us of these
things at Herbipolis, your transcending knowledge, and learning, and your
ardent adhortation put courage, and boldness into me. There selecting the
opinions of Philosophers of known credit, and purging the introduction of the
wicked (who dissemblingly, with a counterfeited knowledge did teach, that
traditions of Magicians must be learned from very reprobate books of darkness,
as from institutions of wonderful operations) and removing all darkness, have
at last composed three compendious books of Magic, and titled them Of Occult
Philosophy, being a title less offensive, which books I submit (you excelling
in the knowledge of these things) to your correction and censure, that if I
have wrote any thing which may tend either to the contumely of nature,
offending God, or injury of Religion, you may condemn the error; but if the
scandal of impiety be dissolved and purged, you may defend the tradition of
truth; and that you would do so with these books, and Magic it self, that
nothing may be concealed which may be profitable, and nothing approved of which
cannot but do hurt, by which means these three books having passed your
examination with approbation, may at length be thought worthy to come forth
with good success in public, and may not be afraid to come under the censure
of posterity.

Farewell, and pardon these my hold undertakings.
John Tritemius, Abbot of Saint James of Herbipolis, formerly of Spanhemia, to
his Henry Cornelius Agrippa of Nettes-heym, health and love.
YOur work (most renowned Agrippa) Entitled Of Occult Philosophy, which you
have sent by this bearer, to me to be examined, with how much pleasure I
received it, no mortal tongue can ever express, nor the pen of any write; I
woundred at your more then vulgar learning, That you being so young should
penetrate into such secrets as have been hide from most learned men, and not
only clearly, and truly, but also properly, and elegantly set them forth.
Whence first I give you thanks for your good will to me, and if I shall ever be
able, I shall return you thanks to the utmost of my power; Your work, which no
learned man can sufficiently commend, I approve of. Now that you may proceed
toward higher things, as you have begun, and not suffer such excellent parts of
wit to be idle, I do with as much earnestness as I can advise, entreat, and
beseech you, that you would exercise your self in laboring after better things,
and demonstrate the light of true wisdom to the ignorant, according as you your
self are divinely enlightened; neither let the consideration of idle vain
fellows withdraw you from your purpose; I say of them, of whom it said, The
wearyed Ox treads hard, Whereas no man, to the judgment of the wise, can be
truly learned, who is sworn to the rudiments of one only faculty; But you has
God gifted with a large, and sublime wit, not that you should imitate Oxen, but
birds; neither think it sufficient that you stay about particulars, but bend
your mind confidently to universals; for by so much the more learned any one
is thought, by how much fewer things he is ignorant of. Moreover your wit is
fully apt to all things, and to be rationally employed, not in a few, or low
things, but many, and sublimer. Yet this one rule I advise you to observe, that
you communicate vulgar secrets to vulgar friends, but higher and secret to
higher, and secret friends only. Give Hey to an Ox, Sugar to a Parret only;
understand my meaning, least you be trod under the Oxens feet, as oftentimes it
falls out. Farewell my happy friend, and if it lie in my power to serve you,
command me, and according to your pleasure it shall without delay be done; also
let our friendship increase daily; write often to me, and send me some of your
labors I earnestly pray you. Again farewell.

From our Monastery of Peapolis, the 8. day of April, An. M. D. X.
To the Revernd Father in Christ, and most Illustrious Prince, Hermannus, Earl
of Wyda, by the Grace of God Archbishop of the holy Church of Colonia, Prince
Elector of the holy Roman Empire, and Chief Chancellor through Italy, Duke of
Westphalia, and Angaria, and descended of the Legate of the holy Church of
Rome, one of the Vicar Generals Court, Henry Cornelius Agrippa of Nettes-heym,
sends greeting.
SUch is the greatness of your renowned fame (most reverend, and Illustrious
Prince) such is the greatness of your virtues, and splendour of learning, and
frequent exercise of the best learning, and grave oration, with solid prudence,
and elegant readiness of speaking, knowledge of many things, constant Religion,
and commendable conditions, with which you are endowed beyond the common custom
of others; I say nothing of those ancient monuments of your eminent nobility,
the treasures of your riches, both old, and new, the largness of your dominion,
the ornaments of the sacred dignities, with the excellency whereof you excel,
together with the comely form, and strength of the body. Though all these
things be very great, yet I esteem you far greater then all these, for those
your Heroic, and superillustrious virtues, by which you truly have caused,
that byhow much the more any one is learned, and loves virtue, so much the more
he may desire to insinuate himself into your favor, whence I also am resolved
that your favor shall be obtained by me, but after the manner of the people of
Parthia, i. e. not without a present, which custom of saluting Princes, is
indeed derived from the Ages of the Ancients, unto these very times, and still
we see it observed. And when I see certain other very learned men to furnish
you with fair, and great presents of their learning, least I only should be a
neglecter of your worship and reverence, I durst not apply my self with empty
hands to your greatness. Now being thoughtfull, and looking about in my study
to see what present I should bestow upon such an Illustrious Prince, behold!
amongst such things are were closely laid up, the books Of Occult Philosophy,
or of Magic, presently offered themselves, such as I attempted to write
whilst I was very young, and now many years being past, as it were forgetting
them, have neglected to perfect them; I presently made have, as it were to pay
my vows, to present them to your honor to complete them. Truly I was persuaded
that I could give nothing more acceptable to you, then a new work of most
ancient and abstruse learning; I say a work of my curious youth, but a doctrine
of antiquity, by none I dare say hitherto attempted to be restored. Yet my
works are not wrote to you, because they are worthy of you, but that they might
make a way open for me to gain your favor. I beseech you, if it may be, let
them be excused by you. I shall be devotedly yours, if these studies of my
youth shall by the authority of your greatness come into knowledge, envy being
chased away by the power of your worthiness, there remain the memory of them to
me, as the fruit of a good conscience, seeing many things in them seemed to me,
being older, as most profitable, so most necessary to be known. You have
therefore the work, not only of my youth, but of my present Age, for I have
corrected many Errataes of the work of my youth, I have inserted many things in
many places, and have added many things to many Chapters, which may easily be
perceived by the inequality of the style; and so shall you know that I shall
all my life be devoted to your pleasure. Farewell most happy Prince of happy
Colonia.

From Mechlinia, Anno M. D. XXXI. In the month of January.

Judicious Reader!
THere is the outside, and the inside of Philosophy; but the former without the
latter is but an empty flourish; yet with this alone most are satisfied. To
have a bare notion of a Diety, to apprehend some motions of the Celestials,
together with the common operations thereof, and to conceive of some Terrestial
productions, is but what is superficial, and vulgar; But this is true, this is
sublime, but Occult Philosophy; to understand the mysterious influences of the
intellectual world upon the Celestial, and of both upon the Terrestiall; and
to know how to dispose, and fit our selves so, as to be capable of receiving
those superior operations, whereby we may be enabled to operate wonderful
things, which indeed seem impossible, or at least unlawful, when as indeed
they may be effected by a natural power, and without either offense to God, or
violation of Religion. To defend Kingdoms, to discover the secret counsels of
men, to overcome enemies, to redeem captives, to increase riches, to procure
the favor of men, to expel diseases, to preserve health, to prolong life, to
renew youth, to foretell future events, to see and know things done many miles
off, and such like as these, by virtue of superior influences, may seem things
incredible; Yet read but the ensuing Treatise, and thou shall see the
possibility thereof confirmed both by reason, and example. I speak now to the
judicious, for as for others, they neither know, nor believe, nor will know any
thing, but what is vulgar, nay they think, that beyond this there is scarce any
thing knowable; when as indeed there are profound mysteries in all beings, even
from God in the highest heavens, to the devils in the lowest hell; Yea in very
numbers, names, letters, characters, gestures, time, place, and such like, all
which are by this learned Author profoundly discussed. I cannot deny but in
this his work there is much superstition, and vanity. But remember that the
best Gold must have the greatest allowance; consider the time of darkness, and
of his youth, when, the place where, and the things which he has discovered
and wrote, and thou will rather admire his solidity, then condemn his vanity.
Gold has much blackness adhearing to it as soon as it is taken out of the
earth. Mysterious truths do not presently shine like rays of the Sun as soon as
they are recovered from a long darkness, but d^e clouded with some obscurity.
Nay I will not say but this Agrippa might obscure these mysteries like an
Hermeticall Philosopher, on purpose, that only the sons of Art might understand
them. He perhaps might mix chafe with his wheat, that quick, sighted birds
only might find it out, and not swine trample it underfoot.

From saying much as touching the excusing, or commending this Author, I am
already prevented; For at the beginning and ending of this book there are
several Epistles of his own to others, wherein he excuses what may be excepted
against him; and of others to him sufficiently commending what is praise worthy
in him; to which may be added that honorable testimony given to him by the
author of that most witty, and sublime The-anthroposophia theo magica, lately
set forth. All that I shall say to persuade thee to read this book, is but to
desire thee to cast thine eye upon the Index of the Chapters contained therein,
which is at the end thereof: and thou shall therein see such variety of
wonderful subjects, that at the sight thereof thou will be impatient till thou
have read them. I shall crave leave now to speak one word for my self. If this
my translation shall neither answer the worth of the Author, or expectation of
the reader; consider that the unquothness of the Authors style in many places,
the manifold Errata's, as well literal, as those in respect of Grammatical
construction, may happily occasion some mistakes in this my translation. Yet
nowithtstanding, I hope I have, though without much elegancy (which indeed the
matter would not bear) put it into as intelligible an English phrase as the
orginal would afford. As for the terms of art, which are many, diverse of them
would not bear any English expression, therefore I have expressed them in
Latinisms or Grecisms, according as I have found them. I hope an Artist will be
able to understand them; as for Errata's, as I cursorily read over the book, I
observed these as you see mentioned. If thou shall meet with any more, as it is
possible thou may, be thou candid, and impute them to the Printers mistake;
for which, as also for taking in the best sense, what here I present thee
withal, thou shall for ever oblige thy friend,

J. F.

Errata.
PAge 5. line 1. blot out the word Natural. p. 12. l. 13. r. Hesiod. p. 30. l.
6 r. very little. p 24. l. 4 r. These virtues are. p. 24. l 5 r. they. p. 24.
l. 5 r. are. p. 41 l. 4. r. Origanum. p. 59 l. 125. were p. 83. l. 12. 5 which.
p. 86. l 37. r. Storax. p. 96. l. 31. r. or to. p. 109. l 37 r. odysses. p 126
l. 15. r. place. p. 146. l. 7 r. brought forth. p. 183 l. 28. r. Jove. p. 185.
l. 15 r. Theut. p 188. l. 14. r. tasting and feeling. p. 191. l. 21. r. Manna
is to be gather ed. and work to be done. p. 210. l. 8. r. expiated. p. 211. l
37. r. every. p. 235. l. 1. r. of the same. p. 236. l. 20. r. twelves. p. 24^,
l. 7. r. from it. p. 247. l. 2. for 48. r. 43 p. 247. l. 3. for 18. r. 81. p.
247 l. 6. for 38. r. 39. p. 249. l. 3. for 45. r. 48. p. 249. l. 4. for 38. r.
35. p. 249. l. 4. for 25 r. 28. p 249. l 6. for 45. r. 46. p. 251. l. 1. for
75. r. 78. p. 251. l. 1. for 45. r. 54 p. 251. l. 2 for 35. r. 38. p. 251. l. 4
for 45. r. 48. p. 251. l 5. for 68. r. 65. p. 251. l. 6. for 55. r. 58. p. 251.
l. 7. for 78. (...). p 256. l. 25. for the Graniarian, r. Grammaticus. p. 260.
l. 13. r. Are. p 164. l. 5. r. something. p. 304, l. 26 r. silver. p. 306. l.
7. r. jeat. p 316. l. 3. r. demoniacall. p. 331. l. 24. r. corruptible. p. 346.
l. 10. r. confide. p. 354. l. 15. r. injurious. p. 368. l. 4. r. Seraphins. p.
370. l. 10. r. genii. p. 380. l. 26. for portraiting even infinerly, r.
penetrating even to the very center. p. 389. l. 19. r. Cusanns, p. 404. l. 1.
r. world. p. 406, l. 16. r. smite us. p. 437. l. 17. blot out an. p. 437. l.
18. r. they, p. 437. l. 29. blot out the. p. 445. l. 8. r. writ. p. 448. l. 1,
r. by these. p. 4^5. l. 30. blot out of. p. 477. l. 29. r. many. p. 510. l. 19.
r. fighs. p. 517. l. 6. r. do they. p. 525. l. 9. r. less. p. 5^9. l. 15. r.
things 10. r. 551. l. 28. 5. marking.

To my most honorable, and no less learned Friend, Robert Child, Doctor of
Physic.
SIR! Great men decline, mighty men may fall, but an honest Philosopher keeps
his Station for ever. To your self therefore I crave leave to present, what I
know you are able to protect; not with sword, but by reason; and not that only,
but what by your acceptance you are able to give a luster to. I see it is not
in vain that you have compassed Sea and Land, for thereby you have made a
Proselyte, not of another, but of your self, by being converted from vulgar,
and irrational incredulities to the rational embracing of the sublime,
Hermeticall, and Theomagicall truths. You are skilled in the one as if Hermes
had been your Tutor; have insight in the other, as if Agrippa your Master. Many
transmarine Philosophers, which we only read, you have conversed with: many
Countries, rarities, and antiquities, which we have only heard of, and admire,
you have seen. Nay you have not only heard of, but seen, not in Maps, but in
Rome it self the manners of Rome. There you have seen much Ceremony, and little
Religion; and in the wilderness of New England, you have seen amongst some,
much Religion, and little Ceremony; and amongst others, I mean the Natives
thereof, neither Ceremony, nor Religion, but what nature dictates to them. In
this there is no small variety, and your observation not little. In your
passage thither by Sea, you have seen the wonders of God in the Deep; and by
Land, you have seen the astonishing works of God in the unaccessible Mountains.
You have left no stone unturned, that the turning thereof might conduce to the
discovery of what was Occult, and worthy to be known. It is part of my ambition
to let the world know that I honor such as your self, and my learned friend,
and your experienced fellow-traveller, Doctor Charlet, who have, like true
Philosophers neglected your worldly advantages to become masters of that which
has now rendered you both truly honorable. If I had as many languages as your
selves, the rhetorical and patheticall expressions thereof would fail to
signify my estimation of, and affections toward you both. Now Sir! as in
reference to this my translation, if your judgment shall find a deficiency
therein, let your candor make a supply thereof. Let this Treatise of Occult
Philosophy coming as a stranger amongst the English, be patronized by you,
remembering that you your self was once a stranger in the Country of its
Nativity. This stranger I have dressed in an English garb; but if it be not
according to the fashion, and therefore ungrateful to any, let your approbation
make it the mode; you knowstrangers most commonly induce a fashion, especially
if any once begin to approve of their habit. Your approbation is that which it
will stand in need of, and which will render me,

SIR, Most obligedly yours, J. F.

PRagmatick Schoolmen, men made up of pride,
And railing Arguments, who truth deride,
And scern all else but what your selves devise,
And think these high-learned Tracts to be but lies,
Do not presume, unless with hallowed hand
To touch these books who with the world shall stand;
They are indeed mysterious, rare and rich,
And far transcend the ordinary pitch.
Io. Booker.

Three Books of Occult Philosophy, or of Magic; Written by that Famous Man
Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight, And Doctor of both Laws, Counselor to Caesar's
Sacred Majesty, and Judge of the Prerogative Court.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. How Magicians Collectvertues from the threefold World, is declared
in these three Books.
SEeing there is a three f^ld World. Elementary, Celestial, and intellectual
and every inferior is governed by its superior, and receives the influence of
the virtues thereof, so that the very original, and chief Worker of all does by
Angels, the Heavens, Stars, Elements, Animals, Plants, Metals, and Stones
convey from himself the virtues of his Omnipotency upon us, for whose service
he made, and created all these things: Wise men conceive it no way irrational
that it should be possible for us to ascend by the same degrees through each
World, to the same very original World it self, the Maker of all things, and
first Cause, from whence all things are, and proceed; and also to enjoy not
only these virtues, which are already in the more excellent kind of things, but
also besides these, to draw new virtues from above. Hence it is that they seek
after the virtues of the Elementary world, through the help of Physic, and
Natural Philosophy in the various mixtions of Natural things, then of the
Celestial world in the Rays, and influences thereof, according to the rules
of Astrologers, and the doctrines of Mathematicians, joining the Celestial
virtues to the former: Moreover, they ratify and confirm all these with the
powers of diverse Intelligencies, through the sacred Ceremonies of Religions.
The order and process of all these I shall endeavor to deliver in these three
Books: Whereof the first contains natural Magic, the second Celestial, and
the third Ceremonial. But I know not whether it be an unpardonable presumption
in me, that I, a man of so little judgment and learning, should in my very
youth so confidently set upon a business so difficult, so hard, and intricate
as this is. Wherefore, whatsoever things have here already, and shall afterward
be said by me, I would not have any one assent to them, nor shall I my self,
any further then they shall be approved of by the Universal Church, and the
Congregation of the Faithful.

CHAP. II. What Magic is, what are the Parts thereof, and how the Professors
thereof must be qualified.
Magic is a faculty of wonderful virtue, full of most high mysteries,
containing the most profound Contemplation of most secret things, together with
the nature, power, quality, substance, and virtues thereof, as also the
knowledge of whole nature, and it does instruct us concerning the differing,
and agreement of things amongst themselves, whence it produces its wonderful
effects, by uniting the virtues of things through the application of them one
to the other, and to their inferior suitable subjects, joining and knitting them
together thoroughly by the powers, and virtues of the superior Bodies. This is
the most perfect, and chief Science, that sacred, and sublimer kind of
Philosophy, and lastly the most absolute perfection of all most excellent
Philosophy. For seeing that all regulative Philosophy is divided into Natural,
Mathematical, and Theological: (Natural Philosophy teaches the nature of
those things which are in the world, searching and enquiring into their Causes,
Effects, Times, Places, Fashions, Events, their Whole, and Parts, also The
Number and the Nature of those things,
Call d Elements, what Fire, Earth, Air forth brings:
From whence the Heavens their beginnings had;
Whence Tide, whence Rainbow in gay colors clad.
What makes the Clouds that gathered are, and black,
To send forth Lightnings, and a Thundering crack;
What does the Nightly Flames, and Comets make;
What makes the Earth to swell, and then to quake:
What is the seed of Metals, and of Gold
What Virtues, Wealth, does Nature's Coffer hold.


All these things does natural Philosophy, the viewer of nature contain,
teaching us according to Virgil's Muse. -- Whence all things flow,
Whence Mankind, Beast, whence Fire, whence Rain, and Snow,
Whence Earthquakes are, why the whole Ocean beats
Over his Banks, and then again retreats:
Whence strength of Herbs, whence Courage, rage of Bruits,
All kinds of Stone, of Creeping things, and Fruits.
But Mathematical Philosophy teaches us to know the quantity of natural
Bodies, as extended into three dimensions, as also to conceive of the motion,
and course of Celestial Bodies. -- As in great have,
What makes the golden Stars to march so fast;
What makes the Moon sometimes to mask her face,
The Sun also, as if in some disgrace.
And as Virgil sings, How the Sun does rule with twelve Zodiac Signs,
The Orb that's measured round about with Lines,
It does the Heavens Starry way make known,
And strange Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
Arcturns also, and the Stars of Rain,
The seven Stars likewise, and Charles his Wain,
Why Winter Suns make toward the West so fast;
What makes the Nights so long ere they he past?
All which are understood by Mathematical Philosophy. -- Hence by the Heavens
we may foreknow
The seasons all; times for to reap and sow,
And when it is fit to launch into the deep,
And when to War, and when in peace to sleep,
And when to dig up Trees, and them again
To set; that so they may bring forth amain.


Now Theological Philosophy, or Divinity, teaches what God is, what the Mind,
what an Intelligence, what an Angel, what a Devil, what the Soul, what
Religion, what sacred Institutions, Rites, Temples, Observations, and sacred
Mysteries are: It instructs us also concerning Faith, Miracles, the virtues of
Words and Figures, the secret operations and mysteries of Seals, and as
Apuleius says, it teaches us rightly to understand, and to be skilled in the
Ceremonial Laws, the equity of Holy things, and rule of Religions. But to
recollect my self these three principal faculties (...) Magic comprehends,
unites, and actuates; deservedly therefore was it by the Ancients esteemed as
the highest, and most sacred Philosophy. It was, as we find, brought to light
by most sage Authors, and most famous Writers; amongst which principally
Zamolxis and Zoroaster were so famous, that many believed they were the
inventers of this Science. Their track Abbaris the Hyperborean, Charmondas,
Damigeron, Eudoxus, Hermippus followed: there were also other eminent, choice
men, as Mercurius Tresmegistus, Porphyrius, Iamblicus, Plotinus, Proclus,
Dardanus, Orpheus the Thracian, Gog the Grecian, Germa the Babilonian,
Apollonius of Tyana, Osthanes also wrote excellently in this Art; whose Books
being as it were lost, Democritus of Abdera recovered, and set forth with his
own Commentaries. Besides Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, and many
other renowned Philosophers traveled far by Sea to learn this Art: and being
returned, published it with wonderful devoutness, esteeming of it as a great
secret. Also it is well known that Pythagoras, and Plato went to the Prophets
of Memphis to learn it, and traveled through almost all Syria, Egypt, Judea,
and the Schools of the Caldeans, that they might not be ignorant of the most
sacred Memorials, and Records of Magic, as also that they might be furnished
with Divine things. Whosoever therefore is desirous to study in this Faculty,
if he be not skilled in natural Philosophy, wherein are discovered the
qualities of things, and in which are found the occult properties of every
Being, and if he be not skillful in the Mathematics, and in the Aspects, and
Figures of the Stars, upon which depends the sublime virtue, and property of
every thing; and if he be not learned in Theology, wherein are manifested
those immateriall substances, which dispense, and minister all things, he
cannot be possibly able to understand the rationality of Magic. For there is
no work that is done by mere Magic, nor any work that is merely Magical, that
does not comprehend these three Faculties.

CHAP. III. Of the four Elements, their qualities, and mutual mixtions.
THere are four Elements, and original grounds of all corporeal things, Fire,
Earth, Water, Air, of which all elementated inseriour bodies are compounded;
not by way of heaping them up together, but by transmutation, and union; and
when they are destroyed, they are resolved into Elements. For there is none of
the sensible Elements that is pure, but they are more or less mixed, and apt to
be changed one into the other: Even as Earth becoming dirty, and being
dissolved, becomes Water, and the same being made thick and hard, become Earth
again; but being evaporated through heat, passes into Air, and that being
kindled, passes into Fire, and this being extinguished, returns back again
into Air, but being cooled again after its burning, becomes Earth, or Stone,
or Sulphur, and this is manifested by Lightening: Plato also was of that
opinion, that Earth was wholly changeable, and that the rest of the Elements
are changed, as into this, so into one another successively. But it is the
opinion of the subtiller sort of Philosophers, that Earth is not changed, but
relented and mixed with other Elements, which do dissolve it, and that it
returns back into it self again. Now every one of the Elements has two
specificall qualities, the former whereof it retains as proper to it self, in
the other, as a mean, it agrees with that which comes next after it. For Fire
is hot and dry, the Earth dry and cold, the Water cold and moist, the Air
moist and hot. And so after this manner the Elements, according to two contrary
qualities, are contrary one to the other, as Fire to Water, and Earth to Air.
Moreover, the Elements are upon another account opposite one to the other: For
some are heavy, as Earth and Water, and others are light, as Air and Fire.
Wherefore the Stoics called the former passives, but the latter actives. And
yet once again Plato distinguishes them after another manner, and assigns to
every one of them three qualities, viz. to the Fire brightness, thinness, and
motion, but to the Earth darkness, thickness and quietness. And according to
these qualities the Elements of Fire and Earth are contrary. But the other
Elements borrow their qualities from these, so that the Air receives two
qualities of the Fire, thinness and motion; and one of the Earth, viz.
darkness. In like manner Water receives two qualities of the Earth, darkness
and thickness, and one of Fire, viz. motion. But Fire is twice more thin then
Air, thrice more moveable, and four times more bright: and the Air is twice
more bright, thrice more thin, and four times more moveable then Water.
Wherefore Water is twice more bright then Earth, thrice more thin, and four
times more moveable. As therefore the Fire is to the Air, so Air to the
Water, and Water to the Earth; and again, as the Earth is to the Water, so the
Water to the Air, and the Air to the Fire. And this is the root and
foundation of all bodies, natures, virtues, and wonderful works; and he which
shall know these qualities of the Elements, and their mixtions, shall easily
bring to pass such things that are wonderful, and astonishing, and shall be
perfect in Magic.

CHAP. IV. Of a threefold consideration of the Elements.
THere are then, as we have said, four Elements, without the perfect knowledge
whereof we can effect nothing in Magic. Now each of them is threefold, that
so the number of four may make up the number of twelve; and by passing by the
number of seven into the number of ten, there may be a progress to the supreme
Unity, upon which all virtue and wonderful operation depends. Of the first
Order are the pure Elements, which are neither compounded nor changed, nor
admit of mixtion, but are incorruptible, and not of which, but through which
the virtues of all natural things are brought forth into act. No man is able
to declare their virtues, because they can do all things upon all things. He
which is ignorant of these, shall never be able to bring to pass any wonderful
matter. Of the second Order are Elements that are compounded, changeable, and
impure, yet such as may by art be reduced to their pure simplicity, whose
virtue, when they are thus reduced to their simplicity, does above all things
perfect all occult, and common operations of nature: and these are the
foundation of the whole natural Magic. Of the third Order are those Elements,
which originally and of themselves are not Elements, but are twice compounded,
various, and changeable one into the other. They are the infallible Medium, and
therefore are called the middle nature, or Soul of the middle nature: Very few
there are that understand the deep mysteries thereof. In them is, by means of
certain numbers, degrees, and orders, the perfection of every effect in what
thing soever, whether Natural, Celestial, or Supercelestiall; they are full
of wonders, and mysteries, and are operative, as in Magic Natural, so Divine:
For from these, through them, proceed the bindings, loosings, and
transmutations of all things, the knowing and foretelling of things to come,
also the driving forth of evil, and the gaining of good spirits. Let no man
therefore, without these three sorts of Elements, and the knowledge thereof, be
confident that he is able to work any thing in the occult Sciences of Magic,
and Nature. But whosoever shall know how to reduce those of one Order, into
those of another, impure into pure, compounded into simple, and shall know how
to understand distinctly the nature, virtue, and power of them in number,
degrees, and order, without dividing the substance, he shall easily attain to
the knowledge, and perfect operation of all Natural things, and Celestial
secrets.

CHAP. V. Of the wonderful Natures of Fire, and Earth.
THere are two things (says Hermes) viz. Fire and Earth, which are sufficient
for the operation of all wonderful things: the former is active, the latter
passive. Fire (as says Dionysius) in all things, and through all things, comes
and goes away bright, it is in all things bright, and at the same time occult,
and unknown; When it is by it self (no other matter coming to it, in which it
should manifest its proper action) it is boundless, and invisible, of it self
sufficient for every action that is proper to it, moveable, yielding it self
after a manner to all things that come next to it, renewing guarding nature,
enlightening, not comprehended by lights that are veiled over, clear, parted,
leaping back, bending upwards, quick in motion, high, always raising motions,
comprehending another, not Comprehended it self, not standing in need of
another, secretly increasing of it self, and manifesting its greatness to
things that receive it. Active, Powerful, Invisibly present in all things at
once; it will not be affronted or opposed, but as it were in a way of revenge,
it will reduce on a sudden things into obedience to it self, incomprehensible,
impalpable, not lessened, most rich in all dispensations of it self. Fire (as
says Pliny) is the boundless, and mischievous part of the nature of things, it
being a question whether it destroys, or produces most things. Fire it self is
one, and penetrates through all things (as say the Pythagorians) also spread
abroad in the Heavens, and shining: but in the infernal place streightened,
dark, and tormenting, in the mid way it partakes of both. Fire therefore in it
self is one, but in that which receives it, manifold, and in differing subjects
it is distributed in a different manner, as Cleanthes witnesses in Cicero.
That fire then which we use is fetched out of other things. It is in stones,
and is fetched out by the stroke of the steel: it is in Earth, and makes that,
after digging up, to smoke: it is in Water, and heats springs, and wells: it
is in the depth of the Sea, and makes that, being tossed with winds, warm: it
is in the Air, and makes it (as we oftentimes see) to burn. And all Animals,
and living things whatsoever, as also all Vegetables are preserved by heat: and
every thing that lives, lives by reason of the enclosed heat. The properties of
the Fire that is above, are heat, making all things Fruitful, and light,
giving life to all things. The properties of the infernal Fire are a parching
heat, consuming all things, and darkness, making all things barren. The
Celestial, and bright Fire drives away spirits of darkness; also this our Fire
made with VVood drives away the same, in as much as it has an Analogy with,
and is the vehiculum of that Superior light; as also of him, who says, I am
the Light of the World, which is true Fire, the Father of lights, from whom
every good thing that is given, Comes; sending forth the light of his Fire, and
communicating it first to the Sun, and the rest of the Celestial bodies, and
by these, as by mediating instruments conveying that light into our Fire. As
therefore the spirits of darkness are stronger in the dark: so good spirits,
which are Angels of Light, are augmented, not only by that light, which is
Divine, of the Sun, and Celestial, but also by the light of our common Fire.
Hence it was that the first, and most wise institutors of Religions, and
Ceremonies ordained, that Prayers, Singings, and all manner of Divine Worships
whatsoever should not be performed without lighted Candles, or Torches. (Hence
also was that significant saying of Pythagoras. Do not speak of God without a
Light) and they commanded that for the driving away of wicked spirits, Lights
and Fires should be kindled by the Corpses of the dead, and that they should
not be removed, until the expiations were after a Holy manner performed, and
they buried. And the great Jehovah himself in the old Law Commanded that all
his Sacrifices should be offered with Fire, and that Fire should always be
burning upon the Altar, which Custom the Priests of the Altar did always
observe, and keep amongst the Romans. Now the Basis, and foundation of all the
Elements, is the Earth, for that is the object, subject, and receptacle of all
Celestial rays, and influencies; in it are contained the seeds, and Seminall
virtues of all things; and therefore it is said to be Animal, Vegetable, and
Mineral. It being made fruitful by the other Elements, and the Heavens,
brings forth all things of it self; It receives the abundance of all things,
and is, as it were the first fountain, from whence all things spring, it is the
Center, foundation, and mother of all things. Take as much of it as you please,
separated, washed, depurated, subtilized, if you let it lie in the open Air a
little while, it will, being full, and abounding with Heavenly virtues, of it
self bring forth Plants, Worms, and other living things, also Stones, and
bright sparks of Metals. In it are great secrets, if at any time it shall be
purified by the help of Fire, and reduced unto its simplicity by a convenient
washing. It is the first matter of our Creation, and the truest Medicine that
can restore, and preserve us.

CHAP. VI. Of the wonderful Natures of Water, Air, and Winds.
THe other two Elements, viz. Water, and Air are not less efficacious then the
former; neither is nature wanting to work wonderful things in them. There is
so great a necessity of Water, that without it no livin^ thing can live. No
Herb, nor Plant whatsoever, without the moistening of Water can branch forth.
In it is the Seminary virtue of all things, especially of Animals, whose seed
is manifestly waterish. The seeds also of Trees, and Plants, although they are
earthy, must notwithstanding of necessity be rotted in Water, before they can
be fruitful; whether they be imbibed with the moisture of the Earth, or with
Dew, or Rain, or any other Water that is on purpose put to them. For Moses
writes, that only Earth, and Water bring forth a living soul. But he ascribes a
twofold production of things to Water, viz. of things swimming in the Waters,
and of things flying in the Air above the Earth. And that those productions
that are made in, and upon the Earth, are partly attributed to the very Water,
the same Scripture testifies, where it says that the Plants, and the Herbs
did not grow, because God had not caused it to rain upon the Earth. Such is the
efficacy of this Element of Water, that Spiritual regeneration cannot be done
without it, as Christ himself testified to Nicodemus. Very great also is the
virtue of it in the Religious Worship of God, in expiations, and purifications;
yea, the necessity of it is no less then that of Fire. Infinite are the
benefits, and diverse are the uses thereof, as being that by virtue of which all
things subsist, are generated, nourished, and increased. Thence it was that
Thales of Miletus, and Hesiod concluded that Water was the beginning of all
things, and said it was the first of all the Elements, and the most potent, and
that because it has the mastery over all the rest. For, as Pliny says, Waters
swallow up the Earth, extinguish flames, ascend on high, and by the stretching
forth of the clouds, challenge the Heaven for their own: the same falling down
become the Cause of all things that grow in the Earth. Very many are the
wonders that are done by Waters, according to the Writings of Pliny, Solinus,
and many other Historians, of the wonderful virtue whereof, Ovid also makes
mention in these Verses. -- Hornd Hammons Waters at high noon
Are cold; hot at Sunrise, and setting Sun,
Wood, put in bubling Athemas is Fired,
The Moon then farthest from the Sun retired,
Ciconian streams congeal his guts to Stone
That thereof drinks; and what therein is thrown,
Crathis, and Sybaris (from the Mountains rold)
Color the hair like Amber, or pure Gold.
Some four^^ (...) of a more prodigious kind,
Not only change the body, but the mind.
Who has not heard of obscene Salmacis?
Of the Ethiopian lake? for who of this
But only taste, their wits no longer keep,
Or forthwith fall into a deadly sleep.
Who at Clitorius fountain thirst remove,
Loath Wine, and abstinent, mere Water love.
With streams opposed to these Lincestus flows:
They reel, as drunk, who drink too much of those.
A Lake in fair Arcadia stands, of old
Called Pheneus; suspected, as twofold:
Fear, and forbear to drink thereof by night:
By night unwholesome, wholesome by daylight.
Josephus also makes relation of the wonderful nature of a certain river
betwixt Arcea, and Raphanea, Cities of Syria: which runs with a full Channel
all the Sabbath Day, and then on a sudden cease, as if the springs were
stopped, and all the six days you may pass over it dry-shod: but again on the
seventh day (no man knowing the reason of it) the Waters return again in
abundance, as before. Wherefore the inhabitants thereabout called it the
Sabboth-day river, because of the Seventh day, which was holy to the Jews. The
Gospel also testifies of a sheep-poole, into which whosoever stepped first,
after the Water was troubled by the Angel, was made whole of whatsoever disease
he had. The same virtue, and efficacy we read was in a spring of the Jonian
Nymphs, which was in the territories belonging to the Town of Elis, at a
Village called Heraclea, near the river Citheron: which whosoever stepped into,
being diseased came forth whole, and cured of all his diseases. Pausanias also
reports, that in Lyceus, a mountain of Arcadia, there was a spring called
Agria, to which, as often as the dryness of the Region threatened the
destruction of fruits Jupiters Priest of Lyceus went, and after the offering of
Sacrifices, devoutly praying to the Waters of the Spring, holding a Bough of
an Oak in his hand, put it down to the bottom of the hallowed ^pring; Then the
waters being troubled, a Vapor ascending from thence into the Air was blown
into Clouds, with which being joined together, the whole Heaven was overspread:
which being a little after dissolved into rain, watered all the Country most
wholsomly. Moreover Ruffus a Physician of Ephesus, besides many other Authors,
wrote strange things concerning the wonders of Waters, which, for ought I
know, are found in no other Author.

It remains that I speak of the Air. This is a vital spirit, passing through
all Beings, giving life, and subsistence to all things, binding, moving, and
filling all things. Hence it is that the Hebrew Doctors reckon it not amongst
the Elements, but count it as a Medium or glue, joining things together, and as
the resounding spirit of the worlds instrument. It immediately receives into it
self the influencies of all Celestial bodies, and then communicates them to
the other Elements, as also to all mixed bodies: Also it receives into it self,
as if it were a divine Looking-glass, the species of all things, as well
natural, as artificial, as also of all manner of speeches, and retains them;
And carrying them with it, and entering into the bodies of Men, and other
Animals, through their pores, makes an Impression upon them, as well when they
sleep, as when they be awake, and affords matter for diverse strange Dreams and
Divinations. Hence they say it is, that a man passing by a place where a man
was slain, or the Carkase newly hid, is moved with fear and dread; because the
Air in that place being full of the dreadful species of Manslaughter, does,
being breathed in, move and trouble the spirit of the man with the like
species, whence it is that he comes to be afraid. For every thing that makes a
sudden impression, astonisheth nature. Whence it is, that many Philosophers
were of opinion that Air is the cause of dreams, and of many other impressions
of the mind, through the prolonging of Images, or similitudes, or species
(which are fallen from things, and speeches, multiplied in the very Air)
until they come to the senses, and then to the phantasy, and soul of him that
receives them, which being freed from cares, and no way hindered, expecting to
meet such kind of species, is informed by them. For the species of things,
although of their own proper nature, they are carried to the senses of men, and
other animals in general, may notwithstanding get some impression from the
Heaven, whilst they be in the Air, by reason of which, together with the
aptness and disposition of him that receives them, they may be carried to the
sense of one, rather then of another. And hence it is possible naturally, and
far from all manner of superstition, no other spirit coming between, that a man
should be able in a very time to signify his mind unto another man, abiding at
a very long and unknown distance from him; although he cannot precisely give an
estimate of the time when it is, yet of necessity it must be within 24. hours;
and I my self know how to do it, and have often done it. The same also in time
past did the Abbot Tritenius both know and do. Also when certain appearances,
not only spiritual, but also natural do flow forth from things, that is to
say, by a certain kind of flowings forth of bodies from bodies, and do gather
strength in the Air, they offer, and show themselves to us as well through
light as motion, as well to the sight as to other senses, and sometimes work
wonderful things upon us, as Plotinus proves and teaches. And we see how by
the South wind the Air is condensed into thin clouds, in which, as in a
Looking-glass are reflected representations at a great distance of Castles,
Mountains, Horses, and Men, and other things, which when the clouds are gone,
presently vanish. And Aristotle in his Meteors shows, that a Rainbow is
conceived in a cloud of the Air, as in a Looking-glass. And Albertus says,
that the effigies of bodies may by the strength of nature, in a moist Air be
easily represented, in the same manner as the representations of things are in
things. And Aristotle tells of a man, to whom it happened by reason of the
weakness of his sight, that the Air that was near to him, became as it were a
Looking-glass to him, and the optic beam did reflect back upon himself, and
could not penetrate the Air, so that whithersoever he went, he thought he saw
his own image, with his face toward him, go before him. In like manner, by the
artificialness of some certain Looking-glasses, may be produced at a distance
in the Air, beside the Looking-glasses, what images we please; which when
ignorant men see, they think they see the appearances of spirits, or souls;
when indeed they are nothing else but semblances kin to themselves, and without
life. And it is well known, if in a dark place where there is no light but by
the coming in of a beam of the Sun somewhere through a little hole, a white
paper, or plain Looking-glass be set up against that light, that there may be
seen upon them, whatsoever things are done without, being shined upon by the
Sun. And there is another slight, or trick yet more wonderful. If any one
shall take images artificially painted, or written letters, and in a clear
night set them against the beams of the full Moon, whose resemblances being
multiplied in the Air, and caught upward, and reflected back together with the
beams of the Moon, any other man that is privy to the thing, at a long distance
sees, reads, and knows them in the very compass, and Circle of the Moon, which
Art of declaring secrets is indeed very profitable for Towns, and Cities that
are besieged, being a thing which Pythagoras long since did often do, and which
is not unknown to some in these days, I will not except my self. And all
these, and many more, and greater then these are grounded in the very nature of
the Air, and have their reasons, and causes declared in Mathematics, and
Optics. And as these resemblances are reflected back to the sight, so also
sometimes to the hearing, as is manifest in the Echo. But there are more secret
arts then these, and such whereby any one may at a very remote distance hear,
and understand what another speaks, or whispers softly.

There are also from the airy Element Winds. For they are nothing else, but
Air moved, and stirred up. Of these there are four that are principal, blowing
from the four corners of the Heaven, viz. Notus from the South, Boreas from the
North, Zephyrus from the West, Eurus from the East, which Pontanus
comprehending in these verses, says, Cold Boreas from the top of 'lympus blows,
And from the bottom cloudy Notus flows.
From setting Phoebus fruitful Zeph^rus flies,
And barren Eurus from the Suns up-rise.


Notus is the Southern Wind, cloudy, moist, warm, and sickly, which Hieronimus
calls the butler of the rains. Ovid describes it thus. Out flies South Wind,
with dropping wings, who shrowds
His fearful aspect in the pitchie clouds,
His white Hair stream's, his Beard big-swoln with showers;
Mists bind his Brows, rain from his Bosom powers.


But Boreas is contrary to Notus, and is the Northern Wind, fierce, and
roaring, and discussing clouds, makes the Air serene, and binds the Water with
Frost. Him does Ovid thus bring in speaking of himself. Force me befits: with
this thick clouds I drive;
Toss the blew Billows, knotty Oaks up-rive;
Congeal soft Snow, and beat the Earth with hail:
When I my brethren in the Air assail,
(For that's our Field) we meet with such a shock,
That thundering Skies with our encounters rock
And cloud-struck lightning flashes from on high,
When through the Crannies of the Earth I fly,
And force her in her hollow Caves, I make
The Ghosts to tremble, and the ground to quake.
And Zephyrus, which is the VVestern Wind, is most soft, blowing from the West
with a pleasant gale, it is cold and moist, removing the effects of Winter,
bringing forth Branches, and Flowers. To this Eurus is contrary, which is the
Eastern wind, and is called Apeliotes, it is waterish, cloudy, and ravenous. Of
these two Ovid sings thus: To Persis, and Sabea, Eurus flies;
Whose gums perfume the blushing Mornes up-rise:
Next to the Evening, and the Coast that glows
With setting Phoebus, flowery Zeph^rus blows:
In Scythia horrid Boreas holds his rain,
Beneath Boites, and the frozen Wain:
The land to this opposed does Auster steep
With fruitful showers, and clouds which ever weep.


CHAP. VII. Of the kinds of Compounds, what relation they stand in to the
Elements, and what relation there is betwixt the Elements themselves, and the
soul, senses, and dispositions of men.
NExt after the four simple Elements follow the four kinds of perfect Bodies
compounded of them, and they are Stones, Metals, Plants, and Animals: and
although unto the generation of each of these all the Elements meet together in
the composition, yet every one of them follows, and resembles one of the
Elements, which is most predominant. For all Stones are earthy, for they are
naturally heavy, and descend, and so hardened with dryness, that they cannot be
melted. But Metals are waterish, and may be melted, which Naturalists confess,
and Chemists find to be true, viz. that they are generated of a viscous Water,
or waterish argent vive. Plants have such an affinity with the Air, that
unless they be abroad in the open Air, they do neither bud, nor increase. So
also all Animals Have in their Natures a most fiery force,
And also spring from a Celestial source.
And Fire is so natural to them, that that being extinguished they presently
dye. And again every one of those kinds is distinguished within it self by
reason of degrees of the Elements. For amongst the Stones they especially are
called earthy that are dark, and more heavy; and those waterish, which are
transparent, and are compacted of water, as Crystal, Beryll, and Pearls in the
Shells of Fishes: and they are called airy, which swim upon the Water, and are
spongious, as the Stones of a Sponge, the pumish Stone, and the Stone Sophus:
and they are called fiery, out of which fire is extracted, or which are
resolved into Fire, or which are produced of Fire: as Thunderbolts,
Fire-stones, and the Stone Asbestus. Also amongst Metals, Lead, and Silver are
earthy; Quicksilver is waterish: Copper, and Tin are airy: and Gold, and Iron
are fiery. In Plants also, the roots resemble the Earth, by reason of their
thickness: and the leaves, Water, because of their juice: Flowers, the Air,
because of their subtility, and the Seeds the Fire, by reason of their
multiplying spirit. Besides, they are called some hot, some cold, some moist,
some dry, borrowing their names from the qualities of the Elements. Amongst
Animals also, some are in comparison of others earthy, and dwell in the bowels
of the Earth, as Worms and Moles, and many other small creeping Vermin: others
are watery, as Fishes; others airy, which cannot live out of the Air: others
also are fiery, living in the Fire, as Salamanders, and Crickets, such as are
of a fiery heat, as Pigeons, Estriches, Lions, and such as the wise man calls
beasts breathing Fire. Besides, in Animals the Bones resemble the Earth, Flesh
the Air, the vital spirit the Fire, and the humors the Water. And these humors
also partake of the Elements, for yellow choler is instead of Fire, blood
instead of Air, Phlegm instead of Water, and black choler, or melancholy
instead of Earth. And lastly, in the Soul it self, according to Austin, the
understanding resembles Fire, reason the Air, imagination the Water, and the
senses the Earth. And these senses also are divided amongst themselves by
reason of the Elements, for the sight is fiery, neither can it perceive without
Fire, and Light: the hearing is airy, for a sound is made by the striking of
the Air; The smell, and taste resemble the Water, without the moisture of which
there is neither smell, nor taste; and lastly the feeling is wholly earthy, and
takes gross bodies for its object. The actions also, and the operations of man
are governed by the Elements. The Earth signifies a slow, and firm motion; The
Water signifies fearfulness, and sluggishness, and remisseness in working: Air
signifies cheerfulness, and an amiable disposition: but Fire a fierce, quick,
and angry disposition. The Elements therefore are the first of all things, and
all things are of, and according to them, and they are in all things, and
diffuse their virtues through all things.

CHAP. VIII. How the Elements are in the Heavens, in Stars, in Devils, in
Angels, and lastly in God himself.
IT is the unanimous consent of all Platonists, that as in the original, and
exemplary World, all things are in all; so also in this corporeal world, all
things are in all: so also the Elements are not only in these inferior bodies,
but also in the Heavens, in Stars, in Devils, in Angels, and lastly in God, the
maker, and orginall example of all things. Now in these inferior bodies, the
Elements are accompanied with much gross matter; but in the Heavens the
Elements are with their natures, and virtues, viz. after a Celestial, and more
excellent manner, then in sublunary things. For the firmness of the Celestial
Earth is there without the grossness of Water: and the agility of the Air
without running over its bounds; the heat of Fire without burning, only
shining, and giving life to all things by its heat. Amongst the Stars also,
some are fiery, as Mars, and Sol: airy, as Jupiter, and Venus: watery, as
Saturn, and Mercury: and earthy, such as inhabit the eighth Orb, and the Moon
(which notwithstanding by many is accounted watery) seeing, as if it were
Earth, it attracts to it self the Celestial waters, with which being imbibed,
it does by reason of its neerness to us power out, and communicate to us. There
are also amongst the Signs, some fiery, some earthy, some airy, some watery:
the Elements rule them also in the Heavens, distributing to them these four
threefold considerations of every Element, viz. the beginning, middle, and end:
so Aries possesses the beginning of Fire, Leo the progress, and increase, and
Sagittarius the end. Taurus the beginning of the Earth, Virgo the progress,
Capricorn the end. Gemini the beginning of the Air, Libra the progress,
Aquarius the end. Cancer the beginning of Water, Scorpius the middle, and
Pisces the end. Of the mixtions therefore of these Planets, and Signs,
together with the Elements are all bodies made. Moreover Devils also are upon
this account distinguished the one from the other, so that some are called
fiery, some earthy, some airy, and some watery. Hence also those four Infernal
Rivers, fiery Phlegethon, airy Cocytus, watery Styx, earthy Acheron. Also in
the Gospel we read of Hell Fire, and eternal Fire, into which the Cursed shall
be commanded to go: and in the Revelation we read of a Lake of Fire, and Isaiah
speaks of the damned, that the Lord will smite them with corrupt Air. And in
Job, They shall skip from the Waters of the Snow to extremity of heat, and in
the same we read, That the Earth is dark, and covered with the darkness of
death, and miserable darkness. Moreover also these Elements are placed in the
Angels in Heaven, and the blessed intelligencies; there is in them a stability
of their essence, which is an earthy virtue, in which is the steadfast seat of
God; also their mercy, and piety is a watery cleansing virtue. Hence by the
Psalmist they are called Waters, where he speaking of the Heavens, says, Who
rulest the Waters that are higher then the Heavens; also in them their subtle
breath is Air, and their love is shining Fire: Hence they are called in
Scripture the Wings of the Wind; and in another place the Psalmist speaks of
them, Who make Angels thy Spirits and thy Ministers a flaming fire. Also
according to orders of Angels, some are fiery, as Seraphin, and authorities,
and powers; earthy as Cherubin: watery as Thrones, and Archangels: airy as
Dominions, and Principalities. Do we not also read of the original maker of all
things, that the earth shall be opened and bring forth a Savior? Is it not
spoken of the same, that he shall be a fountain of living Water, cleansing, and
regenerating? Is not the same Spirit breathing the breath of life: and the same
according to Moses, and Paul's testimony, A consuming Fire? That Elements
therefore are to be found every where, and in all things after their manner, no
man can deny: First in these inferior bodies feculent, and gross, and in
Celestials more pure, and clear; but in supercelestials living, and in all
respects blessed. Elements therefore in the exemplary world are Idea's of
things to be produced, in Intelligencies are distributed powers, in Heavens are
virtues, and in inferior bodies gross forms.

CHAP. IX. Of the virtues of things Natural, depending immediately upon
Elements.
OF the natural virtues of things, some are Elementary, as to heat, to cool,
to moisten, to dry; and they are called operations, or first qualities, and the
second act: for these qualities only do wholly change the whole substance,
which none of the other qualities can do. And some are in things compounded of
Elements, and these are more then first qualities, and such are those that are
maturating, digesting, resolving, mollifying, hardening, restringing,
absterging, corroding, burning, opening, evaporating, strengthening,
mitigating, conglutinating, obstructing, expelling, retaining, attracting,
repercussing, stupifying, bestowing, lubrifying, and many more. Elementary
qualities do many things in a mixed body, which they cannot do in the Elements
themselves. And these operations are called secondary qualities, because they
follow the nature, and proportion of the mixtion of the first virtues, as
largely it is treated of in Physic Books. As maturation, which is the
operation of natural heat, according to a certain proportion in the substance
of the matter. Induration is the operation of cold; so also is congelation, and
so of the rest. And these operations sometimes act upon a certain member, as
such which provoke Urine, Milk, the Menstrua, and they are called third
qualities, which follow the second, as the second do the first. According
therefore to these first, second, and third qualities many diseases are both
cured, and caused. Many things also there are artificially made, which men much
wonder at; as is Fire, which burns Water, which they call the Greek Fire, of
which Aristotle teaches many compositions in his particular Treatise of this
subject. In like manner there is made a Fire that is extinguished with Oil, and
is kindled with cold Water, when it is sprinkled upon it; and a Fire which is
kindled either with Rain, Wind, or the Sun; and there is made a Fire, which is
called burning Water, the Confection whereof is well known, and it consumes
nothing but it self: and also there are made Fires that cannot be quenched, and
incombustible Oils, and perpetual Lamps, which can be extinguished neither
with Wind, nor Water, nor any other way; which seems utterly incredible, but
that there had been such a most famous Lamp, which once did shine in the Temple
of Venus, in which the stone Asbestus did burn, which being once fired can
never be extinguished. Also on the contrary, Wood, or any other combustible
matter may be so ordered, that it can receive no harm from the Fire; and there
are made certain Confections, with which the hands being anointed, we may carry
red hot Iron in them, or put them into melted Metal, or go with our whole
bodies, being first anointed therewith, into the Fire without any manner of
harm, and such like things as these may be done. There is also a kind of flax,
which Pliny calls Asbestum, the Greeks call (...), which is not consumed by
Fire, of which Anaxilaus says, that a Tree compassed about with it, may be cut
down with insensible blows, that cannot be heard.

CHAP. X. Of the occult Virtues of things.
THere are also other virtues in things, which are not from any Element, as to
expel poison, to drive away the noxious vapors of Minerals, to attract Iron,
or any thing else; and this virtue is a sequel of the species, and form of
this or that thing; whence also it being little in quantity, is of great
efficacy; which is not granted to any Elementary qualitv. For these virtues
having much form, and little matter, can do very much; but an Elementary virtue,
because it has more materiality, requires much matter for its acting. And they
are called occult qualities, because their Causes lie hid, and man's intellect
cannot in any way reach, and find them out. Wherefore Philosophers have
attained to the greatest part of them by long experience, rather then by the
search of reason: for as in the Stomach the meat is digested by heat, which we
know; so it is changed by a certain hidden virtue which we know not: for truly
it is not changed by heat, because then it should rather be changed by the Fire
side, then in the Stomach. So there are in things, besides the Elementary
qualities which we know, other certain imbred virtues created by nature, which
we admire, and are amazed at, being such as we know not, and indeed seldom or
never have seen. As we read in Ovid of the Phoenix, one only Bird, which renews
her self. All Birds from others do derive their birth,
But yet one Foul there is in all the Earth,
Call d by the Assyrians Phoenix, who the wain
Of age, repairs, and sows her self again.
And in another place, Aegyptus came to see this wondrous sight:
And this rare Bird is welcomed with delight.


Long since Metreas brought a very great wonderment upon the Greeks, and Romans
concerning himself. He said that he nourished, and bred a beast that did devour
it self. Hence many to this day are solicitous, what this beast of Matreas
should be. Who would not wonder that Fishes should be dug out of the Earth,
of which Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Polybius the Historian makes mention? And
these things which Pausanias wrote concerning the singing Stones? All these are
effects of occult virtues. So the Estrich concocts cold, and most hard Iron,
and digests it into nourishment for his body; whose Stomach they also report,
cannot be hurt with red hot Iron. So that little Fish called Echeneis does so
curb the violence of the Winds, and appease the rage of the Sea, that, let the
Tempests be never so imperious, and raging, the Sails also bearing a full Gale,
it does notwithstanding by its mere touch stay the Ships, and makes them stand
still, that by no means they can be moved. So Salamanders, and Crickets live in
the Fire; although they seem sometimes to burn, yet they are not hurt. The like
is said of a kind of Bitumen, with which the weapons of the Amazons were said
to be smeared over, by which means they could be spoiled neither with Sword nor
Fire; with which also the Gates of Caspia, made of Brass, are reported to be
smeared over by Alexander the great. We read also that Noah's Ark was joined
together with this Bitumen, and that endured some thousands of years upon the
Mountains of Armenia. There are many such kind of wonderful things, scarce
credible, which notwithstanding are known by experience. Amongst which
Antiquity makes mention of Satyrs, which were Animals, in shape half men, and
half bruits, yet capable of speech, and reason; one whereof S. Hierome
reports, spoke once unto holy Antonius the Hermit, and condemned the error
of the Gentiles, in worshipping such poor creatures as they were, and desired
him that he would pray unto the true God for him; also he affirms that there
was one of them showed openly alive, and afterward sent to Constantine the
Emperor.

CHAP. XI. How Occult Virtues are infused into the several kinds of things by
Idea's, through the help of the Soul of the World, and rays of the Stars: and
what things abound most with this Virtue.
Platonists say that all inferior bodies are exemplified by the superior
Idea's. Now they define an Idea to be a form, above bodies, souls, minds, and
to be but one, simple, pure, immutable, indivisible, incorporeal, and eternal:
and that the nature of all Idea's is the same. Now they place Idea's in the
first place in very goodness it self (i. e.) God, by way of cause; and that
they are distinguished amongst themselves by some relative considerations only,
least whatsoever is in the world, should be but one thing without any variety,
and that they agree in essence, least God should be a compound substance. In
the second place, they place them in the very intelligible it self (i. e.) in
the Soul of the world, differing the one from the other by absolute forms, so
that all the Idea's in God indeed are but one form: but in the Soul of the
world they are many. They are placed in the minds of all other things, whether
they be joined to the body, or separated from the body, by a certain
participation, and now by degrees are distinguished more, and more. They place
them in nature, as certain small seed of forms infused by the Ideas, and lastly
they place them in matter, as shadows. Hereunto may be added, that in the Soul
of the world there be as many Seminal forms of things, as Idea's in the mind of
God, by which forms she did in the Heavens above the Stars frame to her self
shapes also, and stamped upon all these some properties; on these Stars
therefore, shapes, and properties, all virtues of inferior species, as also
their properties do depend; so that every species has its Celestial shape, or
figure that is suitable to it, from which also proceeds a wonderful power of
operating, which proper gift it receives from its own Idea, through the Seminal
forms of the Soul of the world. For Idea's are not only essential causes of
every species, but are also the causes of every virtue, which is in the
species: and this is that which many Philosophers say, that the properties,
which are in the nature of things (which virtues indeed are the operations of
the Idea's) are moved by certain virtues, viz. such as have a certain, and sure
foundation, not fortuitous, nor casual, but efficacious, powerful, and
sufficient, doing nothing in vain. Now these Virtues do not err in their
actings, but by accident, viz. by reason of the impurity, or inequality of the
matter: For upon this account there are found things of the same species, more,
or less powerful, according to the purity, or indisposition of the matter; for
all Celestial influencies may be hindered by the indisposition, and
insufficiency of the matter. Whence it was a Proverb amongst the Platonists,
That Celestial Virtues were infused according to the desert of the matter:
Which also Virgil makes mention of, when he sings, Their natures fiery are, and
from above,
And from gross bodies freed, divinely move.
Wherefore those things, in which there is less of the Idea of the matter (i.
e.) such things which have a greater resemblance of things separated, have more
powerful virtues in operation, being like to the operation of a separated
Idea. We see then that the situation, and figure of Celestials is the cause of
all those excellent Virtues, that are in inferior species.

CHAP. XII. How it is that particluar Virtues are infused into particular
Individuals, even of the same Species.
THere are also in many Individuals, or particular things, peculiar gifts, as
wonderful, as in the species, and these also are from the figure, and
situation of Celestial Stars. For every Individual, when it begins to be
under a determined Horoscope, and Celestial Constellation, Contracts together
with its essence a certain wonderful virtue both of doing, and suffering
something that is remarkable, even besides that which it receives from its
species, and this it does partly by the influence of the Heaven, and partly
through that obedientialness of the matter of things to be generated, to the
Soul of the World, which obedientialness indeed is such as that of our bodies
to our souls. For we perceive that there is this in us, that according to our
conceptions of things, our bodies are moved, and that cheerfully, as when we
are afraid of, or fly from any thing. So many times when the Celestial souls
conceive several things, then the matter is moved obedientially to it: Also in
Nature there appear diverse prodigies, by reason of the imagination of superior
motions. So also they conceive, and imagine diverse virtues, not only things
natural, but also sometimes things artificial, and this especially if the Soul
of the operator be inclined toward the same. Whence Avicen says, that
whatsoever things are done here, must have been before in the motions, and
conceptions of the Stars, and Orbs. So in things, various effects,
inclinations, and dispositions are occasioned not only from the matter
variously disposed, as many suppose, but from a various influence, and diverse
form; not truly with a specifical difference, but peculiar, and proper. And the
degrees of these are variously distributed by the first Cause of all things,
God himself, who being unchangeable, distributes to every one as he pleases,
with whom notwithstanding second Causes, Angelical, and Celestial cooperate,
disposing of the Corporeal matter, and other things that are committed to them.
All virtues therefore are infused by God, through the Soul of the World, yet by
a particular power of resemblances, and intelligences overruling them, and
concourse of the rays, and aspects of the Stars in a certain peculiar
harmonious consent.

CHAP. XIII. Whence the Occult Virtues of things proceed.
IT is well known to all, that there is a Certain virtue in the Loadstone, by
which it attracts Iron, and that the Diamond does by its presence take away
that virtue of the Loadstone: so also Amber, and jeat rubbed, and warmed draw a
straw to them, and the Stone Asbestus being once fired is never, or scarce
extinguished: a Carbuncle shines in the dark, the Stone Aetites put above the
young fruit of Women, or Plants, strengthens them, but being put under, causes
abortion; the Jasper stencheth blood; the little fish Echeneis stops the ships:
Rhuharb expels choler; the liver of the Camelion burnt, raises showers, and
thunders. The Stone Heliotropium dazles the sight, and makes him that wears it
to be invisible, the Stone Lyucurius takes away delusions from before the eyes,
the perfume of the Stone Lypparis calls forth all the beasts, the Stone
Synochitis brings up infernal Ghosts, the Stone Anachitis makes the images of
the Gods appear. The Ennectis put under them that dream, causes Oracles. There
is an Herb in Aethiopia, with which they report ponds, and lakes are dried up,
and all things that are shut, to be opened; and we read of an Herb called
Latace which the Persian Kings give to their Ambassadors, that whithersoever
they shall come, they shall abound with plenty of all things. There is also a
Scythian Herb, with which being tasted, or at least held in the mouth, they
report the Scythians will endure twelve days hunger, and thirst; and Apuleius
says, that he was taught by an Oracle that there were many kinds of Herbs,
and Stones, with which men might prolong their lives for ever, but that it was
not lawful for men to understand the knowledge of those things, because,
whereas they have but a short time to live, they study mischief with all their
might, and attempt all manner of wickedness; if they should be sure of a very
long time, they would not spare the Gods themselves. But from whence these
virtues are, none of all these have showed, who have set forth huge Volumes of
the properties of things, not Hermes, not Bochus, not Aaron, not Orpheus, not
Theophrastus, not Thebith, not Zenothemis, not Zoroaster, not Evax, not
Dioscorides, not Isaaick the Jew, not Zacharias the Babilonian, not Albertus,
not Arnoldus; and yet all these have confessed the same, that Zacharias writes
to Mithridites, that great power, and humane destinies are couched in the
virtues of Stones, and Herbs. But to know from whence these come, a higher
speculation is required. Alexander the Peripateticke not going any further then
his senses, and qualities, is of the opinion that these proceed from Elements,
and their qualities, which happily might be supposed to be true, if those were of
the same species; but many of the operations of the Stones agree neither in
genere, nor specie. Therefore Plato, and his Scholars attribute these virtues
to Idea's, the formers of things. But Avicen reduces these kinds of operations
to Intelligencies, Hermes to the Stars, Albertus to the specificall forms of
things. And although these Authors seem to thwart one the other, yet none of
them, if they be rightly understood, goes beside the truth: since all their
sayings are the same in effect in most things. For God in the first place is
the end, and beginning of all Virtues, he gives the seal of the Idea's to his
servants the Intelligencies; who as faithful officers sign all things
entrusted to them with an Ideall Virtue, the Heavens, and Stars, as
instruments, disposing the matter in the mean while for the receiving of those
forms which reside in Divine Majesty (as says Plato in Timeus) and to be
conveyed by Stars; and the Giver of forms distributes them by the Ministry of
his Intelligencies, which he has set as Rulers, and Controllers over his
Works, to whom such a power is entrusted in things committed to them, that so
all Virtue of Stones, Herbs, Metals, and all other things may come from the
Intelligencies, the Governors. The Form therefore, and Virtue of things comes
first from the Idea's, then from the ruling, and governing Intelligencies, then
from the aspects of the Heavens disposing, and lastly from the tempers of the
Elements disposed, answering the influencies of the Heavens, by which the
Elements themselves are ordered, or disposed. These kinds of operations
therefore are performed in these inferior things by express forms, and in the
Heavens by disposing virtues, in Intelligencies by mediating rules, in the
original Cause by Idea's, and exemplary forms, all which must of necessity
agree in the execution of the effect, and virtue of every thing.

There is therefore a wonderful virtue, and operation in every Herb, and
Stone, but greater in a Star, beyond which, even from the governing
Intelligencies every thing receives, and obtains many things for it self,
especially from the Supreme Cause, with whom all things do mutually, and
exactly correspond, agreeing in an harmonious consent, as it were in Hymns,
always praising the highest Maker of all things, as by the three Children in
the fiery furnace were all things called upon to praise God with singings.
Bless ye the Lord all things that grow upon the Earth, and all things which
move in the Waters, all fowls of the Heavens, Beasts, and Cattle, together with
the sons of men. There is therefore no other cause of the necessity of effects,
then the connection of all things with the first Cause, and their correspondency
with those Divine patterns, and eternal Idea's, whence every thing has its
determinate, and particular place in the exemplary world, from whence it lives,
and receives its original being; And every virtue of Herbs, Stones, Metals,
Animals, Words, and Speeches, and all things that are of God, is placed there.
Now the first Cause, which is God, although he does by Intelligencies, and the
Heavens work upon these inferior things, does sometimes (these Mediums being
laid aside, or their officiating being suspended) works those things immediately
by himself, which works then are called Miracles: But whereas secondary causes,
which Plato, and others call handmaids, do by the Command, and appointment of
the first Cause, necessarily act, and are necessitated to produce their
effects, if God shall notwithstanding according to his pleasure so discharge,
and suspend them, that they shall wholly desist from the necessity of that
Command, and appointment; then they are called the greatest Miracles of God. So
the fire in the Chaldeans furnace did not burn the Children: So also the Sun at
the Command of Joshua went back from its course the space of one whole day; so
also at the prayer of Hezekiah it went back ten degrees, or hours. So when
Christ was Crucified the Sun was darkened, though at full Moon: And the reasons
of these operations can by no rational discourse, no Magic, or occult, or
profound Science whatsoever be found out, or understood, but are to be learned,
and inquired into by Divine Oracles only.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Spirit of the World, what it is, and how by way of medium it
unites occult Virtues to their subjects.
DEmocritus, and Orpheus, and many Pythagorians having most diligently searched
into the virtues of Celestial things, and natures of inferior things, said,
That all things are full of God, and not without cause: For there is nothing of
such transcending virtues, which being destitute of Divine assistance, is
content with the nature of it self. Also they called those Divine powers which
are diffused in things, Gods: which Zoroaster called Divine allurements,
Synesius Symbolicall inticements, others called them Lives, and some also
Souls; saying, that the virtues of things did depend upon these; because it is
the property of the Soul to be from one matter extended into diverse things,
about which it operates: So is a man, who extends his intellect unto
intelligible things, and his imagination unto imaginable things; and this is
that which they understood, when they said, viz. That the Soul of one thing
went out, and went into another thing, altering it, and hindering the
operations of it: As a Diamond hinders the operation of the Loadstone, that it
cannot attract Iron. Now seeing the Soul is the first thing that is moveable,
and as they say, is moved of it self; but the body, or the matter is of it self
unable, and unfit for motion, and does much degenerate from the Soul, therefore
they say there is need of a more excellent Medium, viz. Such a one that may be
as it were no body, but as it were a Soul, or as it were no Soul, but as it
were a body, viz. by which the soul may be joined to the body. Now they
conceive such a medium to be the spirit of the World, viz. that which we call
the quintessence: because it is not from the four Elements, but a certain first
thing, having its being above, and besides them. There is therefore such a kind
of spirit required to be, as it were the medium, whereby Celestial Souls are
joined to gross bodies, and bestow upon them wonderful gifts. This spirit is
after the same manner in the body of the world, as ours is in the body of man.
For as the powers of our soul are communicated to the members of the body by
the spirit, so also the Virtue of the Soul of the World is diffused through all
things by the quintessence: For there is nothing found in the whole world, that
has not a spark of the Virtue thereof. Yet it is more, nay most of all infused
into those things which have received, or taken in most of this spirit: Now
this spirit is received or taken in by the rays of the Stars, so far forth as
things render themselves conformable to them. By this spirit therefore every
occult property is conveyed into Herbs, Stones, Metals, and Animals, through
the Sun, Moon, Planets, and through Stars higher then the Planets. Now this
spirit may be more advantageous to us, if any one knew how to separate it from
the Elements: or at least to use those things chiefly, which do most abound
with this spirit. For these things, in which this spirit is less drowned in a
body, and less checked by matter, do more powerfully, and perfectly act, and
also more readily generate their like: for in it are all generative, and
seminary Virtues. For which cause the Alchymists endeavor to separate this
spirit from Gold, and Silver; which being rightly separated, and extracted, if
thou shall afterward project upon any matter of the same kind (i. e.) any
Metal, presently will turn it into Gold, or Silver. And we know how to do
that, and have seen it done: but we could make no more Gold, then the weight of
that was, out of which we extracted the spirit. For seeing that is an extense
form, and not intense, it cannot beyond its own bounds change an imperfect body
into a perfect: which I deny not, but may be done by another way.

CHAP. XV. How we must find out, and examine the Virtues of things by way of
similitude.
II is now manifest that the occult properties in things are not from the
nature of the Elements, but infused from above, hid from our senses, and scarce
at last known by our reason, which indeed come from the Life, and the Spirit of
the World, through the rays of the Stars: and can no otherwise but by
experience, and conjecture be enquired into by us. Wherefore, he that desires
to enter upon this study, must consider, that every thing moves, and turns it
self to its like, and inclines that to it self with all its might, as well in
property, viz. Occult virtue, as in quality, viz. Elementary virtue. Sometimes
also in substance it self, as we see in Salt, for whatsoever has long stood
with Salt, becomes Salt: for every agent, when it has begun to act, does not
attempt to make a thing inferior to it self, but as much as may be, like, and
suitable to it self. Which also we manifestly see in sensible Animals, in which
the nutritive Virtue does not change the meat into an Herb, or a Plant, but
turns it into sensible flesh. In what things therefore there is an excess of
any quality, or property, as heat, cold, boldness, fear, sadness, anger, love,
hatred, or any other passion, or Virtue; whether it be in them by nature, or
sometimes also by art, or chance, as boldness in a harlot; these things do very
much move, and provoke to such a quality, passion, or Virtue. So Fire moves to
Fire, and Water moves to Water, and he that is bold moves to boldness. And it
is well known amongst Physicians, that brain helps the brain, and lungs, the
lungs. So also it is said, that the right eye of a Frog helps the soreness of a
man's right eye, and the left eye thereof, helps the soreness of his left eye,
if they be hanged about his neck in a Cloth of its natural Color: The like is
reported of the eyes of a Crab. So the foot of a Tortoise helps them that have
the Gout in their being applied thus, as foot to foot, hand to hand, right to
right, left to left.

After this manner they say, that any Animal that is barren causes another to
be barren; and of the Animal, especially the Testicles, Matrix, or Urin. So
they report that a woman shall not conceive, if she drink every month of the
Urin of a Mule, or any thing steeped in it. If therefore we would obtain any
property or Virtue, let us seek for such Animals, or such other things
whatsoever, in which such a property is in a more eminent manner then in any
other thing, and in these let us take that part in which such a property, or
Virtue is most vigorous: as if at any time we would promote love, let us seek
some Animal which is most loving, of which kind are Pigeons, Turtles,
Sparrows, Swallows, Wagtailes: and in these let us take those members, or
parts, in which the Venerall appetite is most vigorous, and such are the heart,
testicles, matrix, yard, sperme, and menstrues. And it must be done at that
time when these Animals have this affection most intense: for then they do much
provoke, and draw love. In like manner to increase boldness, let us look for a
Lion, or a Cock, and of these let us take the heart, eyes, or forehead. And so
we must understand that which Psellus the Platonist says, viz. that Dogs,
Crows, and Cocks conduce much to watchfulness: also the Nightingale, and Bat,
and horn Owl, and in these the heart, head, and eyes especially. Therefore it
is said, if any shall carry the heart of a Crow, or a Bat about him, he shall
not sleep till he cast it away from him. The same does the head of a Bat dried,
and bound to the right arm of him that is awake, for if it be put upon him
when he is asleep, it is said, that he shall not be awaked till it be taken off
from him. After the same manner does a Frog, and an Owl make one talkative,
and of these specially the tongue, and heart; So the tongue also of a
Water-frog laid under the head, makes a man speak in his sleep, and the heart
of a scrich-Owle laid upon the left breast of a woman that is asleep is said to
make her utter all her secrets. The same also the heart of the horn Owl is
said to do, also the sewet of a Hare laid upon the breast of one that is
asleep. Upon the same account do Animals that are long lived, conduce to long
life; and whatsoever things have a power in themselves, to renew themselves,
conduce to the renovation of our body and restoring of youth, which Physicians
have often professed they know to be true; as is manifest of the Viper, and
Snake. And it is known that Hearts renew their old age by the eating of Snakes.
After the same manner the Phoenix is renewed by a fire which she makes for her
self; and the like virtue there is in a Pelican, whose right foot being put
under warm dung, after three months there is of that generated a Pelican.
Therefore some Physicians by some certain confections made of Vipers, and
Hellebor, and the flesh of some such kind of Animals do restore youth, and
indeed do sometimes restore it so, as Medea restored old Pileas. It is also
believed that the blood of a Bear, if it be sucked out of her wound does
increase the strength of the body, because that Animal is the strongest
creature.

CHAP. XVI. How the operations of several Virtues pass from one thing into
another, and are communicated one to the other.
THou must know, that so great is the power of natural things, that they not
only work upon all things that are near them, by their Virtue, but also besides
this, they infuse into them a like power. through which by the same Virtue they
also work upon other things, as we see in the Loadstone, which Stone indeed
does not only draw Iron Rings, but also infuseth a Virtue into the Rings
themselves, whereby they can do the same which Austin, and Albertus say they
saw. After this manner it is, as they say, that a common harlot, grounded in
boldness, and impudence does infect all that are near her, by this property,
whereby they are made like her self. Therefore they say that if any one shall
put on the inward garment of an Harlot, or shall have about him that looking
glass, which she daily looks into, he shall thereby become bold, confident,
impudent, and wanton. In like manner they say, that a cloth that was about a
dead Corpse has received from thence the property of sadness, and melancholy
and that the halter wherewith a man was hanged has certain wonderful
properties. The like story tells Pliny, if any shall put a green Lizard made
blind, together with Iron, or Gold Rings into a glass-vessel, putting under
them some earth, and then shutting the vessel, and when it appears that the
Lizard has received his sight, shall put him out of the glass, that those
Rings shall help sore eyes. The same may be done with Rings, and a Weesel,
whose eyes after they are with any kind of prick put out, it is certain are
restored to sight again. Upon the same account Rings are put for a certain time
in the nest of Sparrows, or Swallows, which afterward are used to procure
love, and favor.

CHAP. XVII. How by enmity and friendship the virtues of things are to be
tried, and found out.
In the next place it is requisite that we consider that all things have a
friendliness, and enmity amongst themselves, and every thing has something
that it fears and dreads, that is an enemy, and destructive to it; and on the
contrary something that it rejoices, and delights in, and is strengthened
by, So in the Elements, Fire is an enemy to Water, and Air to Earth, but yet
they agree amongst themselves. And again, in Celestial bodies, Mercury,
Jupiter, the Sun, and Moon are friends to Saturn; Mars, and Venus enemies to
him, all the Planets besides Mars are friends to Jupiter, also all besides
Venus hate Mars; Jupiter, and Venus love the Sun, Mars, Mercury, and the Moon
are enemies to him, all besides Saturn love Venus; Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn
friends to Mercury, the Sun, Moon, and Mars his enemies. Jupiter, Venus,
Saturn are friends to the Moon, Mars, and Mercury her enemies. There is
another kind of enmity amongst the Stars, viz. when they have opposite houses;
as Saturn to the Sun and Moon, Jupiter to Mercury, Mars to Venus. And their
enmity is stronger, whose exaltations are opposite: as of Saturn, and the Sun;
of Jupiter, and Mars; of Venus, and Mercury. But their friendship is the
strongest, who agree in nature quality, substance, and power; as Mars with the
Sun, and Venus with the Moon, as Jupiter with Venus, as also their friendship
whose exaltation is in the house of another, as that of Saturn with Venus, of
Jupiter with the Moon, of Mars with Saturn, of the Sun with Mars, of Venus with
Jupiter, of the Moon with Venus. And of what sort the friendships, and enmities
of the superiors be, such are the inclinations of things subjected to them in
these inferior. These dispositions therefore of friendship and enmity are
nothing else but certain inclinations of things of the one to another, desiring
such, and such a thing if it be absent, and to move toward it, unless it be
hindered, and to acquiess in it when it is obtained, shunning the contrary, and
dreading the approach of it, and not resting in, or being contented with it.
Heraclitus therefore being guided by this opinion, professed that all things
were made by enmity and friendship. Now the inclinations of friendship are such
in Vegetables and Minerals, as is that attractive inclination, which the
Loadstone has upon Iron, and the Emrald upon riches, and favor; the Jasper
upon the birth of any thing, and the Stone Achates upon Eloquence; In like
manner there is a kind of Bituminous Clay that draws Fire, and leaps into it,
wheresoever it sees it: Even so does the root of the Herb Aproxis draw Fire
from afar off. Also the same inclination there is betwixt the male palm, and
female: whereof when the bough of one shall touch the bough of the other, they
fold themselves into mutual embraces, neither does the female bring forth fruit
without the male. And the Almond tree, when she is alone is loss fruitful. The
Vines love the Elm, and the Olive Tree, and myrtle love one the other: also
the Olive Tree, and Fig tree. Now in Animals there is amity betwixt the
Blackbird, and Thrush, betwixt the Crow, and Heron, betwixt Peacocks, and
Pigeons, Turtles, and Parrats. Whence Sappho writes to Phaon. To Birds unlike
oftimes joined are white Doves;
Also the Bird that is green, black Turtle loves.
Again, the Whale, and the little Fish his guide are friendly. Neither is this
amity in Animals amongst themselves, but also with other things, as with
Metals, Stones, and Vegetables, so the Cat delights in the Herb Nip, by
rubbing her self upon which she is said to conceive without a male; and there
be Mares in Cappadocia, that expose themselves to the blast of the wind, and by
the attraction thereof conceive. So Frogs, Toads, Snakes, and all manner of
creeping poisonous things delight in the Plant called Pas flower, of whom, as
the Physicians say, if any one eat, he shall dye with laughing. The Tortoise
also when he is hunted by the Adder, eats Origanum, and is thereby
strengthened: and the Stork, when he has eat Snakes, seeks for a remedy in
Origanum: and the Weesell, when he goes to fight with the Basilisk, eats Rue,
whence we come to know that Orgianum, and Rue are effectual against poison. So
in some Animals there is an imbred skill, and medicinal art; for when the Toad
is wounded with a bite or poison of another Animal, he is wont to go to Rue,
or Sage, and Rub the place wounded, and so escapes the danger of the poison. So
men have learned many excellent remedies of diseases, and virtues of things
from bruits; So Swallows have showed us that Sallendine is very medicinable for
the sight, with which they cure the eyes of their young, and the pie when she
is sick, puts a Bay-leafe into her nest, and is recovered. In like manner,
Cranes, Daws, Partriges, Blackbirds purge their nauseous stomachs with the
same, with which also Crows allay the poison of the Chameleon; and the Lion, if
he be feavorish, is recovered by eating of an Ape. The Lapwing being surfetted
with eating of Grapes, cures himself with Southernwood; so the Hearts have
taught us that the Herb Ditany is very good to draw out Darts; for they being
wounded with an Arrow, cast it out by eating of this Herb: the same do Goats
in Candy. So Hinds, a little before they bring forth, purge themselves with a
certain Herb called Mountain Ofier. Also they that are hurt with Spiders, seek
a remedy by eating of Crabs: Swine also being hurt by Snakes cure themselves by
eating of them; and Crows when they perceive they are poisoned with a kind of
French poison, seek for cure in the Oak; Elephants, when they have swallowed a
Chameleon help themselves with the wild-olive. Bears being hurt with Mandrakes,
escape the danger by eating of Pismires. Geese, Ducks, and such like watery
foul, cure themselves with the Herb called wall-sage. Pigeons, Turtles, Hens,
with the Herb called Pellitory of the wall. Cranes with Bull-rushes. Leopards
cure themselves, being hurt, with the Herb called Wolfes-bane, by man's dung:
Boars with Ivy, Hinds with the Herb called Cinnara.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Inclinations of Enmities.
ON the contrary there are inclinations of Enmities, and they are as it were
the odium, and anger, indignation, and a certain kind of obstinate contrariety
of nature, so that any thing shuns its contrary, and drives it away out of its
presence. Such kind of inclinations has Rhubarb against Choler, Treacle
against poison, the Saphir Stone against hot biles, and feavorish heats, and
diseases of the eyes; the Amethyst against drunkenness, the Jasper against Flux
of blood, and offensive imaginations, the Emrald, and Agnus Castus against
Lust, Achates against poison, Piony against the Falling sickness, Coral
against the ebullition of black Choler, and pains of the stomach. The Topaze
against spiritual heats, such as are coveteousness, lust, and all manner of
excesses of love. The like inclination is there also of Pismires against the
Herb Origanu^, and the wing of a Bat, and the heart of a Lapwing, from the
presence of which they fly. Also Origanum is contrary to a certain poisonous
fly, which cannot endure the Sun, and resists Salamanders, and loathes Cabbage
with such a deadly hatred, that they destroy one the other; so Cucumbers hate
oil, and will run themselves into a ring least they should touch it. And it is
said that the Gall of a Crow makes men afraid, and drives them away where it
is, as also certain other things; so a Diamond does disagree with the
Loadstone, that being set by it, it will not suffer Iron to be drawn to it; and
sheep fly from Frog-parsley as from some deadly thing: and that which is more
wonderful, nature has pictured the sign of this death in the livers of sheep,
in which the very figure of Frog-parsly being described, does nuturally appear;
So Goats do so hate Garden basil, as if there were nothing more pernicious. And
again, amongst Animals, Mice, and Weesels do disagree; whence it is said that
Mice will not touch Cheese, if the brains of a Weesel be put into the rennet,
and besides that the Cheese will not be corrupt with age. So a Lizard is so
contrary to Scorpions, that it makes them afraid with its very sight, as also
it puts them into a cold sweat, therefore they are killed with the oil of
them, which oil also cures the wounds made by Scorpions. There is also an
enmity betwixt Scorpions, and Mice: wherefore if a Mouse be applied to a prick
or wound made by a Scorpion, it cures it, as it is reported. There is also an
enmity betwixt Scorpions, and Stalabors, Aspes, and Waspes. It is reported also
that nothing is so much an enemy to Snakes as Crabs, and that if Swine be hurt
therewith they eat them, and are cured. The Sun also being in Cancer, Serpents
are tormented. Also the Scorpion, and Crocodile kill one the other; and if the
Bird Ibis does but touch a crocodile with one of his feathers, he makes him
immovable; the Bird called Bustard flies away at the sight of a horse; and a
Heart runs away at the sight of a Ram, as also of a Viper. An Elephant trembles
at the hearing of the grunting of a Hog, so does a Lion at the sight of a Cock:
And Panthers will not touch them that are anointed all over with the broth of
a Hen, especially if Garlic has been boiled in it. There is also enmity
betwixt Foxes, and Swans, Bulls, and Daws. Amongst Birds also some are at a
perpetual strife one with another, as also with other Animals, as Daws, and
Owls, the Kite, and Crows, the Turtle, and Ring-taile, Egepis, and Eagles,
Hearts, and Dragons. Also amongst Water Animals there is an enmity, as betwixt
Dolphins, and Whirpools, Mullets, and Pikes, Lampreys, and Congers: Also the
fish called Pourcontrel makes the Lobster so much afraid, that the Lobster
seeing the other but near him is struck dead. The Lobster, and Conger tear one
the other. The Civet Cat is said to stand so in awe of the Panther, that he
has no power to resist him, or touch his skin; and they say that if the skins
of both of them be hanged up one against the other, the hairs of the Panthers
skin fall off. And Orus Apollo says in his Hiereglyphicks, if any one be girt
about with the skin of the Civet Cat, that he may pass safely through the
middle of his enemies, and not at all be afraid. Also the Lamb is very much
afraid of the Wolf and slies from him. And they say that if the tail, or skin,
or head of a Wolf be hanged upon the sheep-coate, the sheep are much troubled,
and cannot eat their meat for fear. And Pliny makes mention of a Bird called
Marlin, that breaks Crows Eggs; whose young are annoyed by the Fox that she
also will pinch, and pull the Foxes whelps, and the Fox her self also: which
when the Crows see, they help the Fox against her, as against a common enemy.
The little Bird called a Linnet living in Thistles, hates Asses, because they
eat the Flowers of Thistles. Also there is such a bitter enmity betwixt the
little Bird called Esalon, and the Ass, that their blood will not mix together,
and that at the braying of the Ass both the eggs and young of the Esalon
perish. There is also such a disagreement betwixt the Olive Tree and a Harlot,
that if she Plant it, it will either be always unfruitful, or altogether
wither. A Lion fears nothing so much as fired Torches, and will be tamed by
nothing so much as by these: and the Wolf fears neither sword, nor spear, but a
stone, by the throwing of which a wound being made, worms breed in the Wolf. A
Horse fears a Camel, so that he cannot endure to see so much as his picture.
An Elephant when he rages, is quieted by seeing of a Cock. A Snake is afraid
of a man that is naked, but pursues a man that is clothed. A mad Bull is tamed
by being tied to a Fig Tree. Amber draws all things to it besides Garden
Basil, and those things, which are smeared with oil, betwixt which there is a
kind of a natural Antipathy.

CHAP. XIX. How the Virtues of things are to be tried and found out, which are
in them specifically, or any one Individual by way of special gift.
MOreover thou must consider that the Virtues of things are in some things
according to the species, as boldness, and courage in a Lion, and Cock:
fearfulness in a Hare, or Lamb, ravenousness in a Wolf, treachery, and
deceitfulness in a Fox, flattery in a Dog, coveteousness in a Crow, and Daw,
pride in a Horse, anger in a Tygre, and Boar, sadness, and melancholy in a Cat,
lust in a Sparrow, and so of the rest. For the greatest part of natural
Virtues does follow the species. Yet some are in things individually; as there
be some men which do so wonderfully abhor the sight of a Cat, that they cannot
look upon her without quaking; which fear it is manifest is not in them as they
are men. And Avicen tells of a man that lived in his time, whom all poisonous
things did shun, all of them dying, which did by chance bite him, he himself
not being hurt, and Albertus reports that in a City of the Ubians he saw a
wench which would catch Spiders to eat them, and being much pleased with such a
kind of meat, was wonderfully nourished therewith. So is boldness in a Harlot,
fearfulness in a Thief. And upon this account it is that Philosophers say, that
any particular thing that never was sick, is good against any manner of
sickness: therefore they say that a bone of a dead man, which never had a
feavor, being laid upon the patient, frees him of his quartane. There are also
many singular virtues infused into particular things by Celestial bodies, as
we have showed before.

CHAP. XX. That natural Virtues are in some things throughout their whole
substance, and in other things in certain parts, and members.
AGain thou must consider, that the virtues of things are in some things in the
whole (i. e.) the whole substance of them, or in all their parts, as that
little fish Echeneis, which is said to stop a ship by its mere touch, this it
does not do according to any particular part, but according to the whole
substance. So the Civet Cat has this in its whole substance, that Dogs by the
very touch of his shadow hold their peace. So Salendine is good for the sight,
not according to any one, but all its parts, not more in the root then in the
leaves, and seeds; and so of the rest. But some virtues are in things according
to some parts of it, viz. only in the tongue, or eyes, or some other members,
and parts; so in the eyes of a Basilisk, is a most violent power to kill men,
as soon as they see them: the like power is there in the eyes of the Civet Cat,
which makes any Animal that it has looked upon, to stand still, to be amazed,
and not able to move it self. The like virtue is there in the eyes of some
Wolfes, which if they see a man first, make him amazed, and so hoarse, that if
he would cry out, he has not the use of his voice: Of this Virgil makes
mention, when he sings, Moeris is dumb, has lost his voice, and why?
The Wolf on Moeris first has cast his eye.
So also there were some certain women in Scythia, and amongst the Illyrians,
and Triballians, who as often as they looked angrily upon any man, were said to
slay him. Also we read of a certain people of Rhodes called Telchines, who
corrupted all things with their sight wherefore Jupiter drowned them. Therefore
Witches, when they would after this manner work by witchcraft, use the eyes of
such kind of Animals in their waters for the eyes, for the like effects. In
like manner do Pismires fly from the heart of a Lapwing, not from the head,
foot, or eyes. So the gall of Lizards being bruised in Water is said to gather
Weesels together, not the tail or the head of it; and the gall of Goats put
into the Earth in a brazen Vesel, gathers Frogs together; and a Goats liver is
an enemy to Butterflies and all Maggots, and Dogs shun them that have the heart
of a Dog about them, and Foxes will not touch those poultry that have eaten the
liver of a Fox. So diverse things have diverse virtues dispersed variously
through several parts, as they are from above infused into them according to
the diversity of things to be received; as in a man's body the bones receive
nothing but life, the eyes sight, the ears hearing. And there is in man's body a
certain little bone, which the Hebrews call LVZ, of the bigness of a pulse that
is husked, which is subject to no corruption, neither is it overcome with Fire,
but is always preserved unhurt, out of which, as they say, as a Plant out of
the seed, our Animal bodies shall in the Resurrection of the dead spring up
And these virtues are not cleared by reason, but by experience.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Virtues of things which are in them only in their life time,
and such as remain in them even after their death.
MOreover we must know that there are some properties in things only whilst
they live, and some that remain after their death. So the little fish Echeneis
stops the ships, and the Basilisk, and Catablepa kill with their sight, when
they are alive; but when they are dead do no such thing. So they say that in
the Colic, if a live Duck be applied to the belly, it takes away the pain, and
her self dies: like to this is that which Archytas says. If you take a heart
newly taken out of an Animal, and whilst it is yet warm, and hang it upon one
that has a quartane feavor, it drives it away. So if any one swallow the heart
of a Lapwing, or a Swallow, or a Weesel, or a Mole whilst it is yet warm with
natural heat, it shall be helpful to him for remembering, understanding, and
foretelling: Hence is this general rule, viz. That whatsoever things are taken
out of Animals, whether they be Stones, any Member, Excrements, as Hair, Dung,
Nails, they must be taken from those Animals, whilst they be yet living; and
if it be possible, that so they may be alive afterward. Whence they say, when
you take the tongue of a Frog, you must put the Frog into the water again, and
if you take the tooth of a Wolf, you must not kill the Wolf; and so of the
rest. So writes Democritus, if any one take out the tongue of a water-Frog, yet
living, no other part of the body sticking to it, and she be let go into the
Water again, and lay it upon the place where the heart beats, of a woman, she
shall answer truly whatsoever you ask her. Also they say, that if the eyes of a
Frog be before Sun rising bound to the sick party, and the Frog be let go again
blind into the Water, they will drive away a tertian ague; as also that they
will, being bound with the flesh of a Nightingale in the skin of a Heart, keep
one always watchful without sleep. Also the ray of the fork fish being bound
to the Navil, is said to make a woman have an easy travel, if it be taken from
it alive, and that put into the Sea again. So they say the right eye of a
Serpent being applied, does help the watering of the eyes, if the Serpent be
let go alive. And there is a certain fish, or great Serpent called Myrus, whose
eye, if it be pulled out, and bound to the forehead of the patient, is said to
cure the inflammation of the eyes, and that the eye of the fish grows again, and
that he is taken blind that did not let the fish go. Also the teeth of all
Serpents, being taken out whilst they are alive, and hanged about the patient,
are said to cure the quartane. So does the tooth of a Mole taken out whilst
she is alive, being afterward let go, cure the toothache: and Dogs will not
bark at those that have the tail of a Weesel that is escaped. And Democritus
relates that the tongue of a Chameleon, if it be taken from her alive, does
conduce to a good success in trials, and is profitable for women that are in
travel, if it be about the outside of the house, for you must take heed that it
be not brought into the house, because that would be most dangerous; Moreover
there be some properties that remain after death: and of these the Platonists
say, that they are things in which the Idea of the matter is less swallowed up,
in these, even after death that which is immortal in them, does not cease to
work wonderful things. So in the Herbs, and Plants pulled asunder, and dried,
that virtue is quick, and operative which was infused at first into them by the
Idea. Thence it is, that as the Eagle all her life time does overcome all other
birds: so also her feathers after her death destroy, and consume the feathers
of all other birds. Upon the same account does a Lions skin destroy all other
skins: and the skin of the Civet Cat destroys the skin of the Panther: and the
skin of a Wolf corrodes the skin of a Lamb: And some of these do not do it by
way of a corporeal contract, but also sometimes by their very sound. So a drum
made of the skin of a Wolf, makes a drum made of a Lamb skin not to sound. Also
a drum made of the skin of the fish called Rotchet, drives away all creeping
things, at what distance soever the sound of it is heard: and the strings of an
instrument made of the guts of a Wolf, and being strained upon a Harp, or Lute
with strings made of sheeps guts, will make no harmony.

CHAP. XXII. How inferior things are subjected to superior bodies, and how
the bodies, the actions, and dispositions of men are ascribed to Stars, and
Signs.
IT is manifest that all things inferior are subject to the superior, and
after a manner (as says Proclus) they are one in the other, viz. in inferior
are superior, and in superior are inferior: so in the Heaven are things
Terrestiall, but as in their cause, and in a Celestial manner; and in the
Earth are things Celestial, but after a Terrestiall manner, as in an effect.
So we say that there be here certain things which are Solary, and certain which
are Lunary, in which the Sun, and Moon make a strong impression of theirvertue.
Whence it is that these kind of things receive more operations, and properties,
like to those of the Stars, and Signs which they are under: So we know that
Solary things respect the heart, and head, by reason that Leo is the house of
the Sun, and Aries the exaltation of the Sun: so things under Mars are good for
the head, and testicles, by reason of Aries, and Scorpio. Hence they whose
senses fail, and heads ache by reason of drunkenness, if they put their
testicles into cold Water, or wash them with Vinegar, find present help. But in
reference to these it is necessary to know how man's body is distributed to
Planets, and Signs. Know therefore that according to the doctrine of the
Arabians, the Sun rules over the brain, heart, the thigh, the marrow, the right
eye, and the spirit; also the tongue, the mouth, and the rest of the Organs of
the senses, as well internal as external; also the hands, feet, legs, nerves,
and the power of imagination. That Mercury rules over the spleen, stomach,
bladder, womb, and right ear, as also the faculty of the common sense. That
Saturn rules over the liver, and fleshy part of the stomach. That Jupiter over
the belly, and navill, whence it is written by the Ancients, that the effigies
of a navil was laid up in the temple of Jupiter Hammon. Also some attribute to
him the ribs, breast, bowels, blood, arms, and the right hand, and left ear,
and the powers natural. And some set Mars over the blood, and veins, and
kidneys the bag of the gall, the buttocks, the back, and motion of the sperm,
and the irascible power. Again they set Venus over the kidneys, the testicles,
the privities, the womb, the seed, and concupiscible power; as also the flesh,
fat, belly, breast, navill, and all such parts as serve to venerall acts, also
the Ossacrum, the back bone, and loins; as also the head, mouth, with which
they give a kiss, as a token of love. Now the Moon, although she may challenge
the whole body, and every member thereof according to the variety of the
Signs: yet more particularly they ascribe to her the brain, lungs, marrow of
the back bone, the stomach, the menstrues, and all other excrements, and the
left eye, as also the power of increasing. But Hermes says, That there are
seven holes in the head of an Animal, distributed to the seven Planets, viz.
the right ear to Saturn, the left to Jupiter, the right nostrell to Mars, the
left to Venus, the right eye to the Sun, the left to the Moon, and the mouth to
Mercury. The several Signs also of the Zodiac take care of their members. So
Aries governs the head, and face, Taurus the neck, Gemini the arms, and
shoulders, Cancer the breast, lungs, stomach, and arms, Leo heart, stomach,
liver, and back, Virgo the bowels, and bottom of the stomach, Libra the
kidneys, thighs, and buttocks, Scorpius the genitals, the privities, and womb,
Sagittarius the thigh, and groins, Capricornus the knees, Aquarius the legs and
shins, Pisces the feet. And as the triplicities of these Signs answer one the
other, and agree in Celestials, so also they agree in the members, which is
sufficiently manifest by experience, because with the coldness of the feet, the
belly, and breast are affected, which members answer the same triplicity;
whence it is, if a medicine be applied to the one, it helps the other, as by
the warming of the feet, the pain of the belly cease. Remember therefore this
order, and know, that things which are under any one of the Planets, have a
certain particular aspect, or inclination to those members that are attributed
to that Planet, and especially to the houses, and exaltations thereof. For the
rest of the dignities, as those triplicities, and marks, and face are of little
account in this; upon this account therefore Piony, Balm, Clove-gilliflowers,
Citronpils, sweet Majoram, Cynnamon, Saffron, Lignum Aloes, Frankincense,
Amber, Musk, and Myrrh help the head, and heart; by reason of Sol, Aries, and
Leo: so does Rib-wort, the Herb of Mars, help the head, and testicles by
reason of Aries, and Scorpio: and so of the rest. Also all things under Saturn
conduce to sadness, and melancholy; those under Jupiter to mirth, and honor;
those under Mars to boldness, contention, and anger; those under the Sun to
glory; victory, and courage; those under Venus to love, lust, and
concupiscence; those under Mercury to Eloquence; those under the Moon to a
common life. Also all the actions, and dispositions of men are distributed
according to the Planets. For Saturn governes old men, Monks, melancholy
men, and hid treasures; and those things which are obtained with long journies,
and difficulty; but Jupiter, those that are Religious, Prelates, Kings, and
Dukes, and such kind of gains that are got lawfully: Mars rules over Barbers,
Surgeons, Physicians, Sergents, Executioners, Butchers, all that make fires
Bakers, Soldiers, who are every where called Matial men. Also do the other
Stars signify their office, as they are described in the books of Astrologers.

CHAP. XXIII. How we shall know what Stars natural things are under, and what
things are under the Sun, which are called Solary.
NOw it is very hard to know, what Star, or Sign every thing is under: yet it
is known through the imitation of their rays, or motion, or figure of the
superiors. Also some of them are known by their colors and odours, also some
by the effects of their operations, answering to some Stars. So then Solary
things, or things under the power of the Sun are, amongst Elements, the lucid
flame; in the humors, the purer blood, and spirit of life; amongst tastes, that
which is quick, mixed with sweetness. Amongst Metals, Gold by reason of its
splendour, and its receiving that from the Sun which makes it cordial. And
amongst stones, they which resemble the rays of the Sun by their golden
sparklings, as does the glittering stone Aetites which has power against the
Fallingsickness, and poisons: so also the stone, which is called the eye of the
Sun, being of a figure like to the Apple of the eye, from the middle whereof
shines forth a ray, it comforts the brain, and strengthens the sight; So the
Carbuncle which shines by night, has a virtue against all aerie, and vaporous
poison: so the Chrysolite stone is of a light green color, in which, when it
is held against the Sun, there shines forth a golden Star; and this comforts
those parts that serve for breathing, and helps those that be Asthmaticall, and
if it be bored through, and the hole filled with the Mane of an Ass, and bound
to the left arm, it drives away idle imaginations, and melancholy fears, and
puts away foolishness: So the stone called Iris, which is like Crystal in
color, being often found with six corners, when under some roof part of it is
held against the rays of the Sun, and the other part is held in the shadow, it
gathers the rays of the Sun into it self, which, whilst it sends them forth,
by way of reflection, makes a Rainbow appear on the opposite wall. Also the
Stone Heliotropion green like the Jasper, or Emrald, beset with red specks,
makes a man constant, renowned, and famous, also it conduces to long life: And
the virtue of it indeed is most wonderful upon the beams of the Sun, which it
is said to turn into blood (e. i.) to appear of the color of blood, as if the
Sun were eclypsed, viz. When it is joined to the juice of an Herb of the same
name, and be put into a vessel full of Water: There is also another virtue of
it more wonderful, and that is upon the eyes of men, whose sight it does so
dim, and dazel, that it does not suffer him that carries it to see it, and this
it does not do without the help of the Herb of the said name, which also is
called Heliotropium, (e. i.) following the Sun. These virtues does Albertus
Magnus, and William of Paris confirm in their writings. The Hyacinth also has
a virtue from the Sun against poisons, and pestiferous vapors; it makes him
that carries it to be safe, and acceptable; it conduces also to riches, and
wit, it strengthens the hears; being held in the mouth, it does wonderfully
cheer up the mind. Also there is the stone Pyrophylus, of a red mixture, which
Albertus Magnus, says Aesculapius, makes mention of in one of his Epistles
unto Octavius Augustus, saying, that there is a certain poison so wonderful
cold, which preserves the heart of man being taken out from burning, so that if
for any time it be put into the Fire, it is turned into a stone, and this is
that stone which is called Pyrophylus, from the fire. It has a wonderful
virtue against poison, and it makes him that carries it, to be renowned and
dreadful to his enemies. But above all, that stone is most Solary, which
Apollonius is reported to have found, and is called Pantaura, which draws other
stones to it, as the Loadstone does Iron, most powerful against all poisons;
it is called by some Pantherus, because it is spotted like the beast called the
Panther. It is therefore also called Pantochras, because it contains all
colors. Aaron calls it Evanthum. There are also other Solary stones, as the
Topazius, Chrysopassus, the Rubine, and Balagius. So also is Auripigmentum, and
things of a golden color, and very lucid. Amongst plants also and trees, those
are Solary, which turn totwards the Sun, as the Marygold, and those which fold
in their leaves when the Sun is near upon setting, but when it rises unfold
their leaves by little and little. The Lote-tree also is Solary, as is manifest
by the figure of the fruit and leaves. So also Piony, Sallendine, Balm,
Ginger, Gentian, Dittany, and Vervin which is of use in prophesying, and
expiations, as also driving away evil spitits. The Bay Tree also is
consecrated to Phoebus, so is the Cedar the Palm tree the ash, the Ivy, and
Vine, and whatsoever repel poisons, and lightnings, and those things which
never fear the extremities of the Winter. Solary also are Mint, Mastick,
Zedoary, Saffron, Balsome, Amber, Musk, Yellow-honey, Lignum aloes, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Calamus, Aromaticus, Pepper, Frankincense, sweet Majoram, and
Libanotis, which Orpheus calls the sweet perfume of the Sun. Amongst Animals
those are Solary which are magnanimous, courageous, ambitious of victory, and
renown: as the Lion, King of beasts, the Crocodile, the spotted Wolf, the Ram,
the Boar, the Bull, King of the herd, which was by the Egyptians at Heliopolis
dedicated to the Sun, which they call Verites; and an Ox was consecrated to
Apis in Memphi, and in Herminthus a Bull by the name of Pathis. The Wolf also
was consecrated to Apollo, and Latona. Also the beast called Baboon is Solary,
which twelve times in a day, viz. every hour barks, and in time of Equinoctium
pisseth twelve times every hour: the same also it does in the night, whence the
Egyptians did Engrave him upon their Fountains. Also amongst birds these are
Solary, the Phoenix, being but one of that kind, and the Eagle, the Queen of
birds, also the Uultur, the Swan, and those which sing at the rising Sun, and
as it were calling upon it to rise, as the Cock, Crow, also the Hawk, which
because in the Divinity of the Egyptians is an emblem of the spirit, and light,
is by Porphyrius reckoned amongst the Solary birds. Moreover, all such things
as have some resemblence of the works of the Sun, as Worms shining in the
night, and the Betle, which is a creature that lies under Cow Dung, also
according to Appious interpretation, such whose eyes are changed according to
the course of the Sun, are accounted Solary, and those things which come of
them. And amongst fish, the Sea Calf is chiefly Solary, who does resist
lightning, also shell fish, and the fish called Pulmo, both which shine in the
night, and the fish called Stella for his parching heat, and the fish called
Strombi, that follow their King, and Margari, which also have a King, and being
dried, are hardened into a stone of a golden color.

CHAP. XXIV. What things are Lunary, or under the power of the Moon.
THese things are Lunary, amongst the Elements, viz. the Earth then the Water,
as well that of the Sea, as of the Rivers, and all moist things, as the
moisture of Trees, and Animals, especially they which are White, as the Whites
of Eggs, fat, sweat, phlegm, and the superfluities of bodies. Amongst tastes,
salt, and insipid: amongst Metals, Silver; amongst stones, Crystal, the Silver
Marcasite, and all those stones that are White, and Green. Also the stone
Selenites (e. i.) Lunary, shining from a white body, with a yellow brightness,
imitating the motion of the Moon having in it the figure of the Moon which
daily increases, or decreaseth as does the Moon. Also Pearls, which are
generated in shells of fishes from the droppings of Water, also the Berill.
Amongst Plants and Trees, these are Lunary, as the Selenotropion, which turns
toward the Moon, as does the Heliotropion toward the Sun, and the Palm tree
sends forth a bough at every rising of the Moon; Hyssope also, and Rosemary,
Agnus Castu, and the Olive Tree, are Lunary. Also the Herb Chinosta, which
increases, and decreaseth with the Moon, viz. in substance and number of
leaves, not only in Sap, and virtue, which indeed is in some sort common to all
Plants, except Onions, which are under the influence of Mars, which have
contrary properties; As amongst flying things the Saturnine bird, called a
Quail is a great enemy to the Moon and Sun. Lunary Animals are such as delight
to be in man's company, and such as do naturally excel in love, or hatred, as
all kinds of Dogs: The Chameleon also is Lunary, which always assumes a color
according to the variety of the color of the object: as the Moon changes her
nature according to the variety of the Sign which it is found in. Lunary also
are Swine, Hinds, Goats, and all Animals whatsoever, that observe, and imitate
the motion of the Moon: As the Baboon, and Panther, which is said to have a
spot upon her shoulder like the Moon, increasing into a roundness, and having
horns that bend inwards. Cats also are Lunary, whose eyes become greater or
less, according to the course of the Moon: and those things which are of like
nature, as Menstruous blood, of which are made wonderful strange things by
Magicians; The Civet-Cat also changing her sex, being obnoxious to diverse
Sorceries, and all Animals that live in water as well as on land: as Otters,
and such as prey upon fish. Also all Monstrous beasts, such as without any
manifest seed are equivocally generated, as Mice, which sometimes are generated
by Coition, sometimes of the putrefaction of the Earth. Amongst foul, Geese,
Ducks, Didoppers, and all kind of watery fowl as prey upon fish, as the Heron,
and those that are equivocally produced, as Wasps of the Carkases of horses:
Bees of the putrefaction of Cows, small Flies of putrefied wine, and Betles of
the flesh of Asses; but most Lunary of all is the two-horned Betle, horned
after the manner of a Bull: which digs under Cow Dung, and there remains for
the space of twenty eight days, in which time the Moon measures the whole
Zodiac and in the twenty ninth day, when it thinks there will be a conjunction
of their brightness, it opens the dung and casts it into Water, from whence
then come Betles. Amongst fish these are Lunary, Aelurus, whose eyes are
changed according to the course of the Moon, and whatsoever observe the motion
of the Moon, as the Tortoise, the Echeneis, the Crab, Oisters, Cockles, and
Frogs.

CHAP. XXV. What things are Saturnine, or under the power of Saturn.
SAturnine things, amongst Elements, are Earth, and also Water: amongst humors,
black Choler that is moist, as well natural, as adventitious, adust Choler is
excepted. Amongst tastes, sour, tart, and dead. Amongst Metals, Lead, and Gold,
by reason of its weight, and the golden Marcasite. Amongst stones, the Onix,
the Ziazaa, the Camonius, the Saphir, the brown Jasper, the Chalcedon, the
Loadstone, and all dark, weighty, earthy things. Amongst Plants, and Trees the
Daffodill, Dragon-wort, Rue, Cummin, Hellebor, the tree from whence Benzoine
comes, Mandrake, Opium, and those things which stupifie, and those things which
are never sown, and never bear fruit, and those which bring forth berries of a
dark color, and black fruit, as the black Fig Tree, the Pine Tree, the
Cypress-tree, and a certain tree used at burials, which never springs afresh
with berries, rough, of a bitter taste, of a strong smell, of a black shadow,
yielding a most sharp pitch, bearing a most unprofitable fruit, never dies with
age, deadly, dedicated to Pluto, as is the Herb pas-flower, with which they
were wont Anciently to strew the graves before they put the dead bodies into
them, wherefore it was lawful to make their Garlands at feasts with all
Herbs, and Flowers besides pas-flower, because it was mournful, and not
conducing to mirth. Also all creeping Animals, living apart, and solitary,
nightly, sad, contemplative, dull, covetous, fearful, melancholy, that take
much pains, slow, that feed grossly, and such as eat their young. Of these kinds
therefore are the Mole, the Asses, the Wolf, the Hare, the Mule, the Cat, the
Camel, the Bear, the Hog, the Ape, the Dragon, the Basilisk, the Toad, all
Serpents, and creeping things, Scorpious, Pismires, and such things as proceed
from putrefaction in the Earth, in Water, or in the ruins of houses, as Mice,
and many sorts of Vermin. Amongst birds those are Saturnine, which have long
necks, and harsh voices, as Cranes, Estriches, and Peacocks, which are
dedicated to Saturn, and Juno. Also the scrich-Owle, the horn-Owle, the Bat,
the Lapwing, the Crow, the Quail, which is the most envious bird of all.
Amongst fishes, the Eel, living apart from all other fish; the Lamprey, the
Dog-fish, which devours her young, also the Tortoise, Oisters, Cockles, to
which may be added Sea-spunges, and all such things as come of them.

CHAP. XXVI. What things are under the power of Jupiter, and are called Jovial.
THings under Jupiter, amongst Elements, are the Air: amongst humors, blood,
and the spirit of life, also all things which respect the increase,
nourishment, and vegetation of the life. Amongst tastes such as are sweet, and
pleasant. Amongst Metals, Tin, Silver, and Gold, by reason of their
temperateness: Amongst stones, the Hyacinth, Beril, Saphir, the Emrald, green
Jasper, and aerie colors: Amongst Plants and Trees, Seagreen, Garden Basil,
Bugloss, Mace, Spike, Mints, Mastick, Elicampane, the Violet, Darnell, Henbane,
the Poplar tree, and those which are called lucky trees, as the Oak, the tree
Aesculus, which is like an Oak, but much bigger, the Holm tree, the Beech tree,
the Hasle tree, the Service tree, the white Fig tree, the Pear tree, the Apple
tree, the Vine, the Plum tree, the Ash, the Dog-tree, and the Olive tree, and
also Oil. Also all manner of Corn, as Barley, Wheat, also Raisins, Licorish,
Sugar, and all such things whose sweetness is manifest, and subtle, partaking
somewhat of an astringent, and sharp taste, as are Nuts, Almonds, Pine-apples,
Filberds, Pistake Nuts, roots of Peony. Mirabolaus, Rhubarb, and Manna, Orpheus
adds Storax. Amongst Animals such as have some stateliness, and wisdom in them,
and those which are mild, well trained up, and of good dispositions, as the
Heart, Elephant, and those which are gentle, as the Sheep, and Lambs: Amongst
birds, those that are of a temperate complexion, as Hens, together with the
Yolk of their Eggs. Also the Partridge, the Pheasant, the Swallow, the
Pelican, the Cuckoo, the Stork, birds given to a kind of devotion which are
Emblemes of gratitude. The Eagle is dedicated to Jupiter, she is the Ensign of
Emperors, and an Emblem of Justice, and Clemency. Amongst fish, the Dolphin,
the fish called Anchia, the Sheath fish, by reason of his devoutness.

CHAP. XXVII. What things are under the power of Mars, and are called Martial.
THese things are Martial, amongst Elements, Fire, together with all adust,
and sharp things: Amongst humors, Choler; also bitter tastes, tart, and
burning the tongue, and causing tears: Amongst Metals, Iron, and red Brass; and
all fiery, red, and sulphurous things: Amongst Stones the Diamond, Loadstone,
the Boodstone, the Jasper, the stone that consists of diverse kinds, the
Amethist. Amongst Plants, and Trees, Hellebor, Garlic, Euphorbium, Cartabana,
Armoniack, Radish, the Laurel, Wolfs-bane, Scammony, and all such as are
poisonous, by reason of too much heat, and those which are beset round about
with prickles, or by touching the skin, burn it, prick it, or make it swell, as
Cardis, the Nettle, Crowfoot, and such as being eaten cause tears, as Onyons,
Ascolonia, Leeks, Mustardseed, and all thorny Trees, and the Dogtree, which is
dedicated to Mars. And all such Animals as are warlike, ravenous, bold, and of
clear fancy, as the Horse, Mule, Goat, Kid, Wolf, Libard, the wild Ass;
Serpents also, and Dragons full of displeasure, and poison; also all such as
are offensive to men, as Gnats, Flies, Baboon, by reason of his anger. All
Birds that are ravenous, devour flesh, break bones, as the Eagle, the Faulcon,
the Hawk, the Vultur; and those which are called the fatal Birds, as the
Horn-Owl, the Scrich-Owl, Castrels, Kites, and such as are hungry, and
ravenous, and such as make a noise in their swallowing, as Crows, Daws, the
Pie, which above all the rest is dedicated to Mars. And amongst Fishes, the
Pike, the Barbell, the Fork-fish, the Fish that has horns like a Ram, the
Sturgeon, the Glaucus, all which are great devourers, and ravenous.

CHAP. XXVIII. What things are under the power of Venus, and are called
Venereall.
THese things are under Venus, amongst Elements, Air, and Water; amongst
humors, Phlegm, with Blood, Spirit, and Seed; amongst tastes, those which are
sweet, unctuous, and delectable; amongst Metals, Silver, and Brass, both
yellow, and red; amongst Stones, the Berill, Chrysolite, Emrald, Saphir, green
Jasper, the Corneola, the stone Aetites, the Lazull stone, Coral, and all of a
fair, various, white, and green Color; amongst Plants and Trees the Vervin,
Violet, Maidenhaire, Valerian, which by the Arabian is called Phu; also Thyme,
the gum Ladanum, Amber grise, Musk, Sanders, Coriander, and all sweet perfumes,
and delightful, and sweet fruits, as sweet Pears, Figs, Pomegranats, which the
Poets say was, in Cyprus, first sown by Venus. Also the Rose of Lucifer was
dedicated to her, also the Myrtle tree of Hesperus. Moreover all luxurious,
delicious Animals, and of a strong love, as Dogs, Conies, stinking Sheep, and
Goats, both female, and male, which generates sooner then any other Animal,
for they say that he couples after the seventh day of his being brought forth;
also the Bull for his disdain, and the Calf for his wantonness. Amongst birds
the Swan, the Wagtail, the Swallow, the Pelican, the Burgander, which are very
loving to their young. Also the Crow, and Pigeon, which is dedicated to Venus,
and the Turtle, one whereof was Commanded to be offered at the purification,
after bringing forth. The Sparrow also was dedicated to Venus, which was
Commanded in the Law to be used in the purification, after the Leprosy, a
martial disease, then which nothing was of more force to resist it. Also the
Egyptians called the Eagle Venus, because she is prone to Venery for after she
has been trod thirteen times in a day, if the Male call her, she runs to him
again. Amongst fishes, these are Venereall the lustful Pilchards, the
letcherous Gilthead, the Whiting for her love to her young, the Crab fighting
for his Mate, and Tithymallus for its fragrant, and sweet smell.

CHAP. XXIX. What things are under the power of Mercury, and are called
Mercuriall.
THings under Mercury are these; amongst Elements, Water, although it moves all
things indistinctly; amongst humors, those especially which are mixed, as also
the Animal spirit; amongst tastes those that are various, strange, and mixed:
amongst Metals, Quicksilver, Tin, the Silver Marcasite; amongst stones, the
Emrald, Achates, red Marble, Topaze, and those which are of diverse colors, and
various figures naturally, and those that are artificial, as glass, and those
which have a color mixed with yellow, and green. Amongst Plants, and Trees,
the Hazle, Five-leaved-grass, the Herb Mercury, Fumitary, Pimpernell, Majoram,
Parsley, and such as have shorter and less leaves, being compounded of mixed
natures, and diverse colors. Animals also, that are of quick sense, ingenious,
strong, inconstant, swift, and such as become easily acquainted with men, as
Dogs, Apes, Foxes, Weesels, the Heart, and Mule; and all Animals that are of
both sexes, and those which can change their Sex, as the Hare, Civet-Cat, and
such like. Amongst birds, those which are naturally witty, melodious, and
inconstant, as the Linet, Nightingale, Blackbird, Thrush, Lark, the
Gnat-sapper, the bird Calandra, the Parret, the Pie, the Bird Ibis, the bird
Porphyrio, the black Betle with one horn. And amongst fish, the fish called
Trochius, which goes into himself, also Pourcontrell for deceitfulness, and
changeableness, and the Fork fish for its industry; the Mullet also that shakes
off the bait on the hook with his tail.

CHAP. XXX. That the Whole sublunary World, and those things which are in it,
are distributed to Planets.
MOreover whatsoever is found in the whole world is made according to the
governments of the Planets, and accordingly receives its virtue. So in Fire the
enlivening light thereof is under the government of the Sun, the heat of it
under Mars, in the Earth, the various superficies thereof under the Moon, and
Mercury, and the starry Heaven, the whole mass of it under Saturn, but in the
middle Elements, Air is under Jupiter, and Water the Moon, but being mixed are
under Mercury, and Venus. In like manner natural active causes observe the
Sun, the matter the Moon, the fruitfulness of active causes Jupiter, the
fruitfullness of the matter, Venus, the sudden effecting of any thing, Mars,
and Mercury, that for his vehemence, this for his dexterity, and manifold
virtue: But the permanent continuation of all things is ascribed to Saturn.
Also amongst Vegetables, every thing that bears fruit is from Jupiter, and
every thing that bears Flowers is from Venus, all Seed, and Bark is from
Mercury, and all roots from Saturn, and all Wood from Mars, and leaves from
the Moon. Wherefore all that bring forth fruit, and not Flowers, are of Saturn
and Jupiter, but they that bring forth Flowers, and Seed, and not fruit, are of
Venus, and Mercury; These which are brought forth of their own accord without
Seed, are of the Moon, and Saturn; All beauty is from Venus, all strength from
Mars, and every Planet rules, and disposes that which is like to it. Also in
stones, their weight, Clamminess, Sliptickness is of Saturn, their use, and
temperament of Jupiter, their hardness from Mars, their life from the Sun,
their beauty and fairness from Venus, their occult virtue from Mercury, their
common use from the Moon.

CHAP. XXXI. How Provinces, and Kingdoms are distributed to Planets.
MOreover the whole Orb of the Earth is distributed by Kingdoms, and Provinces
to the Planets, and Signs: For Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria, India, Arriana,
Gordiana, (many of which countries are in the lesser Asia) are under Saturn
with Capricorn; but with Aquarius, under him are the Sauromatian Country,
Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia, Phazania, Media, Aethiopia, which Countries for the
most part belong to the more inward Asia. Under Jupiter with Sagittarius are
Tuscana, Celtica, Spain, and happy Arabia: under him with Pisces, are Lycia,
Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Nasamonia, and Lybia. Mars with Aries
governs Britany, France, Germany, Bastarnia, the lower parts of Syria, Idumea,
and Judea: with Scorpio, he rules Syria, Comagena, Cappadocia, Metagonium,
Mauritania, and Getulia. The Sun with Leo governs Italy, Apulia, Sicilia,
Phenicia, Chaldea, and the Orchenians. Venus with Taurus governs the Isles
Cyclades, the Seas of little Asia, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Persia: but with
Libra she commands the people of the Island Bractia, of Caspia, of Seres, of
Thebais, of Oasis, and of Troglodys. Mercury with Gemini, rules Hircania,
Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the lower Egypt: but with Virgo,
Greece, Achaia, Creta, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Ela, whence they of
that place are in Scripture called Elamites. The Moon with Cancer governs
Bithivia, Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia Africa, Carthage, and all Carchedonia.
These we have in this manner gathered from Ptolomies opinion, to which
according to the writings of other Astrologers many more may be added. But he
which knows how to compare these divisions of Provinces according to the
divisions of the Stars, with the Ministry of the ruling-Intelligencies, and
blessings of the Tribes of Israel, the lots of the Apostles, and typical
seals of the sacred Scripture, shall be able to obtain great and prophetical
oracles concerning every Region, of things to come.

CHAP. XXXII. What things are under the Signs, the fixed Stars, and their
Images.
THe like consideration is to be had in all things concerning the figures of
the fixed Stars: so they will have the Terrestiall Ram to be under the rule of
the Celestial Aries: and the Terrestiall Bull, and Ox to be under the
Celestial Taurus. So also that Cancer should rule over Crabs, and Leo over
Lions: Virgo over Virgins, and Scorpio over Scorpions. Capricorn over Goats.
Sagittarius over Horses, and Pisces over Fishes. Also the Celestial Ursa over
Bears, Hydra over Serpents, and the Dog Star over Dogs, and so of the rest. Now
Apuleius distributes certain and peculiar Herbs to the Signs, and Planets,
viz. to Aries the Herb Sange, to Taurus Vervine that grows straight, to Gemini
Vervine that grows bending, to Cancer Comfrey, to Leo Sowbread, to Virgo
Calamint, to Libra Mug-wort, to Scorpio Scorpion-grass, to Sagittarius
Pimpernell, to Capricorn the Dock, to Aquarius Dragonwort, to Pisces Hart-wort.
And to the Planets these, viz. to Saturn Sen-green, to Jupiter Agrimony, to
Mars Sulphurwort, to the Sun Marygold, to Venus Wound-wort, to Mercury
Mulleine, to the Moon, Peony. But Hermes, whom Albertus follows, distributes to
the Planets these, viz. to Saturn the Daffodill, to Jupiter Henbane, to Mars
Rib-wort, to the Sun Knotgrass, to Venus Vervine, to Mercury Cinquefoile, to
the Moon, Goos foot. We also know by experience that Asparagus is under Aries,
and Garden-basill under Scorpio; For of the shavings of Rams horn sowed, comes
forth Asparagus, and Garden Basil rubbed betwixt two stones, produces
Scorpions. Moreover I will according to the doctrine of Hermes, and Thebit
reckon up some of the more eminent Stars, whereof the first is called the head
of Algol, and amongst stones, rules over the Diamond, amongst Plants, black
Hellebor, and Mugwort. The second are the Pleiades, or seven Stars, which
amongst stones, rule over Crystal, and the stone Diodocus; amongst Plants, the
Herb Diacedon, and Frankincense, and Fennill: and amongst Metals,
Quicksilver. The third is the Star Aldeboran, which has under it, amongst
stones, the Carbuncle, and Ruby: amongst Plants, the Milky Thistle, and
Matry-silva. The fourth is called the Goat-Star, which rules, amongst stones,
the Saphir, amongst Plants, Horehound, Mint, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The fifth
is called the great Dog Star, which amongst stones, rules over the Berill:
amongst Plants, Savin, Mugwort, and Dragonwort: and amongst Animals the tongue
of a Snake. The sixth is called the lesser Dog Star, and amongst stones, rules
over Achates: amongst Plants the Flowers of Marigold, and Penyroial. The
seventh is called the Heart of the Lion, which amongst stones, rules over the
Granate; amongst Plants, Sallendine, Mugwort, and Mastick. The eighth is the
Tail of the lesser Bear, which amongst stones rules over the Loadstone,
amongst Herbs, Succory, whose leaves, and Flowers turn toward the North, also
Mugwort, and the flowers of Perwinckle; and amongst Animals the tooth of a
Wolf. The ninth is called the Wing of the Crow, under which, amongst stones,
are such stones as are of the Color of the black Onyx stone: amongst Plants
the Bur. Quadraginus, Henbane, and Comfrey; and amongst Animals the tongue of a
Frog. The tenth is called Spica, which has under it, amongst stones, the
Emrald: amongst Plants, Sage, Trifoile, Perwinkle, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The
eleventh is called Alchamech, which amongst stones, rules over the Jasper:
amongst Plants the Plantain. The twelfth is called Elpheia, under this, amongst
stones, is the Topaze; amongst Plants, Rosemary, Trifoile, and Ivy. The
thirteenth is called the Heart of the Scorpion, under which, amongst stones, is
the Sardonius, and Amythist; amongst Plants long Aristolochy, and Saffron. The
fourteenth is the Falling Vultur, under which, amongst stones, is the
Chrysolite: amongst Plants Succory, and Fumitary. The fifteenth is the Tail of
Capricorn under which, amongst stones, is the Chalcedone: amongst Plants,
Majoram, Mugwort, and Nip, and the root of Mandrake. Moreover this we must
know, that every stone, or Plant, or Animal, or any other thing is not
governed by one Star alone, but many of them receive influence, not separated,
but conjoined, from many Stars. So amongst stones, the Chalcedony is under
Saturn, and Mercury, together with the Tail of Scorpion, and Capricorn. The
Saphir under Jupiter, Saturn, and the Star Alhajoth; Tutia is under Jupiter,
and the Sun and Moon, the Emrald under Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury, and the
Star Spica. The Amethyst, as says Hermes, is under Mars, Jupiter, and the
Heart of the Scorpion. The Jasper which is of diverskinds is under Mars,
Jupiter, and the Star Alchamech, the Chrysolite is under the Sun, Venus, and
Mercury, as also under the Star which is called the falling Vultur; the Topaze
under the Sun, and the Star Elpheia: the Diamond under Mars, and the Head of
Algol. In like manner amongst Vegetables, the Herb Dragon is under Saturn,
and the Celestial Dragon, Mastick, and Mints, are under Jupiter, and the Sun;
but Mastick is also under the Heart of the Lion, and Mint under the Goat star:
Hellebor is dedicated to Mars, and the Head of Algol, Moss, and Sanders, to
the Sun, and Venus: Coriander to Venus, and Saturn. Amongst Animals, the Sea
Calf is under the Sun, and Jupiter; The Fox, and Ape under Saturn, and
Mercury: and Domestical Dogs under Mercury, and the Moon And thus we have
showed more things in these inferiors, by their superiors.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Seals, and Characters of Natural things.
ALl Stars have their peculiar Natures, properties, and conditions, the Seals
and Characters whereof they produce through their rays even in these inferior
things, viz. in Elements, in Stones, in Plants, in Animals, and their members,
whence every thing receives from an harmonious disposition, and from its Star
shining upon it, some particular Seal, or Character stamped upon it, which is
the significator of that Star, or harmony, containing in it a peculiar virtue
differing from other virtues of the same matter, both generically,
specifically, and numerically. Every thing therefore has its Character pressed
upon it by its Star for some peculiar effect, especially by that Star which
does principally govern it: And these Characters contain, and retain in them
the peculiar natures, virtues, and roots of their Stars, and produce the like
operations upon other things, on which they are reflected, and stir up, and
help the influencies of their Stars, whether they be Planets, or fixed Stars,
and figures, and Celestial signs, viz. as often as they shall be made in a fit
matter, and in their due, and accustomed times. Which ancient wise men
considering, such as labored much in the finding out of the occult properties
of things, did set down in writing the images of the Stars, their figures,
Seals, Marks, Characters, such as nature her self did describe by the rays of
the Stars, in these inferior bodies, some in stones, some in Plants, and
joints, and knots of boughs and some in diverse members of Animals. For the
Bay Tree, the Lote-tree, the Marygold are Solary Plants, and in their roots and
knots being cut off, show the Characters of the Sun, so also in the bone, and
shoulderblades in Animals: whence there arose a spatulary kind of divining (i.
e.) by the shoulder-blades and in stones, and stony things the Characters, and
images of Celestial things are often found. But seeing that in so great a
diversity of things there is not a traditionall knowledge, only in a few
things, which humane understanding is able to reach: Therefore leaving those
things which are to be found out in Plants, and Stones, and other things, as
also, in the members of diverse Animals, we shall limit our selves to man's
nature only, which seeing it is the compleatest image of the whole universe,
containing in it self the whole heavenly harmony, will without all doubt
abundantly afford us the Seals, and Characters of all the Stars, and Celestial
influencies, and those as the more efficacious, which are less differing from
the Celestial nature. But as the number of the Stars is known to God alone, so
also their effects, and Seals upon these inferior things: wherefore no humane
intellect is able to attain to the knowledge of them. Whence very few of those
things became known to us, which the ancient Philosophers, and Chyromancers
attained to, partly by reason, and partly by experience, and there be many
things yet ly hid in the treasury of nature. We shall here in this place note
some few Seals, and Characters of the Planets, such as the ancient Chyromancers
knew in the hands of men. These does Julian call sacred, and divine letters,
seeing that by them according to the holy Scripture is the life of men writ in
their hands. And there are in all Nations, and Languages always the same, and
like to them, and permanent; to which were added, and found out afterward many
more, as by the ancient, so by latter Chyromancers. And they that would know
them must have recourse to their Volumes. It is sufficient here to show from
whence the Characters of Nature have their original, and in what things they
are to be enquired after.

There follow the Figures of Divine Letters.

The Letters, or Characters of Saturn.


The Letters, or Characters of Jupiter.


The Letters, or Characters of Mars.


The Letters, or Characters of the Sun.


The Letters, or Characters of Venus.


The Letters, or Characters of Mercury.


The Letters, or Characters of the Moon.


CHAP. XXXIV. How by Natural things, and their virtues we may draw forth, and
attract the influencies, and virtues of Celestial bodies.
NOw if thou desire to receive virtue from any part of the World, or from any
Star, thou shall (those things being used which belong to this Star) come under
its peculiar insluence, as Wood is fit to receive Flame, by reason of Sulphur,
Pitch, and Oil. Nevertheless when thou do to any one species of things, or
individual, rightly apply many things, which are things of the same subject
scattered amongst themselves, conformable to the same Idea, and Star, presently
by this matter so opportunely fitted, a singular gift is infused by the Idea,
by means of the soul of the world. I say opportunely fitted, viz. under a
harmony like to the harmony, which did infuse a certain virtue into the matter.
For although things have some virtues, such as we speak of, yet those virtues
do so ly hid that there is seldom any effect produced by them: but as in a
grain of Mustard seed bruised, the sharpness which lay hid is stirred up: and
as the heat of the fire does make letters apparently seen, which before could
not be read, that were writ with the juice of an Onion or milk: and letters
wrote upon a stone with the fat of a Goat, and altogether unperceived, when the
stone is put into Vinegar, appear and show themselves. And as a blow with a
stick stirs up the madness of a Dog, which before lay asleep, so does the
Celestial harmony disclose virtues lying in the water, stirs them up
strengthens them, and makes them manifest, and as I may so say, produces
that into Act, which before was only in power, when things are rightly exposed
to it in a Celestial season. As for example; If thou dest desire to attract
virtue from the Sun, and to seek those things that are Solary, amongst
Vegetables, Plants, Metals, Stones, and Animals, these things are to be used,
and taken chiefly, which in a Solary order are higher. For these are more
available: So thou shall draw a singular gift from the Sun through the beams
thereof, being seasonably received together, and through the spirit of the
world.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Mixtions of natural things one with another, and their
benefit.
IT is most evident, that in the inferior nature all the powers of superior
bodies are not found comprehended in any one thing, but are dispersed through
many kinds of things amongst us: as there are many Solary things, whereof every
one does not contain all the virtues of the Sun: but some have some properties
from the Sun, and others othersome. Wherefore it is sometimes necessary that
there be mixtions in operations, that if a hundred or a thousand virtues of the
Sun were dispersed through so many Plants, Animals, and the like, we may gather
all these together, and bring them into one form, in which we shall see all the
said virtues, being united, contained. Now there is a two fold virtue in
commixtion, one, viz. which was first planted in its parts, and is Celestial,
the other is obtained by a certain, and artificial mixtion of things mixed
amongst themselves, and of the mixtions of them according to certain
proportions, such as agree with the heaven under a certain Constellation; And
this virtue descends by a certain likeness, and aptness that is in things
amongst themselves toward their superiors, and as much as the following do by
degrees correspond with them that go before, where the patient is fitly applied
to its agent. So from a certain composition of Herbs. vapors, and such like,
made according to natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, there results a certain
common form, endowed with many gifts of the Stars: as in the honey of Bees,
that which is gathered out of the juice of innumerable Flowers, and brought
into one form, contains the virtue of all, by a kind of divine, and admirable
art of the Bees. Yet this is not to be less wondered at which Eudoxus Giudius
reports of an artificial kind of honey, which a certain Nation of Giants in
Lybia knew to make out of Flowers, and that very good, and not far inferior to
that of the Bees. For every mixtion, which consists of many several things, is
then most perfect, when it is so firmly compacted on all parts, that it becomes
one, is every where firm to it self, and can hardly be dissipated: as we
sometimes see stones, and diverse bodies to be by a certain natural power
conglutinated, and united, that they seem to be wholly onething: as we see two
trees by graffing to become one, also Oisters with stones by a certain occult
virtue of nature, and there have been seen some Animals which have been turned
into stones, and so united with the substance of the stone, that they seem to
make one body, and that also homogeneous. So the tree Ebeny is one while wood,
and another while stone. When therefore any one makes a mixtion of many matters
under the Celestial influencies, then the variety of Celestial actions on one
hand, and of natural powers on the other hand, being joined together does
indeed cause wonderful things, by ointments, by collyries, by fumes, and such
like, which viz. are read in the book of Chiramis, Archyta, Democritus, and
Hermes, who is named Alchorat, and of many others.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Union of mixed things, and the introduction of a more noble
form, and the Senses of life.
MOreover we must know, that by how much the more noble the form of any thing
is, by so much the more prone, and apt it is to receive, and powerful to act.
Then the virtues of things do then become wonderful, viz. when they are put to
matters that are mixed, and prepared in fit seasons, to make them alive, by
procuring life for them from the Stars, as also a sensible soul, as a more
noble form. For there is so great a power in prepared matters which we see do
then receive life, when a perfect mixtion of qualities seems to break the
former contrariety. For so much the more perfect life things receive, by how
much their temper is more remote from contrariety. Now the Heaven, as a
prevalent cause does from the beginning of every thing to be generated by the
concoction, and perfect digestion of the matter, together with life, bestows
Celestial influences, and wonderful gifts, according to the Capacity that is
in that life, and sensible soul to receive more noble, and sublime virtues. For
the Celestial virtue does otherwise lie asleep, as Sulphur kept from Flame,
but in living bodies it does always burn* as kindled Sulphur, then by its
vapor it fills all the places that are next to it; so certain wonderful works
are wrought, such as are read in the book of Nemith, which is tituled a Book of
the Laws of Pluto, because such kind of monstrous generations are not produced
according to the Laws of Nature. For we know that of Worms are generated Gnats,
of a Horse Waspes, of a Calf, and Ox Bees, of a Crab, his legs being taken of,
and he buried in the ground, a Scorpion; of a Duck dried into powder, and put
into Water, are generated Frogs; but if it be baked in a Pie, and cut into
pieces, and put into a moist place under the ground, Toads are generated of it:
of the Herb Garden Basil bruised betwixt two stones, are generated Scorpions,
and of the hairs of a menstruous Woman put under dung, are bred Serpents; and
the hair of a Horse tail put into Water, receives life, and is turned into a
pernicious Worm. And there is an art wherewith by a Hen sitting upon Eggs may
be generated a form like to a man, which I have seen and knew how to make,
which Magicians say has in it wonderful virtues, and this they call the true
Mandrake. You must therefore know which, and what kind of matters are either of
nature, or art, begun or perfected, or compounded of more things, and what
Celestial influencies they are able to receive. For a Congruity of natural
things is sufficient for the receiving of influcence from Celestial; because
when nothing does hinder the Celestials to send forth their lights upon
inferiors, they suffer no matter to be destitute of their virtue. Wherefore as
much matter as is perfect, and pure, is not unfit to receive the Celestial
influence. For that is the binding and continuity of the matter to the soul of
the world, which does daily flow in upon things natural, and all things which
nature has prepared, that it is impossible that a prepared matter should not
receive life, or a more noble form.

CHAP. XXXVII. How by some certain natural, and artificial preparations we
may attract certain Celestial, and vital gifts.
PLatonists, together with Hermes, say, and Jarchus Brachmanus, and the
Mecubals of the Hebrews confess, that all sublunary things are subject to
generation, and corruption, and that also there are the same things in the
Celestial world, but after a Celestial manner, as also in the intellectual
world, but in a far more perfect, and better fashion, and manner, but in the
most perfect manner of all in the examplary. And after this course, that every
inferior should in its kind answer its superior, and through this the supreme
it self, and receive from heaven that Celestial power which they call the
quintessence, or the spirit of the world, or the middle nature, and from the
intellectual world a spiritual and enlivening virtue transcending all
qualities whatsoever, and lastly from the exemplary or original world, through
the mediation of the other, according to their degree receive the original
power of the whole perfection. Hence every thing may be aptly reduced from
these inferiors to the Stars, from the Stars to their Intelligencies, and from
thence to the first cause it self; from the series, and order whereof whole
Magic, and all occult Philosophy flows: For every day some natural thing is
drawn by art, and some divine thing drawn by nature, which the Egyptians
seeing, called Nature a Magicianess, (i. e.) the very Magical power it self,
in the attracting of like by like, and of suitable things by suitable. Now such
kind of attractions by the mutual correspondency of things amongst themselves,
of superiors with inferiors, the Grecians called (...). So the earth agrees
with cold water, the water with moist Air, the Air with Fire, the Fire with
the Heaven in water; neither is Fire mixed with water, but by Air, nor the
Air with the Earth, but by water. So neither is the soul united to the body,
but by the spirit, nor the undestanding to the spirit but by the soul. So we
see when nature has framed the body of the infant, by this very preparative
she presently fetches the spirit from the Universe. This spirit is the
instrument to obtain of God the understanding, and mind in the soul, and body,
as in wood the dryness is fitted to receive oil, and the oil being imbibed is
food for the Fire, the Fire is the vehiculum of light. By these examples you
see how by some certain natural, and artificial preparations, we are in a
capacity to receive certain Celestial gifts from above. For stones, and Metals
have a correspondency with Herbs, Herbs with Animals, Animals with the
Heavens, the Heavens with Intelligencies and those with divine properties, and
attributes, and with God himself, after whose image, and likness all things are
created. Now the first Image of God is the world, of the world, man, of man,
beasts of beasts, the Zeophyton (i. e.) half Aniamll, and half Plant; of
Zeophyton, plants, of plants, metals, of metals, stones. And again in things
spiritual, the Plant agrees with a bruit in Vegetation, a bruit with a man in
sense, man with an Angel in understanding an Angel with God in immortality.
Divinity is annexed to the mind, the mind to the intellect, the intellect to
the intention, the intention to the imagination, the imagination to the senses,
the senses at last to things. For this is the band, and continuity of nature,
that all superior virtue does flow through every inferior with a long, and
continued series, dispersing its rays even to the very last things; and
inferiors through their superiors, come to the very supreme of all. For so
inferiors are successively joined to their superiors, that there proceeds an
influence from their head, the first cause, as a certain string stretched out,
to the lowermost things of all, of which string if one end be touched, the
whole does presently shake, and such a touch does sound to the other end, and
at the motion of the inferior, the superior also is moved, to which the other
does answer, as strings in a Lute well tuned.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How we may draw not only Celestial, and vital, but also
certain Intellectual and divine gifts from above.
MAgicians teach that Celestial gifts may through inferiors being conformable
to superiors be drawn down by opportune influencies of the Heaven; and so also
by these Celestial, the Celestial Angels, as they are servants of the Stars,
may be procured, and conveyed to us. Jamblichus, Proclus, and Synesius, with
the whole School of Platonists confirm, that not only Celestial, and vital,
but also certain Intellectual, Angelical, and divine gifts may be received
from above by some certain matters, having a natural power of divinity (i. e.)
which have a natural correspondency with the superiors, being rightly
received, and opportunely gathered together according to the rules of Natural
Philosophy, and Astronomy: And Mercurius Trismegistus writes, that an Image
rightly made of certain proper things, appropriated to any one certain Angel,
will presently be animated by that Angel. Of the same also Austin makes mention
in his eighth book De Civitate Dei. For this is the harmony of the world, that
things supercelestiall be drawn down by the Celestial, and super-naturall by
natural, because there is one operative virtue that is diffused through all
kinds of things, by which virtue indeed, as manifest things are produced out of
occult causes; so a Magician does make use of things manifest, to draw forth
things that are occult, viz. through the rays of the Stars, through fumes,
lights, sounds, and natural things, which are agreeable to Celestial: in
which, besides corporeal qualities, there is a kind of reason, sense, and
harmony, and incorporeall, and divine measures, and orders. So we read that the
Ancients were wont often to receive some divine, and wonderful thing by
certain natural things: so the stone that is bred in the Apple of the eye of a
Civet Cat, held under the tongue of a man, is said to make him to divine, or
prophecy: The same is Selenites, the Moon stone reported to do, so they say
that the Images of Gods may be called up by the stone called Anchitis, and that
the Ghosts of the dead may be, being called up, kept up by the stone
Synochitis. The like does the Herb Aglauphotis do, which is called Marmorites,
growing upon the Marbles of Arabia, as says Pliny, and the which Magicians
use. Also there is an Herb called Rheangelida, which Magicians drinking of can
prophecy. Moreover there are some Herbs by which the dead are raised to life;
whence Xanthus the Historian tells, that with a certain Hrarb called Balus, a
young Dragon being killed, was made alive again, also that by the same a
certain man of Tillum, whom a Dragon killed, was restored to life: and Juba
reports, that in Arabia a certain man was by a certain Herb restored to life.
But whether or no any such things can be done indeed upon man by the virtue of
Herbs, or any other natural thing, we shall discourse in the following
Chapter. Now it is certain, and manifest that such things can be done upon
other animals. So if flies, that are drowned, be put into warm ashes, they
revive. And Bees being drowned, do in like manner recover life in the juice of
the herb Nip; and Eels being dead for want of water, if with their whole
bodies they be put under mud in vinegar, and the blood of a Vultur being put to
them, will all of them in a few days recover life. They say that if the fish
Echeneis be cut into pieces, and cast into the sea, the parts will within a
little time come together, and live. Also we know that the Pelican does
restore her young to life, being klled, with her own blood.

CHAP. XXXIX That we may by some certain matters of the world stir up the Gods
of the world, and their ministering spirits.
NO man is ignorant that evil spirits, by evil, and profane Arts may be
raised up as Psellus says Sorcerers are wont to do, whom most detestable, and
abominable filthiness did follow, and accompany, such as were in times past in
the sacrifices of Priapus, and in the worship of the Idol which was called
Panor, to whom they did sacrifice with their privy members uncovered. Neither
to these is that unlike (if it be true, and not a fable) which is read
concerning the detestable heresy of old Churchmen, and like to these are
manifest in Witches and mischeivous women, which wickednesses the foolish
dotage of women is subject to fall into. By these, and such as these evil
spirits are raised. As a wicked spirit spoke once to John, of one Cynops a
Sorcerer; all the power, says he, of Satan dwells there, and he is entered into
a confederacy with all the principalities together, and likewise we, with him,
and Cynops obeys us, and we again obey him. Again, one the contrary side, no
man is ignorant that supercelestiall Angels or spirits may be gained by us
through good works, a pure mind, secret prayers, devout humiliation, and the
like. Let no man therefore doubt that in like manner by some certain matters of
the world, the Gods of the world may be raised by us, or at least the
ministering spirits, or servants of these Gods, and as Mercurius says, the airy
spirits, not supercelestiall, much less higher. So we read that the ancient
Priests made statues, and images, foretelling things to come, and infused into
them the spirits of the stars, which were not kept there by constraint in some
certain matters, but rejoicing in them, viz. as acknowledging such kinds of
matter to be suitable to them, they do always, and willingly abide in them, and
speak, and do wonderful things by them: no otherwise then evil spirits are
wont to do, when they possess men's bodies.

CHAP. XL. Of bindings, what sort they are of, and in what ways they are wont
to be done.
WE have spoken concerning the virtues, and wonderful efficacy of natural
things. It remains now that we understand a thing of great wonderment: and it
is a binding of men into love, or hatred, sickness or health, and such like.
Also the binding of thieves, and robbers, that they cannot steal in any place;
the binding of Merchants, that they cannot buy, or sell in any place; the
binding of an army, that they cannot pass over any bound; the binding of ships,
that no winds, though never so strong, shall be able to carry them out of the
Haven. Also the binding of a mill, that it can by no force whatsoever be turned
round: The binding of a Cisterne, or fountain, that the water cannot be drawn
up out of them: The binding of the ground, that it cannot bring forth fruit:
The binding of any place, that nothing can be built upon it: The binding of
fire, that though it be never so strong, can burn no combustible thing that is
put to it. Also the bindings of lightnings, and tempests, that they shall do no
hurt. Also the binding of dogs, that they cannot bark. Also the binding of
birds, and wild beasts, that they shall not be able to fly, or run away. And
such like as these, which are scarce credible, yet often known by experience.
Now there are such kind of bindings as these made by Sorceries, Collyries,
Unguents, love potions, by binding to, and hanging up of things, by rings, by
charms, by strong imaginations, and passions, by images, and characters, by
enchantments, and imprecations, by lights, by sound, by numbers, by words, and
names, invocations, sacrifices, by swearing, conjuring, consecrations,
devotions, and by diverse superstitions, and observations, and such like.

CHAP. XLI. Of Sorceries, and their power.
THe force of Sorceries is reported to be so great, that they are believed to
be able to subvert, consume, and change all inferior things, according to
Virgils Muse. Moeris for me these herbs in Pontus chose,
And curious drugs, for there great plenty grows;
I many times, with these, have Moeris spide
Changed to a wolf, and in the woods to hide:
From Sepulchers would souls departed charm,
And Corn bear standing from another Farm.
Also in an other place, concerning the companions of Ulysses, whom The cruel
Goddess Circe there invests
With fierce aspects, and changed to savage beasts.
And a little after, When love from Picus Circe could not gain
Him with her charming wand, and hellish bane
Changed to a bird, and spots his speckled wings
With sundry colors --


Now there are some kind of these sorceries mentioned by Lucan concerning that
Sorceress Thessala, calling up ghosts, where he says, Here all natures
products unfortunate;
Foam of mad Dogs, which waters fear and hate;
Guts of the Lynx; Hyena's knot imbred;
The marrow of a Heart with Serpents fed
Were not wanting; no not the sea Lamprey
Which stops the ships; nor yet the Dragons eye.


And such as Apuleius tells of concerning Pamphila, that Sorceress,
endeavoring to procure love; to whom Fotis a certain maid brought the hairs
of a goat (cut off from a bag or botle made with the skin thereof) instead of
Baeotius a young man's hairs: Now she (says he) being out of her wits for the
young man, goes up to the tyled rough, and in the upper part thereof makes a
great hole open to all the oriental, and other aspects, and most fit for these
her arts, and there privately worships, having before furnished her mournful
house with suitable furniture, with all kinds of spices, with plates of Iron,
with strange words engraven upon them, with sternes of ships that were cast
away, and much lamented, and with diverse members of buried carcasses cast
abroad: here noses, and fingers, there the fleshy nails of those that were
hanged, and in another place the blood of them that were murdered, and their
skulls mangled with the teeth of wild beasts; then she offers sacrifices (their
in chanted entralls lying panting) and sprinkles them with diverse kinds of
liquors; sometimes with fountain water, sometimes with cowes milk, sometimes
with mountain honey, and mead: Then she ties those hairs into knots, and lays
them on the fire, with diverse odours to be burnt, then presently with an
irresistible power of Magic, and blind force of the Gods, the bodies of those
whose hairs did smoke, and crash, assume the spirit of a man, and feel, and
hear, and walk, and come whither the stink of their hair led them, and instead
of Baeotius the young man, come skipping, and leaping with joy, and love into
the house. Austin also reports, that he heard of some women Sorceresses, that
were so versed in these kinds of arts, that by giving cheese to men, they could
presently turn them into working cattle, and the work being done, restored
them into men again.

CHAP. XLII. Of the wonderful virtues of some kinds of Sorceries.
NOw I will show you what some of the Sorceries are, that by the example of
these there may be a way opened for the consideration of the whole subject of
them. Of these therefore the first is menstruous blood, which, how much power
it has in Sorcery, we will now consider; for, as they say, if it comes over
new wine, it makes it sour, and if it does but touch the Vine it spoils it
for ever, and by its very touch it makes all Plants, and Trees barren, and they
that be newly set, to dye; it burns up all the herbs in the garden, and makes
fruit fall off from the Trees, it darkens the brightness of a looking glass,
dulls the edges of knives, and razors, dims the beauty of Ivory, and it makes
Iron presently rusty, it makes brass rust, and smell very strong: it makes dogs
mad, if they do but taste of it, and if they being thus mad shall bite any one,
that wound is incurable: it kills whole hives of Bees, and drives them from the
hives that are but touched with it: it makes linen black that are boiled, it
makes Mares cast their foal if they do but touch it, and makes women miscarry
if they be but smeared with it: it makes Asses barren as long as they eat of
the corn that has been touched with it. The ashes of menstruous clothes, if
they be cast upon purple garments that are to be washed, change the color of
them, and takes away colors from flowers. They say that it drives away
tertian, and quartane Agues, if it be put into the wool of a black Ram, and
tied up in a silver bracelet, as also if the soles of the patients feet be
noynted therewith, and especially if it be done by the woman her self the
patients not knowing of it; moreover it cures the fits of the falling sickness.
But most especially it cures them that are afraid of water, or drink after
they are bitten with a mad dog, if only a menstruuos cloth be put under the
cup. Besides, they report, that if menstruous women shall walk naked about the
standing corn, they make all cankars, worms, beetles, flies, and all hurtful
things fall off from the corn: but they must take heed that they do it before
Sun rising, or else they will make the corn to wither. Also they say they are
able to expel hail, tempests, and lightnings, more of which Pliny makes
mention of. Know this, that they are a greater poison if they happen in the
decrease of the Moon, and yet much greater, if they happen betwixt the
decrease, and change of the Moon: But if they happen in the Eclypse of the Moon
or Sun, they are an incurable poison. But they are of greatest force of all,
when they happen in the first years, even in the years of virginity, for if
they do but touch the posts of the house there can no mischief take effect in
it. Also they say that the threads of any garment touched therewith, cannot be
burnt, and if they be cast into the fire, it will spread no further. Also it is
said that the root of Peony being given with Castor, and smeared over with a
menstruous cloth, cures the falling sickness. Moreover if the stomach of a
Heart be burnt or roasted, and to it be put a perfuming made with a menstruous
cloth, it will make crass-bows useless for the killing of any game: The hairs
of a menstruous woman put under dung, breed Serpents: and if they be burnt,
will drive away Serpents with their smell. So great a poisonous force is in
them, that they are poison to poisonous creatures. There is also Hippomanes,
which amongst Sorceries is not the least taken notice of, and it is a little
venomous piece of flesh as big as a fig, and black, which is in the forehead of
a Colt newly foaled, which unless the Mare her self does presently eat, she
will never after love her foals, or let it suck. And for this cause they say
there is a most wonderful power in it to procure love, if it be powdered, and
drank in a cup with the blood of him that is in love. There is also another
Sorcery, which is called by the same name, viz. Hippomanes, viz. a venomous
humor, issuing out of the share of a Mare what time she desires a horse, of
which Virgill makes mention, when he sings Hence comes that poison which the
Shepherds call
Hippomanes, and from Mares groines does fall,
The woeful bane of cruel stepdames use
And with a charm amongst powerful drugs infuse.
Of this does Juvenall the Satyrist make mention. Hippomanes, poisons that
boiled are, and charms
Are given to Sons in law, with such like harms.


Apollonius also in his Argonanticks makes mention of the herb of Prometheus,
which he says grows from corrupt blood dropping upon the earth, whilst the
Vultur was gnawing upon the liver of Prometheus upon the hill Caucasus. The
flower of this herb, he says, is like Safforn, having a double stalk hanging
out, one further then another the length of a cubit, the root under the earth,
as flesh newly cut, sends forth a blackish juice as it were of a beech; with
which, says he, if any one shall after he has performed his devotion to
Proserpina, smear over his body, he cannot be hurt either with sword, or fire.
Also Saxo Gramaticus writes, that there was a certain man called Froton, who
had a garment, which when he had put on he could not be hurt with the point or
edge of any weapon. The civet Cat also abounds with Sorceries: for, as Pliny
reports, the posts of a door being touched with her blood, the Arts of Juglers,
and Sorcerers are so invallid, that the Gods cannot be called up, and will by
no means be persuaded to talk with them. Also that they that are noynted with
the ashes of the ankle bone of her left foot, being decocted with the blood of
a Weesell shall become odious to all. The same also is done with the eye, being
decocted. Also it is said that the straight gut is administered against the
injustice, and corruption of Princes, and great men in power, and for success
of Petitions, and to conduce to ending of suits, and controversies, if any one
has never so little of it about him, and that if it be bound unto the left
arm, it is such a present charm, that if any man do but look upon a woman, it
will make her follow him presently; and that the skin of her forehead does
withstand bewitchings. They say also that the blood of a Basilisk, which they
call the blood of Saturn, has such great force in Sorcery, that it procures
for him that carries it about him, good success of his Petitions, from great
men in power, and of his prayers from God, and also remedies of diseases, and
grant of any priveledge. They say also that a tyke, if it be pulled out of the
left care of a dog, and if be it altogether black, has great virtue in the
prognostic of life, for if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in,
who standing at his feet, and shall ask of him concerning his disease, there is
certain hope of life, and that he shall dye, if he make no answer. They say
also, that a stone that is bit with a mad dog has power to cause discord, if
it be put in drink, and that he shall not be barked at by dogs, that puts the
tongue of a dog in his shoe under his great toe, especially if the herb of
the same name, viz. houndstongue be joined with it. And that a membrane of the
secondines of a dog does the same; and that dogs will shun him that has a dogs
heart. And Pliny reports that there is a red toad that lives in briars, and
brambles, and is full of Sorceries, and does wonderful things: for the little
bone which is in his left side, being cast into cold water, makes it presently
very hot, by which also the rage of dogs is restrained, and their love is
procured, if it be put in drink; and if it be bound to any one, it stirs up
lust. On the contrary, the little bone which is on the right side, makes hot
water cold, and that it can never be hot again, unless that be taken out, also
it is said to cure quartanes if it be bound to the sick in a snakes skin, as
also all other feavors, and restrain love, and lust. And that the spleen, and
heart is an effectual remedy against the poisons of the said Toad. Thus much
Pliny writes. Also it is said that the sword, with which a man is slain, has
wonderful power in Sorceries: For if the snaffle of the bridle, or spurs be
made of it, they say that with these any horse, though never so wild, may be
tamed, and gentled: and that if a Horse should be shod with shoes made with
it, he would be most swift and fleet, and never, though never so hard rod,
tire. But yet they will that some Characters, and names should be written upon
it. They say also, if any man shall dip a sword, wherewith men were beheaded,
in wine; and the sick drink thereof, he shall be cured of his quartane. They
say also that a cup of liquor being made with the brains of a Bear, and drank
out of the skull, shall make him that drinks it, be as fierce, and as raging as
a Bear, and think himself to be changed into a Bear, and judge all things he
sees to be Bears, and so to continue in that madness, until the force of that
draught shall be dissolved, no other distemper being all this while perceived
in him.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Perfumes, or Suffumigations, their manner, and power.
SOme Suffumigations also, or perfumings, that are proper to the Stars, are of
great force for the opportune receiving of Celestial gifts under the rays of
the Stars, in as much as they do strongly work upon the Air, and breath. For
our breath is very much changed by such kind of vapors, if both vapors be of
another like: The Air also being through the said vapors easily moved, or
affected with the qualities of inferiors, or Celestial, daily, and quickly
penetrating our breast, and vitals, does wonderfully reduce us to the like
qualities; Wherefore Suffumigations are wont to be used to them that are about
to Sooth-say, for to affect their fancy, which indeed being appropriated to any
certain Deities, do fit us to receive divine inspiration: So they say that
fumes made with Lin-seed, and Flea-bane seed, and roots of Violets, and Parsley,
does make one to foresee things to come, and does conduce to prophesying. Let
no man wonder how great things suffumigations can do in the Air, especially
when he shall with Porphyrius consider, that by certain vapors exhaling from
proper suffumigations, airy spirits are presently raised, as also Thundrings,
and Lightnings, and such like things. As the ^iver of a Chamelion being burnt
on the top of the house, does, as it is manifest, raise showers, and
Lightnings. In like manner the head, and throat, if they be burnt with Oken
wood, cause Storms, and Lightnings. There are also suffumigations under
opportune influencies of Stars, that make the images of spirits forthwith
appear in the Air, or elsewhere. So they say, that if of Coriander, Smallage,
Henbane, and Hemlock be made a fume, that spirits will presently come together;
hence they are called the spirits Herbs. Also it is said that a fume made of
the root of the reedy Herb Sagapen, with the juice of Hemlock, and Henbane,
and the Herb Tapsus Barbatus red Sanders, and black Poppy, makes spirits and
strange shapes appear: and if Smallage be added to them, chaseth away spirits
from any place, and destroys their visions. In like manner a fume made of
Calamint, Peony, Mints, and Palma Christi, drives away all evil spirits, and
vain imaginations. Moreover it is said that by certain fumes certain Animals
are gathered together, and put to flight, as Pliny mentions concerning the
stone Liparis, that with the fume thereof all beasts are called ont; so the
bones in the upper part of the throat of a Heart, being burnt, gather all the
Serpents together, but the horn of the Heart being burnt does with its fume
chase them all away. The same does a fume of the feathers of Peacocks. Also the
lungs of an Ass being burnt, puts all poisonous things to flight; the fume of
the burnt hoof of a Horse drives away Mice, the same does the hoof of a Mule,
with which also if it be the hoof of the left foot, Flies are driven away; And
they say, if a house, or any place be smoaked with the gall of a Cutle fish,
made into a confection with red Slyrax, Roses, and Lignum-aloes, and if then
there be some Sea Water, or blood cast into that place, the whole house will
seem to be full of Water, or blood; and if some Earth of plowed ground be cast
there, the Earth will seem to quake. Now such kinds of vapors we must conceive
do infect any body, and infuse a virtue into it, which does continue long, even
as any contagious, or poisonous vapor of the Pestilence, being kept for two
years in the Wall of a house, infect the inhabitants, and as the contagion of
Pestilence, or Leprosy lying hid in a garment, does long after infect him that
wears it. Therefore were certain suffumigations used to images, rings, and such
like instruments of Magic, and hid treasures, and as Porphyrius says, very
effectually. So they say, if any one shall hide Gold, or Silver, or any other
precious thing, the Moon being in conjunction with the Sun, and shall fume the
place with Coriander, Saffron, Henbane, Smallage, and black Poppy, of each a
like quantity, bruised together, and tempered with the juice of Hemlock, that
which is so hid shall never be found, or taken away, and that spirits shall
continually keep it: and if any one shall endeavor to take it away, he shall
be hurt by them, and shall fall into a frenzy. And Hermes says, that there is
nothing like the fume of Sperma Ceti for the raising of spirits: wherefore if a
fume be made of that, and Lignum-aloes, Pepperwort, Musk, Saffron, red Storax
tempered together, with the blood of a Lapwing, it will quickly gather airy
spirits together, and if it be used about the graves of the dead, it gathers
together spirits, and the Ghosts of the dead. So, as often as we direct any
work to the Sun, we must make suffumigations with Solary things, if to the
Moon, with Lunary things, and so of the rest. And we must know, that as there
is a contrariety and enmity in Stars, and spirits, so also in suffumigations
unto the same. So there is a contrariety betwixt Lignum-aloes, and Sulphur,
Frankincense, and Quicksilver, and spirits that are raised by the fume of
Lignum-aloes, are allayed by the burning of Sulphur. As Proclus gives an
example in a spirit, which was wont to appear in the form of a Lion, but by the
setting of a Cock before it, vanished away, because there is a contrariety
betwixt a Cock, and a Lion, and so the like consideration, and practice is to
observed concerning such like things.

CHAP. XLIV. The Composition of some fumes appropriated to the Planets.
WE make a suffumigation for the Sun in this manner, viz. of Saffron,
Amber-gryse, Musk, Lignum-aloes, Lignum-balsaim, the fruit of the Laurel,
Cloves, Myrrh, and Frankincense, all which being bruised, and mixed in such a
proportion as may make a sweet odor, must be incorporated with the brain of an
Eagle, or the blood of a white Cock, after the manner of Pills, or Trochiscks.

For the Moon we make a suffumigation of the head of a Frog dried, the eyes of
a Bull, the seed of white Poppy, Frankincense, and Camphir, which must be
incorporated with Menstruous blood, or the blood of a Goose.

For Saturn take the seed of black Poppy, of Henbane, the root of Mandrake,
the Lodestone, and Myrrh, and make them up with the brain of a Cat, or the
blood of a Bat.

For Jupiter take the seed of Ash, Lignum-aloes, Storax, the gum Benjamin, the
Lazule stone, the tops of the feathers of a Peacock, and incorporate them with
the blood of a Stork, or a Swallow, or the brain of a Heart.

For Mars take Euphorbium, Bdellium, gum Armoniack, the roots of both
Hellebors, the Load stone, and a little Sulphur, and incorporate them all with
the brain of a Heart, the blood of a Man, and the blood of a black Cat.

For Venus take Musk, Amber-gryse, Lignum-aloes, red Roses, and red Coral, and
make them up with the brain of Sparrows, and the blood of Pigeons.

For Mercury take Mastick, Frankincense, Cloves, and the Herb Cinquefoile, and
the stone Achates, and incorporate them all with the brain of a Fox, or Weesel,
and the blood of a Pie.

Besides, to Saturn are appropriated for fumes all odoriferous roots, as
Pepper-wort root, etc. and the Frankincense tree: to Jupiter odoriferous
fruits, as Nutmegs, Cloves: to Mars all odoriferous wood, as Sanders, Cypress,
Lignum-balsaim, and Lignum-aloes: to the Sun, all Gums, Frankincense, Mastick,
Benjamin, Storax, Laudanum, Amber-gryse, and Musk; to Venus Flowers, as Roses,
Violets, Saffron, and such like: to Mercury all the Pills of Wood and fruit, as
Cinnamon, Lignum Cassia, Mace, Citron pill, and Bayberries, and whatsoever
seeds are odoriferous; to the Moon the leaves of all Vegetables, as the leaf
Indum, the leaves of the Myrtle, and Bay Tree. Know also, that according to the
opinon of the Magicians, in every good matter, as love, good will, and the
like, there must be a good fume, odoriferous, and precious; and in every evil
matter, as hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must be a stinking fume,
that is of no worth. The twelve Signs also of the Zodiac have their proper
fumes, as Aries has Myrrh, Taurus, Pepper-wort, Gemini, Mastick, Cancer,
Camphir, Leo, Frankincense, Virgo Sanders, Libra, Galbanum, Scorpio, Opoponax,
Sagittarius, Lignum-aloes, Capricornus, Benjamin, Aquarius, Euphorbium, Pisces,
red Storax. But Hermes describes the most powerful fume to be, viz. that which
is compounded of the seven Aromaticks, according to the powers of the seven
Planets, for it receives from Saturn, Pepper-wort, from Jupiter, Nutmeg, from
Mars, Lignumaloes, from the Sun, Mastick, from Venus Saffron, from Mercury,
Cinnamon, and from the Moon, the Myrtle.

CHAP. XLV. Of Collyries, Unctions, Love-Medicines, and their virtues.
MOreover Collyries, and Unguents conveying the virtues of things Natural, and
Celestial to our spirit, can multiply, transmute, transfigure and transform it
accordingly, as also transpose those virtues which are in them into it, that so
it cannot act only upon its own body, but also upon that which is near it, and
affect that by visible rays charms, and by touching it, with some like
quality. For because our spirit is the subtle, pure lucid, airy, and unctuous
vapor of the blood; it is therefore fit to make Collyries of the like vapors,
which are more suitable to our spirit in substance, for then by reason of their
likeness, they do the more stir up, attract, and transform the spirit. The like
virtues have certain ointments, and other confections. Hence by the touch
sometimes sickness, poisonings, and love is induced; some things, as the hands,
or garments being anointed: Also by kisses, some things being held in the
mouth, love is induced, as in Virgil we read that Venus prays Cupid That when
glad Dido hugs him in her lap
At royal feasts, crowned with the cheering Grape,
When she embracing, shall sweet kisses give,
Inspire hid Flame, with deadly bane deceive,
He would --


Now the sight, because it perceives more purely, and clearly then the other
senses, and fastening in us the marks of things more acutely, and deeply, does
most of all and before others agree with the Fantastic spirit, as is apparent
in dreams, when things seen do more often present themselves to us then things
heard, or any thing coming under the other senses. Therefore when Collyries
transform visuall spirits, that spirit does easily affect the imagination,
which indeed being affected with diverse species, and forms, transmits the same
by the same spirit unto the outward sense of sight, by which occasion there is
caused in it a perception of such species, and forms in that manner, as if it
were moved by external objects, that there seem to be seen terrible images,
and spirits, and such like: so there are made Collyries, making us forthwith to
see the images of spirits in the Air, or elsewhere, as I know how to make of
the gall of a man, and the eyes of a black Cat, and of some other things. The
like is made also of the blood of a Lapwing, of a Bat, and of a Goat, and they
say, if a smooth shining piece of Steel be smeered over with the juice of
Mugwort, and made to fume, it will make invocated spirits to be seen in it. So
also there are some suffumigations, or unctions, which make men speak in their
sleep, to walk, and to do those things which are done by men that are awake,
and sometimes to do those things, which men that are awake cannot, or dare not
do. Some there are that make us to hear horrid, or delectable sounds, and such
like. And this is the cause why Maniacall, and Melancholy men believe they see,
and hear those things without, which their imagination does only fancy within,
hence they fear things not to be feared, and fall into wonderful, and most
false suspicions, and fly when none pursues them, are angry, and contend, no
body being present, and fear where no fear is. Such like passions also can
magical confections induce, by Suffumigations, by Collyries, by Unguents, by
potions, by poisons, by lamps, and lights, by looking glasses, by images,
enchantments, charms, sounds, and Music. Also by diverse rites, observations,
ceremonies, religions, and superstitions; all which shall be handled in their
piaces. And not only by these kind of arts, passions, apparitions, and images
are induced, but also things themselves, which are really changed, and
transfigured into diverse forms, as the Poet relates of Proteus, Periclimenus,
Acheloas, and Merra, the daughter of Erisichthon: So also Circe changed the
companions of Ulysses, and of old in the sacrifices of Jupiter Lycaeus, the men
that tasted of the inwards of the sacrifices, were turned into Wolves, which
Pliny says, befell a certain man called Demarchus, the same opinion was Austin
of: for he says, whilst he was in Italy, he heard of some women that by
giving Sorceries in cheese to travellors, turned them into working Catle, and
when they had done such work as they would have them, turned them into men
again, and that this befell a certain Father called Prestantius. The Scriptures
themselves testify that Pharao's Sorcerers turned their rods into Serpents, and
water into blood, and did such like things.

CHAP. XLVI. Of natural alligations, and suspensions.
WHen the soul of the world, by its virtue does make all things that are
naturally generated, or artificially made, fruitful, by infusing into them
Celestial properties for the working of some wonderful effects, then things
themselves not only applied by suffumigations, or Collyries, or ointments, or
potions, or any other such like way, but also when they being conveniently
wrapped up, are bound to, or hang ed about the neck, or any other way applied,
althoug^ by never so easy a contact, do impress their virtue upon us. By these
alligations therefore, supensions, wrappings up, applications, and contacts the
Accidents of the body, and mind are changed into sickness, health, boldness,
fear, sadness, and joy, and the like: They render them that carry them,
gracious, or terrible, acceptable, or rejected, honored, and beloved, or
hateful, and abominable. Now these kind of passions are conceived to be by the
abovesaid, infused no otherwise, then is manifest in the graffing of trees,
where the vital virtue is sent, and Communicated from the trunk to the twig
graffed into it, by way of contact and alligation; so in the female Palm tree,
when she comes near to the male, her boughs bend to the male, and are bowed:
which the gardners seeing, bind ropes from the male to the female, which
becomes straight again, as if it had by this continuation of the rope received
the virtue of the male. In like manner we see, that the crampfish being touched
afar off with a long pole, does presently stupify the hand of him that touches
it. And if any shall touch the sea Hare with his hand or stick, does presently
run out of his wits. Also if the fish called Stella, as they say, being fastened
with the blood of a Fox and a brass nail to a gate, evil medicines can do no
hurt. Also it is said, that if a woman take a needle, and beray it with dung,
and then wrap it up in earth, in which the carcass of a man was buried, and
shall carry it about her in a cloth which was used at the funeral, that no man
shall be able to ly with her as long as she has it about her. Now by these
examples we see, how by certain alligations of certain things, as also
suspensions, or by a simple contact, or the continuation of any thread, we may
be able to receive some virtues thereby. It is necessary that we know the
certain rule of alligation, and suspension, and the manner which the Art
requires, viz. that they be done under a certain, and suitable constellation,
and that they be done with wire, or silken threads, with hair, or sinews of
certain animals. And things that are to be wrapped up must be done in the
leaves of herbs, or the skins of animals, or fine cloths, and the like,
according to the sutableness of things: as if you would procure the solary
virtue of any thing, this being wrapped up in bay leaves, or the skin of a
Lion, hang it about thy neck with a golden thread, or a silken thread of a
yallow color, whilst the Sun rules in the heaven: so thou shall be endued
with the Solary virtue of that thing. But if thou do desire the virtue of any
Saturnine thing, thou shall in like manner take that thing whilst Saturn
reigns, and wrap it up in the skin of an Ass, or in a cloth used at a
funeral, especially if thou desire it for sadness, and with a black thread
hang it about thy neck. In like manner we must conceive of the rest.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Rings, and their compositions.
RIngs also, which were always much esteemed of by the Ancients, when they are
opportunely made, do in like manner impress their virtue upon us, in as much as
they do affect the spirit of him that carries them with gladness or sadness,
and render him courteous, or terrible, bold, or fearful, amiable, or hateful;
in as much also as they do fortify us against sickness, poisons, enemies,
evil spirits, and all manner of hurtful things, or at least will not suffer
us to be kept under them. Now the manner of making these kinds of Rings, is
this, viz. when any Star ascends fortunately, with the fortunate aspect, or
conjunction of the Moon, we must take a stone, and Herb that is under that
Star, and make a Ring of the Metal that is suitable to this Star, and in it
fasten the stone, putting the Herb, or root under it; not omitting the
inscriptions of images, names, and Characters, as also the proper
suffumigations, but we shall speak more of these in another place, where we
shall treat of Images, and Characters. So we read in Philostratus Jarchus, that
a wise Prince of the Indians bestowed seven Rings made after this manner,
marked with the virtues, and names of the seven Planets to Apollonius, of which
he wore every day one, distinguishing them according to the names of the days,
by the benefit of which he lived above one hundred and thirty years, as also
always retained the beauty of his youth. In like manner Moses the Lawgiver,
and ruler of the Hebrews, being skilled in the Egyptian Magic, is said by
Josephus to have made Rings of love, and oblivion. There was also, as says
Aristotle, amongst the Cireneans a Ring of Battus, which could procure love and
honor. We read also that Eudamus a certain Philosopher made Rings against the
bites of Serpents, bewitchings, and evil spirits. The same does Josephus relate
of Solomon. Also we read in Plato that Gygus, King of Lydia had a Ring of
wonderful, and strange virtues, the seal of which, when he turned toward the
palm of his hand, no body could see him, but he could see all things: by the
opportunity of which Ring he ravished the Queen, and slew the King his Master,
and killed whomsoever he thought stood in his way, and in these villainies no
body could see him, and at length by the benefit of this Ring he became King of
Lydia.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the virtue of places, and what places are suitable to every
Star.
THere be wonderful virtues of places accompanying them, either from things
there placed, or the influences of the Stars, or any other way. For as Pliny
relates of a Cuckoo, in what place any one does first hear him, if his right
foot be marked about, and that foot-step dug up, there will no Fleas be bred
in that place where it is scattered. So they say that the dust of the track of
a Snake being gathered up and scattered amongst Bees, makes them return to
their hives. So also that the dust, in which a Mule has rolled himself, being
cast upon the Body, does mitigate the heats of love, and that the dust wherein
a Hawk has rolled her self, if it be bound to the body in a bright red cloth,
cures the quartane. So does the stone taken out of the nest of a Swallow, as
they say, presently relieve those that have the falling sickness, and being
bound to the party, continually preserve them, especially if it be rolled in
the blood, or heart of a Swallow. And it is reported, That if any one having
cut a vein and being fasting, shall go over a place where any one lately fell
with the fit of a Falling sickness, that he shall fall into the same disease.
And Pliny reports, that to fasten an Iron nail in that place where he that
fell with a fit of the Falling sickness first pitched his head, will free him
from his disease. So they say that an Herb growing upon the head of any image,
being gathered, and bound up in some part of ones garment with a red thread,
shall presently allay the headache; and that any Herb gathered out of the
brooks or rivers before Sun rising, that no body see him that gathers it, shall
cure the Tertian, if it be bound to the left arm, the sick party not knowing
what is done. But amongst places that are appropriated to the Stars, all
stinking places, dark, underground, religious, and mournful places, as
Churchyards, tombs, and houses not inhabited by men, and old, tottering,
obscure, dreadful houses, and solitary dens, caves, and pits, also fish ponds,
standing pools, fennes, and such like are appropriated to Saturn. Unto Jupiter
are ascribed all privileged places, Consistories of noble men, Tribunals,
Chaires, places for Exercises, Schools, and all beautiful, and clean places,
scattered, or sprinkled with diverse odours. To Mars, fiery, and bloody places,
furnaces, bake-houses, shambles, places of execution, and places where there
have been great battles fought, and slaughters made, and the like. To the
Sun, light places, the Serene Air, Kings Palaces, and Princes Courts,
Pulpits, Theators, Thrones, and all kingly, and Magnificent places. To Venus,
pleasant fountains, green Meadows, flowrishing Gardens, garnished beds, stews
(and according to Orpheus) the sea, the sea shore, baths, dancing-places, and
all places belonging to women. To Mercury, shops, schools, warehouses, an
Exchange for Merchants, and the like. To the Moon, wildernesses, woods, rocks,
hills, mountains, forests, fountains, waters, rivers, seas, sea-shores, ships,
groves, highways, and granaries for Corn, and such like. Upon this account
they that endeavor to procure love, are wont to bury for a certain time the
instruments of their art, whether they be rings, images, looking-glasses, or
any other, to hide them in a stew house, because in that place they will
contract some venerall faculty, no otherwise then things that stand in stinking
places, become stinking, and those in an Aromaticall place, become Aromaticall,
and of a sweet favor. The four corners of the Earth also pertain to this
matter. Hence they that are to gather a Saturnall, Martial, or Joviall Herb,
must look toward the East, or South, partly because they desire to be
oriental from the Sun, and partly, because their principal houses, viz.
Aquarius, Scorpius, Sagittarius are Southern signs, so also are Capricornus,
and Pisces. But they that will gather a Venerall, Mercuriall, or Lunary Herb,
must look toward the West, because they delight to be western, or else they
must look Northward, because their principal houses, viz. Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer, Virgo are Northern signs, so in any Solary work we must look toward
the East, or South, but rather toward the Solary body, and light.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Light, Colors, Candles, and Lamps, and to what Stars, Houses,
and Elements several colors are ascribed.
LIght also is a quality that partakes much of form, and is a simple act, and a
representation of the understanding: it is first diffused from the Mind of God
into all things, but in God the Father, the Father of light, it is the first
true light; then in the Son a beautiful overflowing brightness, and in the
Holy Ghost a burning brightness, exceeding all Intelligencies; yea, as
Dyonisius, says, of Seraphins, In Angels therefore it is a shining
intelligence diffused, an abundant joy beyond all bounds of reason, yet
received in diverse degrees, according to the Nature of the intelligence that
receives it; Then it descends into Celestial bodies, where it becomes a store
of life, and an effectual propagation, even a visible splendour. In the fire a
certain natural liveliness infused into it by the heavens. And lastly in men,
it is a clear discourse of reason, and knowledge of divine things, and the
whole rational: but this is manifold, either by reason of the disposition of
the body, as the Peripateticks will have it, or which is more true, by reason
of the good pleasure of him that bestows it, who gives it to every one as he
pleases. From thence it passes to the fancy, yet above the sense, but only
imaginable, and thence to the sense, but especially to that of the eyes; In
them it becomes a visible clearness, and is extended to other perspicuous
bodies, in which it becomes a color, and shining beauty, but in dark bodies it
is a certain beneficial and generative virtue, and penetrates, to the very
center, where the beams of it being collected into a narrow place, it becomes
a dark heat, tormenting, and scorching, so that all things perceive the vigor
of the light according to their capacity, all which joining to it self with an
enlivening heat, and passing through all things, does convey its qualities, and
virtues through all things. Therefore Magicians forbid the Urin of a sick man
to be sprinkled in the shadow of a sick man, or to be uncovered against the Sun
or the Moon, because the rays of the light penetrating, bringing suddenly with
it the noxious qualities of the sick bodies, convey them into the opposite
body, and affect that with a quality of the same kind. This is the reason why
Enchanters have a care to cover their Enchantments with their shadow. So the
Civet Cat makes all Dogs dumb with the very touch of her shadow. Also there are
made artificially some Lights, by Lamps, Torches, Candles, and such like, of
some certain things, and liquors opportunely chosen, according to the rule of
the Stars, and composed amongst themselves according to their congruity, which
when they be lighted, and shine alone, are wont to produce some wonderful, and
Celestial effects, which men many times wonder at, as Pliny reports out of
Anaxilaus, of a poison of Mares after copulation, which being lighted in
Torches, does monstrously represent a sight of Horse heads: the like may be
done of Asses, and flies, which being tempered with wax, and lighted, make a
strange sight of flies: and the skin of a Serpent lighted in a Lamp, makes
Serpents appear. And they say when Grapes are in their flower, if any one shall
bind a Vial to them full of Oil, and shall let it alone till they be ripe,
and then the Oil be lighted in a Lamp, it makes Grapes to be seen. And so in
other fruits. If Centory be mixed with Honey, and the blood of a Lapwing, and
be put in a Lamp, they that stand about will seem a great deal bigger then they
are wont: and if it be lighted in a clear night, the Stars will seem to be
scattered the one from the other. Such force also is in the ink of the Cuttle
fish, that it being put into a Lamp, makes Black-mores appear. It is also
reported, that a Candle made of some certain Saturnine things, if being
lighted, it be extinguished in the mouth of a man newly dead, will afterward,
as often as it shines alone, bring great sadness, and fear upon them that stand
about it. Of such like Torches, Lamps, does Hermes speak more of, also Plato,
and Chyrannides, and of the latter writers Albertus ina certain Treatise of
this particular thing. Colors also are a kind of lights, which being mixed
with things, are wont to expose them to those Stars, to which they are
agreeable. And we shall afterward speak of some colors, which are the lights
of the Planets, by which even the natures of fixed Stars themselves are
understood, which also may be applied to the flames of Lamps, and Candles. But
in this place we shall relate how the colors of inferior mixed things are
distributed to diverse Planets. For all colors, black, lucid, earthy, leaden,
brown, have relation to Saturn. Sapphire, and airy colors, and those which are
always green, clear, purple, darkish, golden, mixed with Silver, belong to
Jupiter. Red colors, and burning, fiery, flaming, violet, purple, bloody, and
iron colors, resemble Mars. Golden, Saffron, purple, and bright colors,
resemble the Sun. But all white, fair, curious, green, ruddy, betwixt saffron,
and purple, resemble Venus, Mercury, and the Moon. Moreover amongst the houses
of the heaven, the first, and seventh has white color: the second, and
twelfth green: the third, and eleventh saffron: the fourth, and the tenth red:
the fifth, and ninth honey color: the sixth, and eighth, black. The Elements
also have their colors, by which Natural Philosophers judge of the complexion
and property of their nature; For an earthy color, caused of coldness, and
dryness is brown, and black, and manifests black choler, and a Saturnine
nature; the blew tending toward whiteness, does denote phlegm: for cold makes
white, moisture and dryness makes black: reddish color shows blood, but fiery,
flaming, burning hot, show choler, which by reason of its subtilty, and
aptness to mix with others does cause diverse colors more: for if it be mixed
with blood, and blood be most predominant, it makes a florid red; if choler
predominate, it makes a redish color; if there be an equal mixtion, it makes
a sad red. But if adust choler be mixed with blood, it makes a Hempen color,
and red, if blood predominate, and somewhat red if choler prevail; but if it
be mixed with a melancholy humor, it makes a black color, but with
malancholy, and phlegm together, in an equal proportion, it makes a Hempen
color: If phlegm abound, a mud color, if melancholy, a bluish; but if it be
mixed with phlegm alone, in an equal proportion, it makes a citrine color; if
unequally, a pale, or palish. Now all colors are more prevalent, when they be
in silk, or in metals, or in perspicuous substances, or precious stones; and in
those things which resemble Celestial bodies in color, especially in living
things.

CHAP. L. Of Fascination, and the Art thereof.
FAscination is a binding, which comes from the spirit of the Witch, through
the eyes of him that is bewitched, entering to his heart. Now the instrument of
Fascination is the spirit, viz. a certain pure, lucid subtle vapor, generated
of the purer blood, by the heat of the heart. This does always send forth
through the eyes, rays like to it self; Those rays being sent forth, do carry
with them a spiritual vapor, and that vapor a blood, as it appears in bleer,
and red eyes, whose rays being sent forth to the eyes of him that is opposite,
and looks upon them, carries the vapor of the corrupt blood, together with it
self, by the contagion of which, it does infect the eyes of the beholder with
the like disease. So the eye being opened, and intent upon any one with a
strong imagination, does dart its beams, which are the Vehiculum of the spirit
into the eyes of him that is opposite to him, which tender spirit strikes the
eyes of him that is bewitched, being stirred up from the heart of him that
strikes, and possesses the breast of him that is stricken, wounds his heart,
and infects his spirit. Whence Apuleius says, Thy eyes sliding down through my
eyes, into mine inward breast, stirs up a most vehement burning in my Marrow.
Know therefore that men are then most bewitched, when with often beholding they
direct the edge of their sight to the edg of their sight that bewitch them, and
when their eyes are reciprocally intent one upon the other, and when rays are
joined to rays, and lights to lights, for then the spirit of the one is joined
to the spirit of the other, and fixes its sparks: So are strong ligations
made, and so most vehement loves are inflamed with the only rays of the eyes,
even with a certain sudden looking on, as if it were with a dart, or stroke
penetrating the whole body, whence then the spirit, and amorous blood being
thus wounded, are carried forth upon the lover, and enchanter, no otherwise
then the blood, and spirit of the vengeance of him that is slain, are upon him
that slayes him. Whence Lucretius sang concerning those amorous bewitchings.
The body smitten is, but yet the mind
Is wounded with the darts of Cupid blind.
All parts do Simpathize in the wound, but know
The blood appears in that which had the blow.


So great is the power of Fascination, especially when the vapors of the eyes
are subservient to the affection. Therefore Witches use collyries, ointments,
alligations, and such like, to affect, and corroborate the spirit this or that
manner. To procure love, they use venereall collyries, as Hippomanes, the blood
of Doves, or Sparrows, and such like. To induce fear, they use Martial
Collyries, as of the eyes of Wolves, the Civet Cat, and the like. To procure
misery or sickness, they use Saturnine, and so of the rest.

CHAP. LI. Of certain observations, producing wonderful Virtues.
THey say that certain acts, and observations have a certain power of natural
things, that they believe diseases may be expelled, or brought thus, and thus.
So they say that quartanes may be driven away if the parings of the nails of
the sick be bound to the neck of a live Eel in a linen clout, and she be let
go into the water. And Pliny says, that the paring of the sick man's nails of
his feet, and hands being mixed with wax, cure the quartane, tertian, and
quotidian Ague, and if they be before Sun rising fastened to another man's gate,
will cure such like diseases. In like manner let all the parings of the nails
be put into Pismires caves, and they say that that which begun to draw the
nails first must be taken, and bound to the neck, and by this means will the
disease be removed. They say that by Wood stricken with lightning, and cast
behind the back with ones hands, any disease may be cured, and in quartanes a
piece of a nail from a Gibbet, wrapped up in Wool, and hanged about the neck,
cures them; also a Rope does the like, that is taken from a Gallows, and hid
under ground, that the Sun cannot reach it. Also the throat of him that has a
hard swelling, or imposthume, being touched with the hand of him that dyed by
an immature death, is cured thereby. Also they say, that a woman is presently
eased of her hard travel, if any one shall put into the bed, where the woman in
travel is, a stone, or dart, with which either of these Animals, viz. a Man, a
Boar, or a Bear were at one blow killed. The same also, as they say, does a
spear that is pulled out of the body of a man, if it shall not first touch the
ground; also they say that Arrows pulled out of the body of man, if they have
not touched the Earth, and be put under any one lying down, will procure love;
Also they say that the falling sickness is cured by meat made of the flesh of a
wild beast, slain in the same manner as a man is slain. Also they say that a
man's eyes that are washed three times with the water wherein he has washed his
feet, shall never be sore or bleer. It is said that some do cure diseases of
the groin with thread taken out of the Weavers Loom, being tied in nine, or
seven knots, the name of some Widow being named at every knot. Also the Spleen
of Catle extended upon pained Spleens, cures them, if he that applies it, says
that he is applying a medicine to the Spleen to cure, and ease it: After this,
they say, the patient must be shut into a sleeping room, the door being sealed
up with a Ring, and some verse be repeated over nineteen times. The Urine of a
green Lizard cures the same disease, if it be hanged up in a pot before the
patients bedchamber, so that he may, as he comes in and out, touch it with his
hand. Also a Lizard killed in the Urine of a Calf, as they say, restrains his
lust that put it in: but he that shall put his own Urine into a Dogs Urine, is
said to be made thereby dull to venerous acts, and to feel a benummedness in
his loins. They say, that if ones own Urine be dropped upon the foot in the
morning, it is a remedy against all evil medicines. And a little Frog climbing
up a tree, if any one shall spit in his mouth, and then let him escape, is said
to cure the Cough. It is a wonderful thing, but easy to experience, what Pliny
speaks of, If any one shall be sorry for any blow that he has given another
afar off, or nigh at hand, if he shall presently spit into the middle of that
hand with which he gave the blow, the party that was smitten shall presently be
freed from pain. This has been approved of in a four-footed beast that has
been sorely hurt. Some there are that aggravate the blow before they give it.
In like manner spitle carried in the hand, or to spit in the shoe of the right
foot before it be put on, is good when any one passes through a dangerous
place. They say that Wolves will not come to a field, if one of them be taken,
and the blood let by little and little out of his legs, being unbroken, with a
knife, and sprinkled about the outsides of the field, and he himself be buried
in that place, from which he was first drawn. The Methanenses, Citizens of
Trezenium, accounted it as a present remedy for preserving of Vines from the
wrong of the Southern wind, having always found it by most certain experience;
if whilst the wind blows, a white Cock should be pulled to pieces in the
middle by two men, both which keeping their part, must walk round the Vineyard,
and both meeting in the place from whence they began their Circuit, must in
that place bury the pieces of the Cock. They say also that if any one shall
hold a Viper over a vapor with a staff, he shall prophecy, and that the
staff wherewith a Snake was beaten is good against diseases of breeding women.
These things Pliny recites. It is said also in gathering of roots and herbs,
we must draw three circles round about them, first with a sword, then dig them
up, taking heed in the mean time of a contrary wind. Also they say, that if any
one shall measure a dead man with a rope, first from the Elbow to the biggest
finger, then from the shoulder to the same finger, and afterward from the
head. to the feet, making thrice those mensurations, if any one afterward shall
be measured with the same rope, in the same manner, he shall not prosper, but be
unfortunate, and fall into misery, and sadness. And Albertus out of Chyrannis
says, that if any woman has enchanted thee to love her, take the sheet she
lies in, and piss through her hood, and her right sleeve, out of doors, and the
enchantment will be quitted. And Pliny says, that to sit by women great with
child, or when a medicine is given to any one of them, the fingers being joined
together like the teeth of a Kemb, is a charm. This was known by experience in
Alcumena breeding Hercules: and so much the worse, if that be done about one,
or both knees. Also to sit cross legged, is Sorcery, therefore it was forbiden
to be done in the Counsels of Princes, and Rulers, as a thing which hindered all
acts. And it is said, if any one standing before the door call the man by his
name, that is lying with a woman, and he answer, if then he fasten a knife, or
needle on the door, and break it, the edge being downward, he that is in the
bed with the woman cannot couple with her as long as those things shall be
there.

CHAP. LII. Of the Countenance, and Gesture, the Habit, and Figure of the Body,
and what Stars any of these do answer; whence Physiognomy, and Metoposcopy, and
Chyromancy, Arts of divination, have their grounds.
THe countenance, gesture, the motion, setting, and figure of the body, being
accidental to us, conduce to the receiving of Celestial gifts, and expose us
to the superior bodies, and produce certain effects in us, no otherwise then
in Hellebor, which when thou gatherest, if thou pullest the leaf upward, it
draws the humors upward, and causes vomiting; if downward, it causes purging,
by drawing the humor downward. How much also the countenance, gesture, do
affect the sight, imagination, and Animal spirit, no man is ignorant. So they
that couple for generation, for the most part are wont to make an impression on
the children that are then begotten, of that countenance which they themselves
then form, or imagine: So a mild, and cheerful countenance of a Prince in the
City, makes the people joyful: but fierce, and sad, terrifies them: so the
gesture, and countenance of any one lamenting, does easily move to pity: So
the shape of an amiable person, does easily excite to love. Thou must know that
such like gestures, and figures, as harmonies of the body do expose it no
otherwise to the Celestials, then odours, and the spirit of a Medicine, and
internal passions do the soul. For as Medicines, and passions of the mind are
by certain dispositions of the Heaven increased so also the gesture, and motion
of the body do get an efficacy by certain influences of the heavens. For there
are gestures resembling Saturn, which are melancholy, and sad, as are beating
of the breast, striking of the head: also such as are Religious, as the bowing
of the knee, and a fixed looks downward, as of one praying, also weeping, and
such like, as are used by an Austere, and Saturnine man, such an one as the
Satyrist describes, saying, With hanged down head, with eyes fixed to the
ground,
His raging words bites in, and muttering sound
He does express with powting lips --


A cheerful, and honest countenance, a worshipful gesture, clapping of the
hands, as of one rejoicing, and praising; also the bending of the knee, with
the head lifted up, as of one that is worshipping, are ascribed to Jupiter. A
sour, fierce, cruel, angry, rough countenance, and gesture, are ascribed to
Mars. Solary are honorable, and courageous gestures, and countenances: also
walkings abroad, bending of the knee, as of one honoring a King with one knee.
Venereal, are dances, embraces, laughters, amiable, and cheerful countenances.
Mercuriall are inconstant, quick, variable, and such like gestures, and
countenances. Lunary are such as are moveable, poisonfull, and childish, and
the like. And as we have spoke of gestures, so also are the shapes of men
distinct. For Saturn bespeaks a man to be of a black, and yellowish color,
lean, crooked, of a rough skin, great veins, hairy all over his body, little
eyes, of a frowning forehead, of a thin beard, great lips, eyes intent upon the
ground, of a heavy gate, striking his feet together as he walks, crafty, witty,
a seducer, and murderous. Jupiter signifies a man to be of a pale color,
darkish red, a handsome body, good stature, bold, of great eyes, not black
altogether, large pupil, short nostrils, not equal, great teeth before, curld
hair, of good disposition, and manners. Mars makes a man red, of a red hair,
round face, yellowish eyes, of a terrible, and sharp looks, bold, jocund,
proud, crafty. The Sun makes a man of a tauny color, betwixt yellow and black,
dashed with red, of a short stature, yet of a handsome body, without much hair,
and curld, of yellow eyes, wise, faithful, desirous of praise. Venus signifies
a man to be tending toward blackness, but more white, with mixture of red, of
a handsome body, a fair, and round face, fair hair, fair eyes, the blackness
whereof is more intense, of good manners, and honest love, also kind, patient,
and jocund; Mercury signifies a man not much white, or black, of a long face,
high forehead, fair eyes, not black, to have a straight, and long nose, thin
beard, long fingers, to be ingenious, a subtle inquisitor, turn-coat, and
subject to many fortunes. The Moon signifies a man to be in color white, mixed
with a little red, of a fair stature, round face, with some marks in it, eyes
not fully black, frowning forehead, also kind, gentle, sociable. The Signs
also, and faces of Signs have their figures, and shapes, which he that would
know, must seek them out in books of Astrology. Lastly, upon these figures, and
gestures Physiognomy, and Metoposcopy, arts of divination do depend: Also
Chyromancy, foretelling future events, not as causes, but as signs through
like effects, caused by the same cause. And although these diverse kinds of
divinations may seem to be done by inferior, and weak signs, yet the
judgments of them are not to be slighted, or condemned, when prognostication
is made by them, not out of superstition, but by reason of the harmoniacall
correspondency of all the parts of the body. Whosoever therefore does the more
exactly imitate the Celestial bodies, either in nature, study action, motion,
gesture, countenance, passions of the mind, and opportunity of the season, is
so much the more like to the heavenly bodies, and can receive larger gifts from
them.

CHAP. LIII. Of Divination, and its kinds.
THere are some other kinds of divinations depending upon natural causes,
which are known to every one in his art, and experience, to be in diverse
things; by which Physicians, husbandmen, shepherds, Mariners, and every one of
these out of probable signs do Prognosticate. Many of these kinds Aristotle
made mention of in his Book of Times. Amongst which Auguria, and Auspicia are
the chiefest, which were in former time in such esteem amongst the Romans,
that they would do nothing that did belong to private or public business,
without the counsel of the Augures: Cicero also in his Book of Divinations
largely declares, that the people of Tuscia would do nothing without this art.
Now there are diverse kinds of Auspicia's for some are called Pedestria (i. e.)
which are taken from four footed beasts: Some are called Auguria, which are
taken from birds: Some are Celestial, which are taken from thundrings, and
lightnings; some are called Caduca (i. e.) when any fell in the temple, or
elsewhere; Some were sacred, which were taken from sacrifices. Some of these
were called Piacula, and sad Auspicia, as when a sacrifice escaped from the
Altar, or being smitten made a bellowing, or fell upon another part of his body
then he should. To these is added Exauguration, viz. when the rod fell out of
the hand of the Augure, with which it was the custom to view, and take notice
of the Auspicium. Michael Scotus makes mention of twelve kinds of Auguria's,
viz. Six on the right hand, the names of which he says are Fernova, Fervetus,
Confert, Emponenthem, Sonnasarnova, Sonnasarvetus: and the other six on the
left hand, the names of which are, Confernova, Confervetus, Viaram, Herrenam,
Scassarnova, Scassarvetus. Then expounding their names, he says, Fernova is an
Augurium; when thou go out of thy house for to do any business, and in going
thou see a man, or a bird going, or flying, so that either of them set
himself before thee upon thy left hand, that is a good signification in
refrence to thy business. Fervetus is an Augurium; when thou shall go out of
thy house for to do any business, and in going thou find or see a bird, or
a man resting himself before thee on the left side of thee, that is an ill sign
in reference to thy business: Viaram is an Augurium; when a man or a bird in
his journey, or flying passes before thee, coming from the right side of thee,
and bending toward the left, goes out of thy sight, that is a good sign
concerning thy business. Confernova is an Augurium; when thou do first find a
man, or a bird going, or flying, and then he rests himself before thee on thy
right side, thou seeing of it, that is a good sign concerning thy business;
Confervetus is an Augurium; when first thou find, or see a man, or a bird
bending from thy right side, it is an ill sign concerning thy business.
Scimasarnova is an Augurium; when a man, or a bird comes behind thee, and
outgoeth thee, but before he comes at thee, he rests, thou seeing of him on thy
right side, it is to thee a good sign. Scimasarvetus is an Augurium; when thou
see a man, or a bird behind thee, but before he comes to thee he rests in
that place, thou seeing of it, it is a good sign. Scassarvetus is when thou
see a man, or a bird passing by thee, and resting in a place on thy left
side, it is an evil sign to thee. Emponenthem is when a man, or a bird coming
from thy left side, and passing to thy right, goes out of thy sight without
resting, it is a good sign. Hartena is an Augurium; if a man or a bird coming
from thy right hand, passing behind thy back to thy left, and thou shall see
him resting any where, this is an evil sign. Thus much Scotus. The Ancients
did also prognosticate from sneesings, of which Homer in the seventeenth book
of his Odes, makes mention, because they thought they proceeded from a sacred
place, viz. the head, in which the intellect is vigorous, and operative. Whence
also whatsoever speech came into the breast, or mind of a man rising in the
morning unawares, is said to be some presage, and an Augurium.

CHAP. LIIII. Of diverse certain Animals, and other things which have a
signification in Auguria's.
ALL the Auspicia which first happen in the beginning of any enterprise are to
be taken notice of: as if in the beginning of thy work thou shall perceive that
Rats have gnawn thy garments, desist from thy undertakings; If going forth thou
shall stumble at the threshold, or in the way thou shall dash thy foot against
any thing, forbear thy journey; If any ill omen happen in the beginning of thy
business, put off thy undertakings, least thy intentions be wholly frustrated,
or accomplished to no purpose; but expect and wait for a fortunate hour for the
dispatching of thy affairs with a better omen. We see that many Animals are, by
a natural power imbred in them, prophetical. Does not the Cock by his crowing
diligently tell you the hours of the night, and morning, and with his wings
spread forth chase away the Lion; and many birds with their singing, and
chattering, and flies by their sharp pricking foretell rain, and Dolphins by
their often leaping above the water, fore-run tempests. It would be too long to
relate all the passages, which the Phrygians Cilicians, Arabians, Umbrians,
Tuscians, and other people, which follow the Auguria's, learned by birds. These
they have proved by many experiments, and examples. For in all things the
Oracles of things to come are hid: but those are the chiefest which Ominall
birds shall foretell. These are those which the Poets relate were turned from
men into birds. Therefore what the Daw declares, hearken, and mark, observing
her setting as she sits, and her manner of flying, whether on the right hand,
or left, whether clamorous, or silent, whether she goes before, or follows
after, whether she waits for the approach of him that passes by, or flies from
him, and which way she goes; all these things must be diligently observed. Orus
Apollo says in his Hyeroglyphicks, Daws that are twins signify marriage,
because this Animal brings forth two eggs, out of which male, and female must
be brought forth: But if (which seldom happens) two males be generated, or two
females, the males will not couple with any other females, nor females with any
other males, but will always live without a mate; and solitary. Therefore they
that meet a single Daw, divine thereby that they shall live a single life. The
same also does a black Hen Pigeon betoken; for after the death of her mate, she
always lives single. Thou shall as carefully observe Crows, which are as
significant as Daws, yea, and in greater matters. It was Epictetus the Stoics
Philosophers judgment, who was a Sage Author, that if a Crow did croke over
against any one, it did betoken some evil, either to his body, fortune,
honor, wife, or children. Then thou shall take heed to Swans, who foreknow the
secrets of the waters, for their cheerfulness does presage happy events not
only to Mariners, but all other travelers, unless they be overcome by the
coming over of a stronger, as of an Eagle, who by the most potent Majesty of
her sovereignty makes null the predictions of all other birds, if she speaks to
the contrary; for she slies higher then all other birds, and is of more acute
sight, and is never excluded from the secrets of Jupiter: She portends
advancement, and victory, but by blood; because she drinks no water but blood.
An Eagle flying over the Locrensians, fighting against the Crotoniensians gave
them victory. An Eagle setting her self unawares upon the Target of Hiero,
going forth to the first War, betokened that he should be King. Two Eagles
sitting all day upon the house at the birth of Alexander of Macedonia, did
portend to him an omen of two Kingdoms, viz. Asia, and Europe. An Eagle also
taking off the hat of Lucias Tarquinius Priscus, Son to Demarathus the
Corinthian (flying from home by reason of some discord, and being come into
Hetraria, and going to Rome) and then flying high with it, and afterward
putting it upon his head again, did portend to him the Kingdom of the Romans.
Vulturs also signify diffiulty, hardness, ravenousness, which was verified in
the beginning of building of Cities. Also they foretell the places of
slaughter, coming seven days before hand; and because they have most respect
to that place where the greatest slaughter shall be, as if they gaped after the
greatest number of the slain; therefore the ancient Kings were wont to send out
spies to take notice what place the Vulturs' had most respect to. The Phoenix
promises singular good success, which being seen a new, Rome was built very
auspiciously. The Pelican, because she hazards her self for her young,
signifies that a man should out of the zeal of his love undergo much hardship.
The painted bird gave the name to the City of Pictavia, and foreshewed the
lenity of that people by its color, and voice. The Heron is an Augurium of
hard things. The Stork is a bird of concord, and makes concord. Cranes gives us
notice of the treachery of enemies. The bird Cacupha betokens gratitude, for she
alone does express love to her Dam, being spent with old age. On the contrary,
Hippopotamus that kills his Dam, does betoken ingratitude for good turn, also
injustice. The bird Origis is most envious, and betokens envy.

Amongst the smaller birds, the Pie is talkative, and foretells guests. The bird
Albanellus flying by any one, if from the left to the right, betoken
cheerfulness of entertainment, if contrariwise, betokens the contrary. The
scrich Owl is always unlucky, so also is the ho^^ Owl, who because she goes to
her young by night unaware as death comes unawares, is therefore said to
foretell death: yet sometimes, because she is not blind in the dark of the
night, does betoken diligence and watchfulness, which she made good, when she
sat upon the spear of Hiero. Dido, when she sees the unlucky Owl, pitied
Aeneas, whence the Poet sang, The Owl sitting on top of the house alone,
Sends forth her sad complaints with mournful tone.
An in another place, The slothful Owl by mortals is esteemed
A fatal omen --


The same bird sang in the Capitol when the Roman affairs were low at
Numantia, and when Fregelia was pulled down for a conspiracy made against the
Romans. Almadel says, that Owls, and night-ravens, when they turn aside to
strange countries, or houses, betoken the death of the men of that country, and
those houses; for those birds are delighted with dead Carkases, and perceive
them before hand. For men that are dying have a near affinity with dead
Carkases. The Hawk also is a foreteller of contention, as Naso sings. We hate
the Hawk, because that arms amongst
She always lives --


Lelius the Ambassador of Pompey was slain in Spain amongst the Purveyours,
which misfortune, a Hawk flying over his head, is said to foretell. And Almadel
says, that these kind of birds fighting amongst themselves, signify the
change of a Kingdom; but if birds of another kind shall fight with them, and
are never seen to come together again, it portends a new condition, and state
of that Country. Also little birds by their coming to, or departing from, fore
show that a family shall be enlarged, or lessened, and their flight, by how
much the more serene it is, by so much the more laudable. Whence Melampus the
Augure conjectured at the slaughter of the Greeks by the flight of little
birds, when he says, Thou see that no bird takes his flight in fair
weather. Swallows, because when they are dying they provide a place of safety
for their young, do portend a great patrimony, or Legacy after the death of
friends. A Bat meeting any one running away, signifies an evasion: for although
she have no wings, yet she flies. A Sparrow is a bad omen to one that runs
away, for she flies from the Hawk, and makes have to the Owl, where she is in
as great danger: yet in love she is fortunate, for being stirred up with lust,
couples seven times in an hour. Bees are a good omen to Kings, for they
signify an obsequious people. Flies signify importunity, and impudency,
because being oftentimes driven away, they do yet continually return. Also
domestic birds are not without some Auguria's, for Cocks by their crowing
promote hope, and the journey of him that is undertaking it. Moreover Livia the
mother of Tiberius, when she was great with him, took a Hen-Egg and hatched it
in her bosom, and at length came forth a Cock chick with a great comb, which
the Augures interpreted that the child that should be born of her should be
King. And Cicero writes that at Thebais Cocks, by their crowing all night, did
presage that the Baeotians would obtain victory against the Lacedaemonians: and
the reason is according to the Augures interpretations, because that bird when
he is beaten is silent, but when he himself has overcome, crows. In like
manner also omens of events are taken from beasts. For the meeting of a Weesel
is ominous, also meeting of a Hare is an ill omen to a traveller, unless she be
taken. A Mule also is bad, because barren. A Hog is pernicious, for such is his
nature, and therefore signifies pernicious men. A Horse betokens quarrellings,
and fightings: whence Anchises seeing of white Horses, cries out in Virgil,
With War are Horses armed, yea threaten War.

But when they are joined together in a Chariot, because they draw with an
equal yoke, they signify that peace is to be hoped for. An Ass is an
unprofitable creature, yet did Marius good, who when he was pronounced enemy to
his country, saw an Ass disdaining provender that was offered to him, and
running to the water, by which Augury, he supposing he saw a way of safety
showed to him, entreated the aid of his friends, that they would convey him to
the Sea; which being granted, he was set into a little ship, and so escaped the
threats of Silla the Conqueror. If the Foal of an Ass meet any one going to an
Augury, he signifies labor, patience, and hindrances. A Wolf meeting any one
is a good sign, the effect whereof was seen in Hiero of Sicilia, from whom a
Wolf snatching away a book whilst he was at School, confirmed to him the
success of the Kingdom: but yet the Wolf makes him speechless whom he sees
first. A Wolf rent in pieces a Watchman of P. Africanus, and C. Fulvius at
Minturn, when the Roman Army was overcome by the fugitives in Sicilia. Also he
signifies perfidious men, such as you can give no credit to: which was known in
the progeny of Romans. For the faith which they long since sucked from their
mother the Wolf, and kept to themselves from the beginning, as by a certain law
of nature, passed over to their posterity. To meet a Lion, seeing she is
amongst Animals the strongest, and striking terror into all the rest, is good.
But for a woman to meet a Lioness, is bad, because she hinders conception, for
a Lioness brings forth but once. To meet Sheep, and Goats is good. It is read
also in the Ostentarian of the Tuscians, if this Animal shall wear any
unusual color, it portends to the Emperor plenty of all things, together
with much happiness. Whence Virgil to Pollio sings thus, But in the Meadows
Rams shall Skarlet bear,
And changing, sometimes golden Fleeces wear.


It is good also to meet Oxen treading out Corn, but better to meet them
plowing, which although breaking the way hinder thy journey, yet by the favor
of their Auspicium will recompense thee again. A Dog in a journey is fortunate,
because Cyrus being cast into the woods was nourished by a Dog till he came to
the Kingdom, which also the Angel, companion of Tobit did not scorn as a
companion. The Castor, because he bites off his Testicles, and leaves them to
the Hunters, is an ill omen, and portends that a man will injure himself. Also
amongst small Animals, Mice signify danger. For the same day that they did
gnaw Gold in the Capitol, both the Consuls were intercepted by Hannibal by way
of ambush near Tarentum. The Locust making a stand in any place, or burning the
place, hinders one from their wishes, and is an ill omen; on the contrary the
Grass-hoppers promote a journey, and foretell a good event of things. The
Spider weaving a line downwards, is said to signify hope of money to come.
Also the Pismires, because they know how to provide for themselves, and to
prepare safe nests for themselves, portend security, and riches, a great Army.
Hence, when the Pismires had devoured a tame Dragon of Tiberius Caesar, it was
advised, that he should take heed of the tumult of a multitude. If a Snake meet
thee, take heed of an ill tongued enemy; For this Animal has no other power
but in his mouth. A Snake creeping into Tiberius his palace, portended his
fall. Two Snakes were found in the bed of Sempronius Gracchus, wherefore a
Soothsayer told him, if he would let the male, or the female escape, either he
or his wife would shortly dye; he preferring the life of his wife, killed the
male, and let the female escape, and within a few days he dyed. So a Viper
signfies lewd women, and wicked children; and an Eel signifies a man displeased
with every body: For she lives apart from all other fishes, nor is ever found
in the company of any. But amongst all Auspicia's and omens, there is none more
effectual, and potent then man, none that does signify the truth more
clearly. Thou shall therefore diligently note, and observe the condition of the
man that meets thee, his age, profession, station, gesture, motion, exercise,
complexion, habit, name, words, speech, and all such like things. For seeing
there are in all other Animals so many discoveries of presages, without all
question these are more efficatious, and clear, which are infused into man's
soul; which Tully himself testifies, saying, that there is a certain Auspicium
naturally in men's souls of their eternity, for the knowing of all the courses,
and causes of things. In the foundation of the City of Rome the head of a man
was found with his whole face, which did presage the greatness of the Empire,
and gave the name to the Mountain of the Capitol. The Brutian soldiers
fighting against Octavius, and M. Antonius, found an Ethiopian in the gate of
their Castle; whom though they did slay as a presage of ill success, yet they
were unfortunate in the batle, and Brutus, and Cassius both Generals, were
slain. Meeting of Monks is commonly accounted an ill omen, and so much the
rather, if it be early in the morning, because these kind of men live for the
most by the sudden death of men, as Vulturs do by slaughters.

CHAP. LV. How Auspicia's are verified by the light of Natural instinct, and
of some rules of finding of it out.
AUspicia, and Auguria, which foretell things to come by Animals and birds,
Orpheus the divine himself (as we read) did teach and show first of all, which
afterward were had in great esteem with all Nations. Now they are verified by
the light of natural instinct, as if from this, some lights of divination may
descend upon four-footed beasts, winged, and other Animals, by which they are
able to presage to us of the events of things: which Virgil seems to be
sensible of, when he sings, Nor think I Heaven on them such knowledge states,
Nor that their prudence is above the fates.


Now this instinct of nature, as says William of Paris, is more sublime then
all humane apprehension, and very near, and most like to prophecy. By this
instinct there is a certain wonderful light of divination in some Animals
naturally, as it manifestly appears in some Dogs, who know by this instinct
thieves, and men that are hid, unknown both to themselves, and men, and find
them out, and apprehend them, falling upon them with a full mouth. By the like
instinct Vulturs foresee future slaughters in batles, and gather together into
places where they shall be, as if they foresaw the flesh of dead Carkases. By
the same instinct Partridges know their Dam, which they never saw and leave the
Partridge which stole away her Dams Eggs, and sat upon them. By the same
instinct also certain hurtful and terrible things are perceived (the soul of
the men being altogether ignorant of them) whence terror, and horror cease
much upon men when they think nothing of these things. So a thief lying hid in
any house, although no body knows, or thinks of his being there, strikes fear,
and terror, and a troublesomeness of mind into the inhabitants of that house,
although happily not of all, because the brightness of this instinct is not in
all men; yet of some of them. So a harlot being hid in some very large house,
is sometimes perceived to be there by some one that is altogether ignorant of
her being there. It is mentioned in Histories that Heraiscus a certain
Egyptian, a man of a divine nature, could discern unclean women, not only by
his eyes, but by their voice, being heard afar off, and thereupon did fall into
a most grievous headache. William of Paris also makes mention of a certain woman
in his time, that by the same instinct perceived a man whom she loved, coming
two miles off. Also he relates that in his time was a certain Stork convicted
of inchastity by the smell of the male, who being judged guilty by a multitude
of Storks whom the male gathered together, discovering to them the fault of his
mate, was, her feathers being first pulled off, torn in pieces by them. He also
makes mention of a certain horse, who not knowing his dam, and leaping of her,
when afterward he understood what he had done, bit off his own Stones by way
of revenge upon himself for his incest. The same does Varro, Aristotle, and
Pliny relate concerning horses. And Pliny makes mention of a certain Serpent,
called the Asp, that did such a like thing, for she coming to a certain man's
table in Egypt, was there daily fed, and she having brought forth some young,
by one of which a son of her hosts was killed, after she knew of it, killed
that young one, and would never return to that house any more. Now by these
examples you see, how the lights of presage may descend upon some Animals, as
signs, or marks of things, and are set in their gesture, motion, voice, flying,
going, meat, color, and such like. For according to the doctrine of the
Platonists, there is a certain power put into inferior things, by which for
the most part they agree with the superiors; whence also the racid consents of
Animals seem to agree with divine bodies, and their bodies, and affections to
be affected with their powers, by the name of which they are ascribed to the
Dieties. We must consider therefore what Animals are Saturnall, what are
Joviall, and what Martial, and so of the rest, and according to their
properties to draw forth their presages: so those birds which resemble Saturn,
and Mars, are all of them called terrible, and deadly, as the Scritch Owl, the
Hawlet, and others which we have mentioned before, also the horn Owl, because
she is a Saturnall Solitary bird, also nightly, and is reputed to be most
unfortunately ominous, of which the Poet says, The ugly Owl, which no bird
well resents,
Foretells misfortunes, and most sad events.


But the Swan is a delicious bird, Venereall, and Dedicated to Phoebus, and is
said to be most happy in her presages, especially in the Auspicia's of
Mariners, because she is never drowned in water, whence Ovid sings, Most happy
is the cheerful, singing Swan
In her presages --


There are also some birds that presage with their mouth, and singing, as the
Crow, Pie, Daw, whence Virgil, -- This did fore-show
Often from the hollow holm that ominous Crow.


Now the birds that portend future things by their flying are, viz. Buzzards,
the bone-Breakers, Eagles, Vulturs, Cranes, Swans, and the like: for they are
to be considered in their flying, whether they fly slowly, or swiftly, whether
to the right hand, or to the left, how many fly together: upon this account if
Cranes fly apace, they signify a tempest: when slowly, fair weather. Also when
two Eagles fly together, they are said to portend evil, because that is a
number of confusion. In like manner thou shall enquire into the reason of the
rest, as this is showed of number. Moreover it belongs to an artist to observe
a similitude in these conjectures, as in Virgil, Venus dissembling, teaches
her son Aeneas in these verses. -- -- -- All this is not for naught,
Else we in vain my parents Augury taught,
Lo! twice six Swans in a glad company
Joves bird pursued through the etheriall Sky
In Heavens broad tracks: now earth in a long train
They seem to take, or taken to disdain;
As they return with sounding wings they sport,
And Heaven surrounding in a long consort.
Just so, I say, thy friends and fleet have gained
The port, or with full sails the Bay obtained.


Most wonderful is that kind of Auguring of theirs, who hear, and understand
the speeches of Animals, in which as amongst the Ancients, Melampus, and
Tiresias, and Thales, and Apollonius the Tyanean, who as we read, excelled, and
whom they report had excellent skill in the language of birds: of whom
Philostratus, and Porphyrius speak, saying, that of old when Apollonius sat in
company amongst his friends, seeing Sparrows sitting upon a tree, and one
Sparrow coming from elsewhere unto them, making a great chattering and noise,
and then flying away, all the rest following him, he said to his companions,
that that Sparrow told the rest that an Ass being burdened with wheat fell
down in a hole near the City, and that the wheat was scattered upon the ground:
many being much moved with these words, went to see, and so it was, as
Apolonius said, at which they much wondered. Also Porphyrius the Platonist in
his third book of Sacrifices, says, that there was a Swallow: for it was
certain, because every voice of any Animal is significative of some passion of
its soul, as joy, sadness, or anger, or the like, which voices it is not so
wonderful a thing should be understood by men conversant about them. But
Democritus himself declared this art, as says Pliny, by naming the birds, of
whose blood mixed together was produced a Serpent, of which whosoever did eat,
should understand the voices of birds. And Hermes says, if any one shall go
forth to catch birds on a certain day of the Kalends of November, and shall
boil the first bird which he catches, with the heart of a Fox, that all that
shall eat of this bird, shall understand the voices of birds, and all other
Animals. Also the Arabians say, that they can understand the meaning of bruits,
who shall eat the heart, and liver of Dragons. Proclus also the Platonist
believed, and wrote, that the heart of a Mole conduces to presages. There were
also divinations, and Auspicia's which were taken from the inwards of
sacrifices, the inventor whereof was Tages, of whom Lucan sang, And if the
Inwards have no credit gained,
And if this Art by Tages was but feigned.


The Roman Religion thought that the liver was the head of the inwards. Hence
the Soothsayers enquiring after future things in the inwards, did first look
into the liver, in which were two heads, whereof the one was called the head
for the City, the other for the enemy; and the head of this, or another part
being compared together, they pronounced Victory, as we read in Lucan, that the
inwards did signify the slaughter of Pompeys men, and the Victory of Caesar's,
according to these verses, In The inwards all defects are ominous
On part, and branch of the entrals does increase,
Another part is weak, and flagging lies,
Beats, and moves with quick pulse the arteries.
Then the bowels being finished, they search the heart. Now if there were a
sacrifice found without an heart, or a head was wanting in the Liver, these
were deadly presages, and were called piacularia. Also if a sacrifice fled from
the Altar, or being smitten, made a lowing, or fell upon any part of his body
then he ought to do, it was the like ominous. We read that when Julius Caesar
upon a day went forth to procession with his purple Robe, and sitting in a
golden chair, and sacrificeing, there was twice a Heart wanting; And when C.
Marius Utica was sacrificing, there was wanting a Liver. Also when Caius the
prince, and M. Marcellus, C. Claudius, and L. Petellius Coss: were offering
sacrifices, that the Liver was consumed away suddenly: and not long after, one
of them dyed of a disease, another was slain by men of Lyguria, the entrals
foretelling so much: which was thought to be done by the power of the Gods, or
help of the devil: Hence it was accounted a thing of great concernment amongst
the Ancients as often as any thing unusual was found in the inwards: as when
Sylla was sacrificing at Laurentum, the figure of a Crown appeared in the head
of the Liver: which Posthumous the Soothsayer interpreted to portend a Victory
with a Kingdom, and therefore advised that Sylla should eat those entrals
himself. The color also of the inwards is to be considered. Of these Lucan
made mention. Struck at the color Prophets were with fear,
For with foul spots pale entrals tinged were.
Both black, and blew, with specks of sprinkled blood
They were --


There was in times past such a venerable esteem of these arts, that the most
potent, and wise men sought after them yea the Senate, and Kings did nothing
without the Counsel of the Augures. But all these in these days, partly by
the negligence of men, and partly by the authority of the Fathers, are
abolished.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Sooth sayings of Flashes, and Lightenings, and how
Monstrous, and prodigious things are to be interpreted.
NOw the Sooth-sayings of Flashes, and Lightenings, and of wonders, and how
monstrous, and prodigious things are to be interpreted, the Prophets, and
Priests of Hetruscus have taught the Art. For they have ordained sixteen
Regions of the Heavens, and have ascribed Gods to every one of them; and
besides eleven kinds of Lightenings, and nine Gods, which should dart them
forth, by showing rules for the understanding the signification of them. But as
often as Monstrous, prodigious, and wondrous things happen, they do presage, as
is most certain, some great matter. Now their interpreter must be some
excellent conjecturer of similitudes, as also some curious searcher, and of
them who at that time are employed about the affairs of Princes, and Provinces.
For the Celestials take such care only for Princes, peoples, and provinces,
that before the rest they might be prefigured, and admonished, by Stars, by
Constellations, by wonders, and by prodigies. Now if the same thing, or the
like has been seen in former Ages, we must consider that very thing, and what
happened after that, and according to these, to foretell the same, or the like
because the same signs are for the same things, and the like for like. So
prodigies have come before the birth, and death of many emient men and Kings;
as Cicero makes mention of Midas a boy, into whose mouth, whilst he was
sleeping, the Pismire put corns of Wheat, which was an omen of great riches. So
Bees sat upon the mouth of Plato when he was sleeping in the Cradle, by which
was soretold the sweetness of his speech. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth
Paris, saw a burning Torch, which should set on fire Troy, and all Asia. There
appeared unto the mother of Phalaris the image of Mercury pouring forth blood
upon the earth, with which the whole house was over-flowed. The mother of
Dionysius dreamed she brought forth a Satyr, which prodigious dreams the event
that followed made good. The wife of Tarquinius Priscus seeing a flame lick the
head of Servius Tullius, foretold that he should have the Kingdom. In like
manner after Troy was taken, Aeneas disputing with Anchises his father
concerning a flight, there appeared a flame licking the Crown of Ascanius his
head, and doing of him no hurt: which thing, seeing it did portend the Kingdom
to Ascanius, persuaded him to depart, for monstrous prodigies did fore-run
great and eminent destruction. So we read in Pliny, that M. Attilius, and C.
Portius being Consuls, it rained Milk and Blood, which did presage that a very
great Pestilence should the next year overspread Rome. Also in Lucania it
rained spongious Iron and in the year before Marcus Crassus was slain in
Parthia; with which also all the soldiers of Lucania, being a very numerous
Army, were slain. Also L. Paulus, and C. Marcellus being Consuls, it rained
Wool about the Castle of Corisanum, near which place a year after T. Annius was
slain by Milus. Also in the wars of Denmark, the noise of Arms. and sound of a
Trumpet was heard in the Air. And Livie concerning the Macedonian wars, says,
in the year when Annibil dyed it rained blood for two days. Also concerning
the second punick war, he says, that water mixed with blood came down from
Heaven like rain, at that time when Annibal did spoil Italy. A little before
the destruction of ^euctra the Lacedaemonians heard a noise of Arms in the
temple of Hercules, and at the same time in the temple of Hercules, the doors
that were shut with bars, opened themselves, and the arms that were hanged on
the wall, were found on the ground. The like events may be prognosticated of
other like things, as oftentimes in times past something has been foretold of
them. But concerning these also, the judgments of the Celestial influencies
must not be neglected, of which we shall more largely treat in the following
Chapters.

CHAP. LVII. Of Geomancy, Hydromaency, Aeromancy, Pyromancy, four Divinations
of Elements.
MOreover the Elements themselves teach us fatal events; whence those four
famous kinds of Divinations, Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy,
have got their names, of which that Sorceress in Lucan seems to boast her self,
when she says, The Earth, the Air, the Chaos, and the Sky,
The Seas, the Fields, the Rocks, and Mountains high
Foretell the truth --


The first therefore is Geomancy, which foresheweth future things by the
motions of the earth, as also the noise, the swelling, the trembling, the
chops, the pits, and exhalation, and other impressions, the art of which
Almadel the Arabian sets forth. But there is another kind of Geomancy, which
Divines by points written upon the earth, by a certain power in the fall of it,
which is not of present speculation; but of that we shall speak hereafter.

Now Hydromancy does perform its presages by the impressions of water, their
ebbing and flowing, their increases, and depressions, their tempests, and
colors, and the like; to which also are added visions, which are made in the
waters. A kind of Divination found by the Persians, as Varro reports, a boy saw
in the water the effigies of Mercury, which foretold in an hundred and fifty
verses all the event of Mithridates his War. We read also that Numa Pompilius
practiced Hydromancy; for in the water he called up the gods, and learned of
them things to come. Which art also Pythagoras, a long time after Numa
practiced. There was of old a kind of Hydromancy, had in great esteem amongst
the Assyrians, and it was called Lecanomancy, from a skin full of water, upon
which they put plates of Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, written upon
with certain images, names, and characters. To this may be referred that art,
by which Lead, and Wax being melted, and cast into the water, do express
manifest marks of images, what we desire to know. There were also in former
years Fountains that did foretell things to come, as the Fathers-Fountain at
Achaia, and that which was called the water of Juno in Epidaurus; but of these
more in the following Chapters, where we shall speak of Oracles.

Hither also may be referred the divination of Fishes, of which kind there was
use made by the Lycians in a certain place, which was called Dina, near the
Sea, in a Wood dedicated to Apollo, made hollow in the dry sand, into which, he
that went to consult of future things, let down roasted meat, and presently
that place was filled with waters, and a great multitude of Fish, and of
strange shapes, unknown to men, did appear, by the forms of which the Prophet
foretold what should come to pass. These things does Atheneus more at large
relate out of Polycharmus, in the History of the Lycians.

After the same manner does Aeromancy divine by airy impressions, by the blowing
of the Winds, by Rainbows, by Circles about the Moon and Stars, by Mists, and
Clouds, and by imaginations in Clouds, and visions in the Air.

So also Pyromancy divines by fiery impressions, and by Stars with long Tails,
by fiery Colors, by visions, and imaginations in the fire. So the wife of
Cicero foretold that he would be Consul the next year, because when a certain
man after the Sacrifice was ended, would look in the ashes, there suddenly
broke forth a flame. Of this kind are those that Pliny speaks of, that terrene,
pale, and buzzing fires presage tempests, Circles about the snuffs of Candles
betoken rain; if the flame fly turning, and winding, it portends wind. Also
Torches when they strike the fire before them, and are not kindled: Also when a
Coal sticks to Pots taken off from the fire, and when the fire casts off the
ashes, and sparkles, or when ashes are hard grown together on the hearth, and
when a Coal is very bright.

To these is added Capnomancy, so called from smoke, because it searches into
the flame, and smoke, and thin colors, sounds, and motions, when they are
carried upright, or on one side, or round, which we read in these Verses in
Statius. Let Piety be bound, and on the Altar laid,
Let us implore the Gods for divine aid.
She makes acute, red, towering flames, and bright,
Increased by the air, the middle being white;
And then she makes the flames without all bound,
For to wind in and out, and to run round.
Like to a Serpent --


Also in the Aethnean Caves, and Fields of the Nymphs in Apollonia, Auguries
were taken from fires, and flames; joyful, if they did receive what was cast
into them, and sad, if they did reject them. But of these we shall speak in the
following Chapters, amongst the answers of the Oracles.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the reviving of the dead, and of sleeping, and wanting
victuals many years together.
THE Arabian Philosophers agree, that some men may elevate themselves above the
powers of their body, and above their sensitive powers; and those being
surmounted, receive into themselves by the perfection of the Heavens, and
Intelligencies, a divine vigor. Seeing therefore all the souls of men are
perpetual, and also all the spirits obey the perfect souls; Magicians think
that perfect men may by the powers of their soul repair their dying bodies with
other inferior souls newly separated, and inspire them again; As a Weesell
that is killed, is made alive again by the breath, and cry of his Dam; And
Lions make alive their dead Whelps by breathing upon them. And because, as they
say, all like things being applied to their like, are made of the same natures;
and every patient, and thing that receives into it self the act of any agent,
is endowed with the nature of that agent, and made con-naturall. Hence they
think, that to this vivification, or making alive, some Herbs, and Magical
confections, such as they say are made of the ashes of the Phoenix, and the
cast skin of a Snake do much conduce, which indeed to many seems fabulous, and
to some impossible, unless it could be accounted approved by an Historical
faith. For we read of some that have been drowned in water, others cast into
the fire, and put upon the fire, others slain in war, others otherwise tried,
and after a few days were alive again, as Pliny testifies of Aviola, a man
pertaining to the Consul, of L. Lamia, Caelius, Tubero, Corfidius, Gabienus,
and many others. Also we read that Aesop the Tale-maker, Tindoreus, Hercules,
and Palicy, the sons of Jupiter, and Thalia being dead, were raised to life
again; also that many were by Physicians, and Magicians raised from death
again, as the Historians relate of Aesculapius; and we have above mentioned out
of Juba, and Xanthus, and Philostratus concerning Tillo, and a certain Arabian,
and Apollonius the Tyanean. Also we read that Glaucus, a certain man that was
dead, whom they say, beyond all expectation, the Physicians coming to see it,
the herb Dragon-wort restored to life. Some say that he revived by the putting
into his body a medicine made of Honey, whence the proverb, Glaucus was raised
from death by taking in Honey into his body. Apuleius also relating the manner
of these kinds of restorings to life, says of Zachla the Egyptian prophet: The
prophet being thus favorable, lays a certain Herb upon the mouth of the body
of a young man being dead, and another upon his breast, then turning towards-the
East, or rising of the propitious Sun, praying silently (a great assembly of
people striving to see it) in the first place heaved up his breast, then makes a
beating in his veins, then his body to be filled with breath, after which the
Carkase arises, and the young man speaks. If these things are true, the dying
souls must, sometimes lying hid in their bodies, be oppressed with vehement
ecstasies, and be freed from all bodily action: So that the life, sense, motion,
forsake the body, but so, that the man is not yet truly dead, but lies
astonished, and as it were dead for a certain time. And this is often found, that
in times of Pestilence many that are carried for dead to the graves to be
buried, revive again. The same also has often befaln women, by reason of fits
of the Mother. And Rabbi Moises out of the book of Galen, which Patriarcha
translated, makes mention of a man, who was suffocated for six days, and did
neither eat, nor drink, and his arteries became hard. And it is said in the
same book, that a certain man by being filled with Water, lost the pulse of his
whole body, so that his heart was not perceived to move, and he lay like a dead
man. Also it is said that a man by reason of a fall from an high place, or great
noise, or long staying under the Water, may fall into a swoun, which may
continue forty eight hours, and so he lie as if he were dead, with his face
being very green. And in the same place there is mention made of a man that
buried a man that seemed to be dead seventy two hours after his seeming
decease, and so killed him, because he buried him alive, and there are given
signs whereby it may be known who are alive; although they seem to be dead, and
indeed will dye, unless there be some means used to recover them, as
Phlebotomy, or some other cure. And these are such as very seldom happen. This
is the manner, by which we understand Magicians, and Physicians do raise dead
men to life, as they that were tried by the stinging of Serpents, were by the
Nation of the Marsi, and the Psilli restored to life. Now we may conceive that
such kind of ecstasies may continue a long time, although a man be not truly
dead, as it is in Dor-mice, and Crocodiles, and many other Serpents, which
sleep all Winter, and are in such a dead sleep, that they can scarce be
awakened with fire. And I have often seen a Dor mouse dissected, and continue
immovable, as if she were dead, until she was boiled, and then presently in
boiling the water the dissected members did show life. Also, although it be
hard to be believed, we read in some approved Historians, that some men hvae
slept for many years together, and in the time of sleep, until they awaked,
there was no alteration in them, as to make them seem older: The same does
Pliny testify of a certain boy, whom he says, being wearied with heat, and
his journey, slept fifty seven years in a Cave. We read also that Epimenides
Gnosius slept fifty seven years in a Cave. Hence the proverb arose, To outsleep
Epimenides. M. Damascenus tells, that in his time a certain country man being
wearied in Germany, slept for the space of a whole Autumn, and the Winter
following, under a heap of hay, until the Summer, when the hay began to be
eaten up, then he was found awakened as a man half dead, and out of his wits.
Eclesiasticall Histories confirm this opinion concerning the seven sleepers,
whom they say slept 196 years. There was in Norvegia a Cave in a high
Seashore, where, as Paulus Diaconus, and Methodius the Martyr write, seven men
lay sleeping a long time without any corruption, and the people that went in to
disturb them were contracted, or drawn together, so that after a while being
forewarned by that punishment, they durst not hurt them. Now Xenocrates, a man
of no mean repute amongst Philosophers was of opinion, that this long sleeping
was appointed by God as a punishment for some certain sins. But Marcus
Damascenus proves it by many reasons to be possible, and natural, neither does
he think it irrational, that some should without meat, and drink, and avoiding
excrements, without consuming, or corruption, sleep many months. And this may
befall a man by reason of some poisonous potion, or sleepy disease, or such
like causes, for certain days, months, or years, according to the intention,
or remission of the power of the medicine, or of the passions of their mind.
And Physicians say that there are some Antidotes, of which they that take too
great a potion, shall be able to endure hunger a long time, as Elias in former
time being fed with a certain food by an Angel, walked, and fasted in the
strength of that meat, forty days. And John Bocatius makes mention of a man
in his time, in Venice, who would every year fast four days without any meat.
But that was a greater wonder, that there was a woman in lower Germany at the
same time, who took no food till the thirteenth year of her age, which to us
may seem incredible, but that he lately confirmed it; as also he tells of a
Miracle of our Age, that his brother Nicolaus Stone, an Helvetian by Nation,
who lived twenty years in the wilderness without meat, till he dyed. That also
is wonderful which Theophrastus mentions concerning a certain man, called
Philinus, who used no meat, or drink, besides Milk. And there are grave Authors
who describe a certain herb of Sparta, with which they say the Scythians can
endure twelve days hunger, without meat or drink, if they do but taste it, or
hold it in their mouth.

CHAP. LIX. Of Divination by Dreams.
THere is also a certain kind of Divination by Dreams, confirmed by the
traditions of Philosophers, the authorities of Divines, the examples of
Histories, and daily experience. A Dream I call here, not vain Dreams, or idle
imaginations: for those are vain, and have no Divination in them, but arise
from the remains of watchings, and disturbance of the body. For as the mind is
taken up about, and wearied with cares, it suggests it self to him that is
asleep. I call that a Dream here, which is caused by the Celestial influences
in the fantastic spirit, mind, or body, being all well disposed. The rule of
interpreting this is found amongst Astrologers, in that part which is wrote
concerning questions; but yet that is not sufficient, because these kind of
Dreams come by use to diverse men after a diverse manner, according to the diverse
quality, and dispositions of the fantastic spirit: wherefore there cannot be
given one common rule to all for the interpretation of Dreams. But according to
the opinion of Synesius, seeing there are the same accidents to things, and
like befall like; so he which has often fallen upon the same visible thing,
has assigned to himself the same opinion, passion, fortune, action, event, and
as Aristotle says, the memory is confirmed by sense, and by keeping in memory
the same thing knowledge is obtained, as also by the knowledge of many
experiences, by little, and little, arts, and sciences are obtained. After the
same account you must conceive of Dreams. Whence Synesius commands that every
one should observe his Dreams, and their events, and such like rules, viz. to
commit to memory all things that are seen, and accidents that befall, as well
in sleep, as watching, and with a diligent observation consider with himself
the rules by which these are to be examined, for by this means shall a Diviner
be able by little, and little to interpret his Dreams, if so be nothing slip
out of his memory. Now Dreams are more efficatious, when the Moon over-runs
that Sign, which was in the ninth number of the Nativity, or revolution of that
year, or in the ninth Sign from the Sign of perfection. For it is a most true,
and certain divination, neither does it proceed from nature or humane Arts, but
from purified minds, by divine inspiration. Now we shall discuss, and examine
that which belongs to prophecyings, and oracles.

CHAP. LX. Of Madness, and Divinations which are made when men are awake, and
of the power of a Melancholy humor, by which Spirits are sometimes induced into
men's bodies.
IT happens also sometimes, that not only they that are asleep, but also they
that are watchful do with a kind of instigation of mind, Divine, which
Divination Aristotle calls ravishment or a kind of madness, and teaches that it
proceeds from a melancholy humor, saying in his Treatise of divination:
Melancholy men, by reason of their earnestness, do far better conjecture, and
quickly conceive a habit, and most easily receive an impression of the
Celestials. And in his Problemes says, that the Sybils, and the Bacchides, and
Niceratus the Syracusan, and Amon, were by their natural Melancholy complexion
Prophets, and Poets. The cause therefore of this madness, if it be any thing
within the body, is a melancholy humor, not that which they call black choler,
which is so obstinate, and terrible a thing, that the violence of it is said by
Physicians, and Natural Philosophers, besides mandness, which it does induce,
also to entice evil spirits to seize upon men's bodies. Therefore we understand
a melancholy humor here, to be a natural, and white choler. For this, when it
is stirred up, burns, and stirs up a madness conducing to knowledge, and
divination, especially if it be helped by any Celestial influx, especially of
Saturn, who seeing he is cold, and dry, as is a melancholy humor, has his
influence upon it, increases, and preserves it. Besides, seeing he is the
Author of secret contemplation, and estranged from all public affairs, and the
highest of all the planets, does always as with call his mind from outward
businesses, so also makes it ascend higher, and bestows upon him the knowledge,
and passages of future things. And this is Aristotle's meaning in his book of
Problemes. By Melancholy, says he, some men are made as it were divine,
foretelling things to come, and some men are made Poets. He says also, that
all men that were excellent in any Science, were for the most part melancholy.
Democritus, and Plato attest the same, saying, that there were some melancholy
men, that had such excellent wits, that they were thought, and seemed to be
rather divine then humane. So also there have been many melancholy men at first
rude, ignorant, and untractable, as they say, Hesiod, Jon, Tynnichus,
Calcinenses, Homer, and Lucretius were, who on a sudden were taken with a
madness, and became Poets, and prophesied wonderful, and divine things, which
they themselves scarce understood. Whence divine Plato in Jon says, many
Prophets, after the violence of their madness was abated do not well understand
what they wrote, yet treated acurately of each Art in their madness, as all
Artists by reading of them judge. So great also they say the power of
melancholy is of, that by its force, Celestial spirits also are sometimes
drawn into men's bodies, by whose presence, and instinct, antiquity testifies
men have been made drunk, and spoke most wonderful things. And that they think
happens under a threefoold difference, according to a threefold apprehension of
the soul, viz. imaginative, rational, and mental. They say therefore, when
the mind is forced with a melancholy humor, nothing moderating the power of the
body, and passing beyond the bonds of the members, is wholly carried into
imagination, and does suddenly become a seat for inferior spirits, by whom it
oftentimes receives wonderful ways, and forms of manual Arts. So we see that
any most ignorant man does presently become an excellent painter, or contrivers
of building, and to become a master in anysuch Art. But when these kinds of
spirits portend to us future things, then they show those things which belong
to the disturbing of the Elements, and changes of times, as rain, tempests,
innudations, earthquakes, great mortality, famine, slaughter, and the like. As
we read in Aulus Gelius, that Cornelius Patarus his Priest did at that time,
when Caesar, and Pompey were to fight in Thessalia, being taken with a madness,
foretell the time, order, and issue of the battle. But when the mind is turned
wholly into reason, it becomes a receptacle for middle spirits. Hence it obtains
the knowledge, and understanding of natural, and humane things. So we see that
a man sometimes does on a sudden become a Philosopher, Physician, or an
excellent Orator, and foretells mutations of Kingdoms, and restitutions of
Ages, and such things as belong to them, as the Sybill did to the Romans; but
when the mind is wholly elevated into the understanding, then it becomes a
receptable of sublime spirits, and learns of them the secrets of divine things,
as the Law of God, the orders of Angels, and such things as belong to the
knowledge of things eternal, and salvation of souls. It foresees things which
are appointed by Gods special predestination, as future prodigies, or
miracles, the prophet to come, the changing of the law. So the Sybills
Prophesied of Christ a long time before his coming. So Virgil understanding
that Christ was at hand, and remembering what the Sybill Cumaea had said, sang
thus to Pollio. Last times are come, Cumaea's prophecy
Now from high heaven springs a new progeny,
And times great order now again is born,
The Maid returns, Saturnian Realms return.
And a little after intimating that original sin shall be of no effect, says,
If any prints of our old vice remained
By thee they are void, and fear shall leave the Land;
He a Gods life shall take, with Gods shall see
Mixed Heroes, and himself their object be,
Rule with paternall power the appeased earth
He shall --
Then he adds, that thence the fall of the Serpent, and the poison of the tree
of death, or of the knowledge of good, and evil shall be nulled, saying, --
The Serpent shall
And the deceitful herb of venom fall.
Yet he intimates that some sparks of original sin shall remain, when he
says, Some steps of ancient fraud shall yet be found. And at last with a most
great hyberbole cries out to this child, as the offspring of God, adoring of
him in these words, Dear race of Gods, great stock of Jupiter,
Behold! the world shakes on its ponderous axe,
See earth, and heavens immense, and the Ocean tracts,
How all things at the approaching Age rejoice!
Oh! that my life would last so long, and voice,
As would suffice thy actions to rehearse.


There are also some prognostics, which are in the middle, betwixt natural,
and supernatural divination, as in those who are near to death, and being
weakened with old Age, do sometimes foresee things to come, because as says
Plato, by how much the more men are less hindered by their sense, so much the
more acurately they understand and because they are nearer to the place whither
they must go, and their bonds being as it were a little loosed, seeing they are
no more subject to the body, easily perceive the light of divine revelation.

CHAP. LXI. Of the forming of Man, of the external Senses, and also the Inward,
and the Mind: of the threefold appetite of the Soul, and passions of the Will.
IT is the opinion of some Divines, That God did not immediately creat the body
of man, but by the assistance of the heavenly Spirits compound, and frame him;
which opinion Alcinous, and Plato favor; thinking that God is the chief
Creator of the whole world, of the spirits both good and bad, and therefore
immortalized them: but that all kinds of mortal animals were made at the
command of God; for if he should have created them, they must have been
immortal. The spirits therefore mixing Earth, Fire, Air, and Water together,
made of them all, put together, one body, which they subjected to the service
of the soul, assigning in it several Provinces to each power thereof, to the
meaner of them, mean and low places: as to Anger the Midrist, to Lust the Womb,
but to the more noble senses the Head, as the Tower of the whole body, and then
the manifold Organs of Speech. They divide the Sense into External, and
Internal. The external are divided into five, known to every one, to which
there are allotted five Organs, or subjects, as it were Foundations; being so
ordered, that they which are placed in the more eminent part of the body, have
a greater degree of purity. For the Eyes placed in the uppermost place, are the
most pure, and have an affinity with the Nature of Fire, and Light: then the
Ears have the second order of place, and purity, and are compared to the Air:
the Nostrils have the third order, and have a middle nature betwixt the Air,
and the Water; then the Organ of tasting, which is grosser and most like to the
nature of Water: Last of all, the touching is diffused through the whole body,
and is compared to the grossness of Earth. The more pure senses are those which
perceive their Objects farthest off, as Seeing, and Hearing, then the Smelling,
then the Taste, which does not perceive but those that are nigh. But the touch
perceives both ways, for it perceives bodies nigh; and as Sight discerns by
the medium of the Air, so the touch perceives by the medium of a stick or
pole, bodies Hard, Soft, and Moist. Now the touch only is common to all
animals. Fot it is most certain that man has this sense, and in this, and taste
he excels all other animals, but in the other three he is excelled by some
animals, as by a Dog, who Hears, Sees, and Smells more acutely then Man, and the
Linx, and Eagles see more acutely then all other Animals, and Man. Now the
interior senses are, according to Averrois, divided into four, whereof the
first is called Common sense, because it does first collect, and perfect all
the representations which are drawn in by the outward senses. The second is the
imaginative power, whose office is, seeing it represents nothing, to retain
those representations which are received by the former senses, and to present
them to the third faculty of inward sense, which is the fantasy, or power of
judging, whose work is also to perceive, and judge by the representations
received, what or what kind of thing that is of which the representations are,
and to commit those things which are thus discerned, and adjudged, to the
memory to be kept. For the virtues thereof in general, are discourse,
dispositions, persecutions, and flights, and stirrings up to action: but in
particular, the understanding of intellecutals, virtues, the manner of
Discipline, Counsel, Election. And this is that which shows us future things by
dreams: whence the Fancy is sometimes named the Fantastical Intellect. For it
is the last impression of the understanding; which, as says Iamblicus, is
belonging to all the powers of the mind, and forms all figures, resemblances of
species, and operations, and things seen, and sends forth the impressions of
other powers unto others: And those things which appear by sense, it stirs up
into an opinion, but those things which appear by the Intellect, in the second
place it offers to opinion, but of it self it receives images from all, and by
its property, does properly assign them, according to their assimilation, forms
all the actions of the soul, and accommodates the external to the internal,
and impresses the body with its impression. Now these senses have their Organs
in the head, for the Common sense, and imagination take up the two former Cells
of the brain, although Aristotle places the Organ of the Common sense in the
heart, but the cogitative power possesses the highest, and middle part of the
head; and lastly, the memory the hinmost part thereof. Moreover, the Organs of
Voice, and Speech are many, as the inward muscles of the breast betwixt the
ribs, the breasts, the lungs, the arteries, the windpipe, the bowing of the
Tongue, and all those parts and muscles that serve for breathing. But the
proper Organ of Speech is the Mouth, in which are framed words, and speeches,
the Tongue, the Teeth, the Lips, the Palate, etc. Above the sensible soul,
which expresses its powers by the Organs of the body, the incorporeall mind
possesses the highest place, and it has a double nature, the one, which
inquireth into the causes, properties, and progress of those things which are
contained in the order of nature, and is content in the contemplation of the
truth, which is therefore called the contemplative intellect. The other is a
power of the mind, which discerning by consulting what things are to be done,
and what things to be shunned is wholly taken up in consultation, and action,
and is therefore called the Active Intellect. This Order of powers therefore
nature ordained in man, that by the external senses we might know corporeal
things, by the internal the representations of bodies, as also things
abstracted by the mind and intellect, which are neither bodies, nor any thing
like them. And according to this threefold order of the powers of the soul,
there are three appetites in the soul: The first is natural, which is an
inclination of nature into its end, as of a stone downward, which is in all
stones: another is animal, which the sense follows, and it is divided into
irascible, and concupiscible the third is intellective, which is called the
will, differing from the sensitive, in this, the sensitive is of it self, of
these things, which may be presented to the senses, desiring, nothing unless in
some manner comprehended. But the will, although it be of it self, of all
things that are possible, yet because it is free by its essence, it may be also
of things that are impossible, as it was in the Devil, desiring himself to be
equal with God, and therefore is altered and depraved with pleasure and
continual anguish, whilst it assents to the inferior powers. Whence from its
depraved appetite there arise four passions in it, with which in like manner
the body is affected sometimes. Whereof the first is called Oblectation, which
is a certain quietness or assentation of the mind or will, because it obeys,
and not willingly consents to that pleasantness which the senses hold forth;
which is therefore defined to be an inclination of the mind to an effeminate
pleasure. The second is called effusion, which is a remission of, or
dissolution of the power, viz. when beyond the oblectation the whole power of
the mind, and intension of the present good is melted, and diffuseth it self to
enjoy it. The third is vaunting, and loftiness, thinking it self to have
attained to some great good, in the enjoyment of which it prides it self, and
glories. The fourth and the last is Envy, or a certain kind of pleasure or
delight at another man's harm, without any advantage to it self. It is said to
be without any advantage to it self, because if any one should for his own
profit rejoice at an other man's harm, this would rather be out of love to
himself, then out of ill will to another. And these four passions arising from a
depraved appetite of pleasure, the grief or perlexity it self does also beget
so many contrary passions, as Horror, Sadness, Fear, and Sorrow at another
good, without his own hurt, which we call Envy, i. e. Sadness at another
prosperity, as pity is a certain kind of sadness at another misery.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Passions of the Mind, their Original, difference, and kinds.
THe passions of the mind are nothing else but certain motions or inclinations
proceeding from the apprehension of any thing, as of good or evil, convenient
or inconvenient. Now these kind of apprehensions are of three sorts, viz.
Sensual, Rational, and Intellectual. And according to these three, are three
sorts of passions in the Soul; For when they follow the sensitive apprehension,
then they respect a temporal good or evil, under the notion of profitable, or
unprofitable, delightful and offensive, and are called natural, or animal
passions. When they follow the rational apprehension, and so respect good or
bad, under the notions of Virtue or Vice, praise or disgrace, profitable or
unprofitable, honest or dishonest, they are called rational, or voluntary
passions. When they follow the Intellectual apprehension, and respect good or
bad, under the notion of just or unjust, true or false, they are called
intellectual passions, or synderesis. Now the subject of the passions of the
soul, is the concupitive power of the soul, and is divided into concupiscible,
and irascible, and both respect good and bad, but under a different notion. For
when the concupiscible power respects good, and evil absolutely; Love or Lust,
or on the contrary, hatred is caused: When it respects good, as absent, so
desire is caused; or evil, as absent, or at hand, and so is caused horror,
flying from, or loathing: or if it respect good, as present, then there is
caused delight, mirth, or pleasure; but if evil, as present, then sadness,
anxiety, grief. But the irascible power respects good or bad, under the notion
of some difficulty; to obtain the one, or avoid the other, and this sometimes
with confidence: and so there is caused Hope or Boldness; but when with
diffidency, then Despair, and Fear. But when that irascible power rises into
revenge, and this be only about some evil past, as it were of injury or hurt
offered, there is caused Anger. And so we find eleven passions in the mind,
which are, Love, Hatred, Desire, Horror, Joy, Grief, Hope, Despair, Boldness,
Fear, and Anger.

CHAP. LXIII. How the passions of the mind change the proper body, by changing
the Accidents, and moving the spirit.
THe Fantasy, or imaginative power has a ruling power over the passions of
the soul, when they follow the sensual apprehension. For this does of its own
power, according to the diversity of the Passions, First of all change the
proper body with a sensible transmutation, by changing the Accidents in the
body, and by moving the spirit upward or downward, inward, or outward, and by
producing diverse qualities in the members. So in joy, the spirits are driven
outward, in fear, drawn back, in bashfulness, are moved to the brain. So in
joy, the heart is dilated outward, by little, and little, in sadness, is
constringed by little, and little inward. After the same manner in anger or
fear, but suddenly. Again anger, or desire of revenge produces heat, redness,
a bitter taste, and a looseness. Fear induces cold, trembling of the heart,
speechlesness, and paleness. Sadness causes sweat, and a bluish whiteness.
Pity, which is a kind of sadness, does often ill affect the body of him that
takes pity, that it seems to be the body of another man affected. Also it is
manifest, that amongst some lovers there is such a strong tie of love, that
what the one suffers, the other suffers. Anxiety induces dryness, and
blackness. And how great heats love stirs up in the Liver, and pulse,
Physicians know, discerning by that kind of judgment the name of her that is
beloved, in an Heroic Passion. So Naustratus knew that Antiochus was taken
with the love of Stratonica. It is also manifest that such like Passions, when
they are most vehement, may cause death. And this is manifest to all men, that
with too much joy, sadness, love, hatred, men many times dye, and are sometimes
freed from a disease. So we read, that Sophocles, and Dionysius the Sicilian
Tyrant, did both suddenly dye at the news of a Tragical victory. So a certain
woman seeing her son returning from the Canensian battle, dyed suddenly. Now
what sadness can do, is known to all. We know that Dogs oftentimes dye with
sadness for the death of their masters. Sometimes also by reason of these like
Passions, long diseases follow, and are sometimes cured. So also some men
looking from an high place, by reason of great fear, tremble, are dim-sighted,
and weakened, and sometimes loose their senses. So fears, and falling sickness,
sometimes follow sobbing. Sometimes wonderful effects are produced, as in the
son of Craesus, whom his mother brought forth dumb, yet a vehement fear, and
ardent affection made him speak, which naturally he could never do. So with a
sudden fall oftentimes life, sense, motion on a sudden leave the members, and
presently again are sometimes returned. And how much vehement anger, joined
with great audacity, can do, Alexander the great shows, who being circumvented
with a battle in India, was seen to send forth from himself lightening and
fire. The Father of Theodoricus is said to have sent forth out of his body,
sparks of fire; so that sparkling flames did leap out with a noise. And such
like things sometimes appear in beasts, as in Tiberius his horse, which is said
to send forth a flame out of his mouth.

CHAP. LXIV. How the Passions of the mind change the body by way of imitation
from some resemblance; Also of the transforming, and translating of men, and
what force the imaginative power has not only over the body, but the soul.
THe foresaid Passions sometimes alter the body by way of imitation, by reason
of the virtue which the likness of the thing has to change it, which power the
vehement imagination moves, as in seeting the teeth on edge at the sight or
hearing of something, or because we see or imagine another to eat sharp or
sour things: So he which sees another gape, gapes also; and some when they
hear any one name sour things, their tongue waxes tart. Also the seeing of
any filthy thing causes nauseousness. Many at the sight of man's blood fall
into a swoun. Some when they see bitter meat given to any, perceive a bitter
spitle in their mouth. And William of Paris says, that he saw a man, that at
the sight of a medicine, went to stool as often as he pleased; when as neither
the substance of the medicine, nor the odor, nor the taste of it came to him:
but only a kind of resemblance was apprehended by him. Upon this account some
that are in a dream think they burn, and are in a fire, and are fearfully
tormented, as if they did truly burn, when as the substance of the fire is not
near them, but only a resemblance apprehended by their imagination. And
sometimes men's bodies are transformed, and transfigured, and also transported,
and this oft-times when they are in a dream, and sometimes when they are awake.
So Cyprus after he was chosen King of Italy, did very much wonder at, and
meditate upon the sight, and victory of Bulls, and in the thought thereof did
sleep a whole night, but in the morning was found horned, no otherwise then by
the vegetative power being stirred up by a vehement imagination, elevating
corniferous humors into his head, and producing horns. For a vehement
cogitation, whilst it vehemently moves the species, pictures out the figure of
the thing thought on, which they represent in their blood, and the blood
impresseth from it self, on the members that are nourished by it, as upon those
of the same body, so upon those of another. As the imagination of a woman with
child impresseth the mark of the thing longed for upon her infant, and the
imagination of a man bit with a mad Dog, impresseth upon his Urine the image of
Dogs. So men may grow gray on a sudden. And some by the dream of one night,
have grown up from boys into perfect men. Hitherto may be referred those many
scarrs of King Dagobertus, and Marks of Franciscus, which they received, the
one whilst he was afraid of correction, the other whilst he did wonderfully
meditate upon the wounds of Christ. So, many are transpored from place to
place, passing over rivers, fires, and unpassable places, viz. when the species
of any vehement desire, or fear, or boldness are impressed upon their spirits,
and being mixed with vapors, do move the Organ of the touch in their original,
together with fantasy, which is the original of local motion. Whence they
stir up the members, and Organs of motion to motion, and are moved without any
mistake unto the imagined place, not out of sight, but from the interior
fantasy. So great a power is there of the soulupon the body, that which way
soever that imagines, and dreams that it goes, thither does it lead the body.
We read many other examples by which the power of the soul upon the body is
wonderfully explaned, as is that which Avicen describes of a certain man, who
when he pleased could affect his body with the palsy. They report of Gallus
Vibius, that he did fall into madness, not casually, but on purpose: for
whilst he did imitate mad men, he assimilated their madness to himself, and
became mad indeed. And Austin makes mention of some men who would move their
ears at their pleasure, and some that would move the crown of their head to
their forehead, and could draw it back again when they pleased: and of another
that could sweat at his pleasure. And it is well known, that some can weep at
their pleasure, and pour forth abundance of tears: and that there are some that
can bring up what they have swallowed, when they please, as out of a bag, by
degrees. And we see that in these days there are many who can so imitate, and
express the voices of Birds, Cattle, Dogs, and some men, that they can scarce
at all be discerned. Also Pliny relates by diverse examples, that women have
been turned into men. Pontanus testifies that in his time a certain women
called Caietava, and another called Aemilia, who after many years, after they
were married, were changed into men Now how much imagination can do upon the
soul, no man is ignorant: for it is nearer to the substance of the soul then
the sense is; wherefore it acts more upon the soul then the sense does. So
women by certain strong imaginations, dreams, and suggestions brought in by
certain Magical Arts do often times bind them into most strong loving of any
one. So they say that Medea only by a dream, burnt in love toward Jason. So
the soul sometimes is by a vehement imagination, or speculation altogether
abstracted from the body, as Celsus relates of a certain Presbyter, who as often
as he pleased, could make himself senseless, and lie like a dead man, that when
any one pricked, or burned him, he felt no pain, but lay without any motion or
breathing, yet he could, as he said, hear men's voices as it were afar off, if
they cried out aloud. But of these abstractions we shall discourse more fully
in the following Chapters.

CHAP. LXV. How the Passions of the Mind can work out of themselves upon
another Body.
THE Passions of the Soul which follow the fantasy, when they are most
vehement, cannot only change their own body, but also can transcend so, as to
work upon another body, so that some wonderful impressions are thence produced
in Elements, and (...) thing, and also can so take away, of bring some d^^a^es
of the mind or body. For the Passions of the Soul are the chiefest cause of the
temperament of its proper body. So the Soul being strongly elevated, and
inflamed with a strong imagination, sends forth health or sickness, not only in
its proper body, but also in other bodies. So Avicen is of the opinion, that a
Camel may fall by the imagination of any one. So he which is bitten with a mad
Dog presently falls into a madness, and there appear in his Urine the shapes of
Dogs. So the longing of a woman with Child, does act upon another body, when
it Signs the infant in the womb with the mark of the thing longed for. So, many
monstrous generations proceed from monstrous imaginations of women with Child,
as Marcus Damascenus reports was at Petra Sancta, a Town situated upon the
territories of Pisa, viz. a wench that was presented to Charles King of Bohemia,
who was rough and hairy all over her body, like a wild beast, whom her mother
affected with a religious kind of horror upon the picture of John Baptist,
which was by her bed, in time of conception, afterward brought after this
fashion. And this we see is not only in men, but also is done amongst bruit
Creatures. So we read that Jacob the Patriarch, with his speckled Rods set in
the watering places, did discolor the Sheep of Laban. So the imaginative
powers of Pea-Cocks, and other Birds, whilst they be coupling, impress a
color upon their wings. Whence we produce white Pea-Cocks, by hanging round
the places where they couple, with white Clothes. Now by these examples it
appears how the affection of the fantasy, when it vehemently intends it self,
does not only affect its own proper body, but also another. So also the desire
of Witches to hurt, does bewitch men most perniciously with steadfast looks. To
these things Avicen, Aristotle, Algazel, and Galen assent. For it is manifest
that a body may most easily be affected with the vapor of another diseased
body, which we plainly see in the Plague, and Leprosy. Again, in the vapors
of the eyes there is so great a power, that they can bewitch and infect any
that are near them, as the Cockatrice, or Basilisk, killing men with their
looks. And certain women in Scythia, amongst the Illyrians, and Triballi,
killed whomsoever they looked angry upon. Therefore let no man wonder that the
body, and soul of one may in like manner be affected with the mind of another,
seeing the mind is far more powerful, strong, fervent, and more prevalent by
its motion then vapors exhaling out of bodies; neither are there wanting
Mediums, by which it should work, neither is another body less subjected to
another mind then to another body. Upon this account they say, that a man by
his affection, and habit only, may act upon another. Therefore Philosophers
advise, that the society of evil, and mischievous men be shunned, for their
soul being full of noxious rays, infects them that are near with a hurtful
Contagion. On the contrary, they advise that the society of good, and fortunate
men be endeavored after, because by their nearness they do us much good. For
as the smell of Assa-fetida, or Musk, so of bad something of bad, of good
something of good, is derived upon them that are nigh, and sometimes continues
a long time. Now then if the foresaid Passions have so great a power in the
Fantasy, they have certainly a greater power in the reason, in as much as the
reason is more excellent then the Fantasy; and lastly, they have much greater
power in the mind; for this, when it is fixed upon God for any good with its
whole intention, does oftentimes affect another body as well as its own with
some divine gift. By this means we read that many miracles were done by
Apollonius, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Philolaus, and many Prophets, and holy men
of our Religion.

But of these more fully in the following Chapters, where we shall discourse of
Religion.

CHAP. LXVI. That the Passions of the mind are helped by a Celestial season,
and how necessary the Constancy of the mind is in every work.
THe Passions of the mind are much helped, and are helpful, and become most
powerful by virtue of the Heaven, as they agree with the heaven, either by any
natural agreement, or voluntary Election. For as says Ptolomeus, he which
chooses that which is the better, seems to differ nothing from him who has
this of nature. It conduces therefore very much for the receiving the benefit
of the Heavens, in any work, if we shall by the Heaven make our selves suitable
to it in our thoughts, affections, imaginations, elections, deliberations,
contemplations, and the like. For such like passions do vehemently stir up our
spirit to their likeness, and suddenly exposs us, and ours to the superior
significators of such like passions; and also by reason of their dignity, and
neerness to the superiors, do much more partake of the Celestials, then any
material things. For our mind can through imaginations, or reason by a kind of
imitation, be so conformed to any Star, as suddenly to be filled with the
virtues of that Star, as if it were a proper receptacle of the influence
thereof. Now the contemplating mind, as it withdraws it self from all sense,
imagination, nature, and deliberation, and calls it self back to things
separated, unless as it exposes it self to Saturn, is not of present
consideration, or enquiry. For our mind does effect diverse things by faith,
which is a firm adhesion, a fixed intension, and vehement application of the
worker, or receiver, to him that co-operates in any thing, and gives power to
the work which we intend to do. So that there is made as it were in us the
image of the virtue to be received, and the thing to be done in us, or by us.
We must therefore in every work, and application of things, affect vehemently,
imagine, hope, and believe strongly, for that will be a great help. And it is
verified amongst Physicians, that a strong belief, and an undoubted hope, and
love toward the Physician, and medicine, conduce much to health, yea more
sometimes than the medicine it self. For the same that the efficacy, and virtue
of the medicine works, the same does the strong imagination of the Physician
work, being able to change the qualities in the body of the sick, especially
when the patient places much confidence in the Physician, by that means
disposing himself for the receiving the virtue of the Physician, and Physic.
Therefore he that works in Magic, must be of a constant belief, be credulous,
and not at all doubt of the obtaining the effect. For as a firm, and strong
belief does work wonderful things, although it be in false works, so distrust
and doubting does dissipate, and break the virtue of the mind of the worker,
which is the medium betwixt both extremes, whence it happens, that he is
frustrated of the desired influence of the superiors, which could not be
joined, and united to our labors without a firm, and solid virtue of our mind.

CHAP. LXVII. How man's mind may be joined with the mind, and Intelligencies of
the Celestials, and together with them impress certain wonderful virtues upon
inferior things.
THe Philosophers, especially the Arabians, say, that man's mind, when it is
most intent upon any work, through its passion, and effects, is joined with the
mind of the Stars, and Intelligencies, and being so joined is the cause that
some wonderful virtue be infused into our works, and things; and this, as
because there is in it an apprehension, and power of all things, so because all
things have a natural obedience to it, and of necessity an efficacy, and more
to that which desires them with a strong desire. And according to this is
verified the Art of Characters, images, enchantments, and some speeches, and
many other wonderful experiments to every thing which the mind affects. By
this means whatsoever the mind of him that is in vehement love affects, has an
efficacy to cause love, and whatsoever the mind of him that strongly hates,
dictates, has an efficacy to hurt, and destory. The like is in other things,
which the mind affects with a strong desire. For all those things which the
mind acts, and dictates by Characters, Figures, Words, Speeches, Gestures, and
the like, help the appetite of the soul, and acquire certain wonderful
virtues, as from the soul of the operator, in that hour when such a like
appetite does invade it, so from the opportunity, and Celestial influence,
moving the mind in that manner. For our mind, when it is carried upon the great
excess of any Passion, or virtue, oftentimes presently takes of it self a
strong, better, and more convenient hour, or opportunity. Which Thomas Aquinas
in his third book against the Gentiles, confesses. So many wonderful virtues
both cause, and follow certain admirable operations by great affections, in
those things which the soul does dictate in that hour to them. But know that
such kind of things confer nothing, or very little but to the Author of them,
and to him which is inclined to them, as if he were the Author of them: And
this is the manner by which their efficacy is found out. And it is a general
rule in them, that every mind that is more excellent in its desire, and
affection, makes such like things more fit for it self, as also efficatious to
that which it desires. Every one therefore that is willing to work in Magic,
must know the virtue, measure, order, and degree of his own soul, in the power
of the universe.

CHAP. LXVIII. How our mind can change, and bind inferior things to that which
it desires.
THere is also a certain virtue in the minds of men, of changing, attracting,
hindering, and binding to that which they desire, and all things obey them, when
they are carried into a great excess of any Passion or virtue, so as to exceed
those things which they bind. For the superior binds that which is inferior,
and converts it to it self, and the inferior is by the same reason converted to
the superior, or is otherwise affected, and wrought upon. By this reason things
that receive a superior degree of any Star, bind, or attract, or hinder things
which have an inferior, according as they agree, or disagree amongst
themselves. Whence a Lion is afraid of a Cock, because the presence of the
Solary virtue is more agreeable to a Cock then to a Lion: So a Loadstone draws
Iron, because in order it has a superior degree of the Celestial Bear.

So the Diamond hinders the Loadstone, because in the order of Mars it is
superior then it. In like manner any man when he is opportunely exposed to the
Celestial influencies, as by the affections of his mind, so by the due
applications of natural things, if he become stronger in a Solary virtue,
binds and draws the inferior into admiration, and obedience, in order of the
Moon to servitude or infirmities, in a Saturnall order to quietness or sadness;
in order of Jupiter to worship, in order of Mars to fear, and discord, in order
of Venus to love, and joy, in 3. Mercuriall order to persuasion, and
obsequiousness, and the like. Now the ground of such a kind of binding is the
very vehement, and boundless affection of the souls, with the concourse of the
Celestial order. But the dissolutions, or hindrances of such a like binding,
are made by a contrary effect, and that more excellent or strong, for as the
greater excess of the mind binds, so also it loses, and hinders. And lastly,
when the fear Venus, oppose Saturn. When Saturn or Mars, oppose Venus or
Jupiter: for Arstologers say, that these are most at enmity, and contrary the
one to the other (e. i.) causing contrary effects in these inferior bodies; For
in the heaven, where there is nothing wanting, where all things are governed
with love, there can in no wise be hatred, or enmity.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Speech, and the virtue of Words.
IT being showed that there is a great power in the affections of the soul, you
must know moreover, that there is no less Virtue in words, and the names of
things, but greatest of all in speeches, and motions, by which we chiefly
differ from bruits, and are called rational, not from reason, which is taken
for that part of the soul, which contains the affections, which Galen says, is
also common to bruits, although in a less degree; but we are called rational,
from that reason which is according to the voice understood in words, and
speech, which is called declarative reason, by which part we do chiefly excel
all other Animals. For (...) in Greek signifies, reason, speech, and a word.
Now a word is twofold, viz. internal, and uttered; An internal word is a
conception of the mind, and motion of the soul, which is made without a voice.
As in dreams we seem to speak, and dispure with our selves, and whilst we are
awake we run over a whole speech silently. But an uttered word has a certain
act in the voice, and properties of locution, and is brought forth with the
breath of a man, with opening of his mouth, and with the speech of his tongue,
in which nature has coupled the corporeal voice, and speech to the mind, and
understanding making that a declarer, and interpreter of the conception of our
intellect to the hearers, And of this we now speak. Words therefore are the
fittest medium betwixt the speaker and the hearer, carrying with them not only
the conception of the mind, but also the virtue of the speaker with a certain
efficacy unto the hearers, and this oftentimes with so great a power, that
oftentimes they change not only the hearers, but also other bodies, and things
that have no life. Now those words are of greater efficacy then others, which
represent greater things, as intellectual, Celestial, and supernatural, as
more expressly, so more misteriously. Also those that come from a more worthy
tongue, or from any of a more holy order: for these, as it were certain Signs,
and representations, receive a power of Celestial, and supercelestiall things,
as from the virtue of things explained, of which they are the vehicula, so from
a power put into them by the virtue of the speaker.

CHAP. LXX. Of the virtue of proper names.
THat proper names of things are very necessary in Magical operations, almost
all men testify: For the natural power of things proceeds first from the
objects to the senses, and then from these to the imagination, and from this to
the mind, in which it is first conceived, and then is expressed by voices, and
words. The Platonists therefore say, that in this very voice, or word, or name
framed, with its Articles, that the power of the thing as it were some kind of
life, lies under the form of the signification. First conceived in the mind as
it were through certain seeds of things, then by voices or words, as a birth
brought forth, and lastly kept in writings. Hence Magicians say, that proper
names of things are certain rays of things, every where present at all times,
keeping the power of things, as the essence of the thing signified, rules, and
is discerned in them, and know the things by them, as by proper, and living
Images. For as the great operator does produce diverse species, and particular
things by the influencies of the Heavens, and by the Elements, together with
the virtues of Planets; so according to the properties of the influencies
proper names result to things, and are put upon them by him who numbers the
multitude of the Stars, calling them all by their names, of which names Christ
in another place speaks, saying, Your names are written in Heaven. Adam
therefore that gave the first names to things, knowing the influencies of the
Heavens, and properties of all things, gave them all names according to their
natures, as it is written in Genesis, where God brought all things that he had
created before Adam, that he should name them, and as he named any thing, so
the name of it was, which names indeed contain in them wonderful powers of the
things signified. Every voice therefore that is significative, first of all
signifies by the influence of the Celestial harmony: Secondly, by the
imposition of man, although oftentimes otherwise by this, then by that. But
when both significations meet in any voice or name, which are put upon them by
the said harmony or men, then that name is with a double virtue, viz. natural,
and arbitrary, made most efficatious to act, as often as it shall be uttered in
due place, and time, and seriously with an intension exercised upon the matter
rightly disposed, and that can naturally be acted upon by it. So we read in
Philostratus, that when a maid at Rome dyed the same day she was married, and
was presented to Apollonius, he acurately inquired into her name, which being
known, he pronounced some occult thing, by which she revived. It was an
observation amongst the Romans in their holy rites, that when they did besiege
any City, they did diligently enquire into the proper, and true name of it, and
the name of that God, under whose protection it was, which being known, they
did then with some verse call forth the Gods that were the protectors of that
City, and did curse the inhabitants of that City, so at length their Gods being
absent, did overcome them, as Virgil sings, -- That kept this Realm, our Gods
Their Altars have for sook, and blessed abodes.


Now the verse with which the Gods were called out, and the enemies were cursed,
when the City was assaulted round about, let him that would know, find it out
in Livy, and Macrobius; but also many of these Serenus Samonicus in his book of
secret things makes mention of.

CHAP. LXXI. Of many words joined together, as in sentences, and verses, and of
the virtues, and astrictions of charms.
BEsides the virtues of words, and names, there is also a greater virtue found
in sentences, from the truth contained in them, which has a very great power
of impressing, changing, binding, and establishing, so that being used it does
shine the more, and being resisted is more confirmed, and consolidated; which
virtue is not in simple words, but in sentences, by which any thing is
affirmed, or denied, of which sort are verses, enchantments, imprecations,
deprecations, orations, invocations, obtestations, adjurations, conjurations,
and such like. Therefore in composing verses, and orations, for the attracting
the virtue of any Star, or Deity, you must diligently consider what virtues any
Star contains, as also what effects, and operations, and to infer them in
verses, by praising, extolling, amplifying, and setting forth those things
which such a kind of Star is wont to cause by way of its influence, and by
vilifying, and dispraising those things which it is wont to destroy, and
hinder, and by supplicating, and begging for that which we desire to get, and
by condemning, and detesting that which we would have destroyed and hindered:
and after the same manner to make an elegant oration, and duly distinct by
Articles, with competent numbers, and proportions. Moreover Magicians command
that we call upon, and pray by the names of the same Star, or name, to them to
whom such a verse belongs, by their wonderful things, or miracles, by their
courses, and ways in their sphere, by their light, by the dignity of their
Kingdom, by the beauty, and brightness that is in it, by their strong, and
powerful virtues, and by such like as these. As Psyche in Apuleius prays to
Ceres; saying, I beseech thee by thy fruitful right hand, I entreat thee by
the joyful Ceremonies of harvests, by the quiet silence of thy chests, by the
winged Chariors of Dragons thy servants, by the furrows of the Sicilian earth,
the devouring Wagon, the clammy earth, by the place of going down into cellars
at the light Nuptials of Proserpina, and returns at the light inventions of her
daughter, and other things which are concealed in her temple in the City
Eleusis in Attica. Besides, with the diverse sorts of the names of the Stars,
they command us to call upon them by the names of the Intelligencies, ruling
over the Stars themselves, of which we shall speak more at large in their
proper place. They that desire further examples of these, let them search into
the hymns of Orpheus, then which nothing is more efficatious in natural
Magic, if they together with their circumstances, which wise men know, be used
according to a due harmony, with all attention. But to return to our purpose.
Such like verses being aptly, and duly made according to the rule of the Stars,
and being full of signification, and meaning, and opportunely pronounced with
vehement affection, as according to the number, proportion of their Articles,
so according to the form resulting from the Articles, and by the violence of
imagination, do confer a very great power in the inchanter, and sometimes
transfer it upon the thing enchanted, to bind, and direct it to the same
purpose for which the affections, and speeches of the inchanter are intended.
Now the instrument of the inchanters is a most pure harmoniacall spirit, warm,
breathing, living, bringing with it motion, affection and signification,
composed of its parts, endued with sense, and conceived by reason. By the
quality therefore of this spirit, and by the Celestial similitude thereof,
besides those things which have already been spoken of, verses also from the
opportunity of time, receive from above most excellent virtues, and indeed more
sublime, and efficatious then spirits, and vapors exhaling out of the Vegetable
life, out of herbs, roots, gums, aromaticall things, and fumes, and such like.
And therefore Magicians enchanting things, are wont to blow, and breath-upon
them the words of the verse, or to breath in the virtue with the spirit, that
so the whole virtue of the soul be directed to the thing enchanted, being
disposed for the receiving the said virtue. And here it is to be noted, that
every oration, writting, and words, as they induce accustomed motions by their
accustomed numbers, and proportions, and form, so also besides their usual
order, being pronounced, or wrote backwards, more unto unusual effects.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the wonderful power of Enchantments.
THey say that the power of enchantments, and verses is so great, that it is
believed they are able to subvert almost all nature, as says Apuleius, that
with a Magical whispering, swift Rivers are turned back, the slow Sea is
bound, the Winds are breathed out with one accord, the Sun is stopped, the Moon
is clarified, the Stars are pulled out, the day is kept back, the night is
prolonged, and of these sings Lucan, The courses of all things did cease, the
night
Prolonged was, 'twas long before 'twas light;
Astonished was the headlong world, all this
Was by the hearing of a verse --
And a little before. Thessalian verse did into's heart so flow,
That it did make a greater heat of love.
And elsewhere. No dregs of poison being by him drunk,
His wits decayed enchanted --
Also Virgil in Damon. Charms can command the Moon down from the Sky,
Circes Charms changed Ulisses company.
A cold Snake being charmed, burst in the Meads.
--
And in another place. Charms bear Corn standing from another Farm. And Ovid
in his book, sine Titulo, says. With charms does withering Ceres dye,
Dried are the fountains all,
Acorns from Oaks, enchanted Grapes
And Apples from trees fall.


If these things were not true, there would not be such strict penal Statutes
made against them, that should inchant fruit. And Tibullus says of a certain
Inchantress, Her with Charms drawing Stars from Heaven, I
And turning the Course of rivers, did espy,
She parts the earth, and Ghosts from Sepulchers
Draws up, and fetches bones away from the fires,
And at her pleasure scatters Clouds in the Air,
And makes it Snow in Summer hot, and fair.
Of all which that Inchantress seems to boast her self in Ovid when she says,
-- At will, I make swift streams retire
To their fountains, whilst their banks admire;
Seas toss, and smooth; clear Clouds, with Clouds deform,
With Spells. and Charms I break the Vipers jaw,
Cleave Solid Rocks, Oaks from their seasures draw,
Whole Woods remove, the airy Mountains shake,
Earth for to groan, and Ghosts from graves awake,
And thee O Moon I draw --


Moreover all Poets sing, and Philosophers do not deny, that by verses many
wonderful things may be done, as Corn to be removed, Lightenings to be
commanded, diseases be cured, and such like. For Cato himself in Country
affairs used some enchantments against the diseases of beasts, which as yet are
extant in his writings. Also Josephus testifies that Solomon was skilled in
those kind of enchantments. Also Celsus Africanus reports, according to the
Egyptain doctrine, that man's body, according to the number of the faces of the
Zodiac Signs, was taken care of by so many, viz. thirty six spirits, whereof
each undertake, and defend their proper part, whose names they call with a
peculiar voice, which being called upon, restore to health with their
enchantments the diseased parts of the body.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the virtue of writting, and of making imprecations, and
inscriptions.
THE use of words, and speech, is to express the inwards of the mind, and from
thence to draw forth the secrets of the thoughts, and to declare the will of
the speaker. Now writing is the last expression of the mind, and is the number
of speech and voice, as also the collection, state, end, continuing, and
iteration, making a habit, which is not perfected with the act of ones voice.
And whatsoever is in the mind, in voice, in word, in oration, and in speech,
the whole, and all of this is in writing also. And as nothing which is
conceived in the mind is not expressed by voice, so nothing which is expressed
is not also written. And therefore Magicians command, that in every work, there
be imprecations, and inscriptions made, by which the operator may express his
affection: that if he gather an Herb, or a Stone, he declare for what use he
does it; if he make a picture, he say, and write to what end he makes it;
which imprecations, and inscriptions, Albertus also in his book called
Speculum, does not disallow, without which all our works would never be brought
into effect; Seeing a disposition does not cause an effect, but the act of the
disposition. We find also that the same kind of precepts was in use amongst the
Ancients, as Virgil testifies, when he sings, -- I walk a round
First with these threads, in number which three are,
'Bout the Altars thrice I shall thy Image bear.
And a little after. Knots, Amaryllis tie! of Colors three,
Then say, these bonds I knit, for Venus be.
And in the same place. As with one fire this clay does harder prove,
The wax more soft; so Daphnis with our love.


CHAP. LXXIV. Of the proportion, correspondency, reduction of Letters to the
Celestial Signs, and Planets, according to various tongues, with a Table
showing this.
GOD gave to man a mind, and speech, which (as says Mercurius Trismegistus)
are thought to be a gift of the same virtue, power, and immortality. The
omnipotent God has by his providence divided the speech of men into diverse
languages; which languages have according to their diversity received diverse,
and proper Characters of writing, consisting in their certain order, number,
and figure, not so disposed, and formed by hap, or chance, nor by the weak
judgment of man, but from above, whereby they agree with the Celestial, and
divine bodies, and virtues. But before all notes of languages, the writing of
the Hebrews is of all the most sacred in the figures of Characters, points of
vowels, and tops of accents, as consisting in matter, form, and spirit.

The position of the Stars being firct made in the seat of God, which is
heaven, after the figure of them (as the masters of the Hebrews testify) are
most fully formed the letters of the Celestial mysteries, as by their figure,
form, and signification, so by the numbers signified by them, as also by their
various harmony of their conjunction. Whence the more curious Mecubals of the
Hebrews do undertake by the figure of their letters, the forms of Characters,
and their signature, simpleness, composition, separation, crookedness,
directness, defect, abounding, greatness, litleness, crowning opening,
shutting, order, transmutation, joining together, revolution of letters, and of
points, and tops, and by the supputation of numbers by the letters of things
signified to explain all things, how they proceed from the first cause, and are
again to be reduced into the same. Moreover they divide the letters of their
Hebrew Alphabet, viz. into twelve simple, seven double, and three mothers,
which they say signify as Characters of things, the twelve Signs, seven
Planets, and three Elements, viz. Fire, Water, and Earth, for they account Air
no Element, but as the glue, and spirit of the Elements. To these also they
appoint points, and tops: As therefore by the aspects of Planets, and Signs,
together with the Elements, the working spirit, and truth all things have been,
and are brought forth, so by these Characters of letters, and points,
signifying those things that are brought forth, the names of all things are
appointed, as certain Signs, and vehicula's of things explained carrying with
them every where their essence, and virtues. The profound meanings, and Signs
are inherent in those Characters, and figures of them, as also numbers, place,
order, and revolution; so that Origenes therefore thought that those names
being translated into another Idiome, do not retain their proper virtue. For
only original names, which are rightly imposed, because they signify
naturally, have a natural activity: It is not so with them which signify at
pleasure, which have no activity, as they are signifying, but as they are
certain natural things in themselves. Now if there be any original, whose
words have a natural signification, it is manifest that this is the Hebrew,
the order of which he that shall profoundly, and radically observe. and shall
know to resolve proportionably the letters thereof, shall have a rule exactly
to find out any Idiome. There are therefore two and twenty Letters, which are
the foundation of the world, and of creatures that are, and are named in it,
and every saying, and every creature are of them, and by their revolutions
receive their Name, being, and Virtue.

He therefore that will find them out, must by each joining together of the
Letters so long examine them, until the voice of God is manifest, and the
framing of the most sacred letters be opened and discovered. For hence voices,
and words have efficacy in Magical works: because that in which nature first
exercises Magical efficacy, is the voice of God. But these are of more deep
speculation, then to be handled in this book. But to return to the division of
the Letters. Of these, amongst the Hebrews, are three mothers, viz. (...).
seven double, viz. (...). The other 12. viz. (...); are simple. The same rule
is amongst the Chaldeans; And by the imitation of these also the letters of
other tongues are distributed to Signs, Planets, and Elements, after their
order. For the Vowels in the Greek tongue, viz. AEHIOT^ answer to the seven
Planets. (...) are attributed to the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, the other
five (...) represent the four Elements, and the spirit of the world. Amongst
the Latin there is the same signification of them. For the five Vowels AEIOU,
and J and V Consonants are ascribed to the seven Planets; but the Consonants
BCDFGLMNPRST are answerable to the twelve Signs. The rest viz. KQXZ make four
Elements. H the aspiration represents the Spirit of the World. Y because it is
a Greek, and not a Latin Character, and serving only to Greek words, follows
the nature of its Idiome.

But this you must not be ignorant of, that it is observed by all wise men,
that the Hebrew letters are the most efficacious of all, because they have the
greatest similitude with Celestials, and the world, and that the letters of the
other tongues have not so great an efficacy, because they are more distant from
them. Now the dispositions of these, the following Table will explain. Also all
the Letters have double numbers of their order, viz. Extended, which simply
express of what number the letters are, according to their order: and
collected, which recollect with themselves the numbers of all the preceding
letters. Also they have integrall numbers, which result from the names of
Letters, according to their various manners of numbering. The virtues of which
numbers, he that shall know, shall be able in every tongue to draw forth
wonderful mysteries by their letters, as also to tell what things have been
past, and foretell things to come. There are also other mysterious joynings of
letters with numbers: but we shall abundantly discourse of all these in the
following Books: Wherefore we will now put an end to this first Book.

Place this Table after folio (...)


To the Most Honorable Lord, Most Illustrious Prince, Hermannus of Wyda, Prince
Elector, Duke of Westphalia, and Augaria, Lord and Arch prelate of Colonia, and
Paderbornia, his most gracious Master, Henry Cornelius Agrippa of Nettes-heym
wishes health.
BEhold now (most Illustrious Prince, and most honorable Prelate!) the rest of
the books of Occult Philosophy, or Magic, which I promised Your Worthiness
that I would put forth when I published the first of them: but the sudden, and
almost unexpected death of holy Margaret of Austria my Princess coming upon it,
hindered me then from the endavoring to put it forth. Then the wickedness of
some Pulpit-sycophants, and of some School-Sophisters incessantly raging
against me for a declamation I put forth concerning the Vanity of things, and
the excellency of the word of God, and contending against me continually with
bitter hatred, envy, malice, and calumnies, hindered me from putting of it
forth; whereof some very proudly, with a full mouth, and loud voice aspersed me
with impiety in the Temple amongst a promiscuous people. Others with
corner-whisperings from house to house, street by street, did fill the ears of
the ignorant with my infamy: others in public, and private assemblies did
instigate Prelates, Princes, and Caesar himself against me. Hence I began to be
at a stand, whether I should put forth the rest of the book or no, whilst I
did doubt that I should by this means expose my self to greater calumnies, and
as it were cast my self out of the smoke into the fire, a certain rude fear
seized upon me, least by putting them forth I should seem more offensive then
officious to you, and expose your highness to the envy of malicious Carpers,
and tongues of detracters. Whilst these things troubled me with a various
desparation, the quickness of your understanding, exact discretion, uprightness
of Judgment, Religion without superstition, and other most known virtues in
you, your authority, and integrity beyond exception, which can easily check and
bridle the tongues of slanderers, removed my doubting, and enforced me to set
upon that again more bodly, which I had almost left off by reason of despair.
Therefore (most Illustrious Prince) take in good part this second book of
Occult Philosophy, in which we show the mysteries of the Celestial Magic, all
things being opened, and manifested, which experienced antiquity makes relation
of, and which came to my knowledge, that the secrets of Celestial Magic
(hitherto neglected, and not fully apprehended by men of latter times) may with
your portection be by me, after the showing of natural virtues, proposed to
them that are studious, and curious of these secrets: by which let him that
shall be profited and receive benefit give you the thanks, who have been the
occasion of this Edition, and setting of it at liberty to be seen abroad.

Farewell.
The Second Book of Occult Philosophy, or Magic; written by Henry Cornelius
Agrippa.
Book II.
CHAP. I. Of the necessity of Mathem aticall learning, and of the many
wonderful works which are done by Mathematical Arts only.
THE Doctrines of Mathematics are so necessary to, and have such an affinity
with Magic, that they that do profess it without them, are quite out of the
way, and labor ^^ vain and shall in no wise obtain their desired effect. For
whatsoever things are, and ^^e done in these inferior natural virtues, are all
done, and governed by number, weight, measure, harmony, motion, and light. And
all things which we see in these inferiors, have root, and foundation in them:
yet nevertheless without natural virtues, of Mathematical Doctrines only
works like to naturals can be produced, as Plato says, a thing not partaking
of truth or divinity, but certain Images kin to them, as bodies going, or
speaking, which yet want the Animal faculty, such as were those which amongst
the Ancients were called Dedalus his Images, and (...), of which Aristotle
makes mention, viz. the threefooted Images of Vulcan, and Dedalus, moving
themselves, which Homer says came out of their own accord to the exercise, and
which we read, moved themselves at the feast of Hiarba the Philosophical
Exerciser: As also that golden Statues performed the offices of Cup bearers,
and Carvers to the guests. Also we read of the Statues of Mercury, which did
speak, and the wooden Dove of Arthita, which did fly, and the miracles of
Boethius, which Cassiodorus made mention of, viz Diomedes in Brass, sounding a
Trumpet, and a brazen Snake hissing and pictures of birds singing most sweetly.
Of this kind are those miracles of Images which proceed from Geometry, and
Optics, of which we made some mention in the first book, where we spoke of the
Element of Air. So there are made glasses, some Concave, others of the form of
a Column, making the representations of things in the Air feem like shadows
at a distance: of which sort Apollonius, and Vitellius in their Books De
Perspectiva, and Speculis, taught the making, and the use. And we read that
Magnus Pompeius brought a certain glass amongst the spoils from the East, to
Rome, in which were seen Armies of Armed men. And there are made certain
transparent glasses, which being dipped in some certain juices of Herbs, and
irradiated with an artificial light, fill the whole Air round about with
visions. And I know how to make reciprocal glasses, in which the Sun shining,
all things which were illustrated by the rays thereof are apparently seen many
miles off. Hence a Magician, expert in natural Philosophy, and Mathematics,
and knowing the middle sciences consisting of both these, Arithmatick, Music,
Geometry, Optics, Astronomy, and such sciences that are of weights, measures,
proportions, articles, and joints, knowing also Mechanical Arts resulting from
these, may without any wonder, if he excel other men in Art, and wit, do many
wonderful things, which the most prudent, and wife men may much admire. Are
there not some relics extant of the Ancients works, viz. Hercules, and
Alexanders pillars, the gate of Caspia made of brass, and shut with Iron beams,
that it could by no Wit or Art, be broken? And the Pyramid of Julius Caesar
erected at Rome near the hill Vaticanus, and Mountains built by Art in the
middle of the Sea, and Towers, and heaps of Stones, such as I saw in England
put together by an incredible Art. And we read in faithful Historians, that in
former times Rocks have been cut off, and Valleys made, and Mountains made into
a Plain. Rocks have been dug through, Promontories have been opened in the
Sea, the bowels of the Earth made hollow, Rivers divided, Seas joined to Seas,
the Seas restrained, the bottom of the Sea been searched, Pools exhausted,
Fens dried up, new Islands made, and again restored to the continent, all
which, although they may seem to be against nature, yet we read have been done,
and we see some relics of them remaining till this day, which the vulgar say
were the works of the devil, seeing the Arts, and Artificers thereof have been
dead out of all memory, neither are there any that care to understand, or
search into them. Therefore they seeing any wonderful sight, do impute it to
the devil, as his work, or think it is a miracle, which indeed is a work of
natural, or Mathematical Philosophy. As if any one should be ignorant of the
virtue of the Loadstone, and should see heavy Iron drawn upwards, or hanged in
the Air (as we read the Iron Image of Mercury did long since as Treveris hand
up in the middle of the Temple by Loadstones, this verse attesting the same.
The Iron white rod bearer flies in the Air. The like to which we read was done
concerning the image of the Sun at Rome, in the Temple of Serapis) would not
such an ignorant man, I say, presently say it is the work of the devil? But if
he shall know the virtue of the Loadstone to the Iron, and shall make trial of
it, he presently cease to wonder, and does no more scruple it to be the work
of nature. But here it is convenient that you know, that as by natural virtues
we collect natural virtues, so by abstracted, mathematical, and celestial,
we receive celestial virtues, as motion, life, sense, speech, southsaying, and
divination, even in matter less disposed, as that which is not made by nature,
but only by art. And so images that speak, and foretell things to come, are
said to be made, as William of Paris relates of a brazen head made under the
rising of Saturn, which they say spoke with a man's voice. But he that will
choose a disposed matter, and most fit to receive, and a most powerful agent,
shall undoubtedly produce more powerful effects. For it is a general opinion
of the Pythagoreans, that as Mathematical things are more formal then
Natural, so also they are more efficacious: as they have less dependence in
their being, so also in their operation. But amongst all Mathematical things,
numbers, as they have more of form in them, so also are more efficacious, to
which not only Heathen Philosophers, but also Hebrew, and Christian Divines do
attribute virtue, and efficacy, as well to effect what is good, as what is bad.

CHAP. II. Of Numbers, and of their power, and virtue.
SEverinus Boethius says, that all things which were first made by the nature
of things in its first Age, seem to be formed by the proportion of numbers, for
this was the principal pattern in the mind of the Creator. Hence is borrowed
the number of the Elements, hence the courses of times, hence the motion of the
Stars, and the revolution of the heaven, and the state of all things subsist by
the uniting together of numbers. Numbers therefore are endowed with great and
sublime virtues. For it is no wonder, seeing there are so many, and so great
occult virtues in natural things, although of manifest operations, that there
should be in numbers much greater, and more occult, and also more wonderful,
and efficacious, for as much as they are more formal, more perfect, and
naturally in the celestialls, not mixed with separated substances; and lastly,
having the greatest, and most simple commixtion with the Idea's in the mind of
God, from which they receive their proper, and most efficacious virtues:
wherefore also they are of most force, and conduce most to the obtaining of
spiritual, and divine gifts, as in natural things, elementary qualities are
powerful in the transmuting of any elementary thing. Again, all things that
are, and are made, subsist by, and receive their virtue from numbers. For time
consists of number, and all motion, and action, and all things which are
subject to time, and motion.

Harmony also, and voices have their power by, and consist of numbers, and
their proportions, and the proportion arising from numbers, do by lines, and
points make Charracters, and figures: And these are proper to Magical
operations, the middle which is betwixt both being appropriated by declining to
the extremes, as in the use of letters. And lastly, all species of natural
things, and of those things which are above nature, are joined together by
certain numbers: which Pythagoras seeing, says, that number is that by which
all things consist, and distributes each virtue to each number. And Proclus
says, Number has always a being: Yet there is one in voice, another in the
proportion of them, another in the soul, and reason, and another in divine
things. But Themistius, and Boethius, and Averrois the Babilonian, together
with Plato, do so extol numbers, that they think no man can be a true
Philosopher without them. Now they speak of a rational, and formal number,
not of a material, sensible, or vocal, the number of Merchants buying, and
selling, of which the Pythagorians, and Platonists, and our Austin make no
reckoning, but apply it to the proportion resulting from it, which number they
call natural, rational, and formal, from which great mysteries flow, as well
in natural, as divine, and heavenly things. By it is there a way made for the
searching out, and understanding of all things knowable. By it the next access
to natural prophesying is had: and the Abbot Joachim proceeded no other way in
his Prophecies, but by formal numbers.

CHAP. III. How great virtues Numbers have, as well in Natural things, as in
Supernatural.
THat there lies wonderful efficacy, and virtue in numbers, as well to good as
to bad, not only most eminent Philosophers do unanimously teach, but also
Catholic Doctors, and especially Hierom, Austin, Origin, Ambrose, Gregory of
Nazianzen, Athanasius, Basilius, Hilarious, Rubanus, Bid, and many more
confirm. Hence Hilarious in his Commentaries upon the Psalms, testifies that the
seventy Elders, according to the efficacy of numbers, brought the Psalms into
order. Rabanus also, a famous Doctor, composed an excellent book of the virtues
of numbers: But now how great virtues numbers have in nature, is manifest in
the herb which is called Cinquefoil, i. e. five leaved Grass; for this resists
poisons by virtue of the number of five; also drives away devils, conduces to
expiation; and one leaf of it taken twice in a day in wine, cures the Fever
of one day: three the tertian Fever: four the quartane. In like manner four
grains of the seed of Turnisole being durnk, cures the quartane, but three the
tertian. In like manner Vervin is said to cure Fevers, being durnk in wine, if
in tertians it be cut from the third joint, in quartans from the fourth. A
Serpent, if he be once struck with a Spear, dies, if twice, recovers strength.
These and many such as these are read, and testified in diverse Authors. We must
know now whence these are done, which certainly have a cause, which is a
various proportion of various numbers amongst themselves. There is also a
wonderful experiment of the number of seven, that every seventh male, born
without a female coming betwixt, has power to cure the Kings evil by his
touch alone, or word. Also every seventh daughter that is born, is said
wonderfully to help forward the birth of children neither is the natural
number here considered, but the formal consideration that is in the number.
And let that which we spoke before, be always kept in mind, viz. that these
powers are not in vocal, or numbers of merchants buying, and selling, but in
rational, formal, and natural; These are distinct mysteries of God and
nature. But he that knows how to join together the vocal numbers, and natural
with divine, and order them into the same harmony, shall be able to work and
know wonderful things by numbers; the Pythagorians profess that they can
prognosticate many things by the numbers of names, in which truly, unless there
did ly a great mystery, John had not said in the Revelation, He which has
understanding, let him compute the number of the name of the beast, which is
the number of a man, and this is the most famous manner of computing amongst
the Hebrews, and Cabalists, as we shall show afterward. But this you must
know, that simple numbers signify Divine things: numbers of ten; Celestial
numbers of an hundred; terrestiall numbers of a thousand; those things that
shall be in a future age. Besides, seeing the parts of the mind are according
to an Arithmeticall Mediocrity, by reason of the identity, or equality of
excess, coupled together. But the body, whose parts differ in their greatness,
is according to Geometrical mediocrity, compounded: But an animal consists of
both, viz soul and body, according to that mediocrity, which is suitable to
harmony: Hence it is that numbers do work very much upon the soul, figures upon
the body, and harmony upon the whole animal.

CHAP. IV. Of Unity, and the Scale thereof
NOw let us treat particularly of numbers themselves: and because number is
nothing else but a repetition of Unity, let us first consider Unity it self. For
Unity does most simply go through every number, and is the common measure,
fountain, and original of all numbers, contains every number joined together
in it self entirely, the beginner of every multitude, always the same, and
unchangable: whence also being multiplied into it self, produces nothing but
it self: it is indivisible, void of all parts: But if it seem at any time to be
divided, it is not cut, but indeed Multiplied into Unities: yet none of these
Unities is greater or lesser then the whole Unity, as a part is less then the
whole: It is not therefore Multiplied into parts, but into it self: Therefore
some called it concord, some piety, and some friendship, which is so knit, that
it cannot be cut into parts. But Martianus, according to the opinion of
Aristotle says, it is named Cupid, because it is made one alone, and will
always bewail it self, and beyond it self it has nothing but being void of
all haughtiness, or coupling, turns its proper heats into it self. It is
therefore the one beginning, and end of all things, neither has it any
beginning, or end it self: Nothing is before one, nothing is after one, and
beyond it is nothing, and all things which are, desire that one, because all
things proceeded from one, and that all things may be the same, it is necessary
that they partake of that one: And as all things proceeded of one into many
things, so all things endeavor to return to that one, from which they
proceeded; it is necessary that they should put off multitude. One therefore is
referred to the high God, who seeing he is one, and innumerable, yet creates
innumerable things of himself, and contains them within himself. There is
therefore one God, one world of the one God, one Sun of the one world, also one
Phoenix in the World, one King amongst Bees, one Leader amongst Flocks of
Catel, one Ruler amongst herds of Beasts, and Cranes follow one and many other
Animalls honor Unity; Amongst the Members of the body there is one Principle
by which all the rest are guided, whether it be the head, or (as some will) the
heart. There is one Element overcoming, and penetrating all things, viz. Fire.
There is one thing created of God, the subject of all wondering, which is on
Earth, or in Heaven, it is actually Animal, Vegetable, and Minnerall, every
where found, known by few, called by none by its proper name, but covered with
figures, and Riddles, without which neither Alchymie, nor Natural Magic, can
attain to their complete end, or perfection. From one man, Adam, all men
proceed, from that one all become mortal, from that one Jesus Christ they are
regenerated: and as says Paul, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and
Father of all, one mediator betwixt God and man, one most high Creator, who is
over all, by all, and in us all. For there is one Father, God, from whence all,
and we in him: one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all, and we by him: one God Holy
Ghost, into whom all, and we into him.

The Scale of Unity.
In the exemplary world. Iod One Divine essence, the fountain of all virtues,
and power, whose name is expressed with one most simple Letter. In the
intellectual world. The soul of the world. One supreme Intelligence, the first
Creature, The fountain of lives. In the Celestial world. The Sun. One King of
Stars, fountain of life. In the Elementall world. The Philosophers Stone. One
subject, and instrument of all virtues, natural, and supernatural. In the
lesser world. The Heart. One first living, and last dying. In the infernal
world. Lucifer. One Prince of Rebellion, of Angels, and darkness.

CHAP. V. Of the Number of Two, and the Scale thereof.
THe first Number is of two, because it is the first Multitude, it can be
measured by no number besides unity alone, the common measure of all Numbers:
It is not compounded of Numbers, but of one unity only; neither is it called a
number uncompounded, but more properly not compounded: The Number of three is
called the first Number uncompounded: But the Number of two is the first branch
of unity, and the first procreation: Hence it is called generation, and Juno,
and an imaginable Corporation, the proof of the first motion, the first form of
parity: the number of the first equality, extremity, and distance betwixt, and
therefore of peculiar equity, and the proper act thereof, because it consists
of two equally poysed: and it is called the Number of Science, and Memory, and
of light, and the number of man, who is called another, and the lesser World:
it is also called the number of charity, and mutual love, of marriage, and
society, as it is said by the Lord, Two shall be one flesh. And Solomon says:
It is better that two be together then one, for they have a benefit by their
mutual society: If one shall fall, he shall be supported by the other. Woe to
him that is alone, because when he falls he has not another to help him: and
if two sleep together, they shall warm one the other; how shall one be hot
alone? and if any prevail against him, two resist him. And it is called the
number of Wedlock and Sex; for there are two sexes, Masculine, and Feminine:
and two Doves bring forth two Eggs, out of the first of which is hatched the
Male, out of the second the Female. It is also called the middle, that is
capable, that is good, and bad, partaking, and the beginning of division, of
Multitude, and distinction, and signifies matter. This is also sometimes the
number of discord, and confusion, of misfortune, and uncleanness, whence Saint
Hierom against Jovianus says, that therefore it was not spoken in the second
day of the creation of the world, and God said, That it was good, because the
number of two is evil. Hence also it was that God commanded that all unclean
Animals should go into the Ark by couples: because as I said, the number of
two, is a number of uncleanness, and it is most unhappy in their Soothsayings,
especially if those things, from whence the Soothsaying is taken, be Saturnall,
or Martial, for these two are accounted by the Astrologers unfortunate. It is
also reported, that the number of two does cause apparitions of Ghosts, and
fearful Goblins, and bring mischiefs of evil spirits to them that travel by
night. Pythagoras (as Eusebius reports) said, that Unity was God, and a good
intellect; and that Duality was a Devil, and an evil intellect, in which is a
material multitude: wherefore the Pythagorians say, that two is not a number,
but a certain confusion of unities. And Plutarke writes, that the Pythagorians
called unity Apollo, and two, strife, and boldness; and three, Justice, which
is the highest perfection, and is notwithout many mysteries. Hence there were
two Tables of the Law in Sina, two Cherubins looking to the Propitiatory in
Moses, two Olives dropping oil, in Zachariah, two natures in Christ, Divine,
and Humane; Hence Moses saw two appearances of God, viz. his face, and
back-parts, also two Testaments, two commands of Love, two first dignities, two
first people, two kinds of Spirits, good, and bad, two intellectual creatures,
an Angel, and soul, two great lights, two Solstia, two equinoctials, two
poles, two Elements, producing a living soul, viz. Earth, and Water.

The Scale of the Number of two.
In the exemplary world. (...) Iah (...) El The names of God expressed with two
letters. In the Intellectual world. An Angel. The Soul. Two intelligible
substances. In the Celestial world. The Sun. The Moon. Two great lights. In
the Elementary world. The Earth. The Water. Two Elements producing a living
soul. In the lesser world. The Heart. The Brain. Two principal seats of the
soul. In the Infernal soul. Beemoth Weeping. Leviathan gnashing of teeth. Two
chief of the devils. Two things which Christ threatens to the damned.

CHAP. VI. Of the Number of three, and the Scale thereof.
THE number of three is an incompounded number, a holy number, a number of
perfection, a most powerful number. For there are three persons in God, there
are three Theological virtues in Religion. Hence it is that this number
conduces to the Ceremonies of God, and Religion, that by the solemnity of
which, prayers, and sacrifices are thrice repeated. Whence Virgil sings, Odd
numbers to the God delightful are. And the Pythagorians use it in their
sanctifications, and purifications, whence in Virgil, The same did cleanse, and
wash with Water pure
Thrice his companions --
And it is most fit inbindings, or ligations, hence that of Virgil, -- I walk a
round
First with these threads, which three, and several art,
'Bout the Altar thrice I shall thy image bear.
And a little after; Knots, Amaryllis, tie, of colors three,
Then say, these bonds I knit, for Venus be.
And we read of Medea. She spoke three words, which caused sweet sleep at will,
The troubled Sea, the raging Waves stand still.
And in Pliny it was the custom in every medicine to spit with three
deprecations, and hence to be cured. The number of three is perfected with
three Augmentations, long, broad, and deep, beyond which there is no
progression of dimension, whence the first number is called square. Hence it is
said that to a body that has three measures, and to a square number, nothing
can be added. Wherefore Aristotle in the beginning of his speeches concerning
Heaven, calls it as it were a Law, according to which all things are disposed.
For Corporeal, and spiritual things consist of three things, viz. beginning,
middle, and end. By three (as Tresmegistus says) the world is perfected:
He^armene, necessity, and order (i. e.) concurrence of causes, which many call
fate, and the execution of them to the fruit, or increase, and a due
distribution of the increase. The whole measure of time is concluded in three,
viz. Past, present, to come; All magnitude is contained in three; line,
superficies, and body, every body consists of three Intervals, length, breadth,
thickness. Harmony contains three consents in time, Diapason, Hemiolion,
Diatessaron. There are also three kinds of souls, Vegetative, sensitive, and
intellectual. And as says the Prophet, God orders the world by number,
weight, and measure, and the number of three is deputed to the Ideall forms
thereof, as the number of two is to the procreating matter, and unity to God
the maker of it. Magicians do constitute three Princes of the world, Oromasis,
Mitris, Araminis (i. e.) God, the Mind, and the Spirit. By the three square or
solid, the three numbers of nine of things produced are distributed, viz. of
the supercelestiall into nine orders of Intelligencies: of Celestial into nine
Orbs: of inferiors into nine kinds of generable, and corruptible things.
Lastly in this ternall Orb, viz. twenty seven, all Musical proportions are
included, as Plato, and Proclus, do at large discourse. And the number of three
has in a harmony of five, the grace of the first voice. Also in Intelligencies
there are three Hierarchies of Angelical spirits. There are three powers of
Intellectual creatures, memory, mind, and will. There are three orders of the
blessed, viz. of Martyrs, Confessors, and Innocents. There are three
quaternions of Celestial Signs, viz. Of fixed, moveable, and common, as also of
houses, viz. centers, succeeding, and falling. There are also three faces, and
heads in every Sign, and three Lords of each triplicity. There are three
fortunes amongst the Planets. Three graces amongst the Goddesses. Three Ladies
of destiny amongst the infernal crew. Three Judges. Three furies. Three headed
Cerberus. We read also of a thrice double Hecate. Three months of the Virgin
Diana. Three persons in the supersubstantiall Divinity. Three times, of Nature,
Law, and Grace. Three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Jonas was
three days in the Whales belly; and so many was Christ in the grave.

The Scale of the Number of three.
In the Original world. The Father adai. The Son. The Holy Ghost. The name of
of God with three letters. In the Intel lectual world Supreme. Innocents.
Middle. Martyrs. Lowest of all Confessors. Three Hierarchies of Angels. Three
degrees of the blessed. In the Celestial world. Moveable. Corners. Of the day.
Fixed. Succeeding. Nocturnall. Common. Falling. Partaking. Three quaternions of
Signs. Three quaternions of houses. Three Lords of the Triplicites. In the
Elementary world. Simple. Compounded. Thrice compounded. Three degrees of
Elements. In the lesser world. The head, in which the Intellect grows,
answering to the intellectual world. The breast, where is the heart, the seat
of life, answering to the Celestial world. The belly, where the faculty of
gene ration is, and the genitall members, answering the Elemental world. Three
parts, answering the threefold world. In the infernal world. Alecto. Minos.
Wicked. Megera. Acacus. Apostates. Cresiphone. Rhadamantus. Infidels. Three
infernal furies. Three infernal Judges. Three degrees of the damned.

CHAP. VII. Of the Number of Four, and the Scale thereof.
THe Pythagorians call the Number of four Tetractis, and prefer it before all
the virtues of Numbers, because it is the foundation, and root of all other
numbers; whence also all foundations, as well in artificial things, as
natural, and divine, are four square, as we shall show afterward: and it
signifies solidity, which also is demonstrated by a four square figure. For the
number four is the first four square plain, which consists of two proportions,
whereof the first is of one to two, the latter of two to four, and it proceeds
by a double procession and proportion, viz. of one to one, and of two to two,
beginning at a unity, and ending at a quaternity: which proportions differ in
this, that according to Arithmatick, they are unequal to one the other: but
according to Geometry are equal. Therefore a four square is ascribed to God
the Father, and also contains the mystery of the whole Trinity: for by its
single proportion, viz. by the first of one to one, the unity of the paternall
substance is signified, from which proceeds one Son, equal to him; by the next
procession, also simple, viz. of two to two, is signified by the second
procession the Holy Ghost from both, that the Son be equal to the Father by
the first procession; and the Holy Ghost be equal to both by the second
procession. Hence that superexcellent, and great name of the divine Trinity in
God is written with four letters, viz. Iod, He, and Vau; He, where it is the
aspiration He, signifies the proceeding of the spirit from both: for He being
duplicated, terminates both syllables, and the whole name, but is pronounced
Jove as some will, whence that Jovis of the heathen, which the Ancients did
picture with four ears, whence the number four is the fountain, and head of the
whole divinity. And the Pythagorians call it the perpetual fountain of nature:
for there are four degrees in the Scale of nature, viz. to be, to live, to be
sensible, to understand. There are four motions in nature, viz. ascendent,
descendent, going forward, circular. There are four Corners in the heaven, viz.
rising, falling, the middle of the heaven, and the bottom of it. There are four
Elements under Heaven, viz. Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; according to these
there are four triplicities in Heaven: There are four first qualities under the
Heaven, viz. Cold, Heat, Dryness, and Moystness, from these are the four
Humors, Blood, Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy. Also the year is divided into four
parts, which are the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; also the wind is
divided into Eastern, Western, Northern, and Southern. There are also four
rivers of Paradise, and so many infernal. Also the number four makes up all
knowledge: first it fills up every simple progress of numbers with four terms,
viz. with one, two, three, and four constituting the number ten. It fills up
every difference of numbers, the first even, and containing the first odd in
it. It has in Music Diatessaron, the grace of the fourth voice. Also it
conteins the instrument of four strings, and a Pythagorean Diagram, whereby are
foundout first of all musical tunes, and all harmony of Music. For Double,
Treble, fourtimes double, one and half, one and a third part, a concord of
all, a double concord of all, of five, of four, and all consonancy is limited
within the bounds of the number four. It does also contein the whole of
Matheticks in four terms, viz. point, line, superficies, and profundity. It
comprehends all nature in four terms, viz. substance, quality, quantity, and
motion. Also all natural Philosophy, in which are the seminary virtues of
nature, the natural springing, the growing form, and the compositum. Also
Metaphysick is comprehended in four bounds, viz. being, essence, virtue, and
action. Moral Philosophy is comprehended with four virtues, viz. prudence,
justice, fortitude, temperance. It has also the power of justice: hence a
fourfold law, of providence from God: fatal, from the soul of the world: of
nature from Heaven: of prudence, from man. There are also four judiciary powers
in all things being, viz. the intellect, discipline, opinion, and sense. It
has also great power in all mysteries. Hence the Pythagorians did ratify the
number four with an oath, as if it were the chiefest ground whereon their faith
was grounded, and their belief might be confirmed. Hence it was called the
Pythagorians oath, which is expressed in these verses. I with pure mind by the
number four do swear
That Is holy, and the fountain of nature
Eternal, parent of the mind --


Also there are four rivers of Paradise; four Gospels received from four
Evangelists throughout the whole Church. The Hebrews received the chiefest name
of God written with four letters. Also the Egyptians, Arabians, Persians,
Magicians, Mahumitans, Grecians, Tuscans, Latins, write the name of God with
only four letters, viz. thus, Thet, Alla, Sire, Orsi, Abdi, (...), Esar, Deus.
Hence the Lacedaemonians were wont to paint Jupiter with four wings. Hence also
in Orpheus his divinity, it is said that Neptunes Chariots are drawn with four
horses. There are also four kinds of divine furies, proceeding from several
deities, viz. from the Muses, Dionysius, Apollo, and Venus. Also the Prophet
Ezekiel saw four beasts by the river Chobar, and four Cherubims in four wheels.
Also in Daniel, four great beasts did ascend from the Sea, and four winds did
fight. And in the Revelations four beasts were full of eyes, before, and
behind: standing ^ound about the Throne of God, and four Angels, to whom was
given power to hurt the Earth, and the Sea, did stand upon the four corners of
the Earth, holding the four winds, that they should not blow upon the Earth,
nor upon the Sea, nor upon any Tree.

The Scale of the Number four, answering the four Elements.
The Scale.
The name of God with four letters. (...) In the Original world, whence the
Law of providence. Four Triplicities or intelligible Hierarchies. Seraphim.
Cherubin. Thrones. Dominations. Powers. Virtues. Principalities. Archangels.
Angels. Innocents. Martyrs. Confessors. In the Intellectual world, whence the
fatal Law. Four Angels ruling over the corners of the world. (...) Michael.
(...) Raphael. (...) Gabriel. (...) Uriel. Four rulers of the Elements. (...)
Seraph. (...) Cherub. (...) Tharsis. (...) Ariel. Four consecrated Animals. The
Lion. The Eagle. Man. A Calf. Four Triplicities of the tribes of Israel. Dan.
Asser. Nephtalin. Jehuda. Isachar. Zabulun. Manaile. Benjamin. Ephraim. Reuben.
Simeon. Gad. Four Triplicities of Apostles. Mathias. Peter. Jacob the elder.
Simon. Bartholemew. Matthew. John. Phillip. James the younger. Thaddeus. Andrew
Thomas. Four Evangelists. Mark. John. Matthew. Luke Four Triplicities of Signs.
Aries. Leo. Sagittarius. Gemini. Libra. Aquarius. Cancer. Scorpius. Pisces.
Taurus. Virgo. Capricornus. In the Celestial world, where is the law of nature
The Stars, and Planets, related to the Elements. Mars, and the Sun. Jupiter,
and Venus. Saturn, and Mercury. The fixed Stars, and the Moon. Four qualities of
the Celestial Elements. Light. Diaphanousness. Agility. Solidity. Four
Elements. (...) Fire. (...) Air. (...) Water. (...) Earth. In the Elementary,
where the Law of generation, and corruption is. Four qualities. Heat. Moisture.
Cold. Dryness. Four seasons. Summer. Spring. Winter. Autumn. Four corners of
the World. The East. The West. The North. The South Four perfect kinds of mixed
bodies. Animals. Plants. Metals. Stones. Four kinds of Animals. Walking.
Flying. Swimming. Creeping.

What answer the Elements, in Seeds. Plants. Flowers. Leaves. Roots. What in
Metals. Gold, and Iron. Copper, and Tin. Quicksilver. Lead, and Silver. What in
stones. Bright, and burning. Light, and transparent. Clear, and congealed.
Heavy, and dark. Four Elements of man. The Mind. The Spirit. The Soul. The
body. In the lesser world, viz. man, from whom is the Law of prudence. Four
powers of the Soul. The Intellect. Reason. Phantasy. Sense. Four Judiciary
powers. Faith. Science. Opinion. Experience. Four moral virtues. Justice.
Temperance. Prudence. Fortitude. The senses answering to the Elements. Sight.
Hearing. Taste, and smell. Touch. Four Elements of man's body. Spirit. Flesh.
Humors. Bones. A fourfold spirit. Animal. Vital. Generative. Natural. Four
humors. Choler. Blood. Phlegm. Melancholy. Four Manners of complexion.
Violence. Nimbleness. Dullness. Slowness. Four Princes of devils, offensive in
the Elements. (...) Samael. (...) Azazel. (...) Azael. (...) Mahazael. In the
infernal world, where is the Law of wrath, and punishment. Four infernal
Rivers. Phlegeton. Cocytus. Styx. Acheron. Four Princes of spirits, upon the
the four angels of the world. Oriens. Paymon. Sgyn. Amaymon.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Number Five, and the Scale thereof.
THe number five is of no small force, for it consists of the first even, and
the first odd, as of a Female, and Male For an odd number is the Male, and the
even the Female Whence Arithmeticians call that the Father, and this the
Mother. Therefore the number five is of no small perfection, ^^ virtue, which
proceeds from the mixtion of these numbers* It is also the just middle of the
universal number, viz. ten. For yon divide the number ten, there will be nine
and one, or eight and two, or seven and three, or six and four, and every
collection makes the number ten, and the exact middle always is the number
five, and its equadistant; and therefore it is called by the Pythagoreans the
number of Wedlock, as also of justic^ because it divides the number ten in an
even Scale. There b^ five senses in man, sight, hearing, smelling, tasting:
five powers in the soul, Vegetative, Sensitive, Concupiscible, Inscible,
Rational: five fingers on the hand: five wandering Planets in the heavens,
according to which there are five-fo^ terms in every sign. In Elements there
are five kinds ^ mixed bodies, viz. Stones, Metals, Plants, Plant-Animals,
Animals, and so many kinds of Animals, as men, four-foote beasts, creeping,
swimming, flying. And there are five kind^ by which all things are made of God,
viz. Essence, the same another, sense, motion. The Swallow brings forth but
fi^^ young, which she seeds with equity, beginning with the eldest and so the
rest, according to their age. Also this number ha^^ great power in expiations:
For in holy things it drives away Devils. In natural things, it expels
poisons. It is also called the number of fortunateness, and favor, and it is
the seal of the Holy Ghost, and a bond that binds all things, and the number
of the cross, yea eminent with the principal wounds of Christ whereof he
vouchsafed to keep the scars in his glorified body. The heathen Philosophers
did dedicate it as sacred to Mercury esteeming the virtue of it to be so much
more excellent then the number four, by how much a living thing is more
excellent then a thing without life. For in this number the Father Noah found
favor with God, and was preserved in the flood of waters. In the virtue of
this number Abraham, being an hundred years old, begat a Son of Sarah, being
ninety years old, and a barren Woman, and past child bearing, and grew up to be
a great people. Hence in time of grace the name of divine omnipotency is called
upon with five letters. For in time of nature the name of God was called upon
with three letters. (...) Sadai: in time of the Law, the ineffable name of God
was expressed with four letters (...) instead of which the Hebrews express
(...) Adonai: in time of grace the ineffable name of God was with five letters
(...) Ihesu, which is called upon with no less mystery then that of three
Letters (...).

The names of God with five Letters. The names of Christ with five Letters.
(...) Eloim. Elohim. Jhesu. In the examplary world. Five Intelligible
substances. Spirits of the first Hierarchy called Gods, or the Sons of God.
Spirits of the second Hierarchy called Intelligencies. Spirits of the third
Hierarchy, called Angels which are sent. Souls of Celestial bodies. Heroes or
blessed souls. In the Intellectual world. Five wandering Stars, Lords of the
Terms. Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Venus. Mercury. In the Celestial world. Five
kinds of corruptible things. Water. Air. Fire. Earth. A mixed body. In the
Elementary world. Five kinds of mixed bodies. Animal. Plant. Metal. Stone.
Plant-animal. Five senses. Last. Hearing. Seeing. Touching. Smelling. In the
lesser world. Five Corporeal torments. Deadly Bitterness. Horrible howling.
Terrible darkness. Unquenchable Heat. A piercing stink. In the infernal world.

CHAP. IX. Of the Number six, and the Scale thereof.
SIx is a number of perfection, because it is the most perfect in nature, in
the whole course of numbers, from one to ten, and it alone is so perfect, that
in the collection of its parts it results the same, neither wanting, nor
abounding. for if the parts thereof, viz. the middle, the third, and sixth part,
which are three, two, one, be gathered together, they perfectly fill up the
whole body of six, which perfection all the other numbers want: Hence by the
Pythagorians it is said to be altogether applied to generation, and Marriage,
and is ^^lled the Scale of the world. For the world is made of the number six,
neither does it abound, or is defective. Hence ^^at is, because the world was
finished by God the sixth day. For ^^e sixth day God saw all the things which he
had made, and ^^ey were very good. Therefore the heaven, and the earth, ^^d all
the Host thereof were finished. It is also called the number of man because the
sixth day man was created: and it is also the number of our redemption, for the
sixth day Christ suffered ^^r our redemption: whence there is a great affinity
betwixt the number six and the Cross, labor, and servitude: ^^nce it is
commanded in the Law, that in six days the ^ork is to be done, six days Manna
is to be gathered, six years ^^e ground was to be sown, and that the Hebrew
servant should ^^ve his Master six years; six days the glory of the Lord
appeared upon Mount Sina, covering it with a cloud: the Cherubins ^^d six
wings, 6. circles in the Firmament, Artick, Antartick, two ^^opicks,
Equinoctial, and Eclipticall, six wandering Planets, Sa^^rn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, the Moon, running through (...) latitude of the Zodiac, on
both sides the Eclyptick. There (...) six substantificall qualities in the
Elements, viz. Sharpness, ^^inness, Motion, and the contrary to these Dullness,
Thickness, ^^st. There are six differences of position, Upwards, Downwards,
Before, Behind, on the right side, one the left side. There (...) six natural
offices, without which nothing can be, viz. Mag^^^de, Color, Figure,
Intervall, Standing, Motion. Also a solid ^^ure of any four square thing has
six superficies. There are Tones of all harmony, viz. 5. Tones, and 2. half
tones which ^^e one tone, which is the sixth.

The Scale of the Number six.
In the examplary world. (...) Names of six Letters. In the intelligible World.
Seraphin. Cherubin. Thrones. Dominations Powers. Virtues. Six orders of Angels,
which are not sent to inferiors. In the Celestial World. Saturn. Jupiter.
Mars. Venus. Mercury. The Moon. Six planets wandering through the latitude of
the Zodiac from the Eclyptick. In the Elemental world. Rest. Thinness.
Sharpness. Dullness. Thickness. Motion. Six substantificall qualities of
Elements. In the lesser world. The Intellect. Memory. Sense. Motion. Life.
Essence. Six degrees of men. In the infernal World. Acteus. Megalesius.
Ormenus. Lycus. Nicon. Mimon. Six devils, the authors of all calamities.

CHAP. X. Of the Number Seven, and the Scale thereof.
THe number seven is of various, and manifold power, for it consists of one,
and six, or of two, and five, or of three and four, and it has a Unity, as it
were the coupling together of two threes: whence if we consider the several
parts thereof, and the joining together of them, without doubt we shall confess
that it is as well by the joining together of the parts hereof, as by its
fullness apart most full of all Majesty. And the Pythagorians call it the
Vehiculum of man's life, which it does not receive from its parts so, as it
perfects by its proper sight of its whole, for it contains body, and soul, for
the body consists of four Elements, and is endowed with four qualities: Also
the number three respects the soul, by reason of its threefold power, viz.
rational, irascible, and concupiscible. The number seven therefore, because
it consists of three, and four, joins the soul to the body, and the virtue of
this number relates to the generation of men, and it causes man to be
received, formed, brought forth, nourished, live, and indeed altogether to
subsist. For when the genitall seed ^^ received in the womb of the woman, if it
remain there seven hours after the effusion of it, it is certain that it will
abide there for good: Then the first seven days it is coagu^ated, and is fit
to receive the shape of a man: then it produces mature infants, which are
called infants of the seventh month, i. e. because they are born the seventh
month. After the birth, the seventh hour tryes whether it will live or no:
for that which shall bear the breath of the air after that hour is conceived
will live. After seven days it casts off the relics of the Navell.

After twice seven days its sight begins to move after the ^^ght: in the
third seventh it turns its eyes, and whole face ^reely. After seven months
it breeds teeth: After the second seventh month it sits without fear of
falling: After the third seventh month it begins to speak: After the fourth
seventh month it stands strongly, and walks: after the fifth seventh month
it begins to refrain sucking its Nurse: After seven years its first teeth
fall, and new are bred fitter for harder meat, and its speech is perfected:
After the second seventh year boys wax ripe, and then is a beginning of
generation: At the third seventh year they grow to be menin stature, and begin
to be hairy, and become able, and strong for generation: At the fourth seventh
year they begin to barnish, and cease to grow taller: In the fifth seventh
year they attain to the perfection of their strength: The sixth seven year they
keep their strength; The seventh seventh year they attain to their utmost
descretion, and wisdom, and the perfect age of men. But when they come to the
tenth seventh year where the number seven is taken for a complete number,
then they come to the common term of life, the Prophet saying, Our age is
seaventy years. The utmost hight of man's body is seven feet. There are also
seven degrees in the body, which complete the dimension of its altitude from
the bottom to the top, viz. marrow, bone, nerve, vein, attery, flesh, skin.
There are seven, which by the Greeks are called black members, the Tongue, the
Heart, the Lunges, the Liver, the Spleen, and two Kidneys. There are also
seven principle parts of the body, the head, the breast the hands, the feet,
and the privy members. It is manifest concerning breath, and meat, that without
drawing of the breath the life does does not endure above seven hours: and
they that are starved with famine, live not above seven days. The Veins also,
and arteries (as Physicians say) are moved by the seventh number. Also
judgments in diseases are made with greater manifestation upon the seventh
days, which Physicians call critical, i. e. judicial. Also of seven
portions God Creates the soul, as divine Plato witnesses in Timeus. The soul
also receives the body by seven degrees. All difference of voices proceeds to
the seventh degree, after which there is the same revolution. Again, there are
seven modulations of the voices, Ditonus, Semiditonus, Diutessaron, Diapente
with a tone, Diapente with a half time, and Diapason. There is also in
Celestials a most potent power of the number seven. For seeing there are four
corners of the Heaven Diametrically looking one toward the other, which indeed
is accounted a most full, and powerful aspect, and consists of the number
seven. For it is made from the seventh Sign, and makes a Cross, the most
powerful figure of all, of which we shall speak in its due place. But this you
must not be ignorant of, that the number seven has a great Communion with the
Cross. By the same radiation, and number the solstice is distant from Winter,
and the Winter equinoctium from the Summer, all which are done by seven Signs.
There are also seven Circles in the Heaven, according to the longitudes of the
Axel tree. There are seven Stars about the Articke Pole, greater, and lesser,
called Charles Wain also seven Stars called the Pleiades, and seven Planets,
according to those seven days constituting a week. The Moon is the seventh of
the Planets and next to us observing this number more then the rest, this
number dispensing the motion, and light thereof. For in twenty eight days it
runs round the Compass of the whole Zodiac, which number of days, the number
seven, with its seven terms, viz. from one to seven, does make, and fill up,
as much as the several numbers, by adding to the Antecedents, and makes four
times seven days, in which the Moon runs through, and about all the longitude,
and latitude of the Zodiac by measuring, and measuring again: with the like
seven of days it lispenseth its light, by changing it; For the first seven
days unto the middle as it were of the divided world, it increases; the
second seven days it fills its whole Orb with light; the third by decreasing is
again contracted into a divided Orb; but after the fourth seven days, it is
renewed with the last diminution of its light, and by the same seven of days
it disposes the increase, and decrease of the Sea, for in the first seven of
the increase of the Moon, it is by little lessened; in the second by degrees
increased: but the third is like the first, and the fourth does the same as the
second. It is also applied to Saturn, which ascending from the lower, is the
seventh Planet, which betokens rest, to which the seventh day is ascribed,
which signifies the seven thousandth, wherein (as John witnesses) the Dragon,
which is the Devil, and Satan, being bound, men shall be quiet, and lead a
peaceable life. Moreover the Phythagorians call seven the number of Virginity,
because the first is that which is neither generated, or generates, neither can
it be divided into two equal parts, so as to be generated of another number
repeated, or being doubled to bring forth any other number of it self, which is
contained within the bounds of the number ten, which is manifestly the first
bound of numbers, and therefore they dedicated the number seven to Pallas. It
has also in Religion mo^^ potent signs of its esteem, and it is called the
number of anoath. Hence amongst the Hebrews to swear is called Septenare, (i.
e.) to protest by seven. So Abraham, when he made a Covenant with Abimelech,
appointed seven Ewe Lambs for a testimony. It is also called the number of
blessedness, or ^^rest, whence that, O thrice, and four times blessed! viz. in
soul, and body. The seventh day the Creator reste^ from his work, wherefore
this day was by Moses called the Sabbath (i. e.) the day of rest; hence it was
that Christ rested the seventh day in the grave. Also this number has a great
communion with the Cross, as is above showed, as also with Christ. For in
Christ is all our blessedness, rest, and felicity besides, it is most
convenient in purifications. Whence Apule^us says, and I put my self forthwith
into the bath of the Sea, to be purified, and put my head seven times under the
Waves. And the Leprous person that was to be cleansed, was sprinkled seven
times with the blood of a Sparrow; and Elis^^ the Prophet, as it is written in
the Second Book of the Kings, says unto the Leprous preson; Go, and wash thy
self seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh shall be made whole, and thou shall
be cleansed, and it follows a little after, And he washed himself seven times
in Jordan, according to the Prophets saying, and he was cleansed. Also it is a
number of repentance, and remission: Hence was ordained the seventh years
repentance for every sin, according to the opinion of the wise man, saying, And
upon every sinner seven fold: Also the seventh year there were granted
remissions, and after full seven years there was giving a full remission* as
is read in Leviticus. And Christ with seven petitions finished his speech of
our satisfaction: hence also it is called the number of liberty, because the
seventh year the Hebrew servant did challenge liberty for himself. It is also
most suitable to divine praises. Whence the Prophet says, Seven times a day do
I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments. It is moreover called the
number of revenge, as says the Scripture, and Cain shall be revenged seven
fold. And the Psalmist says, Render unto our Neighbors seven fold into their
bosom, their reproach. Hence there are seven wickednesses, as says Solomon,
and seven wickeder spirits taken, are read of in the Gospel. It signifies
also the time of the present circle, because it is finished in the space of
seven days. Also it is consecrated to the Holy Ghost, which the Prophet Isaiah
describes to be seven fold, according to his gifts, viz. the spirit of wisdom,
and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and strength, the spirit of
knowledge, and holiness, and the spirit of the fear of the Lord, which we read
in Zachariah to be the seven eyes of God. There are also seven Angels
spirits standing in the presence of God, as is read in Tobias, and in the
Revelation; seven Lamps did burn before the Throne of God, and seven golden
Candlesticks, and in the middle thereof was one like to the son of man, and he
had in his right hand seven Stars. Also there were seven spirits before the
Throne of God, and seven Angels stood before the Throne, and there were given
to them seven Trumpets. And he saw a Lamb having seven horns, and seven
eyes, and he saw the book sealed with seven Seals, and when the seventh seal
was opened, there was made silence in heaven. Now by all what has been said,
it is apparent that the number seven, amongst the other numbers, may
deservedly be said to be most full of all efficacy. Moreover, the number seven
has great conformity with the number twelve; Fot as three, and four make
seven, so thrice four make twelve, which are the numbers of the celestial
Planets, and signs, resulting from the same root, and by the number three
partaking of the divinity, and by the number four of the nature of inferior
things. There is in sacred writ a very great observance of this number, before
all others, and many, and very great are the mysteries thereof; many we have
decreed to reckon up here, repeating them out of holy writ, by which it will
easily appear, that the number seven does signify a certain fullness of sacred
mysteries. For we read in Genesis, that the seventh was the day of the rest of
the Lord; and Enoch, a pious, holy man, was the seventh from Adam, and that
there was another seventh man from Adam, a wicked man, by name Lamech, that
had two wives; and that the sin of Cain should be abolished the seventh
generation: As it is written, Cain shall be punished seven fold: and he that
shall slay Cain, shall be revenged seven fold, to which the Master of the
History collects, that there were seven sins of Cain. Also of all clean beasts
seven, and seven were brought into the Ark, as also of Fowls: And after
seven days the Lord rained upon the Earth, and upon the seventh day the
fountains of the deep were broken up, and the waters covered the Earth. Also
Abraham gave to Abimelech seven Ewe Lambs: and Jacob served seven years for
Leah, and seven more for Rachel: and seven days the people of Israel
bewailed the death of Jacob. Moreover, we read in the same place, of seven
Kine, and seven Ears of Corn, seven years of plenty, and seven years of
scarcity. And in Exodus, the Sabbath of Sabboths, the holy rest to the Lord, is
commanded to be on the seventh day. Also on the seventh day Moses ceased to
pray. On the seventh day there shall be a solemnity of the Lord, the seventh
year the servant shall go out free: seven days let the Calf, and the Lamb be
with its damm; the seventh year let the ground that has been sown six years,
be at rest: the seventh day shall be a holy Sabbath, and a rest: the seventh
day, because it is the Sabbath, shall be called holy. In Leviticus the seventh
day also shall be more observed, and be more holy: and the first day of the
seventh month shall be a Sabbath of memorial. Seven days shall the
sacrifices be offered to the Lord, seven days shall the holy days of the
Lord be celebrated, seven days in a year everlastingly in the generations. In
the seventh month you shall celebrate feasts, and shall dwell in Tabernacles
leaven days: seven times he shall sprinkle himself before the Lord, that has
dipped his finger in blood: he that is cleansed from the Leprosy, shall dip
seven times in the blood of a sparrow: seven days shall she be washed with
running water, that is menstruous: seven times he shall dip his finger in the
blood of a bullock: seven times I will smite you for your sins: In Deuteronomy
seven people possessed the Land of promise. There is also read of a seventh
year of remission, and seven Candles set up on the South side of the
Candlesticks. And in Numbers it is read, that the sons of Israel offered up
seven Ewe Lambs without spot, and that seven days they did eat unleavened
bread, and that sin was expiated with seven Lambs and a Goat, and that the
seventh day was celebrated, and holy, and the first day of the seventh month
was observed, and kept holy, and the seventh month of the feast of
Tabernacles, and seven Calves were offered on the seventh day, and Baalam
erected seven Altars; seven days Mary the sister of Aaron went forth leprous
out of the Camp, seven days he that touched a dead Carcass was unclean. And
in Joshua seven priests carried the Ark of the Covenant before the Host, and
seven days they went round the Cities, and seven trumpets were carried by
the seven Priests, and on the seventh day the seven Priests sounded the
Trumpets. And in the book of Judges, Abessa reigned in Israel seven years,
Sampson kept his nuptials seven days, and the seventh day he put forth a
Riddle to his wife, he was bound with seven green withs, seven locks of his
head were shaved off, seven years were the children of Israel oppressed by the
King of Maden. And in the books of the Kings, Elias prayed seven times, and at
the seventh time, behold a little cloud! seven days the children of Israel
pitched over against the Syrians, and in the seventh day the battle was
joined: seven years famine was threatened to David for the peoples murmuring;
and seven times the child neesed, that was raised by Elisha, and seven men
were crucified together in the days of the first harvest. Naaman was made
clean with seven washings by Elisha, the seventh month Golias was slain. And
in Hester we read, that the King of Persia had three Eunuchs: and in Tobias
seven men were coupled with Sara the daughter of Raguel: And in Daniel
Nebucadnezzars Furnace was heated seven times hotter then it was used to be,
and seven Lions were in the den, and the seventh day came Nebucadnezzar. In
the book of Job there is made mention of seven sons of Job, and seven days
and nights Jobs friends sat with him on the Earth; and in the same place. In
seven troubles no evil shall touch thee. In Ezra we read of Artaxerxes his
seven counselors: and in the same place the trumpet sounded: the seventh
month of the feast of tabernacles were in Ezraes time, whilst the children of
Israel were in the Cities: and on the first day of the seventh month Esdras
read the Law to the people. And in the Psalms David praised the Lord seven
times in a day: silver is tried seven times; and he renders to our neighbors
seven fold into their bosoms. And Solomon says, that wisdom has hewn her
self seven Pillars; seven men that can render a reason, seven abominations
which the Lord abhors, seven abominations in the heart of an enemy, seven
overseers, seven eyes beholding. Isaiah numbers up seven gifts of the Holy
Ghost, and seven women shall take hold on a man. And in Jeremiah, she that
has born seven, languisheth, she has given up the ghost. In Ezekiel, the
Prophet continued sad for seven days. In Zachariah seven lamps, and seven
pipes to those seven lamps, and seven eyes running to and fro throughout the
whole Earth, and seven eyes upon one stone, and the fast of the seventh day
is turned into joy. And in Micah, seven shepherds are raised against the
Assyrians. Also in the Gospel we read of seven blessednesses, and seven
virtues, to which seven vices are opposed; seven petitions of the Lords
prayer, seven words of Christ upon the cross, seven words of the blessed
Virgin Mary, seven loaves distributed by the Lord, seven baskets of
fragments, seven brothers having one wife, seven disciples of the Lord that
were fishers, seven water pots in Cana of Galile, seven woes which the Lord
threatens to the Hypocrites, seven devils cast out of the unclean woman, and
seven wickeder devils taken in after that which was cast out. Also seven
years Christ was fled into Egypt; and the seventh hour the Fevour left the
Governors son. And in the Canonical Epistles, James describes seven degrees
of wisdom, and Peter seven degrees of Virtues. And in the Acts are reckoned
seven Deacons, and seven disciples chosen by the Apostles. Also in the
Revelations there are many mysteries of this number: for there we read of
seven Candlesticks, seven Stars, seven Crowns, seven Churches, seven
Spirits before the Throne, seven Rivers of Egypt, seven Seals, seven
Marks, seven Horns, seven Eyes, seven Spirits of God, seven Angels with
seven Trumpets, seven horns of the Dragon, seven heads of the Dragon, which
had seven Diadems: also seven plagues, and seven ^ials, which were given to
one of the seven Angels, seven heads of the scarlet Beast, seven Mountains,
and seven Kings sitting upon them, and seven thunders uttered their voices.
Moreover this number has much power, as in natural, so in sacred,
Ceremonial, and also in other things: therefore the seven days are related
hither, also the seven Planets, the seven Stars called Pleiades, the seven
Ages of the World the seven changes of man, the seven liberal Arts, and so
many mechanic, and so many forbidden, seven Colors, seven Metalls, seven
holes in the head of a man, seven pair of nerves, seven Mountains in the City
of Rome, seven Roman Kings, seven Civil Wars, seven wise men in the time
of Jeremiah the Prophet, and seven wise men of Greece. Also Rome did burn
seven days by Nero. By seven Kings were slain ten thousand Martyrs. There
were seven sleepers, seven principal Churches of Rome, and so many
Monasteries did Gregory build: So many sons Saint Felicity brought forth: there
were seven Electors of the Empire appointed, and seven solemn Acts in
crowning the Emperor; the Laws in the Testament require seven witnesses,
there are seven civil punishments, and seven canonical, and seven
canonical hours, the priest makes seven obeysances in the Mass; seven
Sacraments, and seven orders of the Clergy, and a boy of seven years may be
ordained by the lesser order, and may obtein a benefice sine Cura. There are
seven penitential Psalms, and seven commands of the second table, and
seven hours were Adam, and Eve in Paradise, and there were seven men foretold
by an Angel before they were born, viz. Ismael, Isaac Sampson, Jeremiah John
Baptist, James the brother of the Lord, and Christ Jesus. Lastly, this number
is most potent of all, as in good, so evil; of this Livy, the most ancient
Poet sang, The seventh light is come, and then all things
T'absolve the father of all light begins
The seaventh's of all things original,
The first seventh, seventh seven we call
Perfect, with wandering Stars the heavens pol'd,
And with as many circles are round rolled,


The Scale of the Number seven.
In the original world. Ararita. (...) Asser Eheie (...) The name of God with
seven letters. In the Intelligible world. (...) Zaphiel. (...) Zadkiel. (...)
Camael. (...) Raphael. (...) Haniel. (...) Michael. (...) Gabriel. Seven Angels
which stand in the presence of God. In the Celestial world. (...) Saturn.
(...) Jupiter. (...) Dlars. (...) The Sun. (...) Venus. (...) Mercury. (...)
The Moon. Seven Planets. In the Elementary world. The Lapwing The Eagle. The
Vultur. The Swan. The Dove. The Stork. The Owl. Seven Birds of the Planets. In
the lesser world. The right foot. The Head. The right hand. The heart. The
privy members. The left hand. The left foot. Seven integrall members
distributed to the Planets. In the infernal world. Heil. The gates of death.
The shadow of death. The pit of destruction. The clay of death. Perdition. The
depth of the Earth. Seven habitatlons of infernals, which Rabbi Joseph of
Castilia the Cabalist describes in the Garden of Nuts.

CHAP. XI. Of the number of Eight, and the Scale thereof.
THe Pythagorians call eight the number of justice, and fullness: first, because
it is first of all divided into numbers equally even, viz, into four, and that
division is by the same reason made into twice two, viz. by twice two twice;
and by reason of this equality of division, it took to it self the name of
justice, but the other received the name, viz. of fullness, by reason of the
contexture of the corporeal solidity, since the first makes a solid body.
Hence that custom of Orpheus, swearing by eight dieties, if at any time he
would beseech divine justice, whose names are these. Fire, Water, Earth, the
Heaven, Moon, Sun, Phanes, the Night. There are also only eight visible Spheres
of the heavens: also by it the property of corporeal nature is signified which
Orpheus comprehends in eight of his Sea songs. This is also called the covenant
or circumcision, which was commanded to be done by the Jews the eight day.

There were also in the old Law eight ornaments of the Priest, viz. a
breast plate, a coat a girldle, a myter a robe, an Ephod, a girdle of the
Ephod, a golden plate; hither belongs the number to eternity, and the end of
the world, because it follows the number seven, which is the mystery of time:
hence also the number of blessedness; for Christ teaches so many degrees of
blessednesses, as you may see in Matthew: It is also called the number of
safety, and conservation, for there were so many souls of the sons of Jesse,
from which David was the eighth. Also Zacharias, the father of John, received
his speech the eighth day. They say this number was dedicated to Dionysius,
because he was born the eighth month, in everlasting memory where of, Naxos
the Island was dedicated to him, which obtained this prerogative, that only the
women of Naxos should safely bring forth in the eighth month, and their
children should live* whereas the children of the eighth month in other
Nations die, and their mothers then bringing forth are in manifest danger.

The Scale of the Number eight.
The name of God with eight letters. Eloha Vadaath (...) Jehovah Vedaath (...)
In the Original Eight rewards of the blessed. Inheritance. Incorruption.
Power. Victory. The vision of God. Grace. A Kingdom. Joy. In the Intelligible
world. Eight visible Heavens. The Starry Heaven. The Heaven of Saturn. The
Heaven of Jupiter. The Heaven of Mars. The Heaven of the Sun. The Heaven of
Venus. The Heaven of Mercury. The Heaven of the Moon. In the Celestial world.
Eight particular qualities. The dryness of the earth. The coldness of the
water. The moisture of the air. The heat of the fire. The heat of the air.
The moisture of the water. The dryness of the fire The cold ness of the earth.
In the Elementary world. Eight kinds of blessed men. The peace makers. That
hunger and thirst after righteousness. The meek. They which are persecuted for
righteousness sake. Pure in heart. Merciful. Poor in spirit. Mourners. In the
lesser world. Eight rewards of the damned. Prison. Death. Judgment. The wrath
of God. Darkness. Indignation. Tribulation. Anguish. In the infernal world.

CHAP. XII. Of the Number of Nine, and the Scale thereof.
THe number nine is dedicated to the Muses, by the help of the order of the
Celestial Spheres, and divine spirits Hence there are nine movable Spheres,
and according to those there are nine Muses, viz. Calliope, Urania, Polymnia,
Terpsichore, Clio, Melpomene, Erato, Euterpe, Thalia, which nine Muses indeed
are appropriated to the nine Spheres, so that the first resembles the supreme
Sphere, which they call Primum mobile, and so descending by degrees, according
to the written order, unto the last, which resembles the Sphere of the Moon,
s^^ viz. Calliope is appropriated to the Primum mobile; Urania to the Starry
Heaven, Polymnia to Saturn, Terpsichore, to Jupiter Clio to Mars, Melpomene to
the Sun, Erato to Venus, Euterpe to Mercury, Thalia to the Moon.

There are also nine orders of blessed Angels, viz. Seraphim, Cherubim,
Thrones, Domination, Powers, Virtues Principallities, Archangels, Angels, which
Ezekiel figure out by nine Stones, which are the Saphir, Emrald, Carbuncle
Berill, Onyx, Chrysolite, Jasper, sopaze, Sardis: The number has also a great,
and Occult mystery of the Cross For the ninth hour our Lord Jesus Christ
breathed out b^ Spirit. And in nine days the Ancients buried their dea^ and in
so many years they say Minea received Laws from Jupiter in a Cave; whence this
number was most especially take notice of by Homer, when Laws were to be given,
or answers were to be given, or the sword was like to rag^ The Astrologers also
take notice of the number nine in to Ages of men, no otherwise then they do of
seven, which they call Climactericall years, whch are eminent for so^^
remarkable change. Yet sometimes it signifies imperfectnes and incompleatness,
because it does not attain to the perfect on of the number ten, but is less by
one, without which it deficient, as Austin interprets it of the ten Leapers:
Neither the longitude of nine Cubits of Og King of Basan, who is a (...) of the
devil, without a mystery.

The Scale of the Number nine.
The names of God with nine letters. Jehovah Saboath. Jehovah Zidkenu. Elohim
Gibor. In the original world. Nine Quires of Angels. Seraphim. Cherubin.
Thrones. Dominations. Powers. Virtue. Principalities Archangels. Angels. In the
intelligible world. Nine Angels ruling the Heavens. Metattron. Ophaniel.
Zaphkiel. Zadkiel. Camael. Raphael. Haniel. Michael. Gabriel. Nine moveable
spheres. The primum mobile. The Starry Heaven. The sphere of Saturn. The sphere
of Jupiter. The sphere of Mars. The sphere of the Sun. The sphere of Venus. The
sphere of Mercury. The sphere of the Moon. In the Celestial world Nine stones
representing the nine Quires of Angels Saphir. Emrald. Carbuncle Beril. Onyx.
Chrysolite Jasper. Topaze. Sardis. In the Elementary world. Nine senses inward,
and outward together. Memory. Cogitative. Imaginative. Common sense. Hearing.
Seeing. Smelling. Tasting. Touching. In the lesser world. Nine orders of
devils. False spirits. Spirits of lying. Vessels of iniquity. Avengers of
wickedness. Juglers. Aerie powers. Furies, sowing mischiefs. Si^ters or tryers.
Tempters or ins^arers. In the infernal world.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Number Ten, and the Scale thereof.
THE number ten is called every number, or an universal number, complete,
signifying the full course of life: for beyond that we cannot number, but by
replication; and ^^ either implies all numbers within it self, or explains them
b^ it self, and its own, by multiplying them: wherefore it is accounted to be
of a manifold Religion, and power, and ^^ applied to the purging of souls.
Hence the Ancients called Ceremonies Denary, because they that were to be
expected and to offer sacrifices, were to abstain from some certain things for
ten days. Whence amongst the Egyptians i^ was the custom for him that would
sacrifice to Jo, to ^^ ten days before, which Apuleius testifies of himself,
saying It was commanded that I should for the space of ten days refrain all
meat, and be fasting. There are ten sanguine parts of man, the Menstrues, the
Sperm, the Plasmatick spirit the Mass, the Humors, the Organicall body, the
vegetative part, the sensitive part, reason, and the mind. There are also ten
simple integrall parts constituting man, the bone, cartilage, nerve, fiber,
ligament, artery, vein, membrane flesh, skin. There are also ten parts of which
a man consists intrinsecally; The spirit, the brain, the lungs, the heart, the
liver, the gall, the spleen, the kidneys, the testicles, the Matrix. There were
ten Curtains in the Temple, ten strings in the Psaltery; ten musical
instruments with which Psalms were sang, the names whereof were, Neza, on which
their Odes were sang, Nablum, the same as Organs, Mizmor, on which the Psalms,
Sir, on which the Canticles, Tehila, on which Orations, Beracha, on which
Benedictions, Halel, on which Praises: Hodaia, on which Thanks, Asre on which
the Felicity of any one, Hallelujah, on which the praises of God only, and
Contemplations. There were also ten singers of Psalms, viz. Adam, Abraham,
Melchisedech, Moses, Asaph, David, Solomon, and three sons of Chora, there are
also ten commandments; And the tenth day after the ascension of Christ the
Holy Ghost came down. This lastly is the number, in which Jacob wrestling with
the Angel all sight overcame, and at the rising of the Sun was blessed, and
called by the name of Israel In this number Joshua overcame thirty one kings,
and David overcame Goliath, ^^d the Philistines, and Daniel escaped the danger
of the ^ions. This number also is as circular as unity, because being ^^aped
together, returns into a unity, from whence it had ^s beginning, and it is the
end, and perfection of all numbers, and the beginning of tens. As the number
ten flows ^^ck into a unity, from whence it proceeded so every thing that is
flowing is returned back to that from which it had be beginning of its Flux. So
water returns to the Sea, ^^om whence it had its beginning, the body returns to
the earth, from whence it was taken: time returns into Eternity, from whence it
flowed, the spirit shall return to ^od that gave it; and lastly every creature
returns to nothing, from whence it was created, neither is it support^^ but by
the word of God, in whom all things are hid; and things with the number ten,
and by the number ten, make ^ound, as says Proclus, taking their beginning
from God, ^^d ending in him. God therefore that first unity, or one ^^ing,
before he communicated himself to inferiors, diffused himself first into the
first of numbers, viz. The number three, ^en into the number ten, as into ten
Idea's, and measures of ^aking all numbers, and all things, which the Hebrews
call ^^ Attributes, and account ten divine names; For which those there cannot
be a further number. Hence all tens have ^me divine thing in them, and in the
Law are required of ^od as his own, together with the first fruits, as the
origi^l of things, and beginning of numbers, and everytenth is as the end given
to him, who is the beginning, and end of all things.

The Scale of the Number ten.


The Scale of the Number Ten.
In the original (...) (...) (...) (...) The name of God with ten letters.
(...) Eheie. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Ten names of
God. In the intelligible world. Seraphim. Cherubim. Thrones. Dominations.
Powers. Virtues. Principalities. Archangels. Angels. Blessed souls. Ten orders
of the blessed according to Dionysius. In the Celestial world. Reschith
hagallalim. Masloth. Sabbathi. Zedeck. Madim. Schemes. Noga. Cochab. Levanah.
Holom. Jesodoth. Ten spheres of the world. In the Elementary world. A Dove. A
Libard. A Dragon. An Eagle. A Horse. Lion. Man. Genitals. Bull. Lamb. Ten
Animals consecrated to the Gods. In the lesser world. Spirit. Brain. Spleen.
Liver. Gall. Heart. Kidnyes. Lungs. Genitals. Matrix. Ten parts intrinse call
of man In the internal world. False Gods. Lying spirits Vessels of inquity.
Revengers of wickedness. Juglers. Aerie powers. Furies the seminaries of evil.
Sisters or tryers. Tempters or ensnarers. Wicked souls bearing rule. Ten orders
of the damned.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Number eleven, and the number twelve; with a double Scale
of the Number twelve Cabilisticall, and Orphicall.
THE number eleven as it exceeds the number ten, which is the number of the
commandments, so it falls short of the number twelve, which is of grace and
perfection, therefore it is called the number of sins, and the penitent. Hence
in the tabernacle there were commanded to be made eleven Coats of hair which is
the habit of those that are penitent, and lament for their sins, whence this
number has no Communion with Divine or Celestial things, nor any attraction,
or scale tending to things above: neither has it any reward; but yet sometimes
it receives a gratuitous favor from God, as he which was called the eleventh
hour to the vineyard of the Lord received the same reward as those who had born
the burden, and heat of the day. Now the number twelve is divine, and that
whereby the Celestials are measured; it is also the number of the Signs in the
Zodiac over which there are twelve angels as chief, supported by the
irrigation of the great name of God. In twelve years also Jupiter perfects his
course, and the Moon daily runs through twelve degrees. There are also twelve
chief joints in the body of man, viz. in hands, elbones, shoulders, thighs,
knees, and vertebrae of the feet. There is also a great power of the number
twelve in divine mysteries God chose twelve families of Israel, and set over
them twelve Princes; so many stones were placed in the midst of Jordan, and God
commanded that so many should be set on the breast of the Priest; twelve Lions
did bear the brazen Sea that was made by Solomon: there were so many fountains
in Helim, and so many spies sent to the land of promise, and so many Apostles
of Christ set over the twelve tribes, and twelve thousand people were set apart
and chosen; the queen of Heaven crowned with twelve Stars, and in the Gospel
twelve baskets of the fragments were taken up, and twelve Angels are set over
the twelve gates of the City, and twelve stones of the heavenly Jerusalem. In
inferior things many breeding things proceed after this number; so the Hare and
Coney being most fruitful, bring forth twelve times in the year, and the
Cammel is so many months in breeding, and the Pea-cock brings forth twelve
Eggs.

The Scale of the Number twelve.
The names of God with twelve letters. (...) (...) (...) (...) In the original
world. The great name returned back into twelve banners. (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Twelve orders of the
blessed Spirits. Seraphim. Cherubim. Thrones. Dominations. Powers. Virtues.
Trincipalities. Archangels. Angels. Innocents. Martyrs. Confessors. In the
Intelligible world. Twelve Angels ruling over the signs. Malchidiel. Asmodel.
Ambriel Muriel. Verchiel. Hamaliel Zuriel. Barbiel. Adnachiel Hanael. Gabiel.
Barchiel. Twelve Tribes: Dan. Ruben. Judah. Manasseh. Asher. Simeon. Issachar.
Benjamin. Napthalin Gad. Zabulon. Ephraim. Twelve Prophets. Malachi. Haggai.
Zachary. Amos. Hosea. Micha. Jonah. Obadiah. Zephaniah Nahum. Habakuk Joel.
Twelve Apostles. Mathias Thadeus. Simon. John. Peter. Andrew. Bartholemew.
Philip. James the elder. Thomas. Matthew. James the younger. Twelve signs of the
Zodiac. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpius.
Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius. Pisces. In the Celestial world. Twelve
Months. March. April. May. June. July. August. September October. November.
December January. February. In the Elementall world. Twelve Plants. Sang.
Upright Vervain. Bending Vervain. Comfrey. Lady's Seal. Calamint.
Scorpion-grass. Mugwort. Pimpernel. Dock. Dragonwort. Aristolochy. Twelve
stones. Sardonius. A Carneol Topaze Calcedony. Jasper. Emrald. Berill.
Amethyst. Hyacinth. Chrysoprasus. Crystal. Saphir. Twelve principal members.
The head. The neck. The arms. The breast. The heart. The belly. The kidneys.
Genitals. The hams Knees. Legs. Feet. In the Elementary world. Twelve degrees
of the damned, and of Devils. False gods Lying spirits. Vessels of iniquity.
Revengers of wickedness. Juglers. Aerie powers. Furies the ^owers of evils.
Sifters or Tryers. Tempters or ensnarers. Witches. Apostates. Infidels. In the
infernal world.

The Orphical Scale of the Number twelve.
Twelve Deities. Pallas. Venus. Phoebus. Mercury. Jupiter. Ceres. Vulcan. Mars.
Diana. Vesta Juno. Neptune. In the intelligible world. Twelve signs of the
Zodiake. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpius.
Sagittarlus. Capricorn Aquarius. Pisces. In the Celestial world. Twelve
months. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November.
December. January. February. In the Elementall world. Twelve consecrated birds.
The Owl Dove. Cock. Ibis. Eagle. Sparrow. Goose. Pie. Daw. Heron. Peacock.
Swan. Twelve consecrated beasts She Goat He Goat. Bull. Dog. Heart. Sow. Ass.
Wolf. Hind. Lion. Sheep. Horse. Twelve consecrated trees. Olive Tree
Myrtiltree. Laurel. Hasle. Aesculus. Apple Tree. Box-tree. Dog-tree. Palm Tree
Pine Tree. Ram-thorn Elm-tree. Twelve members of man distributed to the signs.
The head. The Neck The Arms. The Breast The Heart The Belly Kidneys. Genitals.
Hamnes. Knees. Legs. Feet. In the lesser world.

CHAP. XV. Of the Numbers which are above twelve, and of their powers, and
virtues.
THE other numbers also which are above twelve, are endowed with many, and
various effects, the virtues whereof you must understand by their original,
and parts, as they are made of a various gathering together of simple numbers,
or manner of multiplication. Sometimes as their significations arise from the
lessening, or exceeding of another going before, especially more perfect, so
they contain of themselves the signs of certain divine mysteries. So you see
the third number above ten, shows the mysteries of Christ's appearing to the
Gentiles, for the thirteenth day after his birth a Star was a guide to the wise
men. The fourteenth day does typifie Christ, who the fourteenth day of the
first month was sacrificed for us; upon which day the children of Israel were
commanded by the Lord to celebrate the Passover. This number Matthew does so
carefully observe, that he passed over some generations, that he might every
where observe this number in the generations of Christ. The fifteenth number is
a token of spiritual ascensions, therefore the song of degrees is applied to
that in fifteen Psalms. Also fifteen years were added to the life of King
Hezekiah: and the fifteenth day of the seventh month was observed, and kept
holy. The number sixteen, the Pythagorians call the number of felicity. It also
comprehends all the Prophets of the old Testament, and the Apostles, and
Evangelists of the new. The number eighteen, and twenty, Divines interpret to
be unhappy, for in the former, Israel served Eglon King of Moab; in the other
Jacob served, and Joseph was sold. And lastly, amongst creatures that have many
feet, there is none that has above twenty feet. The twenty two signifies the
fullness of wisdom, and so many are the Characters of the Hebrew letters, and so
many Books does the old Testament contain. To the number twenty eight, the
favor of the Moon is designed, for the motion thereof is distant from the
course of other Stars, and as it were alone is completed the twenty eighth
day, when it returns to the same point of the Zodiake from whence it came.
Hence twenty eight Mansions of the Moon, having singular virtue, and influence,
are numbered in the heavens. The number thirty is memorable for many mysteries,
Our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized the thirtieth year of his Age, and began to
do miracles, and to teach the Kingdom of God. Also John Baptist was thirty
years old when he began to preach in the wilderness, and to prepare the ways
of the Lord. Also Ezekiel at the same Age began to prophecy; and Joseph was
brought out of Prison on the thirtieth year of his Age, and received the
government of Egypt from Pharaoh. The number thirty two, the Hebrew Doctors
ascribe to wisdom, and so many paths of wisdom are described by Abraham. But
the Pythagorians call this the number of Justice, because it is always
divisible into two parts, even unto a unity. The number forty, the Ancients
did honor with great observation, concerning which they did celebrate the
feast Tessarosten: It is said that it does conduce to the account of birth, for
in so many days the seed is fitted, and transformed in the womb, until it be
by its due, and harmoniacall proportions brought unto a perfect organicall
body, being disposed to receive a rational soul. And so many days they say
women be, after they have brought forth, before all things are settled within
them, and they purified, and so many days infants refrain from smiling, are
infirm, and live with a great deal of hazard. This also is in Religion a
number of expiation, and penitency, and signifying great mysteries. For in the
time of the deluge the Lord rained forty days, and nights upon the earth: The
children of Israel lived forty years in the wilderness; forty days the
destruction of Nineveh was put off. The same number was accounted as holy in
the fasts of the Saints: For Moses, Elias, and Christ fasted forty days.
Christ was carried forty weeks in the womb of a Virgin, Christ tarryed forty
days after his birth at Bethelem before he was presented in the Temple: He
preached forty months publicly: he lay forty hours dead in the Sepulcher,
the fourtieth day after his resurrection he ascended into heaven, all which
Divines say, were not done without some occult property, and mystery of this
number. The number fifty signifies remission of sins, of servitudes, and also
liberty. According in the Law, on the fiftieth year they did remit debts, and
every one did return to his own possessions. Hence by the year of Jubilee, and
by the Psalm of repentance it shows a sign of indulgency, and repentance. The
law also, and the holy Ghost are declared in the same: For the fiftieth day
after Isreal's going forth out of Egypt, the Law was given to Moses in mount
Sinai: The fiftieth day after the resurrection, the holy Ghost came down upon
the Apostles in mount Sion; Whence also it is called the number of grace, and
attributed to the Holy Ghost. The number sixty, was holy to the Egyptians, for
it is proper to the Crocodile, that as she in sixty days brings forth sixty
eggs, and so many days sits on them, so she is said also to live so many
years, and to have so many teeth: and so many days every year to rest solitary
without any meat. The number seventy has also its mysteries, for so many years
the fire of the sacrifice in the Babylonian Captivity lay under the water, and
was alive: so many years Jeremiah foretold the destruction of the Temple, and
so many years the Babylonian Captivity endured, and in so many years the
desolation of Jerusalem was finished. Also there were seventy Palms in the
place where the children of Israel pitched their Tents. The Fathers went down
to Egypt with seventy souls. Also seventy Kings with their fingers, and toes
cut off did gather meat under the table of Adonibezeck seventy sons came forth
of the loins of Joas, seventy men, all ions of Jero, seventy weights of silver
were given to Abimelech, and so many men Abimelech slew upon one stone; Abdon
had seventy sons, and Nephews, who rod upon seventy Foals of Asses; Solomon had
seventy thousand men which carried burdens. Seventy sons of King Ahab were
beheaded in Samaria; seventy years, according to the Psalmist, are the Age of
man. Lamech shall be avenged seventy seven fold; Thou shall forgive thy brother
if he offend against thee, seventy seven times. Also the number seventy seven
times. Also the number seventy two was famous for so many languages, for so
many Elders of the Synagogue, for so many interprers of the old Testament, for
so many Disciples of Christ: It has also a great Communion with the number
twelve; hence in the heavens, every sign being divided into six parts, there
result seventy two fives, over which so many angels bear rule; and so many are
the names of God; and every five is set over one Idiom with such efficacy, that
the Astrologers, and Physiognomists can know from thence from what Idiom every
one arises. Answerable to these are so many manifest joints in man's body,
whereof in every finger and toe there are three, which together with the twelve
Principal reckoned before in the number twelve make up seventy two. The number
a hundred in which the sheep that was ^ound, was placed, which also passes
from the left hand to ^he right, is found holy: and because it consists of tens
it shows complete perfection. But the Complement of all numbers is thousand
which is the four square measure of the number ten, signifying a complete, and
absolute perfection. There are al^^ two numbers especially celebrated by Plato
in his Repub. and not disallowed by Aristotle in his Politics, by which ^eat
mutations in Cities are foretold: These are the square (...) ten, and the four
square measure thereof, viz. the forty ^our above a hundred, and seven hundred
twenty eight above thousand, which number is fatal: to which when any City, or
^ommon Wealth has attained, it shall afterward with a com^^eat four square
measure decline: but in squares it undergoeth change, but for the better, if it
be governed with prudent discipline, and then it shall not with fate, but
imprudency ^^l. And let thus much suffice for numbers in particular.

CHAP. XIV. Of the notes of numbers, placed in certain gesturings.
I Have often read in books of Magicians, and their works, and experiments
certain, wonderful, and as they seemed to me ridiculous gesturings, and I did
think they were certain occult agreements of the devils, by reason of which I
did reject them: but after I did more seriously examine the matter, then I did
presently understand that they were not the compacts of devils; but that there
lay in them the reason of numbers, by which the ancients did by the various
bending forward, and backward, their hands, and fingers represent numbers, by
whose gesturings the Magicians did silently signify words unknown by sound,
various with numbers, yet of great virtue, by their fingers joined together,
and sometimes changed, and did with sacred silence worship the Gods that rule
over the world. The rites whereof Martianus also makes mention of in his
Arithmetic, saying, The fingers of the Virgin were moved all manner of ways,
who after she went in, did by expressing seven hundred and seventeen numbers
with her bended fingers call upon Jupiter. But that these things may be the
better understood, I shall bring something out of the saying of Beda who says,
When thou say one, bend in the little finger on thy left hand, and set it in
the middle of the Palm; when thou say two, place the next singer to the
little finger in the same place; when three, the middle finger after the same
manner; when four, thou shall lift up thy little finger; when five, the next to
it after the same manner; when six, the middle, that finger alone which is
called the ring finger, being fixed on the mddle of the Palm: when thou say
seven, tho^ shall put only thy little finger above the root of thy Palm, the
rest in the mean time being lifted up; and by when thou say eight, thy ring
finger; when thou say ni^^ thou shall set thy middle finger contrary to
them; when thou say ten, thou shall set the nail of thy forefinger, or the
middle joint of thy thumb. When thou say twenty, thou shall put the top of
thy middle finger close betwixt the joints of thy thumb, and forefinger. When
thou say thirty, thou shall join the nail of thy thumb, and forefinger
lightly together. When thou say forty, thou shall bring the inside of thy
thumb to the outside of thy forefinger, both being lifted up. When thou say
fifty, thou shall bend thy thumb with the outward joint, like to the Greek
Gamma, to the Palm. When thou say sixty, compass about thy thumb being
bended as before, with thy forefinger bowed over it. When thou say seventy,
thou shall supply thy forefinger being bowed about as before, with thy thumb
stretched at length, the nail thereof being lifted up beyond the middle joint
of thy forefinger. When thou say eighty, thou shall supply thy forefinger
bowed about as before, with thy thumb stretched forth at length, the nail
thereof being set upon the middle joint of the forefinger. When thou say
ninty, thou shall set the nail of thy forefinger bent into the root of thy
thumb stretched out. Thus much for the left hand. Now thou shall make 100. on
thy right hand, as thou did ten on thy left; and 200. on thy right, as thou
did twenty on thy left; 2000. on thy right, as thou did two on thy left,
and so to 9000. Moreover when thou say 10000. thou shall put thy left hand
upward on thy breast, thy fingers only being lifted toward Heaven. When thou
say 20000. thou shall put the same spread forth upon thy breast. When thou
say 30000. thou shall put thy thumb on the same hand downards, on the
cartilage of the middle of thy breast. When thou say 40000. thou shall lay
the same upright, and stretched forth on thy navell. When thou say 50000.
thou shall lay thy thumb of the same hand downard on thy navell. When thou
say 60000. thou shall hold thy left thigh with the same, being downards.
When thou say 70000. the same thou shall put upon thy thumb upright. When
thou say 80000. thou shall put the same downward on thy thigh. When thou
say 90000. thou shall hold thy loins with the same, thy thumb being turned
downwards. But when thou say 100000. or 200000. and so unto 900000. thou
shall in the same order as we have spoken, fill them up on the right part of
thy body. But when thou say 1000000. thou shall join both thy hands
together, and clasp thy fingers one within the other. Let these suffice which
have been observed out of Beda; Thou shall find more of these in Brother Luke
of Saint Sepulchers, in his great Arithmetic.

CHAP. XVI. Of the various notes of numbers observed amongst the Romans.
THE notes of numbers are made diverse ways in diverse nations. The Romans did
figure them by these following notes, which Valerius Probus describes
concerning the ancient letters, and which are still in use, viz.

One. I. Five. V. Ten. X. Fifty. L. A hundred. C. Two hundred.. CC. Five
hundred. D. A thousand. M. S. I. CX. Five thousand. I. ICC. v. Ten thousand.
CCI. CM. MC. IMI. x. Fifty thousand. I. D. L. A hundred thousand. CCCI ^ ^ CM.
C. Two hundred thousand.. CC. Five hundred thousand. DM. q. D. A thousand
thousand. CM. Cq. M. S.
There are also other notes of numbers now a days used amongst Arithmeticians,
and Calculators, which according to the order of numbers are made after this
manner 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. to which is added a note of privation signed
with the mark o which although it signify no number, yet makes others to
signify, either tens, or hundreds, or thousands, as is well known to
Arithmeticians. Also there are some that mark the number ten with a line
downward, and another made cross it; and five by that line which touches the
other, but does not go cross it, and a unity by that which is put by it self,
as you may see in this example. ^ signifies ten, ^ signifies ten and five, ^
signifies sixteen, ^ ten and seven; and the round 0 being put by it self
signifies a hundred; but being joined to others, signifies so many hundreds as
the numbers are to which it is put, as thus, 00 or thus 110 signifies two
hundred, thus 000 or thus 1110 three hundred ^ five hundred, ^ ten hundred or a
thousand. And these notes are commonly seen added in Magical Characters.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the notes or figures of the Graecians.
THE Graecians use the Alphabeticall letters for their notes of numbers, and
that three ways; first by every Element according to the series of the
Alphabet signifying the number of its place. For in the order of which any
number does possess the place of the Alphabet, it represents the number
thereof, as here you may see.

1. a 2. b 3. g 4. d 5. e 6. z 7. e 8. th 9. i 10. k 11. l 12. m 13. n 14. x
15. o 16. p 17. r 18. s 19. t 20. u 21. ph 22. ch 23. ps 24. o
And this is the first order of numbers amongst the Greeks. Secondly, the
Greeks divide the whole Alphabet into three Classes, whereof the first
beginning from Alpha, is of unites. The second beginning from Iota is of tens.
The third beginning from Rho is of hundreds; and this order by the latter of the
Greeks is instituted after the imitation of the Hebrews. Now because their
Alphabet wants by that rule, three letters, it is necessary to add to them
three figures, and to interlace them with the letters, by which, viz. they
explain the sixth, the ninetieth, and the nine hundredth, as is manifest in the
following Classes.

1. A 2. 3. G 4. D 5. E 6. 7. 8. 9. TH 10. I 20. K 30. L 40. 50. N 60. X 70. O
80. P 90. 100. P 200. S 300. T 400. Y 500. PH 600. 700. PS 800. O 900.
Now if to any of these letters there be subscribed the stroke of an acute
tone, then it signifies so many thousands, as in these examples.

1000. A. 10000. I. 100000. P.
After the third manner, the Greeks use only six letters in signifying their
numbers, viz. I, for an Unite, P for the number five, because it is the head of
the word (...) (i. e.) five. D for the number ten, from (...). H for a hundred
from (...). for a thousand, from the word (...). for ten thousand from (...).
From which six letters joined in number after their manner unto four, or to
other numbers, they make other numbers, besides (...) which is not multiplied,
nor joined to it self, but always signifies the fives of others, as appears in
the following examples.

1 I 2 II 3 III 4 IIII 5 P 6 PI 7 PII 8 PIII 9 PIIII 10 D 11 DI 12 DII 13 DIII
14 DIIII 15 DP 16 DPI 20 DD 21 DDI 50 D 60 DA 100 200 5000 1000 5000 10000
50000
CHAP. XIX. Of the notes of the Hebrews, and Caldeans, and certain other notes
of Magicians.
THE Hebrew letters also have marks of numbers, but fat more excellently then
any other languages, since the greatest mysteries lie in Hebrew letters, as is
handled concerning these in that part of Cabaly which they call Notariacon. Now
the principal Hebrew letters are in number twenty two, whereof five have
diverse other certain figures in the end of a word, which therefore they call
the five ending letters, which being added to them aforesaid make twenty seven,
which being then divided into three degrees, signify the unites, which are in
the first degree; tens which are in the second, and hundreds which are in the
third degree. Now every one of them if they be marked with a great Character,
signifies so many thousands, as here

3000. 2000. 1000.
Now the Classes of the Hebrew numbers are these,

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. 90. 100. 200. 300.
400. 500. 600. 700. 800. 900.
Now there are some which do not use those final letters, but instead of them
write thus.

1000. 900. 800. 700. 600. 500.
And by those simple figures by the joining them together they describe all
other compound numbers, as eleven, twelve, a hundred and ten, a hundred and
eleven, by adding to the number ten, those which are of unites; and in like
manner to the rest after their manner; yet they describe the fifteenth number
not by ten, and five, but by nine, and six, viz. thus (...) and that out of
honor to the divine name (...) which imports fifteen, lest it should happen
that the sacred name should be abused to profane things. Also the Egyptians,
Aethiopians, Caldeans, and Arabians, have their marks of numbers, which also
often times happen amongst Magical Characters. He therefore that would know
them, must seek them, of them that are skilful of these letters. For the
Caldeans mark the numbers with the letters of their Alphabet after the manner
of the Hebrews. We have set down their Alphabet in the end of the first book.
Moreover I found in two most ancient books of Astrologers, and Magicians,
certain most elegant marks of numbers, which I thought good to set down in this
place; Now they were in both Volums such.

1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^
Now by these mark turned to the left hand are made tens, after this manner.

10 ^ 20 ^ 30 ^ 40 ^ 50 ^ 60 ^ 70 ^ 80 ^ 90 ^
And by those marks which are turned downwards on the the right hand, are made
hundreds; on the left thousands, viz: thus.

100 ^ 200 ^ 300 ^ 400 ^ 500 ^ 600 ^ 700 ^ 800 ^ 900 ^ 1000 ^ 2000 ^ 3000 ^
4000 ^ 5000 ^ 6000 ^ 7000 ^ 8000 ^ 9000 ^
And by the composition, and mixture of these marks other mixed and compounded
numbers also are most elegantly made, as you may perceive by these few.

1510 ^ 1511 ^ 1471 ^ 1486 ^ 2421 ^
According to the example of which we must proceed in other compound numbers;
And so much suffice for the marks of numbers.

CHAP. XX. What numbers are attributed to letters; and of divining by the same.
THE Pythagorians say (Aristotle, and Ptolemy are of opinion) that the very
Elements of letters have some certain divine numbers, by which collected from
proper names of things, we may draw conjectures concerning occult things to
come. Whence they call this kind of divination Arithmancy, because, viz. it is
done by numbers, as Terentianus has made mention of it in these verses. Names
are, they say, made of but letters few
Unfortunate, of many, do foreshew
Success; so Hector did Patroclus slay,
So Hector to Achilles was a prey.
Also Pliny says, That there was added to what Pythagoras invented, an uneven
number of vowels of imposed names, which did betoken lameness, or want of eyes,
and such like misfortunes, if they be assigned to the right side parts; but an
even number to them of the left. And Alexandrinus the Philosopher taught, How
that by the number of letters we may find out the ruling Stars of any one that
is born, and whether the husband or wife shall dye first, and know the
prosperous, or unhappy events of the rest of our works. His traditions which
were not disallowed by Ptolemy the Astrologer we shall here add, and put under.
But those numbers, which are deputed to each letter, we have above showed in
the Greek, and Hebrew letters, the Alphabet being divided into three Classes,
whereof the first is of unites, the second of tens, the third of hundreds. And
seeing in the Roman Alphabet there are wanting four to make up the number of
twenty seven Characters, their places are supplied with I, and V simple
consonants, as in the names of John, and Valentine, and hi, and hu aspirate
consonants as in Hierom, and Huilhelme, although the Germans for hu the
asperate use a double v v; the true Italians, and French in their vulgar speech
put G joined with U instead thereof, writing thus, Vuilhelmus, and Guilhelmus.

1. A. 2. B. 3. C. 4. D. 5. E. 6. F. 7. G. 8. H. 9. I. 10. K. 20. L. 30. M. 40.
N. 50. O. 60. P. 70. Q. 80. R. 90. S. 100. T. 200. V. 300. X. 400. Y. 500. Z.
600. I. 700. V. 800. HI. 900. HV.
But if thou desire to know the ruling Star of any one that is born, compute
his name, and of both his parents, through each letter according to the number
above written, and divide the sum of the whole being gathered together by nine,
substracting it as often as thou can; and if there remain a unity, or four,
both signify the Sun; if two or seven, both signify the Moon; but three,
Jupiter; five, Mercury; six, Venus; eight, Saturn; nine, Mars; and the reasons
thereof are showed else where. In like manner if thou desire to know the
horoscope of any one that is born, compute his name, and of his Mother, and
Father, and divide the whole collected together by twelve^, if there remain a
unity, it signifies the Lion; if Junos dewce, Aquarius; if the Vestall three,
Capricorn; if four, Sagittarius; if five, Cancer; if Venus six, Taurus; if
Palladian seven, Aries; if Vulcans eight, Libra; if Mars his nine, Scorpio; if
ten, Virgo; if eleven, Pisces; if Phoebus twelve, they represent Geminos; and
the reasons of them are given elsewhere. And let no man wonder that by the
numbers of names many things may be Prognosticated, seeing (the Pythagorian
Philosophers, and Hebrew Cabalists testifying the same) in those numbers lie
certain occult mysteries understood by few* for the most High created all
things by number, measure, and weight, from whence the truth of letters, and
names had its original, which were not instituted casually, but by a certain
rule (although unknown to us.) Hence John in the Revelation says, Let him
which has understanding compute the number of the name of the beast, which is
the number of a man. Yet these are not to be understood of those names, which a
disagreeing difference of Nations, and diverse rites of Nations according to the
causes of places, or education have put upon men; but those which were inspired
into every one at his birth, by the very Heaven with the conjunction of Stars,
and those which the Hebrew Mecubals, and wise men of Egypt long since taught to
draw from the generation of every one.

CHAP. XXI. What numbers are consecrated to the Gods, and which are ascribed,
and to what Elements.
MOreover the Pythagorians have dedicated to the Element, and dieties of Heaven
sacred numbers; for to the Air they have assigned the number eight, and to
fire five, to the earth six, to the water twelve. Besides, unity is ascribed to
the Sun, which is the only King of the Stars, in which God put his Tabernacle;
and that this also is of Jupiter, does the Causative power of his ideal and
intellectual species testify, who is the head, and the father of the Gods, as
unity is the beginning, and parent of numbers: The number two is ascribed to
the Moon, which is the second great light, and figures out the soul of the
world, and is called Juno, because betwixt that and unity there is the first
conjunction, and near fellowship; it is also ascribed to Saturn, and Mars, two
unfortunate Planets with the Astrologers; so the number three is ascribed to
Jupiter, the Sun, and Venus, viz. three fortunate planets, and is deputed to
Vesta, Hecata, and Diana; hence they say, Threefold is Hecate, three months
Diana
The Virgin has --


The number three therefore is dedicated to this Virgin whom they say to be
powerful in Heaven, and in Hell. The number four is of the Sun, which by that
number constitutes the corners of the heavens, and distinguishes seasons: it
is also ascribed to Cyllenius, because he alone is called the four square God.
The number five consisting of the first even, and the first odd, as of female,
and male, both sexes, is assigned to Mercury it is also attributed to the
Celestial world, which beyond the four Elements is it self under another form,
the fifth. The number six, which consists of two threes, as a Commixtion of both
sexes, is by the Pythagorians ascribed to generation, and marriage, and belongs
to Venus, and Juno. The number seven is of rest, and belongs to Saturn; the
same also does dispense the motion, and light of the Moon, and therefore is
called by the name of Tritonia the Virgin, because it begets nothing. It is
assigned to Minerva, because it proceeds of nothing; also to Pallas the Virago,
because it consists of numbers, as of males, and females. This also Plutarck
ascribes to Apollo. The number eight, by reason it contains the mystery of
justice, is ascribed to Jupiter; it is also dedicated to Vulcan, for of the
first motion, and number two, which is Juno drawn twice into it self, it
consists; It is also attributed to Cybele the mother of the Gods, to whom every
four square is attributed. Plutarck assigns it to Bacchus, or Dionysius, who is
said to be born the eighth month: others, because Infants of the eight month
do not live, have attributed it to Saturn, and the three Ladies of destiny. The
number nine belongs to the Moon, the utmost receptacle of all Celestial
influences, and virtues, as also it is dedicated to the nine Muses, as also to
Mars, from whom is the end of all things. The number ten is Circular, and
belongs to the Sun, after the same manner as unity; also it is attributed to
Janus, because it is the end of the first order, and from whence begins the
second unity; it is also ascribed to the world. In like manner the number
twelve, because the Sun going round twelve signs, distributes the year into
twelve months, is attributed to the world, the Heaven, and the Sun. The number
eleven, because it is semicircular, is attributed to the Moon, and also deputed
to Neptune.

CHAP. XXII. Of the tables of the Planets, their virtues, forms, and what
Divine names, Intelligencies, and Spirits are set over them.
IT is affirmed by Magicians, that there are certain tables of numbers
distributed to the seven planets, which they call the sacred tables of the
planets, endowed with many, and very great virtues of the Heavens, in as much
as they represent that divine order of Celestial numbers, impressed upon
Celestials by the Idea's of the divine mind, by means of the soul of the world,
and the sweet harmony of those Celestial rays, signifying according to the
proportion of effigies, supercelestiall Intelligencies, which can no other way
be expressed, then by the marks of numbers, and Characters. For material
numbers, and figures can do nothing in the mysteries of hid things, but
representatively by formal numbers, and figures, as they are governed, and
informed by intelligencies, and divine numerations, which unite the extremes of
the matter, and spirit to the will of the elevated soul, receiving through
great affection, by the Celestial power of the operator, a power from God,
applied through the soul of the universe, and observations of Celestial
constellations, to a matter fit for a form, the mediums being disposed by the
skill, and industry of Magicians; But let us hasten to explain the tables
severally. The first of them is assigned to Saturn, and consists of a square of
three, containing the particular numbers of nine, and in every line three every
way, and through each Diameter making fifteen. Now the whole sum of numbers is
forty five. Over this are of Divine names set such names as fill up the
numbers with an Intelligency to what is good, with a spirit to what is bad, and
out of the same numbers is drawn the seal, or Character of Saturn, and of the
spirits thereof, such as we shall beneath ascribe to its table. They say that
this table being with a fortunate Saturn engraven on a plate of lead, does help
to bring forth, or birth, and to make a man safe, and powerful, and to cause
success of petitious with princes, and powers: but if it be done with an
unfortunate Saturn, that it hinders buildings, plantings, and the like, and
casts a man from honors, and dignities, and causes discords, and quarrellings,
and disperses an Army. The second is called the table of Jupiter, which
consists of a Quaternian drawn into it self, containg sixteen particular
numbers, and in every line, and Diameter four, making thirty four. Now the Sum
of all is 136. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligence to good,
with a spirit to bad, and out of it is drawn the Character of Jupiter, and the
spirits thereof. They say that if it be impressed upon a Silver plate with
Jupiter being powerful, and ruling, it conduces to gain, and riches, favor,
and love, peace, and concord, and to appease enemies, to confirm honors,
dignities, and counsels, and dissolve enchantments if it be engraven on a
coral. The third table belongs to Mars, which is made of a square of four
containing twenty five numbers, and of these in every side and Diameter five,
which make sixty five, and the sum of all is 325. And there are over it Divine
names with an Intelligence to good, with a spirit to bad, and out of it is
drawn the Character of Mars, and of his spirits. These with Mars being
fortunate, being engraven on an Iron plate, or sword, makes a man potent in
war, and judgments, and petitions, and terrible to his enemies, and victorious
against them; and if engraven upon the Stone Correola, it stops blood, and the
mestrues; but if it be engraven with Mars being unfortunate, on a plate of red
Brass it hinders buildings, casts down the powerful from dignities, honors,
and riches, and causes discord, strife, and hatred of men, and beasts, chaseth
away Bees, Pigeons, and Fish, and hinders Mils, and renders them unfortunate
that go forth to hunting, or fighting, and causes barreness in men and women,
and other Animals, and strikes a terror in all enemies, and compels them to
submit. The fourth table is of the Sun, and is made of a square of six, and
contains thirty six numbers, whereof six in every side, and Diameter, produce
III. and the sum of all is 666. There are over it divine names with an
Intelligency to what is good, and spirit to what is evil, and out of it are
drawn Characters of the Sun, and of the spirits thereof. This being engraven on
a Golden plate with the Sun being fortunate, renders him that wears it to be
renowned, amiable, acceptable, potent in all his works, and equals a man to
Kings, and Princes, elevating him to high fortunes, inabling to do whatsoever
he pleases: but with an unfortunate Sun, it makes a tyrant, and a man to be
proud, ambitious, unsatisfiable, and to have an ill ending. The fifth table is
of Venus, consisting of a square of seven drawn into it self, viz. of forty
nine numbers, whereof seven on each side and Diameter make 175. and the sum of
all is 1225. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligency to good,
and spirit to evil; And there is drawn out of it the Character of Venus, and of
the spirits thereof. This being engraven on a Silver plate, Venus being
fortunate, procures concord, ends strife, procures the love of women,
conduces to conception, is good against barreness, causes ability for
generation, dissolves enchantments, and causes peace between man, and woman,
and makes all kind of Animals and Cattle fruitful; and being put into a
Dove-house, causes an increase of Pigeons. It conduces to the cure of all
melancholy distempers, and causes joyfulness; and being carried about
travelers makes them fortunate. But if it be formed upon Brass with an
unfortunate Venus, it causes contrary things to all that has bin above said.
The sixth table is of Mercury resulting from the square of eight drawn into it
self, containing sixty four numbers, whereof eight on every side and by both
Diameters make 260. and the sum of all 2080. and over it are set divine names
with an Intelligency to what is good, with a spirit to what is evil, and from
it is drawn a Character of Mercury, and of the spirits thereof; and if it be
with Mercury being fortunate engraven upon Silver, or Tin, or yellow Brass, or
be writ upon Virgin Parchment, it renders the bearer thereof grateful, and
fortunate to do what he pleases: it brings gain, and prevents poverty,
conduces to memory, understanding, and divination, and to the understanding of
occult things by dreams: and if it be an unfortunate Mercury, does all things
contrary to these. The seventh table is of the Moon, of a square of nine
multipled into it self, having eighty one numbers, in every side and Diameter
nine, producing 369. and the sum of all is 3321. And there are over it divine
names with an Intelligency to what is good, and a spirit to what is bad. And it
are drawn the Characters of the Moon, and of the spirits thereof. This
fortunate Moon being engraven on Silver, renders the bearer thereof grateful,
aimiable pleasant, cheerful, honored, removing all malice, and ill will. It
causes security in a journey, increase of riches, and health of body, drives
away enemies and other evil things from what place thou please; and if it be
an unfortunate Moon engraven in a plate of Lead, where ever it shall be buried,
it makes that place unfortunate, and the inhabitants thereabouts, as also
Ships, Rivers, Fountains, Mills, and it makes every man unfortunate, against
which it shall be directly done, making him fly from his Country, and that
place of his abode where it shall be buried, and it hinders Physicians, and
Orators, and all men whatsoever in their office, against whom it shall be made.
Now how the seals, and Characters of the Stars, and spirits are drawn from
these tables, the wise searcher, and he which shall understand the verifying of
these tables, shall easily find out.

Divine names answering to the numbers of Saturn.
3. Ab (...) 9. Hod. (...) 15. Iah. (...) 15. Hod. (...) 45. Jehovah extended.
(...) 45. Agiel. The Intelligence of Saturn. (...) 45. Zazel. The spirit of
Saturn. (...)

Divine names answering to the numbers of Jupiter.
4 Abab. (...) 16 (...) 16 (...) 34 El Ab (...) 136 Johphiel. The Intelligence
of Jupiter. (...) 136 Hismael. The spirit of Jupiter. (...)

Names answering to the numbers of Mars.
^ He the letter of the Holy Name. (...) 25 (...) 55 Adonai (...) ^25 Graphiel
The Intelligence of Mars. (...) ^25 Barzabel The spirit of Mars. (...)

Names answering to the numbers of the Sun.
^ Vau the letter of the Holy Name. (...) ^ He extended, the letter of the Holy
Name. (...) ^6 Eloh (...) ^11 Nachiel The Intelligence of the Sun. (...) ^66
Sorath The spirit of the Sun. (...)

Names, answering to the numbers of Venus.
(...) ^9 Hagiel The Intelligence of Venus. (...) ^67 Kedemel. The spirit of
Venus. (...) ^252 Bne Seraphim The Intelligencies of Venus. (...)

Names answering to the numbers of Mercury.
^ A^boga, eight extended. (...) ^4 Din. (...) ^4 Doni (...) ^0 Tiriel. The
Intelligence of Mercury. (...) ^80 Taphthartharath The spirit of Mercury. (...)

Names answering to the numbers of the Moon.
^ Hod (...) ^ Elim (...) ^9 Hasmodai, the spirit of the Moon. (...) ^21
Schedbarschemoth Schartathan, the spirit of the spirits of the Moon. (...)

The Intelligency of the Intelligence of the Moon.
^21 Malcha betharsisim head ber^ah schehalim (...)

The Table of Saturn in his compass.
4 9 2 3 5 7 8 1 6

In Hebrew notes.


The Seals or Characters
Of Saturn.


Of the Intelligence of Saturn.


Of the Spirit of Saturn.


The Table of Jupiter in his compass.
4 14 15 1 9 7 6 12 5 11 10 8 16 2 3 13

In Hebrew notes.


The Seals or Characters
Of Jupiter.


Of the Intelligence of Jupiter.


The Spirit of Jupiter.


The Table of Mars in his compass.
11 24 7 20 3 4 12 25 8 16 17 5 13 21 9 10 18 1 14 22 23 6 19 2 15

In Hebrew notes.


The Seals or Characters
Of Mars.


Of the Intelligence of Mars.


Of the Spirit of Mars.


The Table of the Sun in his compass.
6 32 3 34 35 1 7 11 27 28 8 30 19 14 16 15 23 24 18 20 22 21 17 13 25 29 10 9
26 12 36 5 33 4 2 31

In Hebrew notes.


The Seals or Characters
Of the Sun.


Of the intelligence of the Sun.


Of the Spirit of the Sun.


The Table of Venus in her Compass.
22 47 16 41 10 35 4 5 23 43^ 17 42 11 29 30 6 24 49 ^81 36 12 13 31 7 25 43 19
37 38 14 32 1 26 44 20 21 39 8 33 2 27 45 46 15 40 9 34 3 28

The Seals, or Characters Of the Intelligence
Of Venus.


Of Venus.


The Table of Venus in Hebrew notes.


Of the Spirit of Venus.


Of the Intelligences of Venus.


The Table of Mercury in his compass.
8 58 59 5 4 62 63 1 49 15 14 52 53 11 10 56 41 23 22 44 48 19 18 45 32 34 38
29 25 35 39 28 40 26 27 37 36 30 31 33 17 47 46 20 21 43 42 24 9 55 54 12 13 51
50 16 64 2 3 61 60 6 7 57

The Seals or Characters Of the Intelligency
Of Mercury.


Of Mercury.


The Table of Mercury in Hebrew notes.


Of the Spirit of Mercury.


The Table of the Moon in her Compass.
37 7^ 29 70 21 62 13 454 5 6 38 79 30 71 22 63 14 46 47 7 39 80 31 72 23 55 15
16 48 8 40 81 32 64 24 56 57 17 49 9 41 73 33 65 25 26 58 18 50 1 42 74 34 66
67 27 59 10 51 2 43 7^ 35 36 68 19 60 11 52 3 44 76 77 28 69 20 61 12 53 4 45

The Seals or Characters
Of the Moon.


Of the Spirit of the Moon.


The Table of the Moon in Hebrew notes.


Of the Spirit of the spirits of the Moon.


Of the Intelligence of the Intelligences of the Moon.


CHAP. XXIII. Of Geometrical Figures and Bodies, by what virtue they are
powerful in Magic, and which are agreeable to each Element, and the Heaven.
Geometrical Figures also arising from numbers, are conceived to be of no less
power. Of these first of all, a Circle does answer to Unity, and the number
ten; for Unity is the Center, and circumference of all things; and the number
ten being heaped together returns into a Unity from whence it had its
beginning, being the end and complement of all numbers. A circle is called an
infinite line in which there is no Terminus a quo, nor Terminus ad quem, whose
beginning and end is in every point, whence also a circular motion is called
infinite, not according to time, but according to place; hence a circular being
the largest and perfectest of all is judged to be most fit for bindings and
conjurations; Whence they who adjure evil spirits, are wont to environ
themselves about with a circle. A Pentangle also, as with the virtue of the
number five has a very great command over evil spirits, so by its lineature,
by which it has within five obtuse angles, and without five acutes, five
double triangles by which it is surrounded. The interior pentangle contains in
it great mysteries, which also is so to be enquired after, and understood; of
the other figures, viz. triangle, quadrangle, sexangle, septangle, octangle,
and the rest, of which many, as they are made of many and diverse insections,
obtain diverse significations and virtues according to the diverse manner of
drawing, and proportions of lines, and numbers. The Egyptians, and Arabians
confirmed that the figure of the Cross has very great power, and that is the
most firm receptacle of all Celestial powers, and intelligencies, because it is
the rightest figure of all, containing four right angles, and it is the first
description of the superficies, having longitude and latitude: And they said it
is inspired with the fortitude of the Celestials, because their fortitude
results by the straitness of angles and rays: And stars are then most potent
when they possess four corners in the figure of the heaven, and make a cross,
by the projection of their rays mutually. It has moreover (as we showed
before) a very great correspondency with the numbers 5. 7. 9. most potent
numbers. It was also reckoned by the Egyptian Priests, from the beginning of
Religion amongst sacred letters, signifying amonst them allegorically the life
of future salvation. It was also impressed on the Picture of Serapis, and was
had in great veneration amongst the Greeks. But what here belongs to Religion
we shall discuss elsewhere. This is to be observed, whatsoever wonderful thing
figures work when we write them in Papers, Plates, or Images, they do not do it
but by the virtue acquired from sublimer figures, by a certain affection which
a natural apitude or resemblance procures, in as much as they are exactly
configured to them, as from an opposite wall the Echo is caused, and in a
hollow glass the collection of the solarie rays, which afterward reflecting
upon an opposite body, either wood, or any combustible thing, does forthwith
burn it: or as an Harp causes a resounding in an other Harp, which is no
otherwise but because a suitable and a like figure is set before it, or as two
strings on a Harp being touched with an equal distance of time, and modulated
to the same intention, when one is touched the other shakes also: Also the
figures, of which we have spoken, and what characters soever concern the
virtues of the Celestial figures as they shall be opportunely impressed upon
things, those ruling, or be rightly framed, as one figure is of affinity with,
and does express an other. And as these are spoken of figures, so also they are
to be understood of Geometrical bodies, which are a Sphere, a Tetracedron,
Hexacedron, Octocedron, Icocedron, Dodecacedron, and such like. Neither must we
pass over what figures Phythagoras and his followers, Timeus, Locrus, and Plato
assigned to the Elements and Heavens: for first of all they assigned to the
earth a four square, and a square of eight solid angles, and of twenty four
plains, and six bases in form of a Dice: to the fire, a Pryamis of a four
triangular basis, and of so many solid angles, and of twelve plains; to the
air Octocedron, of eight triangular bases, and six solid angles, and twenty
four plains: and lastly, to Water they have assigned Icocedron twenty bases,
twelve solid angles: To the Heaven they have assigned Dodecacedron of twelve
five cornered bases, and twenty solid angles, and sixty plains. Now he which
knows the powers, relations, and proprieties of these figures, and bodies,
shall be able to work many wonderful things in Natural and Mathematical Magic,
especially in Glasses. And I knew how to make by them wonderful things, in
which any one might see whatsoever he pleased at a long distance.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Musical Harmony, of the force and power thereof.
MUsical Harmony also is not destitute of the gifts of the Stars; for it is a
most powerful imaginer of all things, which whilst it follows opportunely the
Celestial bodies, does wonderfully allure the Celestial influence, and does
change the affections, intentions, gestures, motions, actions and dispositions
of all the hearers, and does quietly allure them to its own properties, as to
gladness, lamentation, to boldness, or rest, and the like; also it allures
Beasts, Serpents, Birds, Dolphins to the hearing of its pleasant tunes. So
Birds are allured with Pipes, and Hearts are caught by the same. Fish in the
lake of Alexandria are delighted with a noise. Music has caused friendship
betwixt Men and Dolphins. The sound of the Harp does lead up and down the
Hyperborean Swans. Melodious voices tame the Indian Elephants: and the very
Elements delight in Music. The Hulesian fountain otherwise calm, and quiet, if
the Trumpet sound, rises up rejoicing, and swells over its banks. There are in
Lydia those which they call the Nymphs Islands, which at the sound of a Trumpet
forthwith come into the middle of the sea, and turning round ^ead a dance, and
then are returned to the shores; M. Varro testifies that he saw them. And there
are more wonderful things then these. For in the shore of Attica the sea sounds
like a Harp. A certain stone of Megaris makes a sound like a Harp every time
the string of a Harp is struck; so great is the power of Music, that it
appeaseth the mind, raises the spirit, stirs up soldiers to fight, and
refreshes the weary, calls back them that are desperate, refreshes
travelers. And the Arabians say, that Camels carrying burdens are refreshed by
the singing of their leaders. In like manner, they that carry great burdens,
sing, and are thereby strengthened and refreshed: for singing causes delight
and strength, pacifieth the angry, cheareth up those that are sad and heavy,
pacifieth enemies, moderates the rage of mad men, chaseth away vain
imaginations: Hence it is that Democritus and Theophrastus affirm that some
diseases of the body, and mind may thus be cured, or caused. So we read that
Therpander, and Arion of Lesbos cured the Lesbians, and Jonians by Music; and
Ismenia of Thebes cured diverse of very great diseases by Music; Moreover,
Orpheus, Amphion, David, Phythagoras, Empedocles, Asclepiades, Timotheus, were
wont to do many wonderful things by sounds: Sometimes they did stir up dull
spirits by familiar sounds; sometimes they did restrain wanton, furious, angry
spirits by more grave tones. So David with a Harp moderated Saul in a rage. So
Phythagoras recalled a luxurious young man from immoderate lust. So Timotheus
stirred up King Alexander to a rage, and again repressed him. Saxo the
Grammatian, in his History of the Danes, tells of a certan Musician who boasted
that he could by his Music make every one that heard it to be mad; and when he
was constrained by the King command to perform the same, he endeavored to work
several ways upon the affections; and first, by a tone of Musical gravity
filled the hearers with a kind of sadness and unsensibleness; then by a more
lively sound he made them rejoice, and dance; and lastly, he by a more earnest
Music, reduced them to fury and madness. We read also, that they in Apulia
that were touched with a kind of dangerous Spider, were astonished until they
heard a certain sound, at the hearing of which every one rises up and danceth.
And it is believed (Gelli^^ being witness) that they that are pained with the
Sciatica, are eased at the sound of a Pipe. Also Theophrastus reports, that the
sound of a Flute cures the biting of Spiders. And Democritus himself confesses
that the Consort of Pipers, has been a cure for very many diseases.

CHAP. XXV. Of Sound, and Harmony, and whence their wonderfulness in operation.
MOreover we shall not deny, that there is in Sounds a virtue to receive the
heavenly gifts; if with Pythagoras and Plato we thought the heavens to consist
by an Harmonial composition, and to rule and cause all things by Harmonial
tones and motions: Singing can do more then the sound of an Instrument, in as
much as it arising by an Harmonial consent, from the conceit of the mind, and
imperious affection of the fantasy and heart, easily penetrateth by motion,
with the refracted and well tempered Air, the aerious spirit of the hearer,
which is the bond of soul and body; and transferring the affection and mind of
the Singer with it, It moves the affection of the hearer by his affection, and
the hearers fantasy by his fantasy, and mind by his mind, and strikes
the mind, and strikes the heart, and pierces even to the inwards of the
soul, and by little and little, infuseth even dispositions: moreover it moves
and stops the members and the humors of the body. From hence in moving the
affections harmony conferreth so much, that not only natural, but also
artificial and vocal Harmony does yield a certain power both to the souls and
bodies: but it is necessary that all Conforts proceed from fit foundations,
both in stringed instruments, in pipes, and vocal singings, if you would have
them agree well together: for no man can make the roaring of Lions, the ^owing
of Oxen, the neighing of Horses, the braying of Asses, the grunting of Hogs to
be harmonious: neither can the strings made of Sheeps and Wolves guts, be
brought to any agreement, because their soundations are dissonant; but the many
and diverse voices of men agree together, because they have one foundation in
the species or kind: so many birds agree, because they have one nigh genus or
kind, and a resemblance from above; also artificial instruments agree with
natural voices, because the similitude that is betwixt them, is either true and
manifest, or has a certain analogy. But every harmony is either of sounds or
voices. Sound is a breath, voice is a sound and animate breath; Speech is a
breath pronounced with sound, and a voice signifying something: the spirit of
which proceeds out of the mouth with sound and voice; Chaludius says that a
voice is sent forth out of the inward cavity of the breast and heart, by the
assistance of the spirit. By which, together with the tongue, forming, and
striking the narrow passages of the mouth, and by the other vocal organs, are
delivered forth articulate sounds; the elements of speech, by which Interpreter
the secret motions of the mind are laid open: but Lactantius says, that the
nature of the voice is very obscure, and cannot be comprehended how it is made,
or what it is. To conclude, All Music consists in voice, in sound, and
hearing: sound without Air cannot be Audible, which though it be necessary for
hearing, yet, as Air, it is not of it self audible, nor to be perceived by any
sense, unless by accident; for the Sight sees it not, unless it be colored,
nor the Ears unless sounding, nor the Smell unless odoriferous, nor the Taste
unless it be sapid, nor the Touch unless it be cold or hot, and so forth:
Therefore though sound cannot be made without Air, yet is not sound of the
nature of Air, nor air of the nature of sound, but air is the body of the life
of our sensitive spirit, and is not of the nature of any sensible object, but
of a more simple and higher virtue; but ^ is meet that the sensitive soul
should vivifie the air joined to in and in the vivificated air, which is joined
to the spirit perceive the species of objects put forth into act, and this is
done in the living air, but in a subtle and Diaphanous the visible species, i^
an ordinary air the audible, in a more gross air the species o^ other senses
are perceived.

CHAP. XXVI. Concerning the agreement of them with the Celestial bodies, and
what harmony and sound is correspondent of every Star.
BUt understanding now, that of the seven Planets, Saturn, Mars, and the Moon
have more of the voice then of the Harmony. Saturn has sad, hoarse, heavy, and
slow words, and sounds, as it were pressed to the Center; but Mars, rough,
sharp, threatening great and wrathful words: the Moon observes a mean betwixt
these two; but Jupiter, Sol, Venus and Mercury, do possess Harmonies; yet
Jupiter has grave, constant, fixed, sweet, merry, and pleasant Consorts; Sol
venerable, settled, pure and sweet, with a certain grace; but Venus lascivious,
luxurious, delicate, voluptuous, dissolute and fluent: Mercury has Harmonies
more remiss, and various, merry and pleasant, with a certain boldness: but the
Tone of particulars, and proportionated Consorts obeys the nine Muses.
Jupiter has the grace of the octave, and also the quinte, viz. the Diapason
with the Diapente: Sol obtains the melody of the octave voice, viz. Diapason;
in like manner by fifteen Tones, a Disdiapason; Venus keeps the grace of the
quinte or Diapente. Mercury has Diatessaron; viz. the grace of the quarte:
Moreover the ancients being content with four strings, as with the number of
Elements, accounted Mercury the Author of them, as Nicomachus reports, and by
their Base strings would resemble the earth, by their Pathypas or middle the
water; by their note Diezeugmenon, or Hyperboleon the fire; by the Paranete or
Synemmenon, or treble, the Air; but afterward Terpander the Lesbian finding
out the seventh string, equalled them to the number of the Planets. Moreover,
they that followed the number of the Elements, did affirm, that the four kinds
of Music do agree to them, and also to the four humors, and did think the
Dorian music to be consonant to the water and phlegm, the Phrygian to choler
and fire, the Lydian to blood and air; the mixed Lydian to melancholy and earth:
Others respecting the number and virtue of the Heavens, have attributed the
Dorian to the Sun, the Phrygian to Mars, the Lydian to Jupiter, the mixed Lydian
to Saturn, the Hypophrygian to Mercury, the Hypolydian to Venus, the Hypodorian
to the Moon, the Hypo mixed Lydian to the mixed Stars: Moreover they refer
these modes of Music to the Muses, and the strings to the Heavens, but not in
that order as we have declared concerning the nine Muses, amongst our numbers
and celestial souls; for they say Thalia has no Harmony, therefore ascribe her
to Silence, and the Earth; but Clio with the Moon move after the Hypodorian
manner; the string Proslambanomenos and Asre. Calliope and Mercury possess the
Hypophrygian manner, and the Chord, Hypate-Hypaton, or B. Mi. Terpsichore with
Venus the Hypolydian manner, and Parahypote, Hypaton; and for Melpomene and the
Dorian manner with Licanos, Hypaton, or D. Sol. Re. are applied to the Sun.
Erato with Mars keep the Phrygian fashion, and the Hypatemise, or E. la. mi.
Euterpe, and the Lydian Music, and Pachyparemeson agree with Jupiter; Polymnia
and Saturn keep the mixed Lydian manner, and Lichanos Meson D. Sol. Re. To
Urania and the fixed Stars the Hypo mixed Lydian Music, and the string Mese, or
A. le. mi. re. are ascribed, as we read them expressed in these Verses. Silent
Thalia we to the Earth compare,
For she by Music never does ensnare,
After the Hypodorian Clio sings,
Persephone likewise does strike the Base strings;
Calliope also does Chord second touch,
Using the Phrygian; Mercury as much:
Terpsichore strikes the third, and that rare,
The Lydian Music makes so Venus fair.
Melpomene, and Titan do with a grace
The Dorian Music use in the fourth place.
The fifth ascribed is to Mars the god
Of War, and Erato after the rare mode
Of the Phrygians, Euterpe does also love
The Lydian, and sixth string; and so does Jove.
Saturn the seventh does use with Polymny,
And causes the mixed Lydian melody.
Urania also does the eight create,
And music Hypo-Lydian elevate.


Moreover there are some who find out the harmony of the Heavens by their
distance one from another. For that space which is betwixt the Earth and the
Moon, viz an hundred and twenty six thousand Italian Miles, makes the
Intervall of a Tone; But from the Moon to Mercury being half that space, makes
half a Tone; And so much from Mercury to Venus makes another half Tone; But
from thence to the Sun, as it were a threefold Tone and a half, and makes
Diapente; But from the Moon to the Sun, makes a twofold Diatessaron with a
half; Again from the Sun to Mars is the same space as from the Earth to the
Moon, making a Tone; from thence to Jupiter half of the same making half a
Tone; So much likewise from Jupiter to Saturn, constituting an half Tone, from
whence to the starry firmament is also the space of an half Tone. Therefore
there is from the Sun to the fixed Stars a Diatessaron distance of two tones
and an half, but from the Earth a perfect Diapason of six perfect tones;
moreover also from the proportion of the motions of the planets amongst
themselves, and with the eight Sphere, resulteth the sweetest Harmony of all;
for the proportion of the motions of Saturn to Jupiters motion, is two fold and
an half; of Jupiter to Mars, a six fold proportion; of Mars to the Sun, Venus
and Mercury, which in a manner finish their course in the same time, is a
double proportion; their motions to the Moon have a twelve-fold proportion: but
Saturns proportion to the starry Sphere is a a thousand and two hundred if it
be true which Ptolomy says, viz. that, that Heaven is moved contrary to the
primum mobile in an hundred years one degree. Therefore the proper motion of
the Moon being more swift, makes a more acute sound then the starry firmament,
which is the slowest of all, and therefore causes the most base sound; But by
the violent motion of the primum mobile, is the most swift, and acute sound of
all; but the violent motion of the Moon is most slow and heavy, which
proportion and reciprocation of motions yields a most pleasant Harmony; from
hence there are not any songs, sounds, or musical instruments more powerful
in moving man's affections, or introducing magical impressions, then those
which are composed of numbers, measures, and proportions, after the example of
the Heavens. Also the Harmony of the Elements is drawn forth from their Bases,
and Angles, of the which we have spoken before; for between Fire and Air,
there is a double proportion in the Bases, and one and an half in solid Angles;
again in Planes, a double; there arises hence an Harmony of a double Diapason,
and a Diapente. Betwixt the Air and Water, the proportion in their Bases is
double, and one and an half; hence Diapason, and Diapente; but in their Angles
double; Hence again Diapason; but between Water and Earth the proportion in the
Bases, is threefold and a third part more; from hence arises Diapason,
Diapente, Diatessaron; but in the Angles one and an half, again constituting
Diapente. To conclude, betwixt Earth and Fire, in the Bases the proportion is
one and an half, making Diapente; but in the Angles, double, causing Diapason;
but between Fire, and Water, Air and Earth, there is scarce any consonancy,
because they have a perfect contrariety in their qualities, but they are united
by the intermediate Element.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the proportion, measure, and Harmony of man's body.
SEeing man is the most beautiful and perfectest work of God, and his Image,
and also the lesser world; therefore he by a more perfect composition, and
sweet Harmony, and more sublime dignity does contain and maintain in himself
all numbers, measures, weights, motions, Elements, and all other things which
are of his composition; and in him as it were in the supreme workmanship, all
things obtain a certain high condition, beyond the ordinary consonancy which
they have in other compounds. From hence all the Ancients in time past did
number by their fingers, and showed all numbers by them; and they seem to prove
that from the very joints of man's body all numbers measures, proportions, and
Harmonies were invented; Hence according to this measure of the body, they
framed, and contrived their temples, palaces, houses, Theaters; also their
ships, engines, and every kind of Artifice, and every part and member of their
edifices, and buildings, as columns, chapiters of pillars, bases, buttresses,
feet of pillars, and all of this kind. Moreover God himself taught Noab to
build the Arc according to the measure of man's body, and he made the whole
(...) of the world proportionable to man's body; from hence it is called the
great world, man's body the less; Therefore some who have written of the
Microcosme or of man, measure the body by six feet, a foot by ten degrees,
every degree by five minutes; from hence are numbered sixty degrees, which make
three hundred minutes, to the which are compared so many Geometrical cubits, by
which Moses describes the Arc; for as the body of man is in length three
hundred minutes, in breath fifty, in height thirty; so the length of the Arc
was three hundred cubits, the breadth fifty, and the eight thirty; that the
proportion of the length to the breadth ^e six fold, to the height ten fold,
and the proportion of the breadth to the height about two thirds. In like
manner the measures of all the members are proportionate, and consonant both to
the parts of the world, and measures of the Archetype, and so agreeing, that
there is no member in man which has not correspondence with some sign, Star,
intelligence, divine name, something in God himself the Archetype. But the
whole measure of the body may be turned, and proceeding from roundness, is
known to tend to it again.



Also the four square measure is the most proportionated body; for, if a man be
placed upright with his feet together, and his arms stretched forth, he will
make a quadrature equilateral, whose center is in the botom of his belly.



But if on the same center a circle be made by the crown of the head, the arms
being let fall so far till the end of the fingers touch the circumference of
that circle, and the feet spread abroad in the same circumference, as much as
the fingers ends are distant from the top of the head; Then they divide that
circle, which was drawn from the center of the lower belly, into five equale
parts, and do constitute a perfect Pentagon; and the Heels of the feet, having
reference to the navile, make a triangle of equal sides.



But if the Heels being unmoved, the feet be stretched forth on both sides to
the right and left, and the hands lifted up to the line of the head, then the
ends of the fingers and Toes do make a square of equal sides, whose center is
on the navile, in the girdling of the body.



But if the hands be thus elevated, and the feet and Thighs extended in this
manner, by the which a man is made shorter by the fourteenth part of his
upright stature, then the distance of his feet having reference to the lower
belly, they will make an equilatecall Triangle; and the center being placed in
his navile, a circle being brought about, will touch the ends of the fingers
and toes.



But if the hands be lifted up as high as can be, above the head, then the
elbow will be equal to the crown of the head, and if then the feet being put
together, a man stand thus, he may be put into an equilaterall square brought
by the extremities of the hands and feet: the center of this square is the
navel, which is the middle betwixt the top of the head and the knees.



Now let us proceed to particular measures. The compass of a man under the
armpits contains the middle of his length, whose middle is the bottom of his
breast: and from thence upward to the middle of his breast betwixt both dugges,
and from the middle of his breast unto the crown of his head, on every side the
fourth part; also from the bottom of his breast to the bottom of the knees, and
from thence to the bottom of the ankles the fourth part of man. The same is the
latitude of his shoulder-blades from one extreme to the other: The same is the
length from the elbow to the end of the longest finger, and therefore this is
called a cubit. Hence four cubits make the length of man, and one cubit the
breadth which is in the shoulder-blades, but that which is in the compass, one
foot; now six hand-bredths make a cubit, four a foot, and four fingers bredths
make a hand-bredth, and the whole length of man is of twenty four hand bredths,
of six foot, of ninty six fingers bredths. From the bottom of his breast to the
top of his breast, is the sixth part of his length, from the top of his breast
to the top of his forehead, and lowermost root of his hairs, the seventh part
of his length; of a strong, and well set body, a foot is the sixth part of the
length, but of a tall the seventh. Neither can (as Varro, and Gellius testify)
the tallness of man's body exceed seven feet. Lastly, the Diameter of his
compass is the same measure as is from the hand, being shut unto the inward
bending of the elbow, and as that which is from the breast to both dugs, upward
to the upward lip, or downward to the navel; and as that which is from the ends
of the bones of the uppermost part of the breast compassing the gullet; and as
that which is from the sole of the foot to the end of the call of the leg, and
from thence to the middle whirle bone of the knee. All these measures are
co-equall, and make the seventh part of the whole height. The nead of a man
from the bottom of the chin to the crown of his head is the eighth part of his
length, as also from the elbow to the end of the shoulderblade: So great is the
Diameter of the compass of a tall man. The compass of the head drawn by the top
of the forehead, and the (...) of the hincer part of the head, make the fist
part of his whole length; So much also does the breadth of the breast. Nine
face-bredths make a square well set man, and ten a tall man. The length of man
therefore being divided into nine parts the face from the top of the forehead
to the bottom of the chin is one; then from the bottom of the throat, or the
top of the breast unto the top of the stomach is another; from thence to the
navell is a third; from thence to the bottom of the thigh, a fourth; from
thence the hipp, to the top of the calf of the leg, makes two; from thence to
the joint of the foot the legs make two more; all which are eight parts.
Moreover the space from the top of the forehead to the crown of the head and
that which is from the chin to the top of the breast, and that which is from
the joint of the foot to the sole of the foot, I say these three spaces joined
together make the ninth part. In breadth the breast has two parts, and both
Arms seven. But that body which ten face bredths make, is the most exactly
proportioned. Therefore the first part of this is from the crown of the head to
the bottom of the nose; from thence to the top of the breast, the second; and
then to the top of the stomach the third; and from thence to the navel, the
fourth; from thence to the privy members, the fifth; where is the middle of the
length of man; from whence to the soles of his feet are five other parts, which
being joined to the former, make ten whole, by which every body is measured by
a most proportioned measure. For the face of a man from the bottom of his chin,
to the top of his forehead, and bottom of the hair is the tenth part. The hand
of a man from the shutting, to the end of the longest finger is also one part;
also betwixt the middle of both dugs is one part, and from both to the top of
the gullet is an equilaterall triangle. The latitude of the lower part of the
forehead from one ear to the other is another part; the latitude of the whole
breast, viz. from the top of the breast to the joints of the shoulder-blades,
is on both sides one part, which make two. The compass of the head cross-wise
from the distance of the eye brows by the top of the forehead unto the bottom
of the hinder part of the head, where the hair ends, has also two parts; from
the shoulders on the outside unto the coupling together of the joints of the
hand, and on the inside from the armpits unto the beginning of the palm of the
hand, and of the fingers, are three parts. The compass of the head by the
middle of the forehead has three parts; the compass of the girdling place has
four parts in a well set man, but in a thin body three parts and a half, or as
much as is from the top of the breast to the bottom of the belly. The compass
of the breast by the arm-pit to the back has five parts, viz. as much as half
the whole length. From the crown of the head, to the knurles of the gullet is
the thirteenth part of the whole altitude. The arms being stretched upward, the
elbow is even to the crown of the head. But now let us see how equal the other
commensurations are to one the other. As much as the distance is from the chin
to the top of the breast, so great is the latitude of the mouth; as much as is
the distance betwixt the top of the breast, to the navell, so great is the
compass of the mouth; as much as the distance is from the chin to the crown of
the head, so great is the latitude of the girdling place; as is the distance
from the top of the nose to the bottom, such is the distance betwixt the chin,
and the throat. Also the cavity of the eyes from the place betwixt the
eyebrows unto the inward corners, and the extension of the bottom of the nose,
and the distance from the bottom of the nose to the end of the upper lip; I say
these three are equals amongst themselves; and as much as from the top o^ the
nail of the forefinger to the lowermost joint thereof.



And from thence where the hand is joined to the arm on the outside, and in the
inside from the top of the nail of the middle finger unto the lowermost joint,
and from thence to the shuting of the hand; I say all these parts are equal
amongst themselves. The greater joint of the forefinger equals the height of
the forehead; the other two to the top of the nail equal the nose, from the
top to the bottom; the first and the greater joint of the middle finger equals
that space which is betwixt the end of the nose to the end of the chin; and the
second joint of the middle finger is as much as the distance from the bottom of
the chin to the top of the lower lip; but the third as from the mouth to the
end of the nose, but the whole hand as much as the whole face. The greater
joint of the thumb is as much as the widness of the mouth, and as the distance
betwixt the bottom of the chin, and the top of the lower lip; but the lesser
joint is as much as the distance betwixt the top of the lower and the end of
the nose; the nails are half as much as those joints which they call the nail
joints. The distance betwixt the middle of the eye brows to the outward corners
of the eyes is as much as betwixt those corners and the ears. The hight of the
forehead, the length of the nose, and the widness of the mouth are equal. Also
the breadth of the hand, and foot are the same. The distance betwixt the lower
part of the ankle to the top of the foot is the same as that betwixt the top of
the foot and the end of the nails. The distance from the top of the forehead
to the place betwixt the eyes, and from that to the end of the nose, and from
thence to the end of the chin is the same. The eyebrows joined together are as
much as the circle of the eyes, and the half circle of the ears equals the
widness of the mouth: Whence the circles of the eyes, ears, and mouth opened
are equal. The breadth of the nose is as much as the length of the eye; Hence
the eyes have two parts of that space which is betwixt both extremities of the
eyes; a third part the nose that is betwixt take up. From the crown of the head
to the knees the navel is the middle; from the top of the breast to the end of
the nose the knurle of the throat makes the middle; from the crown of the head
to the bottom of the chin, the eyes are the middle from the space betwixt the
eyes to the bottom of the chin, the end of the nose is the middle: from the end
of the nose to the bottom of the chin, the end of the lower lip is the middle;
third part of the same distance is the upper lip. Moreover a these measures are
through manifold proportions, and harm^ niacall consents consonant oneto the
other; for the thumb i^ to the wrest in a circular Measure in a double
proportion and half; For it contains it twice and a half as five is to two; But
the proportion of the same to the brawn of the Arm near the shoulder is triple;
The greatness of the leg is to that of the Arm, a proportion half so much
again as of three to two; And the same proportion is of the neck to the leg, as
of that to the Arm. The proportion of the thigh is triple to the Arm; The
proportion of the whole Body to the Trunk, is eigth and a half; From the Trunk
or Breast to the legs, and from thence to the soles of the Feet, a Third and a
half; From the neck to the navell, and to the end of the trunk a Double. The
latitude of them to the latitude of the thigh, is half so much again; of the
head to the neck triple, of the head to the knee triple, the same to the leg.
The length of the forehead betwixt the temples is fourfold to the height
thereof; These are those measures which are every where found; by which the
members of man's body according to the length, breadth, height, and circumference
thereof agree amongst themselves, and also with the Celestials themselves: all
which measures are divided by manifold proportions either upon them that
divide, or are mixed, from whence there results a manifold Harmony. For a
double proportion makes thrice a Diapason; four times double, twice a Diapason,
and Diapente. After the same manner are Elements, qualities, complexions, and
humors proportioned. For these weights of humors and complexions are assigned
to a sound and well composed man, viz. the eight weights of blood, of phlegm
four, of choler two, of melancholy one, that on both sides there be by order a
double proportion; but of the first to the third, and of the second to the
fourth, a four times double proportion; but of the first to the last an
eightfold. Dioscorides says, that the heart of a man in the first year has
the weight of two Drams, in the second four, and so proportionably in the
fiftyeth year to have the weight of a hundred Drams, from which time the
decreases are again reckoned to an equilibrium, which, the course being ended,
may return to the same limit, and not exceed the space of life by the decay of
that member: by which account of a hundred years, he circumscribed the life of
man. And this says Pliny was the heresy of the Egyptians. The motions also of
the members of men's bodies answer to the Celestial motions, and every man has
in himself the motion of his heart, which answers to the motion of the Sun, and
being diffused through the Arteries into the whole body, signifies to us by a
most sure rule, years, months, days, hours, and minutes. Moreover, there is a
certain Nerve found by the Anatomists about the nod of the neck, which being
touched does so move all the members of the body, that every one of them move
according to its proper motion; by which like touch Aristotle thinks the
members of the world are moved by God. And there are two veins in the neck,
which being held hard presently the man's strength fails, and his senses are
taken away until they be loosened. Therefore the eternal Maker of the world
when he was to put the soul into the body, as into its habitation, first made a
fit lodging worthy to receive it, and endows the most excellent soul with a
most beautiful body, which then the soul knowing its own divinity, frames and
adorns for its own habitation. Hence the people of Aethiopia, which were
governed by the wisdom of Gymnosophists, as Aristotle witnesses, did make them
Kings, not of those which were most strong, and wealthy, but those only which
were most proper and beautiful; for they conceived that the gallantry of the
mind did depend upon the excellency of the body. Which many Philosophers, as
well ancient as modern, considering, such as searched into the secrets of
causes hid in the very Majesty of Nature, were bold to assert, that there was
no fault of, and no disproportion in the body, which the vice and intemperance
of the mind did not follow, because it is certain that they do increase,
thrive, and operate by the help one of the other.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Composition and Harmony of the humane soul.
AS the Consonancy of the body consists of a due measure and proportion of the
members: so the consonancy of the mind of a due temperament, and proportion of
its virtues and operations which are concupiscible, irascible, and reason,
which are so proportioned together. For Reason to Concupiscence has the
proportion Diapason; but to Anger Diatessaron: and Irascible to Concupiscible
has the proportion Diapente. When therefore the best proportionated soul is
joined to the best proportionated body, it is manifest that such a man also
has received a most happy lot in the distribution of gifts, for as much as the
soul agrees with the body in the disposition of Naturals, which agreement
indeed is most hid, yet after some manner shadowed to us by the wise. But to
hasten to the Harmony of the soul, we must inquire into it by those Mediums by
which it passes to us, (i. e.) by Celestial Bodies, and Spears; Knowing
therefore what are the powers of the soul to which the Planets answer, we shall
by those things which have been spoken of before, the more easily know their
agreements amongst themselves. For the Moon governs the powers of increasing
and decreasing; the Fantasy and Wits depends on Mercury; the Concupiscible
virtue on Venus; the Vital on the Sun; the Irascible on Mars; the Natural on
Jupiter: the Receptive on Saturn: but the Will as the Primum Mobile, and the
guide of all these Powers at pleasure, being joined with the superior
intellect, is always tending to good; which intellect indeed does always show
a pathway to the Will, as a Candle to the eye; but it moves not it self, but is
the Mistress of her own operation, whence it is called Free Will; and although
it always tends to good, as an object suitable to it self: yet sometimes being
blinded with ^rror, the animal power forcing it, it chooses evil, believing it
to be good. Therefore Will is defined to be a faculty of the intellect, and
Will whereby good is chosen by the help of Grace; and Evil, that not assisting.
Grace therefore, which Divines call Charity, or infused Love is in the Will, as
a first mover; which being absent, the whole consent falls into Dissonancy.
Moreover, the soul answers to the Earth by Sense, to the Water by Imagination,
to the Air by Reason, to the Heaven by the Intellect, and the soul goes out
into an Harmony of them, according as these are tempered in a mortal body. The
wise Ancients therefore knowing that the Harmonious dispositions of bodies and
souls are diverse, according to the divert^^y of the complexions of men, did not
in vain use Musical sounds and singings, as to confirm the health of the body,
and restore it being lost, so to bring the mind to wholesome manners, until
they make a man suitable to the Celestial Harmony, and make him wholly
Celestial. Moreover, there is nothing more efficacious to drive away evil
spirits then Musical Harmony (for they being fallen from that Celestial Harmony,
cannot endure any true consent, as being an enemy to them, but fly from it) as
David by his Harp appeased Saul, being troubled with an evil spirit. Hence by
the ancient Prophets and Fathers, who knew these Harmonicall mysteries, singing
and Musical sounds were brought into sacred servises.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Observation of Celestials, necessary in every Magical Work.
EVery natural virtue does work things far more wonderful when it is not only
compounded of a natural proportion, but also is informed by a choice
observation of the Celelestials opportune to this (viz. when the Celestial
power is most strong to that effect which we desire, and also help by many
Celestials) by subjecting inferiors to the Celestials, as proper females to be
made fruitful by their males. Also in every work there are to be observed, the
situation, motion, and aspect! of the Stars, and Planets, in Signs and Degrees,
and how all these stand in reference to the length and latitude of the Climate;
for by this are varyed the qualities of the angles, which the rays of Celestial
bodies upon the figure of the thing describe, according to which Celestial
virtues are infused. So when thou art working any thing which belongs to any
Planet, thou must place it in its dignities, fortunate, and powerful, and
ruling in the day, hour, and in the Figure of the Heaven. Neither shall thou
expect the signification of the work to be powerful, but also thou must observe
the Moon opportunely directed to this; for thou shall do nothing without the
assistance of the Moon: And if thou have more patterns of thy work, observe
them all being most powerful, and looking upon one the other with a friendly
aspect: and if thou can not have such aspects, it will be convenient at least
that thou take them angular. But thou shall take the Moon, either when she
looks upon both, or is joined to one, and looks upon the other; or when she
passes from the conjunction, or aspect of one to the conjuction or aspect of
the other: for that I conceive must in no wise be omitted; also thou shall in
every work observe Mercury; for he is a messenger betwixt the higher gods, and
infernal gods; when he goes to the good he increases their goodness; when to
the bad, has influence upon their wickedness We call it an unfortunate Sign,
or Planet, when it is by the aspect of Saturn or Mars, especially opposite, or
quadrant; for these are aspects of enmity; but a conjunction, or a trine, or
sextile aspect are of friendship; betwixt these there is a greater conjunction:
but yet if thou do already behold it through a trine, and the Planet be
received, it is accounted as already conjoined. Now all Planets are afraid of
the conjunction of the Sun, rejoicing in the trine, and sextile aspect thereof.

CHAP. XXX. When Planets are of most powerful influence.
NOw we shall have the Planets powerful when they are ruling in a House, or in
Exaltation or Triplicity, or term, or face without combustion of what is direct
in the figure of the heavens, viz when they are in Angles, especially of the
rising, or Tenth, or in houses presently succeeding, or in their delights. But
we must take heed that they be not in the bounds or under the dominion of
Saturn or Mars, least they be in dark Degrees, in pits or vacuityes. Thou shall
ocserve that the Angles of the Ascendent, and Tenth and Seventh be fortunate,
as also the Lord of the Ascendent and place of the Sun and Moon, and the place
of part of the fortune, and the Lord thereof, the Lord of the foregoing
Conjunction and prevention: But that they of the malignant Planet fall
unfortunate, unless happily they be significators of thy work, or can be any way
advantageous to thee; or if in thy revolution or birth, they had the
predominancy; for then they are not at all to be depressed. Now we shall have
the Moon powerful if she be in her house, or exaltation, or triplicity, or
face, and in degree convenient for the desired work, and if it has a mansion
of these twenty and eight suitable to it self and the work; Let her not be in
the way burnt up, nor slow in course; let her not be in the Eclipse, or burnt
by the Sun, unless she be in unity with the Sun; let her not descend in the
Southern latitude, when she goes out of the burning, neither let her be
opposite to the Sun, nor deprived of light, let her not be hindered by Mars, or
Saturn. I will not here discourse any longer of these, seeing these, and many
more necessary things are sufficiently handled in the Volums of Astrologers.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Observation of the fixed Stars, and of their Natures.
THere is the like consideration to be had in all things concerning the fixed
stars. Know this that all the fixed stars are of the signification and nature of
the seven Planets; but some are of the nature of one Planet, and some of two:
Hence as often as any Planet is joined with any of the fixed stars of its own
nature, the signification of that star is made more powerful, and the nature of
the Planet augmented: but if it be a star of two natures, the nature of that
which shall be the stronger with it shall overcome in signification; as for
example, if it be of the nature of Mars, and Venus; if Mars shall be the
stronger with it, the nature of Mars shall overcome; but if Venus, the nature
of Venus shall overcome. Now the natures of fixed stars are discovered by their
colors, as they agree with certain Planets, and are ascribed to them. Now the
colors of the Planets are these: of Saturn, blew, and leaden, and shining with
this: of Jupiter citrine near to a paleness, and clear with this; of Mars, red,
and fiery; of the Sun, yellow, and when it rises red, afterward glittering: of
Venus, white and shining; white with the morning, and reddish in the evening:
of Mercury, glittering; of the Moon, fair. Know also that of the fixed stars by
how much the greater, and the brighter and apparent they are, so much the
greater and stronger is the signification; such are these stars which are
called by the Astrologers of the first, and second Magnitude. I will tell thee
some of these which are more potent to this faculty, as are viz the Navel of
Andromeda in two and twentieth degree of Aries, of the nature of Venus and
Mercury: some call it Jovial, and Saturnine. The head of Algol in the
eighteenth degree of Taurus, of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. The Pleiades
are also in the two and twentieth degree, a Lunary star by Nature and by
complexion Martial. Also in the third degree of Gemini is Aldeboram, of the
nature of Mars, and complexion of Venus: but Hermes places this in the twenty
fifth degree of Aries. The Goat-star is in the thirteenth degree of the said
Gemini, of the nature of Jupiter, and Saturn; the greater Dog Star is in the
seventh degree of Cancer, and Venereal: the lesser Dog Star is in the
seventeenth degree of the same, and is of the nature of Mercury, and complexion
of Mars. The Kings star, which is called the Heart of the Lion, is in the one
and twentieth degree of Leo, and of the nature of Jupiter and Mars; the tail of
the greater Bear is in the nineteenth degree of Virgo, and is Venereal, and
Lunary. The Star which is called the right wing of the Crow is in the seventh
degree of Libra, and in the thirteenth degree of the same is the left wing of
the same, and both of the nature of Saturn and Mars. The Star called Spica is
in the sixteenth degree of the same, and is Venereal and Mercurial. In the
seventeenth degree of the same is Alcameth, of the nature of Mars, and Jupiter;
but of this when the Suns aspect is full toward it; of that when on the
contrary. Elepheia in the fourth degree of Scorpio, of the nature of Venus, and
Mars: The Heart of the Scorpion is in the third degree of Sagittarius, of the
nature of Mars, and Jupiter: the falling Vulture is in the seventh degree of
Capricorn, Temperate, Mercurial, and Venereal: The tail of Capricorn is in the
sixteenth degree of Aquarius, of the nature of Saturn, and Mercury: The Star
called the Shoulder of the Horse, is in the third degree of Piscis, of the
nature of Jupiter and Mars. And it shall be a general rule for thee to expect
the proper gifts of the Stars whilst they rule, to be prevented of them, they
being unfortunate, and opposite, as is above showed. For Celestial bodies, in
as much as they are affected fortunately, or unfortunately, so much do they
affect us, our works, and those things which we use, fortunately, or unhappily.
And although manyeffects proceed from the fixed Stars, yet they are attributed
to the Planets, as because being more near to us, and more distinct and known,
so because they execute whatsoever the superior Stars communicate to them.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Sun, and Moon, and their Magical considerations.
THe Sun, and Moon have obtained the administration or ruling of the Heavens,
and all bodies under the heavens. The Sun is the Lord of all Elementary
virtues; and the Moon by virtue of the Sun is the mistress of generation,
increase, or decrease. Hence Albumasar says, that by the Sun and Moon life is
infused into all things, which therefore Orpheus calls the enlivening eyes of
the heaven. The Sun gives light to all things of it self, and give, it
plentifully to all things not only in the Heaven, Air, but Earth and Deep:
whatsoever good we have, as Jamblicus says, we have it from the Sun alone, or
from it through other things. Heraclitus calls the Sun the fountain of
Celestial light; and many of the Platonists placed the soul of the world
chiefly in the Sun, as that which filling the whole Globe of the Sun does send
forth its rays on all sides as it were a spirit through all things,
distributing life, sense and motion to the very Universe. Hence the ancient
Naturalists called the Sun the very heart of heaven; and the Caldeans put it as
the middle of the Planets. The Egyptians also placed it in the middle of the
world, viz. betwixt the two fives of the world, e. i. above the Sun they place
five Planets, and under the Sun, the Moon and four Elements. For it is amongst
the other Stars the image and statue of the great Prince of both worlds, viz.
Terrestiall, and Celestial; the true light, and the most exact image of God
himself; whose Essence resembles the Father, Light the Son, Heat the Holy
Ghost. So that the Platonists have nothing to hold forth the Divine Essence
more manifestly by, then this. So great is the consonancy of it to God, that
Plato calls it the conspicuous Son of God; and Jamblicus calls it the divine
image of divine intelligence. And our Dionysius calls it the perspicuous statue
of God. It sits as King in the middle of other Planets, excelling all in light,
greatness, fairness, enlightening all, distributing virtue to them to dispose
inferior bodies, and regulating and disposing of their motions, so that from
thence their motions are called daily, or nightly, Southern, or Northren,
Oriental, or Occidentiall, direct, or retrograde; and as it does by its light
drive away all the darkness of the night, so also all powers of darkness, which
we read of in Job; As Soon as morning appears, they think of the shadow of
death: And the Psalmist speaking of the Lions whelps seeking leave of God to
devour, says, The Sun is risen, and they are gathered together, and shall be
placed in their dens; which being put to flight, it follows, Man shall go
forth to his labor. The Sun therefore as it possesses the middle Region of the
world, and as the heart is in Animals to the whole body, So the Sun is over the
heaven, and the world, ruling over the whole Universe, and those things which
are in it, the very author of seasons, from whence day and year, cold and heat,
and all other qualities of seasons; and as says Ptolemy, when it comes unto
the place of any Star, it stirs up the power thereof which it has in the Air.
So as with Mars, heat; with Saturn, cold; and it disposes even the very spirit
and mind of man; from hence it is said by Homer, and approved by Aristotle,
that there are in the mind such like motions, as the Sun the Prince and
moderator of the Planets every day brings to us; but the Moon, the nighest to
the Earth, the receptacle of all the heavenly Influences, by the swiftness of
her course is joined to the Sun, and the other Planets and Stars, every month,
and being made as it were the wi^e of all the Stars, is the most fruitful of
the Stars, and receiving the beams and influences of all the other planets and
Stars as a conception, bringing them forth to the inferior world as being next
to it self; for all the Stars have influence on it being the last receiver,
which afterward communicates the influences of all the superiors to these
inferiors, and pours them forth on the Earth; and it more manifestly disposes
these inferiors, then the others, and its motion is more sensible by the
familiarity and propinquity which it has with us; and as a medium betwixt
both, superiors and inferiors, communicates them to them all; Therefore her
motion is to be observed before the others, as the parent of all conceptions,
which it diversely issues forth in these Inferiors, according to the diverse
complexion, motion, situation, and different aspects to the planets and others
Stars; and though it receives powers from all the Stars, yet especially from
the Sun; as often as it is in conjunction with the same, it is replenished with
vivifying virtue, and according to the aspect thereof it borrows its
complexion; for in the first quarter, as the Peripatetickes deliver, it is hot
and moist; in the second, hot and dry; in the third, cold and dry; in the
fourth cold and moist; and although it is the lowest of the stars, yet it
brings forth all the conceptions of the superiors; for from it in the
heavenly bodies begins that series of things which Plato calls the Golden
Chain, by the which every thing and cause being linked one to an other, do
depend on the superior, even until it may be brought to the supreme cause of
all, from which all things depend; from hence is it, that without the Moon
intermediating, we cannot at any time attract the power of the superiors.
Therefore Thebit advises us, for the taking of the virtue of any Star, to take
the stone and herb of that plant, when the Moon does either fortunately get
under or has a good aspect on that Star.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the twenty eight Mansions of the Moon, and their virtues.
ANd seeing the Moon measures the whole Zodiac in the space of twenty eight
days; hence is it, that the wisemen of the Indians and ancientest Astrologians
have granted twenty eight Mansions to the Moon, which being fixed in the eight
sphere, do enjoy (as Alpharus says) diverse names and proprieties from the
diverse Signs and Stars which are contained in them, through which while the
Moon wandreth, it obtains other and other powers and virtues; but every one
of these Mansions according to the opinion of Abraham, containth twelve
degrees, and one and fifty minutes, and almost twenty six seconds, whose names
and also their beginnings in the Zodiac of the eight sphere, are these. The
first is called Alnath, that is the horns of Aries; his beginning is from the
head of Aries of the eighth sphere; it causes discords, and journies; the
second is called Allothaim or Albochan, that is the belly of Aries, and his
beginning is from the twelfth degree of the same sign, fifty one minutes,
twenty two seconds complete; it conduces to the finding of treasures, and to
the retaining of captives; The third is called Achaomazon or Athoray, that is,
showring or Pleiades; his beginning is from the twenty five degrees of Aries
complete forty two minutes, and fifty one seconds; it is profitable to
Sailors, Huntsmen, and Alchymists; The fourth Mansion is called Aldebaram or
Aldelamen that is the eye or head of Taurus; his beginning is from the eight
degree of Taurus, thirty four minutes, and seventeen seconds of the same Taurus
being excluded; it causes the destruction and hindrances of buildings,
fountains, wels, of goldmines, the flight of creeping things, and begets
discord. The fifth is called Alchatay or Albachay; the beginning of it is after
the twenty one degree of Taurus, twenty five minutes, forty seconds; it
helps to the return from a journey, to the instruction of scholars, it
confirms edifices, it gives health and good will, the sixth is called
Alhanna or Alchaya, that is the little Star of great light; his beginning is
after the fourth degree of Gemini, seventeen minutes, and nine seconds; it
conduces to Hunting, and besieging of Towns, and revenge of princes, it
destroys Harvests and fruits and hinders the operation of the Physician. The
seventh is called Aldimiach or Alarzach, that is the Arm of Gemini and
begins from the seventeeneth degree of Gemini, eight minutes and thirty four
seconds, and lasts even to the end of the sign; it conferreth gain and
friendship, its profitable to Lovers, it scareth flies, destroys Magisteries.
And so is one quarter of the heaven completed in these seven Mansions; and in
the like order and number of degrees, minutes and seconds, the remaining
Mansion in every quarter have their several beginnings; namely so, tha^ in the
first sign of this quarter three Mansions take their beginnings, in the other
two signs two Mansions in each; Therefore the seven following Mansions begin
from Cancer, whose names are Alnaza or Anatrachya that is misty or cloudy, viz.
the eighth Mansion; it causes love, friendship, and society of fellow
travelers, it drives away mice and afflicts Captives, confirming their
imprisonment. After this is the ninth called Archaam or Arcapb, that is the eye
of the Lion; it hinders Harvests and travelers, and puts discord between
men. The tenth is called Algelioche or Albgebh, that is the neck or forehead of
Leo; it strengthens buildings, yields love, benevolence and help against
enemies; the eleventh is called Azobra or Ardaf, that is, the hair of the Lions
head; it is good for voyages, and gain by merchandise, and for redemption of
Captives; the twelfth is called Alzarpha or Azarpha, that is the tail of Leo;
it gives prosperity to Harvests, and Plantations, but hinders Seamen, but it
is good for the bettering of servants, Captives and companions. The thirteenth
is named Alhaire, that is Dogstars, or the wings of Virgo; it is pravalent for
Benevolence, gain, voyages, Harvests, and freedom of captives; the fourteenth
is called Achureth or Arimet, by others Azimeth or Alhumech or Alcheymech, that
is the spike of Virgo, or flying spike; it causes the love of married folk, it
cures the sick, its profitable to Saylors, but it hinders journies by land;
and in these the second quarter of Heaven is completed. The other seven
follow, the first of which begins in the head of Libra, viz. the fifteenth
Mansion, and his name is Agrapha or Algarpha, that is, covered, or covered
flying; its profitable for the extracting of treasures, for digging of pits, it
helps forward divorce, discord, and the destruction of houses and enemies,
and hinders travelers. The sixteenth is called Azubene or Ahubene, that is,
the Horns of Scorpio, it hinders journyes and Wedlock, Harvests and
Merchandise, it prevails for redemption of captives. The seventeenth is
called Alchil, that is the Crown of Scorpio, it bettereth a bad-fortune, makes
love durable, strengthens buildings, and helps Seamen; The eighteenth is
called Alchas or Altob, that is the Heart of Scorpio; it causes discord,
sedition, conspiracy against princes and mighty ones, and revenge from enemies,
but it freeth captives and helps edifices; the ninteenth is called Allatha or
Achala, by others Hycula or Axala, that is the tail of Scorpio; it helps in
the besieging of Cities and taking of Towns, and in the driving of men from
their places, and for the destruction of Seamen, and perdition of captives. The
twenteeth is called Abnahaya, that is a beam; it helps for the taming of wild
beasts, for the strengthening of prisons, it destroys the wealth of
societies, it compels a man to come to a certain place. The one and
twentieeth is called Abeda or Albeldach which is a desert; it is good for
Harvests, gain buildings and travelers, and causes divorce; and in this is
the third quarter of Heaven completed. There remains the seven last Mansions
completing the last quarter of heaven; the first of which being in order to
the two and twentyeth, begins from the head of Capricorn, called Sadabacha
or Zodeboluch, or Zandeldena, that is a pastor; it promoteth the flight of
servants and captives, that they may escape, and helps the curing of
diseases; the three and twentieth is called Zabadoia or Zobrach that is
swallowing; it makes for divorce, liberty of captives and the health of the
sick; the twenty fourth is called Sadabath or Chadezoad, that is the Star of
fortune; it is prevalent for the Benevolence of married folk, for the victory
of soldiers, it hurts the execution of Government, and hinders that it may
not be exercised; The twenty fifth is called Sadalabra or Sadalachia, that is a
Butterfly or a spreading forth; it helps besieging and revenge, it destroys
enemies, makes divorse, confirms prisons and buildings, hasteneth
messengers, it conduces to spells against copulation, and so binds every
member of man, that it cannot perform his duty; the twenty sixth is called
Alpharg or Phrag^ Mocaden, that is the first drawing; it makes for the Union
and love of men, for the health of captives, it destroys prisons and
buildings; The twenty seventh is called Alcharya o^ Alhalgalmoad that is the
second drawing; it increases Harvests, Revenues, Gain, it heals infirmities,
but hinders buildings, prolongeth prisons, causes danger to Seamen, an^
helps to infer mischiefs on whom you shall please; the twenty eight and last
is called Albotham or Alchalcy, that is Pisces; it increases Harvests and
Merchandise, it secureth travelers through dangerous places; it makes for the
joy of married couples, but it strengthenth prisons, and causes loss of
treasures; and in these twentyeight Mansions do lie hid many secrets of the
wisdom of the Ancients, by the which they wrought wonders on all things which
are under the circle of the Moon; and they attributed to every Mansion his
resemblances, Images, and seals, and his president intelligences, and they did
work by the virtue of them after diverse manners.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the true motion of the heavenly bodies to be observed in the
eight sphere, and of the ground of Planetary hours.
WHosoever will work according to the Celestial opportunity, ought to observe
both or one of them, ^amely the motion of the Stars, or their times; I say
their motions, when they are in their dignities or dejections, either ^^sential
or accidental; but I call their times, days and hours ^^stributed to their
Dominions. Concerning all these, it is abundantly taught in the books of
Astrologers; but in this place ^^o things especially are to be considered and
observed by us. ^he that we observe the motions and ascensions and windings ^
Stars, even as they are in truth in the eight sphere, through ^ neglect of
which it happens that many err in fabricating ^ Celestial Images, and are
defrauded of their desired effect; ^ other thing we ought to observe, is about
the times of ^osing the planetary hours; for almost all Astrologers di^e all
that space of time from the Sun rising to setting into ^^elve equal parts, and
call them the twelve hours of the day; ^n the time which follows from the
setting to the rising, like manner being divided into twelve equal parts, they
call the twelve hours of the night, and then distribute each of those hours to
every one of the Planets according to the order of their successions, giving
always the first hour of the day to the Lord of that day, then to every one by
order, even to the end of twenty four hours; and in this distribution the
Magicians agree with them; but in the partition of the hours some do dissent,
saying, that the space of the rising and setting is not to be divided into
equal parts, and that those hours are not therefore called unequal because the
diurnal are unequal to the nocturnall, but because both the diurnal and
nocturnal are even unequal amongst themselves; therefore the partition of
unequal or Planetary hours has a different reason of their measure observed
by Magicians, which is of this sort; for as i^ artificial hours* which are
always equal to themselves, the ascensions of fifteen degrees in the
equinoctial, constituteth an artificial hour: so also in planetary hours the
ascensions of fifteen degrees in the Eclipticke constituteth an unequal or
planetary hour, whose measure we ought to enquir^ and find out by the tables of
the oblique ascensions of every region.

CHAP. XXXV. How some artificial things as Images, Seals, and such like, may
obtain some virtue from the Celestial bodies.
SO great is the extent, power and efficacy of the Celestia^^ bodies, that not
only natural things, but also artificial^ when they are rightly exposed to
those above, do presenth suffer by that most potent agent, and obtain a
wonderful li^^ which oftentimes gives them an admirable Celestial virtue
which thing Saint Thomas Aquinas that holy Doctor, tha^ confirms in his book
de fato, when he says, that even garments, buildings and other artificial
works whatsoever, ^ receive a certain qualification from the Stars; so the
Magicia^^ affirm, that not only by the mixture and application of nature all
things, but also in Images, Seals, Rings, Glasses, and some other Instruments,
being opportunely framed under a certain constellation, some Celestial
Illustration may be taken, and some wonderful thing may be received; for the
beams of the Celestial bodies being animated, living, sensual, and bringing
along with them admirable gifts, and a most violent power, do, even in a
moment, and at the first touch, imprint wonderful powers in the Images, though
their matter be less capable. Yet they bestow more powerful virtues on the
Images, if they be framed not of any, but of a certain matter, namely whose
natural, and also specificall virtue is agreeable with the work, and the
figure of the image is like to the Celestial; for such an Image, both in regard
of the matter naturally congruous to the operation and Celestial influence,
and also for its figure being like to the Heavenly one, is best prepared to
receive the operations and powers of the Celestial bodies and figures, and
instantly receives the Heavenly gift into it self; then it constantly works
on another thing, and other things do yield obedience to it. Hence says
Ptolemy in centiloquio, that inferior things do obey the Celestial, and not
only them, but also even their Images; Even as earthly Scorpions obey not only
the Celestial Scorpion, but also his Image, if it shall be opportunely figured
under his ascent and Dominion.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Images of the Zodiac, what virtues they being engraven,
receive from the stars.
BUt the Celestial Images, according to whose likeness Images of this kind are
framed, are very many in the heavens: Some visible and conspicuous, others
only imaginable, conceived and set down by Egyptians, Indians and Chaldeans;
and their parts are so ordered, that even the figures of some of them are
distinguished from others: for this reason they place in the Zodiac circle
twelve general images, according to the number of the signs: of these they
constituting Aries, Leo, and Sagittary for the fiery and oriental triplicity,
do report that its profitable against Feavors, Palsy, Dropsy, Gout, and all
cold and phlegmatic infirmities, and that it makes him who carries it to be
acceptable, eloquent, ingenious and honorable, because they are the Houses of
Mars, Sol, and Jupiter. They made also the image of a Lion against melancholy
fantasies, the Dropsy, Plague, Feavors, and to expel diseases at the hour of
the Sun, the first degree of the sign of Leo ascending, which is the face and
Decanate of Jupiter; but against the Stone, and diseases of the Reins, and
against the hurts o^ beasts, they made the same image when Sol in the heart of
the Lion obtained the midst of heaven: and again, because Gemini, Libra, and
Aquarius do constitute the Aerial and Occidental Triplicity, and are the houses
of Mercury, Venus, and Saturn, they are said to put to flight diseases, to
conduce to friendship and concord, to prevail against melancholy, and to caus^
health; and they report that Aquarius especially freeth from the Quartane.
Also, that Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, because the constitute the watery and
Northern Triplicity, do prevail against hot and dry Fevors; also against the
Hectic, and all choler rick passions; but Scorpio, because amongst the members
it respects the privy parts, does provoke to lust: but these ^^ frame it for
this purpose, his third face ascending, which be longs to Venus; and they
made the same against Serpents and Scorpions, poisons, and evil spirits; his
second face ascending, which is the face of the Sun, and Decanate of Jupiter;
and they report that it makes him who carries it, wise, of a good color; and
they report that the image of Cancer is most efficacious against Serpents, and
poisons, when Sol and Luna are in conjunction in it, and ascend in the first
and third face; for this is the face of Venus, and the Decanate of Luna; but
the second face of Luna, the Decanate of Jupiter: They report also that
Serpents are tormented when the Sun is in Cancer: Also that Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricorn, because they constitute the earthly and Southern triplicity, do cure
hot infirmities, and prevail against the Synocall Fever; it makes those that
carry it grateful, acceptable, eloquent, devout and religious, because they are
the Houses of Venus, Mars, and Saturn: Capricorn also is reported to keep men
in safety, and also places in security, because it is the exaltation of Mars.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Images of the Faces, and of those Images which are
without the Zodiac.
THere are besides in the Zodiac thirty six images, according to the number of
the faces, of the which, (as Porphyry says) Teucer the Babylonian long since
wrote, who was a most ancient Mathematician, after whom the Arabians also wrote
of these things. Therefore it is said, that in the first face of Aries,
ascends the image of a black man, standing and clothed in a white garment,
girdled about, of a great body, with reddish eyes, and great strength, and like
one that is angry; and this image signifies and causes boldness, fortitude,
loftiness, and shamelesness; in the second face ascends a form of a woman,
outwardly clothed with a red garment, and under it a white, spreading abroad
over her feet, and this image causes nobleness, height of a Kingdom, and
greatness of dominion: in the third face arises the figure of a white man,
pale, with reddish hair, and clothed with a red garment, who carrying on the
one hand a golden Bracelet, and holding forth a wooden staff, is restless, and
like one in wrath, because he cannot perform that good he would. This image
bestows wit, meekness, joy and beauty: in the first face of Taurus ascends
a naked man, an Archer, Harvester or Husbandman, and goes forth to sow,
plough, build, people, and divide the earth, according to the rules of
Geometry; in the second face ascends a naked man, holding in his hand a key;
it gives power nobility, and dominion over people: in the third face,
ascends a man in whose hand is a Serpent, and a dart, and is the image of
necessity and profit, and also of misery and slavery. In the first face of
Gemini ascends a man in whose hand is a rod, and he is, as it were, serving
another; it grants wisdom and the knowledge of numbers and arts in which
there is no profit: in the second face ascends a man in whose hand is a Pipe,
and another being bowed down, digging the earth: and they signify infamous and
dishonest agility, as that of Jesters and Juglers; it also signifies labors
and painful searchings: In the third, ascends a man seeking for Arms, and a
fool holding in the right hand a Bird, and in his left a pipe, and they are the
significations of forgetfulness, wrath, boldness, jeasts, scurrilities, and
unprofitable words: In the first face of Cancer ascends the form of a young
Virgin, adorned with fine clothes, and having a Crown on her head; it gives
acuteness of senses, subtilty of wit, and the love of men: in the second face
ascends a man clothed in comely apparel, or a man and woman sitting at the
table and playing; it bestows riches, mirth, gladness, and the love of women:
in the third face ascends a man a Hunter with his lance and horn, bringing
out dogs for to hunt; the signification of this is the contention of men, the
pursuing of those who fly, the hunting and possessing of things by arms and
brawlings. In the first face of Leo ascends a man riding on a Lion; it
signifies boldness, violence, cruelty, wickedness, lust and labors to be
sustained. In the second ascends an image with hands lifted up, and a man on
whose head is a Crown; he has the appearance of an angry man, and one that
threatens, having in his right hand a Sword drawn out of the scabbard, and in
his left a buckler; it has signification upon hidden contentions, and unknown
victories, and upon base men, and upon the occasions of quarrels and battles:
in the third face ascends a young man in whose hand is a Whip, and a man very
sad, and of an ill aspect; they signify love and society, and the loss of ones
right for avoiding strife. In the first face of Virge ascends the figure of a
good maid, and a man casting seeds; it signifies getting of wealth, ordering
of diet, plowing, sowing, and peopling; in the second face ascends a black
man clothed with a skin, and a man having a bush of hair, holding a bag; they
signify gain, scraping together of wealth and covetousness. In the third face
ascends a white woman and deaf, or an old man leaning on a staff; the
signification of this is to show weakness, infirmity, loss of members,
destruction of trees, and depopulation of lands. In the first face of Libra
ascends the form of an angry man, in whose hand is a Pipe, and the form of a
man reading in a book; the operation of this is in justifying and helping the
miserable and weak against the powerful and wicked: in the second face ascend
two men furious and wrathful and a man in a comely garment, sitting in a chair;
and the signification of these is to show indignation against the evil, and
quietness and security of life with plenty of good things. In the third face
ascends a violent man holding a bow, and before him a naked man, and also
another man holding bread in one hand, and a cup of wine in the other; the
signification of these is to show wicked lusts, singings, sports and gluttony.
In the first face of Scorpio ascends a woman of good face and habit, and two
men striking her; the operations of these are for comeliness, beauty, and for
strifes, treacheries, deceits, detractations, and perditions; in the second
face ascends a man naked, and a woman naked, and a man sitting on the earth,
and before him two dogs biting one another; and their operation is for
impudence, deceit, and false dealing, and for to send mischief and strife
amongst men; in the third face ascends a man bowed downward upon his knees,
and a woman striking him with a staff, and it is the signification of
drunkenness, fornication, wrath, violence, and strife. In the first face of
Sagittarius ascends the form of a man armed with a coat of male, and holding
a naked sword in his hand; the operation of this is for boldness, malice, and
liberty: In the second face ascends a woman weeping, and covered with
clothes; the operation of this is for sadness and fear of his own body. In the
third face ascends a man like in color to gold, or an idle man playing with
a staff; and the signification of this is in following our own wills, and
obstinacy in them, and in activeness for evil things, contentions, and horrible
matters. In the first face of Capricorn ascends the form of a woman, and a
man carrying full bags; and the signification of these is for to go forth and
to rejoice, to gain and to lose with weakness and baseness: in the second face
ascends two women, and a man looking toward a Bird flying in the Air; and
the signification of these is for the requiring those things which cannot be
done, and for the searching after those things which cannot be known: In the
third face ascends a woman chaste in body* and wise in her work, and a banker
gathering his money together on the table; the signification of this is to
govern in prudence, in covetousness of money, and in avarice. In the first face
of Aquarius ascends the form of a prudent man, and of a woman spinning; and
the signification of these is in the thought and labor for gain, in poverty
and baseness: in the second face ascends the form of a man with a long beard;
and the signification of this belongs to the understanding, meeknes, modesty,
liberty and good manners: in the third face ascends a black and angry man; and
the signification of this is in expressing insolence, and impudence. In the
first face of Pisces ascends a man carrying burdens on his shoulder, and
well clothed; it has his signification in journeys, change of place, and in
carefulness of getting wealth and clothes: in the second face ascends a woman
of a good countenance, and well adorned; and the signification is to desire and
put ones self on about high and great matters: in the third face ascends a
man naked, or a youth, and nigh him a beautiful maid, whose head is adorned
which flowers, and it has his signification for rest, idleness, delight,
fornication, and for imbracings of women. And thus far concerning the Images of
Faces. Besides these, there are as yet three hundred and sixty Images in the
Zodiac, according to the number of the degrees, whose forms Petrus de Abano
has described: without the Zodiac there are also general Figures, which
Hyginius and Aratus describe for us, and very many particular ones, according
to the number of faces and degrees, existing therein, of all which to speak it
would be too long; but of these the more principal are accounted, Pegasus which
prevails against the diseases of horses, and preserves horsemen in battle;
Then is Andromache, which begets love betwixt husband and wife, so that it
is said even to reconcile adulterers: Cassiopeia restores weak bodies, and
strentheneth the members; Serpentarins chaseth away poisons, and cures the
bitings of venomous beasts: Hercules gives victory in war; the Dragon with
both the Bears makes a man crafty, ingenious, valiant, acceptable to the gods
and men: Hydra conferreth wisdom and riches, and resists poisons. Centaurus
bestows health and long old age: Ara conserveth chastity, and makes one
acceptable to the gods; Cetus makes one amiable, prudent, happy both by sea
and land, and helps him to recover his lost goods: the Ship affords security
in the waters; the Hare prevails against deceits and madness; the Dog cures
the Dropsy, resists the plague, and also preserves from beasts, and fierce
creatures. Orion grants victory: The Eagle gives new honors, and preserves
the old. The Swan freeth from ^he Palsy and the Quartain: Perseus freeth from
Envy and Witchcrafts, and preserves from Lightnings and Tempests: The Heart
preserves Phrenetical and mad people. And thus much may suffice to have been
spoken.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Images of Saturn.
BUt now, what Images they did attribute to the Planets, although of these
things very large volumes have been written by the ancient wise men, so that
there is no need to declare them here, notwithstanding I will recite a few of
them; for they made, from the operations of Saturn, Saturn ascending in a
stone, which is called the Loadstone, the Image of a man, having the
countenance of an Heart, and Camels feet and sitting upon a Chayr or Dragon,
holding in his right hand, a sith, in his left hand a dart; which image they
did hope would be profitable for prolongation of life; for Albumasar in his
book Sadar, proves that Saturn conduces to the prolongation of life: where
also he tells that certain regious of India being subject to Saturn, there
men are of a very long life, and dye not unless by extreme old Age: They made
also another Image of Saturn for length of days, in a sapphire, at the hour of
Saturn, Saturn ascending or fortunately constituted, whose figure was an old
man setting upon an high chair, having his hands lifting up above his head,
and in them holding a fish or Sickle, and under his feet a bunch of Grapes, his
head covered with a black or dusky colored cloth, and all his garments black
or dark colored: They also make this same Image against the Stone and diseases
of the kidnyes, viz. in the hour of Saturn, Saturn ascending with the third
face of Aquarius: they made also from the operations of Saturn, a^ Image for
the increasing in power, Saturn ascending in Capricorn; The form of which was
an old man leaning on a ^^aff having in his hand a crooked sickle, and clothed
in black. They also made an Image of melted Copper, Saturn ascending in his
rising, viz. in the first degree of Aries, or which is more true in the first
degree of Capricorn, which Image they affirm to speak with a man's voice; They
made also out of the operations of Saturn, and also Mercury, an Image of cast
metal, like a beautiful man, which they promised would foretell things to
come, and made it on the day of Mercury, on the third hour of Saturn, the sign
of Gemini ascending, being the house of Mercury, signifying prophets, Saturn
and Mercury being in conjunction in Aquarius in the ninth place of Heaven,
which is also called God; Moreover let Saturn have a trine aspect on the
ascendent, and the Moon in like manner, and the Sun have an aspect on the place
of conjunction. Venus obtaining some Angle may be powerful and occidentall;
let Mars be combust by the Sun, but let it not have an aspect on Saturn and
Mercury; for they said, that the splendour of the powers of these Stars was
diffused upon this Image, and it did speak with men, and declare those things
which are profitable for them.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Images of Jupiter.
FRom the operations of Jupiter, they made for prolongation of life, an Image,
in the hour of Jupiter. Jupiter being in his exaltation fortunately ascending,
in a clear and white stone, whose figure was a man crowned, clothed with
garments of a Saffron Color, riding upon an Eagle or Dragon, having in his
right hand a dart, about as it were to strike it into the head of the same
Eagle or Dragon. They made also another Image of Jupiter at the same convenient
season, in a white and clear stone, especially in Crystal, and it was a naked
man crowned, having both his hands joined together and lifted up, as it were
deprecating something, sitting in a four-footed chair, which is carried by four
winged boys, and they affirm that this Image increases felicity, riches,
honor, and conferreth Benevolence and prosperity, and freeth from enemies; They
made also another Image of Jupiter for a religious and glorious ^ife, and
advancement of fortune; whose figure was a man having the head of a lion, or a
Ram, and Eagles feet, clothed in Saffron colored clothes, and he was called
the son of Jupiter.

CHAP. XL. Of the Images of Mars.
FRom the operations of Mars they made an Image in the hour of Mars, Mars
ascending in the second face of Aries, in a Martial stone, especially in a
Diamond; The form of which was a man armed, riding upon a Lion, having in his
right hand a naked sword erected, carrying in his left hand the head of a man;
they report, that an Image of this kind renders a man powerful in good and
evil, so that he shall be feared of all; and whosoever carries it they give
him the power of enchantment, so that he shall terrify men by his looks when
he is angry, and stupifie them; they made another Image of Mars for the
obtaining of boldness, courage, and good fortune in wars, and contentions, the
form of which was a soldier armed and crowned, girt with a sword, carrying in
his right hand a long Lance; and they made this at the hour of Mars, the first
face of Scorpio ascending with it.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Images of the Sun.
FRom the operations of the Sun, they made an Image at the hour of the Sun, the
first face of Leo ascending with the Sun, the form of which was a king
crowned, sitting in a chair, having a Raven in his bosom, and under his feet a
Globe* he is clothed in Saffron colored clothes; They report th^^ this Image
renders men invincible, and honorable, and help to bring their businesses to a
good end, and to drive away vain dreams; also to be prevalent against fevers,
and the plague; and they made it in a Balanite stone or a Rubin, at the hour o^
the Sun, when it in his exaltation fortunately ascends; They ma^^ another
Image of the Sun in a Diamond, at the hour of the Sun, it ascending in his
exaltation; the figure of which was a woman crowned with the gesture of one
dancing and laughing, standing in a Chariot drawn with four horses, having in
her right hand a looking glass, or buckler, in the left a staff, leaning on
her breast, carrying a flame of fire on her head; They report that this Image
renders a man fortunate and rich, and beloved of all; and they made this
Image, on a Corneoll stone at the hour of the Sun ascending in the first face
of Leo, against Lunatic passions which proceed from the combustion of the Moon,

CHAP. XLII. Of the Images of Venus.
FRom the operations of Venus they made an Image, which was available for
favor, and benevolence, at the very hour it ascending into Pisces, the form of
which was the Image of a woman having the head of a bird, and feet of an Eagle,
holding a dart in her hand. They made another Image of Venus for to get the
love of women, in the Lapis Lazulus, at the hour of Venus, Venus ascending in
Taurus, the figure of which was a naked maid with her hair spread abroad,
having a looking glass in her hand, and a chain tied about her neck, and nigh
her a handsome young man, holding her with his left hand by the chain, but with
his right hand making up her hair, and they both look lovingly on one another,
and about them is a little winged boy holding a sword or a dart. They made
another Image of Venus, the first face of Taurus or Libra or Pisces ascending
with Venus, the figure of which was a little maid with her hair spread abroad,
clothed in long and white garments, holding a Laurel Apple, or flowers in her
right hand in her left a Comb. Its reported to make men pleasant, jocand,
strong, cheerful and to give beauty.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Images of Mercury.
FRom the operations of Mercury, they made an Image at the hour of Mercury;
Mercury ascending in Gemini, the form of which was an handsome young man,
bearded, having in his left hand a rod in which a serpent is twyned about, in
his right carrying a dart, having his feet winged; They report that this Image
conferreth knowledge, eloquence, diligence in merchandising and gain; moreover
to beget peace and concord, and to cure fevers; They made another Image of
Mercury, Mercury ascending in Virgo, for good will, wit and memory; The form of
which was a man sitting upon a chair, or riding on a Peacock, having Eagles
feet, and on his head a crest, and in his left hand holding a cock or fire.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Images of the Moon.
FRom the operations of the Moon, they made an Image for travelers against
weariness, at the hour of the Moon, the Moon ascending in its exaltation; the
figure of which was a man leaning on a staff, having a bird on his head, and a
flourishing tree before him; They made another Image of the Moon for the
increase of the fruits of the earth, and against poisons, and infirmities of
children, at the hour of the Moon, it ascending in the first face of Cancer,
the figure of which was a woman cornuted, riding on a Bull, or a Dragon with
seven heads, or a Crab; and she has in her right hand a dart, in her left a
looking glass, clothed in white or green, and having on her head two Serpents
with horns twined together, and to each arm a Serpent twined about, and to each
foot one in like manner. And thus much spoken concerning the figures of the
Plants, may suffice.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Images of the head and Tail of the Dragon of the Moon.
THey made also the Image of the head and tail of the Dragon of the Moon,
namely betwixt an Aeriall and fiery circle, the likeness of a Serpent, with the
head of an Hawke tied about them, after the manner of the great letter Theta,
and they made it when Jupiter with the head obtained the midst of Heaven: which
Image they affirm to avail much for the success of Petitions, and would
signify by this Image a good and fortunate Genius, which they would represent
by this Image of the Serpent; for the Egyptians and Phenitians do extol this
creature above all others, and say it is a divine creature and has a divine
nature; for in this is a more acute spirit, and a greater fire then in any
other, which thing is manifested both by his swift motion without feet, hands
or any other instruments and also that it often renews his age with his skin,
and becomes young again: but they made the Image of the tail like as when the
Moon was Ecclipsed, in the Tail, or ill affected by Saturn or Mars, and they
made it to introduce, anguish, infirmity and misfortune; and they called it the
evil Genius; such an Image a certain Hebrew had included in a golden Belt full
of Jewels, which Blanch the daughter of the Duke of Borbon (either willingly or
ignorantly) bestowed on her husband Peter King of Spain, the first of that
name, with which when he was girt, he seemed to himself to be compassed about
with a Serpent; and afterward finding the Magical virtue fixed in the girdle,
for this cause he forsook his wife.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Images of the Mansions of the Moon.
THey made also Images for every Mansion of the Moon; in the first for the
destruction of some one, they made in an Iron ring the Image of a black man in
a garment made of hair, and girdled round, casting a small lance with his
right hand; they sealed this in black wax, and perfumed it with liquid Storax,
and wished some evil to come. In the second, against the wrath of the Prince,
and for reconcilation with him, they sealed in white wax and mastick, the Image
of a king crowned, and perfumed it with Lignum Aloes; In the third, they made
an Image in a silver ring, whose table was square, the figure of which was a
woman well clothed, sitting in a chair, her right hand being lifted up on her
head; they sealed it and perfumed it with musk, Camphire and Calamus
Aromaticus. They affirmed that this gives happy fortune and every good thing.
In the fourth, for revenge, separation, enmity and ill will, they sealed in red
wax the Image of a soldier sitting on an horse, holding a Serpent in his right
hand; they perfumed it with red myrrh, and Storax; in the fifth, for the favor
of Kings and officers, and good entertainment, they sealed in Silver the head
of a man, and perfumed it with Sanders; in the sixth, for to procure love
betwixt two, they sealed in white wax two Images embracing one another, and
perfumed them with Lignum Aloes and Amber; in the seventh, for to obtain every
good thing, they sealed in Sil^m the Image of a man well clothed, holding up
his hands to heaven as it were praying and supplicating, and perfumed it with
good odors; In the eight, for victory in war, they made a seal of Tin, being an
Image of an Eagle, having the face of a man, and perfumed it with Brimstone. In
the ninth, to cause infirmities, they made a seal of Lead, being the image of a
man wanting his privy parts, shutting his eyes with his hands; and they
perfumed it with Rosin of the Pine. In the tenth, to facilitate childbearing,
and to cure the sick, they made a seal of gold, being the head of a Lion, and
perfumed it with Amber: In the eleventh, for fear, reverence and worship, they
made a seal of a plate of gold, being the image of a man riding on a Lion,
holding the ear thereof in his left hand, and in his right, holding forth a
bracelet of gold, and they perfumed it with good odours and Saffron. In the
twelth, for the separation of Lovers, they made a seal of black lead, being the
image of a Dragon fighting with a man, and they perfumed it with the hairs of a
Lion, and Assa fetida. In the thirteenth, for the agreement of married couples,
and for the dissolving of the charms against copulation, they made a seal of
the images of both, of the man in red Wax, of the woman in white, and caused
them to embrace one another, perfuming it with Lignum Aloes and Amber. In the
fourteenth, for divorce and separation of the man from the woman, they made a
seal of red Copper, being the image of a Dog biting his tail, and they perfumed
it with the hair of a black Dog, and black Cat. In the fifteenth, for to obtain
friendship and good will, they made the image of a man sitting, and inditing of
letters, and perfumed it with Frankincense and Nutmegs In the sixteenth, for to
gain much Merchandising they made a seal of Silver, being the image of a man
sitting upon a Chair, holding a balance in his hand, and they perfumed it with
well smelling spices. In the seventeenth, against Thieves and Robbers, they
sealed with an Iron seal the Image of an Ape, and perfumed it with the hair of
an Ape. In the eighteenth, against Feavors and pains of the belly, they made a
seal of Copper, being the image of a Snake, holding his tail above his head,
and they persumed it with Hartshorn, and re^orted the same seal to put to
flight Serpents and all venomous ^^eatures from the place where it is buried.
In the nineteenth for acilitating birth and provoking the menstrues, they made
a seal of opper, being the image of a woman, holding her hands upon her ^ace;
and they perfumed it with Liquid Storax. In the twentieth, for hunting, they
made a seal of Tin, being the image of Sagittary, half a Man, and half an
Horse, and they perfumed it with the head of a Wolf. In the twenty one for the
destruction of some body, they made the image of a man with a double
countenance, before and behind, and they perfumed it with Brimstone and Jet,
and did put it in a box of brass, and with it Brimstone and Jet, and the hair
of him whom they would hurt. In the two and twentieth, for the security, of
Runaways, they made a seal of Iron, being the image of a man with wings on his
feet, bearing an helmet on his head, and they perfumed it with Argent vive. In
the three and twentieth, for destruction and wasting, they made a seal of Iron,
being the image of a Cat, having a Dogs head, and they perfumed it with the
hairs of a Dogs head, and buried it in the place where they did pretend to
hurt. In the four and twentieth, for the multiplying of Herds of Cattle, they
took the horn of a Ram, Bull, or Goat, or of that sort of cattle which they
would increase, and sealed in it burning with an Iron seal, the image of a
woman giving suck to her son, and they hanged it on the neck of that cattle who
was the leader of the flock, or they sealed it in his horn. In the five and
twentieth, for the preservation of Trees and Harvests, they sealed in the wood
of a Fig Tree, the image of a man planting, and they perfumed it with the
flowers of the Fig Tree, and did hang it on the tree. In the six and twentieth
for love and favor, they sealed in white War and Mastick the image of a woman
washing and combing her hairs, and they perfumed it with things smelling very
well. In the seven and twentieth for to destroy Fountains, Pits, Medicinal
Waters and Baths, they made of red Earth the image of a man winged, holding in
his hand an empty vessel, and perforated, and the image being burnt, they did
put in the vessel Assa fetida, and liquid Storax, and they did overwhelm and
bury it in the Pond or Fountain which they would destroy. In the eight and
twentieth, for to gather Fishes together, they made a seal of Copper, being the
image of a Fish, and they perfumed it with the skin of a sea fish, and did cast
it into the water, wheresoever they would have the fish to gather together.
Moreover together with the foresaid Images, they did write down also the names
of the Spirits and their Characters, and did invocate and pray for those things
which they pretended to obtain.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Images of the fixed Behenian Stars.
BUt now for the operations of the fixed stars, according to Hermes opinion,
under the head of Algol, they made an image whose Figure was the head of a man
with a bloody neck; they report that it bestows good success to Petitions,
and makes him who carries it bold and magnanimous, and preserves the members
of the body sound: also it helps against Witchcraft, and reflecteth evil
endeavors and wicked incantations upon our adversaries. Under the constellation
of Pleiades, they made the image of a little Virgin, or the Figure of a Lamp;
its reported to increase the light of the eyes, to assemble Spirits, to raise
Winds, to reveal secret and hidden things: Under Adlebora, they made an image
after the likeness of God, or of a flying man; it gives riches and honor:
Under the Goat they made an image, the Figure of which was, as it were, a man
willing to make himself merry with musical instruments; it makes him who
carries it acceptable, honored and exalted before Kings and Princes; and
helps the pain of the teeth: Under the greater Dog Star, they made the ^mage
of an Hound and a little Virgin; it bestows honor and good will, and the
favor of men, and Aerial spirits, and gives power to pacify and reconcile
Kings, Princes, and other men: Under the lesser Dog Star they made the image of
a Cock, or of three little maids; it conferreth the favor of the gods, of
spirits, and men; it gives power against Witchcrafts, and preserves health:
Under the Heart of Leo, they made the ^mage of a Lion or Cat, or the Figure of
an honorable Person sitting in a Chair; it renders a man temperate, appeaseth
wrath, and gives favor: Under the tail of Vrsa Major they made the image of a
pensive Man, or of a Bull, or the Figure of a Calf; it avails against
incantations, and makes him who carries it secure in his travels: Under the
wing of Corvus, they made the image of a Raven, or Snake, or of a black Man
clothed in black; this makes a man choleric, bold, courageous, full of
thoughts, a backbiter, and causes naughty dreams; also it gives the power of
driving away evil spirits, and of gathering them together; it is profitable
against the malice of Men, Devils and Winds: Under the Spike they made the
image of a Bird, or of a man laden with Merchandise; it conferreth riches, and
makes one overcome contentions, it takes away scarcity and mischief: Under
Alchameth they made the image of an Horse of Wolf, or the Figure of a man
dancing; it is good against Fevers, it astringeth and retains the blood:
Under Elphrya, they made the image of an Hen, or of a man crowned and advanced;
it bestows the good will and love of men, and gives chastity. Under the
Heart of Scorpio they made the image of a man armed, and with a coat of Male,
or the Figure of a Scorpion; it gives understanding and memory, it makes a
good color, and aideth against evil spirits, and drives them away, and
binds them: Under the Vulture, they made the image of a Vulture or Hen, or of
a traveller; it makes a man magnanimous and proud, it gives power over devils
and beasts. Under the tail of Capricorn they made the image of an Heart, or
Goat, or of an angry man; it bestows prosperity, and increases wrath. These
are the images of some of the fixed stars which they command to be engraven on
their stones under them.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Geomanticall Figures, which are the middle betwixt Images and
Characters.
THere are moreover certain other Figures, framed by the number and situation
of the stars, and ascribed both to the Elements, and also to the Planets and
Signs, which are called Geomantical, because that Geomantical Diviners do
reduce the points of their lot projected, by the excess of parity or imparity
into those figures; and they also being engraven or imprinted under the
dominion of their Planets and Signs, do conceive the virtue and power of
images; and these Figures are as a middle betwixt Images and Characters; But
whosoever desires exactly to know the natures, qualities, proprieties,
conditions, significations, and Nativities of these Figures, let him read the
Volums of Geomancy; but they are in number sixteen, whose names and figures are
these.

Figure. Name. Element Planet. Sign. Way Water People Water Conjunction Air A
prison The Earth Great fortune The Earth Lesser fortune Fire Obtaining Air
Acquisition Fire Joy Air Sadness Earth A Girl Watter A Boy Fire White Water.
Reddish Fire The head Earth The Tail Fire.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Images, the figure whereof is not after the likness of any
Celestial figure, but after the likeness of that which the mind of the worker
desires.
THere remains as yet an other manner of images not according to the similitude
of Celestial figures, but according to the similitude of that which the mind
of the worker desires, of whose they are the effigies, and representation: So
to procure love we make images embracing one the other: to discord, striking
one the other; to bring misery, or destruction as damage to a man or house, or
City or any thing else, we make images distorted, broken in members, and parts
after the likeness and figure of that thing which we would destroy or damnifie;
And Magicians advise us that in casting or engraving images we would write upon
it the name of the effect; and this on the back when evil, as destruction; on
the belly when good, as love. Moreover in the forehead of the image let be
written the name of the species or Jndividuum which the image represents, or
for whom or against whom it is made. Also on the breast let the name of the
sign or face ascending, and Lord thereof be written; also the names and
Characters of its Angles. Moreover in making the image they advise that prayer
for the effect for which it is made, be used. All which Albertus Magnus in his
Speculo affirms. Now they use the images being made diversely according to the
virtues thereof; Sometimes they hang them or bind them to the body; Sometimes
they bury them under the Earth, or a River; sometimes they hang them in a
Chimny over the smoke, or upon a tree that they be moved by the wind; sometime
with the head upward, and sometimes downward; sometimes they put them into hot
water, or into the fire. For they say as the workers of the images do affect
the image it self, so does it bring the like pas^^ons upon those to whom it was
ascribed, as the mind of the operator has dictated it. As we read that
Nectanabus the Magician made images of ships with wax after that manner, and
art that when he drowned those images in water, that the ships of his enemies
were in like manner drowned in the Sea, and hazarded. Now that part of Astrology
which is writ concerning elections, teaches us that the constellations also
are to be observed for the making of images, and such like.

CHAP. L. Of certain Celestial observations and the practice of some Images.
I will now show thee the observation of Celestial bodies, which are required
for the practice of some of these kind of images; So to make any one fortunate,
we make an image in which these are fortunate, viz. the significator of the
life thereof, the givers of life, the signs, and Planets. Moreover let the
ascendent, the middle of the heaven, and the Lords thereof be fortunate: also
the place of the Sun, and place of the Moon; part of fortune, and Lord of
conjunction or prevention made before their nativity, by depressing the
Malignant Planets. But if we will make an image to procure misery, we must do
contrariwise, and those which we place here fortunate, must there be
unfortunate, by raising malignant Stars. In like manner must we do to make any
place, Region, City, or house fortunate. Also for destroying or prejudicing any
of the foresaid; Let there be made an image under the ascension of that man
whom thou would destroy, and prejudice, and thou shall make unfortunate, the
Lord of the house of his life, the Lord of the ascending, and the Moon, the
lord of the house of the Moon, and the lord of the house of the lord ascending,
and the tenth house, and the lord thereof. Now for the fitting of any place,
place fortunes in the ascendent thereof; and in the first, and tenth and
second, and eighth house, thou shall make the lord of the ascendent, and the
lord of the house of the Moon fortunate. But to chase away certain Animals from
certain places, that they may not be generated, or abide there, let there be an
image made under the ascension of that Animal, which thou would chase away,
and after the likeness thereof; as if thou would chase away Scorpions from
any place, let an image of the Scorpion be made, the sign of Scorpio ascending
with the Moon, and thou shall make unfortunate the ascendent, and lord thereof,
and the Lord of the house of Mars; and thou shall make unfortunate the lord of
the ascendent in the eighth house, and let them be joined with an aspect
malignant, opposite, or quadrant: and let there be writ upon the image the name
of the ascendent, of the Lord thereof, and of the Moon, and of the lord of the
day, and of the Lord of the hour. And let there be a pit made in the middle of
the place, from which thou would drive them; and let there be carried into
it, some of the earth taken out of the four corners of the same place, and let
the image be buried there with the head downward, with saying, this is the
burying of the Scorpions, that they may not come into this place, and so of the
rest. So for gain let there be made an image under the ascendent of the
nativity of the man, or under the ascension of that place to which thou
would appoint the gain; and thou shall make the lord of the second house,
which is in the house of substance to be joined with the Lord of the ascendent
in the trine or sextil, and let there be a reception amongst them; thou shall
make fortunate the eleventh and the Lord thereof, and the eighth; and if thou
can, put part of the fortune in the ascendent, or second; and let the image
be buried in that place, or carried from that place, to which thou would
appoint the gain. Also for concord, and love, let there be an image made in the
day of Jupiter under the ascendent of the nativity of him whom thou would
have be beloved, make fortunate the ascendent, and the tenth, and hide the evil
from the ascendent; and thou must have the Lord of the tenth, and planets of
the eleveneth fortune, joined to the Lord of the ascendent, from the trine or
sextil with reception; then make an other image for him whom thou would stir
up to love; consider if he be a friend, or companion of him whom thou would
have be beloved; and if so, let there be an image made under the ascension of
the eleventh house from the ascendent of the first image; but if the party be a
wife, or a husband, let it be made under the ascension of the seventh; if a
brother, or a sister, or a cousin, let it be made under the ascension of the
third, and so of the like; and put the significator of the ascendent of the
second image, joined to the significator of the ascendent of the first image;
and let there be betwixt them a reception, and let the rest be fortunate, as in
the first image; afterward join both images together into a mutual embraceing
or put the face of the second image to the back of the first image, and let
them be wrapped up in silk, and cast away or spoiled. Also for success of
petitions, and for the obtaining of a thing denied, or taken, or possessed by
an other, let there be an image made under the ascendent of him who petitions
for the thing; and cause that the Lord of the second be joined with the lord of
the ascendent from a trine, or sextile, and let there be a reception betwixt
them, and if it can be, let the Lord of the second be in the obeying signs, and
the Lord of the ascendent in the ruling, make fortunate the ascendent, and the
Lord thereof, and take heed that the lord of the ascendent be not retrograde or
combust, or falling, or in the house of opposition i. e. in the seventh from
his own house; let him not be hindered by the malignant, let him be strong, and
in an angle; Thou shall make fortunate the ascendent, and the Lord of the
second and the Moon; and make another image for him that is petitioned to, and
begin it under the ascendent belonging to him, as if he be a King or a Prince,
begin it under the ascendent of the tenth house from the ascendent of the first
image; If he be a father under the fourth; if a son under fifth, and so of the
like; and put the significator of the second image, joined with the lord of the
ascendent of the first image, from a trine, or sextile, and let him receive it,
and put them both strong, and fortunate without any let; make all evil fall
from them. Thou shall make fortunate the tenth, and the fourth if thou can or
any of them; and when the second image shall be perfected, join it with the
first, face to face, and wrap them in clean linen, and bury them in the middle
of his house who is the petitioner under a fortunate significator, the fortune
being strong, and let the face of the first image be toward the North, or
rather toward that place where the thing petitioned for does abide; or if it
happen that the petitioner goes forward toward him with whom the thing
petitioned for is, let him bring the images with him as far ar he goes. And let
there be made an image of dreams, which being put under the head of him that
sleeps, makes him dream true dreams concerning any thing that he has formerly
deliberated of; and let the figure of that be the figure of a man sleeping in
the bosom of an Angel, which thou shall make in the Lion ascending, the Sun
keeping the nineth house in Aries; thou shall writ upon the breast of the man
the name of the effect desired, and in the hand of the Angel the name of the
intelligence of the Sun. Let the same image be made in Virgo ascending, Mercury
being fortunate in Aries in the ninth house, or Gemini ascending in Mercury
being fortunate, and keeping the ninth house in Aquarius; and let it be
received from Saturn with a fortunate aspect, and let the name of the spirit of
Mercury be writ upon it. Let also the same be made in Libra ascending, Venus
being received from Mercury in Gemini in the ninth house, by writting upon it
the Angel of Venus. Besides also let the same image be made in Aquarius
ascending, Saturn fortunately possessing the ninth house in his exaltation,
which is in Libra, and let there be writ upon it the Angel of Saturn. Moreover
let it be made in Cancer ascending the Moon being received by Jupiter and Venus
in Pisces, and being fortunately placed in the ninth house, and let there be
writ upon it the spirit of the Moon. There are also made rings of dreams of
wonderful efficacy; and there are rings of the Sun, and Saturn, and the
constellation of them is when the Sun or Saturn ascend in their exaltations in
the ninth house, and when the Moon is joined to Saturn in the ninth house, and
in that sign, which was the ninth house of Nativity; and let there be writ
upon the rings the name of the spirit of the Sun, or Saturn. Let this which
has been spoken suffice concerning images, for nowthou may find out more of
this nature of thy self. But know this that such images work nothing, unless
they be so vivified that either a natural, or Celestial, or Heroical, or
animasticall, or Demoniacall, or angelical virtue be in them, or assistant to
them. But who can give a soul to an image, or make a stone to live, or metal,
or wood, or wax? and who can raise out of stones children unto Abraham?
Certainly this Arcanum does not enter into an Artist of a stiff neck; neither
can he give those things which has them not. No body has them but he who does
(the Elements being restrained, nature being overcome, the Heavens being over
powered) transcend the progress of Angels, and comes to the very Archetype it
self, of which being then made a cooperator may do all things, as we shall
speak afterward.

CHAP. LI. Of Characters which are made after the rule and imitation of
Celestial, and how with the table thereof they are deduced out of Geomantical
figures.
CHaracters also have their community from the rays of the Celestials cast
together according to a certain number by a certain peculiar property, which
Celestials as in diverse strokes of their rays falling several ways amongst
themselves produce diverse virtues: so also Characters being variously
protracted, according to the various concourse of those rays quickly obtain
diverse operations, and also more efficacious many times then the properties of
natural commixtions. Now the true Characters of the heavens is the writing of
Angels, which amongst the Hebrews is called the writing Malachim, by which all
things are described and signified in the Beaven for every knowing man to read.
But of these hereafter; But now they make Characters of Geomantical figures
binding together the points of each variously, and attributing them according
to the manner of their figurings, to those Planets and signs of which they were
made, the making of which the following table will show.

The Characters of the Moon.
From the way From the people

The Characters of Mercury.
From Conjunction From White

The Characters of Venus.
From loosing From g irle

The Characters of the Sun.
From a greater Fortune From a lesser Fortune

The Characters of Mars.
From Red From a Boy

The Characters of Jupiter.
From obtaining From joyfulness

The Characters of Saturn.
From a prison From sadness

The Charactars of the head of the Dragon.


The Characters of the tail of the Dragon.


CHAP. LII. Of Characters which are drawn from things themselves by a certain
likeness.
WE have spoken above of a certain manner of Images made not after the likeness
of Celestial Images, but according to the emulation of that which the mind of
the Operator does desire. In like manner also it is to be understood of
Characters; for such like Characters are nothing else then images ill
dearticulated; yet having a certain probable similitude with the Celestial
images, or with that which the mind of the Operator desires, whether that be
from the whole image, or from certain marks thereof expressing the whole
image. As the Characters of Aries and Taurus we make thus from their horns. Of
Gemini from embracing. of Cancer from a progress and regress, of Leo, Scorpio,
and Capricorn, from their tail of Virgo, from Spike ^ ^ of Libra from a
balance of Sagittarius from a dart, of Aquarius from Waters and of Pisces from
Fishes. In like manner the Character of Saturn is made from a Sickle ^ ^ of
Jupiter, from a Scepter ^ ^ of Mars from a bolt of the Sun from roundness, and
a golden brightness ^ of Venns from a Lookinglass, of Mercury from a Wand ^ ^
of the Moon from her horns of increasing and decreasing. Besides, of these,
according to the mixtions of Signs and Stars, and Natures, are made also mixed
Characters, as of a fiery triplicity ^ of Earthly ^ of Aerie ^ of Watery ^ also
according to the hundred and twenty conjunctions of Planets, result so many
compound Characters of various Figures; as of Saturn and Jupiter, viz. thus, ^
^ or thus ^ or thus of Saturn and Mars, ^ or thus ^ of Jupiter, and Mars ^ or
thus ^ of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, ^ or thus ^ And as these are exemplified by
two and three, so also of the rest, and of more may they be framed: after the
same manner may the Characters of other Celestial images ascending in any face
or degree of signs, be compendiously drawn after the likeness of the images, as
in these which are made according to the way of imitation of that which the
mind of the Operator desires, as to love, the figures be mixed together
embracing and obeying one the other, but to hatred, on the contrary, turning
away the one from the other; contending, unequal, loosed. But now we will here
set down those Characters which Hermes assigned to the fixed stars, and
Behenii, and they are these,

The head of Algol.


The Pleiades.


Aldaboram.


The Goat Star.


The greater Dog Star.


The lesser Dog Star.


The heart of the Lion.


The Tail of the Bear.


The wing of the Crow.


Spica.


Alcameth.


Elpheia.


The heart of the Scorpion.


The Vulture falling.


The tail of Capricorn.


CHAP. LIII. That no Divination without Astrology is perfect.
WE have spoken in the foregoing Chapters of the diverse kinds of Divinations:
But this is to be noted that all these require the use and rules of Astrology,
as a key most necessary for the knowledge of all secrets; and that all kinds of
Divinations whatsoever have their root and foundation in Astrology so, as that
without it they are of little or no use; yet Astrological Divination, in as
much as the Celestials are causes and signs of all those things which are, and
are done in these inferiors, does give most certain demonstations by the
situation, and motion only of Celestial bodies, of those things which are
occult or future; of which we shall in this place speak no further, since of
this Science huge Volums have been wrote by the Ancients, and are everywhere
extant. Therefore whether the Physiognomists lookupon the body, or countenance
or forehead, or hand, or the Soothsayer, searches by dreams or Auspicia, that
the judgment may be right, the figure of heaven is also to be enquired into.
From the judgments whereof, together with conjectures of similitudes and
signs, are produced true opinions of the significators. Also if any prodigy
shall appear, the Figure of the heaven is to be erected; also such things are
to be enquired after, which have gone before in the revolutions of years from
great conjunctions, and Eclipses: then also the Nativities, beginnings,
intronizations, foundations, and revolutions, perfections, directions of
Princes, Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, when these shall appear, and upon what
place of the Celestial figure these fell; that by all these at length we may
come to a rational and probable signification of these things. After the same
manner, but with less labor, we must proceed in the Exposition of dreams.
Moreover, they that being distempered foretell future things, do it not but as
they are instigated by the stars, or inferior instruments of these, whence
their Predictions must at length be imputed to the Celestials, as we read in
Lucan the old Prophet Tuscus, The Lightenings motion, and the veins which are
Fibrous, and warm, and motion of a fair
Plume wandering in the air, being taught --
After the City was viewed, the Sacrifice slain, the inspection into the
intrals did at length by the dispositions of the Celestial stars pronounce
judgment. Also Geomancy it self the most accurate of Divinations, which
divines by points of the earth, or any other superfices, or by a fall, or any
other power inscribed, does first reduce them to Celestial figures, viz. to
those sixteen which we above named, making judgment after an Astrological
manner, by the properties and observations thereof: and hither are referred all
natural Divinations by lots whatsoever, the power whereof can be from no where
else then from the heaven, and from the mind of them that work them. For
whatsoever is moved, caused or produced in these inferiors, must of necessity
imitate the motions, and influences of the superiors, to which, as to its
roots, causes, and signs it is reduced, the judgment whereof is showed by
Astrological Rules. Hence Dice, Tetracedron, Exacedron, Octocedron,
Doderacedron, Icocedron being made by certain Numbers, Signs, and Stars at
opportune times, under the influencies of the Celestials, and being inscribed,
obtain a worderful virtue of Divining, and foretelling by their castings, such
as those Dice Preneste had, in which we read the Destinies of the Romans were
contained.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Lottery, when, and whence the virtue of Divining is incident to
it.
WHatsoever Divinations and Predictions of humane events are made by Lottery,
must of necessity, besides the lot, have some sublime occult cause; which
indeed shall not be a cause by accident, such as Aristotle describes Fortune to
be. For in the series of Causes, seeing according to the Platonists, a cause by
accident can never be the prime and sufficient cause, we must look higher, and
find out a cause which may know and intend the effect. Now this we must not
place in corporeal Nature, but in immaterial, and incorporeal substances which
indeed administer the Lot, and dispense the signification of the truth, as in
men's souls, or separated spirits, or ^n Celestial Intelligences, or in God
himself. Now that there is in man's soul a sufficient power and virtue to ^irect
such kind of lots, it is hence manifest, because there is in our soul a divine
virtue, and similitude, and apprehension, and power of all things; And as we
said in the first Book, All things have a natural obedience to it, and of
necessity have a motion and efficacy to that which the soul desires with a
strong desire; and all the virtues and operations of natural and artifical
things, obey it when it is carried forth into the excess of desire, and then
all Lots of what kind soever are assisting to the appetite of such a mind,
and acquire to themselves wonderful virtues of passages, as from that, so from
the Celestial opportunity in that hour in which the excess of such a like
appetite does most of all exeeed in it. And this is that ground and foundation
of all Astrological Questions, wherefore the mind being elevated into the
excess of any desire, takes of it self an hour and opportunity most convenient
and efficacious, on which the Figure of the heaven being made, the Astrologer
may then judge in it, and plainly know concerning that which any one desires,
and is inquisitive to know. But now because Lots are not directed always by
man's mind, but also, as we said before, by the help of other Spirits; nor is
the mind of a Prophet always disposed to that excess of passion as we spoke
of: hence amongst the Ancients, it was a Custom to premise before the casting
of the Lot, some sacred performances, in which they called upon divine
Intelligencies and spirits for to direct the Lot aright. Whatsoever kind of
presage therefore these kind of Lots portend, must of necessity not be by
chance or fortune, but from a spiritual cause, by virtue whereof the Fantasy,
or hand of him that cast the Lot is moved, whether that power proceed from the
soul of the Operator through the great excess of his affection, or from a
Celestial influence, and opportunity, or from a certain Diety or spirit
assisting, or moving from on high, whether these Lots are placed in casting of
Cockalls, or throwing of Dice, or in the meeting of Verses, such as were
formerly the Lot of Homer and Virgil, of which we read in Aetlius of Sparta,
Hadrianus long since made enquiry, and which we read befell Trajanus the
Emperor. What Is he far off graced with the Olive bough
Presenting offerings? his white chin we know,
A Roman King, whose laws first settled Rome,
And from small Curets a poor soil, shall come
To great command --
By which Verses he did not in vain become to have hopes of enjoying the
Empire. Also amongst Hebrews, and even amongst us Christians (some Divines not
disapproving of it) Lots are taken out of Verses of Psalms. There are also
more, and other kinds of Lots, as are humane Lots, which had no Divination in
them amongst the Ancients, and are observed by us in choosing of Magistrates,
to prevent envy, of which also Cicero against Verres makes mention: but they
are not of our purpose: But those which are divine, and sacred Lots, respecting
Oracles, and Religion, of which we shall discourse in the following Book: Only
thus far I would advise you, that how much presaging, divining or Southsaying
soever Lots are found to have, they have them not as they are Lots, but by
reason of a virtue of a higher operation joined to them.

CHAP. LV. Of the soul of the World, and of the Celestials, according to the
traditions of the Poets, and Philosophers.
IT is necessary that the heaven and Celestial bodies, seeing they have a
power, influence, and manifest operation upon these inferiors, should be
animated: seeing an operation cannot proceed from a mere body. All famous
Poets, and Philosophers affirm therefore that the world and all Celestial
bodies must have a soul, and that also intelligent: Hence Marcus Mavillius in
his Astronomy to Augustus, sings, The great Corporeal world, which does appear
In diverse forms, of Air, Earth, Sea, and Fire,
A divine soul does rule, a Diety
Does wisely govern --
Also Lucan, The Earth that is weighed in the air, 's sustained
By great Jove --
And Boethius Thou do join to the world a soul, that moves
All things of threefold nature, and diffuse
It through the members of the same, and this
Into two Orbs of motion rounded is
Being divided, and for to return
Into it self makes haste --
And Virgil most full of all Philosophy, sings thus, And first the Heaven,
Earth, and liquid plain,
The Moons bright Globe, and Stars Titanian
A spirit fed within, spread through the whole
And with the huge heap mixed infused a soul;
Hence man, and beasts, and birds derive their strain,
And monsters floating in the marbled main;
These seeds have fiery vigor, and a birth
Of heavenly race, but clogged with heavy earth.
For what do these verses seem to mean, then that the world should not only
have a spirit soul, but also to partake of the divine mind: and that the
original, virtue, and vigor of all inferior things do depend on the soul of
the world? This do all Platonists, Pythagorians, Orpheus, Trismegistus,
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Avicen, Algazeles, and all Peripateticks confess, and
confirm.

CHAP. LVI. The same is confirmed by reason.
THe world, the heavens, the Stars, and the Elements have a soul, with which
they cause a soul in these inferior and mixed bodies. They have also as we said
in the former book, a spirit, which by the mediating of the soul is united to
the body: For as the world is a certain whole body, the parts whereof are the
bodies of all living creatures, and by how much the whole is more perfect and
noble then the parts, by so much more perfect, and noble is the body of the
world then the bodies of each living thing. It would be absurd, that all
imperfect bodies and parts of the world, and every base Animal, as Flies, and
Worms should be worthy of a life, and have a life and soul, and the whole
entire world a most perfect, whole, and most noble body, should have neither
life, nor soul; It is no less absurd, that Heavens, Stars, Elements, which give
to all things life, and soul most largely, should themselves be without life,
and soul; and that every plant, or tree should be of a more noble condition
then the Heaven, Stars, and Elements, which are naturally the cause of them;
And what living man can deny that earth, and water live, which of themselves,
generate, vivifie, nourish, and increase innumerable trees, plants, and living
creatures? as most manifestly appears in things that breed of their own accord,
and in those which have no corporeal seed. Neither could Elements generate and
nourish such kind of living creatures, if they themselves were without life or
soul. But some happily may say, that such kind of living creatures are not
generated by the soul of the earth, or water, but by the influencies of
Celestial souls; These the Platonists answer, that an Accident cannot beget a
substance, unless happily as an instrument it be subjected to the next substance,
because an instrument removed from an artificer is not moved to the effect of
the art; so also those Celestial influencies, seeing they are certain
accidents being removed far from vital substances, or from the life it self,
cannot generate a vital substance in these inferiors. And Mercurius in his book
which he calls De Communi, says, All that is in the world is moved either by
increase, or decrease. Now what moves, must needs have life; and seeing that
all things move, even the earth, especially with a generative and alterative
motion, they must themselves live. And if any doubt that the heavens live,
says Theophrastus, he is not to be accounted a Philosopher; and he which
denies the heaven to be animated, so that the mover thereof is not the form
thereof, destroys the foundation of all Philosophy; The world therefore lives,
has a soul, and sense; for it gives life to plants, which are not produced of
seed; and it gives sense to Animals, which are not generated by coition.

CHAP. LVII. That the soul of the world, and the Celestial souls are
rational, and partake of Divine understanding.
THat the above named souls have reason, is apparent hence; For whereas the
universal works of the foresaid souls do with a certain perpetual order
conspire amongst themselves, it is necessary that they be governed not by
chance but by reason; by which reason they do direct, and bring all their
operations to a certainty. For it is necessary that the earth should have the
reason of terrene things, and water of watery things; and so in the rest; by
which reason each in their time, place, and order are generated, and being hurt
are repaired. Therefore Philosophers do not think the soul of the earth to be
as it were the soul of some contemptible body, but to be rational and also
intelligent, yea and to be a diety. Besides it would be absurd, seeing we have
reasons of our works, that Celestial souls, and the soul of the universe
should not have reasons of theirs. But if (as says Plato) the world be made by
very goodness it self, as well as it could be made, it is certainly endowed
with not only life, sense, and reason, but also understanding. For the
perfection of a body is its soul, and that body is more perfect which has a
more perfect soul; It is necessary therefore, seeing Celestial bodies are most
perfect, that they have also most perfect minds. They partake therefore of an
intellect and a mind; which the Platonists also prove by the perseverance of
their order, and tenor, because motion is of its nature free, it may easily
swarve, and wander now one way, now another, unless it were ruled by an
intellect and a mind, and that also by a perfect mind foreseeing from the
beginning the best way, and chief end. Which perfect mind indeed, because it is
most powerful in the soul, as is the soul, and as are the souls of Celestial
bodies, and of Elements, without all doubt does most orderly, and perfectly
govern the work allotted to it. For bodies do not resist a most powerful soul,
and a perfect mind does not change its counsel. The soul of the world therefore
is a certain only thing, filling all things, bestowing all things, binding, and
knitting together all things, that it might make one frame of the world, and
that it might be as it were one instrument making of many strings, out one
sound, sounding from three kinds of creatures, intellectual, Celestial, and
incorruptible, with one only breath and ^ife.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the names of the Celestials, and their rule over this
inferior world, viz. Man.
THe names of Celestial souls are very many, and diverse according to their
manifold power and virtue upon these inferior things, from whence they have
received diverse ^ames, which the ancients in their hymns and prayers made ^se
of. Concerning which you must observe, that every one of these souls according
to Orpheus's Divinity, is said to have a double virtue; the one placed in
knowing, the other in vivifying, and governing its body. Upon this account in
the Celestial spheres, Orpheus calls the former virtue Bacchus, the other a
Muse. Hence he is not inebriated by any Bacchus, who has not first been
coupled to his Muse. Therefore nine Bacchus's are designed about the nine
Muses. Hence in the ninth sphere Orpheus puts Bacchus Cribonius, and the Muse
Calliope; in the starry heaven Picionius, and Urania; in the sphere of Saturn,
Amphietus, and Polyphymnia; in the sphere of Jupiter, Sabasius, and
Terpsichore; in the sphere of Mars, Bassarius, and Clio; in the sphere of the
Sun, Trietericus, and Melpemene; in the sphere of Venus, Lysius, and Erato; in
the sphere of Mercury, Silenus, and Euterpe; in the sphere of the Moon,
Bacchus, Lyeus, and the Muse Thalia. Also in the spheres of the Elements, he
names the souls after this manner. In the fire he puts the planet, and the
morning; in the air lightening Jupiter, and Juno; in water the Ocean, and
Thetys; in the earth Pluto, and Proserpina; but the soul of the world or
universe Magicians call the Jupiter of the world, and the mind of the world
Apollo, and the nature of the world, Minerva. Besides in the fire they put
Vulcan, in the water Neptune, and they did name them by diverse names. Also in
the Stars of the Zodiac the Pythagorians did put twelve particular Gods or
souls placed in the hearts of those Stars, and thence governing the whole Star,
viz. in the heart of Aries is placed a particular Pallas, in the heart of
Taurus a particular Venus, of Gemini a particular Phoebus, of Cancer Mercury, of
Leo Jupiter, of Virgo Ceres, of Libra Vulcan, of Scorpio Mars, of Sagittarius
Diana, of Capricorn Vesta, of Aquarius a patticular Juno, in the heart of
Pisces a particular Neptune: This did Manilius sing forth in these verses.
Pallas does rule the Ram, Venus the Bull,
Phoebus the Twins, and Mercury does rule
The Cancer, and the Lion guides does Jove,
Ceres does Virgo, Vulcan Libra move.
For Scorpion Mars; for Sagittarius fair
Diana cares; for Capricorn does care
Vesta; Aquarius Juno does protect;
And Neptune Pisces --
And most ancient Orpheus writing to Muscus, reckons up more Dieties of the
heavens then these, signifying their names, respects, and duties, calling them
all in proper songs. Let no one therefore think that they are the names of
evil deceiving spirits; but of natural, and divine virtues, distrubted to the
world by the true God, for the service, and profit of man, who knew how to use
them: and antiquity it self has ascribed to each of these Dieties the several
members of man; as the ear to memory, which Virgil also dedicates to Phoebus,
saying, Cynthius pulls my ear, and admonishes me. So the right hand being a
token of fortitude, and by which an oath is made, Numa Pompilius, as says
Livy, has dedicated to faith: The fingers are under the tuition of Minerva,
and the knees given to Mercifullness; Hence they that beg pardon bend them.
Some dedicate the Navell to Venus as the place of luxury; some who refer all
the members to it as the center, say it is dedicated to Jupiter. Hence in the
Temple of Jupiter Hammon the effigies of a navel is celebrated. Many other
things the ancients did observe, ascribing every little member and joint to
their Dieties, which if they be rightly understood, and the true Dieties ruling
over them known, would not at all swerve from their duty, seeing also sacred
writ testifies that all our members are governed by the superior virtues, of
which we shall speak more largely in the following book; and not members only,
but every exercise of men is distributed to its Dietie, as huntings to Diana,
wars to Pallas, husbandry to Ceres, of which thus speaks Apollo in his Oracles
in Porphyrie. Pallas loves wars, woods to Diana fair
Ascribed are, to Juno humid Air,
To Ceres Corn, and fruits; to Osyris
The water, also humors waterish.


CHAP. LIX. Of the seven governers of the world, the Planets, and of their
various names serving to Magical speeches.
MOreover they did call those seven governors of the world (as Hermes calls
them) Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, by many
names, and epithites; viz. calling Saturn Coelius, sithe-bearer, the father of
the Gods, the Lord of the time, the high Lord, the great, the wise, the
intelligent, ingenious revolutor, of a long space, an old man of great
profundity, the author of secret contemplation, impressing, or depressing great
thoughts in the hearts of men, destroying and preserving all things,
overturning force and power, and constituting, a keeper of secret things, and a
shewer of them, causing the loss, and finding of the author of life and death.
So Jupiter is called as it were a helping Father, the King of heaven,
Magnanimous, thundering lightning, unconquered, high and mighty, great and
mighty good, fortunate, sweet, mild, of good will, honest, pure walking well,
and in honor, the Lord of joy, and of judgments, wise, true, the shewer of
truth, the judge of all things excelling all in goodness, the Lord of riches,
and wisdom Mars is called Mavors, powerful in war, bloody, powerful in arms,
a sword bearer, magnanimous, bold, untamed, generous, lightning, of great power
and furious have, against who none can defend himself if he resist him, who
destroys the strong, and powerful, and deposes Kings from their throne the
Lord of heat and power, the Lord of fiery heat, and the planet of blood; who
inflames the hearts of contende^ and gives them boldness. The Sun is called
Phoebus, Diespit Apollo, Titan, Pean Phanes, Horus, Osiris, as it is in that
Ora^ The Sun, Osyris, Dionysius gay,
Apollo, Horus, King ruling the day
Who changes times, who gives winds and rain,
The King of Stars, and the immortal flame.
He is called also Arcitenens, burning fiery, golden flaming radiating, of a
fiery hair, of a golden hair, the eye of the world, Lucifer, seeing all things,
ruling all things, the creator of light, the King of Stars, the great Lord,
good, fortunate, honest, pure, prudent, intelligent, wise, shining over the
whole world, governing, and vivifying all bodies that have a soul, the prince
of the world keeping all the Stars under himself, the light of all the Stars,
darkening, burning overcoming their virtue by his approach, yet by his light
and splendour giving light and splendour to all things: in the night he is called
Dionysius, but in the day Apollo, as if driving away evil things. Therefore
the Athenians called him Alexicacon, and Homer Vlion. i. e. the driver away of
evil things. He is also called Phaehus from his beauty and brightness, and
Vulcan from his fiery violence, because the force thereof consists of many
fires. He is also called the Sun, because he contains the light of all the
Stars: hence he is called by the Assyrians (...) Adad, which signifies only,
and by the Hebrews (...) Schemesch, which signifies proper. Venus is called the
Lady, nourishing, beautiful, white, fair, pleasing, powerful, the fruitful
Lady of love and beauty, the progeny of Ages, the first parent of men, who in
the beginning of all things joined diversity of sexes together with a growing
love, and with an eternal off spring propagates kinds of men and Animals, the
queen of all delights, the Lady of rejoicing, friendly, sociable, pitiful,
taking all things in good part, always bountiful to mortals, affording the
tender affection of a mother to the conditions of them in misery, the safeguard
of mankind, letting no moment of time pass without doing good, overcoming all
things by her power, humbling the light to the low, the strong to the weak, the
noble to the vile rectifying, and equalling all things: and she is called
Aphrodite, because in every sex, she is found to be of every mind: and she is
called Lucifera, i. e. bringing light, bringing the years of the Sun to light;
and she is called Hesperus, when she follows the Sun, and Phosperus, because
she leads through all things though never so hard. Mercury is called the son of
Jupiter, the crier of the gods, the interpreter of gods, Stilbon, the
Serpentbearer, the rod-bearer, winged on his feet, eloquent, bringer of gain,
wise, rational robust, stout, powerful in good and evil, the notary of the
Sun, the messenger of Jupiter, the messenger betwixt the supernall and
infernal gods, male with males, female with females, most fruitful in both
sexes; And Lucan calls him the Arbitrator of the gods. He is also called Hermes
i. e. interpreter, bringing to light all obscurity, and opening those things
which are most secret. The Moon is called Phebe, Diana, Lucina, Proserpina,
Hecate, Menstruous, of a half form, giving light in the night, wandering silent,
having two horns, a preserver, a night-walker, horn-bearer, the queen of
heaven, the chiefest of the Dieties, the first of the heavenly gods and
goddesses, the queen of spirits, the mistress of all the Elements, whom the
stars answer, seasons return, Elements serve; at whose nod lightnings breath
forth, seeds bud, plants increase, the initiall parent of fruit, the sister of
Phoebus, light, and shining, carrying light from one planet to another,
enlightening all powers by its light, restraining the various passings of the
Stars, dispensing various lights by the circuits of the Sun, the Lady of great
beauty, the mistress of rain and waters, the giver of riches, the nurse of
mankind, the governor of all States kind, merciful, protecting men by Sea and
land, mitigating all tempests of fortune, dispensing with fate, nourishing all
things growing on the earth, wandering into diverse woods, restraing the rage of
Goblins, shutting the openings of the earth dispensing the light of the Heaven,
the wholesome rivers of the Sea, and the deplored silence of the infernals, by
its nodsruling the world, treading hell under her feet; of whose majesty the
birds hasting in the Air are afraid, the wild beasts straggling in the
mountains, Serpents lying hid in the ground fish swiming in the Sea; But of
these and the like names of Sta^^ and planets, and their Epithites, Sirnames,
and callings upon, ^^ he that will know more, and make more curious enquiry,
must betake himself to the hymns of Orpheus, which he that truly understands,
has attained to a great understanding of natural Magic.

CHAP. LX. That humane imprecations do naturally impress their powers upon
external things; And how man's mind through each degree of dependencies ascends
into the intelligible world, and becomes like to the more sublime spirits, and
Intelligencies.
THe Celestial souls send forth their virtues to the Celestial bodies, which
then transmit them to this sensible world. For the virtues of the terrene orb
proceed from no other cause then Celestial. Hence the Magician that will work
by them, uses a cunning invocation of the superiors, with mysterious words,
and a certain kind of ingenious speech, drawing the one to the other, yet by a
natural force through a certain mutual agreement betwixt them, whereby things
follow of their own accord, or sometimes are drawn unwillingly. Hence says
Aristotle in the sixth book of his Mystical Philosophy, that when any one by
binding or bewitching does call upon the Sun or other stars, praying them to be
helpful to the work desired, the Sun and other Stars do not hear his words,
but are moved after a certain manner by a certain conjunction, and mutual
series, whereby the parts of the world are mutually subordinate the one to the
other, and have a mutual consent, by reason of their great union: As in man's
body one member is moved by perceiving the motion of another, and in a harp one
string is moved at the motion of another. So when any one moves any part of the
world; other parts are moved by the perceiving the motion of that. The
knowledge therefore of the dependency of things following one the other, is the
foundation of all wonderful operation, which is necessarily required to the
exercising the power of attracting superior virtues. Now the words of men are
certain natural things; and because the parts of the world mutually draw one
the other, therefore a Magician invocating by words, works by powers fitted to
nature, by leading some by the love of one to the other, or drawing others by
reason of the following of one after the other, or by repelling by reason of
the enmity of one to the other, from the contrariety and difference of things,
and multitude of virtues; which although they are contrary, and different, yet
perfect one part; sometimes also he compels things by way of authority, by the
Celestial virtue, because he is not a stranger to the heaven. A man therefore,
if he receives the impression of any ligation, or fascination, does no: receive
it according to the rational soul, but sensual, and if he suffers in any
part, suffers according to the Animal part. For they cannot draw a knowing and
intelligent man by reason, but by receiving that impression and force by sense,
in as much as the Animal spirit of man is by the influence of the Celestials,
and cooperation of the things of the world, affected beyond his former and
natural disposition. As the son moves the father to labor, although unwilling,
for to keep and maintain him, although he be wearied; and the desire to rule is
moved to anger and other labors, for to get the dominion. And the indigency of
nature, and fear of poverty, moves a man to desire riches. And the ornaments,
and beauty of women is an incitement to concupiscence. And the harmony of a
wise Musician moves his hearers with various passions, whereof some do
voluntary follow the consonancy of art, others conform themselves by gesture,
although unwillingly, because their sense is captivated their reason not being
intent to these things. But these kinds of fascinations and ligations the
vulgar does neither admire, nor detest, by reason of their usualness: but they
admire other natural things, because they are ignorant of them, and are not
accustomed to them. Hence they fall into errors, thinking those things to be
above nature, or contrary to nature, which indeed are by nature, and according
to nature. We must know therefore that every superior moves its next inferior,
in its degree, and order, not only in bodies, but also in spirits. So the
universal soul moves the aprticular soul; and the rational acts upon the
sensual, and that upon the vegetable; and every part of the world acts upon
another, and every part is apt to be moved by another; and every part of this
inferior world suffers from the heavens according to their nature, and
aptitude, as one part of the Animal body suffers from another. And the
superior intellectual world moves all things below it self, and after a manner
contains all the same beings from the first to the last, which are in the
inferior world. Celestial bodies therefore move the body of the elementary
world, compounded, generable, sensible, from the circumference to the center,
by superior, perpetual, and spiritual essences, depending on the primary
intellect, which is the acting intellect; but upon the virtue put in by the
word of God, which word the wise Chaldeans of Babylon call the cause of causes,
because from it are produced all beings, the acting intellect which is the
second from it depends; and that by reason of the union of this word with the
first author, from whom all things being are truly produced; The word
therefore is the image of God, the acting intellect the image of the word, the
soul is the image of this intellect; and our word is the image of the soul, by
which it acts upon natural things naturally, because nature is the work
thereof. And every one of those perfects his subsequent, as a father his son,
and none of the latter exists without the former. For they are depending
amongst themselves, by a kind of ordinate dependency, so that when the latter
is corrupted, it is returned into that which was next before it, until it come
to the heavens, then unto the universal soul, and lastly unto the acting
intellect, by which all other creatures exist, and which it self exists in the
principal author, which is the creating word of God, to which at length all
things are returned. Our soul therefore, if it will work any wonderful thing
in these inferiors, must have respect to their beginning, that it may be
strengthened, and illustrated by that, and receive power of acting through each
degree from the very first author. Therefore we must be more diligent in
contemplating the souls of the Stars then their bodies, and the
supercelestiall, and intellectual world, then the Celestial corporeal,
because that is more noble, although also this be excellent, and the way to
that; and without which medium the influence of the superior cannot be
attained to. As for example, the Sun is the King of Stars, most full of light,
but receives it from the intelligible world above all other Stars, because the
soul thereof is more capable of intelligible splendour. Wherefore he that
desires to attract the influence of the Sun, must contemplate upon the Sun, not
only by the speculation of the exterior light, but also of the interior. And
this no man can do unless he return to the soul of the Sun, and become like to
it, and comprehend the intelligible light thereof with an intellectual sight,
as the sensible light with a corporeal eye. For this man shall be filled with the
light thereof; and the light thereof which is an under type impressed by the
supernal Orb it receives into it self, with the illustration whereof his
intellect being endowed and truly like to it, and being assisted by it shall
at length attain to that supreme brightness, and to all forms that partake
thereof. And when he has received the light of the supreme degree, then his
soul shall come to perfection, and be made like to the spirits of the Sun, and
shall attain to the virtues, and illustrations of the supernatural virtue, and
shall enjoy the power of them, if he has obtained faith in the first author.
In the first place therefore we must implore assistance from the first author,
and praying not only with mouth but a Religious gesture and supplicant soul,
also abundantly, uncessantly, and sincerely, that he would enlighten our mind,
and remove darkness growing upon our souls by reason of our bodies.

To the Most Renowned and Illustrious Prince, Hermannus of Wyda, Prince
Elector, Duke of Westphalia, and Angaria, Lord Archbishop of Colonia, and
Paderborne, his most gracious Lord, Henry Cornelius Agrippa of Nettes-heim.
IT is a very excellent opinion of the Ancient Magicians (most Illustrious
Prince) That we ought to labor in nothing more in this life, then that we
degenerate not from Excellency of the mind, by which we come nearest to God and
put on the Divine nature: least at any time our mind waxing dull by vain
idleness, should decline to the frailty of our earthly body and vices of the
flesh: so we should loose it, as it were cast down by the dark precipices of
perverse lusts. Wherefore we ought so to order our mind, that it by it self
being mindful of its own dignity and excellency, should always both Think, do
and operate something worthy of it self; But the knowledge of the Divine
science, does only and very powerfully perform this for us. When we by the
remembrance of its majesty being always busied in Divine studies do every
moment contemplate Divine things, by a sage and diligent inquisition, and by
all the degrees of the creatures ascending even to the Archetype himself, do
draw from him the infallible virtue of all things, which those that neglect,
trusting only to natural and wordly things, are wont often to be confounded by
diverse errors and fallacies, and very often to be deceived by evil spirits; But
the understanding of Divine things, purges the mind from errors, and renders
it Divine, gives infallible power to our works, and drives far the deceits
and obstacles of all evil spirits, and together subjects them to our commands;
Yea it compels even good Angels and all the powers of the world unto our
service viz. the virtue of our works being drawn from the Archetype himself, To
whom when we ascend, all creatures necessarily obey us, and all the quire of
heaven do follow us: For (as Homer says) none of the gods durst remain in
their seats, Jove being moved; and then presently he rules (as says
Aristophanes) by one of the gods, whose right it is to execute his commands,
who then out of his duty does manage our petitions according to our desire.
Seeing therefore (most Illustrious Prince) you have a Divine and immortal soul
given you, which seeing the goodness of the Divine providence, a well disposed
fate, and the bounty of nature have in such manner gifted, that by the
acuteness of your understanding, and perfectness of senses you are able to
view, search, contemplate, discern and pierce through the pleasant theaters of
natural things, the sublime house of the heavens, and the most difficult
passages of Divine things: I being bound to you by the band of these your great
virtues am so far a debtor as to communicate without envy by the true account
of all opinions, Those mysteries of Divine and Ceremonial Magic which I have
truly learned, and not to hide the knowledge of those things, whatsoever
concerning these matters the Isiaci those old Priests of the Egyptians, and
Caldeans, the ancient prophets of the Babylonians, the Cabalists, the Divine
Magicians of the Hebrews, also the Orpheans, Pythagoreans and Platonists, the
profoundest Philosophers of Greece, further what the Bragmanni of the Indians,
the Gymnosophists of Ethiopia, and the uncorrupted Theologians of our Religion
have delivered, and by what force of words, power of Seals by what charms of
Benedictions and imprecations, and by what virtue of observations they in old
time wrought so stupendous and wonderful prodigies, intimating to you in this
third book of Occult Philosophy and exposing to the light those things which
have been buried in the dust of antiquity and involved in the obscurity of
oblivion, as in Cymmerian darkness even to this day. We present therefore now
to you, a complete and perfect work in these three books of Occult Philosophy
or Magic, Which we have prefected with diligent care, and very great labor and
pains both of mind and body; and though it be untrimmed inrespect of words, yet
its most elaborate truly in respect of the matter: Wherefore I desire this one
favor, that you would not expect the grace of an Oration, or the elegancy of
speech in these books, which we long since wrote in our youth when our speech
was as yet rough, and our language rude; and now we have respect, not to the
style of an Oration, but only to the series or order of sentences; We have
studied the less elegancy of speech, abundance of matter succeeding in the
place thereof; and we suppose we have sufficiently satisfied our duty, if we
shall to the utmost of our power perform those things we have promised to
declare concerning the secrets of Magic, and have freed our conscience from a
due debt. But seeing without doubt, many scoffing Sophisters will conspire
against me, especially of those who boast themselves to be allied to God, and
fully replenished with Divinity, and presum to censure the leaves of the
Sibilles, and will undertake to judge and condemn to the fire these our works
even before they have read or rightly understood any thing of them (because
such lettice agrees not with their lips, and such sweet ointment with their
nose and also by reason of that spark of hatred long since conceived against
me, and scarce containing it self under the ashes.) Therefore (most Illustrious
Prince and wise Prelate) we further submit this work ascribed by me to the
merits of you virtue, and now made yours, to your censure, and commend it to
your protection, That, if the base and perfidious Sophisters would defame it,
by the gross madness of their envy and malice, you would by the prespicacy of
your discretion and candor of judgment, happily protect and defend it.

Farewell and prosper.
The third and last Book of Magic, or Occult Philosophy; written by Henry
Cornelius Agrippa.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the necessity, power, and profit of Religion.
NOw it is time to turn our pen to higher matters, and to that part of Magic
which teaches us to know and perfectly understand the rules-of Religion, and
how we ought to obtain the truth by Divine Religion, and how rightly to prepare
our mind and spirit, by which only we can comprehend the truth; for it is a
common opinion of the Magicians, that unless the mind and spirit be in good
case, the body cannot be in good health: But then a man to be truly sound when
body and soul are so coupled, and agree together, that the firmness of the mind
and spirit be not inferior to the powers of the body; But a firm and stout mind
(says Hermes) can we not otherwise obtain, than by integrity of life, by
piety, and last of all, by Divine Religion: for holy Religion purges the mind,
and makes it Divine, it helps nature, and strengthens natural powers, as
a Physician helps the health of the body, and a Husbandman the strength of
the earth. Whosoever therefore (Religion being laid aside,) do confide only in
natural things, are wont very often to be deceived by evil spirits; but from
the knowledge of Religion, the contempt and cure of vices arises, and a
safeguard against evil spirits; To conclude, nothing is more pleasant and
acceptable to God, than a man perfectly pious, and truly Religious, who so far
excels other men, as he himself is distant from the Immortal gods;
Therefore we ought, being first purged, to offer and commend our selves to
divine piety and Religion; and then our senses being asleep, with a quiet mind
to expect that Divine Ambrosian Nectar (Nectar I say, which Zachary the prophet
calls Wine making maids merry) praising and adoring that supercelestiall
Bacchus, the chiefest ruler of the gods and priests, the author of
regeneration, whom the old poets sang was twice born, from whom rivers most
Divine flow into our hearts.

CHAP. II. Of concealing of those thing which are secret in Religion.
WHosoever therefore thou art that now desire to study this science, keep
silence and constantly conceal within the secret closets of your Religious
breast, so holy a determination; for (as Mercury says) to publish to the
knowledge of many a speech thoroughly filled with so great majesty of the Deity,
is a sign of an irreligious spirit; and Divine Plato commanded, that holy and
secret mysteries should not be divulged to the people; Pythagoras also and
Porphyrius consecrated their followers to a Religious silence; Orpheus also,
which a certain terrible authority of Religion did exact an oath of silence,
from those he did initiate to the Ceremonies of holy things: Whence in the
verses concerning the holy word he sings, You, that Admirers are of virtue,
stay,
Consider well what I to you shall say.
But you, that sacred laws contemn, profane!
Away from hence, return no more again.
But thou O Museus whose mind is high,
Observe my words, and read them with thine eye,
And them within thy sacred breast repone,
And in thy journey, think of God alone
The Author of all things, that cannot dye,
Of whom we shall now treat --
So in Virgil we read of the Sybill The goddess comes, hence, hence, all ye
profane,
The Prophet cries, and from her grove refrain.
Hence also in celebrating the holy mysteries of Ceres Eleusine, they only were
admitted to be initiated, the crier proclaiming the profane vulgar to depart;
and in Esdras we read this precept concerning the Cabalisticall secret of the
Hebrews, declared in these verses, Thou shall deliver those books to the wise
men of the people, whose hearts thou know can comprehend them, and keep
those secrets. Therefore the Religious volumes of the Egyptians and those
belonging to the secrets of their ceremonies, were made of consecrated paper;
in these they did write down leters which might not easily be known which they
call holy. Macrobius Marcellinus and others say, they were called
Hieroglyphics, least perchance the writings of this kind should be known to
the profane, which also Apuleius testifies in these words, saying, The
sacrifice being ended, from a secret retired closet he brings forth certain
books noted with obscure letters, affording compendious words of the conceived
speech, partly by the figures of beasts of this kind, partly by figures full of
knots, and crooked in manner of a wheel and set thick, twining about like vine
tendrels, the reading thereby being defended from the curiosity of the
profane; Therefore we shall be worthy scholars of this science, if we be
silent, and hide those things which are secret in religion, for the promise of
silence (as says Tertullian) is due to Religion; but they which do otherwise,
are in very great danger, whence Apuleius says concerning secrets of holy
Writs; I would tell it you, if it were lawful to tell it; you should know it,
if it were lawful to hear it; but both ears and tongue would contract the same
guilt of rash curiosity. So we read Theodorus the tragic poet, when he would
have referred somethings of the mysteries of the Jews Scripture to a certain
fable, was deprived of sight. Theopompus also who began to translate somethings
out of the Divine law into the Greek tongue, was presently troubled in mind and
spirit, whence afterward earnestly desiring God, wherefore this had happened to
him, received an answer in a dream, because he had basely polluted Divine
things, by setting them forth in public. One Numenius also being very curious
of hidden things, incurred the displeasure of the Divine powers, because he
interpreted the holy mysteries of the goddess Eleusina and published them for
he dreamed that the goddesses of Eleusis stood in a whores habit before the
Brothell house, which when he wondered at, they wrathfully answered, that they
were by him violently drawn from their modesty and prostituted everywhere to
all comers, by which he was admonished, that the Ceremonies of the gods ought
not to be divulged. Therefore it has always been the great care of the
Ancients to wrap up the mysteries of God and nature, and hide them with diverse
Aenigmaes, which law the Indians, Brachmans, Aethiopians, Persians, and
Egyptians also observed; hence Mercurius, Orpheus, and all the ancient Poets
and Philosophers, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato Aristoxenus, Ammonius, kept them
inviolably. Hence Plotinus and Origenes and the other disciples of Ammonius (as
Porphyry relates in his book of the education and Discipline of Flotinus) swear
never to set forth the Decrees of their master. And because Plotinus, brake his
oath made to Ammonius, and published his mysteries, for the punishment of his
transgression, he was consumed (as they say) by the Horrible disease of Lice.
Christ also himself, while he lived on earth, spoke after that manner and
fashion that only the more intimate disciples should understand the mystery of
the word of God, but the other should perceive the parables only: commanding
moreover that holy things should not be given to Dogs, nor pearls cast to
Swine: Therefore the Prophet says, I have hid thy words in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee. Therefore it is not fit that those secrets which
are amongst a few wise men, and communicated by mouth only, should be publikly
written. Wherefore you will pardon me, If I pass over in silence many and the
chiefest secret mysteries of Ceremonial Magic. I suppose I shall do enough, if
I open those things which are necessary to be known, and you by the reading of
this book go not away altogether empty of these mysteries; but on that
condition let these things be communicated to you, on which Dionysius bound
Timothy, that they which perceive these Secrets, would not expose them to the
unworthy, but gather them together amongst wise men, and keep them with that
reverence that is due to them. Furthermore I would also warn you in this
beginning, that even as the divine powers detest public things and profane,
and love secrecy: So every Magical experiment flees the public, seeks to be
hid, is strengthened by silence, but is destroyed by publication, neither does
any complete effect follow after; all these things suffer loss, when they are
poured into prating and incredulous minds; therefore it behooves a Magical
operator, if he would get fruit from this art, to be secret, and to manifest to
none, neither his work nor place, nor time, neither his desire nor will, unless
either to a master, or partner, or companion, who also ought to be faithful,
believing, silent, and dignified by nature and education: Seeing that even the
prating of a companion, his incredulity and unworthiness hinders and
disturbeth the effect in every operation.

CHAP. III. What dignification is required, that one may be a true Magician and
a worker of miracles.
ABout the beginning of the first book of this work, we have spoken what manner
of person a Magician ought to be; but now we will declare a mystical and
secret matter, necessary for every one who desires to practice this art, which
is both the beginning, perfection and key of all Magical operations, and it is
the dignifying of men to this so sublime virtue and power; for this faculty
requires in man a wonderful dignification, for that the understanding which
is in us the highest faculty of the soul, is the only worker of wonders, which
when it is overwhelmed by too much commerce with the flesh, and busied about
the sensible soul of the body, is not worthy of the command of Divine
substances; therefore many prosecute this art in vain; Therefore it is meet
that we who endeavor to attain to so great a height should especially meditate
of two things; first how we should leave carnal affections, frail sense, and
material passions. Secondly, by what way and means we may ascend to an
intellect pure and conjoined with the powers of the gods, without which we
shall never happily ascend to the scrutiny of secret things, and to the power
of wonderful workings, or miracles; for in these dignification consists
wholly, which, nature, desert, and a certain religious art do make up; natural
dignity is the best disposition of the body and its Organs, not obscuring the
soul with any grosseness, and being without al distemper, and this proceeds
from the situation, motion, light, and influence of the Celestial bodies and
spirits which are conversant in the generation of every one, as are those whose
ninth house is fortunate by Saturn, Sol, and Mercury; Mars also in the ninth
house commands the spirits; but concerning these things we have largely
treated in the books of the Stars: But who so is not such a one, it is
necessary that he recompense the defect of nature by education, and the best
ordering and prosperous use of natural things until he become complete in all
intrinsecall and extrinsecall perfections. Hence so great care is taken in the
law of Moses concerning the priest, that he be not polluted by a dead carcass,
or by a woman a widow, or menstruous, that he be free from leprosy, flux of
blood, burstness, and be perfect in all his members, not blind, nor lame, nor
crook-backed, or with an illfavored nose. And Apuleius says in his Apology,
that the youth to be initiated to divination by magic spells, ought to be
chosen, sound without sickness, ingenious, comely, perfect in his members, of a
quick spirit, eloquent in speech, that in him the divine power might be
conversant as in the good houses; That the mind of the youth having quickly
attained experience, may be restored to its divinity. But the meritorious
dignity is perfected by two things; namely learning and practice. The end of
learning is to know the truth; it is meet therefore, as is spoken in the
beginning of the first book, that he be learned and skilful in those three
faculties; then all impediments being removed, wholly to apply his soul to
contemplation and to convert it self into it self; for there is even in our own
selves the apprehension and power of all things; but we are prohibited, so as
that we little enjoy these things, by passions opposing us even from our birth,
and vain imaginations and immoderate affections, which being expelled, the
divine knowledge and power presently takes place; but the Religious operation
obtains no less efficacy which ofttimes of it self alone is sufficiently
powerful for us to obtain this deifying virtue, so great is the virtue of holy
duties rightly exhibited and performed, that though they be not understood, yet
piously and perfectly observed, and with a firm faith believed, they have no
less efficacy then to adorn us with a divine power; But what dignity ^s
acquired by the art of Religion, is perfected by certain Religious Ceremonies,
expiations, consecrations, and holy rites, proceeding from him whose spirit the
public Religion has consecrated, who has power of imposition of hands, and
of initiating with Sacramental power, by which the Character of the divine
virtue and power is stamped on us which they call the divine consent, by which a
man supported with the divine nature, and made as it were a companion of the
Angels bears the ingrafted power of God; and this rite is referred to the
Ecclesiastical mysteries: If therefore now thou shall be a man perfect in the
sacred understanding of Religion, and piously and most constantly meditatest on
it, and without doubting believe, and art such an one on whom the authority
of holy rites and nature has conferred dignity above others, and one, whom the
divine powers contemn not, thou shall be able by praying, consecrating,
sacrificeing, invocating, to attract spiritual and Celestial powers, and to
imprint them on those things thou please, and by it to vivifie every magical
work; But whosoever beyond the authority of his office, without the merit of
Sanctity and Learning, beyond the dignity of nature and education, shall
presume to work any thing in Magic, shall work in vain, and deceive both
himself and those that believe on him, and with danger incur the displeasure of
the Divine powers.

CHAP. IIII. Of the two helps of Ceremonial Magic, Religion and Superstition.
THere are two things, which rule every operation of Ceremonial Magic, namely
Religion and Superstition. This Religion is a continual contemplation of
Divine things, and by good works an uniting ones self with God and the Divine
powers, by which in a reverent family, a service, and a sanctification of
worship worthy of them is performed, and also the Ceremonies of Divine worship
are rightly exercised; Religion therefore is a certain discipline of external
holy things and Ceremonies by the which as it were by certain signs we are
admonished of internal and spiritual things, which is so deeply implanted in
us by nature, that we more differ from other creatures by this then
Rationality; whosoever therefore neglects Religion (as we have spoken before)
and confides only in the strength of natural things, are very often deceived
by the evil spirits; therefore they who are more religiously and holily
instructed, neither set a tree nor plant their vineyard, nor undertake any mean
work without divine invocation, as the Doctor of the Nations commands the
Colossians, saying, whatsoever you shall do in word or deed, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ giving thanks to him, and to God the Father by him.
Therefore to superadde the powers of Religion to Physical and Mathematical
virtues is so far from a fault, that not to join them, is an heinous sin. Hence
in libro senatorum says Rabbi Hemina, he that enjoys any of the creatures
without Divine benediction, is supposed both by God and the Church to have used
it as taken by theft and robbery, of whom it is written by Solomon, he that
takes away any things violently from father and mother, is a destroyer; But God
is our father, and the Church our mother, as it is written, Is not he thy
father who possesses thee? and elsewhere, Hear my son the discipline of thy
father, and despise not the law of thy mother; nothing more displeases God,
then to be neglected and contemned; nothing pleases him more, then to be
renowned and adored. Hence he has permitted no creature of the world to be
without Religion. All do worship God, pray (as Proclus says) frame hymns to
the leaders of their order; but some things truly after a natural, others
after a sensible, others a rational, others an intellectual manner, and all
things in their manner, according to the song of the three children, bless the
Lord: But the rites and Ceremonies of Religion, in respect of the diversity of
times and places, are diverse. Every Religion has something of good, because
it is directed to God his creator; and although God allows the Christian
Religion only, yet other worships which are undertaken for his sake, he does
not altogether reject, and leaves them not unrewarded, if not with an eternal,
yet with a temporal reward, or at least does punish them less; but he hates,
thundereth against and utterly destroys profane persons and altogether
irreligious as his enemies, for their impiety is greater then the others who
follow a false and erroneous Religion: For there is no Religion (says
Lactantius) so erroneous, which has not somewhat of wisdom in it, by which
they may obtain pardon, who have kept the chiefest duty of man, if not indeed,
yet in intention: But no man can of himself attain to the true Religion, unless
he be taught it of God. All worship therefore, which is different from the true
Religion, is superstition; In like manner also that which gives Divine
worship, either to whom it ought not, or in that manner which it ought not.
Therefore we must especially take heed least at any time, by some perverse
worship of superstition, we be envious to the Almighty God, and to the holy
powers under him; for this would be not only wicked, but an act most unworthy
of Philosophers; superstition therefore although it be far different from the
true Religion, yet it is not all and wholly rejected, because in many things it
is even tolerated, and observed by the chief rulers of Religion; But I call
that superstition especially, which is a certain resemblance of Religion, which
for as much as it imitates whatsoever is in Religion, as miracles, Sacraments,
rites, observations and such like, from whence it gets no small power, and also
obtains no less strength by the credulity of the operator; for how much a
constant credulity can do, we have spoken in the first book, and is manifestly
known to the vulgar. Therefore superstition requires credulity, as Religion
faith, seeing constant credulity can do so great things, as even to work
miracles in opinions and false operations; whosoever therefore in his Religion,
though false, yet believes most strongly that it is true, and elevates his
spirit by reason of this his credulity, until it be assimilated to those
spirits who are the chief leaders of that Religion, may work those things which
nature and reason discern not; but incredulity and diffidence does weaken every
work not only in superstition, but also in true Religion, and enervates the
desired effect even of the most strong experiments. But how superstition
imitateth Religion, these examples declare; namely when worms and locusts are
excommunicated, that they hurt not the fruits; when bells and Images are
baptized and such like; but because the old Magicians and those who were the
authors of this art amongst the ancients, have been Caldeans, Egyptians,
Assyrians, Persians and Arabians, all whose Religion was perverse and polluted
idolatry, we must very much take heed, least we should permit their errors to
war against the grounds of the Catholic Religion; for this were blasphemous,
and subject to the curse; and I also should be a blasphemer, if I should not
admonish you of these things, in this science; wheresoever therefore you shall
find these things written by us, know that those things are only related out
of other Authors, and not put down by us for truth, but for a probable
conjecture which is allied to truth and an Instruction for imitation in those
things which are true; Therefore we ought from their Errors to collect the
Truth, which work truly requires a profound Understanding, perfect Piety, and
painful and laborious Diligence, and also Wisdom which knows out of every
Evil to extract Good, and to fit oblique things unto the right use of those
things which it governs, as concerning this Augustine gives us an Example of
a Carpenter to whom Oblique and Complicate things are no less necessary and
convenient then the Straight.

CHAP. V Of the three Guides of Religion, which bring us to the path of Truth.
There are three Guides which bring us even to the paths of truth and which
rule all our Religion, in which it wholly consists, namely Love, Hope and
Faith: for Love is the chariot of the Soul, the most excellent of all things,
descending from the Intelligences above even to the most inferior things. It
congregates and converts our mind into the Divine beauty, preserves us also in
all our works, gives us Events according to our wishes, administreth power to
our supplications: as we read in Homer, Apollo heard Chrysons prayers because
he was his very great friend: and some read of Mary Magdalene in the Gospel,
many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much; But hope immoveably
hanging on those things it desires, when it is certain and not wavering,
nourishes the mind and perfecteth it; But Faith the superior virtue of all not
grounded on humane fictions, but Divine revelations wholly, peirceth all things
through the whole world, for seeing it descends from above from the first
light, and remains nearest to it, is far more noble and excellent than the
arts, sciences and beliefes arising from inferior things: this being darted
into our intellect by reflection from the first light. To conclude, by says man
is made somewhat the same with the superior powers and enjoys the same power
with them: Hence Proclus says, As belief which is a credulity, is below
science: so belief which is a true faith, is supersubstantially above all
science and understanding conjoyning us immediately to God; for Faith is the
root of all miracles, by which alone (as the Platonists testify) we approach
to God, and obtain the Divine power and protection. So we read that Daniel
escaped the mouths of the Lions, because he believed on his God. So to the
woman with the bloody issue says Christ, thy Faith has made thee whole; and
of the blind man desiring sight, he required faith, saying, Do ye believe, that
I can open your eyes? so Pallas in Homer comfort Achilles with these words,
I am come to pacify your wrath, if you will believe. Therefore Linus the Poet
sings all things are to be believed, because all things are easy to God;
nothing is impossible to him, therefore nothing incredible; therefore we
believing those things which belong to Religion, do obtain the virtue of them;
but when we shall fail in our Faith, we shall do nothing worthy admiration,
but of punishment; As we have an example o^ this in Luke, in these words,
Therefore certain of the vagabo^ ^ews, exorcists, took upon them to call, over
them which ha^^ evil spirits in the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure
you by Jesus whom Paul preaches; and the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus
I know, and Paul I know, but who art thou? and the man in whom the evil spirit
was, lept on them, and over came them, so that they fled out of the house naked
and wounded.

CHAP. VI. How by these guides the soul of man ascends up into the Divine
nature, and is made a worker of Miracles.
THerefore Our mind being pure and divine, inflamed with a religious love,
adorned with hope, directed by faith, placed in the hight and top of the humane
soul, does attract the truth, and sudainly comprehend it and beholds all the
stations, grounds, causes and sciences of things both natural and immortal in
the divine truth it self as it were in a certain glass of Eternity. Hence it
comes to pass that we, though Natural, know those things which are above
nature, and understand all things below, and as it were by divine Oracles
receive the knowledge not only of those things which are, but also of those that
are past and to come, presently, and many years hence; Moreover not only in
Sciences, Arts and Oracles the Understanding challenges to it self this divine
virtue, but also receives this miraculous power in certain things by command
to be changed: Hence it comes to pass that though we are framed a natural body,
yet we sometimes praedominate over nature, and cause such wonderful, sudden
and difficult operations, as that the evil spirits obey us, the stars are
disordered, the heavenly powers compelled, the Elements made obedient; so
levout men and those elevated by these Theological virtues, command the
Elements, drive away Fogs, raise the winds, cause rain, cure diseases, raise
the dead, all which things to have been done amongst diverse Nations, Poets and
Historians doing and relate: and that these things may be done, all the
famousest Philosophers, and Theologians do confirm; so the prophets, Apostles,
and the rest, were famous by the wonderful power of God; therefore we must
know, that as by the influx of the first agent, is produced oftentimes
something without the cooperation of the middle causes, so also by the work of
Religion alone, may something be done without the application of natural and
Celestial virtues; but no man can work by pure Religion alone, unless he be
made totally intellectual; But whosoever, without the mixture of other powers,
works by Religion alone, if he shall persevere long in the work, is swallowed
up by the Divine power and cannot live long: But whosoever shall attempt this
and not be purified, does bring upon himself judgment, and is delivered to the
evil spirit, to be devoured.

CHAP. VII. That the knowledge of the true God is necessary for a Magician, and
what the old Magicians and Philosophers have thought conceruing God.
SEeing that the being and operation of all things, depend on the most high God
Creator of all things, from thence also on the other divine powers, to whom
also is granted a power of fashioning and creating, not principally indeed, but
instrumentally by virtue of the first Creator (for the beginning of every thing
is the first cause, but what is produced by the second causes, is much more
produced by the first, which is the producer of the second causes; which
therefore we call secondary gods) It is necessary therefore that every Magitian
know that very God, which is the first cause, and Creator of all things; And
also the other gods, or divine powers (which we call the second causes) and not
to be ignorant, with what adoration, reverence, holy rites conformable to the
condition of every one, they are to be worshipped: Whosoever therefore
invocates the gods, and does not confer on them their due honor, rightly
distribute to them what belongs to them, shall neither enjoy their presence,
nor any successful effect from them. As in Harmony, if one string be broken,
the whole music jars, and sometimes incurs the hazard of punishment, as it is
written of the Assyrians, whom Salmanasar planted in Samaria, because they knew
not the customs of the God of the Land, the Lord did send Lions amongst them,
who slew them, because they were ignorant of the rights of the god of the Land.
Now therefore let us see, what the old Magicians and Philosophers thought
concerning God; for we read that Nicocreonte, a tyrant of Cyprus, long since
asking, who was the greatest God, the Serapian Oracle answered him, That he was
to be accounted the greatest God, whose head was the Heavens, the Seas his
Belly, the Earth his feet, his ears placed in the sky, his eyes the light of
the glorious Sun; not much unlike to this, Orphens sang in these verses, The
Heaven's Joves Royal Palace, he is King,
Fountain virtue and God of every thing;
He is Omnipotent, and in his breast
Earth, water, fire and air do take their rest.
Both night and day, true wisdom with sweet Love,
Are all contained in this vast bulk of Jove.
His neck and glorious head if you would see,
Behold the Heavens high, and majesty;
The glorious rays of Stars do represent
His golden locks, and's heads adornament.
And elsewhere, Bright Phoebus and the Moon, are the two eyes
Of this great Jove by which all things he spies;
His head which predicts All, is placed in the sky,
From which no noise can whisper secretly.
It pierces all; his body vast extends,
Both far and wide, and knows no bounds nor ends.
The spacious Air's his breast, his wings the wind,
By which he flies far swifter then the mind.
His belly is our mother earth, who swells
Into huge mountains, whom the Ocean fills
And circles; his feet are the rocks and stones
Which of this Globe are the foundations.
This Jove, under the earth conceals all things,
And from the depth into the light them brings.
Therefore they thought the whole world to be Jupiter, and truly he has
produced the soul of this world, which contains the world in it self. Hence
Sophocles says, in truth there is but one only God, who has made this heaven
and this spacious earth; and Euripides says, Behold the most high, who every
where embraces in his Arms the immensurable heaven and earth; believe that he
is Jupiter, account him God; and Ennius the Poet sings, Behold this bright
sublime shining, whom all
Call Jove --
Therefore the whole world is Jupiter, as Porphyry says, a creature made of
all creatures, and a God constituted of all gods; but Jupiter is, so far as we
can understand, from whence all things are produced, creating all things by his
wisdom. Hence Orpheus sings concerning the Holy word; There is one God, who all
things has created,
Preserves, and over all is elevated.
He only by our mind is comprehended,
And to poor mortals He never ill intended.
Besides whom, there no other is --
And a little after,

He himself is the beginning middle and end, as the ancient Prophets have
taught us, to whom God long since delivered these things in two tables; and he
calls him in the same verse the only great Creator, and immortal. Zoroastes
likewise in his sacred History of the Persians defines God thus, God is the
first of all those things which suffer neither decay nor corruption, unbegot,
never dying, without parts, and most like himself, The author and promoter of
all good things, the father of all, most bountiful and wise, the sacred light
of justice, the absolutest perfection of nature, the contriver, and wisdom
thereof. Apuleius also describs him to be a King, the cause, foundation and
original beginning of all nature, the supreme begetter of spirits, eternal, the
preserver of living creatures, a Father with propagation, not to be
comprehended by time, place or any other circumstance, and therefore imaginable
to a few, utterable to none; from hence therefore Euripides commanded the
highest God to be called Jupiter, through whose head Orpheus sang all things
came into this light, but the other powers he supposes to be subservient, viz.
which are without God, and separated from him, and are by the Philosophers
called the Ministers or Angels of God, and separated intelligences; therefore
they say Religious worship to be due to this most high Jupiter and to him only,
but to the other Divine powers not to be due unless for his sake.

CHAP. VIII. What the Ancient Philosophers have thought concerning the Divine
Trinity.
AUstine and Prophyry testify, that the Platonists held three persons in God,
the first of which, they call the father of the world; the second they call the
Son and the first mind, and so he is named by Macrobius. The third, the spirit
or soul of the world, which Virgil also from Plato's opinion calls a spirit,
when he sings, Within the Spirit nourishes, the mind
Diffused through the whole does in its kind
The lump both act, and agitate --
Plotinus and Philo deliver, that the Son of God, viz. the first mind or Divine
intellect flows from God the Father, even as a word from the speaker or as
light from light; from hence it is that he is called both the word and speech,
and splendour of God the Father; for the Divine mind by it self, with one only
and uninterrupted act understands the chiefest good without any vicissitude,
or mediate knowledge; he generateth in himself an Issue and Son, who is the
full Intelligence, complete image of himself, and the perfect pattern of the
world, whom our John and Mercurius name the word or speech; Plato the Son of
God the Father; Orpheus, Pallas born from Jupiters brain, that is, wisdom: This
is the most absolute image of God the Father, yet by a certain relation, or
some intrinsecall absolute thing, as it were begot and distinguished from the
Father, who says in Ecclesiasticus, I have proceeded from the mouth of the
most high, I am the first begot before all creatures: Jamblichus testifies
this Son to be One and the same God with the Father in Essence, namely calling
God, both the Father and Son of himself. Also Mercurius Trismegistus in
Asclepius mentions the Son of God in diverse places; for he says my God and
Father begat a Mind a work diverse from himself; And elsewhere, unity begets
unity, and reflecteth his flagrant love on himself; and in Pimander (where he
seems to prophecy of the Covenant of grace to come, and of the mystery of
regeneration) says, the author of Regeneration is the Son of God, the man by
the will of the one only God, and also that God is most replenished with the
fruitfulness of both sexes. In like manner the Indian Philosophers affirm, the
World to be an Animal, partly Masculine, and partly Feminine; and Orpheus also
calls Nature or the Jove of this world, both the male and female thereof, and
that the gods partake of both Sexes. Hence is it, that in his Hymns he thus
salutes Minerva, You are indeed both man and woman; and Apuleius in his book of
the world, out of the Divinity of Orpheus produces this verse of Jupiter, Jove
is both male and female, immortal. And Virgil speaking of Venus says, I
descend, and the God guiding -- And elsewhere, understanding Juno or Alecto, he
says Neither was God absent from her praying. And Tibullus sings, I who
profaned have the Dieties
Of Venus great --
And it is reported that the people of Cacenia wonderfully adored the God Moon.
From this complete intelligence of supreme fecundity his love is produced,
binding the intelligence with the mind. And by so much the more, by how much it
is infinitely more intimate to it self, than other offsprings to their
parents. This is the third person, viz. the holy spirit. Jamblichus also brings
the oracles of the Chaldeans placing a fatherly power in God, and an Emanation
of the intellect from the Father, and a fiery love proceeding from Father and
Son, and the same to be God. Hence we read in Plutarch, that the Gentiles
described God to be an intellectual and fiery spirit, having no form, but
transforming himself into whatsoever he pleases, equalizing himself to all
things; and we read in Deuteronomy, Our God is a consuming fire; of whom also
Zoroastes says, all things were begot of fire alone; so also Heraclitus the
Ephesian teaches; Hence Divine Plato has placed Gods habitation in fire,
namely understanding the unspeakable splendour of God in himself, and love about
himself; and we read in Homer, The Heavens to be the Kingdom of Jupiter when he
sings, Jove darkning clouds and reigning in the sky, And the same elsewhere.
The lot of Jove the Heaven is in the air,
He sits --
But Ether is derived according to the Greek Grammar, from Aetho, which
signifies to Burn, and Aer spiritus quass Aethaer, that is, a burning spirit;
And therefore Orpheus calls the Heaven Pyripnon, that is a fiery breathing
place; therefore the Father, the Son, and the aimable spirit, which is also
fiery, are by the Divines called three Persons; Whom Orpheus also in his
adjurations invocateth with these words, Heaven I admire thee, thou wise work
of the great God; I adjure thee, O thou word of the Father, which he first
spoke when he established the whole world by his wisdom. Hesiode also
confesses the same things under the names of Jupiter Minerva and Bule in his
Theogony, declaring the twofold birth of Jupiter in these words: The first
daughter called Tritonia with gray eyes, having equal power with the Father,
and prudent Bule, that is counsel, which Orpheus in the forenamed verses
pronounces plurally, because of his twofold Emanation, for he proceeds both
from Jupiter and Minerva. And Austin himself in his fourth Book De Civit. Dei
does testify that Porphyry the Platonist placed three Persons in God; the
first he calls the father of the universe, the second, the first mind, and
Macrobius the Son, the third the soul of the world, which Virgil according to
Plato's opinion, calls a spirit, saying, the spirit within maintains.
Therefore it is God, as Paul says, from whom, in whom, by whom are all things:
for from the father as from a fountain flow all things, but in the Son as in a
pool all things are placed in their Ideas, and by the Holy Ghost are all things
manifested, and every thing distributed to his proper degrees.

CHAP. IX. What the true and most Orthodox faith is concerning God and the most
holy Trinity.
THe Catholic Doctors and faithful people of God, have decreed, that we ought
thus to believe and profess that there is one only true God, increate,
infinite, omnipotent, eternal Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three persons,
coeternall and coequall, of one most simple Essence, substance and nature. This
is the Catholic faith, this is the Orthodox Religion, this is the Christian
truth, that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither
confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance The Father begat the Son
from all eternity and gave him his substance, and nevertheless retained it
himself. The Son also by being begot, received the substance of the Father, but
assumed not the proper Person of the Father; for the Father translated it not
into the Son; for they are both of one and the same substance, but of diverse
persons. This Son also although he be coeternall with the Father, and begot of
the substance of the Father before the world, yet notwithstanding was born into
the world out of the substance of a Virgin, and his name was called Jesus,
perfect God, perfect man, of a reasonable soul and humane flesh, who in all
things was man, sin excepted. Therefore it is necessary, that we believe, that
our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God and man, one person, two natures,
God begot before the world without a mother, man born into the world, without a
father, from a pure Virgin, both before and after his birth; he suffered on the
Cross, and dyed, but on the Cross restored life, and destroyed death by his
death; he was buried and descended into hell, but brought forth the souls of
the Fathers from hell, and rose again by his own power; the third day he
ascended into the Heavens, and sent his spirit the Comforter, and shall come to
Judge the quick and the dead; and at his coming all men shall rise again in
their flesh, and shall give an account of their workss; this the true faith,
concerning which if any man doubt, and not firmly believe, he is far from the
hope of eternal life and salvation.

CHAP. X. Of Divine emanations, which the Hebrews call Numerations, others
attributes: The gentiles gods and Dieties; and of the ten Sephiroths and ten
most sacred names of God which rule them, and the interpretation of them.
GOD himself, though he be Trinity in persons, yet is but one only simple
Essence; notwithstanding we doubt not but that there are in him many Divine
powers, which as beams flow from him, which the Philosophers of the Gentiles
call gods, the Hebrew masters numerations, we name Attributes; as wisdom which
Orpheus calls Pallas; understanding, which he Mercury; The conception of the
Form, which he Saturn; The Productive power, which he Neptune; the secret
nature of things, which he Juno; Love which he Venus; pure life, which he the
Sun or Apollo. The matter of the whole world, he calls Pan; the soul, as it
ingendereth things below, contemplateth things above, and retracteth its self
into it self, he honored with three names, viz. Maris, Neptune and Ocean, and
more of this kind, of which he sings elsewhere, Plato and Jupiter, and Phoebus,
are one;
But why do we speak twice? Gods one alone.
And of the same Valerius Soranus sang, Omnipotent Jove the God and King of
Kings,
The Father of the gods, One, yet all things.
Therefore the most prudent Theologians of the Gentiles did worship the One
God, under diverse names and powers, ye^ diverse sexes; whom as Pliny says,
Frail and weak mortality has digested unto more, being mindful of his one
frailty, that every man might worship that portion which he especially wants;
so those who had need of faith invocated Jupiter; they that wanted providence,
Apollo; wisdom, Minerva; and so as they wanted other things, they invocated
other powers. Hence arose that great variety of Dieties, by reason of the many
and diverse distribution of graces; but God is one, from whom all things.
Therefore Apuleius in his book De mundo to Faustin says, Whereas there is but
one God and one power, yet he is named by diverse names for the multitude of
species, by whose variety he is made of many shapes; and Marcus Varro in his
book of the worship of God, says, As all souls are reduced to the one soul of
the world or universe, so are all the gods referred to Jupiter, who is the same
God, worshipped under diverse names. Therefore it is meet to know the sensible
proprieties, and perfectly to intellectualize them by the way of more secret
Analogy; whosoever understands truly the Hymns of Orpheus and the old
Magicians, shall find that they differ not from the Cabalisticall secrets and
Orthodox traditions; for whom Orpheus calls Curets and unpolluted gods,
Dionysius names Powers; the Cabalists appropriate them to the numeration Pahad,
that is to the Divine fear: so that which is ^nsoph in the Cabala, Orpheus
calls Might; and Typhon is the ^ame with Orpheus, as Zamael in the Cabala;
but the Mecubales of the Hebrews, the most learned in Divine things, have
received the ten principal names of God, as certain Divine ^owers, or as it
were members of God, which by ten numerations which they call Sephiroth as it
were vestiments, Instruments or examplars of the Archetype, have an influence
on all things created, through the high things, even to the lowest, yet ^y a
certain order; for first and immediately they have influence on the nine orders
of Angels, and quire of blessed souls, ^^d by them into the Celestial Spheres,
Planets and men, by ^e which Sephiroh everything then receives power and
ver^e; The first of these is the name Eheia, the name of the Divine ^ssence;
his numeration is called Cether, which is interpreted a Crown or Diadem, and
signifies the most simple Essence of the Divinity, and it is called that which
the eye sees not, and is attributed to God the Father, and has his influence
by the order of Seraphin^^, or as the Hebrews call them Haioth Hacadosch, that
is creatures of holiness, and then by the primum mobile, bestows the gift of
being to all things, filling the whole Universe both through the circumference
and center, whose particular intelligence is called Merattron, that is, the
prince of faces, whose duty it is to bring others to the face of the prince;
and by him the Lord spoke to Moses. The second name is Iod or Tetragrammaton
joined with Iod; his numeration is Hochma, that is wisdom, and signifies the
Divinity full of Idea's, and the first begotten; and is attributed to the Son,
and has his influence by the order of Cherubins, or that the Hebrews call
Orphanim, that is, forms or wheels; and from thence into the starry Heaven,
where he fabricateth so many figures as he has Ideas in himself, and
distinguishes the very Chaos of the creatures, by a particular Intelligence
called Raziell, who was the ruler of Adam. The thid name is called
Tetrogrammaton Elohim; his numeration is named Prina, unprovidence and
understanding, and signifies remission, quietness, the Jubilee, penitential
conversion, a great Trumpet redemption of the world, and the life of the world
to come it is attributed to the Holy Spirit, and has his influence by the
order of the thrones, or which the Hebrews call Aralim, that ^ great Angels
mighty and strong, and from thence by the sphere of Saturn administreth form to
the unsettled matter, who particular intelligence is Zaphchiel, the ruler of
Noah, and another intelligence named Iophiel the ruler of Sem; and the are
three supreme and highest numerations as it were seats ^^ the Divine persons,
by whose commands all things are ma^^ but are executed by the other seven,
which are therefore call^^ the numerations framing. Therefore the fourth name
is ^ whose numeration is Hesed, which is Clemence or goodne^^ and signifies
grace, mercy, piety, magnificence, the scep^ and right hand, and has his
influx by the order of the Dominations, which the Hebrews call Hasmalim, and so
thro^ the sphere of Jupiter fashioning the Images of bodies, bestowing clemency
and pacifying justice on all; his particular intelligence is Zadkiell the ruler
of Abraham: The first name is Elohim Gibor. that is, the mighty God, punishing
the sins of the wicked; and his numeration is called Geburach, which is to say,
power, gravity, fortitude, security, judgment, punishing by slaughter and war:
and it is applied to the Tribunal of God, The girdle, the sword and left hand
of God; it is also called Pachad, which is fear and has his influence throw
the order of powers which the Hebrews call Seraphim, and from thence through
the sphere of Mars, to whom belongs fortitude, war, affliction, it draws
forth the Elements; and his particular intelligence is Camael, the ruler of
Samson; The sixth name is Eloha, or a name of four letters, joined with
Vaudahat, his numeration is Tiphereth, that is apparel, beauty, glory,
pleasure, and signifies the tree of life, and has his influence through the
order of virtues, which the Hebrews call Malahim, that is Angels into the spear
of the Sun, giving brightness and life to it, and from thence producing
metals; his particular intelligence is Raphael, who was the Ruler of Isaac ^^d
Toby the younger, and the Angel Peliel, ruler of Jacob. ^he seventh name is
Tetragrammaton Sabbath, or Adonai Sabbath, that is the God of hosts; and his
numeration is Nezah, that triumph and victory; the right Column is applied to
it, and signifies the eternity and justice of a revenging God; it has ^^
influence through the order of principalities, whom the hebrews call Elohim,
that is Gods, into the sphere of Venus, ^es zeal and love of righteousness, and
produces vege^les; his Intelligence is Haniel and the Angel Cerviel, the ^e^
of David; The eighth is called also Elohim Sabbath, which is also interpreted
the God of Hoasts, not of war and ^ice, but of piety and agreement; for this
name signifi^ both, and precedeth his Army; the numeration of this ^alled Hod,
which is interpreted both praise, confession, ho^ and famousness. The left
column is attributed to it; it has influence through the order of the
Archangels, which the hebrews call Ben Elohim, that is the sons of God, into
the sphere of Mercury, and gives elegancy and consonancy of speech and
produces living creatures; his intelligence is Michael, who was the ruler of
Solomon; The ninth name is called Sadai, that is Omnipotent, satisfying all,
and Elhai, which is the living God; his numeration is Iesod, that is
foundation, and signifies a good understanding, a Covenant, redemption and
rest, and has his influence through the order of Angels, whom the Hebrews name
Cherubim, into the sphere of the Moon, causing the increase and decrease of all
things, and takes care of the genijl, and keepers of men, and distributeth
them; his intelligence is Gabriel, who was the keeper of Joseph, Josuah, and
Daniel; The tenth name is Adonai Melech, that is Lord and King; his numeration
is Malchuth, that is, Kingdom and Empire, and signifies a Church, Temple of
God, and a Gate, and has his influence through the order of Animastick, viz.
of blessed souls, which by the Hebrews is called Issim, that is Nobles Lords
and Princes; they are inferior to the Hierarchies, and have their influence on
the sons of men, and give knowledge and the wonderful understanding of things,
also industry and prophecy; and the soul of Messiah is president amongst them
or (as others say) the intelligence Metattron, which is called the first
Creature, or the soul of the world, and was the rule of Moses.

CHAP. XI. Of the Divine names, and their power and virtue.
GOD himself though he be only one in Essence, yet h^ diverse names, which
expound not his diverse Essences ^^ Dieties, but certain proprieties flowing
from him, by which names he does pour down, as it were by certain Conduits o^
us and all his creatures many benefits and diverse gifts; ten ^^ these Names we
have above described, which also Hierom reckons up to Marcella. Dionysius
reckons up forty si^ names of God and Christ. The Mecubales of the Hebrew
from a certain text of Exodus, derive seventy two names, both of the Angels and
of God, which they call the name of seventy two letters, and Schemhamphores,
that is, the expository; but others proceeding further, out of all places of
the Scripture do infer so many names of God as the number of those names is:
but what they signify is altogether unknown to us: From these therefore,
besides those which we have reckoned up before, is the name of the Divine
Essence Eheia (...), which Plato translates (...), from hence they call God
(...), others (...) that is the being Hu (...) is another name revealed to
Esaias, signifying the Abyss of the Godhead, which the Greeks translate (...),
the Latins, himself the same. Esch (...) is another name received from Moses
which sounds Fire, and the name of God Na (...) is to be invovaced in
perturbations and troubles. There is also the name Iah (...) and the name Elion
(...) and the name Macom (...), the name Caphu (...), the name Innon (...) and
the name Emeth (...) which is interpreted Truth, and is the seal of God; and
there are two other names Zur (...) and Aben (...) both of them signify a
solid work, and one of them express the Father with the Son; and many more
names have we placed above in the scale of numbers; and many names of God and
the Angels are extracted out of the holy Scriptures by the Cabalisticall
calculation, Notarian and Gimetrian arts, where many words retracted by certain
of their letters make up one name, or one name dispersed by each of its letters
signifies or renders more. Sometimes they are gathered from the heads of
words, as the name Agla (...) from this verse of the Holy Scripture (...) that
is the mighty God for ever; in like manner the name Iaia (...) from this verse
(...) that is God our God is one God; in like manner the name Iava (...) from
this ^erse (...), that is let there be a light, and there was ^^ght; in like
manner the name Ararita (...) from this verse (...) that is one principle of his
unity, one beginning of his Individuality his cissicude is one thing, and this
name Hacaha (...) is extracted from this verse (...) the holy and blessed one;
in like manner this name Jesu (...) is found in the heads of these two verses,
viz. (...) that is, until the Messiah shall come, and the other verse (...)
that is, his name abides till the end, Thus also is the name Amen (...)
extracted from this verse (...) that is the Lord the faithful King; sometimes
these names are extracted from the end of words, as the same name Amen, from
this verse (...) that is, the wicked not so, but the letters are transposed; so
by the final letters of this verse (...) that is, to me what? or what is his
name? is found the name Tetragrammaton; in all these a letter is put for a
word, and a letter extracted from a word, either from the beginning, end, or
where you please; and sometimes these names are extracted from all the letters,
one by one, even as those seventy two names of God are extracted from those
three verses of Exodus beginning from these three words, (...) the first and
last verses being written from the right to the left, but the middle
contrariwise from the left to the right, as we shall show hereafter; and so
sometimes a word is extracted from a word, or a name from a name, by the
transposition of letters, as Messia^ (...) from Ismah (...) and Michael (...)
from (...) Malachi. But sometimes by changing of the Alphabeth, which the
Cabalists call Ziruph (...) so from the name Tetragrammaton (...) are drawn
forth (...) Maz Paz (...) Kuz^ sometimes also by reason of the equality of
numbers, names and changed, as Metattron (...) for Sadai (...) for both of them
make three hundred and fourteen, so Itai (...) and E^ (...) are equal in
number, for both make thirty one. And these are the hidden secrets concerning
which it is most difficult to judge, and to deliver a perfect science; neither
^^ they be understood and taught in any other language excep^ the Hebrew; but
seeing the names of God (as Flato says i^ Cratyliss) are highly esteemed of
the Barbarians, who had the^ from God, without the which we can by no means
perceive the true words and names by which God is called, there fore concerning
these we can say no more, but those things which God out of his goodness has
revealed to us; for they are the mysteries and conveyances of Gods omnipotency,
not from men, nor yet from Angels, but instituted and firmly established by the
most high God, after a certain manner, with an immovable number and figure of
Characters, and breath forth the harmony of the Godhead, being consecrated by
the Divine assistance; therefore the creatures above fear them, those below
tremble at them, the Angels reverence, the devils are affrighted, every
creature does honor, and every Religion adore them; the religious observation
whereof, and devout invocation with fear and trembling does yield us great
virtue, and even deifies the union, and gives a power to work wonderful things
above nature: Therefore we may not for any reason whatsoever, change them;
therefore Origin commands that they be kept without corruption in their own
Characters; and Zoroastes also forbids the changing of barbarous and old
words; for as Plato says in Cratylus, All Divine words or names, have
proceeded either from the gods first, or from antiquity, whose beginning is
hardly known, or from the Barbarians: Jamblicus in like manner advises, that
they may not be translated out of their own language into another; for, says
he, they keep not the same force being translated into another tongue:
Therefore these names of God are the most fit and powerful means of
reconciling and uniting man with God, as we read in Exodus, in every place in
which mention is made of my name, I will be with thee, and bless thee; and in
the book of Numbers, the Lord says, I will put my name upon the sons of Israel
and I will bless them: Therefore Divine Plato in Cratylus and in Philebus
commands to reverence the names of God more than the Images or statues of the
gods: for there is a more express Image and power of God, reserved in the
faculty of the mind, especially if it be inspired from above, than in the works
of men's hands; Therefore sacred words have not their power in Magical
operations, from themselves, as they are words, but from the occult Divine
powers working by them in the minds of those who by faith adhere to them; by
which words the secret power of God as it were through Conduite pipes, is
transmited into them, who have ears purged by faith, and by most pure
conversation and invocation of the divine names are made the habitation of God,
and capable of these divine influences; whosoever therefore uses rightly these
words or names of God with that purity of mind, in that manner and order, as
they were delivered, shall both obtain and do many wonderful things, as we
read of Medea. Most pleasant sleep she caused, words thrice she spoke,
The Seas appeased, and soon their fury brake.
Which the Ancient Doctors of the Hebrews have especially observed, who were
wont to do many wonderful things by words; the Pythagorians also have showed,
how to cure very wonderfully the diseases both of body and mind, with certain
words; we read also, that Orpheus, being one of the Argonauts diverted a most
fierce storm by certain words; in like manner that Apollonius, by certain words
whispered, raised up a dead maid at Rome; and Philostratus reports that some
did by certain words call up Achilles Ghost; and Pausanias relates, that in
Lydia in the Cities of Hiero-Cesare^ and Hypepis, were two temples consecrated
to the Goddess whom they called Persica, in both of which when divine service
was ended, a certain Magitian, after he had laid dry wood upon the Altar, and
in his native language had sang Hymns, and pronounced certain barbarous words,
out of a book which he held in his hand presently the dry wood, no fire being
put to it, was seen to be kindled, and burn most clearly. Also Serenus
Samonicus delivers amongst the precepts of Physic, that if this name
Abracadabra be written, as is here expressed, viz. diminishing letter after
letter backward, from the last to the first, it will cure the Hemitritean
Fever or any other, if the sheet of paper or parchment be hanged about the
neck, and the disease will by little and little decline and pass away.



But Rabbai Hama in his book of speculation delivers a sacred seal more
efficacious against any diseases of man, or any griefs whatsoever, in whose
foreside are the four squared names of God, so subordinated to one another in a
square, that from the highest to the lowest those most holy names or seals of
the Godhead do arise, whose intention is inscribed in the circumferentiall
circle, but on the backside is inscribed the seven lettered name Araritha, and
his interpretation is written about, viz. the verse from which it is extracted,
even as you see it here described.

The former part.


The hinder part.


But all must be done in most pure gold, or Virgin Parchment, pure, clean and
unspotted, also with Jnke made for this purpose, of the smoke of consecrated
wax lights, or incense, and holy water; The actor must be purified and cleansed
by sacrifice, and have an infallible hope, a constant faith and his mind lifted
up to the most high God, if he would surely obtain this Divine power. In like
manner against the affrightments and mischief of evil spirits and men, and what
dangers soever, either of journey, waters, enemies, arms, in the manner as is
above said, these Characters on the one side (...) and these on the back side
(...) which are the beginnings and ends of the five first verses of Genesis,
and representation of the creation of the world; and by this Ligature they say
that a man shall be free from all mischiefs, if so be that he firmly believes
in God the creator of all things.

In the fore part.


In the hinder part.


Neither let any distrust or wonder, that sacred words, applied outwardly can
do very much, seeing by them the Almighty God made the heavens and the earth;
and further, by experience it is found as says Rab Costa Ben Luca, that many
things not having Physical virtues do very much, As for example, the finger of
an abortive childhanged on the neck of a woman hinders conception, so long as
it remains there; Moreover that in diverse sacred words and names of God,
there is great and Divine power, which works miracles, Zoroastes, Orpheus,
Jamblicus, Synesius, Alchindus, and all the famous Philosophers testify; and
Artephius both a Magician and Philosopher has written a peculiar book
concerning the virtue of words and Characters. Origin not inferior to the
famousest Philosophers, does maintain against Celsus, that there dothly hid
wonderful virtue in certain Divine names, and in the book of Judges the Lord
says, my name which is Pele (...) signifies with us, a worker of miracles, or
causing wonders; but the true name of God is known neither to men nor to
Angels, but to God alone, neither shall it be manifested (as the holy
Striptures testify) before the Will of God be fulfilled; Notwithstanding God
has other names amongst the Angels, others amongst us men; for there is no
name of God amongst us (as Moses the Egyptian says) which is not taken from
his works, and signifies with participation, besides the name Tetragrammaton,
which is holy, signifying the substance of the Creator in a pure signification,
in which no other thing is partaker with God the Creator; therefore it is
called the separated name, which is written and not read, neither is it
expressed by us, but named, and signifies the second supernall Idiome, which
is of God, and perhaps of Angels. In like manner the Angels have their name
amongst themselves, and in their Idiome, which Paul calls the tongue of
Angels, concerning which we have very little knowledge with us, but all their
other names are taken from their offices and operations, which have not so
great efficacy, and therefore the Magicians call them by their true names,
namely the heavenly ones, which are contained in the holy Bible.

CHAP. XII. Of the influence of the divine names through all the middle causes
into these inferior things.
THE most high Creator and first cause, although he rules and disposes all
things, yet distributeth the care of execution to diverse Ministers, both good,
and bad, which John in the Revelations calls assisting, and destroying Angels:
of which the prophet sings elsewhere; The Angel of the Lord remains in the
presence of them that fear him, that he may preserve them: and elsewhere he
describes immissions by evil Angels. Now whatsoever God does by Angels, as by
ministers, the same does he by heavens, Stars, but as it were by instruments,
that after this manner all things might work together to serve him, that as
every part of Heaven, and every Star does discern every corner or place of the
earth, and time, species and Individual: so it is fit that the Angelical
virtue of that part and Star should be applied to them, viz place, time, and
species. Whence Austin in his book of questions, says, Every visible thing in
this world, has an Angelical power appointed for it: Hence Origin on the book
of Numbers says, the world has need of Angels, that may rule the Armies of
the earth, Kingdoms, provinces, men, beasts, the nativity, and progress of
living creatures, shrubs, plants, and other things, giving them that virtue
which is said to be in them, from an occult propriety; much more need is there
of Angels that may rule holy works, virtues and men, as they who always see
the face of the most high father, and can guide men in the right path, and also
even the least thing to this place, as fit members of this world in which God
as the chief president, dwells, most sweetly disposing all things, not being
contained, or circumscribed, but containing all things, as John in the
Revelations describes that heavenly City, whose twelve gates are guarded with
twelve Angels, infusing on them what they receive from the Divine name, twelve
times revolved; and in the foundations of that City the names of the twelve
Apostles, and the Lamb; for as in the Law, in the stones of the Ephod and
foundations of the Holy City described by Ezekiel, were written the names of
the tribes of Israel, and the name of four letters did predominate over them;
so in the Gospel, the names of the Apostles are written in the stones of the
foundation of the heavenly City, which stones stand for the tribes of Israel in
the Church, over which the name of the Lamb has influence, that is, the name
of Jesus, in which is all the virtue of the four lettered name; seeing that
Jehovah the Father has given him all things: Therefore the Heavens receive
from the Angels, that which they dart down; but the Angels from the great name
of God and Jesu, the virtue whereof is first in God, afterward diffused into
these twelve and seven Angels, by whom it is extended into the twelve signs,
and into the seven planets, and consequently into all the other Ministers and
instruments of God pour traiting even infinitely. Hence Christ says,
Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give you; and after his
resurrection says, In my name they shall cast out devils, and do as follows;
so that the name of four letters is no further necessary, the whole virtue
thereof being translated into the name Jesus, in which only miracles are done;
neither is there any other (as Peter says) under heaven given unto men, by
which they can be saved, but that; but let us not think, that by naming Jesus
profanely, as the name of a certain man, we can do miracles by virtue of it:
but we must invocate it in the holy Spirit, with a pure mind and a fervent
spirit, that we may obtain those things which are promised us in him;
especially knowledge going before, without which there is no hearing of us,
according to that of the Prophet, I will hear him because he has known my
name; Hence at this time no favor can be drawn from the heavens, unless the
authority, favor and consent of the name Jesu intervene; Hence the Hebrews and
Cabalists most skillful in the Divine names, can work nothing after Christ by
those old names, as their fathers have done long since; and now it is by
experience confirmed, that no devil nor power of Hell, which vex and trouble
men, can resist this name, but will they, nill they, bow the knee and obey,
when the name Jesu by a due pronunciation is proposed to them to be worshipped,
and they fear not only the name but also the Cross, the seal thereof; and not
only the knees of earthly, heavenly, and hellish creatures are bowed, but also
Insensible things do reverence it, and all tremble at his beck, when from a
faithful heart and a true mouth the name Jesus is pronounced, and pure hands
imprint the salutiferous sign of the Cross: neither truly does Christ say in
vain to his Disciples, In my name they shall cast out Devils, etc. unless there
were a certain virtue expressed in that name over devils and sick folk,
serpents, and persons, and tongues, and so forth, seeing the power which this
name has, is both from the virtue of God the institutor, and also from the
virtue of him who is expressed by this name, and from a power implanetd in the
very word. Hence is it that seeing every creature fears and reverenceth the
name of him who has made it, sometimes even wicked and ungodly men, if so be
they believe the invocation of Divine names of this kind, do bind devils, and
operate certain other great things.

CHAP. XIII. Of the members of God, and of their influence on our members.
WE read in diverse places of the holy Scripture, of diverse members of God,
and ornaments; but by the members of God, are understood manifold powers, most
simply abiding in God himself, distinguished amongst themselves by the sacred
names of God; but the garments of God and Ornaments, are as it were certain
ways and relations, or Emanations or conduit pipes, by the which he diffuseth
himself; the hemmes of which as often as our mind shall touch, so often the
Divine power of some member goes forth, even as Jesus cried out, concerning
the woman with the bloody Issue, Some body has touched me, for I perceive
virtue to go forth from me: These members therefore in God are like to ours;
but the Idea's and exemplars of our members, to the which if we rightly conform
our mmbers, then being translated into the same Image, we are made the true
sons of God, and like to God, doing and working the works of God: therefore
concerning the members of God, many things are drawn forth out of the
Scriptures; for we read of his head in the Canticles; Thy head as Carmel, and
the locks of thy head as the purple of a King; but this Carmel signifies not
that mountain in the Sea coast of Syria, but a little creature, which
ingendreth the purple. Also of his eyes, eyelids and ears, we read in the
Psalms, the eyes of the Lord on the Just, and his ears to their prayers, his
eyes look toward the poor, and his eyelids enquire after the sons of men: also
of his mouth, taste, throat, lips, and teeth, we read in Esaias, Thou have not
enquired at my mouth; and in the Canticles, Thy throat as the best wine for my
beloved, that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to
speak; there are also Nostrils, by the which (as we often find in the Law) he
smells the sacrifices for a sweet odor: he has shoulders, arms, hands, and
fingers, of the which we read in Esaias; the government is laid upon his
shoulders; to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? and the kingly Prophet
sings, thy hands O Lord have made me and fashioned me, and I will behold the
heavens, the work of thy fingers; he has also a right and left hand; hence the
Psalmist says, The Lord says to my Lord, sit at my right hand: and of the
left we read, in the Gospel, on which the damned shall be placed at the last
day: further we read of the heart, breast, back, and back parts of God; as in
the book of Kings, that God found David a man according to his own heart; we
have also in the Gospel his breast upon which the Disciple sleeping conceived
divine mysteries; and the Psalmist describes his back, in the paleness of
gold; and he himself says in Jeremiah, I will show my back and not my face in
the day of their perdition, and he says to Moses, Thou shall see my back
parts; of his feet the Psalmist also says, Darkness under his feet, and in
Genesis he is said to walk to the South. In like manner also we read of the
garments, and ornaments of God, as with the Psalmist, the Lord has reigned, he
has put on beauty, clothed with light as with a garment; and elsewhere, Thou
have put on comeliness and beauty; The Abyss as a garment and his clothing;
and in Ezekiel, the Lord speaks, saying, I spread my garment over thee and
covered thy nakedness; moreover also we read of the rod, Staff, Sword and
Buckler of God, as in the Psalmist, Thy rod and thy staff, they have comforted
me; his truth has compassed thee about as with a shield; and in Deutreonomy we
read of the sword of his glory; and very many of this sort the sacred word
declares to us; from which members and Divine ornaments, there is no doubt, but
that our members and al things about us, and all our works, are both ruled
directed, preserved, governed, and also censured, as the prophet says. He has
put my foot upon a rock, and directed my goings; and elsewhere he says, Blessed
be the Lord my God, who teaches my hand to war, and my fingers to fight; and
of his mouth he says, the Lord has put a new song into my mouth; and
elsewhere our Savior says, I will give you a mouth and wisdom; and of the
hair he says, an hair of your head shall not perish; and in another place, the
hairs of your head are numbered; for the Almighty God seeing he would have us to
be his Images and like to himself, has framed members, limbs, and figures
after many ways laid open in us, according to the similitude of his hidden
virtues, as it were signs keeping the same order and proportion to them: whence
the Mecubals of the Hebrews say, that if a man capable of the Divine influence
do make any member of his body clean and free from filthiness, then it becomes
Habitale and proper seat of the secret limb of God, and of the virtue to the
which the same name is ascribed: so that if that member want any thing, the
name being invocated, whence it depends, it is presently heard effectually,
according to that, I will hear him, because he has known my name; and these
are the great and hidden mysteries, concerning which it is not lawful to
publish more.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Gods of the gentiles, and souls of the Celestial bodies,
and what places were consecrated in times past, and to what Dieties:
THe Philosophers have maintained, as we have showed before, that the Heavens
and Stars are Divine Animals, and their souls intellectual, participating of
the Divine mind; and they aver, that some separated substances are superior,
others inferior to them, as it were governing and serving, which they call
intelligences and Angels; moreover Plato himself affirmed, that Celestial
souls are not confined to their bodies, as our souls to our bodies, but to be,
where they will, and also that they rejoice in the vision of God, and without
any labor or pains do rule and move their bodies, and together in moving them
do easily govern these inferior things; therefore they often called the souls
of this kind, Gods, and appointed Divine honors for them, and dedicated prayers
and sacrifices to them, and did worship them with Divine worship, and these are
the gods to the which all people are attributed, concerning which Moses
commanded in Deuteronomy, saying, least perchance your eyes being lifted up to
Heaven, thou should see the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars of Heaven, and
being turned back should adore and worship them, to which all the Nations
are subjected, which are under the Heaven; but the Lord Jehovah has taken and
brought you forth from the furnace of Egypt, that thou should be an
Hereditary people to himself; and in the same book chap. 17. he calls the
Sun, Moon, and Stars Gods; and the Doctors of the Hebrews upon that place of
Genesis where it is said, that Abraham gave gifts to the sons of the
concubines, viz. Shemoth, Steltoma, that is strange names, but left Isaac heir
of all that he possessed, say, that the sons of the concubines werenot in the
blessing of Abraham, given to Jehovah the most high-creator, but to strange
gods and dieties, but that Isaac and his seed were given to the omnipotent
Jehovah, and in no part to any strange Dieties; therefore they are upbraided in
Deutornomy, because they served strange gods, and worshipped them they knew
not, and to whom they were not given; and also Joshua Nave, after that the
people were brought into the land of promise, their enemies overcome, and the
lots of the possessions of Israel distributed, gave the people leave to choose
that God whom they would worship, saying, leave is given you this day to choose
whom you will especially serve, whether the gods which your fathers served in
Mesopotamia; or the gods of the Amorites, whose land you inhabit; but the
people answered, we will serve the Lord Jehovah, and he shall be our God;
Joshua said to them, ye cannot do it, for the Lord Jehovah is holy, strong, and
jealous; but the people persevering to serve Jehovah; he says to them, ye are
witnesses your selves, that ye have chosen for your selves the Lord, to serve
him; take away therefore strange gods out of the midst of you, and incline your
hearts to the Lord God of Israel; and he erected a great stone saying, this
stone shall be for a witness, least perhaps afterward ye will deny and lie to
the Lord your God; therefore the other gods, to which the other Nations were
given, were the Sun, Moon, twelve Signs, and other Celestial bodies, and
Divine fabrics, yet not as they were bodies, but as the soul adhereth to them,
and the whole Militia of Heaven, which Jeremy calls the queen of Heaven, that is
the power by which the Heaven is governed, viz. the soul of the world, of which
Jeremy says, The sons gather sticks, and part thereof makes a fire, and the
women mingle oil, that they might make a cake for the Queen of heaven, neither
was the worship of Doulia, to this Queen and other Celestial souls prohibited
them, but of Latria only, which they that gave, are reproved of the Lord; but
the name of these souls or Gods, we have before declared; but to what Regions,
People, and Cities they were ascribed is proper and tutelar gods; Origin,
Tertullian, Apuleius, Diodorus, and very many other historians, partly relate
to us: Therefore all people worshipped their gods with their proper ceremonies;
The Beotians, Amphiarus; The Africans, Mopsus; the Egyptians, Osiris, and Isis;
the Ethiopians, who inhabit Mero; Jupiter and Bacchus; The Arabians; Bacchus
and Vinus; the Scythians, Minerva; the Naucratians, Serapis; the Syrians,
Atargates; the Arabians, Diaphares; the Africans, Celestus; the Nornians,
Tibelenus: In Italy also by the free Cities consecration, Delventius, was the
God of the Crustumensians, Viridianus of the Narvensians, Aucharia of the
Aesculans, Nursia of the Volsians, Valentia of the Otriculant, Nortia of the
Sutrinians, Curis of the Phaliscians; these especially were famous. The Latians
did adore with the highest worship, Mars; The Egyptians, Isis; the Moors, Iuba;
the Macadonians, Cabrius; the Carthaginians, Uranus; the Latins, Faunus; the
Romans, Quirinus; the Sabines, Sangus; the Athenians, Minerva; Samos, Juno;
Paphos, Venus; Lemnos, Vulcan; Naxos, Bacchus; Delphos, Apollo; and as Ovid
sings in his Fasti. Athens do Pallas; Crete, Dian' implore.
The Island Lemons Vulcan does adore.
The Spartans, Juno --


The Carthaginians and Leucadians did worship Saturn; Crete, Pyreus, Homole,
Ida, Elis and Lybia, Jupiter, where was his Oracle: Epirus, Latium, Gnidus,
Lycia, Pisa, Macedonia, Mars; The Thermodonians, Scythians, and Thracia, the
Sun; the Scythians did worship only one God, sacrificing an horse to him; the
same also the Heliopolitans, and Assyrians did worship; and under the name of
Apollo, the Rhodians, Hyperboreans and Milesians; and the mountains Parnassus,
Phaselus, Cynthus, Soracte, were holy to him, and the Islands Delos, Claros,
Tenedos and Mallois, a place in the Isle Lesbos, and the Grynean Grove or Town,
besides the Cities, Patara, Chrysa, Tarapnas, Cyrrha, Delphos, Arrephina,
Entrosi, Tegyra; Also Thebes, the Island, Naxos, Nise a City of Arabia,
Callichoros a river of Paphlagonia, were consecrated to him under the name of
Bacchus and Dionysius; also Parnassus, and Cytheros mountains of Boetia, in
which every second year by course, the feasts Bacchanalia were kept; also the
Thamaritans a people neighbors to the Hircanians did worship Bacchus with their
own Ceremonies. The Assyrians first of all introduced the worship of Venus;
then the Paphians in Cyprus, and Phenicians, and Cythereans, whom (as Ageus
reports) the Athe^^^ians followed: amongst the Lacedomonians, Venus Armatha was
worshipped; at Delphos, Venus Epitybia; she was also adored of the Coans; and
in Amathus an Island of the Aegean Sea, and in Memphi a City of Egypt, and in
Gnido and Sicilia, and the Idalian Grove, and the City Hypepa and Erice a
mountain of Sicilia, and in Calidonia, Cyrene and Samos; and no Diety of the
old Gods (Aristotle being witness) is reported to have been worshipped with
greater ceremonies, and in more places; the French did especially worship
Mercury, calling him Tentates; so also the Arcadians, Hormopolites, Egyptians
and Memphites. The Scythians about mount Taurus, did worship the Moon under the
name of Diana; and in Ephesus, she had a most stately Temple; and in Mycena
after the death of Thoantes King of Taurica, her Image being stolen away by
Iphigenia and Orestes, she was worshipped nigh A^icia. The Rite of Ceremonies
being changed, she was worshipped likewise by the Magnesians, a people of
Thessalia, and in Pisa, a City of Achaia, and in Tybur, and the Aventinum a
Roman hill, and in Perga a City of Pamphilia, and in Agras in the Kingdom of
Attica; and the Catenian people are reported to have worshipped the Moon under
the Masculine sex; there were also other places consecrated to other Dieties,
as to Pallas, who is called Minerva, were consecrated Athens, the mountains
Pyreus, Aracynthus, the River Tritones, and Alcomeneum a City of Boetia, and
Neo one of the Islands of the Cyclades; The holy places of Ceres are, Eleusis
Attica, Enna, and Catana, Cities of Sicilia and mount Aetna; The chief worship
to Vulcan was in the Island of Lemnos, and in Imbres, an Island of Thracia and
Therasia, an Island consecrated to Vulcan, and also Sicilia: Vesta was the
goddess of the Trojans, whom runaway Aeneas carried into Italy, and to her are
given the Phrygians, Idea and Dindymus, mountain of Phrygia, and Reatum a City
of Umbria; also the mountain Berecynthus, and Pessinuntium, a City of Phrygia;
The Cities Carthage, Prosenna, Arhos, and Mycena, worshipped June; also the
Island Samos and the people of Phaliscia, Orchestus a City of Boetia, and
Tenatus a Promontory of Laconia, were consecrated to Neptune, and the Trezenian
Nation and City were under the protection of Neptune: of this sort therefore
were the gods of the Nations, which did rule and govern them, which Moses
himself in Deuteronomy calls Gods of the earth, to the which all Nations were
attributed, not signifying others then the heavenly Stars, and their souls.

CHAP. XV. What our Theologians think concerning the Celestial souls.
THat the heavens and the heavenly bodies are animated with certain Divine
souls, is not only the opinion of Poets, and Philosophers, but also the
assertion of the sacred Scriptures, and of the Catholics; for Ecclesiastes
also describes the soul of heaven, and Jerome upon the same expressly confesses
it: In like manner Origin in his book of Principles, seems to think that
Celestial bodies are animated, because they are said to receive commands from
God, which is only agreeable to a reasonable nature; for it is written, I have
enjoined a command on all the Stars; Moreover Job seems to have fully
granted, that the Stars are not free from the stain of sin; for there we read,
the Stars also are not clean in his sight; which cannot verily be referred to
the brightness of their bodies; moreover that the Celestial bodies are
animated, even Eusebius the Pamphilian thought, and also Austin in his
Enchiridion; but of the latter writers Albertus Magnus in his book of four
co-equals, and Thomas Aquinas in his book of Spiritual Creatures, and John Scot
upon the second of the sentences; to these the most learned Cardinal Nich:
Cusa^us may be added; Moreover Aureolus himself in a strong disputation does
convince these things; who moreover thinks it not strange, that the Heavenly
bodies are worshipped with the worship of Doulia, and that their suffrages and
helps are implored; to whom also Thomas himself consents, unless the occasion
of idolatry should hinder this rite; moreover Plotinus maintains that they
know our wishes, and hear them; but if any one would contradict these, and
account them sacrilegious tenants, let him hear Austin in his Enchiridion, and
in his book of Retractations, and Thomas in the second book against the
Gentiles, and in his Quodlibets, and Scotus upon the sentences, and Gulielmus
Parisiensis in his sum of the universe, who unanimously answer, that to say the
heavenly bodies are animated or inanimated, nothing belongs to the Catholic
faith. Therefore although it seems to many ridiculous, that the souls
themselves be placed in the spheres and Stars, and as it were the Gods of the
Nations, every one does govern his Regions, Cities, Tribes, People, Nations and
Tongues, yet it will not seem strange to those who rightly understand it.

CHAP. XVI. Of Intelligences and spirits, and of the threefold kind of them,
and of their diverse names, and of Infernal and subterraneal spirits.
NOw consequently we must discourse of Intelligences, spirits and Angels. An
Intelligence is an intelligible substance, free from all gross and putrefying
mass of a body, immortal, insensible, assisting all, having Influence over
all; and the nature of all intelligencies, spirits and Angels is the same. But
I call Angels here, not those whom we usually call Devils, but spirits so
called from the propriety of the word as it were, knowing, understanding and
wise. But of these according to the tradition of the Magicians, there are three
kinds, the first of which they call supercelestiall, and minds altogether
separated from a body, and as it were intellectual spheres, worshipping the
one only God, as it were their mo^^firm and stable unity or center; wherefore
they even call them gods, by reason of a certain participation of the divinity;
for they are always full of God, and overwhelmed with the Divine Nectar. These
are only about God, and rule not the bodies of the world, neither are they
fitted for the government of inferior things, but infuse the light received
from God unto the inferior orders, and distribute every ones duty to all of
them; The Celestial intelligences do next follow these i^ the second order,
which they call worldly Angels viz. being appointed besides the Divine worship
for the spheres of the world, and for the government of every heaven and Star,
whence they are divided into so many orders, as there are heavens in the world,
and as there are Stars in the Heavens, and they called those Saturnine, who
rule the Heaven of Saturn and Saturn himself; others Joviall, who rule the
heaven of Jupiter and Jupiter himself, and in like manner they name diverse
Angels, as well for the name, as the virtue of the other Stars; and because the
old Astrologers did maintain fifty five motions, therefore they invented so
many Intelligences or Angels; they placed also in the Starry heaven, Angels,
who might rule the signs, triplicities, decans, quinaries, degrees and Stars;
for although the school of the Peripateticks assign one only intelligence to
each of the Orbs of the Stars: yet sceing every Star and small part of the
heaven has its proper and different power and influence, it is necessary that
it also have his ruling intelligence, which may confer power and operate;
therefore they have established twelve Princes of the Angels, which rule the
twelve signs of the Zodiac, and thirty six which may rule the so many De^ans,
and seventy two, which may rule the so many Quinaries of heaven, and the
tongues of men and the Nations, and four which may rule the triplicities and
Elements, and seven governors of the whole world, according to the seven
planets, and they have given to all of them names, and seals, which they call
Characters, and used them in their invocations, in^antations, and carvings,
describing them in the instruments of their operations, images, plates,
glasses, rings, papers, wax ^ights and such like; and if at any time they did
operate for the ^un, they did invocate by the name of the Sun, and by the names
of Solare Angels, and so of the rest. Thirdly they established Angels as
Ministers for the disposing of those things which are below, which Origin
calls certain invisible powers to the which those things which are on earth,
are committed to be disposed of. For sometimes they being visible to none to
direct our journies and all our businesses, are often present at ^attels, and by
secret helps do give the desired successes to their friends, for they are
said, that at their pleasures they can procure prosperity, and inflict
adversity. In like manner they distribute these into more orders, so as some
are fiery, some watery, some aerial, some terrestial; which four species of
Angels are computed according to the four powers of the Celestial souls, viz.
the mind, reason, imagination, and the vivifying and moving nature; Hence the
fiery follow the mind of the Celestial souls, whence they concur to the
contemplation of more sublime things, but the Aeriall follow the reason, and
favor the rational faculty, and after a certain manner separate it from the
sensitive and vegetative; therefore it serves for an active life, as the fiery
for a contemplative, but the watery following the imagination, serve for a
voluptuous life; The earthly following nature, favor vegetable nature; moreover
they distinguish also this kind of Angels into Saturnine and Joviall, according
to the names of the Stars, and the Heavens; further some are Oriental, some
Occidentall, some Meridional, some Septentrionall; Moreover there is no part of
the world destitute of the proper assistance of these Angels, no^ because they
are there alone, but because they reign there especially, for they are
everywhere, although some especially operate, and have their influence in this
place, some elsewhere neither truly are these things to be understood, as though
they were subject to the influences of the Stars, but as they him
correspondence with the Heaven above the world, from whence especially all
things are directed, and to the which all things ought to be conformable;
whence as these Angels a^ appointed for diverse Stars, so also for diverse
places and times not that they are limited by time or place, neither by the
bodies which they are appointed to govern, but because the order of wisdom has
so decreed, therefore they favor more and patronize those bodies, places,
times, stars; so they have called some Diurnall, some Nocturnall, other
Meridionall; i^ like manner some are called Woodmen, some Mountianeers some
Fieldmen, some Domestics. Hence the gods of the Woods, Country gods, Satyrs,
Familiars, Fairies of the fountains, Fairies of the Woods, Nymphs of the Sea,
the Naiades, Neriades, Dryades, Pierides, Hamadryades, Potumides, Hi^nides,
Agapte, Pales, Pareades, Dodonae, Feniliae, Lavern^ Pareae, Muses, Aonides,
Castalides, Heliconides, Pegasides, Meonides, Phebiades, Camenae, the Graces,
the Genii, Hobgoblins and such like; whence they call them vulgar superiors,
some the demigods and goddesses; some of these are so familiar and acquainted
with men, that they are even affected with humane perturbations, by whose
instruction Plato thinks that men do oftentimes wonderful things, even as by
the instruction of men, some beasts which are most nigh unto us, as Apes, Dogs,
Elephants, do often strange things above their species; and they who have
written the Chronicles of the Danes and Norwegians, do testify, that spirits
of diverse kinds in those regions are subject to men's commands; moreover some
of these to be corporeal and mortal, whose bodies are begotten and die, yet to
be long lived is the opinion of the Egyptians, and Platonists, and especially
approved by Proclus. Plutarch also and Demetrius the Philosopher, and
Aemilianus the Rhetoritian affirm the same; Therefore of these spirits of the
third kind, as the opinion of the Platonists is; they report that there are so
many Legions, as there are Stars in the Heaven, and so many spirits in every
Legion, as in heaven it self Stars, but there are (as Athanasius delivers)
who think, that the true number of the good spirits, is according to the number
of men ninety nine parts, according to the parable of the hundred sheep; others
think only nine parts, according to the parable of the ten groats; others
suppose the number of the Angels equal with men, because it is written, He has
appointed the bounds of the people according to the number of the Angels of
God; and concerning their number many have written many things, but the latter
Theologians following the master of the sentences, Austin and Gregory easily
resolve themselves, saying, that the number of the good Angels transcendeth
humane capacity; to the which on the contrary, innumerable unclean spirits do
correspond, there being so many in the inferior world, as pure spirits in the
superior, and some Divines affirm that they have received this by revelations;
under these they place a kind of spirits, subterrany or obscure, which the
Platonists call Angels that failed, revengers of wickedness, and ungodliness,
according to the decree of the Divine justice, and they call them evil Angels
and wicked spirits, because they often annoy and hurt even of their own accords;
of these also they reckon more legions, and in like manner distinguishing them
according to the names of the Stars and Elements, and parts of the world, they
do place over them Kings, Princes and Rulers and the names of them; of these,
four most mischeivous Kings do rule over the other, according to the four parts
of the world; under these many more Princes of Legions govern, and also many of
private offices. Hence the Gorgones, Statenocte, the furies. Hence Tisiphone,
Alecto, Megara, Cerberus: They of this kind of spirits, Prophyry says,
inhabit a place nigh to the earth, yea within the earth it self; there is no
mischief, which they dare not commit; they have altogether a violent and
hurtful custom, therefore they very much plot and endeavor violent and sudden
mischiefs; and when they make incursions, sometimes they are wont to lie hide,
but sometimes to offer open violence, and are very much delighted in all things
done wickedly and contentiously.

CHAP. XVII. Of these according to the opinion of the Theologians.
BUt our Theologians, together with Dionysius, maintain the three distinctions
of Angels; every one of which they divide into three orders, they call these
Hierarchies, those quires, whom Proclus also distinguishes by the number nine.
They place therefore in the superior Hierarchies, Seraphim, Cherubim, and
Thrones, as it were supercelestiall Angels contemplating the order of the
Divine providence; the first in the goodness of God; the second in the Essence
of God, as the form; the third in the wisdom. In the middle Hierarchy they
place the Dominations, Virtues, and Powers, as it were worldly Angels
concurring to the government of the world; the first of these command that
which the other execute; the second are Ministers to the Heavens and sometimes
conspire to the working of miracles; the third drive away those things which
seem to be able to disturb the Divine Law; but in the inferior Hierarchy they
place the Principalities, Archangels, whom also Jamblicus reckons up, these
as ministering spirits descend to take care of inferior things; the first of
these take care of public things, princes and magistrates, provinces and
kingdoms, every one those that belong to themselves; when we read in Daniel,
But the prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty one days; and
Jesus the son of Syrach testifies, that for every Nation a ruling Angel is
appointed; which also Moses by his song in Deuteronomy seems to show forth,
saying, when the most High divided the Nations, he appointed them bounds
according to the number of the Angels of God. The second are present at sacred
duties, and direct ^he Divine worship about every man, and offer up the prayers
and sacrifices of men before the gods. The third dispose every smaller matter,
and to each thing each one is a preserver. There are also of these, who afford
virtue to the least plants and stones and to all inferior things; to whom many
things are common with God, many with men, and they are mediating Ministers;
but Athanasius, besides Thrones, Cherubins, and Seraphins, who are next to God,
and magnify him uncessantly with hymns and continual praises, praying for our
salvation, names the other orders, which by a common name he calls the
militia of heaven. The first of these is the Doctrinall order, of the which he
was, who spoke to Daniel, saying, Come, that I may teach thee what shall come
to thy people in the last days; Then there is the tutelar order, of the which
we read also in Daniel. Behold, Michael one of the Princes comes to my help;
and there, In that time shall rise up Michael a great Prince, who stands for
the sons of thy people; of this order was that Raphael also, who carried forth
and brought back Tobiah the younger; after this is the Procuratory Order, of
the which mention is made in Job, where we read, if the Angel shall speak for
him, he will entreat the Lord, and the Lord will be pleased with him; and of
the same order is expounded also that which is written in the sixteenth Chapter
of Ecclesiasticus, about the end. The works of the Lord have been made by his
appointment from the beginning, and he has distributed their portions from the
time they have been made, he has adorned their works for ever, they have not
hungered, nor been wearied, and have not desisted from their works, none of them
shall oppress his neighbor even for ever. The Ministerial order follows, of
the which Paul to the Hebrews says, Are they not all Ministering spirits, sent
forth for them who shall be heirs of salvation. After these is the Auxiliary
order, of the which we read in Esaias, The Angels of the Lord went forth and slew
in the tent of the Assyrians 185. thousands. The Receptory order of souls
follows this, of the which we read in Luke, the soul of Lazarus was carried
by Angels into the boso^^ of Abraham, and there we are taught, that we should
make to our selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that we may be received
into eternal Tabernacles. Moreover, there is the order of the Assistants, of
the which we read in Zachary. These are the two sons of the Oil of splendour,
who assist the ruler of the whole earth, but the Theologians of the Hebrews do
otherwise number and call these orders; for in the highest place are those
which they call (...) that is, creatures of sanctity, or by the which God (...)
gives the gift of being. In the second place succeed Ophanim (...) that is
forms or wheels, by the which God (...) distinguishes the Chaos: In the third
place are Aralim (...) great, strong, and mighty Angels, by the which Jehova
Elohim pronounced or Jehova joined with He (...) administreth form to the
liquid matter: In the fourth place are Hasmalim (...) by which El (...) God
frames the effigies of bodies. The fifth order is Seraphim (...) by the which
God Elohim Gibor (...) draws forth the Elements. The sixth is Malachim (...)
that is of Angels, by the which God Eloha (...), produces metals. The seventh
Elohim (...) that is the gods by the which God Jehovah Saboath (...) produces
vegetables; The eighth Beni Elohim (...) that is the sons of God, by the which
God Elohim Sabbath (...) procreateth Animals; The ninth and lowest Cberubim
(...) by the which God Sadai (...) creates mankind; under these is the order
Animasticus called Issim (...) that is nobles, strong men, or blessed, by the
which God Adonai (...) bestows prophecy.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the orders of evil spirits, and of their fall, and diverse
natures.
THere are some of the School of the Theologians, who distribute the evil
spirits into nine degrees, as contrary to the nine orders of the Angels;
Therefore the first of these are those which are called false gods, who
usurping the name of God, would be worshipped for gods, and require sacrifices
and adorations, as that Devil, who says to Christ, if thou will fall down and
worship me, I will give thee all these things, showing him all the kingdoms of
the world; and the Prince of these is he who said, I will ascend above the
height of the clouds, and will be like to the most High; who is therefore
called Beelzebub, that is, an old god. In the second place follow the spirits
of lies, of which sort was he who went forth, and was a lying spirit in the
mouth of the Prophets of Achab; and the Prince of these is the Serpent Pytho;
from whence Apollo is called Pythius, and that woman a witch in Samuel, and the
other in the Gospel, who had Pytho in their belly. Therefore this kind of
Devils joyneth himself to the Oracles, and deludeth men by divinations, and
predictions, so that he may deceive. In the third order are the vessels of
iniquity, which are also called the vessels of wrath, these are the inventors
of evil things and of all wicked arts, as in Plato, that devil Theutus who
taught Cards and Dice; for all wickedness, malice and deformity proceeds from
these; of the which in Genesis, in the Benedictions of Simeon and Levi, Jacob
says, vessels of iniquity are in their habitations; into their counsel let not
my soul come; whom the Psalmist calls vessels of death, Esaias vessels of fury,
and Jeremy vessels of wrath, Ezekiel vessels of destroying and slaying, and
their prince is Belial, which is interpreted without a yoke or disobedient, a
prevaricator and an Apostate, of whom Paul to the Corinthians says, what
agreement has Christ with Beliall? Fourthly follow the revengers of evil, and
their Prince is Asmodeus, viz. causing judgment; After these in the fifth
place come the deluders, who Imitate miracles, and serve wicked conjurers and
witches, and seduce the people by their miracles, as the serpent seduced Eve,
and their Prince is Satan, of whom is written in the Revelations, that he
seduceth the whole world, doing great signs, and causing fire to descend from
heaven in the sight of men, seducing the inhabitants of the earth, by reason of
the signs, which are given him to do. Sixthly the Aeriall powers offer
themselves; they join themselves to thundering and lightnings, corrupting the
air, causing pestilences and other evils; in the number of which, are the four
Angels, of whom the Revelation speaks, to whom it is given to hurt the Earth
and Sea, holding the four winds, from the four corners of the earth; and their
prince is called Meririm; he is the Meridian Devil, a boiling spirit, a devil
raging in the South, whom Paul to the Ephesians calls the Prince of the power
of this air, and the spirit which works in the children of disobedience. The
seventh mansion the furies possess, which are powers of evil, discords, war and
devastations, whose Prince in the Revelations is called in Greek Apollyon, in
Hebrew Abaddon, that is destroying and wasting. In the eighth place are the
accusers, or the inquisitors, whose Prince is Astarath, that is, a searcher
out: in the Greek language he is called Diabolos, that is an accuser, or
calumniator, which in the Revelations is called the accuser, of the brethren,
accusing them night and day before the face of our God. ^oreover the Tempters
and Ensnarers have the last place, one of which is present with every man,
which we therefore call the will Genius, and their Prince is Mammon, which is
interpreted covetousness: But all unanimously maintain that evil spirits do
^ander up and down in this inferior world, enraged against all, whom they
therefore call Devils, of whom Austine in his ^^rst book of the incarnation of
the word to Januarius, says: concerning the devils and his Angels contrary to
Virtues, the Eclesiasticall preaching has taught, that there are such things;
it what they are and how they are, he has not clear enough pounded: yet there
is this opinion amongst most, that this evil was an Angel, and being made an
Apostate, perswad* very many of the Angels to decline with himself, who even to
this day are called his Angels: Greece notwithstanding ^nketh not that all
these are damned, nor that they are all ^posely evil, but that from the
Creation of the world, the ^pensation of things is ordained by this means, that
the tor^^ting of sinful souls is made over to them: The other Theologians. say
that not any Devil was created evil, but it they were driven and cast forth
of Heaven, from the or^s of good Angels for their pride, whose fall not only
our ^ the Hebrew Theologians, but also the Assyrians, Arabians, ^^yptians and
Greeks do confirm by their tenants; Pherecydes Syrian describes the fall of
the Devils and that Ophis, that ^he Devilish serpent, was the head of that
rebelling Army; Trismegistus sings the same fall in his Pimander, and Homer
under the name of Ararus, in his verses; and Plutarch in his speech of usury,
signifies, that Empedocles knew that the fall of the devils was after this
manner: the devils also themselves often confess their fall: they therefore
being cast forth into this valley of misery, some that are nigh to us wander up
and down in this obscure air, others inhabit lakes, rivers and seas, others the
earth, and terrify earthly things, and invade those who dig Wells and Metals,
cause the gapings of the earth, strike together the foundation of mountains,
and vex not only men, but also other creatures; some being content with
laughter and delusion only, do contrive rather to weary men, then to hurt them,
some heightning themselves to the length of a Giants body, and again shrinking
themselves up to the smalness of the Pigmies, and changing themselves into
diverse forms, do disturb men with vain fear: other study lies and blasphemies,
as we read of one in the this book of Kings, saying, I will go forth and be a
lying spi^^ in the mouth of all the Prophets of Achab: but the worst (...) of
devils are those, who lay wait and overthrow passenge^ in their journeys, and
rejoice in wars and effusion of blood and afflict men with most cruel stripes:
we read of such i^ Matthew, for fear of whom no man durst pass that way
moreover the Scripture reckons up nocturnall, diurnall, (...) meridionall
devils, and describes other spirits of wicked^ by diverse names, as we read in
Esaias of Satyrs, Scricho^^ Syrenes, storkes, Owls; and in the Psalms of Aspes,
Basilisk Lions, Dragons; and in the Gospel we read of Scorpions ^^ Mammon and
the prince of this world and rulers of darkness of all which Beelzebub is the
prince, whom the Scripture ^^ leth the prince of wickedness. Porphyrie says,
their prince Serapis, who is also called Pluto by the Greeks, and a^^ Cerberus
is chief amongst them, that three-headed dog: (...) Because he is conversant in
three elements, air, water, ^ earth, a most pernicious devil; whence also:
Proserpina, (...) can do very much in these three elements, is their Prince
which she testifies of her self in her answers, in these verses. Of threefold
nature I Lucina fair,
The daughter am, sent from above the air;
The golden Phoebe am, and with heads trine,
Whom many forms do change, and the trine sign
Which I bear with forms of earth, fire, and air,
I for black mastives of the earth do care.


Origen's opinion concerning the devils, is: The spirits who act of their own
free will, left the service of God with their Prince the devil; if they began
to repent a little, are clothed with humane flesh; That further by this
repentance, after the resurrection, by the same means by the which they came
into the flesh, they might at the last return to the vision of God, being then
also freed from etheriall and aeriall bodies, and then all knees are to be
bowed to God, of Celestial, Terrestrial, and Infernal things, that God may be
all in all: Moreover Saint Ireneus approves the opinion of Justine Martyr, who
has said, Satan never durst speak blasphemy against God, before that the Lord
came on the earth, because that he knew not as yet his condemnation; but there
are many of the devils who are fallen, who hope for their salvation: Very many
think by the History of Paul the Hermit, written by Jerome, and reverenced by
the Church with Canonical hours, also by the Legend of Brandan, they are so
taught; and even by this Argument they maintain that their prayers are heard;
that we read in the Gospels, that Christ heard the prayers of the devils, and
granted that they should enter into the Herd of Swine; to these also agrees
the 71. Psalm, according to our supputation, but according to the supputation
of the Hebrews the 72, where we read, the Ethiopians shall fall before him, and
his enemies lick the dust; there it is read according to the Hebrew text, they
that inhabit the desert, shall bend their knees before him, that is, the aerie
spirits shall adore ^im, as the Cabalists affirm, and his enemies shall lick
the dust, which they understand of Zazell, and his Army: of which we read in
Genesis, Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life, and elsewhere the
Prophet says, because the dust of the earth is his bread; hence the Cabalists
think, that even some devils shall be saved, which opinion also it is manifest
that Origin was of.

CHAP. XIX. Of the bodies of the Devils.
COncerning the bodies of Angels, there is a great dissension betwixt the late
Divines, and Philosophers; for Thomas affirms that all angels are incorporeall,
yea evil angels, yet that they do assume bodies sometimes, which after awhile
they put off again; Dionysius in Divine names strongly affirms that Angels are
incorporeal. Yet Austin upon Genesis delivers his opinion, that Angels are said
to be Aerie, and Fiery Animals: because they have the nature of Aeriall bodies,
neither can they be dissolved by death, because the element which is more
active then passive is predominant in them; the same seem to affirm, that all
Angels in the beginning of their creation had Aeriall bodies, being formed of
the more pure, and superior part of the air, being more fit to act, then to
suffer and that those bodies were after the confirmation preserve in good
Angels, but changed in the evil in their fall, into the quality of more thick
air, that they might be tormented in the fire: Moreover Magnus Basilius does
attribute bodies no^ only to Devils, but also to pure angels, as certain thin,
Aerial pure spirits; to which Gregory Nazianzen does agree. Apuleius was of
opinion, that all angels had not bodies; for in the book of the Demon of
Socrates, he says, that there is a mo^^ propitious kind of spirits, which
being always free from corporeal bonds, are procured by certain prayers. But
Psellut the Platonist, and Christianus do think that the nature of spirits not
without a body; but yet not that the body of angels, and devils are the same;
for that is without all matter; but the bod^ of devils are in a manner
material, as shadows, and subjects passion, that they being struck are pained,
and may be burnt in the fire, into conspicuous ashes, which as is recorded, was
done in Tuscia. And although it be a spiritual body, yet it is most sensible,
and being touched, suffers; and although it be cut asunder, yet comes together
again, as air and water, but yet in the mean time is much pained. Hence it is
that they fear the edge of the sword, and any weapon. Hence in Virgil the
Sybill says to Aeneas, Do thou go on thy way and draw thy sword.

Upon which Servius says that she would have Aeneas have his sword
consecrated. Orpheus also describes the kinds of Demonaicall bodies; there is
indeed one body, which only abides the fire, but being seen, does not suffer,
which Orpheus calls fiery, and Celestial Demons: the other is contemperated
with the mixtion of fire, and air, whence they are called Etheriall, and
Aeriall; to which if any waterish thing was added, there arose a third kind,
whence they are Called watery, which sometimes are seen: to which if any
earthiness be added, this is not very thick; they are called Terrene Demons,
and they are more conspicuous, and sensible. Now the bodies of sublime Demons
are nourished of the most pure Etheriall ^lement, and are not rashly to be seen
of any, unless they be sent from God; being weaved of such bright threads, and
so small, that they transmit all the rays of our sight by their finess, and
reverberate them with splendour, and deceive by their sub^lety; of which
Calcidius says, Etheriall, and Aeriall Demons, because their bodies have not
so much fire as that they are conspicuous nor yet so much earth that the
solidity of them resists she touch, and their whole composure being made up of
the learnes, of the sky, and moisture of the air, has joined together an
indissoluble superficies. The other Demons are neither ^o appearable, nor
invisible, being sometimes conspicuous ^^e turned into diverse figures, and put
upon themselves bodies sike shadows, of blood-less images, drawing the
filthiness of ^ gross body, and they have too much communion with the Wood
(which the Ancients did call the wicked soul) and by reason of their affinity
with earth, and water, are also taken with Terrene pleasures, and lust; of
which sort are hobgoblins, and Incubi, and Succubi, of which number it is no
absurd conjecture to think that Melusina was: yet there is none of the Demons
(as Marcus supposes) is to be supposed male or female, seeing this difference
of sex belongs to compounds, but the bodies of Demons are simple, neither can
any of the Demons turn themselves into all shapes at their pleasure; but to the
fiery, and aerie it is easy so to do, viz: to change themselves into what
shapes their imagination conceives: now subterraneall and dark Demons, because
their nature being concluded in the streights of a thick and unactive body,
cannot make the diversity of shapes, as others can. But the waterie, and such
as dwell upon the moist superfices of the earth, are by reason of the moistness
of the element, for the most part like to women; of such kind are the fairies
of the Rivers, and Nymphs of the Woods: but those which inhabit dry places,
being of dryer bodies, show themselves i^ form of men, as Satyrs, or Onosceli,
with Asses legs, o^ Fauni, and Incubi, of which he says, he learned by
experience there were many, and that some of them oftentimes did desire and
made compacts with women to lie with them: and that there were some Demons,
which the French call Dusii, that did continually attempt this way of lust.

CHAP. XX. Of the annoyance of evil spirits, and the preservation we have by
good spirits.
It is the common opinion of Divines, that all evil spirits are of that nature,
that they hate God as well as men; therefore Divine providence has set over us
more pure spirits, with whom he has entrusted us, as with Shepherds, and
Governors, that they should daily help us, and drive away evil spirits from
us, and curb, and restrain them, that they should not hurt us as much as they
would; as is read in Tobia, that Raphael did apprehend the Demon called
Asmodeus, and bound him in the wilderness of the upper Egypt. Of these Hesiod
says, there are 30000 of Jupiters immortal spirits living on the earth, which
are the keepers of mortal men, who that they might observe justice and
merciful deeds, having clothed themselves with air, go every where on the
earth. For there is no Prince, nor potentate could be safe, nor any woman
continue uncorrupted, no man in this valley of ignorance could come to the end
appointed to him by God, if good spirits did not secure us; Or if evil spirits
should be permitted to satisfy the wills of men; As therefore amongst the good
spirits there is a proper keeper or protector deputed to every one,
corroborating the spirit of the man to good; so of evil spirits there is sent
forth an enemy ruling over the flesh, and desire thereof; and the good spirit
fights for us as a preserver against the enemy, and flesh; Now man betwixt
these con^enders is the middle, and left in the hand of his own Counsel, ^o
whom he will give victory; we cannot therefore accuse Angels, if they do not
bring the Nations entrusted to them, to the knowledge of the true God, to true
piety, and suffer them to fall into errors, and perverse worship: but it is to
be imputed to themselves, who have of their own accord declined from the right
path, adhering to the spirits of errors, giving victory to the Devil; for it
is in the hand of man to adhere to whom he please, and overcome whom he will;
by whom, if once the enemy the devil be overcome, he is made his servant, and
being overcome, cannot fight any more with another, as a wasp that has lost
his sting: to which opinion Origin assents in his book Periarchon, concluding,
that the Saints fighting against evil spirits, and overcoming, do lessen their
army, neither can he that is overcome by any, molest any more; As therefore
there is given to every man a good spirit, so also there is given to every man
an evil Diabolical spirit, whereof each seeks an union with our spirit, and
endeavors to attract it to it self, and to be mixed with it, as wine with
water; the good indeed, through all good works conformable to it self, change
us into Angels, by uniting us, as it is writ of John Baptist in Malachie:
Behold I send mine Angel before thy face: of which transmutation, and union it
is writ elsewhere; He which adheres to God is made one spirit with him. An evil
spirit also by evil works, studies to make us conformable to it self, and to
unite as Christ says of Judas, Have not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a
devil? And this is that which Hermes says, when a spirit has influence upon
the soul of man, he scatters the seed of his own notion, whence such a soul
being sown with seeds, and full of fury, brings forth thence wonderful
things, and whatsoever are the offices of spirits: for when a good spirit has
influence upon a holy soul, it does exalt it to the light of wisdom; but an
evil spirit being transfused into a wicked soul, does stir it up to theft, to
man slaughter, to lusts, and whatsoever are the offices of evil spirits. Good
spirits (as says Jamblicus) purge the souls most perfectly; and some bestow
upon us other good things; they being present do give health to the body,
virtue to the soul, security to the soul, what is mortal in us they take away,
cherish heat, and make it more efficacious to life, and by an Harmony do
always infuse light into an intelligible mind. But whether there be many
keepers of a man, or one alone, Theologians differ amongst themselves; we think
there are more, the Prophet saying, he has given his Angels a charge
concerning thee, that they should keep thee in all thy ways: which as says
Hierome, is to be understood of any man, as well as of Christ. All men
therefore are governed by the ministry of diverse Angels, and are brought to
any degree of virtue, deserts, and dignity, who behave themselves worthy of
them; but they which carry themselves unworthy of them are deposed, and thrust
down, as well by evil spirits, as good spirits, unto the lowest degree of
misery, as their evil merits shall require: but they that are attributed to the
sublimer Angels, are preferred before other men, for Angels having the care of
them, exalt them, and subject others to them by a certain occult power; which
although neither of them perceive, yet he that is subjected, feels a certain
yoke of presidency, of which he cannot easily acquit himself, yea he fears and
reverenceth that power, which the superior Angels make to flow upon
superiors, and with a certain terror bring the inferiors into a fear of
presidency. This did Homer seem to be sensible of, when he says, that the
Muses begot of Jupiter, did always as inseparable companions assist the Kings
begot of Jupiter, who by them were made venerable, and magnificent. So we read
that M. Antonius being formerly joined in singular friendship with Octavus
Augustus, were wont always to play together. But when as always Augustus went
away conqueror, that a certain Magician Counseled M. Antonius thus. O Antony,
what do thou do with that young man? shun, and avoid him, for although thou
art elder then he, and art more skillful then he, and art better descended then
he, and have endured the Wars of more Emperors, yet thy Genius does much dread
the Genius of this young man, and thy Fortune flatter his Fortune; unless thou
shall shun him, it seems wholly to decline to him. Is not the Prince like
other men, how should other men fear, and reverence him, unless a Divine
terror should exalt him, and striking a fear into others, depress them, that
they should reverence him as a Prince? Wherefore we must endeavor, that being
purified by doing well, and following sublime things, and choosing opportune
times, and seasons, we be entrusted or committed to a degree of sublimer, and
more potent Angels, who taking care of us, we may deservedly be preserred
before others.

CHAP. XXI. Of obeying a proper Genius, and of the searching out the nature
thereof.
AS every Region in the Celestials has a certain Star, and Celestial image
which has influence upon it before others: so also in supercelestials does it
obtain a certain Intelligence set over it, and guarding it, with infinite other
ministering spirits of its order, all which are called by a common name, the
Sons of Elohim Sabbath (...) i. e. Sons of the God of hosts. Hence, as often as
the most high does deliberate of War, or slaughter, or the desolation of any
Kingdom, or subduing of any people in these inferiors, then no otherwise, when
these shall come upon the earth there proceeds a conflict of these spirits
above, as it is written in Isaiah, The Lord of hosts shall visit the Army of
the high, in the heavens; and the Kings of the earth, in the earth; of which
conflict of spirits and presidents, we read also in Daniel, viz. of the Prince
of the Kingdom of the Persians, of the Prince of the Grecians, of the Prince of
the people of Israel; and of their conflict amongst themselves, of which also
Homer seemed formerly to be sensible of, when he sang. Great was the rumor in
the Court above,
When that the gods War mutually did move:
When Phoebus did to Neptune battle give,
Pallas with Mars the god of War did strive,
Diana did withstand in hostile way
Juno, and Latona did for to slay
Mercury attempt. --


Nevertheless seeing there be in every region spirits of all sorts, yet they
are more powerful there which are of the same order with the president of that
region. So in the Solary region, the Solary spirits are most potent; in the
Lunary, Lunany, and so of the rest. And hence it is that various events of our
affairs offer themselves, and follow us in places and provinces, being more
Fortunate in one place more then another, where viz. the Demon our Genius shall
receive more power, or we shall there obtain a more powerful Demon of the same
order. So Solary men, if they shall travel into a Solary region, or province,
shall be made there far more fortunate, because there they shall have more
powerful, and more advantageous conducters or Genii, by the present aid of
whom they shall be brought beyond expectation, and their own power, to happy
events. Hence it is that the choice of a place, region, or time does much
conduce to the happiness of life where any one shall dwell, and frequent,
according to the nature and instinct of his own Genius. Sometimes also the
change of the name does conduce to the same, for whereas the properties of
names being the significators of things themselves, do as it were in a glass
declare the conditions of their forms; thence it comes to pass, that names
being changed, the things oftentimes are changed. Hence the sacred writ does
not without cause bring in God, whilst he was blessing Abram, and Jacob,
changing their names, calling the one Abraham, and the other Israel. Now the
ancient Philosophers teach us to know the nature of the Genius of every man, by
Stars, their influx, and aspects, which are potent in the Nativity of any one;
but with instructions so diverse, and differing amongst themselves, that it is
much difficult to understand the mysteries of the heavens by their directions.
For Porphyrie seeks the Genius of the Star, which is the Lady of the Nativity:
but Maternus either from thence, or from the Planets, which had then most
dignities, or from that into whose house the Moon was to enter after that,
which at the birth of the man it does retain. But the Caldeans enquire after
the Genius, either from the Sun above, or from the Moon. But others, and many
Hebrews think it is to be enquired after from some corner of the heaven, or
from all of them. Others seek a good Genius from the eleventh house, which
therefore they call a good Demon; but an evil Genius from the sixth, which
therefore they call an evil Demon. But seeing the inquisition of these is
laborious, and most occult, we shallfar more easily enquire into the nature of
our Genius from our selves, observing those things which the instinct of nature
does dictate to, and the heaven inclines us to from our infancy, being
distracted with no contagion, or those things which the mind, the soul being
freed from vain cares, and sinister affections, and impediments being removed,
does suggest to us: These without all doubt are the persuasions of a Genius
which is given to every one from their birth, leading, and persuading us to
that whither the Star thereof inclines us to.

CHAP. XXII. That there is a threefold keeper of man, and from whence each of
them proceed.
EVery man has a threefold good Demon, as a proper keeper, or preserver, the
one whereof is holy, another of the nativity, and the other of profession. The
holy Demon is one, according to the Doctrine of the Egyptians, assigned to the
rational soul, not from the Stars or Planets, but from a supernatural cause,
from God himself, the president of Demons, being universal, above nature: This
does direct the life of the soul, and does always put good thoughts into the
mind, being always active in illuminating of us, although we do not always
take notice of it; but when we are purified, and live peaceably, then it is
perceived by us, then it does as it were speak with us, and communicates its
voice to us, being before silent, and studyeth daily to bring us to a sacred
perfection. Also by the aid of this Demon we may avoid the malignity of a Fate;
which being religiously worshipped by us in honesty, and sanctity, as we know
was done by Socrates; the Pythagorians think we may be much helped by it, as by
dreams, and signs, by diverting evil things, and carefully procuring good
things. Wherefore the Pythagorians were wont with one consent to pray to
Jupiter, that he would either preserve them from evil, or show them by what
Demon it should be done. Now the Demon of nativity, which is called the Genius,
does here descend from the disposition of the world, and from the circuits of
the Stars, which were powerful in his nativity. Hence there be some that
think, when the soul is coming down into the body, it does out of the quire of
the Demons naturally choose a preserver to it self, nor only choose this guide
to it self, but has that willing to defend it. This being the executor, and
keeper of the life, does help it to the body, and takes care of it, being
Communicated to the body, and helps a man to that very office, to which the
Celestials have deputed him, being born. Whosoever therefore have received a
fortunate Genius, are made thereby virtuous in their works, efficacious,
strong, and prosperous. Wherefore they are called by the Philosophers
fortunate, or luckily born. Now the Demon of profession is given by the Stars,
to which such a profession, or sect, which any man has professed, is
subjected, which the soul, when it began to make choice in this body, and to
take upon it self dispositions, does secretly desire. This Demon is changed,
the profession being changed; then according to the dignity of the profession,
we have Demons of our profession more excellent and sublime, which successively
take care of man, which procures a keeper of profession, as he proceeds from
virtue to virtue. When therefore a profession agrees with our nature, there is
present with us a Demon of our profession like unto us, and suitable to our
Genius, and our life is made more peaceable, happy, and prosperous: but when we
undertake a profession unlike, or contrary to our Genius, our life is made
laborious, and troubled with disagreeing patrons. So it falls out that some
profit more in any science, or art, or office, in a little time, and with
little pains, when another takes much pains, and studies hard, and all in vain:
and although no science, art, or virtue be to be contemned, yet that thou may
live prosperously, carry on thy affairs happily; in the first place know thy
good Genius, and thy nature, and what good the celestial disposition promises
thee, and God the distributor of all these, who distributes to each as he
pleases, and follow the beginnings of these, profess these, be conversant in
that virtue to which the most high distributor does elevate, and lead thee, who
made Abraham excel in justice, and clemency, Isaac with fear, Jacob with
strength, Moses with meekness, and Miracles, Joshua in war, Phinias in zeal,
David in religion, and victory, Solomon in knowledge, and fame, Peter in faith,
John in charity, Jacob in devotion, Thomas in prudence, Magdalen in
contemplation, Martha in officiousness. Therefore in what virtue thou think
thou can most easily be a proficient in, use diligence to attain to the
height thereof; that thou may excel in one, when in many thou can not: but
in the rest endeavor to be as great a proficient as thou can: but if thou
shall have the overseers of nature, and religion agreeable, thou shall find a
double progress of thy nature, and profession: but if they shall be
disagreeing, follow the better, for thou shall better perceive at some time a
preserver of an excellent profession, then of nativity.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the tongue of Angels, and of their speaking amongst
themselves, and with us.
WE might doubt whether Angels, or Demons, since they be pure spirits, use any
vocal speech, or tongue amongst themselves, or to us; but that Paul in some
place says, If I speak with the tongue of men, or angels: but what their
speech or tongue is, is much doubted by many. For many think that if they use
any Idiome, it is Hebrew, because that was the first of all, and came from
heaven, and was before the confusion of languages in Babylon, in which the Law
was given by God the Father, and the Gospel was preached by Christ the Son,
and so many Oracles were given to the Prophets by the Holy Ghost: and seeing
all tongues have, and do undergo various mutations, and corruptions, this alone
does always continue inviolated. Moreover an evident sign of this opinion is,
that though each Demon, and Intelligence do use the speech of those nations,
with whom they do inhabit, yet to them that understand it, they never speak in
any Idiome, but in this alone. But now how Angels speak it is hid from us, as
they themselves are. Now to us that we may speak, a tongue is necessary with
other instruments, as are the jaws, palate, lips, teeth, throat, lungs, the
aspera arteria, and muscles of the breast, which have the beginning of motion
from the soul. But if any speak at a distance to another, he must use a louder
voice; but if near, he whispers in his ear: and if he could be coupled to the
hearer, a softer breath would suffice; for he would slide into the hearer
without any noise, as an image in the eye, or glass. So souls going out of the
body, so Angels, so Demons speak: and what man does with a sensible voice, they
do by impressing the conception of the speech in those to whom they speak,
after a better manner then if they should express it by an audible voice. So
the Platonists say that Socrates perceived his Demon by sense indeed, but not
of this body, but by the sense of the etheriall body concealed in this: after
which manner Avicen believes the Angels were wont to be seen, and heard by the
Prophets: That instrument, whatsoever the virtue be, by which one spirit makes
known to another spirit what things are in his mind, is called by the Apostle
Paul the tongue of Angels. Yet oftentimes also they send forth an audible
voice, as they that cried at the ascension of the Lord, Ye men of Galile, why
stand ye here gazing into the heaven? And in the old law they spoke with diverse
of the Fathers with a sensible voice, but this never but when they assumed
bodies. But with what senses those spirits and Demons hear our invocations, and
prays, and see our ceremonies, we are altogether ignorant.

For there is a spiritual body of Demons everywhere sensible by nature, so
that it touches, sees, hears, without any medium, and nothing can be an
impediment to it: Yet neither do they perceive after that manner as we do with
different organs, but happily as sponges drink in water, so do they all sensible
things with their body, or some other way unknown to us; neither are all
animals endowed with those organs; for we know that many want ears, yet we know
they perceive a sound, but after what manner we know not.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the names of Spirits, and their various imposition; and of
the Spirits that are set over the Stars, Signs, Corners of the Heaven, and the
Elements.
MAny and diverse are the names of good spirits, and bad: but their proper, and
true names, as those of the Stars, are known to God alone, who only numbers the
multitude of Stars, and calls them all by their names, whereof none can be
known by us but by divine revelation, and very few are expressed to us in the
sacred. writ. But the masters of the Hebrews think that the names of Angels
were imposed upon them by Adam, according to that which is written, The Lord
brought all things which he had made unto Adam, that he should name them, and
as he called any thing, so the name of it was. Hence the Hebrew Mecubals think,
together with Magicians, that it is in the power of man to impose names upon
Spirits, but of such a man only who is dignified, and elevated to this virtue
by some divine gift, or sacred authority: but because a name that may express
the nature of divinity, or the whole virtue of angelical essences cannot be
made by any humane voice, therefore names for the most part are put upon them
from their works, signifying some certain office, or effect, which is required
by the quire of Spirits: which names then no otherwise then oblations, and
sacrifices offered to the Gods, obtain efficacy and virtue to draw any
spiritual substance from above or beneath, for to make any desired effect. I
have seen, and known some writing on virgin parchment the name and seal of some
spirit in the hour of the Moon: which when afterward he gave to be devoured by
a water-frog, and had muttered over some verse, the frog being let go into the
water, rains, and shours presently followed. I saw also the same man inscribing
the name of another Spirit with the seal thereof in the hour of Mars, which was
given to a Crow, who being let go, after a verse muttered over, presently there
followed from that corner of the heaven, whither he flew, lightnings, shakings,
and horrible thunders, with thick clouds: Neither were those names of spirits
of an unknown tongue, neither did they signify any thing else but their
offices. Of this kind are the names of those angels, Raziel, Gabriel, Michael,
Raphael, Haniel, which is as much as the vision of God, the virtue of God, the
strength of God, the medicine of God, the glory of God. In like manner in the
offices of evil Demons are read their names, a player, deceiver, a dreamer,
fornicator, and many such like. So we recieve from many of the ancient Fathers
of the Hebrews the names of Angels set over the planets, and signs; over Saturn
Zaphiel: over Jupiter Zadkiel: over Mars Camael: over the Sun Raphael: over
Venus Haniel: over Mercury Michael: over the Moon Gabriel. These are those
seven Spirits which always stand before the face of God, to whom is entrusted
the disposing of the whole celestial, and terrene Kingdoms, which is under the
Moon. For these (as say the more curious Theologians) govern all things by a
certain vicissitude of hours, days, and years, as the Astrologers teach
concerning the planets which they are set over; which therefore Mercurius
Trismegistus calls the seven governers of the world, who by the heavens, as by
instruments, distribute the influences of all the Stars and signs upon these
inferiors. Now there are some that do ascribe them to the Stars, by names
somewhat differing, saying, that over Saturn is set an intelligence called
Oriphiel; over Jupiter Zachariel; over Mars Zamael; over the Sun Michael; over
Venus Anael; over Mercury Raphael; over the Moon Gabriel. And every one of
these governs the world 354 years, and four months; and the government begins
from the Intelligence of Saturn; afterward in order, the Intelligences of
Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, the Moon, the Sun reign, and then the government
returns to the Spirit of Saturn. Abbas Tritemius writ to Maximilian Caesar a
special Treatise concerning these, which he that will thoroughly examine, may
from thence draw great knowledge of future times. Over the twelve Signs are set
these, viz. over Aries Malchidael; over Taurus Asmodel; over Gemini Ambriel;
over Cancer Muriel; over Leo Verchiel; over Virgo Hamaliel; over Libra Zuriel;
over Scorpio Barchiel; over Sagittarius Advachiel; over Capricorn Hanael; over
Aquarius Cambiel; over Pisces Barchiel. Of these Spirits set over the planets,
and Signs, John made mention in the Revelation, speaking of the former in the
beginning; And of the seven Spirits which are in the presence of ths Throne of
God, which I find are set over the seven planets, in the end of the book,
where he describes the platform of the heavenly City, saying that in the twelve
gates thereof were twelve Angels. There are again twenty eight Angels, which
rule in the twenty eight mansions of the Moon, whose names in order are those,
Geniel, Enediel, Amixiel, Azariel, Gabiel, Dirachiel, Seheliel, Amnediel,
Barbiel, Ardefiel, Neciel, Abdizuel, Jazeriel, Ergediel, Ataliel, Azeruel,
Adriel, Egibiel, Amutiel, Kyriel, Bethnael, Geliel, Requiel, Abrinael, Aziel,
Tagriel, Alheniel, Amnixiel. There are also four Princes of the Angels, which
are set over the four winds, and over the four parts of the world, whereof
Michael is set over the Eastern wind; Raphael over the Western; Gabriel over
the Northern; Nariel, who by some is called Uriel, is over the Southern. There
are also assigned to the Elements these, viz. to the air Cherub; to the water
Tharsis; to the Earth Ariel; to the Fire Seruph, or according to Philon,
Nathaniel. Now every one of these Spirits is a great Prince, and has much
power and freedom in the dominion of his own planets, and signs, and in their
times, years, months, days, and hours, and in their Elements, and parts of the
world, and winds. And every one of them rules over many legions; and after the
same manner amongst evil spirits, there are four which as most potent Kings are
set over the rest, according to the four parts of the world, whose names are
these, viz. Urieus, King of the East; Amaymon, King of the South; Paymon, King
of the West; Egin, King of the North, which the Hebrew Doctors perhaps call
more rightly thus, Samuel, Azazel, Azael, Mahazuel, under whom many other rule
as princes of legions, and rulers; also there are innumerable Demons of private
offices. Moreover the ancient Theologians of the Greeks reckon up six Demons,
which they call Telchines, others Alastores; which bearing ill will to men,
taking up water out of the river Styx with their hand, sprinkle it upon the
earth, whence follow Calamities, plagues, and famines; and these are said to be
Acteus, Megalezius, Ormenus, Lycus, Nicon, Mimon. But he which desires to know
exactly the distinct names, offices, places, and times of Angels, and evil
Demons, let him enquire into the book of Rabbi Simon of the Temples. And in his
book of lights, and in his treatise of the greatness of stature, and in the
treatise of the Temples of Rabbi Ishmael, and in almost all the Commentaries of
his book of formation, and he shall find it written at large concerning them.

CHAP. XXV. How the Hebrew Mecubals draw forth the sacred names of Angels out
of the sacred writ, and of the seventie two Angels, which bear the name of God,
with the Tables of Ziruph, and the Commutations of letters, and numbers.
THere are also other sacred names of good, and evil Spirits deputed to each
offices, of much greater efficacy then the former, which the Hebrew Mecubals
draw forth out of sacred writ, according to that art which they teach
concerning them; as also certain names of God are drawn forth out of certain
places: the general rule of these is, that wheresoever any thing of divine
essence is expressed in the Scripture, from that place the name of God may
rightly be gathered; but in what place soever in the Scripture the name of God
is found expressed, there mark what office lies under that name. Wheresoever
therefore the Scripture speaks of the office or work of any spirit, good, or
bad, from thence the name of that spirit, whether good, or bad, may be
gathered; this unalterable rule being observed, that of good spirits we receive
the names of good spirits, of evil the names of evil and let us not confound
black with white, nor day with night, nor light with darkness: which by these
verses, as by an example, is manifest. Let them be as dust before the face of
the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord scatter them: Let their ways be
darkness, And slippery, and let the angel of the Lord pursue them.

In the 35. Psalm with the Hebrews, but with us the 34. out of which the names
of those angels are drawn. (...) Midael, and (...) Mirael, of the order of
warriers. So out of that verse, Thou shall set over him the wicked, and Satan
shall stand at his right hand. Out of the Psalm 109. with the Hebrews, but with
the Latins the 108: (...) is extracted the name of the evil spirit Schii
(...) which signifies a spirit that is a work of engines. There is a certain
text in Exodus contained in three verses, whereof every one is writ with
seventy two letters, beginning thus: The first, Vajisa (...) the second, Vajabo
(...): the third, Vajot (...): which are extended into one line, viz. the
first, and third from the left hand to the right, but the middle in a contrary
order, beginning from the right to the left, is terminated on the left hand:
then each of the three letters being subordinate the one to the other, make one
name, which are seventy two names, which the Hebrews call Schemhamphorae: to
which if the divine name El or Jah (...) be added, they produce seventy two
trissyllable names of angels, whereof every one carries the great name of God,
as it is written: My Angel shall go before thee; observe him, for my name is in
him. And these are those that are set over the seventy two Celestial quinaries,
and so many Nations, and tongues, and joints of man's body, and cooperate with
the seventy two seniors of the Synagogue, and so many disciples of Christ: and
their names according to the extraction which the Cabalists make, are manifest
in this following table, according to one manner which we have spoke of. Now
there are many other manner or ways of making Schemhamphorae out of those
verses, as when all three are in a right order written one after the other from
the right to the left, besides those which are extracted by the tables of
Ziruph, and the tables of commutations, of which we made mention above. And
because these tables serve for all names, as well divine, as angelical, we
shall therefore subjoyn them to this Chapter.

These are the seventy two Angels, bearing the name of God, Schemhamphorae.

(...) Vehuiah (...) Leuuiah (...) Aniel (...) Mebahiah (...) Ieliel (...)
Pahaliah (...) Haamiah (...) Poiel (...) Sitael (...) Nelchael (...) Rehael
(...) Nemamiah (...) Elemiah (...) Ieiaiel (...) Ieiazel (...) Ieialel (...)
Mahasiah (...) Melahel (...) Hahahel (...) Harahel (...) Lelahel (...) Hahuiah
(...) Michael (...) Mizarael (...) Achaiah (...) Nithhaiah (...) Vevaliah (...)
Umabel (...) Cahethel (...) Haaiah (...) Ielahiah (...) Iahhel (...) Haziel
(...) Ierathel (...) Sealiah (...) Annauel (...) Aladiah (...) Seehaih (...)
Ariel (...) Mehekiel (...) Lauiah (...) Reiiel (...) Asaliah (...) Damabiah
(...) Hahaiah (...) Omael (...) Mihael (...) Meniel (...) Ieiazel (...) Lecabel
(...) Vehuel (...) Eiael (...) Mebahel (...) Vasariah (...) Daniel (...)
Habuiah (...) Hariel (...) Iehuaih (...) Hahasiah (...) Roehel (...) Hakamiah
(...) Lehahiah (...) Imamiah (...) Iibamiah (...) Leviah (...) Chavakiah (...)
Nanael (...) Haiaiel (...) Caliel (...) Monadel (...) Nithael (...) Mumiah

The Right Table of the Commutations.


The Averse Table of the Commutations.


Another Averse Table, called the irregular.


The Table of the Combinations of Ziruph.


Another table of Ziruph, which is called the Rational.


Tables of the Numeral transpositions.




CHAP. XXVI. Of finding out of the names of spirits, and Genius's from the
disposition of Celestial bodies.
THe ancient Magicians did teach an art of finding out the name of a spirit to
any desired effect, drawing it from the disposition of the heaven; as for
example, any Celestial Harmony being proposed to thee for the making an image
or ring, or any other work to be done under a certain constellation; if thou
will find out the spirit that is the ruler of that work; the figure of the
heaven being erected, cast forth letters in their number and order from the
degree of the ascendent, according to the succession of signs through each
degree by filling the whole circle of the heaven: then those letters which fall
into the places of the Stars the aid whereof thou would use, being according
to the number, and powers of those Stars, marked without into number, and
order, make the name of a good spirit: but if thou shall do so from the
beginning of a degree falling against the progress of the signs, the
resulting spirit shall be evil. By this art some of the Hebrew and Caldean
masters teach that the nature, and name of any Genius may be found out; as for
example, the degree of the ascendent of any ones, nativity being known, and the
other corners of the heaven being Coequated, then let that which had the more
dignities of Planets in those four corners which the Arabians call Almutez, be
first observed amongst the rest: and according to that in the second place,
that which shall be next to it in the number of dignities, and so by order the
rest of them, which obtain any dignity in the foresaid corners: this order
being used, thou may know the true place, and degree of them in the heaven,
beginning from the degree of the ascendent through each degree according to the
order of signs to cast 22. of the letters of the Hebrews; Then what letters
shall fall into the places of the aforesaid Stars, being marked, and disposed
according to the order found out above in the Stars, and rightly joined
together according to the rules of the Hebrew tongue, make the name of a
Genius: to which, according to the custom, some Monosyllable name of Divine
omnipotency, viz. El, or Iah is subjoyned. But if the casting of the letters be
made from an angle of the falling, and against the succession of signs, and the
letters which shall fall in the Nadir (that is the opposite point) of the
aforesaid Stars, be after that order as we said, joined together, shall make
the name of an evil Genius. But the Chaldeans proceed another way; for they
take not the Almutez of the corners, but the Almutez of the eleventh house, and
do in all things as has been said. Now they find out an evil Genius from the
Almutez of the angle of the twelfth house, which they call an evil spirit,
casting from the degree of the falling against the progress of the signs. There
are also the Arabians, and many others, and some Hebrews, who find out the
name of a Genius by the places of the five Hylegians, and making projection
always from the beginning of Aries, and the letters being found out according
to the order of Hylegians with the Astrologers, being reduced into a known
order, and being joined together, make the name of a good Genius: but they draw
the name of an evil Genius From the opposite Hylegian places, projection being
made from the last degree of Pisces against the order of signs. But other-some
do not take the places of Hylegians, but the places of Almutez upon the five
Hylegians making, projection from an Horoscope, as abovesaid: and these names
being thus distributed according to the proportioned numbers to the Starry
accoant, compacted of joined and changed letters, although unknown in sound,
and significative, we must of necessity confess may do more by the secret of
the chiefest Philosophy in a magic work, then significative names, whilst the
mind being astonished at the obscurity of them, and deeply intent, firmly
believing that something Divine is under it, does reverently pronounce these
words, and names, although not understood, to the glory of God, captivating
himself with a spiritual affection of piety, in the obedience of him.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the calculating Art of such names by the tradition of
Cabalists.
THere is yet another Art of these kinds of names, which they call calculatory,
and it is made by the following tables, by entering with some sacred, Divine, or
Angelical name, in the column of letters descending; by taking those letters
which thou shall find in the common angles under their Stars, and Signs: which
being reduced into order, the name of a good spirit is made of the nature of
that Star, or Sign, under which thou did enter: but if thou shall enter in
the column ascending, by taking the common angles above the Stars, and Signs
marked in the lowest line, the name of an evil spirit is made. And these are
the names of spirits of any order, or heaven ministering; as of good, so of bad,
which thou may after this manner multiply into nine names of so many orders,
in as much as thou may by entering with one name draw forth another of a
spirit of a superior order out of the same, as well of a good, as bad one. Yet
the beginning of this calculation depends upon the names of God; for every word
has a virtue in Magic, in as much as it depends on the word of God, and is
thence framed. Therefore we must know that every Angelical name must proceed
from some primary name of God. Therefore Angels are said to bear the name of
God, according to that which is written, because my name is in him. Therefore
that the names of good Angels may be discerned from the names of bad, there is
wont oftentimes to be added some name of Divine omnipotency, as El, or On, or
Jah, or Jod, and to be pronounced together with it: and because Jah is a name
of beneficence, and Jod the name of a diety, therefore these two names are put
only to the names of angels; But the name El, because it imports power, and
virtue, is therefore added not only to good but bad spirits, for neither can
evil spirits either subsist, or do any thing without the virtue of El, God. But
we must know that common angles of the same Star and Sign are to be taken,
unless entrance be made with a mixed name, as are the names of Genii, and those
of which it has bin spoken in the preceding Chapter which are made of the
dispositions of the heaven, according to the harmony of diverse Stars. For as
often as the table is to be entered with these, the common angle is to be taken
under the Star, or Sign of him that enters. There are moreover some that do so
extend those tables, that they think also if there be an entrance made with the
name of a Star, or office, or any desired effect, a Demon whether good, or bad,
serving to that office, or effect, may be drawn out. Upon the same account they
that enter with the proper name of any person, believe that they can extract
the names of the Genii, under that Star which shall appear to be over such a
person, as they shall by his Physiognomy, or by the Passions and inclinations
of his mind, and by his profession, and fortune, know him to be Martial, or
Saturnine, or Solarie, or of the nature of any other Star. And although such
kind of primary names have none or little power by their signification, yet
such kind of extracted names, and such as are derived from them, are of very
great efficacy; as the rays of the Sun collected in a hollow glass, do indeed
most strongly burn, the Sun it self being scarce warm. Now there is an order of
letters in those tables under the Stars, and Signs, almost like that which is
with the Astrologers, of tens, elevens, twelves. Of this calculatory Art
Alfonsus Cyprius once wrote, and I know who elss, and also fitted it to Latin
Characters; But because the letters of every tongue, as we showed in the first
book, have in their number, order, and figure a Celestial and Divine
original, I shall easily grant this calculation concerning the names of
spirits to be made not only by Hebrew letters, but also Chaldean, and Arabic,
Egyptian, Greek, Latin, and any other, the tables being tightly made after
the imitation of the presidents. But here it is objected by many, that it falls
out, that in these tables men of a differing nature, and Fortune, do oftentimes
by reason of the sameness of name obtain the same Genius of the same name. We
must know therefore that it must not be thought absurd that the same Demon may
be separated from any one soul, and the same be set over more. Besides, as
diverse men have many times the same name, so also spirits of diverse offices and
natures may be noted or marked by one name, by one and the same seal, or
Character, yet in a diverse respect: for as the serpent does sometimes typifie
Christ, and sometimes the devil; so the same names, and the same seals may be
applied sometimes to the order of a good Demon, sometimes of a bad. Lastly, the
very ardent intension of the invocator, by which our intellect is joined to the
separated intelligencies, causes that we have sometimes one spirit, sometimes
another, although called upon under the same name, made obsequions to us.

There follow the tables of the calculation of the names of spirits, good and
bad, under the presidency of the 7. Planets, and under the order of the 12.
Militant Signs.

The entrance of the evil Angels.
The entrance of the good Angels.


The entrance of the evil Angels.
The entrance of the good Angels.


CHAP. XXVIII.
How Sometimes names of Spirits are taken from those things over which they are
set.

I Find yet another kind of names given to the spirits from those things,
which they are set over, their names being as it were borrowed from the Stars,
or men, or places, or times, or such like things, the divine name being added
at the end, thus. The Spirit of Saturn is called Sabathiel: the Spirit of
Jupiter, Zedekiel: the Spirit of Mars, Madimiel: the Spirit of the Sun,
Semeliel, or Semeschia; the Spirit of Venus, Nogahel; the spirit of Mercury,
Cochabiah, or Cochabiel; the Spirit of the Moon, Jareahel, or Levanael. In like
manner also they call the Spirits which are set over the signs by the names of
signs in order; from Aries Teletiel, Suriel, Tomimiel, Sattamiel, Ariel,
Betuliel, Masniel, Acrabiel, Chesetiel, Gediel, Deliel, Dagymiel. And if we
call them from the latin words, Ariel, Tauriel, Geminiel, Cancrie^l, Leoniel,
Virginiel, Libriel, Scorpiel, Sagittariel, Capriel, Aquariel, Pisciel; and from
the Planets, Saturniel, Ioviel, Martiel, Soliah, Veneriel, Mercuriel, Lunael,
or Lunaiah. Now because (as we said before all spirits, as well good as bad,
seek for a union with man, which oftentimes in some sort they obtain, we read
that some men are called Gods, and angels, and Devils. So the names of them
which are endowed with any singular excellency of virtue, or with some
desperate wickedness have departed this life, have obtained a place amongst the
names of good and bad Demons, and are reckoned amonst them, whether we shall
think that the souls of those men or the Genii whether good or bad are
signified. So we readin Esdras that the name of the Archangel Ieremiel was from
Jeremiah the Prophet. So Zachariel from Zacharia; and Uriel from Uriah the
Prophet, whom Ioachim slew. In like manner Samuel, Ezekiel, Daniel, were the
names of Angels as well as Prophets. Phaniel is the name of an Angel, and of
the place where Jacob wrestled all night. Ariel is the name of an angel, and is
the same as the Lion of God; sometimes also it is the name of an evil Demon,
and of a City which is thence called Ariopolis, where the Idol Ariel was
worshipped, We find also in sacred writ that many names of evil Demons had
their rise from most wicked men, or from the habitations of wicked men; as the
name Astaroth which is the name of an evil Demon, was formerly the name of the
City of Og King of Basan, in which dwelt giants; in like manner Astaroth was
formerly the City of the Amorrhei; Raphaim a valley, and Ieramiel the country
of the Allophyli; and also they were the names of Idols, and evil Demons; as
Remma was the statue of the Idol of Damascus; Chamos the Idol of Moab; Melchim
the Idol of the Amonta; Bell the Idol of Babylonians; Adramelech the Idol of of
the Assirians; Dagon the Idol of the Allophyli. And Philo makes mention of
seven golden Statues which the Amorrhei had, which they called the holy Nymphs,
which being, called upon did show to the Amorthei every hour their works; and
the names of them were the names of women, which were the wives of seven wicked
men, which consecrated them after the flood, viz. Chanaan, Phut, Selath,
Nebroth, Abirion, Elath, Desuat, and there were put upon them precious stones,
engraven, and consecrated, one of which had a virtue to restore sight to the
blind; neither could any fire burn these stones; and the books were consecrated
with stones, which in like manner could not be burnt with fire, nor cut with
iron, nor obliterated with water, until the angel of the Lord took them, and
buried them in the bottom of the sea. Moreover we know that Nimbroth,
Chodorlaomor, Balach, Amaloch, names of Kings, have obtained the order of evil
spirits. Also giants are called with devils after a common name Enakim (...)
because they did not partake of the image of God e i. they have not received
the splendour of the spiritual intellect, but their reason has multiplied evil
kinds of frauds and sins. Therefore they are not reckoned of the specjes of man
(as says Rabbi Moses the Egyptian) but of the species of beasts, and devils,
only that they have the shape of a man, and such (he says) were the sons of
Adam, which were predecessors to Seth after Abel; of which the wise men of the
Hebrews said, that Adam begat Tochot (...) i. e. devils. But after that he had
found favor in the eyes of God, he begot Seth after his own image, and likness,
i. e. who according to the image of God obtained a human perfection, which he
that has not, is not reckoned of the species of man, by reason of the
pravities which are the cause of all evils and mischief. It is also (as says
Porphyry) the opinion of Magicians that evil souls are turned into the nature
of Devils, and become as pernicious as they; which Christ confirmed, when he
spoke concerning Judas Iscariot: Have not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a
devil? which devils therefore they call adventitious, because of men's souls,
they are become Devils. Whence the names of wicked men and devils are the same,
whether by these we call their souls, an evil Genii, which have taken upon them
the names of wicked men, as if as were their persons. Also Bebemoth, and the
Leviathan signify beasts, and devils. By these examples he that is inquisitive
shall find out the names of good, as well as of evil spirits.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Characters and Seals of spirits.
WE must now speak of the Characters and Seals of spirits. Characters therefore
are nothing else then certain unknowable letters and writings, preserving the
secrets of the Gods, and names of spirits from the use and reading of profane
men, which the Ancients called Hyeroglyphicall, or sacred letters, because
devoted to the secrets of the Gods only. For they did account it unlawful to
write the mysteries of (...) God with those Characters with which profane and
vulgar things were wrote. Whence Porphyry says, that the Ancients were willing
to conceal God, and divine virtues by sensible figures, and by those things
which were visible, yet signifying invisible things, as being willing to
deliver great mysteries in sacred letters, and explain them in certain
Symbolical figures; as when they dedicated all round things to the World, the
Sun, the Moon, hope, and fortune, a circle to the heaven, and parts of a circle
to the Moon, Pyranide and Obelisks to the fire, and Olympian Gods; a Cylindar
to the Sun and Earth; a man's Yard to generation and Juno, to whom also by
reason of the feminine sex the triangular figure. Wherefore this kind of
Characters has another root beside the pleasure, and authority of the
institutor, of him I say, who received power of instituting, and consecrating
these kind of letters, such as were many Prelates amongst diverse Nations, and
Sects of Religions, whose institutions came not to us, by reason that few of
them were delivered by the Authors scatteringly, and by fragments. Of this kind
of Character therefore are those which Peter Apponus notes, as delivered by
Honorius of Thebes, the figures whereof are such, being related to our Alphabet.

(...) A B C D E F G H I (...) K L M N O P Q R S (...) T V X Y Z.

CHAP. XXX. Another manner of making Characters, delivered by Cabalists.
AMongst the Hebrews I find more fashions of Characters, whereof one is most
ancient, viz. an Ancient writing which Moses, and the Prophets used, the form
of which is not rashly to be discovered to any; for those letters which they
use at this day, were instituted by Esdras. There is also amongst them a
writing which they call Celestial, because they show it placed and figured
amongst the Stars, no otherwise then the other Astrologers produce images of
signs from the lineaments of Stars. There is also a writing which they call
Malachim, or Melachim i. e. of Angels, or Regal; there is also another, which
they call the passing through the River, and the Characters and figures of all
these are such.

Celestial writing.

Zain Vau He Daleth Gimel Beth Aleph (...) Nun Mem Lamed Caph Iod Theth Cheth
(...) Tau Shin Res Kuff Zade Pe Ain Samech (...)

The writing called Malachim.

(...) Vau He Daleth Gimel Beth Aleph (...) Caph Iod Teth Cheth Zain (...)
Samech Samech Tau Nun Mem Lamed (...) Res Kuff Zade Pe Ain

The writing called the passing of the River.

Zain Vau He Daleth Gimel Beth Aleph (...) Samech Nun Mem Lamed Caph Iod Teth
Cheth (...) Tau Schin Res Kuph Zade Pe Ain (...)

There is moreover another fashion amongst the Cabalists, formerly had in great
esteem, but now it is so common, that it is placed amongst profane things, ans
it is this. The twenty seven Characters of the Hebrews may be divided into
three Classes, whereof every one (...) (...) l^^ters, viz. (...) which are the
seals or marks of simple numbers, and of intellectual things, distributed into
nine orders of Angels. The second has (...) the marks of tens, and of
Celestial things, in the nine Orbs of the heavens. The third has the other
four letters, with the five final, by order, viz. (...) which are marks of
hundreds, and inferior things, viz. four simple Elements, and of five kinds of
perfect compounds. They do now and then distribute these three Classes into
nine Chambers, whereof the first is of unites, viz. intellectual, celestial and
elemental: The second is of Twos. The third of Threes, and so of the rest:
These Chambers are framed by the interfection of four parallel lines,
intersecting themselves into right angles, as is expressed in this following
figure.



Out of which being dissected into parts, proceed nine particular figures, viz.



Which are of the nine Chambers, Characterizing their letter by the above
written Notariacon: which if itbe of one points shows the first letter of that
Chamber; if of two, the second; if of three, the third letter; as if thou
would frame the Character Michael (...), that comes forth thus, extended
with five figures, viz.



Which then are contracted to three figures, after this manner.



Which then are contracted into one, yet the points Notariacon are wont to be
omitted, and then there comes forth such a Character of Michael.



There is yet another fashion of Characters, common to almost all letters, and
tongues, and very easy, which is by the gathering together of letters; as if
the name of the Angel Michael be given, the Characters thereof shall be framed
thus.

In Hebrew.


In Greek.


In Latin.


And this fashion amongst the Arabians is most received; Neiis there any
writing, which is readily, and elegantly joined to it self, as the Arabic. Now
you must know that Angelical spirits, seeing they are of a pure intellect, and
altogether incorporeall, are not marked with any marks or Characters, and
pingible figures, or any other humane signs; but we not knowing their essence,
or quality, do from their names, or works, or otherwise, according to our
fancies devote and consecrate to them figures, and marks, by which we cannot
any way compel them to us, but by which we rise up to them; as not to be known
by such Characters, and figures, and first of all we do set our senses both
inward and outward, upon them; then by a certain admiration of our reason we
are induced to a Religious veneration of them, and then are wrapped with our
whole mind into an extaticall adoration, and then with a wonderful belief, an
undoubted hope, quickening love we calling upon them in spirit, and truth, by
true names and Characters do obtain from them that virtue, or power which we
desire.

CHAP. XXXI. There is yet another fashion of Characters, and concerning marks
of spirits which are received only by revelation.
THere is another kind of Character received by Revelation only, which can be
found out no other way: the virtue of which Characters is from the diety
revealing, of whom there are some secret works, breathing out a harmony of some
Divinity: or they are as it were some certain agreements or compacts of a
league betwixt us and them. Of this kind there was a mark or sign showed to
Constantine, which many did call the Cross write upon in Latin letters, In hoc
vince i. e. in this overcome; and there was another revealed to Antiochus by
Surname Soteris in the figure of a pentangle, which signifies health; for being
resolved into letters it speaks the word (...) i. e. Health: in the faith, and
virtue of which signs both Kings obtained a great victory against their
enemies. So Judas, who by reason of that was afterward surnamed Machabeus,
being to fight with the Jews against Antiochus Eupator, received from an Angel
that notable sign (...) in the virtue of which they first slew 14000 with an
infinite number of Elephant; then again 35000. of their enemies: For that sign
did represent the name Jehovah and was a memorable emblem of the name of 72.
letters by the equality of number, and the exposition thereof is, (...) i. e.
Who is there amongst the strong as Jehovah? The figures of these memorable
signs are to be framed thus.



Moreover of those signs and Characters Porphyrie speaks in his book De
Responsis, saying that they did signify the gods themselves, by whom they did
enjoy things, and by which they were called forth, and which were to be offered
to them: And did show the figures of the images what they should be; and that
he perceived these things concerning the Oracle of Proserpina. He says
moreover that Hecate commanded how images should be constituted to her, and
that they were to be cirrounded with wormwood, and that domestic mice were to
be painted; and the finest ornaments such as were most pleasing to her, and so
many mice as her forms were to be taken; then blood, myrrh, storax, and other
things were to be burnt: Which things if they were done, she would appear, and
answer the worker thereof by dreams. But we shall here underwrite the Oracle of
Hecate; for thus she speaks, Mark I will teach What statue thou shall make
For me; boughs of the wood, and wormwood take,
Then garnish it, on it paint domestic mice;
Let ornaments be fair, and of great price.
Then frankincense, myrrh, storax mix't with blood
Of mice; then sing thou words secret and good;
As thou see shapes of mine, so on it lay,
As many real mice; then take the bay,
And out of the trunk thereof a case prepare
To put it in; then see thou have a care,
That to the Statue thou devoutly pray,
Also thy debts, and vows take care thou pay;
If that these things that here required be,
Thou shall perform, in dreams thou shall me see.


Such were in old time the secret mysteries of the gods and Demons of the
Gentiles, by which they did persuade themselves to be compelled, detained, and
bound by men. Hence Jamblicus, and Porphyrie teach that he that calls upon
sacred Demons must observe them, with their proper honor, and to distribute to
each what is convenient to every one, as thanks, oblations, gifts, sacrifices,
with words, Characters suitable to their conditions, and most like unto them; or
elss he should never obtain the presence of the Dieties, and Demons, and the
desired effect; Moreover if they were called upon, yet they shall be
constrained to hurt them especially who did it neglegently.

CHAP. XXXII. How good spirits may be called up by us, and how evil spirits may
be overcome by us.
BY the efficacy of Religion the presence of spirits does dispose the effect,
neither can any work of wonderful efficacy in Religion be done, unless some
good spirit the ruler and finisher of the work be there present. Now good
spirits, if they may be diverse ways called up, yet can by no bonds, or very
hardly be allayed by us, but we must by some sacred things beseech them, as we
read in Apuleius, by the Celestial Stars, by the infernal dieties, by the
natural elements, by the silence of the night, by the increase of the Country
of Nilus, by the secrets of Memphis and elsewhere in Porphyrie: Thou who art
risen out of the mud, who sit in thy place, who sailest in ships, who every
hour do change thy shape, and art changed in each sign of the Zodiac. (...)
these, and such like Symbolicall orations and hymns, because they are signs
of Divine virtues, spirits did sometimes apply themselves to humane uses: not
as being compelled by any kind of necessity, but of their own accord, and by a
kind of custom did, being overcome by the prayers of them that called on them,
more easily yield: whence in Porphyrie in his book De Responsis Hecate says, I
by thy prayers being overcome
Came thither --
And in another place in the same book he says, Conquered by prayer the
Dieties above
Come down on the earth and future things foreshew.


Also the divining of suitable things works so with man's mind, that good spirits
do assist us willingly, and communicate their power and virtue to us, daily
helping us with illuminations, inspirations, oracles, prophecyings, dreams,
miracles, prodigies, divinations, and auguries, and working upon and acting
upon our spirits, as images like to them, by framing them by their influences,
and making them most like to themselves even so far, as that oftentimes our
spirit does as surely work wonderful things as the Celestial spirits are wont
to do. But evil spirits are overcome by us through the assistance of the good,
especially when the petitioner is very pious and devout, and sings forth sacred
words, and a horrible speech, as by conjuring the Divine power by the venerable
names, and signs of supernatural powers, by miracles, by Sacraments, by sacred
mysteries, and such like; which conjurations, or adjurations, in as much as
they are done by the name and power of Religion, and Divine virtue, those evil
spirits are afraid of; whence also oftentimes profane men do bind or allay by
such kind of sacred conjurations, evil spirits, not enduring such things,
whence Cyprian in his book, Quod Idola Dii non sint, says; that spirits being
adjured by the true God do presently yield to us, and confess, and are forced
to go out of possessed bodies, and either presently leap out, or by degrees
vanish, according as the faith of the Patient is helping, or grace of the
swearer aspires. And Athanasius in his book De Variis Questionibus says that
there is no word more terrible and more destructive to the power of Devils then
the beginning of the 68. Psalm, Arise O God, and let thine enemies be
scattered; For as soon as that word is spoken, the devil vanishes away
howling. And Origin against Celsus says, that the naming the name Jesus has
oftentimes cast many devils as well out of the souls of men as their bodies,
and has exercised much power in them out of whom the devils were cast. Also we
do oftentimes with threats and revilings bind or repel evil spirits,
especially the lesser, as Haggs, Incubi, and such like, as we read in Lucan
concerning that witch saying, I will now call you up by a true name,
The stygian dogs I in the light supreme
Will leave, and follow you also through grave,
From all the Urnes in death I will you save,
Thee O Hecate, unto the gods will show,
(To whom to address thy self in other hew,
Thou wast wont) in wan, form and without grace,
And thee forbid to change Erebus his face.


And in Philostratus we read, when Apollonius, and his companions were
traveling in a bright Moon-shining night, that the Phantasme of a Hagge met
them, and some times changed it self into this shape, and some times intothat,
and some times vanished out of their sight. Now as soon as Apollonius knew what
it was, grievously reviling it advised his companions to do the like: for he
knew that that was the best remedy against such invasions. His companions did
as he advised, and the Phantasme presently with a noise vanished away like a
shadow: For so fearful is this kind of spirits, that they are moved, tremble,
and are compelled by a feigned terror, and false and impossible threats.
Whence Chereon the holy scribe says that these are those things by which
especially the spirits are compelled. There is moreover as has been above
said, a certain kind of spirits not so noxious, but most near to men, so that
they are even affected with humane passions, and many of these delight in man's
society, and willingly dwell with them: Some of them dote upon women, some upon
children, some are delighted in the company of diverse domestic and wild
animals, some inhabit Woods and Parks, some dwell about fountains and meadows.
So the Fairies, and hobgoblins inhabit Champian fields; the Naiades fountains:
the Potamides Rivers; the Nymphs marshes, and ponds: the Oreades mountains; the
Humedes Meadows; the Dryades and Hamadryades the Woods, which also Satyrs and
Sylvani inhabit, the same also take delight in trees and brakes, as do the
Naptae, and Agaptae in flowers: the Dodonae in Acorns; the Paleae and Feniliae
in fodder and the Country. He therefore that will call upon them, may easily
do it in the places where their abode is, by alluring them with sweet fumes,
with pleasant sounds, and by such instruments as are made of the guts of
certain animals and peculiar wood, adding songs, verses, enchantments suitable
to it, and that which is especially to be observed in this, the singleness of
the wit, innocence of the mind, a firm credulity, and constant silence;
wherefore they do often meet children, women, and poor and mean men. They are
afraid of and fly from men of a constant, bold, and undaunted mind, being no
way offensive to good and pure men, but to wicked and impure, noxious. Of this
kind are hobgoblins, familiars, and ghosts of dead men. Hence Plotinus says,
that the souls of men are sometimes made spirits: and of men well deserving are
made familiars which the Greeks call Eudemons, i. e. blessed spirits: but of
ill deserving men, hags, and hobgoblins, which the Greeks call Cacodemons, i.
e. Evil spirits; But they may be called ghosts when it is uncertain whether
they have deserved well or ill. Of these apparitions there are diverse examples;
such was that which Pliny the Junior makes mention of concerning the house of
Athenodorus the Philosopher of Tharsis in which there appeared with a sudden
horrible noise the ghost of an old man. And Philostratus tells of the like of a
hag of Menippus Lycius the Philosopher turned into a beautiful woman of
Corinth, whom Tyaneus Apollonius took to be a hobgoblin; the same at Ephesus,
the like in the shape of an old beggar who was the cause of the pestilence, who
therefore being by his command stoned, there appeared a mastive dog, and
presently the pestilence ceased. We must know this that whosoever shall
intellectually work in evil spirits, shall by the power of good spirits bind
them; but he that shall work only worldlily, shall work to himself judgment
and damnation.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the bonds of spirits, and of their adjurations, and castings
out.
THe bonds by which spirits are bound, besought, or cast out, are three; Some
of them are taken from the elementall world, as when we adjure a spirit by any
inferior and natural things of affinity with or adverse to them, in as much
as we would call upon or cast them out, as by flowers, and herbs, by animals,
by snow, by ice, by hell, by fire, and such like, as these also are oftimes
mixed with Divine praises, and blessings and consecrations, as appears in the
song of the three Children, and in the Psalm, Praise ye the Lord from the
heavens, and in the consecration and blessing of the Paschal taper. This bond
does work upon the spirits by an apprehensive virtue under the account of love,
or hatred, in as much as the spirits are present with or favor, or abhor any
thing that is natural or against nature, as these things themselves love or
hate one the other. Hence that of Proclus, As the Lion fears a cock, especially
a white cock: so does a spirit appearing in the form of a lion vanish away at
the sight of a cock. The second bond is taken from the Celestial world, viz:
when we adjure them by the heaven, by Stars, by their motions, rays, light,
beauty, clearness, excellency, fortitude, influence, and wonders, and such
like: and this bond works upon spirits by way of admonition, and example. It
has also some Command, especially upon the ministering spirits, and those who
are of the lowest orders. The third bond is from the Intellectual and divine
world, which is perfected by religion, that is to say, when we swear by the
sacraments, by the miracles, by the divine names, by the sacred Seals and other
mysteries of Religion; wherefore this bond is the highest of all and the
strongest, working upon the spirits by Command and power; But this is to be
observed, that as after the universal providence, there is a particular one;
and after the universal soul, particular souls; so in the first place we
Invocate by the superior bonds, and by the names and powers which rule the
things, then by the inferior, and the things themselves; We must know further,
that by these bonds not only Spirits, but also all creatures are bound, as
Tempests, burnings, floods, plagues, diseases, force of arms, and every
animal, by assuming them, either by the manner of Adjuration, or by the way of
deprecation or benediction, as in the charming of Serpents, besides the
natural and celestial, by rehearsing out of the mysteries and Religion, the
curse of the Serpent in terrestial Paradise, the lifting up of the Serpent in
the wilderness; moreover by assuming that verse of the Psalm 91. Thou shall
walk upon the Aspe and the Basiliske, and shall tread upon the Lion and Dragon:
Superstition also very much prevails in these, by the translating of some
Sacramental rites to that which we Intend to bind or hinder, as, of
Excommunication, burial or exequies for the driving away of diseases, Serpents,
Mice or Worms, which thing we read to have bin thus done in diverse places,
and it is wont to be done even as yet.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Animasticall order, and the Heroes.
AFter the Quires of the blessed spirits, the Animastic al order is the next,
which the Hebrew Theologians call Issim, that is, strong and mighty men; the
Magicians of the Gentiles, call Heroes and Demigods, or gods half men: whom
Fulgentius, an Author not to be contemned, supposes were so called, either
because that for the meanness of their desert they are not judged worthy of
Heaven, nor yet are accounted Terrestrical for the reverence of Grace; of this
kind in old time were Priapus, Hippo, Vertumnus; or because they being eminent
in this life for divine virtues, and benefits for mankind, after this mortal
man put off, are translated into the quire of the blessed gods; always
providing for mortal men the same virtues and benefits which they long since
had in this life: or because they were procreated from the secret seed of the
superiors, whom they think were begotten by the mixture of Gods or Angels with
men, and therefore obtaining a certain middle nature, so as they are neither
Angels nor men: which opinion Lactantius also follows; and there are even at
this time who have commerce and conjugall mixture with spirits; and all now
believe that Merline, a British Prophet, was the son of a Spirit, and born of a
virgin: and also they imagined, that Plato the Prince of wisdom was born of a
virgin, impregnated by a phantasme of Apollo. And it is delivered in Histories,
that certain women of the Goths (which they call Alrumnae) eminent both for
beauty and ingenuity, long since at Filimire, or (as others say) at
Idanthresie, going forth out of the tents of the King of the Goths, wandered in
the deserts of Scythia in Asia beyond the Marshes of Meotis, and there being
Impregnated by Fanni and Satyrs, brought forth the first Hunni; more over
Psellus is the Author, that Spirits sometimes cast forth seed, from the which
certain little creatures arise: Therefore these Heroes have no less, power in
disposing and ruling these inferior things, than the Gods and angels, and have
both their offices and their dignities distributed to them: and therefore to
them no otherwise than to the Gods themselves were Temples, Images, Altars,
Sacrifices, Vows, and other mysteries of religion dedicated. And their names
invocated had divine and magical virtues for the accomplishing of some
miracles: which thing Eusebius declares that many tried by the invocation of
the name of Apollonius of Tyana; and more of this kind we read of, both in the
Poets, and also in the Historians and Philosophers, concerning Hercules, Atlas,
Aesculapius and the other Heroes of the Gentiles; but these are the follies of
the Gentiles; but as concerning our holy Heroes we beleve that they excel in
divine power, and that the soul of the Meschihae does rule over them (as the
Theologians of the Jews also testify) that is Jesus Christ, who by diverse of
his Saints, as it were by members fitted for this purpose, does administer and
distribute diverse gifts of his grace in these inferior parts, and every one of
the Saints do enjoy a peculiar gift of working. Whence they being implored by
us with diverse prayers and supplications according to the manifold distribution
of graces, every one does most freely bestow their gifts, benefits, and graces
on us much more readily, truly, and also more abundantly than the Angelical
powers, by how much they are nigher to us, and more allied to our natures, as
they who in times past were both men, and suffered humane affections and
infirmities; and their names, degrees and offices are more known unto us;
Therefore out of the number of these almost Infinite, there are twelve chief,
viz. the twelve Apostles of Christ, who (as the evangelical truth says (sit
upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, who in the
Revelations are distributed upon twelve foundations, at the twelve gates of the
heavenly City, who rule the twelve Signs, and are sealed in the twelve precious
Stones, and the whole world is distributed to them; but their true names are
these; the first (...) Symehon Hacephi this is Peter. The second (...) Alousi,
whom we call Andrew The third (...) Jahacobah, this is James the greater. The
fourth (...) Polipos whom we call Philip. The fifth (...) Barachiah, this is
Bartholomew. The sixth (...) Johanah, whom we name John. The seventh is (...)
Thamni, whom we call Thomas. The eighth is called (...) Medon, for whom we say
Matthew. The ninth is (...) Jahacob, this is James the less. The tenth is
(...)* Catepha, this is Thadeus, the eleventh (...) Samam, who is Simon the
Canaanite. The twelfth (...) Matattiah, who is called Matthias. After these are
the seventy two disciples of Christ, who also themselves do rule so many
Quinaries of Heaven, and Tribes, People, Nations and Tongues. After whom is an
Innnumerable multitude of Saints, who also themselves have received diverse
Offices, Places, Nations and People into their protection and patronage, whose
most apparent miracles at the faithful prayers of those that Invocate them, we
plainly see and confess.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Mortal and Terrestrial Gods.
NExt after these are the mortal Gods, whom in like manner also we call
Heroes, and Terrestrial gods, or Companions of the superior Gods: viz. Kings,
Princes, and Priests, by whom this world is governed, and disposed by their
Laws, whom therefore as Gods we receive, worship and reverence, because God
himself has suffered his name to be communicated to them, and by a proper
denomination has confirmed it to them, calling them gods, even as he spoke to
Moses, saying, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh; and elsewhere he has
commanded concerning them saying, Thou shall not detract from the gods; and
again, if Theft shall lie hid, the Master of the House shall apply himself to
the Gods; and the Psalmist says, The princes of the people were gathered
together with the God ^^ Abraham: because that the mighty gods of the Earth are
vehemently lifted up; and elsewhere God stood in the counsels of the gods, but
in the midst he Judges the gods; and a little after, I have said ye are all
gods, and sons of the most high; moreover he has commanded concerning the
worshipping and reverencing of them, decreeing tithes and first fruits for
them, and giving them the power of the sword, and forbidding any to curse them,
and commanding obedience to be yielded to them, though wicked. Hence all
Antiquity called their princes gods, and worshipped them as divine powers, as
Janus testifies in Ovid, in his first book of Fasti saying., When the earth of
the Gods was potent, I did reign
And dieties mixed were with seats humane.


And Divine Plato in his third book de Republica appointed that princes both
alive and dead should be celebrated with divine honors, which Institution has been received amongst all Nations, even from the first age, viz. to deify their
princes with divine honors, and to consecrate them with eternal memory; Hence
they did impose their never dying names on Cities, Provinces, Mountains,
Rivers, Lakes, Islands and Seas; And dedicated to them with great pomp,
Piramides, Colosses, triumphal Arches, Trophies, Statues, Temples, Plays,
Feasts; and also called the Heavens, Stars, Dyaes and Months by their names.
Hence January from Janus, July from Julius, August from Augustus; so dies
Mercurii from Mercury Trismegist Dies Jovis from Jupiter, which custom we read
was observed not only by the Egyptians Greeks and Romans, but also by the
extreme barbarous people, as Goths, Danes and Teutones. Hence Saxo Grammaticus
being witness, what day the former call Dies Mercurii, these do call Othines
day: what day the former name from Jupiter, these call Thors day, from Othin
and Thor in times past Kings of Gotland and Denmark; neither are they for any
other reason called Goths, then that they callin their language their chiefest
god Got. Hence also the Dutch are thus called, because they named the god Mars,
whom they worshipped, Teutan; by which name the Gauls also called Mercury.
Therefore are Kings and Priests (if they be Just) companions of the gods, and
endowed with the like power. Hence they cure diseases by their touch and word
and sometimes command the times and the Heavens, as Virgil, sang of Augustus,
It rains all night, in the morn the rays return;
Caesar with Jove divided has the throne.


And the Scripture testifies of Joshuah, who fighting in Gibeon, commanded the
Sun and Moon, saying, Sun stand still in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of
Ajalon; and the Sun and the Moon stood still at his command, neither did the
Sun set in the space of one day, until he had revenged himself of his Enemies,
and the Lord obeyed the voice of man; Also Moses divided the red Sea, and
Joshua Jordan, and led the people over dry shod; The like did Alexander the
Macedonian, leading forth his Army; Sometimes also they are endowed with a
prophetic spirit, as we read of Chaiaphas in the holy Scripture, that he
prophesied, for that he was High Priest that year: Seeing therefore it is so
that the Lord of the Earth would that Kings and Priests be called gods by
communication of name and power, surely we ought also to deserve well of them,
and to prefer their Judgments before ours, and simply to obey, supplicate and
adore, and worship with all kind of worship and reverence the most high God in
them.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Man, how he was created after the Image of God.
THe most abundant God (as Trismegistus says) has framed two Images like
himself, viz. the world and man, that in one of these he might sport himself
with certain wonderful operations: but in the other, that he might enjoy his
delights, who seeing he is one, has created the world one, seeing that he is
infinite, has created the world round seeing he is eternal, he has created
the world incorruptible and everlasting: seeing he is Immense, he has created
the world the greatest of all things; seeing he is the chiefest life, he has
adorned the world with vital seeds, begetting all things out of himself; and
seeing he is omnipotent, by his will alone, not by any necessity of nature, he
has created the world, not out of any foregoing matter, but out of nothing;
and seeing he is the chief goodness, embracing his word, which is the first
Idea of allthings, with his choicest will, and essential love, he has
fabricated this external world after the example of the Internal, viz. Ideall
world, yet sending forth nothing of the essence of the Idea, but created of
nothing that which he had from eternity by the Idea: God also created man after
his Image; for as the world is the Image of God, so man is the Image of the
world. Hence some think that it is spoken, that man is not created simply the
Image of God, but after the Image, or the Image of the Image; therefore he is
called Microcosme, that is the lesser world; The world is a Rational creature,
Immortall'; man in like manner is rational but mortal, that is, dissolvable;
for (as Hermes says) seeing the world it self is immortal, it is Impossible
that any part of it can perish. Therefore to dye, is a vain name, and even as
Vacuum is no where, so also Death; Therefore we say a man dies, when his Soul
and body are separated, not that any thing of them perishes or is turned into
nothing. Notwithstanding the true Image of God is his word. The wisdom, life,
light and Truth existing by himself, of which Image man's soul is the Image, in
regard of which we are said to be made after the Image of God, not after the
Image of the world, or of the creatures; for as God cannot be touched, nor
perceived by the ears, nor seen with the eyes; so the soul of man can neither
be seen, heard nor touched. And as God himself is infinite, and cannot be
compelled by any, so also the mind of man is free, and cannot be enforced or
bounded. Further, as God comprehends this whole world, and whatsoever is in
it in his mind alone; so man's mind comprehends it even in thought; and that
which is peculiar to him alone with God, as God moves and governs all this
world by his beck alone, so man's mind rules and governs his body Therefore
it was necessary, that the mind of man thus sealed by the word of God, should
put on also the corporeal man, after the most complete example of the world:
Therefore man is called the other world, and the other Image of God, because he
has in himself All that is contained in the greater world, so that there
remains nothing which is not found even truly and really in man himself, and
all these things do perform the same duties in him, as in the great world:
There are in him the four Elements, with the most true proprieties of their
nature, and in him an ethereal body, the Chariot of the soul in proportion
corresponding to the Heaven: There are in him the vegetative life of Plants,
the senses of animals, of celestial spirits, the Angelical reason, and the
Divine understanding, and the true conjunction, and divine possession of all
these things flowing together into one. Hence in sacred Letters man is called
every creature, and not only man being made another world does comprehend all
the parts thereof in himself but also does receive and contain even God
himself. Hence Xystus the Pythagorian, says, that the soul of man is the
temple of God: which thing Paul also more clearly expressed, saying, ye are the
Temple of God; and the same the sacred Scripture testifies in many places:
Therefore man is the most express Image of God, seeing man contains in himself
all things which are in God: but God by a certain eminency contemeth all things
through his power, and simply, as the cause and beginning of all things; but he
has given this power to man that he should in like manner contein all things,
but by a certain act and composition, as the knot, tie, and bond of all things:
Therefore man only rejoices in this honor, that he has a similitude with all,
operation with all and conversation with all: He Symbolizeth with the matter in
a proper subject; with the Elements in a fourfold body; with Plants in a
vegetative virtue; with animals in a sensitive faculty; with the Heavens in an
Etherial spirit, and influx of the superior parts on the inferior: with the
Angels in understanding and wisdom; with God, in containing all things: He is
preserved with God, and the Intelligences, by faith and wisdom: with the
heavens and heavenly things, by reason and discourse: with all Inferior
things, by sense and Dominion: and acts with all, and has power on all, even
on God himself, by knowing and loving him; and as God knows all things, so
also man can know all things Intelligible, seeing he has for an adequate
Object, Ens in general, or (as others say) Truth it self; neither is there any
thing found in man, nor any disposition, in which something of divinity may not
shine forth; neither is there any thing in God, which may not also be
represented in man: Whosoever therefore shall know himself, shall know all
things in himself; especially he shall know God, according to whose Image he
was made; he shall know the world, the resemblance of which he bears; he
shall know all creatures, with which he Symbolizeth; and what comfort he can
have and obtain, from Stones, Plants, Animals, Elements, Heavens, from Spirits,
Angels, and every thing, and how all things may be fitted for all things, in
their time, place, order, measure, proportion and Harmony, and can draw and
bring to himself, even as a Loadstone Iron; And Geber in his sum of Alchimy
teaches, that no man can come to the perfection of this art, who shall not
know the principles of it in himself; but by how much the more every one shall
know himself, by so much he obtains the greater power of attracting it, and
by so much operateth greater and more wonderful things, and will ascend to so
great perfection, that he is made the Son of God, and is transformed into that
Image which is God, and is united with him, which is not granted to Angels,
the world, or any creature, but to man only, viz. to have power to be made the
Son of God, and to be united to him: but man being united to God, all things
which are in man, are united, especially his mind, then his spirits and animal
powers, and vegetative faculty, and the Elements are to the matter, drawing
with it self even the body, whose form it has been, leading it forth into a
better condition, and an heavenly nature, even until it be glorified into
Immortality. And this which we have spoken is the peculiar gift of man, to whom
this dignity of the divine image is proper, and common to no other creature:
But there are some Theologians, who make those powers of man's memory,
understanding, will, the image of the Divine trinity; and there are who going
further, do place this image not only in these three faculties which they call
first acts, but also in the second acts; And as the memory represents the
father, the understanding the son, the will the Holy Ghost; So also the word
produced from our understanding, and love flowing from our will, and the
understanding it self having a present object and producing it, do set forth
the son, spirit and father; and the more mysterious Theologians teach that
moreover all our members do represent something in God whose image they bear;
and that even in our passions we represent God, but by a certain Analogy: for
in the holy word we read of the wrath, fury, repentance, complacency, love,
hatred, pleasure, delectation, delight, indignation of God, and such like, and
we have above spoken something of the members of God, which may be congruent
here; Also Mercurius Trismegistus confessing the divine Trinity, describes it
understanding, life and brightness, which elsewhere he calls the word, the
mind and the spirit, and says that man made after the image of God, does
represent the same Trinity; for there is in him an understanding mind, a
verifying word, and a spirit, as it were a Divine brightness diffusing it self
on every side, replenishing all things, moving and knitting them together: but
this is not to be understood of the natural spirit which is the middle by the
which the soul is united with the flesh and the body, by the which the body
lives and acts, and one member works on another, of the which spirit we
have spoken in the first book. But we here speak of the natural spirit, which
yet in some sort is also corporeal, notwithstanding it has not agrosse body,
tangible and visible, but a most subtle body and easy to be united with the
mind viz. that superior and Divine one which is in us; neither let any one
wonder, if we say that the rational soul is that spirit, and a corporeal
thing, or that it either has or savoureth something of corporiety while it is
in the body and uses it as an instrument, if so be that ye shall understand,
what, amongst the Platonists, that Etheriall body of the soul, and chariot of
the same may be; therefore Plotine and all the Platonists, after Trismegist, in
like manner, place three things in man, which they call the Supreme, lowest and
middle: The Supreme is that Divine thing which they call the mind, or superior
portion, or illuminated intellect. Moses in Genesis calls it the breath of
life, viz. breath from God or his spirit inspired into us; The lowest is the
Sensitive soul which they also call an Image: Paul the Apostle names it the
Animal man. The middle is the reasonable spirit knitting and tying together
both extremes, viz. the Animal soul with the mind savouring of the nature of
both extremes: yet it differs from that Supreme which is called the
illuminated intellect, the mind, light and supreme portion; it differs also
from the Animal soul, from the which, the Apostle teaches us, that we ought
to separate it, by the power of the word of God, saying, the word of God is
lively and powerful, more penetrating then a twoedged sword, peircing even to
the dividing of the soul and spirit: for as that supreme portion never sins,
never consents to evil, and always resists error and exhorts to the
best things; so that inferior portion and Animal soul is always overwhelmed
in evil, in sin and concupiscence, and draws to the worst things, of the
which Paul says, I see another Law in my members, leading me captive to the
law of sin: The mind therefore the supreme portion is never damned; but when
its companions are to be punished, goes away unhurt into its Original: But
the spirit, which by Plotinus is called the reasonable soul, seeing it is by
its nature, free, and can according to his pleasure adhere to either of them,
if it constantly adhere to the superior portion, is at length united and
beautified with it, until it be assumed into God: if it adhere unto the
inferior soul, it is depraved, and becomes vicious, until it be made a wicked
spirit. But thus much concerning the mind and spirit: now let us see concerning
the speech or word. Mercurius thinks this of the same value for immortality:
for speech or word is that without which nothing is done or can be done; for it
is the expression of the expressor and of the thing expressed; and the speaking
of the speaker, and that which speaks, is speech or word: and the conception
of the conceiver and that which conceives, is the word: and the writing of the
writer and that which writes, is the word: and the forming of the former and
that which forms, is the word; and the creation of the Creator, and that
which creates is the word: and the doing of the doer, and that which is done
is the word: and the knowledge of him that knows and the thing known is the
word; and every thing that can be spoken is but a word, and its called
equality: for it carries it self equally toward all; seeing that it is not
one thing more then another, equally bestowing on all, that they may be, that
which they are, neither more nor less; and it self being sensible, does make
it self and all things sensible, as light makes it self and all things
visible; therefore the word is called by Mercurius the bright son of the mind;
for the conception by the which the mind conceives it self, is the
intrinsecall word generated from the mind viz. the knowledge of it self: But
the extrinsecall and vocal word, is the offspring and manifestation of that
word, and a spirit proceeding out of the mouth with sound and voice, signifying
something: but every voice of ours, speech and word unless it be formed by the
voice of God, is mingled with the air and vanishes; but the spirit and word of
the Lord remains, life and sense accompanying it. Therefore all our speech,
words, spirit and voice have no power in Magic, unless they be formed by the
divine word: and Aristotle himself in his Meteors, and in the end of his
Ethics confesses, that there is not any virtue either natural or moral,
unless through God; and in his secret tenants, he affirms that our
understanding being good and sound can do very much on the secrets of nature if
so be that the influence of the Divine power be present, otherwise nothing at
all: So also our words can do very many miracles, if they be formed by the word
of God, in which also our universal generation is perfected, as Isay says, by
thy countenance O Lord we have conceived, as women rightly conceive by the
countenance of their husbands, and have brought forth spirit. Hither in some
sort belongs that which is delivered by the Gymnosophists of the Indians,
viz. that Budda a prince of this opinion, brought forth a virgin out of his
side; and amongst the Mahumetans there is a constant opinion, that many, whom
in their tongues they call Nefesohli, are born by a certain occult manner of
Divine dispensation without carnal copulation, whose life is therefore
wonderful and impassible and as it were Angelical and all together
supernatural; but these triffles we leave; only the King Messiah, the word of
the father, made flesh, Christ Jesus has revealed this secret, and will
further manifest it at a certain fullness of time: therefore a mind very like to
himself (as Lazarillus sang in Crater of Hermes.) God gave man reason that like
dieties
He might bring forth gods with capacity.
O happy he that knows his worth, and how
He equal is unto the gods above!
They repress dangers, make diseases fly,
They give presages, and from misery
Deliver men, reward the good, and ill
Chastise, and so the will of God fulfill;
These are Disciples, and the sons of God
Most High --


Who are not born of the will of flesh, or of man, or of a menstruous woman,
but of God: but it is an universal generation in which the Son is like the
Father in all manner of similitude, and in the which, that which is begot is
the same in specie with the begetter; and this is the power of the word formed
by the mind, and received into a subject rightly disposed, as seed into the
matrix for the generation; but I say disposed and rightly received; because
that all are not partakers of the word after the same manner, but others
otherwise; and these are the most hidden secrets of nature which ought not to
be further published.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of man's soul and through what means it is joined to the body.
THe soul of man is a certain divine Light, created after the image of the
word, the cause of causes and first example, and the substance of God, figured
by a seal whose Character is the eternal word; also the soul of man is a
certain divine substance, individual and wholly present in every part of the
body, so produced by an incorporeall Author, that it depends by the power of
the Agent only, not by the bosom of the matter: The soul is a substantial
number, uniform, conversive unto it self, and rational, very far excelling all
bodies and material things; the partition of which is not according to the
matter, nor proceeding from inferior and grosser things, but from the
efficient cause: For it is not a quantitative number, but removed from all
corporeal Laws, whence it is not divided nor multiplied by parts. Therefore
the soul of man is a certain divine substance, flowing from a divine fountain,
carrying along with it self number: not that divine one by the which the
creator has disposed all things, but a rational number by the which seeing it
has a proportion to all things, it can understand all things: Therefore man's
soul being such, according to the opinion of the Platonists, immediately
proceeding from God, is joined by competent means to this grosser body; whence
first of all in its descent, it is involved in a Celestial and aeriall body,
which they call the celestial vehicle of the soul, others the chariot of the
soul: Through this middle thing, by the command of God who is the center of the
world, it is first infused into the middle point of the heart, which is the
center of man's body, and from thence it is diffufed through all the parts and
members of his body, when it joyneth his chariot to the natural heat, being a
spirit generated from the heart by heat; by this it plungeth it self into the
humors, by the which it inhereth in all the members, and to all these is made
equally the nighest, although it be diffused through one to another; even as
the heat of fire adhereth most nigh to the air and water, although it be
transferred by the air to the water; thus it is manifest, how the immortal
soul, by an immortal body, viz. an Etheriall vehicle, is included in a gross
and mortal body, but when by a disease or some mischief, these middle things
are dissolved or fail, then the soul it self by these middle things
recollecteth it self, and flows back into the heart which was the first
receptacle of the soul: but the spirit of the heart failing, and heat being
extinct, it leaves him, and man dies, and the soul flies away with this
Celestial vehicle, and the Genius his keeper and the Demon follow it being
gone forth, and carry it to the Judge, where sentence being pronounced, God
quietly leads forth the good souls to glory: the evil the fierce devil
draggeth to punishment.

CHAP. XXXVIII. What Divine gifts man receives from above, from the several
Orders of the Intelligences and the heavens.
BY the seven Planets as it were by instruments all powers are diffused into
man from the Supreme fountain of good: by Saturn a sublime contemplation and
profound understanding, solidity of judgment, firm speculatiom, stability and
an immovable resolution: by Jupiter, an unshaken prudence, temperance,
benignity, piety, modesty, Justice, Faith, Grace, Religion, equity, clemency,
royalty; by Mars, truth; not to be terrified, constant courage and fortitude, a
fervent desire of animosity, the power of acting and the practice, and an
inconvertible vehemence of the mind. By the Sun, nobility of mind, persp^cuity
of imagination, the nature of knowledge and opinion, maturity, counsel, zeal,
light of justice, reason and judgment distinguishing right from wrong purging
light from the darkness of ignorance, the glory of truth found out, and charity
the Queen of all virtues: by Venus a fervent love, most sweet hope, the motion
of desire, order, concupiscence, beauty, sweetness, desire of increasing and
propagation of it self; by Mercury a piercing faith and belief, clear
reasoning, the vigor of interpreting and pronouncing, gravity of speech,
acuteness of wit, discourse of reason, and the swift motions of the senses: by
the Moon a peace making consonancy, fecundity, the power of generating and of
growing greater, of increasing and decreasing, and a moderate temperance, and
faith which being conversant in manifest and occult things, yields direction
to all; also motion to the tilling of the earth for the manner of life and
giving growth to itself and others; but these influences are principally drawn
from those seven intelligences, who stand before the face of God, who dispose
the soul the seat of these virtues: but the planets dispose the body only
giving a tractable complexion proportionated and tempered for every good thing,
and they are as it were the instruments of the Intelligences; but God as the
primary cause does yield both the influence and increase to all they therefore
who have sought out the virtues and diverse dispositions of the soul, do judge,
that they obtain diverse natures, by reason of the diversity of means, by the
which they have a passage to us, and that these souls are not joined with the
bodies themselves unless they be proportioned by these Stars; So in a body
brought to a temperament by Jupiter, they think that the soul infused is
temperated by the power and intelligence of Jupiter, and so of the rest.
According to which disposition if the soul work well in this body, when its
purged and expiated, it returns to that divine power and Mansion, from whence
it descended. Furthermore from the Angelical orders man is strengthened with
wonderful virtues, viz. from the angels, that he may be a messenger of the
divine will and an interpreter of the mind of God; from the Archangels, that he
may rule over all beasts of the field, fish of the sea, and fowls of the air,
over the which command is given him; from the Principalities, that all things
may be subdued to him, he comprehending the powers of all, and drawing all
powers to himself by a certain force most secret and supercelestiall; From the
Virtues, it receives power, by the which it constantly fighting is
strengthened against the enemies of truth, for the reward of which we run a
race in this life; from the powers against the enemies of this earthly
Tabernacle: from the Dominations, it has help by the which we can subject any
domestic enemy we carry along with us, and can obtain our desired end. From
the Thrones, we are knit together, and being collected into our selves, we fix
our memory on those eternal visions: From the Cherubins, is light of mind,
power of wisdom, very high plantasies and figures, by the which we are able to
contemplate even the divine things; From the Seraphins, that by the perfect
flame of love we may at length inhere in them: These are the degrees, these the
ladders, by the which men easily ascend to all kinds of powers by a certain
natural connection and chariot, according to the diverse disposition of body
and mind, and by the favor of the Stars, in the disposing of the body, and of
the Intelligences ruling them, the nature of which the soul in its descense
puts on, even as light the color of the glass, through which it passes;
the supreme power of the Creator favoring, from whom is all good, and without
which no good nor perfect thing can be obtained; Therefore all those do labor
in vain, who trusting only on the course of nature, and the power and favor of
inferior things, do think to attain to divine things; and those who faining to
have a foot in the heavens, do endeavor to receive those things from the
favor of the heavens, which ought to be received from God alone; for these
inferiors have, I mean animals, Herbs, stones, metals, their power subservient
to the heaven; but the heaven from the Intelligences; but these from God, in
whom all things pre-exist in the greatest power; as in man the little world
there is not a member which has not correspondence with some element, plant,
intelligence, and with some measure and numeration in the Archetype: as we have
shown before.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How the superior Influences, seeing they are good by nature, are depraved in
these inferior things, and are made causes of evil.

SEEing every power and virtue is from above, from God, from the Intelligences
and Stars, who can neither err nor do evil, it is necessary, that all evil,
and whatsoever is found disagreeing and dissonant in these inferior things, do
proceed, not from the malice of the Influence, but from the evil disposition
of the receiver; thus Chysippus rightly sang, They do like fools accuse the
Gods falsely
Make them the cause of all their misery,
When as their folly hurts themselves --


Hence Jupiter calling to mind the case of Aegisthus slain by Orestes, by
Homer in the counsel of the Gods, says, Us Gods do men accuse (what vice is
this?)
To be the cause, fountain of what is amiss,
When they themselves by their own wickedness
Run into danger --


When therefore the perversity of the subject receives the Influences of the
perverse, or its debility cannot endure the efficacy of the superiors, then by
the Influence of the heavens thus received into a matter full of discords, does
result something dissonant, deformed and evil; yet the celestial powers
always remain good, which while they exist in themselves, and from the giver
of light have their Influence by the holy Intelligences and the heavens, even
till they shall come to the Moon, their Influence is good, as it were in the
first degree; but then when it is received in a viler subject, it also is
vilified; then also in respect of the different nature of the recipient it is
received after diverse manners, and by the qualities disagreeing in the same
subject amongst themselves, it also is varied and patiently suffers in the
subject; whence from all comprehended in the subject, at length some other
thing does result than that the Superiors send down; therefore the hurtful
quality in these Inferiors, is far different from the influx of the heavens;
and therefore as the distemperof the bleareyed, is not to be imputed to the
light, nor burnings to the fire, nor wounds to the sword, nor fetters and
Prisons to the Judge, but to the evil disposed and offenders; so neither is
the fault of wicked ones to be cast on the celestial Influences: Therefore we
being well disposed, the celestial influences cooperate all things for good;
but being evil disposed, and having for our sins, that divine good, which was
in us, departed from us, all things work for evil: therefore the cause of all
our evils is sin, which is the disorder and distemper of our soul; from the
which then, thus evilly governing, or falling down or declining from that which
the celestial influences require, all things rebel, and are distempered for our
destruction: then in man's body otherwise most temperate and composed with most
sweet Harmony, the distemper of the Elements begins, evil humors arise: and
even the good being disordered and severed from one another, by a certain
vicissitude both vex and torment the body: then is a most vehement dissonance
perceived, either by superfluity or diminution, or some intrinseral accident,
or by superfluous meat, whence superfluous humors are generated, and by the
same cause infirmities follow; yea the animal spirits, the bridle being broken,
do fall to contention. Then the celestial influences, otherwise of themselves
good, are made hurtful to us, even as the light of the sun to eyes ill
disposed: Then Saturn darteth down anguish, tediousnes, melancholy, madness,
sadness, obstinacy, rigidnes, blasphemy, desperation, lying, Apparations,
affrightments, walkings of the dead, stirrings of Devils: Jupiter then sends
down covetousnes, evil occasions to get wealth and tyranny: Mars, furious
wrath, profane arrogance, violent boldness, fierce stubbornnes: but the Sun
imperious pride, and insatiable ambition: Venus, the deceits of concupiscence,
lascivious loves and filthy lusts: Mercury deceits, cousenages, lies, subtle
desires of evil, propensity to sin; The Moon the inconstant progress of all
things, and whatsoever is contrary to man's nature: and by this means man
himself by reason of his unlikeness with the heavenly things receives hurt,
whence he ought to reap benefit: by reason of the same dissonancy with the
heavenly things (as Proclus says) men also are subjected even to wicked
spirits who as the officers of God do discharge themselves in punishing them:
Then do they suffer grievances by evil spirits, even until they are again
expiated by due purgations, and man returns to a divine nature: therefore an
excellent Magitian can prohibit many mischifes about to fall on him from the
disposition of the Stars, when he foreknoweth their nature by preventing,
taking heed, and defending, least they should meet him, and least an ill
disposed subject, as we have said, should receive hurt whence it ought to reap
benefit.

CHAP. XL.
That on every man a divine Character is imprinted, by the virtue of which man
can attain the working of miracles.

BY no small experience it is found that a certain power of ruling and pred
ominating is implanted in man by nature; for (Pliny testifies) that an
Elephant meeting a man wandering in a desert, is reported to show himself gentle
and courteous, and to show the way to him; and the same creature also is said,
before he sees man, to tremble, to stand still, to look about, to quake at the
steps of man, for fear of treachery: in like manner the Tiger the most fierce
of all beasts, at the sight of man does remove her young ones; and more of this
kind we read in diverse authors, who have writ great volumes of creatures; but
from whence do these animals know, that man is to be feared, whom they never
saw: and if they have seen and known, whence do they fear him seeing they do
excell-him in greatness, force and swiftnes? what is this nature of man,
striking this terror on wild beasts? all the Historiographers of animals do
find out and grant this, but have left to others to teach and prove it.
Concerning this therefore Apollonius Tyaneus (as we read in Philostartus)
seeing a child leading an hu^ge Elephant, answered Damus asking him, whence
came that obedience of so huge a Creature to the little child: That it was from
a certain active terror, implanted in man by his creator, which inferior
creatures and all animals perceiving do fear and reverence man, which is as it
were a terrifiing Character, and a seal of God imprinted on man, by the which
every thing is subject to him, and acknowledges him superior, whither it be
servant or animal. For otherwise neither could a child rule his herd and
Elephants, neither could a King terrify his people, nor the Judge the guilty.
Therefore this Character is imprinted on man from the divine Idea which the
Cabalists of the Hebrew call Pahad (...) and the left hand or sword of God:
furthermore man has not only a seal by the which he is feared, but also by the
which he is be loved, the Idea of which in the divine numerations is called
Hesed (...) which signifies Clemency, and the right hand and Scepter of God:
from these divine numerations, by the intelligences and Stars, Seals and
Characters are imprinted on us to every one according to his capacity and
purity: which signs the first man created, without doubt did possess in all
integrity and fullness, when all creatures being attracted by secret gentleness,
and subjected by terror, came to him as to their lord, that he might give them
names: but after the sin of prevarication he fell from that dignity with all
his posterity; yet that Character is not all together extinct in us. But by how
much every one is laden with sin, by so much he is farther off from these
divine Characters and receives less of them; and whence he ought to receive
friendship and reverence, he falls into the slavery and terror of others, both
of animals and also men and devils: which Cain perceiving feared, saying to
God, every one who finds me, will kill me; for he feared beasts and devils,
not only men, who were very few; but in the old times, many men who lived
innocently, a very good life, as yet did enjoy that obedience and power, as
Sampson, David and Daniel over the Lions, Elisha over the Bear, Paul over the
Viper; and many Anchorites lived in the deserts, in Caves and Dens of wild
beasts, not fearing, nor receiving any hurt; for as by sin that divine
Character is obscured, so sin being purged and expiated, it again more and more
shines forth.

CHAP. XLI. What concerning man after death, diverse Opinions.
IN general it is appointed for all men once to dye; death is fatal to all;
but one is natural, another violent, another voluntarily received, another
inflicted by humane laws for offenses, or by God for sin, that they seem not
to have rendered a due to nature, but a punishment for sins; which (as the
Hebrew Masters says) God remitteth to none; Whence the Assembly delivered to
Ezechiah, that after the house of the Sanctuary was pulled down, although there
remained not any order of judiciary execution, yet there should be a fourfold
kind of punishment by the which they might be condemned, that no man guilty of
death should escape without retaliation; for he which had deserved to be stoned
to death, was, God dispensing, either cast down headlong from the house, or
trodden in pieces by wild beasts, or overwhelmed by ruin or fall; but he which
had deserved to be burned, was either consumed by burnings, or finished his
life either by venomous bitings, or stings of a serpent, or by poison; but he
which should dye by the sword, was killed either by the violence of the
jurisdiction, or by the tumult of the people or faction, or by the treachery of
thieves; he that ought to be hanged, was suffocated either in the waters, or
extinguished by some other strangling punishment; and by the ground of this
doctrine, that great Origin supposed the Gospel of Christ to be declared, He
who uses the sword shall perrish by sword. Moreover the Ethnic Philosophers
pronounced that retaliation of this kind is Adrastia, viz. an inevitable power
of divine laws, by the which in courses to come, is recompensed to every one
according to the reason and merits of his former life; so as he who uniustly
ruled in the former life, in the other life should relapse into a servile
state; he which has polluted his hands with blood, should be compelled to
undergo retaliation; he that lived a brutish life, should be precipitated and
revolved into a brutish body; of these things Plotinus writes in his book of
the proper Genius of every one; saying, whosoever have kept humane propriety,
do again arise men: but whosoever have used sense only, do return brute
animals: yet so, as those who use sense especially together with wrath, do
arise wild beasts; but whosoever use sense by concupiscence and pleasure, do
return leacherous and gluttenous beasts: but if they shall live, not by sense
together with them, so much as by the degeneration of sense, plants grow up
again with them; for the vitals only, or chiefly, are living; and all their
care was that they might be turned into plants. But they which have lived being
too much allured by music, not being depraved in other things, are born again
musical animals; and they which have reigned without reason, become Eagles,
unles they have been tainted with any wickedness. But he which has lived
civilly and virtuously, returns a man. And Solomon himself in the Proverbs
calls man sometimes a Lion, Tiger, Bear, a Boar. Sometimes a Hare, a hunting
dog, a Cony; sometimes a Pismire, a Hedghog, a Serpent, a Spider; sometimes an
Eagle, a Stork, a Cock, or any other bird, and many such as these. But the
Cabalists of the Hebrews do not admit that souls are turned into brutes: Yet
they do not deny but that they that have wholly lost their reason, shall in an
other life be left to a brutish affection and imagination: they assert also
that souls are revolved hither thrice, and no more; because this number seems
sufficiently to suffice for the purgation of sins, according to that of Job, He
has delivered my soul that it should not proceed to death, but should live,
and and see the light. Behold all these things does God work three times
through each, that he might reduce their souls from corruption, and illuminate
them with the light of the living. But now let us see what the Ancients opinion
is concerning the dead. When man dies, his body returns into the earth, from
which it was taken: the spirit returns to the heavens, from whence, it
descended, as says the Preacher, The body returns to the earth from whence it
was, and the spirit returns to God that gave it; which Lucretius has
expressed in these verses; What came from earth to earth returns again;
What came from God, returns from whence it came.
But Ovid expresses it better in these verses. Four things of man there are;
Spirit, Soul, Ghost, Flesh;
These four four places keep and do posess.
The earth covers flesh, the Ghost hovers over the grave.
Orcus has the soul, Stars do the spirit crave;


The flesh being forsaken, and the body being defunct of life, is called a dead
Carcass; Which as say the divines of the Hebrews, is left in the power of the
Demon Zazel, of whom it is said in the Scripture, Thou shall eat dust all thy
days; and elsewhere, The dust of the earth is his bread. Now man was created of
the dust of the earth, whence also that Demon is called the lord of flesh, and
blood, whilst the body is not expiated and sanctified with due solemnities.
Hence not without cause the Ancients ordained expiations of Carcasses, that
that which was unclean might be sprinkled with holy water, perfumed with
incense, be conjured with sacred orations, have lights set by, as long as it
was above ground, and then at length be buried in a holy place. Hence Elpenor
in Homer, Ibeseech thee (says he) Ulysses, be mindful of me, and leave me
not unburied, lest being unburied I become an object of the Gods wrath. But the
spirit of a man, which is of a sacred nature, and divine-offspring; because it
is alwais faultless, becomes incapable of any punishment; But the soul if it
has done well, rejoices together with the spirit, and going forth with its
Aerial Chariot, passes freely to the quires of the Heroes, or reaches heaven,
where it enjoys all its senses, and powers, a perpetual blessed felicity, a
perfect knowledge of all things, as also the divine vision, and possession of
the kingdom of heaven, and being made partaker of the divine power bestows
freely diverse gifts upon these inferiors, as if it were an immortal God. But if
it has done ill, the spirit judges it, and leaves it to the pleasure of the
devil, and the sad soul wanders about Hell without a spirit, like an image, as
Dido complains in Virgil; And now the great image of me shall go
Under the earth --


Wherefore then this soul being void of an intelligible essence, and being
left to the power of a furious phantasy, is ever subjected by the torment of
corporeal qualities, knowing that it is by the just judgment of God, for ever
deprived of the divine vision (to which it was created) for its sins: the
absence of which divine vision, as the Scripture testifies, is the ground of
all evils, and the most grievous punishment of all, which the Scripture calls
the pouring down of the wrath of God. This image therefore of the soul enters
into the ghost as an Aerial body, with which being covered does sometimes
advise friends, sometimes stir up enemies, as Dido threatens Aeneas in Virgil
saying. I ll hunt thee, and thee tortures I will give.

For when the soul is separated from the body, the perturbations of the memory
and sense remain. The Platonists say, that the souls, especially of them that
are slain, stir up enemies, man's indignation not so much doing of it, as the
divine Nemesis and Demon foreseeing, and permitting of it. So the spirit of
Naboth (as the masters of the Hebrews interpret it) because in the end of its
life it went forth with a desire of revenge, was made, to execute revenge, the
spirit of a lie, and went forth, God permitting it, a lying spirit in the mouth
of all the prophets, until it made Achab go up unto Ramoth-Gilead And Virgil
himself together with the Pythagorians, and Platonists, to whom also our
Austin assents, confesses that separated souls retain the fresh memory of
those things which they did in this life, and their will, whence he sings; What
care they Living had of horses brave
And Arms, the same does follow them to the grave.


And Agazel in his book De Scientia Divina, and other Arabians, and Mahumatists
which were Philosophers, think that the operations of the soul, being common to
the conjoined body, impresse upon the soul a Character of use and exercise,
which it being separated will use, being strongly impressed to the like
operations and passions which were not destroyed in life time. And although the
body and organ be corrupted, yet the operation will not cease, but like
affections and dispositions will remain. And these souls the ancients call with
a common name Manes, whereof those that were in this life innocent, and
purifyed by moral virtues, were very happy; And of them as Virgil sings, --
That did for their country die,
With priests who in their lives vowed chastity,
And sacred Poets, who pleased Phoebus best,
Or by invented arts man's life assist,
And others in their memories renowned, --


Although they departed this life without the justification of faith, and
grace, as may Divines think, yet their souls were carried without any suffering
into happy pleasant fields; and as says Virgil, They went to places and to
pleasant greens,
And pleasant seats the pleasant groves between.


Where they enjoy certain wonderful pleasures, as also sensitive,
intellectual and revealed knowledge; also perhaps they may be indoctrinated
concerning faith, and justification, as those spirits long since to whom Christ
preached the Gospel in prison. For as it is certain that none can be saved
without the faith of Christ, so it is probable that this faith is preached to
many Pagans and Saracens after this life, in those receptacles of souls unto
salvation, and that they are kept in those receptacles, as in a common prison,
until the time comes when the great Judge shall examine our actions. To which
opinion Lactantius, Ireneus, Clemens, Tertullian, Austin, Ambrose, and many
more Christian writers do assent. But those souls which are impure,
incontinent, depart wicked, do not enjoy such happy dreams, but wander full of
most hideous Phantasmes, and in worser places, enjoying no free knowledge but
what is obtained by concession, or manifestation, and with a continual fleshly
desire are subjected by reason of their corporeal corruption to the sense of
pain, and fear swords, and knives. These without doubt Homer seemed to be
sensible of, when in the eleventh book of his Odysses he brings in the mother
of Ulysses being dead, standing near to him offering sacrifice, but neither
knowing him, or speaking to him, whilst he with his sword drawn did keep off
ghosts from the blood of the sacrifice. But after that Tyresia the prophetess
advising of her, she had tasted of the sacrifice, and had drunk the blood, she
presently knew her son, and crying spoke to him. But the soul of Tyresia the
prophetess, notwithstanding the drawn sword, even before she tasted the blood,
knew Ulysses, and spoke to him, and showed him the ghost of his mother standing
near to him. Whatsoever vices therefore souls have committed in the bodies
unexpiated in this life, they are constrained carrying the habits of them along
with them, to purge themselves of them in hell, and to undergo punishment for
them; which the Poet explains in these verses; -- When they die,
Then does not leave them all their misery.
They having not repented of their crimes,
Must now be punish d for their misspent times.


For as the manners and habits of men are in this life, such affections for the
most part follow the soul after death, which then calls to mind those things
which it did formerly do in its life, and then more intently thinks on them,
for as much as then the diverse offices of life cease, as those of nourishing,
growing, generating, and various occupations of senses, and humane affairs and
comforts, and obstacles of a grosser body. Then are represented to the
plantastick reason those species, which are so much the more turbulent and
furious, by how much in such souls there lies hid an intellectual spark more
or less covered, or altogether extinct into which are then by evil spirits
conveyed species either most false, or terrible: whence now it is tormented in
the concupiscile faculty, by the concupiscence of an imaginary good, or of
those things which it did formerly affect in its life time, being deprived of
the power of enjoying them, although it may seem to it self sometimes almost to
obtain its delights, but to be driven from them by the evil spirits into bitter
torments, as in the Poets, Tantalus from a banquet, Sardanapalus from embraces,
Midas from gold, Sisyphus from power; and they called these souls hobgoblins,
whereof if any taking care of household affairs lives and inhabits quietly in
the house, it is called a household god, or familiar. But they are most cruelly
tortured in the irascible saculty with the hatred of an imaginary evil, into
the perturbations whereof, as also false suspicions, and most horrible
Phantasmes they then fall, and there are represented to them sad
representations; sometimes of the heaven falling upon their head, sometimes of
being consumed by the violence of flames, sometimes of being drowned in a
gulf, sometimes of being swallowed up into the earth sometimes of being
changed into diverse kinds of beasts sometimes of being torn and devoured by
ugly monsters, sometimes of being carried abroad, through woods seas, fire,
air, and through fearful infernal places, and sometimes of being taken, and
tormented by devils. All which we conceive happens to them after death no
otherwise then in this life to those who are taken with a frenzy, and some
other melancholy distemper, or to those who are affrighted with horrible things
seen in dreams, and are thereby tormented, as if these things did really happen
to them, which truly are not reall^ but only species of them apprehended in
imagination: even so do horrible representations of sins terrify those souls
after death as if they were in a dream and the guilt of wickedness drives them
headlong through diverse places; which therefore Orpheus calls the people of
dreams, saying, the gates of Pluto cannot be unlocked; within is a people of
dreams; such wicked souls therefore enjoying no good places, when wandering in
an Aeriall body, they represent any form to our sight, are called hags, and
goblins, inoffensive to them that are good, but hurtful to the wicked,
appearing one while in thinner bodies another time in grosser, in the shape of
diverse animals, and monsters, whose conditions they had in their life time, as
sings the Poet, Then diverse forms and shapes of brutes appear;
For he becomes a tiger, swine, and bear,
A skalie dragon, and a lioness,
Or does from fire a dreadful noise express;
He does transmute himself to diverse looks,
To fire, wild beasts, and into running brooks.


For the impure soul of a man, who in this life contracted too great a habit to
its body, does by a certain inward affection of the elementall body frame
another body to it self of the vapors of the elements, refreshing as it were
from an easy matter as it were with a suck, that body which is continually
vanishing; to which being moreover enslaved as to a prison, and sensible
instrument by a certain divine Law, does in it suffer cold, and heat, and
whatsoever annoys the body, spirit, and sense, as stinks, howlings, wailings,
gnashing of the teeth, stripes, tearings, and bonds, as Virgil sang; -- And
therefore for their crimes
They must be punished, and for misspent times
Must tortures feel; same in the winds are hung,
Others to cleanse their spotted sins are flung
Into vast gulfes, or purged in fire --


And in Homer in his Necyomancy Alcinous makes this relation to Ulysses, Of
Tytius the dear darling of the earth,
We saw the body stretched nine furlongs forth
And on each side of whom a vultur great
Gnawing his bowels --


These souls sometimes do inhabit not these kinds of bodies only, but by a too
great affection of flesh and blood transmute themselves into other animals, and
seize upon the bodies of creeping things, and brutes, entering into them, what
kind soever they be of, possessing them like Demons. Pythagoras is of the same
opinion, and before him Trismegistus, asserting that wicked souls do oftentimes
go into creeping things, and into brutes, neither do they as essential forms
vivifie and inform those bodies, but as an inmate dwell there as in a prison,
or stand near them by a local indistance as an internal mover to the thing
moved; or being tied to them are tormented, as Ixion to the wheels of serpents,
Sysiphus to a stone; neither do they enter into brutes only, but sometimes into
men, as we have spoken concerning the soul of Nabaoth which went forth a lying
spirit in the mouth of the Prophets. Hence some have asserted that the lives,
or spirits of wicked men going into the bodies of some men, have disturbed
them, and sometimes slew them. Which is more fortunately granted unto blessed
souls that like good Angels they should dwell in us, and enlighten us, as we
read of Elias, that he being taken from men his spirit fell upon Elisha: and
elsswhere we read that God took of the spirit which was in Moses, and gave it
to 70. men. Here lies a great secret, and not rashly to be revealed. Sometimes
also (which yet is very rare) souls are driven with such a madness that they do
enter the bodies not only of the living, but also by a certain hellish power
wander into dead Carcasses, and being as it were revived commit horrid
wickednesses, as we read in Saxo Grammaticus, that Asuitus and Asmundus two
cerrain men vowed one to the other, that he that should live longest should be
buried with him that was first dead: at length Asuitus being first dead, is
buried in a great vault with his dog, and horse, with whom also Asmundus by
reason of his oath of friendship, suffered himself to be buried alive, (meat
which he should for a long time eat, being brought to him;) in process of time
Ericus King of Suecia passing by that place with an army, breaking up the tomb
of Asuitus (supposing that there was treasure) the vault being opened, brought
forth Asmundus: whom, when he saw having a hideous look, being smeared over
with filthy corrupt blood which flowed from a green wound (for Asuitus being
revived, in the nights, took off with often struggling his right ear) he
commanded him to tell him the cause of that wound: which he declares in these
verses; Why does my visage wan you thus amaze?
Since he that lives amongst the dead, the grace
Of beauty needs must loose; I know not yet
What daring Stygian feind of Asuit
The spirit sent from hell, who there did eat
A horse, and dog, and being with this meat
Not yet suffie'd, then set his claws on me,
Pulled off my cheek mine ear, and hence you see
My ugly, wounded, mangled bloody face;
This monstrous Wight returned not to his place
Without received revenge; I presently
His head cut off, and with a stake did I
His body thorough run --


Pausanias tells a story not unlike to this, taken out of the interpreters of
the Delphi; viz. that there was a certain infernal Demon, which they called
Eurinomus, who would eat the flesh of dead men, and devour it so that the bones
would scarce be left. We read also in the Chronicles of the Cretensians, that
the ghosts which they call Catechanae were wont to return back into their
bodies, and go in to their wives, and lie with them; for the avoiding of which,
and that they might annoy their wives no more, it was provided in the common
laws that the heart of them that did arise should be thrust through with a
nail, and their whole carcass be burnt. These without doubt are wonderful
things, and scarce credible, but that those laws, and ancient Histories make
them credible. Neither is it altogether strange in Christian Religion that many
souls were restored to their bodies, before the universal resurrection.
Moreover we believe that many by the singular favor of God are together with
their bodies received to glory, and that many went down alive to hell. And we
have heard that oftentimes the bodies of the dead were by the devils taken from
the graves, without doubt for no other use then to be imprisoned, and tormented
in their hands. And to these prisons and bonds of their bodies there are added
also the possessions of most filthy and abominable places, where are Aetnean
fires, gulfes of water, the shakings of thunder, and lightening, gapings of the
earth, and where the region is void of light, and receives not the rays of the
Sun, and knows not the light of the Stars, but is always dark. Whither Ulysses
is reported in Homer to come, when he sings, Here people are that be Cymmerian
named,
Drowned in perpetual darkness, it is famed,
Whom rising, nor the setting sun does see,
But with perpetual night oppressed be.


Neither are those mere fables which many have recorded of the cave of
Patricius, of the den of Unlcan of the Aetnean caves, and of the den of Nursia,
many that have seen and know them testifying the same. Also Saxo Grammaticus
tells of greater things then these of the Palace of Geruthus, and of the cave
of Ugarthilocus: Also Pliny, Solinus, Pythias, Clearchus, of the wonderful
prodigies of the Northern sea, of which Tacitus also in his history of Drusus
shows that in the German sea there wandered soldiers by whom diverse miraculous
unheard of things were seen, viz. the force of whirlpools, unheard of kinds of
birds, sea monsters like men and beasts; and in his book of Germany he tells
that the Heldusians, and Axions, who had the face of men, but their other parts
were equal to beasts, did dwell there. Which without all doubt were the works
of ghosts and devils. Of these also Claudianus long time since sang, In the
extreme bounds of Franch there is a place,
Encompassed by the sea, where in his race
Fame says Ulysses having tasted blood,
A secret people did descry where loud
And mournful plaints were heard of wandering spirits
Which did the country people much affright.


Aristotle relates of the Aeolian Islands near Italy, that in Lipara was a
certain tomb, to which no man could go safe by night, and that there were
Cymbals and shrill voices with certain absurd loud laughters; also tumults and
empty sounds made, as the inhabitants did strongly aver; and that upon a time a
certain young man being drunk went thither, and about night fell asleep near the
cave of the tomb, and was after the third day found by them that sought him,
and was taken up for dead; who being brought forth, the solemnities of the
funeral being ready, suddenly arose up, and told in order, to the great
admiration of all, many things which he had seen and suffered. There is also in
Novergia a certain mountain most dreadful of all, cirrounded by the sea, which
commonly is called Hethelbergius, representing Hell, whence there are heard
great bewailings, howlings, and scritchings a mile round about, and over which
great vulters and most black. Crows fly, making most horrible noyses, which
forbid any to come near it: Moreover from hence flow two fountains whereof the
one is most intense cold, the other most intense hot, far exceeding all other
elements. There is also in the same country toward the Southern corner thereof
a Promontory called Nadhegrin, where the Demons of the place are seen by all,
in an aeriall body. There is also in Scotland the Mountain Dolorosus, from
whence are heard dreadful lamentations: and in Thuringia there is a mountain
called Horrisonus, where dwelt Sylvani, and Satyrs, as fame and experience
teaches, and faithful writers testify. There are in diverse Countries and
Provinces such like miracles as these. I will not relate here those things
which I have seen with mine eyes, and felt with mine hands, least by the
wonderful admirablenes and strangeness of them I should by the incredulous be
accounted a liar. Neither do I think it fit to pass by what many of our age
think concerning the receptacles of souls, not much differing from these which
we have now spoken of: of which Tertullian in his fourth book against the
heresies of Marcion says, It is apparent to evey wise man, which has ever
heard of the Elysian fields that there is some local determination, (which is
called Abraham's bosom) for the receiving of the souls of his sons, and that
that region is not celestial, yet higher then hell, where the souls of the just
rest, until the consummation of things restore the resurrection of all things
with fulness of reward. Also Peter the Apostle says to Clemens asking him of
these things, thou do constrain me O Clemens to publish something concerning
things unutterable: Yet as far as I may, I will. Christ, who from the beginning
and always was, was always through each generation, though secretly, present
with the godly, with those especially by whom he was desired and to whom he did
most often appear. But it was not time, that the bodies then being resolved,
there should be a resurrection: but this rather seemed a remuneration from God,
that he that was found just, should remain longer in a body, or that the Lord
should translate him (as we see clearly related in the scripture of some
certain just men.) After the like example God dealt with others, who pleased
him well, and fullfilling his will were being translated to Paradise reserved
for a kingdom. But of those who could not fulfill the rule of justice, but
had some relic of wickedness in their flesh, the bodies indeed areresolved,
but souls are kept in good and pleasant regions, that in the resurrection of
the dead, when they shall receive their bodies, being now purged by resolution,
they may enjoy an eternal inheritance for those things which they have done
well. Ireneus also in the end of his book which he wrote against the Heresies of
the Valentinians, says: Whereas the Lord went in the middle of the shadow of
death, where the souls of the dead were, and after rose again corporeally, and
after resurrection was taken up, it is manifest that the souls of his disciples
(for whom he worked these things) should go to some invisible place, appointed
by God, and there tarry until the resurrection, afterward receiving their
bodies, and rising again perfectly, i e. corporeally, as the Lord arose, so
shall they come into the presence of God; for no disciple is above his master;
But every one shall be perfect as his Master. Therefore even as our Master did
not presently fly and go away, but expected the time of his resurrection
determined by the father; which is also manifested by Jonas, after three days
arising he is taken up; So also ought we to expect the time of our resurrection
determined by God, foretold by the Prophets; and so rising again we shall be
taken up, as many as the Lord shall account worthy of this honor; Lactantius
Firmianus also agrees to this, in that book of Divine institutions, whose
title is of Divine reward; Saying, let no man think, that ^^e souls after death
are presently judged; for they are all detained in one common custody, until
the time comes in which the great Judge shall examine deserts; then they whose
righteousness shall be approved, shall receive the reward of immortality: but
they whose sins and wickedness are detected, shall not rise again, but being
destinated for certain punishment, shall be shut up with the wicked angels into
the same darknes^ of the same opinion are Austine, and Ambrose, who says in
his Enchiridion, The time which is interposed betwixt the death of man and the
last resurrection, contains the soul in secret receptacles; as every one is
worthy of rest or sorrow, according to that which it obtained whilst it lived
in the flesh; but Ambrose in his book concerning the benefits of death, says;
The writing of Esdras calls the habitations of the souls, store houses; which
he meting with the complaints of man (because that the Just who have gone
before, may seem, even to the day of Judgment viz. for a long time, to be
wonderfully defrauded of their just recompense of reward) does liken the day of
judgment to a garland; for the day of reward is expected of all, that in the
mean time both the conquered may be ashamed, and the conquerors may attain the
palm of victory; therefore while the fulness of times is expected, the souls
expect their due recompense; punishment remaining for some, glory for others;
and in the same place he calls Hell a place which is not seen, which the
souls go to being separated from the bodies; And in his second book of Cain and
Abel, he says, the soul is loosed from the body, and after the end of this
life, is even as yet in suspense, being doubtful of the judgment to come; To
these assenteth that evangelical saying, concerning the last judgment, Christ
saying in Matthew, Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils? And then I shall
confess to them, that I never knew them; by which speech it seems to be
clear, that even until this day they were uncertain concerning their sentence,
and by the confidence of miracles which they had performed in the name of
Jesus, whilst they lived, to have bin in some hope of salvation; Therefore
because the judgment of souls is deferred until the last day, many
Theologians think that satisfactory intercessions may help not only the
Justified, but also the damned, before the appointed day of judgment. So Trajan
the Emperor was delivered from Hell by Saint Gregory, and Justified to
salvation, though some think that he was not freed from the guilt of
punishment, but the Justice of punishment was prorogued until the day of
judgment; But Thomas Aquinas says it seems more probable, that by the
intercessions of S. Gregory, Traian lived again, and obtained a gracious power
by the which he was freed from the punishment and guilt of sin; and there are
some Theologians who think, that by the Diriges for the dead neither the
punishment nor the guilt is taken away or detracted, but that only some ease
and asswagement of the pains is procured; and this by the similitude of a
sweating porter, who by the sprinkling of some water seems to be eased of the
weight of his burden, or helped to carry it more easily, although nothing of
the burden be taken off: Yet the common opinion of Theologians denies that
prayers or funeral Diriges do cause any favor for the guilty within the gates
of Pluto: but seeing all these things are of an incomprehensible obscurity,
many have vainly whet their wits in them: Therefore we holding to the opinion
of Austine, as he says in the tenth book on Genesis, do affirm, That it is
better do doubt concerning occult things, then to contend about uncertain
things; for I doubt not but that that rich man is to be understood in the
flames of pains, and that poor man in the refreshment of joys; but how that
flame of hell, that bosom of Abraham, that tongue of the rich man, that torment
of thirst, that drop of cooling, are to be understood, it is hardly found out
by the modest searcher, but by the contentious never; but these things being
for this present omitted, we hasten to further matters and will dispute
concerning the restitution of souls.

CHAP. XLII. By What ways the Magicians and Necromancers do think they can
call forth the souls of the dead.
BY the things which have been already spoken, it is manifest that souls after
death do as yet love their body which they left, as those souls do whose bodies
want a due burial or have left their bodies by violent death, and as yet
wander about their carcasses in a troubled and moist spirit, being as it were
allured by something that has an affinity with them; the means being known by
the which in times past they were joined to their bodies, they may easily be
called forth and allured by the like vapors, liquors and savours, certain
artificial lights being also used, songs, sounds and such like, which do move
the imaginative and spiritual Harmony of the soul; also sacred invocations,
and such like, which belong to Religion, ought not to be neglected, by reason
of the portion of the rational soul, which is above nature: So the witch is
said to have called up Samuel, and the Thessalian prophetess in Lucan, to have
caused a carcass to stand upright: Hence we read in Poets, and those who
relate these things, that the souls of the dead cannot be called up without
blood and a carcass: but their shadows to be easily allured by the
fumigations of these things; eggs being also used, and milk, honey, oil, wine,
water, flower, as it were yielding a fit medicine for the souls to reassume
their bodies, as you may see in Homer, where Circe at large instructs
Ulysses; yet they think, that these things can be done in those places only
where these kinds of souls are known to be most conversant, either by reason of
some affinity, as their dead body alluring them, or by reason of some affection
imprinted in their life, drawing the soul it self to certain places, or by
reason of some hellish nature of the place; and therefore fit for the punishing
or purging of souls: places of this kind are best known by the meeting of
nocturnall visions and incursions, and such like Phantasmes; Some are
sufficiently known by themselves, as burial places and places of execution,
and where public slaughters have lately been made, or where the carcasses of
the slain, not as yet expiated, nor rightly buried, were some few years since
put into the ground; for expiation and exorcisation of any place, and also the
holy right of burial being duly performed to the bodies, oftentimes
prohibiteth the souls themselves to come up, and drives them farther off the
places of judgment; Hence Necromancy has its name, because it works on the
bodies of the dead, and gives answers by the ghosts and apparitions of the
dead, and subterrany spirits, alluring them into the carcasses of the dead, by
certain hellish charms, and infernal invocations, and by deadly sacrifices,
and wicked oblations; such we read in Lucan of Erichthone the witch, who called
up the dead, who foretold to Sextus Pompey all the event of the Pharsalian War:
There were also in Phigalia a city of Arcadia, certain magicians, priests most
skilful in sacred rites, and raisers up of the souls of the dead: and the holy
scriptures testify, that a certain woman a witch called up Samuels soul: Even
so truly the souls of the saints do love their bodies, and hear more readily
there, where the pledges of their relics are preserved: but there are two
kinds of Necromancy, the one called Necyomancy, raising the carcasses, which is
not done without blood. The other Sciomancy, in which the calling up of the
shadow only suffices: to conclude, it works all its experiments by the
carkases of the slain, and their bones and members, and what is from them,
because there is in these things a spiritual power friendly to them. Therefore
they easily allure the flowing down of wicked spirits, being by reason of the
similitude and propriety very familiar: by whom the Necromancer strengthened by
their help can do very much in humane and terrestrial things, and kindle
unlawful lusts, cause dreams, diseases, hatred and such like passions, to the
which also they can confer the powers of these souls, which as yet being
involved in a moist and turbide spirit, and wandering about their cast bodies,
can do the same things that the wicked spirits commit; seeing therefore they
experimentally find, that the wicked and impure souls violently plucked from
their bodies, and of men not expiated, and wanting burial, do stay about their
carcases, and are drawn to them by affinity, the witches easily abuse them for
the effecting of their witchcrafts, alluring these unhappy souls by the
apposition of their body or by the taking of some part thereof, and compelling
them by their devilish charms, by entreating them by the deformed carkases
dispersed through the wide fields, and the wandering shadows of those that
want burials, and by the ghosts sent back from Acheron, and the guests of hell,
whom untimely death has precipitated into Hell; and by the horrible desires of
the damned, and proud devils revengers of wickednesses. But he which would
restore the souls truly to their bodies, must first know what is the proper
nature of the soul from whence it went forth, with how many and how great
degrees of perfection it is replenished, with what intelligence it is
strengthened, by what means diffused into the body, by what harmony it shall be
compacted with it; what affinity it has with God, with the intelligences, with
the heavens, elements and all other things whose image and resemblance it
holds. To conclude, by what influences the body may be knit together again
for the raising of the dead, requires all these things which belong not to men
but to God only, and to whom he will communicate them, as to Elishai who raised
up the son of the Shunamite; so also Alcestis it reported to have been raised
by Hercules, and to have lived long after; and Apollonius Tyanensis restored a
dead maid to life. And here is to be noted that sometimes it happens to men,
that their vivifying spirit is retracted in them, and they appear as dead and
without sense, when as yet the intellectual nature remains united to the
body, and it has the same form, and remains the same body, although the
power of vivifying extends not it self into it actually, but remains
retracted in the union with the intellectual nature; yet it cease not to be;
and although that man may truly be said to be dead, inasmuch as death is a want
of a vivifying spirit, yet is it not truly separated; and that body can be
wakened again and live; and thus many miracles appear in these; and of this
kind many have been seen amongst the Gentiles and Jews in former ages; in the
number of which is that which Plato recites in his tenth book de Republ. viz.
that one Phereus of Pamphilia lay ten days amongst the slain in battle, and
after that he had been taken away and laid to the fire two days, he revived
and told many wonderful things which he had seen in the time of his death; and
concerning these things we have spoken partly in the first book, and shall yet
speak further anon where we shall speak of Oracles which come forth in a
Rapture, Ecstasy, and in the Agony of dying men.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the power of man's soul, in the mind, reason and imagination.
Man's soul consists of a mind, reason and imagination; the mind illuminates
reason, reason flows into the imagination: All is one soul. Reason unless it
be illuminated by the mind, is not free from error: but the mind gives not
light to reason, unless God enlighten, viz. the first light; for the first
light is in God very far exceeding all understanding: wherefore it cannot be
called an intelligible light; but this when it is infused into the mind, is
made intellectual, and can be understood: then when it is infused by the mind
to the reason, it is made rational, and cannot only be understood but also
considered: then when it is infused by the reason into the fantasy of the
soul, it is made not only cogitable, but also imaginable; yet it is not as yet
corporeal; but when from hence it goes into the Celestial vehicle of the
soul; it is first made corporeal, yet not manifestly sensible till it has
passed into the elementall body, either simple and Aerial, or compound in the
which the light is made manifestly visible to the eye; The Chaldean
Philosophers considering this progress of light, declare a certain wonderful
power of our mind: viz. that it may come to pass, that our mind being firmly
fixed on God, may be filled with the divine power; and being so replenished
with light, its beams being diffused through all the media, even to this
gross, dark, heavy, mortal body, it may endow it with abundance of light, and
make it like the Stars, and equally shining, and also by the plenty of its
beams and lightness lift it on high, as straw lifted up by the flame of fire,
and can presently carry the body as a spirit into remote parts. So we read of
Philip in the Acts of the Apostles, who baptizing the Eunuch in India, was
presently found, in Azotus. The like we read of Habacuc in Daniel: so others
going through the doors being shut, escaped both their keepers and
imprisonment; as we read of Peter the Apostle and of Peter the Exorcist: He may
the less wonder at this, who has seen those famous melancholic men, who walk
in their sleeps and pass through places even unpassible, and ascend even
unaccessible places, and exercise the works of those that are awake, which they
themselves being awake could not do; of the which things there is no other
reason in nature, than a strong and exalted imagination: but this power is in
every man, and it is in the soul of man from the root of his Creation; but it
is varied in diverse men, in strength and weakness, and is increased and
diminished according to his exercise and use, by the which it is drawn forth
from power into act, which thing he that rightly knows, can ascend by his
knowledge, even until his imaginative faculty does transcend and is joined
with the universal power, which Alchindus, Bacon, and Gulielmus Parisiensis do
call the sense of nature; Virgil, the Etheriall sense, and Plato the sense of
the vehicle: and his imagination is made most strong, when that Etheriall and
Celestial power is poured out upon it, by whose brightness it is comforted,
until it apprehend the species, notions and knowledge of true things, so that
that which he thought in his mind, comes to pass even as he thought, and it
obtains so great power, that it can plunge, join and insinuate it self into
the minds of men, and make them certain of his thoughts, and of his will and
desire, even through large and remote spaces, as if they perceived a present
object by their senses; and it can in little time do many things, as if they
were done without time; yet these things are not granted to all, but to those
whose imaginative and cogitative power is most strong and has arrived to the
end of speculation; and he is fitted to apprehend and manifest all things, by
the splendor of the universal power, or intelligence and spiritual
apprehension which is above him: and this is that necessary power, which every
one ought to follow and obey, who follows the truth; if therefore now the
power of the imagination is so great, that it can insinuate it self unto whom
it pleases, being neither hindered nor let by any distance of time or place,
and can sometimes draw its heavy body along with it, whither it imagines and
dreameth: There is no doubt but that the power of the mind is greater, if at
any time it shall obtain its proper nature, and being no way oppressed by the
allurements of the senses, shall persevere both incorrupted and like it self;
but now for example, that the souls abound with so plentiful Light of the
Celestial Stars, and hence, a very great a bundance of light redoundeth into
their bodies; so Moses face did shine, that the children of Israel could not
behold him by reason of the brightness of his countenance; thus Socrates was
transfigured, as we read, that in light he overcame the luciferous wheels of
the Sun; So Zoroastes being transfigured, his body was takenup. So Eliah and
Enoch ascended to heaven in a certain fiery chariot, so Paul was rapt up into
the third heaven: So our bodies after the judgment of the world, shall be
called Glorified, and in like manner be rapt up, and we may say by this means,
shall shine as the Sun and Moon; which thing that it is possible, and has
formerly been done, Avicebron the Moore, and Avicen the Arabian and Hippocrates
of Cous, and all the school of the Chaldeans do acknowledge and confirm:
Moreover it is reported in Histories, that Alexander the great being
circumvented and in great danger in India, did so burn in mind, that he seemed
to the Barbarians to cast forth light; the father of Theodoricus also is
reported to have cast forth sparks of fire through his whole body; the same
thing a wise man also delivered concerning himself, so that sparkling flames
did break forth here and there even with a noise; neither is this power of the
soul found in men only, but sometimes even in beasts, as in the horse of
Tiberius, who seemed to send forth flames out of his mouth. But the mind is
above fate in providence, therefore is not affected either with the influences
of the heavenly bodies, or the qualities of natural things; Religion therefore
can only cure it; but the sensitiveness of the soul is in fate, above nature,
which is in a certain manner the knot of the body and soul, and under fate,
above the body; therefore it is changed by the influences of the heavenly
bodies, and affected by the qualities of natural and corporeal things: now I
call the sensitiveness of the soul, that vivifying and rectifying power of the
body, the original of the senses; the soul it self does manifest in this body
its sensitive powers and perceives corporeal things by the body, and locally
moves the body, and governs it in his place, and nourishes it in a body. In
this sensitiveness two most principal powers predominate; viz. one which is
called the Phantasy, or imaginative or cogitative faculty, of whose power we
have already spoken, where we have handled the passions of the soul: the other
which is called the sense of nature, of the which also we have spoken, where we
made mention of witchcraft. Man therefore by the nature of his body is under
fate; the soul of man, by the sensitiveness moves nature in Fate, but by the
mind is above fate, in the order of providence; yet reason is free at its own
choice; therefore the soul by reason ascends into the mind, where it is
replenished with divine light; sometimes it descends into sensitiveness and
is affected by the influences of the heavenly bodies, and qualities of natural
things, and is distracted by the passions and the encountering of sensible
objects: sometimes the soul revolveth it self wholly into reason, searching
out other things either by discourse, or by contemplating it self: for it is
possible, that that part of the reason, which the Peripateticks call the
possible Intellect may be brought to this, that it may freely discourse and
operate without conversion to his Phantasmes: for so great is the command of
this reason, that as often as any thing incurreth either into the mind, or into
the sensitiveness, or into nature, or into the body, it cannot pass into the
soul, unless reason apply it self to it; by this means the soul perceives it
self neither to see, nor hear, nor feel, not that it suffers any things by
the external senses, until cogitative reason first apprehend ^t; but it
apprehends it when it is at leisure, not when it earnestly gapeth after
another thing, as we manifestly see by th^se who he^d not those that they meet,
when they more seriously think on some thing else. Know therefore that neither
the superior influences, nor natural affections, nor sensations, nor passions
either of the mind or body, nor any sensible thing whatsoever, can work or
penetrate into the soul unless by the Judgment of reason it self. Therefore by
its act, not by any extrinsecall violence, can the soul be either affected or
disturbed, which thing even innumerable Martyrs have proved by their Martyrdom:
So Anasarchus a Philosopher of Abdera, who, who by the the command of
Nicocreontes a tyrant of Cyprus, being cast into a concave stone neglecting the
pains of his body, while he was pounded with iron pestils, is reported to have
said: pound, pound the shell of Anasarchus, thou nothing hurtest Anasarchus
himself: The tyrant commanded his tongue to be cut off, but he with his own
teeth did bite it off, and did spit it in the face of the Tyrant.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the degrees of souls, and their destruction, or Immortality.
THe mind, because it is from God or from the intelligible world, is therefore
immortal and eternal; but reaon is long-lived by the benefit of its celestial
original from the Heaven; but the sensitive because it is from the bosom of
the matter and depends on sublunary nature, is subject to destruction and
corruption: therefore the soul by its mind is immortal, by its Reason long
lived in its etherial vehicle, but resolvable unless it be restored in the
circuit of its new body; therefore it is not immortal, unless it be united to
an immortal mind therefore the sensitivenes of the soul or the sensitive or
animal soul, because it is produced out of the bosom of a corporeal matter,
the body being resolved, perishes together with it, or the shadow thereof
remains not long in the vapors of its resolved body, partaking nothing of
immortality, unless it be also united to a more sublimed power; therefore the
soul which is united to the mind, is called the Soul standing not falling; but
all men obtain not this mind, because (as Hermes says) God would propound it
as it were a prize and reward of the souls, which they that shall neglect,
being without mind, spotted with corporeal senses, and made like to
irrational creatures, are allotted to the same destruction with them, as
Ecclesiastes says: there is the same destruction of man and beasts, and the
condition of both is equal; as man dies, so also they dye, yea they have all
one breath, so that man has no pre-eminence over a beast; thus far he. Hence
many Theologians think, that the souls of men of this kind have no immortality
after they have left their body, but an hope of the resurrection only, when all
men shall be restored. Austin relates that this was the heresy of the
Arabians, who affirmed that the souls perished together with their bodies; and
in the day of judgment did arise again with them; whosoever therefore being
upheld by the divine grace have obtained a mind, these according to the
proportion of their works become immortal (as Hermes says) having comprehended
all things by their understanding, which are in the earth, and in the sea, and
in the Heavens, and if there be any thing besides these above heaven, so that
they behold even goodness it self: but they who have lived a middle life,
though they have not obtained the divine intelligence, but a certain rational
intelligence of it; these men's souls, when they shall depart from their bodies,
are bound over to certain secret receptacles, where they are affected with
sensitive powers, and are exercised in a certain kind of act; and by
imagination, and the irascible and concupiscible virtues, do either extremely
rejoice, or greivously lament. Of which opinion Saint Austin also was, in his
book which he wrote of the spirit and soul; The wise men of the Indians,
Persians, Egyptians and Chaldeans have delivered, that this soul superviveth
much longer then its body, yet that it is not made altogether immortal, unless
by Transmigration. But our Theologians do philosophize far otherwise concerning
these things, that although there be the same common original and beginning of
all souls, yet they are distinguished by the creator with diverse degrees, not
only accidental, but also intrinsecall, founded in their very essence, by the
which one soul differs from another, by that which is proper to it self;
which opinion John Scotus also holds, and the Parisian Theologians have so
decreed in their articles; Hence the wise man says, I was an ingenuous child,
and obtained a good soul, viz. a better then many others; and according to this
inequality of souls, every one is capable in their degree, of their charge;
which gift is freely given by God, as we read in the Gospel, that he gave to
one five Talents, to another two, to another one, to every one according to his
virtue, and the Apostle says, he has given, some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists and Doctors, for the consummation of the Saints in
the work of the Ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ; for there
are (says Origin) certain invisible perfections, to the which are committed
those things which are dispensed here upon earth, in which there is no small
difference, as also is required in the men; wherefore some one attaineth the
highest degree of wisdom and dignity; another little differs from beasts and
seeding beasts is made half a beast; another abounds in virtues and in
wealth; another has even little or nothing, and oftentimes that little which
he has is taken away from him, and given to him that has; and this is the
divine justice in the distribution of gifts, that they may correspond to the
virtues of every receiver, to whom also rewards are given according to their
works: that what proportion there is, of gifts to gifts, and of deserts to
deserts, there may be the same proportion of rewards to rewards; to conclude,
we must know this, that every noble soul has a fourfold operation; First
divine, by the Image of the divine propriety; the second intellectual, by
formality of Participation with the intelligences; the third rational by the
perfection of its proper essential essence; the fourth animal or natural, by
communion with the body and these Inferior things; So that there is no work in
this whole world so admirable, so excellent, so wonderful, which the sou^ of
man, being associated to his Image of divinity, which the Magitians call a
soul, standing and not falling, cannot accomplish by its own power without any
external help: Therefore the form of all Magical power is from the soul of man
standing and not falling.

CHAP. XLV. Of Soothsaying, and Frenzy.
SOothsaying is that which the priests or others were stricken withal, and
discerned the causes of things, and foresaw future things, viz. when Oracles
and Spirits descend from the Gods or from Demons upon them, and are delivered
by them; which descendings the Platonists call the falling down of superior
souls on our souls; and Mercurius calls them the senses of the Demons, and the
spirits of Demons. Of which sort of Demons the Ancients called Eurideae, and
Pythonae, who, as the Ancients believed, were wont to enter into the bodies of
men, and make use of the voices, and tongues for the prediction of things to
come; of which Plutarch also made mention in his dialogue of the causes of
defect of Oracles. But Cicero following the Stoics, affirms that the
foreknowing of future things belongs only to the Gods; and Ptolomie the
Astrologer says, that they only that are inspired with a diety foretell
particular things. To these Peter the Apostle consents, saying, Prophesying is
not made according to the will of man, but holy men spoke as they were moved by
the holy ghost. Nor that the foretellings of things to come are properly the
fallings down of the Gods. Isaiah affirms, saying, And tell unto us those
things that are coming, and we will tell them, because ye are Gods; But these
kinds of fallings down, or senses, come not into our souls when they are more
attently busied about any thing else; but they pass into them, when they are
vacant. Now there are three kinds of this vacancy, viz. frenzy, ecstasy, and
dreams, of each of which in their order.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the first kind of frenzy from the Muses.
Frenzy is an illustration of the soul coming from the Gods, or Demons.
Whence this verse of Ovid, God is in us, Commerces of the throne
Of God, that spirit from above came down.


Plato defines this by alienation, and binding; for he abstracts from those by
which the corporeal senses are stirred up, and being estranged from an animal
man, adheres to a diety from whom it receives those things which it cannot
search into by its own power; for when the mind is free, and at liberty, the
reins of the body being loosed, and going forth as out of a close prison,
transcends the bonds of the members, and nothing hindering of it, being stirred
up by its own instigations, and instigated by a divine spirit, comprehends all
things, and foretells future things. Now there are four kinds of divine
frenzy proceeding from several dieties, viz. from the Muses, from Dionysius,
from Apollo, and from Venus. The first frenzy therefore proceeding from the
Muses, stirs up and tempers the mind, and makes it divine by drawing superior
things to inferior things by things natural. Now Muses are the souls of the
celestial spheres, according to which there are found several degrees, by which
there is an attraction of superior things to inferior. The inferior of these
resembling the sphere of the Moon, possesses those things which are from
vegetables, as plants, fruits of trees, roots, and those which are from harder
matters, as Stones, Metals, their alligations, and suspensions. So it is said
that the stone Selenites i. e. Moon-Stone, and the stone of the Civet-cat cause
divination; also Vervain, and the Herb Theangelis cause soothsaying, as has
been above said. The second degree resembling Mercury, possesses those things
which are from animals, and which are compounded of the mixtion of diverse
natural things together, as Cups, and Meats; upon this account the heart of a
Mole, if any one shall eat it whilst it is warm, and panting, conduces, as it
is said, to the foretelling of future events. And Rabbi Moses in his
commentaries upon Leviticus tells, that there is an animal called (...) Jedua,
having a humane shape, in the middle of whose navel comes forth a string, by
which it is fastened to the ground like a gourd, and as far as the length of
that string reaches, it devours and consumes all that is green about it, and
deceiving the sight, cannot be taken, unless that string be cut off by the
stroke of a dart, which being cut off, it presently dies. Now the bones of this
animal being after a certain manner laid upon the mouth, presently he whose
mouth they are laid on, is taken with a frenzy, and soothsaying. The third
degree answers to the sphere of Venus; This possesses subtle powders,
vapors, and odours, and ointments, and suffumigations, which are made of these
of which we have spoke above. The fourth degree belongs to the sphere of the
Sun; this possesses voices, words, singings, and harmonical sounds, by the
sweet consonancy whereof it drives forth of the mind any troublesomeness
therein, and chears it up. Whence Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, advise us to
compose a discontented mind, and cheer it up by singing and harmony. So
Timotheus is said to have with sounds stirred up King Alexander to a frenzy:
so the Priest Calame (Aurelius Augustus being witness) was wont at his pleasure
by a certain shrill harmony to call himself forth out of his body into a
rapture, and ecstasy; of these also we have before spoken. The first degree is
answerable to Mars: this possesses vehement imaginations, and affections of
the mind, conceits also, and motions thereof, of all which before. The sixth
degree answers to Jupiter: this possesses the discourses of reason,
deliberations, consultations, and moral purgations: of these we have spoken in
part above, and further we shall speak afterward; It possesses also
admirations, and venerations, at the astonishment of which, the fantasy, and
reason are sometimes so restrained, that they suddenly let pass all their own
actions: whence then the mind it self being free, and exposed to a diety only,
whether to any God, or Demon does receive supernal, and divine influencies,
viz. those concerning which it did deliberate before. So we read that the
Sybils, and the Priests of Pythia were wont to receive oracles in the caves of
Jupiter, and Apollo. The seventh degree resembles Saturn: this possesses the
more secret intelligencies, and quiet contemplations of the mind. I call here,
the contemplation, the free perspicacity of the mind, suspended with
admiration upon the beholding of wisdom. For that excogitation which is made by
riddles, and images, is a certain kind of speculation, or discourse belonging
to Jupiter, and not a contemplation. The eighth degree resembles the starry
heaven; this observes the situation, motion, rays, and light of the celestial
bodies: it possesses also images, rings, and such like, which are made after
the rule of celestials, as we have above spoken. The ninth degree answers to
the primum mobile, viz. the ninth sphere, as the very universe: this possesses
things more formal, as Numbers, Figures, Characters, and observes the occult
influencies of the intelligences of the heaven, and other mysteries, which
because they bear the effigies of celestial dieties, and invocated spirits,
easily allures them, and compels them being forced by a certain necessity of
conformity to come to one, and detains them, that they shall not easily go
back, of which we read in the Oracles in Porphyrie. Cease now at length, spare
words, to life give rest,
Dissolve, and leave old shapes (I thee request)
Dishape the members, and the winding sheet
Unloose --
And in an other place in the same book. Ye Garlands loose the feet, with water
clean
Let them be sprinkled, and the Laurel green
Be taken off from the hands, and every line
And Character be blotted out --


Of these we have sufficiently treated already, and shall afterward treat
further of them.

CAAP. XLVII. Of the second kind from Dionysius.
NOw the second frenzy proceeds from Dionysius: this does by expiations
exterior, and interior, and by conjurations, by mysteries, by solemnities,
rites, temples, and observations divert the soul into the mind, the supreme
part of it self, and makes it a fit and pure temple of the Gods, in which the
divine spirits may dwell, which the soul then possessing as the associate of
life, is filled by them with felicity, wisdom, and oracles, not in signs, and
marks, or conjectures, but in a certain concitation of the mind, and free
motion: So Bacchus did soothsay to the Beotians, and Epimenides to the people
of Cous, and the Sybil Erithea to the Tro^^ns. Sometimes this frenzy happens
through a clear vision, sometimes by an express voice: So Socrates was governed
by his Demon, whose counsel he did diligently obey, whose voice he did often
hear with his ears, to whom also the shape of a Demon did often appear. Many
prophesying spirits also were wont to show themselves, and be associats with
the souls of them that were purified; examples of which there are many in
sacred Writ, as in Abraham, and his bond m^^d Hagar, in Jacob, Gideon, Elias,
Tobias, Daniel, and many more. So Adam had familiarity with the Angel Raziel.
Shem the son of (...) with Jophiel; Abraham with Zadkiel: Isaac and Jacob with
Peliel; Joseph, Joshua and Daniel with Gabriel; Moses with Metattron; Elias
with Malhiel, Tobias the younger with Raphal; David with Cerniel; Mannoah with
Phadael; Cenez with Cerrel; Ezekiel with Hasmael; Esdras with Uriel; Solomon
with Michael. Sometimes the spirits by virtue of the souls enter into, and
seize upon organical bodies, whether of (...) or men, and using the souls
thereof as the basis, utter voices through organical instruments, as is
manifest in Baalams Ass, and in Saul, on whom the spirit of the Lord fell, and
Prophesied. Of these Apollo in his answers in Porphyry thus; Phebean fulgor
charmed, did from on high
Come down, and through pure air was silently
Conveyed; came into souls well purified
With a sonorous breath, a voice uttered
Through a mortal throat --


CHAP. XLVIII. Of the third kind of frenzy from Apollo.
NOw the third kind of frenzy proceeds from Apollo, viz. from the mind of the
world. This does by certain sacred mysteries, vows, sacrifices, adorations,
invocations, and certain sacred arts, or certain secret confections, by which
the spirits of their God did infuse virtue, make the soul rise above the mind,
by joining it with dieties, and Demons: so we read concerning the Ephod, which
being applied, they did presently prophecy: so we read in the books of the
Senats in the chapters of Eleazar, that Rabbi Israel made certain cakes, writ
upon with certain divine and angel call names, and so consecrated, which they
that did eat with faith, hope, and charity, did presently break forth with a
spirit of prophecy. We read in the same place that Rabbi Johena the son of
Jochahaed did after that manner enlighten a certain rude countryman, called
Eleazar, being altogether illiterate, that being compassed about with a sudden
brightness, did unexpectedly preach such high mysteries of the Law to an
assembly of wise men, that he did even astonish all that were near him. And it
is reported of a certain man called Herviscus an Egyptian, that he was endowed
with such a divine nature, that at the very sight of images that had any diety
in them, he was forthwith stirred up with a kind of a divine frenzy. We read
also in the scripture, that when Saul was amongst the Prophets, the spirit of
the Lord came upon him, and he prophesied, and when he went forth from the
assembly of the Prophets, he ceased to prophecy; the same happened to those
officers which Saul sent to catch David: who when they saw the company of the
Prophets, and Samuel standing in the midst of them, received the spirit of the
Lord on them, and prophesied also. So great is the abounding of divine light
oftentimes in the prophets, taken with a divine frenzy, that it also seiseth
on them that are near them, and makes them have the same spirit of frenzy: It
is not therefore incredible, that an ignorant man should presently be made
wise, and again that a wise man become ignorant: for there is a certain art
(known but to few) of informing, adorning, and illustrating a pure mind, so
that it should presently be recovered out of the darkness of ignorance, and
brought to the light of wisdom: and on the contrary, there is a way by certain
hid secrets, to make them that have unclean, and unbelieving minds to become
ignorant again, although for the present they are learned and wise. Man's mind
also, especially that which is simple, and pure, may (Apuleius being witness)
by some sacred, and mysterious recreation, and appeasing, be so brought into a
sleep, and astonished, that it may forget things present so utterly, as to be
brought into its divine nature, and so be enlightened with the divine light, and
inspired with a divine frenzy that it may foretell things to come, and
withal receive the virtue of some wonderful effects. Whence Jamblicus says,
when the prophets are inspired with a diety, they fear nothing, for they go
through ways unpassable, and are carried into the fire without any hurt, and
pass over rivers. So we read of certain caves as of Apollo, Trophonius, the
three footed stools, dens, fountains, lakes, and such like, that were
consecrated to the gods after this manner, or made by that mystery, that from
thence the priests might draw the spirit of prophesying, as Jamblicus in
Porphyrie: The Sybill (says he) in Delphi was wont to receive God after two
ways: either by a subtle spirit, and fire, which did break forth somewhere
out of the mouth of the cave, where she sitting in the entrance upon a brazen
three footed stool dedicated to a diety, was divinely inspired, and did utter
prophecyings; or a great fire flying out of the cave did cirround this
prophetess, stirring her up, being filled with a diety, to prohhesie, which
inspiration also she received as she sat upon a consecrated seat, breaking
forth presently into predictions. Moreover there was a prophetess in Branchi
which sat upon an extree, and either held a wand in her hand given to her by
some diety, or washed her feet, and sometimes the hem of her garment in the
waters, or drew the vapor of fire from the waters. By all these she was filled
with divine splendor, and did unfold many Oracles. We also read that in the
country of Thracia there was a certain passage consecrated to Bacchus, from
whence predictions, and Oracles were wont to be given: the Priors of whose
temples having drank wine abundantly did do strange things. Amongst the
Clarians also, where the temple of Clarius Apollo was, to whom it was given to
utter divine things, they having drank much wine did strange things. There was
also a prophetical fountain of Father Achaia, constituted before the temple of
Ceres, where they that did enquire of the event of the sick did let down a
glass by degrees tied to a small cord, to the top of the water, and certain
supplications and fumes being made, the event of the thing did appear in the
glass. There was also not far from Epidaurus a City of Laconia a deep Fe^,
which was called the water of Juno, into which cakes of corn being cast,
answers were given, fortunate, if the waters did quietly retain what was cast
in; but unhappy, if they did as it were, scorning of them, cast them back. The
like they say do the caves of A^n^a, into which money or sacrifices did show
the same pre^age of good or ill, by being retained, or rejected. The like
things reports Dion in his Roman History, in a place which they call the
Nymphs: where Frankincense being cast into the flames, Oracles were received
concerning all those things which he did desire to know, especially concerning
death, and those things which belonged to marriages. Wonderful also is that
which Aristotle relates of a certain fountain of the Paliscans of Sicilia, to
which they that did take an oath did go, and whatsoever they did affirm upon
oath writ it upon tables, which they cast into the fountain. If those things
were true, the tables would swim; if false, sink; then fire coming suddenly
forth burned him that was perjured into ashes. There was also in the City
Dodona an Oak, which as soon as any one entered in to receive an answer, did
forthwith move, and make a sound; there was also a statue holding a wand, which
did strike a basin, whereby the basin made answer by moderated strokes. Whence
it is read in the Epistle of Ausinus to Paulinus, Answers did give the Dodonean
brass,
With moderated strokes; so docile it was.


CHAP. XLIX. Of the fourth kind of Frenzy, from Venus.
NOw the fourth kind of Frenzy proceeds from Venus, and it does by a servent
love convert, and transmute the mind to God, and makes it altogether like to
God, as it were the proper image of God; Whence Hermes says, O Aselepius! Man
is a great miracle, an animal to be honored and adored; for he passes into
the nature of God, whereby he becomes God: He knows the rise of Demons, and he
knows himself to have his original with them, despising the part of his humane
nature in himself, having a sure confidence of the divinity of the other; The
soul therefore being converted, and made like to God, is so formed of God, that
it does above all intellect, know all things by a certain essential contract of
Divinity: therefore Orpheus describes love to be without eyes, because it is
above the intellect. Now then the soul being so converted into God by love, and
sublimated above the intellectual spear, does beside that it has by its
integrity obtained the spirit of prophecy, sometimes work wonderful things,
and greater then the nature of the world can do, which works are called
miracles. For as the heaven by its image, light, and heat, does those things,
which the force of the fire cannot do by its natural quality (which in
Alchymie is most known by experience) so also does God by the image and light
of himself do those things, which the world cannot do by its innate virtue. Now
the image of God is man, at least such a man that by a frenzy from Venus is
made like to God, and lives by the mind only, and receives God into himself.
Yet the soul of man according to the Hebrew Doctors and Cabalists, is defined
to be the light of God, and Created after the image of the word, the cause of
causes, the first example, and the substance of God, figured by a seal whose
Character is the eternal word. Which Mercurius Trismegistus considering,
says, that such a man is more excellent then they that are in heaven, or at
least equal to them.

CHAP. L. Of rapture, and ecstasy, and soothsayings, which happen to them which
are taken with the falling sickness, or with a swoune, or to them in an agony.
ARapture is an abstraction, and alienation, and an illustration of the soul
proceeding from God, by which God does again retract the soul being fallen from
above to hell, from hell to heaven. The cause of this is in us a continual
contemplation of sublime things, which as far as it conjoyns with a most
profound intension of the mind, the soul to incorporeal wisdom, does so far
recall it self with its vehement agitations from things sensible and the body,
and (as Plato says) in such a manner sometimes, that it even flies out of the
body, and seems as it were dissolved: even as Aurelius Austin reports
concerning a Priest of Calamia; (of whom we have made mention before) he lay
(says he) most like unto a dead man, without breath; and when he was burnt
with fire and wounded, he felt it not; so great therefore is the command of the
soul: viz. when it has obtained its own nature, and is not oppressed by the
allurements of the senses, that by its own power it suddenly ascends, not
only remaining in the body, but even sometimes loosed from its fetters, and
flies forth of the body to the supercelestiall habitations, where now it being
most nigh, and most like to God, and made the receptable of divine things, it
is filled with the divine Light and Oracles. Whence Zoroastes says, thou must
ascend to the light it self, and to the beams of the Father, whence thy soul
was sent thee, clothed with very much mind; and Trismegistus says, it is
necessary that thou ascend above the heavens, and be far from the quire of
spirits: and Pythagoras says, if thou by leaving the body shall pass into the
spacious heavens, thou shall be an immortal god. So we read that Hermes,
Socrates, Xenocrates, Plato, Plotine, Heraclitus, Pythagoras and Zoroastes,
were wont to abstract themselves by rapture, and so to learn the knowledge of
many things: also we read in Herodotus, that there was in Proconnesus a
Philosopher of wonderful knowledge, called Atheus, whose soul sometimes went
out of the body, and after the visitation of places far remote, returned again
into the body more learned: Pliny reports the same thing, that the soul of
Harman Clazomenius was wont to wander abroad, his body being left, and to bring
true tidings of things very far off; and there are even to this day in Norway
and Lapland very many who can abstract themselves three whole days from their
body, and being returned declare many things which are afar off; and in the
mean time it is necessary to keep them, that not any living creature come upon
them or touch them; otherwise they report that they cannot return into their
body. Therefore we must know, that (according to the doctrine of the
Egyptians,) seeing the soul is a certain spiritual light, when it is loosed
from the body, it comprehends every place and time, in such a manner as a
light enclosed in a Lanthern, which being open, diffuseth it self every where,
and fails not any where, for it is every where, and continually; and Cicero
in his book of Divination says, neither does the soul of man at any time
divine, when it is so loosed that it has indeed little or nothing to do with
the body; when therefore it shall attain to that state, which is the supreme
degree of contemplative perfection, then it is rapt from all created species,
and understands not by acquired species, but by the inspection of the Ideas,
and it knows all things by the light of the Ideas: of which light Plato says
few men are partakers in this life; but in the hands of the gods, all: also
they who are troubled with the syncope and falling sickness, do in some manner
imitate a rapture, and in these sicknesses sometimes as in a rapture do bring
forth prophecy, in which kind of prophesying we read that Hercules and many
Arabians were very excellent, and there are certain kinds of soothsayings,
which are a middle betwixt the confines of natural predictions, and
supernatural Oracles, viz. which declare things to come from some excess of
passion, as too much love, sorrow, or amongst frequent sights, or in the agony
of death, as in Statius, of the mother of Achilles; -- Nor she without parents
dear
Under the glassie gulf the oars did fear.


For there is in our minds a certain perspicuous power, and, capable of all
things, but encumbred and hindered by the darkness of the body and mortality,
but after death it having acquired immortality, and being freed from the body
it has a full and perfect knowledge. Hence it comes to pass, that they who
are nigh to death, and weakened by old age, have sometimes somewhat of an
unaccustomed light, because the soul being less hindered by the senses,
understands very acutely, and being now as it were a little relaxed from its
bands, is not altogether subject to the body, and being as it were nigher to
the place, to the which it is about to go, it easily perceives revelations,
which being mixed with its agonies, are then offered to it; whence Ambrose in
his book of the belief of the resurrection, says, Which being free in the
aerial motion, knows not whither it goes, and whence it comes; yet we know
that it superviveth the body, and that it being freed, the chains of its senses
being cast off, freely discerns those things which it saw not before, being
in the body, which we may estimate by the example of those who sleep, whose
mind being quiet, their bodies being as it were buried, do elevate themselves
to higher things, and do declare to the body the visions of things absent, yea
even of celestial things.

CHAP. LI. Of Prophetical Dreams.
NOw I call that a dream, which proceeds either from the spirit of the
fantasy and intellect united together, or by the illustration of the Agent
intellect above our souls, or by the true revelation of some divine power in a
quiet and purified mind; for by this our soul receives true oracles, and
abundantly yields prophesies to us: for in dreams we seem both to Ask
questions, and learn to read and find them out; also many doubtful things,
many Policies, many things unknown, and unwished for, nor ever attempted by our
minds, are manifested to us in Dreams: also the representations of unknown
places appear, and the Images of men both alive and dead, and of things to come
are foretold; and also things which at any times have happened, are revealed,
which we knew not by any report; and these dreams need not any art of
interpretation, as those of which we have spoken in the first book, which
belong to divination, not foreknowledge; and it comes to pass that they who
see these dreams, for the most part understand them not; for (as Abdala the
Arabian says) as to see dreams, is from the strength of imagination, so to
understand them, is from the strength of understanding; whose intellect
therefore, being overwhelmed by the too much commerce of the flesh, is in a
dead sleep, or its imaginative or fantastic spirit is too dull and
unpolished, that it cannot receive the species and representations which flow
from the superior intellect, and retain them when received, this man is
altogether unfit for the scothsaying by dreams. Therefore it is necessary, that
he who would receive true drams, should keep a pure, undisturbed, and an
undisquieted imaginative spirit, and so compose it, that it may be made worthy
of the knowledge and government by the mind and understanding: for such a
spirit is most fit for prophesying, and (as Sinesius says) is a most clear
glass of all the Images which flow every where from all things: when therefore
we are sound in body, not disturbed in mind, not dulled by meat or drink, nor
sad through poverty, nor provoked by any vice of lust or wrath, but chastely
going to bed, fall asleep, then our pure and divine soul being loosed from all
hurtful thoughts, and now freed by dreaming, is endowed with this divine
spirit as an instrument, and does receive those beams and representations,
which are darted down, and shine forth from the divine mind into it self; and
as it were in a deifving glass, it does far more certainly, clearly, and
efficaciously behold all things, then by the Vulgar enquiry of the intellect,
and by the discourse of reason; the divine power instructing the soul, being
invited to their society by the opportunity of the nocturnal so litariness;
neither further will that deity be wanting to him when he is awaked, which
rules all his actions: whosoever therefore does, by quiet and religious
meditation, and by a diet temperate and moderated according to nature, preserve
his spirit pure, does very much prepare himself, that by this means he may
become divine, and knowing all things; but whosoever, on the contrary, does
languish with a fantastic spirit, receives not perspicuous and distinct
visions, but even as the divine sight, by reason of its weakness, Judges
confusedly and indistinctly; and also when we are overcome with wine and
drunkenness, then our spirit being oppressed with noxious vapors (as a
troubled water is wont to appear in diverse forms) is deceived, and waxes dull;
for which cause Amphiarus the Prophet (as we read in Philostratus) commanded
those, who would receive Oracles, to abstain one whole day from meat, and three
days from wine that the soul could not rightly prophefie unless it were free
from wine, and meat; for to sober and religious minds, attending on the divine
worship, the Gods are wont to give Oracles; whence Orpheus cries out, -- Thou
spirit great of prophecy
Do go to souls that sleep full quietly,
And them inspire with knowledge of the Gods,
And make them soothsay --


Hence it was a custom amongst the ancients, that they who should receive
Answers, certain sacred expiations and sacrifices being first celebrated, and
divine worship ended, did religiously ly down even in a consecrated chamber, or
at least on the skins of the sacrifices; of which Ceremony Virgil makes mention
in these verses, -- Hence they sought
Answers to doubts; when gifts the priests had brought,
Here he reposed on skins of slaughtred sheep,
And under silent night prepares to sleep.
And a little after he sings, -- But now
Here King Latinus Oracles to know,
They did a hundred choice sheep sacrifice,
And on their skins, and spreading fleeces lies --


And the rulers of the Lacedaemonians (as Cicero says) were wont to lie down in
the Temple at Pasiphae, that they might dream. The same was done in the Temple
of Aesculapius, from whom true dreams were thought to be sent forth. And the
Calabrians consulting Podalyrius the son of Aesculapius, did sleep near his
Sepulcher in lambs skins; for so doing they were told in their dreams
whatsoever they desired to know; for the most usual time for dreams is the
night, when the senses are freed from wandering objects, and meridian errors,
and vain affections; neither does fear strike the mind, nor the thoughts
tremble, and the mind being most quiet, does steadfastly adhere to the Deity;
for there are, (as Rabbi-Johenan in his book of Senators says) four kinds of
true dreams: the first Matutine, which is made betwixt sleep and awaking: the
second, which one sees concerning another: the third, whose interpretation is
shown to the same dreamer in the nocturnall vision: the fourth, which is
repeated to the same dreamer, according to that which Joseph says to Pharaoh,
But that thou have seen the dream belonging to the same thing the second time,
it is a sign of confirmation; but that dream is most sure, which is concerning
those things which one did meditate on, and revolve in his mind, when he goes
to bed, as it is written, Thou O King did think upon thy bed, what should
become of these things; but it is necessary, that he which interprets other
men's dreams, has the knowledge by the which he can distinguish and discern the
similitude; of all things, and know the customs of all nations, according to
the laws which they have received from God and his Angels; farther this must be
known, that there is scarce any dream without some vanity, as no grain of corn
without his chafe, which thing even the dream of Joseph the Patriard
manifests; which his father Jacob interpreted, saying; what means this
dream, that thou have seen? what shall I, and thy mother, and thy brethren fall
down and worship thee? which effect concerning his mother, who shortly after
died, followed not. Also Rabbi Johenan in the forecited book, says these
things; and also Rabbi Levi affirms, that no prophetical dream can be kept
back from his effect longer than twenty two years; so Joseph dreamed in the
seventeenth year of his age, which was accomplished in the thirty ninth year of
his age; therefore whosoever would receive divine dreams, let him be well
disposed in body, his brain free from vapors, and his mind from perturbations,
and let him that day abstain from supper, neither let him drink that which will
inebriate, let him have a clean and neat chamber, also exorcized and
consecrated: in the which, a perfume being made, his temples anointed, things
causing dreams being put on his fingers, and the representation of the heavens
being put under his head, and paper being consecrated, his prayers being said,
let him go to bed, earnestly meditating or that thing he desires to know: So
he shall see most true and certain dreams with the true illumination of his
intellect: whosoever therefore shall know to join together those things which
here and there we have delivered concerning this matter in these books, he
shall easily obtain the gift of oracles and dreams.

CHAP. LII. Of Lots and marks possessing the sure power of Oracles.
THere are also certain Lots having a divine power of Oracles, and as it were
Indexes of divine judgment, being before sought for by earnest prayer, and
sometimes commanded by God himself to be done, as is read in Leviticus
concerning a goat to be offered to the Lord, and of the escape goat; and in the
book of Numbers of the rods of the Tribes of Israel. Now both Moses and Joshua
did by Lots in the presence of the Lord divide the lands, and inheritances to
the tribes of Israel according to the command of God. The Apostles of Christ,
prayers going-before, did by lot choose Matthias into the place of Judas the
traitor. Jonas the Prophet when he flying from the presence of God did sail to
Tharsus, a dangerous storm being raised, was by lot found out by the Mariners
to be the cause of the danger, and being cast into the sea, the tempest seized.
Caesar reports of M. Valerius Procillus, being taken by his enemies, concerning
whom it was consulted whether he should be presently burnt, or reserved to
another time, that by lot he escaped safe. There was formerly at Bura, a Town
of Achaia, an oracle of Hercules constituted by a chest board, where he that
went to consult of any thing, after he had prayed, cast four dice, the cast of
which the Prophet observing, did find written in the chestboard what should
come to pass: Now all such dice were made of the bones of sacrifices. Now this
you must know, that the Ancients were not wont upon every slight cause to cast
lots, but either upon necessity, or for some advantageous end, and that not but
with great devotion, reverence, expiations, fasting, purity, prayers,
invocations, vows, sacrifices, consecrations, and such like sacred mysteries
of religion. For these sacred ordinances were wont to go before our works,
especially to procure the divine good will, and pleasure, and the presence of
the divine spirits, by whose dispensation the lot being directed, we may
receive a true judgment of the things sought for. Every one therefore that
works by lots, must go about it with a mind well disposed, not troubled, nor
distracted, and with a strong desire, firm deliberation, and constant intention
of knowing that which shall be desired. Moreover he must, being qualified with
purity, chastity, and holiness toward God, and the celestials, with an
undoubted hope, firm faith, and sacred orations, invocate them, that he may be
made worthy of receiving the divine spirits, and knowing the divine pleasure;
for if thou shall be qualified, they will discover to thee most great secrets
by virtue of lots, and thou shall become a true Prophet, and able to speak
truth concerning things past, present, and to come, of which thou shall be
demanded. Now what we have spoken here concerning lots, is also to be observed
in the auguries of all discernings, viz when with fear, yet with a firm
expectation we prefix to our souls for the sake of prophesying some certain
works, or require a sign, as Eleasar Abraham's countryman, and Gideon Judge in
Israel are read to have done. There was once at Pharis a City of Achaia in the
middle of the market a statue of Mercury, where he that went to receive any
omen, did, frankincense being fumed, and candles being lighted, which were set
before it, and that country coin being offered on the right hand of the statue,
whisper into the right ear of the statue whatsoever he would demand, and
presently his ears being stopped with both his hands, did make have away from
the market place, which when he was past, did presently, his ears being opened,
observe the first voice he did hear from any man for a certain Oracle given to
him. Although therefore these kinds of lots seem to the ignorant to be casual,
or fortuitous, and to have nothing of reason in them, yet they are disposed by
God, and the higher virtues by certain reasons, neither they do fall beside the
intention of him that moderates them. Was not the lot in choosing Saul to be
King of Israel, thought to fall upon him casually, and fortuitously? Yet he was
before appointed by the Lord to be King, and anointed by the Prophet Samuel.
And God that appointed him King, disposed of the Lot that it should fall upon
him. And thus much of these.

CHAP. LIII. How he that will receive Oracles must dispose himself.
WHosoever therefore being desirous to come to the Supreme state of the soul,
goes to receive oracles, must go to them being chastely and devoutly disposed,
being pure and clean go to them, so that his soul be polluted with no
filthiness, and free from all guilt. He must also so purify his mind and body
as much as he may from all diseases, and passions, and all irrational
conditions, which adhere to it as rust to iron, by rightly composing and
disposing those things which belong to the tranquillity of the mind; for by
this means he shall receive the truer and more efficacious Oracles. Now by what
things the mind is purged, and reduced into a divine purity, we must learn by
Religion, and wisdom. For neither wisdom without Religion, nor Religion without
wisdom is to be approved off. For wisdom (as says Solomon) is the tree of life
to them that lay hold on it. And Lucretius says that it is the intention of
God, or the breathings of God, where he sings. Most famous Memmius! this that
God is he,
The prince of life, who reason, which all we
Call wisdom, first found out and who by art
The life from troubles, darkness set apart
And freed, and unto light, and peace reduced.


He also understands that to be a divine illustration, whence Democritus
thinks that there are no men wise but they that are struck with some divine
frenzy, as was Menos that Cretensian, whom they report learned all things of
Jupiter, whence he had frequent converse with God in the mount Ida: so also the
Athenians report that Melosagora Eleusinus was taught by the Nymphs; so also we
read, that Hesiod when he was a Shepherd in Beotia, and kept his flock near the
mountain Helicon, had some pens given him by the Muses, which having received,
he presently became a Poet, which to become so suddenly was not of man, but by
a divine inspiration; for God conveying himself into holy souls, makes men
Prophets, and workers of miracles, being powerful in work and speech, as Plato
and Mercurius affirm, and also Xistus the Pythagorian, saying that such a man
is the temple of God, and that God is his guest: to whom assents our Paul,
calling man the temple of God; and in another place speaking of himself, I can
do all things in him that strengthens me; for he is our power, without which
(as he says) we can do nothing; which also Aristotle confesses in his Meteors
and Ethics, saying, that there is no virtue whether natural or moral but by
God; and in his secrets he says that a good and sound intellect can do nothing
in the secrets of nature without the influence of divine virtue. Now we receive
this influence then only, when we do acquit our selves from burdensome
impediments, and from carnal and Terrene occupations, and from all external
agitation; neither can a blear or impure eye behold things too light, neither
can he receive divine things who is ignorant of the purifying of his mind. Now
we must come to this purity of mind by degrees, neither can any one that is
initiated newly unto those mysteries presently comprehend all clear things, but
his mind must be accustomed by degrees, until the intellect becomes more
enlightened, and applying it self to divine light be mixed with it. A humane
soul therefore when it shall be rightly purged, and expiated, does then, being
loosed from all impurity, break forth with a liberal motion, and ascends
upwards, receives divine things, instructs it self, when happily it seems to be
instructed from elsswhere; neither does it then need any remembrance, or
demonstration by reason of the industry of it self, as by its mind which is the
head and the pilot of the soul, it does, imitating by its own nature the
angels, attain to what it desires, not by succession or time, but in a moment.
For David when he had not learning, was of a Shepherd made a Prophet, and most
expert of divine things. Solomon in the dream of one night, was filled with the
knowledge of all things above and below. So Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the
other Prophets, and Apostles were taught. For the soul (which is the common
opinion of the Pythogorians, and Platonists) can by way of purification,
without any other study, or searching only by an easy, and adventitious
collating on these intelligibles received from above, acquire the perfect
knowledge of all things knowable. It can also by an extrinsecall expiation
attain to this, as to understand all things Invisibly by its substantial form.
For the mind is purged, and expiated by cleansing, by abstinence, by penitency,
by alms: and then also do thereunto conduce certain sacred institutions, as
shall afterward be discovered. For the soul is to be cured by the study of
Religions, and indeed these which are commonly called occult, that being
restored to its soundness, confirmed by truth, and fortified by divine graces,
may not fear any rising shakings.

CHAP. LIVE. Of cleanness, and how to be observed.
WE must therefore first observe cleanness in food, in works, in affections,
and to put away all filthiness, and perturbations of the mind, and whatsoever
sense or spirit that offends, and whatsoever things are in mind unlike to the
heavens, not only if they be in mind and spirit, but also if they be in the
body, or about the body: for such an external cleanness is believed not to
help a little to the purity of the mind. For this cause the Pythagorian
Philosophers being taken with the desire of Oracles, divine praises being
celebrated, did wash themselves in a river as in a bath, and did put on white
raiment and linen; for they did account wool a profane clothing being the
excrements of beasts, and they did inhabit in a pure chamber, and altogether
unspotted. In like manner the Bragmanni the wise men of the Indians were wont
to wash themselves naked in a fountain, which is called Dirce in Beotia, their
heads being first anointed with amber drops, and odours fit for that purpose;
then after they were according to custom sufficiently clean, they were to go
forth about noon, clothed in white linen, with a white attire having rings on
their fingers and staves in their hands. In like manner amongst the
Gymnosophists it was a custom to wash themselves thrice in a day, and twice in
the night in cold water, before they entered into the holy places. They did also
every day use linen garments every day newly washed. We read also of the manner
of this kind of washing in Hesiod in his books of works and days, where he
sings, None dare with hands unwashed unto Jove
Wine pour forth, nor unto the gods above;
For then they do refuse for to be heard,
Though being prayed unto --
And elsewhere When wicked men the rivers do pass by
With hands unwash'd, then are the gods angry
With them, and them afflict --
Hence in Virgil, Aeneas thus speaks to his father, O Father, take the household
gods, and hold
Them in thy sacred hands; to be so bold
As them to handle after so great fights
I dare not till that washed in streams most bright.


It was also a custom amongst the Gentiles, when they were wont to perform any
holy services to the gods, to cleanse their bodies by washing; and when they
were to contend with the infernal gods, sprinkling only did suffice. Hence in
Virgil, Dido, when she did perform any solemnities to the gods, says, Cause
that my sister Ann (my nurse most dear:)
Come, and my body wash with water clear.


And in another place where Aeneas is brought in amongst the infernals bringing
a bough to Proserpina, he sing thus, The passage does Aeneas keep, and wash
His body with fresh water --
Also when he relates of Misenus to be buried, he sings, His friends he thrice
did wash with water new,
And with an Olive branch, wett in the dew,
He did them sprinkle --


Now man being made thus clean becomes celestial, and spiritual, and is
fitted for the sight of and union with God, whilst he ministers to God with a
clean body, and pure mind, and delights in the cleanness of all things, as
inwards, skin garments, houses, utensils, oblations, gifts, and sacrifices; the
cleanness of all which even purifies the air, and attracts the most pure
influence of celestial, and divine things, and allures the pure ministers of
God, and good Demons: although sometimes impure spirits, and ill Demons, as the
apes of the good Demons, take upon them this kind of cleanness, that either
they may be adored, or may deceive: therefore first of all we must observe that
the mind be pure, and the heart pure, and then the impure powers cannot ascend.

CHAP. LV. Of abstinence, fastings, chastity, solitariness, the tranquillity
and ascent of the mind.
ABstinence also does commonly fortify, and defend the observers thereof
against vices, and evil Demons, and makes the mind an unpolluted temple of God,
uniting it to God. For nothing does more conduce to health, and temperance of
the complexion, then not to heap together superfluities, and not to exceed the
bounds of necessary food. Neither is nutriment to be taken that is too strong
for nature, but rather let nature be stronger then the meat, as some affirm of
Christ, that he took meat in that proportoin that it should not breed any
excrement of the third concoction. Many others also taking meat sparingly,
enjoyed thereby health and agility of body, as Moses, and Elias, who fasted
forty days: whence his face shined, and he lifted up, could easily guide his
body as if it were a spirit. For Magicians, and Philosophers affirm that our
spirit is not as a terrene thing, or body nourished by nutriment received
through certain organs by the concoction of meat, and drink, but draws in their
aliment like sponges through the whole body, viz. from the thin vapors
penetrating the body on all sides. Therefore they that desire to have this
spirit pure, and potent, let them use dryet meats, and extenuate this gross
body with fastings, and they make it easily penetrable, and least by the weight
thereof, the spirit should either become thick, or be suffocated, let them
preserve the body clean by lotions, frictions, exercises, and clothings, and
corroborate their spirits by lights, and fumes, and bring it to a pure and thin
finess. We must therefore in taking of meats be pure, and abstinent, as the
Pythagorian Philosophers, who keeping a holy and sober table, did protract
their life in all temperance. The temperance therefore of life and complexion,
because thereby no superfluous humor is bred, which may dull the fantasy,
makes, that our soul oftentimes dreaming, and sometimes watching, is always
subjected to the superior influences. Moreover the Pythagorians, if any one
does by abstinence moderate prudently every motion of the mind, and body,
promise perpetual health of both, and long life. So the Bragmani did admit
none to their college, but those that were abstinent from wine, from flesh,
and vices, saying that none could understand God, but they that emulate him by
a divine conversation: which also Phraotes in Philostrates taught the lower
Indians. Moreover we must abstain from all those things which infect either the
mind, or spirit, as from covetousness, and envy, which are handmaids to
injustice (as Hermes says) enforcing the mind and the hand to evil practices;
also from idleness, and luxury; for the soul being suffocated with the body,
and lust, cannot foresee any celestial thing. Wherefore the priests of the
Athenians who are called in Greek Hierophantae (as Hierom reports) that they
might live more chastely in their sacred employments, and might follow their
divine affairs without lust, were wont to castrate themselves by drinking of
hemlock. Moreover the chastity of a mind devoted to God does make our mind (as
Orpheus teaches Museus in the hymn of all the gods) a perpetual temple of
God. Also we must abstain from all multitude and variety of senses, affections,
imaginations, opinions, and such like passions, which hurt the mind and pervert
the judgment of reason, as we manifestly see in the lascivious, the envious,
and ambitious. Wherefore Cicero (in his Tusculans questions) calls these
passions the sicknesses of the mind, and the pestiferous diseases thereof. But
Horace calls them furies or madness, where he sings, Girls have a thousand
furies, so have boys.

The same also seems to be of opinion that all men are fools in something.
Whence it is read in Ecclesiasticus, there are an infinite number of fools.
Therefore the Stoics deny that passions are incident to a wise man; I say such
passions, which follow the sensitive apprehension: for rational, and mental
passions, they yield a wise man may have. This opinion did Boethius seem to be
of, where he sings that some passions are to be laid aside in the inquisition
of truth, in these verses, If truth thou would discover with clear sight,
And walk in the right path, then from thee quit
Joy, fear, grief, hope expel; for where these reign,
The mind is dark and bound --


We must therefore acquit and avert our minds from all multitudes, and such
like passions, that we may attain to the simple truth; which indeed many
Philosophers are said to have attained to in the solitude of a long time. For
the mind by solitude being loosed from all care of humane affairs is at
leisure, and prepared to receive the gifts of the celestial dieties. So Moses
the lawgiver to the Hebrews, and the greatest of prophets, and learned in all
the knowledge of the Caldeans and Egyptians, when he would abstract himself
from senses, went into the vast wildernesses of Ethiopia, where all humane
affairs being laid aside, he applied his mind to the sole contemplation of
divine things, in which thing he so pleased the omnipotent God, that he
suffered him to see him face to face, and also gave him a wondrous power of
miracles, as sacred writ testifies of him. So Zoroastes the father and prince
of the Magicians, is said to attain to the knowledge of all natural and divine
things by the solitude of twenty years, when he wrote, and did very strange
things concerning all the art of divining, and soothsaying. The like things do
the writings of Orpheus to Museus declare him to have done in the deserts of
Thracia. So we read that Epimenides of Crete, because learned by a very long
sleep, for they say that he slept fifty years, i. e. to have lay hid so long;
Fythagoras also in like manner to have layen hid ten years, and Heraclitus, and
Democritus for the same cause were delighted with solitariness. For by how much
the more we have the animal and the humane life, by so much the more we live
like angels, and God, to which being conjoined, and brought into a better
condition, we have power over all things, ruling over all. Now how our mind is
to be separated from an animal life, and from all multitude, and to be erected,
until it ascend to that very one, good, true, and perfect, through each degree
of things knowable, and knowledges, Proclus teaches in his Commentaries upon
Alcibiades, showing how that first sensible things are to be shunned, that we
may pass to an incorporeal essence, where we must exceed the order of souls yet
multiplied by diverse rules, habitudes, and various proportions, many bonds, and
a manifold variety of forces, and to strive after an intellect, and
intelligible kingdom, and to contemplate how far better these are then souls.
Moreover we must bear an intellectual multitude, although united, and
individual, and come to the superintellectual and essential unity, absolute
from all multitude, and the very fountain of good, and truth. In like manner we
must avoid all knowledge that does any ways distract, and deceive, that we may
obtain the most simple truth. The multitude therefore of affections, senses,
imaginations, and opinions is to be left, which in it self is as different, as
some things are contrary to others in any subject; and we must ascend to
sciences, in which although there be a various maltitude, yet there is no
contrariety. For all are knit one to the other, and do serve one the other,
under one the other, until they come to one, presupposed by all, and supposing
none beyond it; to which all the rest must be referred: yet that is not the
highest top of knowledges, but above it is a pure intellect. Therefore all
composition, division, and various discourse being laid aside, let us,
ascending to the intellectual life, and simple sight, behold the intelligible
essence with individual and simple precepts, that we may attain to the highest
being of the soul, by which we are one, and under which our multitude is
united. Therefore let us attain to the first unity, from whom there is a union
in all things, through that one which is as the flower of our essence: which
then at length we attain to, when avoiding all multitude we do arise into our
very unity, are made one, and act uniformely.

CHAP. LVI. Of Penitency, and Alms.
NOw the greatest part of purgations is a voluntary penitency for faults for
(as says Seneca in Thyeste) he whom it grieves that he has offended, is in a
manner innocent. This brings to us the greatest expiation, whilst it opposes
afflictings to delights, and purges out of the soul a stupid joyfulness, and
gives a certain peculiar power, reducing us to the things above. Penitency
therefore is not only a mortification of vices, but a spiritual Martyrdom of
the soul; which with the sword of the spirit is on all sides mortified; Now the
sword of the spirit is the word of God; whence Jeremiah the Prophet says, and
also Paul, writing to the Ephesians, Cursed is he that withholds his sword
from blood; and the Psalmist sings; A sword is in their lips. Therefore our
cogitations, affections of our mind, and all evils that proceed from our heart
and mouth, must be uttered to the priest in confession, that he may according
to the word of God judge those things; and according to the power granted to
him by God, penitency being joined with it, may purify, and purge them, and
direct them to that which is good, neither is there found in religion for the
expiating heinous offenses a stronger Sacrament. Hence the Gods themselves
(Ovid in Pontus being witness) Do often ease the pains, restore the lights
Which were caught away, when that mortal wights
They see repenting of their sins --


There is as yet another Sacrament of expiation, viz. Almsgiving, of which as I
remember I have read very little in Philosophers, but the very truth taught us
that, saying, Give ye alms, and all things shall be clean to you; and in
Eclesiasticus it is read; as water extinguisheth fire, so alms does sin; and
Daniel taught the King of Babylon, that he should redeem his sin by alms; and
the Angel Raphael testifies to Tobias; because alms frees from death, and is
that which purges sins, and make us find eternal life. Hence Christ commanded
us to pray to the Father, Forgive as we forgive others, give us as we give to
others; of which he said in another place, ye shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall possess eternal life. He shall when he comes to judge the quick and
the dead, upbraid the wicked above all things for their neglect of alms and
works of mercy, when he shall say, I was hungry, and thirsty, and ye gave me
neither meat, nor drink; and in another place he speaks of the poor; what ye
have done to any one of them ye have done to me. Which Homer also seems to be
sensible of, when he brings in a young man wooing Antinoe, saying these words,
Antinoe how plausibly have thou slain a poor beggar! he shall destroy thee if
God be in heaven, for the Gods themselves being likened to strangers, and
guests, go out into the whole world, overturning Cities, and beholding the
injaries, and wickedness of men.

CHAP. LVII. Of those things which being outwardly administered conduce to
Expiation.
IT is believed, and it is delivered by them that are skilful in sacred things,
that the mind also may be expiated with certain institutions, and sacraments
ministered outwardly, as by sacrifices, baptismes, and adjurations,
benedictions, consecrations, sprinklings of holy water, by anoyntings, and
fumes, not so much consecrated to this, as having a natural power thus to do;
upon this account sulphur has a place in Religions, to expiate ill Demons with
the fume thereof. An egg also was wont to be used in Purgations; hence eggs
are called holy, whence Ovid, Let the old woman come, and purge the bed,
And place, and bring sulphur and eggs sacred
In her trembling hand --


Proclus also writes, that the priests in purifyings were wont to use sulphur,
and bitumen, or the washing of sea water: For sulphur purifies by the sharpness
of its odor, and sea water by reason of its fiery part; In like manner the
herb Cinquefoil: wherefore by reason of its purity the ancient priests did use
it in purifications, also the boughs of Olives. For these are said to be of so
great purity, that they report that an olive tree planted by an harlot is
thereby for ever made unfruitful, or else withers. In like manner,
frankincense, myrrh, vervain, valerian, and the herb called Phu conduce to
expiation. Also the blessed Clove flower; and the gall of a black dog being
fumed is said to be very powerful in these, as well for expiating of ill
spirits, as any bewitchings: also the feathers of a lapwing being fumed, drives
away Phantasmes. It is wonderful, and scarce credible, but that that grave and
worthy Author Josephus relates it in his history of Jerusalem, of a root of
Baaras, so called from a place near Machernus a Town of Judea, being of a
yellow color, that in the night it did shine, and was hard to be taken, that
it did oftentimes deceive the hands of them that went to take it, and go out of
their sight, never stood still, till the urine of a menstrous woman was
sprinkled on it. Neither yet being thus retained, is it pulled up without
danger, but sudden death falls upon him that draws it up, unless he were
fortified with an amulet of the said root; which they that want, sacrificing
about the earth do bind the root to a dog by a cord, and presently depart: at
length the dog with a great deal of pains draws up the root, and as it were
supplying the place of his master presently dies, after which any one may
handle the root without danger; the power of which is much excellent in
expiations, as is manifest for the delivery of those that are vexed with
unclean spirits; now that these kind of waters should act upon spiritual
substances by putting them to flight, or by alluring them, or mitigating them,
or by inciting them, they are of no other opinion then that the fire of Sicilia
acts upon souls: which (William of Paris being witness) not hurting the bodies,
does most intolerably torment the souls of them that are near. But of those in
part we have treated before.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Adorations, and vows.
ADorations, and vows, sacrifices, and oblations are certain degrees in sacred
^^ things find out God, and those things which principally provoke the divine
pleasure, and procure a sacred and indissolvible communion of God with souls;
for by prayers which we utter with true and sacred words, sensibly, and
affectionately, we obtain a great power, when by the application of them to any
diety we do so far move it, that he may direct his speech and answer by a
divine way, by which (as says Dionysius) God speaks with men, but so occultly
that very few perceive it. But oftentimes that King and Prophet David perceives
it, when he says, I will hear what the Lord will speak in me. Adoration
therefore being a long time continued, and often frequented, perfects the
intellect, and makes the soul more large for the receiving of divine lights,
inflaming divine love, producing faith, hope, and sacred manners, purifieth the
soul from all contrariety, and what is any away adverse to it, and does also
repel diverse evils, which would otherwise naturally fall out. Hence Ovia
sings, -- With prayers moved is Jove;
I oftentimes have seen when from above --
He would send dreadful lightnings, him to be
Appeas^d with frankincense --


Now man is returned to God by prayers, by which coming he (says Plato in
Phedrus) stops horses, and enters into the chambers of repose, where he feeds
upon Ambrosia, and drinks Nectar. Therefore they that desire to enjoy any
virtue, must pray, and supplicate often to him who has all virtue in himself
Now that is the best prayer, which is not uttered in words, but that which with
a Religious silence and sincere cogitation is offered to God, and that which
with the voice of the mind and words of the intellectual world is offered to
him. Now a vow is an ardent affection of a chaste mind given up to God, which by
vowing wishes that which seems good. This affection (as Jamblicus, and Proclus
testify) does so join the soul to God, that the operation of the mind and of
God is one; viz. of God as an artificer, of the mind as a divine instrument:
all antiquity testifies that by vows sometimes miracles are done, diseases are
cured, tempests are diverted, and such like. Hence we read that the most
excellent, and wise in all nations, the Bragmanni of the Indians the Magicians
of the Persians, the Gymnosopists of the Egyptians, the divines of the Greeks,
and Caldeans which did excel in divine secrets, did apply themselves to divine
vows, and prayers, and thereby did effect many wonderful things. Now to the
perfection of a vow, and adoration (for a vow cannot be perfect without an
adoration, nor an adoration without a vow) there are two things especially
required, viz. First the knowledge of the thing to be adored, and to which we
must vow, and in what manner, and order, and by what Mediums it must be
worshipped; for there are various cooperators and instruments of God, viz The
heavens, Stars, and ministering spirits, the celestial souls, and Heroes, which
we must implore as porters, interpreters, administrators, mediators, but first
of all him, who goes to the Archetype God, who only is the utmost term of
adoration; the others dieties are as it were passages to that very God. Know
therefore that adorations and vows must with a pure and pious mind be
principally made to that one only God, the highest father, King and Lords of
all the god. But when they shall come before to the inferior gods, let the
intention of the administration be terminated in them; therefore to adorations,
and vows, when they be directed to the inferior dieties, Zoroastes and
Orpheus thought fitting that suffumigations and characters should be used; But
when they are erected to the majesty of the supreme God, they must not in any
wise; which also Hermes, and Plato forbid to be done. Whence Hermes to Tatius;
This (says he) is like to sacrilege when thou prayest to God to be willing to
kindle frankincense, and such like; For (says Porphyrie) they are not
agreeable to piety. For there is not any material thing can be found, which to
the immateriall God is not unclean. Therefore neither is that prayer which is
uttered by words agreeable to him, nor that prayer which is mental, if the
mind be polluted with vice; Secondly there is also required a certain
assimilation of our life to the divine life, in purity, chastity and holiness,
with a lawful desire of that which we wish for; for by this means we
especially obtain the divine benevolence, and are subjected to the divine
bounty; for unless we, having our minds purged, be worthy to be heard; and
also those things which we desire, be worthy to be done, it is manifest that
the gods will not hearken to our prayers; whence divine Plato says that God
cannot be bound by our prayers or gifts to do unjust things; therefore let us
desire nothing of God, which we think uncomely to wish fore for by this means
only, we see that very many are frustrated of their prayers and vows, because
that neither they themselves are Religiously disposed, nor are their desires
and prayers made for those things which are well pleasing to God, neither do
they know to discern in what order they ought to pray, and through what
mediators they ought to go to God; the ignorance of which does very often reduce
our prayers and supplications to nothing, and causes our desires and wishes to
be denied.

CHAP. LIX. Of sacrifices and oblations, and their kinds and manners.
ASacrifice is an oblation which is both holy by offering, and sanctifies and
makes Holy the offerer, unless either Irreverence or some other sin be an
impediment to him; therefore these sacrifices and oblations do yield us much
hope, and make us of the family of God, and do repel from us many evils hanging
over our heads, which the doctors of the Hebrews do especially confirm, saying
by this that we kill our living creatures, and dissipate our wealth by
sacrifice, we turn away mischiefs which do hang over us: for as this mortal
priest sacrifices in this inferior world the soul of irrational creatures to
God, by the separating of the body from the soul: so Michael the Archangel the
priest of the higher world, sacrifices the souls of men, and this by the
separation of the soul from the body, and not of the body from the soul, unless
perchance, as it happens in fury, Rapture, Ecstasy and sleep, and such like
vacations of the soul, which the Hebrews call the death of the body. But
sacrifices and oblations are first of all and principally to be offered up to
the most high God; but when they are to be directed to the secondary divine
powers, this ought to be done even as we have spoken concerning prayers and
vows: but there are many kinds of sacrifices: one kind is called a burnt
offering, when the thing sacrificed was consumed by fire; another, is an
offering for the effusion of blood; moreover there are salutiferous sacrifices
which are made for the obtaining of health, others pacifying for obtaining
peace, others praising for the freeing from some evil, and for the bestowing
of some good thing; others Gratulatory, for divine worship and thanksgiving;
but some sacrifices are made neither for the honor of God, nor out of good
will, of which sort was that amongst the Hebrews, called the sacrifice of
Jealousy, which was made only for the detecting of occult adultery. There was
in times past amongst the Gentiles the sacrifice of expiation, by the which
cities were purged from famine, pestilence, or some horrible calamity; whose
rites were to search out the most wicked man in that city, and to lead him to
the place appointed carrying in his hands a cheese and wafers and dry figs;
afterward to whip him seven times with Rods, and then to burn him to ashes
with the same rods, and to cast the ashes into the sea; of these Lycophron and
Hipponax make mention; neither does Philostratus relate things much different
from these, concerning Apollonius of Tiana while he chased away the Pestilence
from Ephesus. Moreover there were many kind of sacrifices and offeringsas
Agonalia, Dapsa, Farreationes, Hecatombe, Hostia, Hyacinthia, Armilustra,
Janualia, Lucalia, Lupercalia, Munychia, Novendinalia, Nyctiluca, Palatialia,
Pastillaria, Popularia, Protervia, Scenopegia, Solitaurilia, Stata, Rubigalia,
Fontanalia, Ormia, Parentalia, Inferiae, Consualia, Lampteria, Amburbia,
Ambarvalia, Vivalta, Thyia, Holocaustomata, Orgia, Latialia, Dianetaurica,
Bacchanalia, Trieterica, Liberalia, Cocytia, Cerealia, Thesmophoria, Adonia,
Teonia, Laurentalia, Opalia, Palilia, Quirinalia, Vertumnalia, Gynaecia,
Panathenea, Quinquatria, Diapalia, Diasia, Horma, Hormea, Nemea, Mytriaca,
Palogygia. And the offerings of these were proper and diverse; for a Goat and
an Ass were sacrificed to Bacchus, a Sow to Ceres, an horse to the Sun, an heart
and dogs to Diana, an Ass to Priaapus, a Goose to Isis, a dunghil-cock to the
Night, a she-Goate to Faunus, a Bull to Neptune, a she-Goate to Minerva, a Bull
to Hercules, a child to Saturn, a Sow with piggs to Maja, a Cock to
Aesculapius: moreover they did sacrifice to Hercules Gnidius with scoulding and
railings; there were also diverse orders of Priests, as high priests, Flamines,
Archislamines, Phylades, Salians, Hierophantes and diverse names of religions,
and superstitions, and sacrifices, ceremonies, feasts, consecrations,
dedications, vows, devotions, expiations, oaths, offerings, satisfactory
works; by the which the seduced gentiles did sacrifice to false Gods and
devils; but the true sacrifice, which purges any man, and uniteth him to God,
is twofold; one which the high priest Christ offered for the remission of sins,
purifying all things by the blood of his cross; the other, by the which a man
offers up himself clean unspotted, for a living sacrifice to God, as Christ
the high priest offered himself, and taught us to be offered together with him,
as he was offered, saying of the sacrament of his body, and blood, Do this in
remembrance of me; viz. that we should offer our selves together, being
mortified by the passion of his mortal body, and quickened in spirit; of the
which Porphyry says, Let us labor to offer up holiness of life for a sacrifice;
for no man can be a good priest of God, but he which brings forth himself for
a sacrifice, and builds up his own soul, as it were for an Image, and does
constitute both his mind, and understanding for a Temple in the which he may
receive the divine light; but eternal sacrifices (as Heraclitus says) are
certain cures of the soul, instituted by the most High Physician; for the evil
spirit possesses a man (as Proclus says) even until he be expiated by
sacrifices; therefore sacrifices are required to pacify God and the Heavenly
powers, and to expiate a man, who bears the Image both of God and the world;
But our Lord Jesus Christ the true high priest concluded all sacrifices in
bread and wine only, as in the primary substance of man's meat, needing further
the offering up of no animals, nor other things, or the effusion of blood, in
which we may be cleansed, being perfectly cleansed in his blood. There were
also amongst the Egyptians sixhundred sixty six kinds of sacrifices; for they
did appoint divine honors, and holy sacrifices to each star, and planet,
because they were divine animals partaking of an intellectual soul and a divine
mind; whence they say that the stars being humbly prayed unto, do hear our
prayer, and bestow celestial gifts, not so much by any natural agreement, as by
their own free will. And this is that which Jamblicus says, that celestial
bodies, and the dieties of the world have certain divine and superior powers in
themselves, as also natural and inferior, which Orpheus calls the keys to open
and shut; and that by those we are bound to the fatal influencies, but by
these to loose us from fate. Whence if any misfortune hang over any one from
Saturn, or from Mars, the Magicians command that he must not forthwith fly to
Jupiter, or Venus, but to Saturn or Mars themselves. So that Apuleian Psyche
who was persecuted by Venus for equalling her in beauty, was forced to
importune for favor, not from Ceres, or Juno, but from Venus her self. Now they
did sacrifice to each star with things belonging to them; to the Sun with
solary things, and its animals, as a Laurel tree, a Cock, a Swan, a Bull; to
Venus with her animals, as a Dove, or turtle, and by her plants, as Vervain; as
Virgil sings, -- Water bring out
With garlands soft, the altar round about
Compass, and burn fat boughs and frankincense
That's strong and pure --


Moreover the Magicians when they made any confection either natural, or
artificial, belonging to any star, this did they afterward religiously offer,
and sacrifice to the same star, receiving not so much a natural virtue from the
influence thereof being oppottunly received, as by that religious oblation
receiving it divinely confirmed and stronger. For the oblation of any thing,
when it is offered to God after aright manner, that thing is sanctified by God
by the oblation as is a sacrifice, and is made part thereof. Moreover to the
celestial and etherial Gods white sacrifices were offered; but to the
terrestial or infernal, black: but to the terrestial upon the altars, but to
the infernal in ditches; to the aerial and watery flying things: But to these
white, to these black. Finally, to all the Gods and Demons besides terrestial
and infernal, flying things were offered, but to those only four-footed
animals, for like rejoices in like. Of these only which were offered to the
celestial, and etherial, it is lawful to eat, the extreme parts being reserved
for God, but of the other not. Now all these the Oracle of Apollo has
expressed in these verses, A threefold sacrifice to the Gods above,
White must be slain for them; for them below
Threefold also, but black for them; withal
With open altars Gods celestial
Are taken, when the infernal Gods require
Pits embru'd with black blood, and filled with mire,
And are not pleased but with a sacrifice
That Is buried; but of the air the dieties
Delight in honey, and in wines most clear,
And that on altars kindled be the fire,
Require, with flying sacrifice, and white:
But of the earth the dieties delight
That earthly bodies should with frankinsense
And wafers offered be in reverence.
But for the Gods that rule the sea thou must
Thy sacrifices lay on the sea coasts,
And on the waves cast the whole animal.
But to the dieties celestial
Give th* extreme parts, and them consume with fire;
What then remains thou may if thon desire
Eat up, and let the air with vapors thick
And sweet smelling drop --


These does Porphyry make mention of in his book of answers, to whom the rest
assent. For they say that these sacrifices are certain natural Mediums betwixt
the Gods and men; which Aristotle affirming says, that to sacrifice to God is
in a man naturally. They are therefore they say, Mediums, which savor of the
nature of both, and represent divine things analogically, and have with the
diety to whom they are offered, certain convenient anlogies, but so occult that
a man's understanding can scarce conceive of them, which God, and the Dieties
require in particular for our expiation with which the celestial virtues are
pleased, and withhold themselves from execution of the punishment which our
sins deserve. And these are (as Orpheus calls them) keys which open the gate of
the elements and the heavens, that by them a man may ascend to the
supercelestials; and the intelligences of the heavens, and the demons of the
elements may descend to him. Now men that are perfect, and truly Religious need
them not, but only they, who (says Trismegistus) being fallen into disorder,
are made the servants of the heavens and creatures; who because they are
subjected to the heavens, therefore think they may be corroborated by the
favor of the celestial virtue, until they flying higher be acquitted from
their presidency, and become more sublime then they.

CHAP. LX. What imprecations, and rites the ancients were wont to use in
sacrifices, and oblations.
NOw let us see what imprecations they did join to oblations, and sacrifices;
For he that did offer any sacrifice to God, did say these, or the like things:
I thy servant do offer and sacrifice these things to thee; I confess that thou
art the author of all sanctity, and I call upon thee to sanctify this
oblation, that thou would pour upon it the virtue of thy high and excellent
spirit, that by it we may obtain what we ask for. Moreover also as this thing
present by any oblations is made thine, as to live, or die to thee, so also let
me be made thine who by this oblation, and communion, by this thing which I
come to offer, and sacrifice to thee, profess to be one of thy family, and
worshippers. Besides in offerings it was said, As that animal is in my power to
be slain, if I pleased, or to be saved: so it is in thy power to take away in
wrath, or to give in love that which we desire. Lastly, when for expiation, or
the avoiding of any evil, any sacrifice was to be made, it was said, As that
animal dies in my hand, so die all vice in me, also all uncleanness, or so let
die and be annihilated such or such an evil, or discommodity. Also, As the
blood of this animal is poured forth out of its body, so let all vice and
uncleanness flow out from me. In sacrifices laid on the altarto be burnt, it
was said, as this oblation is consumed by this present fire, so that nothing
remains of it; so let all evil be consumed in me, or let such or such an evil
which we would repel and avoid be consumed. It was also a custom when
imprecation was made, to touch the altar with the hands of all those for whom
such a sacrifice was made, or of them who did desire to be partakers of it,
because prayer only cannot prevail, unless he that prays touches the altar
with his hands; whence in Uirgil, Those that in these words pray, and altar
touch
The omnipotent does hear --
And elsewhere, I touch the altars, and the middle fires,
And the Dieties beseech.


CHAP. LXI. How these things must be performed, as to God, so to inferior
dieties.
EVery Adoration therefore, oblation, or sacrifice, deprecation, invocation,
are differenced thus, viz. either because they are made to God only, or to
inferior dieties, as angels, Stars, Heroes. In these therefore such rules are
to be observed, that when any prayer is to be offered to God alone for the
obtaining of any effect, it must be done with the commemoration of some work,
miracle, sacrament, or promise, taken somewhere out of scripture; as if there
be a deprecation made for the destruction of enemies, let it be commemorated
that God destroyed the Giants in the deluge of waters, and the builders of
Babel in the confusion of tongues, Sodom, and Gomorrha in raining of fire, the
host of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, and the like; adding to those some malediction
out of the Psalms, or such as may be gathered out of other places of scripture.
In like manner when we are to deprecate against dangers of waters, let us
commemorate the saving of Noah in the flood; the passing of the children of
Israel through the Red Sea, and Christ walking dryshod upon the waters, and
saving a ship from shipwreck, commanding the winds and waves, and lifting up
Peter sinking in the waters of the sea, and such like. But if a prayer be
necessary for obtaining Oracles, or dreams, whether it be to God, Angels, or
Heroes, there are many places offer themselves out of the old testament, where
God is said to talk with men, promising in very many places Presages, and
Revelations, besides the prophetical dreams of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh, Daniel,
Nebuchadnezzer, in the old Testament, and the Revelation of John, Paul, in the
new; also of holy Magicians, as Helen, Constantine and Charles; also of later
Prophets, as Methedius, Cyrillus, Joachim, Merlin, Brigitta, Mechtindis,
Hildegardis, the dieties of whom being piously invocated, render us oftentimes
partakers of divine Revelations. Moreover we must invocate the sacred names of
God, but those especially, which are significative of the thing desired, or any
way applicable to it; as for the destruction of enemies we must invocate the
name of Gods wrath, of the revenge of God, fear of God, justice of God,
fortitude of God: but for the avoiding of any danger we must invocate the names
of pity, defense, salvation, goodness, and the like. Moreover we must petition
for and to the effecters of the thing desired, viz. such an Angel, Star or
Hero on whom that office lies; but observing that our invocation on them must
be made with due number, weight, and measure, and according to the rules
delivered concerning enchantments. For betwixt these there is no difference,
but that enchantments are such as affect our mind, disposing the Passions
thereof into a conformity to certain dieties; but prayers are such as are
exhibited to any diety by way of worship, and veneration; and from the same
root also may the manner of consecrations be taken, of which we shall in the
next place speak.

CAAP. LXII. Of Consecrations, and their manner.
COnsecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which a spiritual soul, being
drawn by proportion and conformity, is infused into the matter of our works
according to the tradition of Magiciall art rightly and lawfully prepared, and
our work is vivified by the spirit of understanding. The efficacy of
consecrations is perfected by two things especially, viz the virtue of the
person himself consecrating, and the virtue of the prayer it self. In the
person himself is required holiness of life, and a power to consecrate; the
former, nature and desert perform; the latter is acquired by imitation, and
dignification, of which we have spoken elsewhere. Then it is necessary that he
that sacrifices must know this virtue and power in himself, with a firm and
undoubted faith. Now what things are required in prayer, are these. There is
also a certain power of sanctifying placed in it by God, as if it be so
ordained of God for this or that very thing (of which sort we read of many in
the holy writ) or instituted to this or that thing, by the virtue of the holy
ghost, according to the ordination of the Church, of which sort are many every
where extant: or this holiness is in the prayer it self, not by virtue of
institution, but of the commemoration of sacred things, as of sacred letters,
histories, miracles, works, effects, favors, promises, sacraments and such
sacramental things, which shall seem to cohere with the thing to be
consecrated, either properly, or improperly or analogically. And of these we
shall now give some examples, by which a way easily may be laid open to the
whole consideration of it. So in the consecrating of water there is this
commemoration made, viz. because God placed the firmament in the midel: of
waters; because in the middle of the earthly paradise he made a holy fountain,
from which through four rivers the whole earth is watered: because he made the
waters an instrument of his justice, in the destruction of the Giants, by the
general deluge over the whole earth: and in the destruction of the Army of
Pharaoh in the Red sea, and because he led the people dry-shod through the
middle of the Red sea, and through the middle of Jordan, and because he brought
water miraculously out of a rock of the wilderness, and brought forth a
fountain of living water out of the jaw bone of an ass at the prayers of
Sampson, and because he appointed the waters as an instrument of his pity, and
of salvation for remission of sins: and because Christ being baptized in
Jordan, purified and sanctified the waters; and the like also by invocating
divine names suitable to these things, as when God is called a living fountain,
living water, a living river. In like manner in consecration of fire, let there
be a commemoration that God created the fire to be an instrument of his justice
for punishment, revenge, purgation of sins, and when he comes to judge the
world he will command burning to go before; and he appeared to Moses in a
burning bush, went before the children of Israel in a pillar of fire, and
commanded that inextinguishable fire should be kept in the tabernacle of the
Covenant, and kept fire unextinguished under the water. Also we must use such
divine names as offer themselves, as because God is a consuming fire, and a
melting fire: and such as are proper to these, as the shining of God, the light
of God, the brightness of God, and such like. So in the consecration of oil
such solemnities must be commemorated as belong to these, as in Exodus the oil
of unction and sweet perfumes and sacred names suitable to these, such as is the
name Christ, which signifies anointed, and such as this, and that in the
Apocalypse concerning the two olive trees distilling sanctified oil into lamps
burning in the presence of God. So in the consecration of places let there be
commemoration made of mount Sinai, of the Tabernacle of the Covenant, of the
sanctum sanctorum, the temple of Solomon, and of the sanctification of the hill
Golgotha through the mystery of the passion of Christ, and of the field which
was bought with the price of Christ's blood; also of mount Tabor, where the
transfiguration and ascent into heaven was. Sacred names also being used as of
the place of God, the throne of God, the chair of God, the tabernacle of God,
the altar of God, the seat of God, and the habitation of God, and of such like.
After the same manner we must proceed in the benediction of other things, by
enquiring into holy write by divine names, and profession of Religion for such
things which may seem to be after a manner suitable to this or that thing. As
for example, if there be a paper, or a book having some of the mysteries which
we should comemorate, as the tables of the ten commandments given to Moses on
mount Sinai, and the sanctification of the law, and of the Prophets, and
Scriptures promulgated by the holy spirit: and let the divine names of the
testament of God, the book of God, the book of life, the knowledge of God, the
wisdom of God, and of such like be commemorated. So if a sword be to be
consecrated, we may remember out of the second of Maccabees there was a sword
sent from God to Judas Macchabeus, that he should destroy the children of
Isreal's enemies: also that in the prophets, Take unto you two edged swords;
also in the Gospel, coats being sold, swords must be bought; and in the History
of David an Angel was seen hiding a bloody sword; and many such like we shall
find in the Prophets, and Apocalypse, as also the sacred names of the sword of
God, the rod of God, the staff of God, the vengeance of God, and such like. And
now let these things which have been exemplified concerning real
consecrations, and benedictions suffice: by which personal consecrations, and
benedictions may easily be understood. But there is yet another powerful and
efficacious rite of consecrating, and expiating, which is of the kinds of
superstitious, viz: when the rite of any sacrament is transsumed to another
thing, which is intended to be consecrated, or expiated, as the rite of
baptism, confirmation, funeral, and such like. Moreover we must know, that a
vow, oblation, and sacrifice, have a certain power of consecration, as well
real as personal, as the things or persons are vowed or offered.

CHAP. LXIII. What things may be called holy, what consecrased, and how these
become so betwixt us and the Dieties; and of sacred times.
NOw those things are called sacred, which are made holy by the gods
themselves, or their Demons, being (as I may say) dedicated to us by the gods
themselves. By this account we call Demons holy, because in them God dwells,
whose name they are often said to bear. Whence it is read in Exodus: I will
send my Angel who shall go before thee; observe him, neither think that he is
to be despised, because my name is in him. So also mysteries are called sacred.
For a mystery is that which has a holy and an occult virtue, and favor given
by the gods or Demons, or despensed by the most high God himself; such as are
those sacred names and Characters, which have been above spoken of. So the
cross is called holy and mysterious, being made so by the passion of Jesus
Christ. Hence also certain prayers are called holy, and mystical which are not
instituted by the devotion of man, but by divine Revelation, as we read in the
Gospel that Christ instituted the Lords Prayer. In like manner certain
confections are called holy, into which God has put the especial beam of his
virtue, as we read in Exodus of the sweet perfume, and oil of anointing, and as
with us there is a sacred fountain, and a sacred ointment; There is also
another kind of holiness, whereby we call those things holy which are dedicated
and consecrated by men to God, as vows, and sacrifices, of which we have spoken
already: Whence Virgil, But Caesar with a tripple triumph brought.
Into the City Rome, as most devout,
Did dedicate unto the Italian gods
An immortal vow --
And Ovid in his Metamorphosis sings thus, A feast was kept, wherein Aeacides
For Cicnus death with heifers blood did please
Propitious Pallas, when the entralls laid
On burning altars, to the Gods convaid
An acceptable smell; a part addressed
To sacred use, the board received the rest.


In like manner the representations, resemblances, Idols, Statues, Images,
Pictures, made after the similitudes of the Gods, or dedicated to them, are
called sacred, even as Orpheus sings in his hymn to Lycian Venus, The
chieftains that the sacred things protect
Of our country, did for our town erect
A Sacred Statue --
And Virgil.

Hence divine Plato in his eleventh book of Laws, commanded that the sacred
Images and Statues of the Gods should be honored, not for themselves, but
because they represent the Gods to us, even as the ancients did worship that
Image of Jupiter, thus interpreting it: for in that he bares the resemblance of
a man, was signified that he is a mind which produces all things by his
seminary power; he is seigned to sit, that his immutable and constant power
might be expressed; he has the upper parts bare and naked, because he is
manifest to the intelligences and the superiors; but the lower parts are
covered, because he is hid from the inferior creatures he holds a scepter in
his left hand, because in these parts of the body the most spiritual habitation
of life is found. For the Creator of the intellect is the King and the
vivifying spirit of the world; but in his right hand he holds forth both an
Eagle and victory; the one, because he is the Lord of all the Gods, as the
Eagle is of other birds; the other, because all things are subject to him; in
like manner we also reverence the Image of a Lamb, because it represents
Christ, and the picture of a Dove, because it signifies the holy Ghost, and
the forms of a Lion, Ox, Eagle, and a man, signifying the Evangelists, and
such like things, which we find expressed in the Revelations of the Prophets;
and in diverse places of the holy Scripture: moreover those things confer to the
like revelations and dreams, and therefore are called sacred pictures; there
are also sacred rites and holy observations, which are made for the reverencing
of the Gods, and religion, viz. devout gestures, genuflexions, uncoverings of
the head, washings, sprinklings of Holy water, perfumes, exterior expiations,
humble processions, and exterior Ornaments for divine praises, as musical
Harmony, burning of wax candles and lights, ringing of bells, the adorning of
Temples, Altars and Images, in all which there is required a supreme and
special reverence and comeliness; wherefore there are used for these things,
the most excellent, most beautiful and precious things, as gold, silver,
precious stones, and such like: which reverences and exterior rites are as it
were lessons and invitations to spiritual sacred things, for the obtaining the
bounty of the Gods; concerning which Proserpina bears witness in these
verses. Who ever did the brazen statues slight,
The yellow gifts of gold, or silver white,
Who would not wonder, and not say that these
Are of the Gods? --


The priests also are called sacred, and the ministers of the divine powers,
and Gods, and they themselves being consecrated do both administer all the holy
things, and also consecrate them, whence Lucan. The consecrated priests, to
whom great power
Is granted --
And Virgil says of Helenus the priest of Apollo, He prays for peace of the
Gods, and does unloose
The Garlands of his sacred head --


Those holy rites are as it were certain agreements betwixt the Gods and us,
exhibited with praise, reverence or obedience, by the means of which we very
often obtain some wonderful virtue from that divine power, on whom such
reverence is bestowed; so there are sacred Hymns, Sermons, Exorcismes,
Incantations, and words, which are compounded and dedicated for the praises,
and divine services of the Gods, whence, Orpheus in a verse composed for the
stars, says. With Holy words, now on the Gods I call.

And the primitive Church did use certain holy incantations against diseases
and tempests, which we either pronounce, praying to some divine powers, or also
sometimes carrying them along with us, written and hanged on our neck, or bound
to us, we obtain very often some power from such a Saint, which men very much
admire; by this means also there are sacred names, figures, Characters, and
seals, which contemplative men, in purity of mind, for their secret vows, have
devoted, dedicated and consecrated to the worship of God; which things truly,
if any man afterward shall pronounce with the same purity of mind, with the
which they were first instituted, he shall in like manner do miracles; further
also, the manner and rules delivered by the first institutor must be observed,
for they who are ignorant of these things, loose their labor, and work in vain;
Thus not only by barbarous words, but also by Hebrew, Egyptian, Greek, Latin,
and the names of other languages, being devoted to God, and artributed and
dedicated to his essence, power or operation, we sometimes do wonders; such
names there are in Iamblicus; viz Osyris, Jcton, Emeph, Ptha, Epies, Amun; so
in Plato, and amongst the Greeks, (...), so the Greeks call Jupiter (...) which
signifies to live, because he gives life to all things; in like manner (...)
which signifies through, because through him are all things made, so (...),
which signifies Immortal; so amongst the Latins he is called Jupiter, as it
were an adjuvant father, and such like, and also certain names are devoted to
men, as Eutychis, Sosia, Theophilus, that is, prosperous, servant, dear to God.
In like manner certain material things receive no little sanctity and virtue
by consecration, especially if done by a priest, as we see those waxen seals,
in which are imprinted the figure of Lambs, to receive virtue by the
benediction of the Roman High priest, against lightnings and tempests, that
they cannot hurt those who carry them, for a divine virtue is inspired into
Images thus consecrated, and is contained in them, as it were in a certain
sacred Letter, which has the Image of God; the like virtue those holy waxed
lights receive at Easter, and at the feast of the purification of the virgins;
in like manner bells by consecration and benediction receive virtue, that they
drive away and restrain lightnings and tempests, that they hurt not in those
places where their sounds are heard; in like manner salt and water, by their
benedictions and exorcismes receive power to chase and drive away evil
spirits; and thus in things of this kind, there are also sacred times always
observed by the nations of every religion with very great reverence, which are
either commanded that we should sanctify by the Gods themselves, or are
dedicated to them by our forefathers and Elders, for the commemoration of some
benefit received of the Gods, and for a perpetual Thanksgiving. Thus the
Hebrews have received their Sabbaths, and the Heathens their holydaies, and we
the solemn days of our holy rites, always to be reverenced with the Highest
solemnity; there are also times contrary to these, which they call penitential,
and we black days, because that in those days the commonwealth has suffered
some notable blow, and calamity, of which sort amongst the Romans was the day
before the fourth nones of August, because that on that day they suffered that
extraordinary blow at the Battle of Canna. In like manner all Postriduan days
are called black days, because that most commonly battles succeeded ill on
these days: So amongst the Jews the black days are the seventeenth day of
June, because on that day Moses brake the Tables, Manasses erected an Idol in
the Sanctum Sanctorum, and the walls of Jerusalem are supposed to have been
pulled down by their Enemies; likewise the ninth of July is a black day with
them, because on that day the destructions of both the Temples happened, by
this reason they are called Egyptian days, in the old time observed by the
Egyptians, and every Nation by this way may easily make a like calculation of
days fortunate or unfortunate to them, and the Magicians command that these
holy and religious days be observed no less then the planetary days, and the
celestial dispositions; for they affirm that they are far more efficacious,
especially to obtain spiritual and divine virtues, because that their virtue is
not from the Elements and celestial bodies, but descends from the
intelligible and supercelestial world, and being helped by the common suffrages
of the Saints, is not infringed by any adverse disposition of the heavenly
bodies, nor frustrated by the corruptible contagion of the Elements, if so be
that firm belief and religious worship be not wanting, that is, joined with
fear and trembling, for religion properly holds forth thus much; Hence those
days are called religious, which to violate is a sin, which if we carefully
observe, we fear not any great mischief, which we may do, if we do otherwise.

CHAP. LXIV. Of certain Religious observations, ceremonies, and rites of
perfumings, unctions, and such like.
WHosoever therefore thou art, who disirest to operate in this faculty, in the
first place implore God the Father being one, that thou also may be one
worthy of his favor, be clean, within and without, in a clean place, because
it is written in Leviticus, Every man who shall approach those things which are
consecrated, in whom there is uncleanness, shall perish before the Lord;
Therefore wash your selves often, and at the days appointed, according to the
mysteries of number, put on clean clothes, and abstain from all uncleanness,
pollution, and lust; for the Gods will not hear that man (as Porphyry says)
who has not abstained many days from venereous Acts; Be not thou coupled to a
polluted or menstruous woman, neither to her who has the Hemorhoides, touch
not an unclean thing; nor a Carcass, whence Porphyry says, whosoever shall
touch a dead man, may not approach the Oracles, perhaps, because that by a
certain affinity of the funeral ill odor, the mind is corrupted and made unfit
to receive divine influences; Thou shall wash, and anoint, and perfume they
self, and shall offer sacrifices; for God accepts for a most sweet odor
those things which are offered to him by a man purified and well disposed, and
together with that perfume condescendeth to your prayer and oblation, as the
Psalmist sings; Let my prayer, O Lord, be directed to thee, as incense in thy
sight; Moreover, the soul being the offspring and Image of God himself, is
delighted in these perfumes and odours, receiving them by those nostrils, by
the which it self also entered into this corporeal man, and by the which (as Job
testifies) the most lively spirits are sometimes sent forth, which cannot be
retained in man's heart, boiling either through choler, or labor; whence some
think that the faculty of smelling is the most lively and spiritual of all the
senses. Further, perfumes, sacrifice, and unction penetrate all things, and
open the gates of the Elements and of the Heavens, that through them a man can
see the secrets of of God, Heavenly things, and those things which are above
the Heavens, and also those which descend from the Heavens, as Angels, and
spirits of deep pits, and profound places, apparations of desert places, and
does make them to come to you, to appear visibly, and obey you; and they pacify
all spirits, and attract them as the Loadstone Iron, and join them with the
elements, and cause the spirits to assume bodies: for truly the spiritual body
is very much incrassated by them, and made more gross: for it lives by
vapors, perfumes and the odours of sacrifices: moreover whatsoever thou
operatest, do it with an earnest affection and hearty desire; that the goodness
of the Heavens and heavenly bodies may favor thee, whose favor, that thou
may more easily obtain, the fitness of the place, time, profession, custom,
diet, habit, exercise and name also do wonderfully conduce: for by these the
power of nature is not only changed, but also overcome, for a fortunate place
conduces much to favor ^ neither without cause did the Lord speak to Abraham
that he should come into the land which he would show him; and Abraham arose
and journeyed toward the south: in like manner, Isaac went to Gerarath, where
he sowed and gathered an hundred fold, and waxed very rich: but what place is
congruous to each one, must be found out by his nativity, which thing he that
knows not, let him observe where his spirits are especially recreated, where
his senses are more lively, where the health of his body and his strength is
most vigorous, where his businesses succeed best, where most favor him, where
his enemies are overthrown, let him know that this region, this place is
preordained by God and his Angels for him; and is also well disposed, and
prepared by the Heavens. Therefore reverence this place, and change it
according to your time and business, but always fly an unfortunate place:
fortunate names also make things more fortunate; but unfortunate, unhahpy;
Hence the Romans in listing their soldiers were wary, least that the first
soldiers names should be in any measure unfortunate; and for paying
tributaries, and mustrings of their Armies and Colonies, they did choose
Gensours with good names. Moreover they believed, that if unfortunate names
were changed into fortunate, that the fortune of things would also be changed
into better; So Epidamnus, least that sea men going that way should suffer
damage, they commanded to be called Dyrachius; for the same cause they called
Maleoton, least he should cause some mischief, Beneventus; but they thought
good to call Lacus, Lucrinus, for the goodness of the name being the most happy
place of all: make election also of hours and days for thy operations, for not
without cause our Savior spoke, Are there not twelve hours in the day, and so
forth? For the Astrologers teach that times can give a certain fortune to our
businesses; the Magicians likewise have observed, and to conclude, all the
ancient wise men consent in this, that it is of very great concernment; that in
what moment of time, and disposition of the heavens, every thing, whether
natural or Artificial has received its being in this world; for they have
delivered, that the first moment has so great power, that all the course of
fortune depends thereon, and may be foretold thereby, and in like manner, by
the successes of the fortune of every thing, they both firmly believed, and
experience also testifies, that the beginning of any thing may thereby be
found out; even as Sulla the Astrologian foretold, that a most certain
destruction approached Caligula, who asked his advice concerning his nature;
Metheon the Astrologer foresaw the calamity of the wars which happened
afterward to the Athenians, making an expedition against the Syracusans: to the
same about to sail to Sicilia, Meson the Astrologer foretold a great tempest.
Anaxagoras by the knowledge of the times, forewarned on what days a great
stone should fall from the Sun; as afterward it happened at Aegos, a river of
Thracia; on the contrary, L. Tarnucius Firmianus by the acts and fortune of
Romulus, found both the time of his conception and nativity; the same man found
out also the nativity of the City of Rome, by making the successes and fortunes
of that City: So Maternus reports, that the beginning and Creation even of
this world was found out by the events of things: for that times can do very
much in natural things, may be manifested by many examples; for there are
trees, which after the Solstice do invert their leaves, as the Poplar, Elm,
Olive, Linetree, whitewillow; and shelfishes, Crabs and Oisters do increase,
the Moon increasing, and when the Moon decreaseth, do grow lean; and the Seas
in ebbing and flowing do observe the motions and times of the Moon; and Euripus
in Euboea, does it not seven times with wonderful swiftness ebb and flow? and
three days in every month, viz. the 7. 8. and 9. day of the Moon it stands
still; and amongst the the Troglotides there is a lake, which thrice in a day
is made bitter and salt, and again sweet; moreover in the winter time, when all
things wither, and dry, Penyroyall flourishes: on the same day, they say, that
blown bladders do break, and that the leaves of Sallows and Pomegranats are
turned and forced about; and its known to all, that which I have seen both in
France and Italy, and I know also the sowing thereof, viz. that a nut-tree,
which seems dry all the year, on the Even of Saint John's day does produce
both leaves, and flowers, and ripe fruits: and this miracle does wholly consist
in the observation of the time of its sowing; moreover that times can yield
some wonderful power to artificial things, the Astrologers in their books of
Elections and Images do constantly affirm; and by this means, we read in
Plutarch. That there was an image amongst the Peleneans made with such art,
that what way soever it did look, it did strike all things with terror and
very great perturbation, so that no man durst through fear behold it; and we
read in the life of Apollonius, that the Magicians of Babylon had tied to the
roof of their house, four golden fowls, which they called the tongues of the
gods; and that they had power to reconcile the minds of the multitude to the
love and obedience of the King. In the Island Chios there was the face of Diana
placed on high whose countenance appeared sad to those which came in, but to
those that went out, it appeared cheerful: In Troas, the sacrifices which were
left about the Image of Minerva did not putrify; In the temple of Venus at
Paphos, it never rained in the court: If any thing was taken forth from the
Tomb of Antheus, showers were powered down from heaven till that which was
dug up, was restored into its place: In the tomb of King Bibria of Pontus,
did arise a Laurel, from which if any one did break a branch and carry it on
shipboard, quarrels would never cease until it was thrown over. In the Island
Boristhenes, no bird did haunt the house of Achilles: at Rome, neither fly,
nor dog did enter into the Palace of Hercules, in the ox market. In Olynthus
of Thracia there was a place, into the which if a Beetle had fallen, it could
not get forth, but writhing it self every way it died: I could bring even
innumerable examples, and far more wonderful then these, which Antiquity
reports to have been done by the Art of images, and by the observation of
times: but least any one should think them long since, obsolere, and repute
them for fables, I will bring more new things, and such as remain even to this
time in some places, and I will join to these some artificial wonders; for
they say, that by the Art of images it comes to pass that at Byzantine
Serpents hurt not, and that Jackdaws fly not over within the walls; that in
Crete there are no night Owls, that about Naples Grasshoppers are never heard;
that at Venice, no kind of fly does enter the public houses of Barbers, that
in Toledo in the public shambles, one only fly is seen all the year long, of
a notable whiteness: and we in the foregoing book have declared already both
the fashions and times, by the observation of which, these things and such like
may be done; moreover you ought especially to observe the virtue of speeches
and words, for by these the soul is spread forth into inferior substances,
into stones, metals, plants, animals and all natural things, imprinting diverse
figures and passions on them, enforcing all creatures, or leading and drawing
them by a certain affection: So Cato testifies, that weary Oxen are refreshed
by words, and also that by prayers and words, you may obtain of T^llus, that it
produce unusual trees; trees also may by this means be entreated to pass over
to another place, and to grow in another ground: Rapes grow the greater, if
they be entreated when they are sown, to be beneficial to them, their family,
and neighbors; the Peacock also being commended, presently extends his
feathers: but on the contrary, it is found by experience that the herb Basil,
being sown with cursings and railings, is more flourishing; also a kind of
Lobster does cure burnings and scaldings, if so be that in the mean time his
name be not named: further, they which use witchcraft, kill trees by praising
them, and thus do hurt sown Corn and children: moreover they say that there is
so great power in man's execrations, that they chase and banish even wicked
spirits: Eusebius declares that by this means Serapis amongst the Egyptians,
did publish short sentences, by the which devils were expelled, and he taught
also, how devils having assumed the forms of brute beasts, do ensnare men: To
conclude, in all businesses, put God before your eyes, for it is written in
Deuteronomie, When you shall seek the Lord your God, you shall find him. Whence
we read in Mark, That whatsoever ye shall desire and pray for, believing that
you shall receive it, it shall come to pass for you; and in Matthew, If you
shall have faith as a grain of mustard seed, nothing shall be impossible for
you; also the fervent prayer of a righteous man prevails much, for Elias (as
James says) was a man like unto us, subject unto passions, and he prayed
earnestly, that it might not rain upon the earth, and it rained not in three
years and six months; and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the
earth brought forth its fruit: but take heed in your prayers, least that you
should desire some vain thing, or that which is against the will of God; for
God would have all things good: neither shall thou use the name of thy God in
vain, for he shall not go unpunished, who takes his name for a vain thing: be
abstemious and give alms, for the Angel says to Tobiah, prayer is good with
fasting and alms; and we read in the book of Judith: Know ye, that the Lord
will hear your prayers, if ye shall persevere in fastings and prayers in his
sight.

CHAP. LXV. The Conclusion of the whole Work
THese are the things, which for an introduction into Magic we have collected
out of the tradition of the ancients, and diversely compiled in this book, in
short words, yet sufficient for those who are intelligent; some of these things
are written in order, some without order, some things are delivered by
fragments, some things are even hid, and left for the search of the
intelligent, who more acutely contemplating these things which are written, and
diligently searching, may obtain the complete rudiments of the magical Art,
and also infallible experiments: for we have delivered this Art in such a
manner, that it may not be hid from the prudent and intelligent, and yet may
not admit wicked and incredulous men to the mysteries of these secrets, but
leave them destitute and astonished, in the shade of ignorance and desperation:
You therefore sons of wisdom and learning, search diligently in this book,
gathering together our dispersed intentions, which in diverse places we have
propounded, and what is hid in one place, we make manifest in another, that it
may appear to you wise men; for, for you only have we written, whose mind is
not corrupted, but regulated according to the right order of living, who in
chastity, and honesty, and in found faith fear and reverence God: whose hands
are free from sin and wickedness, whose manners are gentle, sober, and modest,
you only shall find out this knowledge which is preserved for you, and the
secrets which are hid by many Enigmaes cannot be perceived but by a profound
intellect, which when you shall obtain, the whole science of the invincible
magical discipline will insinuate it self into you: and those virtues will
appear to you, which in times past Hermes, Zoroastes, Apollonius, and the
others, who wrought miracles, obtained. But ye, envious, caluminators, sons of
base ignorance, and foolish lewdness, come not nigh our writings, for they are
your enemies, and stand on a precipice, that ye may err and fall headlong
into misery: if any therefore through his incredulity or dullness of intellect,
does not obtain his desire, let him not impute the fault of his ignorance to
me, or say that I have erred, or purposely written falsely and lied, but let him
accuse himself, who understands not our writings; for they are obscure, and
covered with diverse mysteries, by the which it will easily happen, that many
may err and loose their sense; therefore let no man be angry with me, if we
have folded up the truth of this science with many Enigmaes, and despersed it
in diverse places, for we have not hidden it from the wise, but from the wicked
and ungodly, and have delivered it in such words which necessarily blind the
foolish, and easily may admit the wise to the understanding of them.

FINIS.
To the Reverend Father, and Doctor of Divinity Aurelius de Aquapendente,
Austin Friar; Henry Cornelius Agrippa sends greeting.
BY those letters (most reverend Father!) which you sent me since the second of
this month, I understand your candidness toward me, and great learning, and
indeed the curious searching after these things which lie hid in darkness; I
did presently rejoice, and do bless my self that I have entered into
acquaintance with such a friend, with whom I may improve my gifts; And now
(this handwriting being my witness) I reckon you amongst the chiefest of my
friends. But oh, who are your leaders that you follow, dareing to enter into
the house of Dedalus, from whence is no return; and of most dreadful Minois,
and daring to go through the watches, and commit your self to the sisters of
destiny? Who are your masters that you are conversant about such huge things
daring to attempt to make a wandering diety, stable, perfidious, faithful, and
the most fugatious of all the Gods to be more constant then Adrastia; Take heed
that you be not deceived by them that are deceived. N^^ her can the great
reading of books direct you here, since they are but as riddles. How great
writings are there made of the irresistible power of the Magical Art, of the
prodigious Images of Astrologers, of the monstrous transmutations of
Alchymists. of that blessed stone, by which, Mydas like, all metals that were
touched are presently transmuted into Gold, or Silver, all which are found
vain, fictitious, and false, as often as they are practiced according to
letter. Yet such things are delivered, and writ by great and grave
Philosophers, and holy men, whose traditions, who dare say are false? Nay, it
were impious to think that they were lies. There is therefore another meaning
then what is written in letters, and that is veiled with diverse mysteries, and
as yet clearly explained by none of the Masters, and which I believe no man can
attain to by reading of books only, without a skillful, and faithful master,
unless he be divinely illuminated, as very few are. Therefore it is a vanity
for any man that searches into the secrets of nature, to give himself to bare
reading. For they that thus do, are, being ensnared in the gins of the exterior
spirits, to whom it is given to rule, made dangerous slaves, not knowing
themselves, and go back into the footsteps of their flocks, seeking without
themselves, what they have in themselves. And this is that which I would have
you know, because in us is the operator of all wonderful effects, who knows
how to discern, and effect, and that without any sin or offense to God,
whatsoever the monstrous Mathematicians, the prodigious Magicians, the envious
Alchymist, and bewitching Necromancers can do by spirits. In us I say is the
operator of Miracles. Not the bright stars of the sky, nor flames of Hell,
But the spirit that these does make, does in us dwell.


But of these I shall discourse more fully, but in your presence (for these
things are not to be written, but to be infused by a few sacred words, and with
face to face) and that when I shall happily see you. Now as concerning those
books which you desire of me, some of them were sometime in my custody, but now
are not. But as for those books which you have of mine which were made in my
youth, being entitled, Of Occult Philosophy, the two forme^ of them were
dificient in many things, the third is wholly imperfect, and contains but a
certain Epitome of my writings. But I will (God willing) set forth the whole
work, being made entire, and revised, reserving the key thereof for most
intimate friends only, one whereof you need not at all question but that I
reckon you. Farewell and prosper. From Lions the XXIV. of September, Annoque
Domini. M. D. XXVII.

Unto the same Man.
BY your courteous letters (most reverend Father!) I have seen, as in a glass,
your whole mind, which I heartily embrace and I would have you know that you
shall be welcome to me beyond expression, and that you are seated deeply in my
affections, and that I am such an one (I write this out of the abundance of my
heart) as am not wont upon any occasion to forsake my friends. Wherefore that
you may obtain the desires, which are no less then mine, I will hasten to come
to you. When we shall come face to face, hear and speak with one the other, I
know our friendship will be indissoluble, and endure for ever. But now
concerning that Philosophy which you require to know, I would have you know,
that it is to know God himself, the worker of all things, and to pass into him
by a whole image of likeness (as by an essential contract, and bond) whereby
thou may be transformed, and made as God, as the Lord spoke concerning Moses,
saying; Behold, I have made thee the God of Pharaoh. This is that true, high
Occult Philosophy of wonderful works. The key thereof is the intellect: for by
how much higher things we understand, with so much the sublimer virtues are we
endowed, and so much greater things do work, and that more easily, and
efficaciously. But our intellect being included in the corruptible flesh,
unless it shall exceed the way of the flesh, and obtain a proper nature, cannot
be united to these virtues (for like to like) and is in searching into these
occult secrets of God, and nature, altogether inefficacious; for it is no easy
thing for us to ascend to the heavens. For how shall he that has lost himself
in mortal dust, and ashes, find God? How shall he apprehend spiritual things
that is swallowed up in flesh and blood? Can man see God, and live? What fruit
shall a grain of corn bear if it be not first dead? For we must dye, I say dye
to the world, and to the flesh, and all senses, and to the whole man animal,
who would enter into these closets of secrets, not because the body is
separated from the soul, but because the soul leaves the body: of which death
Paul wrote to the Collosians: Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ:
And elsewhere he speaks more clearly of himself. I know a man, whether in the
body, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows, caught up unto the third
heaven, etc. I say by this death, precious in the sight of God, we must dye,
which happens to few, and perhaps not always. For very few whom God loves, and
are virtuous, are made so happy. And first those that are born, not of flesh
and blood, but of God. Secondly those that are dignified to it by the blessing
of nature, and the heavens at their birth. The rest endeavor by merits, and
art, of which more fully when I see you. But this I will advise you, that you
be not deceived concerning me, as if I at any time having received such divine
things should boast of them to you, or should arrogate any such thing to my
self, or could hope to have them granted to me, who hitherto have been a
soldier, consecrated with man's blood, having been almost always belonging to
the Kings Court, bound to a most dear wife by the bond of flesh, exposed to all
the blast of inconstant fortune, and being crossed in my flesh, in the world,
and worldly affairs, and therefore could not obtain the sublime gifts of the
immortal God. But I would be accounted as a director, who waiting always at
the doors, shows to others which way they must go. But as for my love to you,
you are indeed a little deceived: I do not see how you are my debtor, seeing I
have bestowed nothing upon you, only I am ready when occasion serves to bestow
all things. So farewell and prosper. From Lions XI X. November. Anno Dom. M. D.
XXVII.

Henry Cornelius Agrippa sends greeting to a certain friend of the Kings
Court.
THe Ancients were wont to brand notorious folly with this proverb, viz. To
bring Owls to Athens: but it is not a part of less folly, but of most great
impiety, to send devils to hell. You know what I call hell, viz. that School of
wickednesses, which with much displeasure I have elsewhere in its colors
notoriously showed the Court to be. But there was never so just an occasion of
writing and of indignation given as now, if it were lawful to treat of the
whole business as I should, yet I cannot contein but give you an argument of
it. Now therefore hear a thing both foolish and impious: There was sent for out
of Germany with no small charges a certain master of Spirits, that is a
Necromancer who possesses a power over spirits, that as James and Jambres
resisted Moses, so he should oppose Caesar; for they were persuaded by the
father of lies, that he could foretell all things to come, and disclose all
secret counsels, and manifest even the thoughts; moreover that he was endowed
with so great power, that he could bring back the Kings children through the
air, even as we read that Habacuck with his pulle was carried to the den of
Lions, and that he could do as Elisha did being besieged in Dotham, show
mountains full of horsemen and fiery Chariots, and a very great Army; moreover
that he could find out and fetch up the treasures of the earth, and compel
what marriages and affections he pleased, to break them off, and cu^e all
desperate diseases, by a Stygian medicine, as a confirmed Hectic, a radicated
Dropsy, Leprosy in the bones; and Who wisely can the Knotty gout soon cure,
And health even to the desperate procure.


See where their faith is placed, where their hope is reposed, who endeavor to
subject the Elements, Heaven, Fate, Nature, Providence, God, and all things to
the command of one Magitian; and seek for the preservation of a kingdom from
Devils the enemies of public preservation; saying in their heart with
Ochozias, there is not a God in Israel, let us go and consult Beelzebub the God
of Achron, and as Saul speaking to the witch, says, the Philistius fight
against me, and God has deserted me, and will not hear me, therefore am I come
to you. What do they so much despair of God, that they have judged it requisite
to desire aid of the Devils? is not this according to the word of Jude and
Peter, to deny God and Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior who has redeemed us,
and to bring upon themselves swift destruction? do they not treasure up for
themselves the fierce wrath of the Lord who will send it upon them by evil
spirits? are they not delivered over to a reprobate sense, who desire the
certainty of secret counsels from the devil, the father of lies, and hope for
victory elsewhere than from the Lord of Hoasts? and further, this adds
boldness to this abominable worker of Idolatry and Sacrilege, that the
Oxthodox mother does very much favor those things, and the authority of her
most Christian Son is accommodated, and gifts bestowed out of the sacred pence;
the Pillars of the Church, Bishops and Cardinals, winking at, yea furthering
this abominable work; and the wicked Nobles applaude this operation of Impiety,
as the crows the works of the Wolf. What greater wickedness have Pharaoh,
Balack Saul, Ahab with his Iezabel, Ochozias, Nebuchadnezar, Balthazar,
Senacherib and the other worshippers of Bala^m, committed? Pharaoh called forth
his magicians against Moses; they being convicted in the third plague,
confessed the finger of God: but the King being obstinate through the ten
plagues perished in the red sea; Balack the Moabite sent forth Baalam the
Sorcerer that he should curse Israel, but God himself turned the curse into a
blessing; Balack is cursed; what did the answers of Samuel or the witch profit
Saul? was he not slain in the mountain Gilboah? Ahab and Iezabel being wickedly
married together, did confide in the prophets of Baal, and according to the word
of the Lord, a lying spirit went forth into the mouths of all the prophets who
promised prosperity to Ahab going up against Ramoth Gilead, but Ahab fell, and
Jezabel was thrown down headlong, and the dogs did eat her: Asa a King of Juda
is reproved by the prophet of the Lord, because that in his sickness he sought
not the Lord, but trusted to the skill of his physician: have not they
committed a greater sin, who leave God the savior, and the wholesome virtues
of nature, and seek for help of Satan? Ochozias did thus in times past, and
therefore heard from the prophet of the Lord, Thou shall not descend from thy
bed on which thou art, but shall certainly die: Let the series of the other
unrighteous Kings be run over, and also the histories of the Gentiles.
Zoroastes, Diatharus, Croesus, Pompey, Pyrrhus, Crassus, Nero, Julian, what
have they gained by their Magitians and Diviners, who falsely fained prosperity
for them? were they not all reduced to nothing, and did they not wickedly
perish in their sins? So are all these ungodly follyes wont to bring
destruction to the admirers thereof, to the which truly, they who especially
confide, are made the most unfortunate of all men. I deny not but that there
are natural sciences, Metaphysical arts, Occult Ingenuities, which can, without
offending God, or injuring faith or religion, preserve Kingdoms, dive into
counsels, overcome Enemies, deliver captives, increase wealth, obtain the good
will of men, expel diseases, conserve health, prolong life, and restore
strength of youth: There are moreover sacred religious intercessions, public
supplications, private prayers of good men: by the which we may not only turn
away the wrath of God, but also entreat him to be gracious unto us; besides if
there be a certain art to foretell, and work miracles, which the Ancients call
Calomagia or Theurgia, surely it is unknow unto these fools and slaves of the
Devil for to find out things to come, and to pronounce truth concerning those
things which hang over our heads, and are occult, and from heaven portended
unto men; and to effect things which exceed the common course of nature,
belongs only to a man of profound and perfect knowledge, and of a most pure
life and faith, and not to men most vain and unlearned. But every Creature
serves those who are Innocent; and learned in the law of God, for their faiths
sake; and whatsoever they shall ask they shall receive: so the Ravens fed
Eliah, and at his prayers the earth withheld her fruits, the Heaven denied
rain, and showred down fire upon the wicked: So the Ravens served Elisha, the
Angels fought for him; rivers are passed dry-foot; the Lions laying aside their
fierceness, and not regarding their hunger, sawn on Daniel, and the hot fiery
furnace burns not the children. These are not the works of Necromancers and
Sorcerers, nor of Devils, but of faithful and godly men; for not the Devils,
but the spirit of God does assist them: I confess there are some, (perhaps
many) even at this time, who are very wise, and of wonderful knowledge, virtue
and power, and of a pure conversation, most prudent, and also disposed by age
and strength, that they can very much profit the Commonwealth by their counsel
and operations; but your courtiers contemn these men, as those who are very far
from their purpose, who for wisdom have malice, guile and deceit; for counsel
deceit, and craft for knowledge; guile, and perfidiousness for prudence.
Superstition is in the place of religion, and God is blasphemed in afflictions:
and what faith (as says the Apostle) is perfected in weakness is contemned:
but they run to the invocations of evil spirits. Every good man is mocked at by
them, bold hypocrisy is promoted, truth is accounted a crime; praise and
rewards are reserved for foolishness and wickedness. O fools, and wicked, who
by these arts would establish a kingdom, by which formerly most potent Empires
have fallen, and have been utterly overthrown; Of whom it was truly spoken by
Jeremiah, our Crown is fallen, woe to us because we have sinned: which I wish
might not be so truly as fitly applied to you. For truly that verse, the
numeral letters being gathered together M. C. V. I. expresses the year M. D.
XXIV. wherein according to the account your King was taken at Papia: Did not ye
see these things, and admire at them, which before they were done you judged
impossible? And as yet you are proud, and obdurate in your affliction. You
despise the prophets, and the threatenings of God are as tales to you. Behold it
is at hand, and as yet you shall see, and feel the great things of God upon the
whole earth, and shall tremble because the misery which you know not shall come
upon you suddenly; Whither then will ye fly? Stand with your inchanters, and
with the multitude of your Sorceries, if happily they can profit you, or you can
be made thereby stronger. Will not that German Sorcerer that is sent for, save
you, and make lying Prophets, and prevail against the wrath of the Lord, and
deliver you from evil? No, ye wicked, No; unless the Lord shall build, and keep
the Cities, and Kingdom, all the keepers thereof labor and watch in vain. It is
the work of God alone, not of Devils, not of Magicians to suspend or change the
sentence of the Prophets. But if you will with your whole heart turn unto his
mercy, and will change your wickedness, then you may be freed from evil, as was
Nebucadnezar, who by t^^ counsel of Daniel redeeming his sins by alms, and his
iniquities by taking pity on the poor, avoided the imminent wrath of God for a
time, until in the Court at Babylon he with a proud speech recalled it back to
himself again. Achab most impious, with his Iezebel, to whom the Lord threatened
death by Elias, was, because he turned to God, made again the word of the Lord
to Eliah. Because Achab feared my face I will not bring the evil in his days.
The Ninevites, because by the Edict of the King and Princes they repented at
the preaching of Jonas, were totally freed from the imminent punishment. Esaias
brought this sentence to Ezechias, that he should set his house in order,
because he should die; He prayed and wept, and was healed, and fifteen years
added to his life; for thus the Lord spoke to the same man by the same Prophet,
I have seen thy tears, and heard thy prayers, behold I will add to thy days
fifteen years; moreover I will deliver thee from the hand of the King of
Assyria and this City, and protect it; So much could the conversion and prayer
of this pious King do, who though he prayed for himself alone, yet obtained not
only for himself, but also for the City and people; It is the Lord only who
preserves the King and who gives wisdom to the Kings Son; they ought to fly
to this master, who seek salvation, and not to Magicians and Sorcerers: put on
righteousness and fear the Lord, you who desire prosperity: if the stability of
a Kingdom be sought for; it is written, the just shall inherit the Land, the
just shall be had in everlasting remembrance, he shall not be moved for ever;
if security be sought for; They that fear the Lord shall not be afraid for evil
tidings, but shall scorn all their enemies. If honor, and wealth be sought
for; In his house are glory, and riches. If praise, and favor; The generation
of the righteous shall be blessed: If power; He shall be powerful on the
earth, and his seed also. His strength shall be exalted in glory: If marriage,
and prosperity of wedlock; His wife shall be as a vine flourishing on the house
side, and his children as olive branches. If health of body, and strength; the
Lord will not suffer his holy one to see corruption. Lastly, blessed is the man
in all things that feats the Lord, who is unspotted in the way, who goes not
into the counsel of the wicked, who takes pity on the poor, and needy. For in
an evil day the Lord shall deliver him, and shall not deliver him into the
hands of his enemies. All the wicked shall see, and be vexed, and shall gnash
their teeth and pine away, their desire shall perish. Let this suffice for
admonition. For I will not more curiously prosecute this matter, lest happily the
evilness of the subject should provoke me to write more then is expedient.
Farewell, from Paris. XIII. of February, Anno. M. D. XXVIII. after the Roman
account.

The Censure, or Retractation of Henry Cornelius Agrippa, concerning Magic,
after his declamation of the vanity of Sciences, and the excellency of the word
of God.
Of Magic in general.
THis place does require that we speak of Magic; for it is so near joined to,
and of affinity with Astrology, in so much that he that professes Magic
without Astrology, does nothing, but altogether is in an error. Suidas is of
the opinion that Magic had its name, and original from the Maguseans. It is
the common opinion, that it is a Persian name, to which Porphyry, and Apuleius
assent, and that in that tongue it signifies a priest, wise man, or
Philosopher. Magic therefore comprehending all Philosophy, natural, and
Mathematical, joins the powers of Religions to them. Hence also they contain
in them Goetia, and Theurgia, for which cause many divide Magic into two
parts, viz. Natural, and Ceremonial.

Of Natural Magic.
IT is thought that natural Magic is nothing else but the highest power of
natural Sciences, which therefore is called the height of natural Philosophy,
and the most absolute consummation thereof, and that which is the active part
of natural Philosophy, which by the help of natural virtues, from a mutual,
and opportune application of them, brings forth operations even to Admiration:
which Magic the Aethiopians, and Indians especially did use, where the virtue
of herbs, and stones, and other things looking toward it was sufficient. It is
said that Hierome made mention of it to Paulinus, where he says that
Apollonius the Tyanean was a Magician, or Philosopher, as also the
Pythagorians; of this kind were those wise men which came to worship Christ
with gifts when he was born, which the interpreters of the Chaldeans expound
the Philosophers of the Chaldeans, such as were Hiarchas amongst the Bragmanni,
Tespion amongst the Gymnosophists, Budda amongst the Babylonians, Numa
Pompilius amongst the Romans, Zamolxides amongst the Thracians, Abbaris amongst
the Hyperboreans, Hermes amongst the Aegygtians, Zoroastes the son of Oromasus
amongst the Persians. For the Indians, Aethiopians, Chaldeans, and Persians
chiefly did excel in this Magic. With which therefore (as Plato relates in
Alcibiades) the sons of the Persian Kings were instructed, that they might
learn to administer, and distribute their image to the commonwealth of the
world, and the commonwealth to it; and Cicero says in his books of divination,
that there was none amongst the Persians did enjoy the Kingdom, but he that
first had learned Magic. Natural Magic therefore is that which contemplates
the powers of all natural and celestial things, and searching curiously into
their Sympathy, does produce occult powers in nature into public view, so
coupling inferior things as allurements to the gifts of superior things, by
their mutual application, that from thence arise wonderful miracles, not so
much by art as by nature, to which art becomes an assistant whilst it works
these things. For Magicians, as the most curious searchers of nature, making
use of those things which are prepared by nature, by applying active things to
passive, produce oftentimes effects before the time ordained by nature, which
the vulgar think are miracles, which indeed are natural works, the prevention
of the time only coming betwixt: as if any one should produce Roses in the
month of March, and ripe Grapes, or sown Beans, or make Parsley to grow into a
perfect plant within few hours, nay, and cause greater things, as clouds,
rains, thunders, and animals of diverse kinds, and very many transmutations of
things, many of which fort Roger Bacon boasted that he did do by mere natural
Magic. Of the works thereof wrote Zoroastes, Hermes, Eranthes King of Arabia,
Zacharias the Babylonian, Joseph the Hebrew, Bocus, Aaron, Zenotenus,
Kiramides, Almadal, Thetel, Alchindus, Abel, Ptolomy, Geber, Zahel, Nazabarub,
Tebith, Berith, Solomon, Astaphon, Hipparchus, Al^meon, Apollonius, Triphon,
and many others, many of whose works are yet entire, and many fragments are yet
extant, and have come to my hands. Some modern men have also wrote of natural
Magic, but they but a few things, as Albertus, Arnoldus de villa nova,
Raimundus Lullie, Bacon, and Apponus, and the Author of the book to Alfonsus,
set forth under the name of Picatrix, who also together with natural Magic,
mixeth much superstition, which indeed the rest have done.

Of Mathematical Magic.
THere are moreover other most witty emulators of nature and most bold
inquisitors, which promise they can by the influences of the heavens, obtained
without natural virtues, but only by Mathematical learning, produce works
like to those of nature, as walking, or talking bodies, which have not animal
virtues: such was the wooden dove of Architas which did fly, and the statue of
Mercury which did speak; and the brazen head made by Albertus Magnus, which
they say did speak. Boethius a man of a great wit and much learning, excelled in
these things, to whom Cassiodorus writing concerning such like things, says,
to thee it is appointed to know hard things, and show miracles: by the
ingenuity of thy art metals speak, Diomedes in brass trumpets, the brazen
Serpent hisseth, birds are feigned, and those which know no proper sound, are
heard sending forth sweet melody; we relate small things of him, who has power
to imitate the heavens; concerning these arts I think that is spoken which we
read in Plato in the eleventh book of Laws. There is an art given to mortal
men, by which they should generate certain latter things, not partaking of
truth or divinity, but should deduce certain representations of affinity with
them: and thus far have Magicians gone, being men most bold to do all things,
especially that old strong Serpent, the promiser of all Sciences favoting them,
that they like apes endeavor to emulate God, and nature.

Of Enchanting Magic.
THere is more over a kind of natural Magic, which they call bewitching,
medicinary, which is done by cups, lovepotions, and diverse medicaments of
Sorcerers: Of which sort Democritus is said to make some, whereby good, happy,
and fortunate sons may be begotten: and another whereby we may rightly
understand the voices of birds, as Philostratus and Porphyrie relate of
Apollonius. Virgil also speaking of certain Pontick herbs, says, I many times,
with these have Moeris spide,
Changed to a wolf, and in the woods to bide:
From sepulchers would souls departed charm,
And corn bear standing from another farm.


And Pliny relates that a certain man, Demarchus Parrhasitus, in a sacrifice
which the Arcades made by a humane sacrifice to Jupiter Lyceus tasted of the
entrals of a boy that was sacrificed, and turned himself into a wolf, by
reason of which changing of men into a wolf, Austin thinks that the name was
put upon Pan Lyceus, and Jupiter Lyceus. The same Austin relates, that whilst
he was in Italy, there were certain women Magicians like Circe, who by giving
cheese to travelers turned them into cattle; and when they had carried what
burdens they pleased, restored them into men again; and that the same happened
to a certain Father called Prestantine. But least any one should think these
things to be but foolish toys, and things impossible, let him call to mind
what the Scripture mentions concerning Nebuchadnezar the King, how he was
turned into an ox, and lived seven years with hay, and at length returned
through the mercy of God into a man again, whose body after his death, his son
Evilmerodac gave as a prey to the Vulters, least he should again rise from the
dead, who returned from a beast into a man: and more of this kind does Exodus
relate of the Magicians of Pharaoh. But Solomon speaks of the same, whether
Magicians, or Sorcerers, when he says, Thou have terrified them O God! because
they have done horrible deeds by enchantments. Moreover, this I would have you
know, that these Magicians do not search into natural things only, but also
those things which do accompany nature, and after a manner put it off, as
motions, numbers, figures, sounds, voices, concents, lights, affections of the
mind, and words. So the Psylli, and Marsi called together serpents, and others
by other things depressing them, put them to flight. So Orpheus repressed the
tempest of the Argonaute with a hymn; and Homer relates to Ulysses that his
blood was restrained with words. And in the law of the twelve tables punishment
was ordained for them who enchanted the corn: that without all doubt the
Magicians did produce wonderful effects by words only, affections, and such
like, not upon themselves, but also upon extraneous things; all which things
are thought to put forth their innate virtue upon other things, draw them to
them, or expel them from them, or any otherwise affecting of them, no
otherwise then the Loadstone draws Iron, or Jeat Chaff, or a Diamond or Garlic
bind them, so that by this graduall, and concatenated Sympathy of things, not
only natural, and celestial gifts, but also intellectual, and divine may, as
Jamblicus, Proclus, and Synesius confirm by the opinion of Magicians, be
received from above, which Proclus in his book of sacrifice, and Magic
confesses, viz: That by the consent of these kinds of things, the Magicians
were wont to call up the dieties themselves. To such a height of madness some
of them are grown, that from diverse constellations of the Stars, through
intervals of times, and a certain rule of proportions being observed, think
that an image of the gods can with a beck receive the spirit of life, and
intellect, and so give an answer to them that ask counsel of it, and reveal
the secrets of occult truth. Hence it is manifest that this natural Magic is
sometimes inclining to Goetia, and Theurgia, ^^tangled in the wyles and errors
of evil Spirits.

Of Goetia Necromancy.
NOw the parts of Ceremonial Magic are Goetia and Theurgia; Goetia is
unfortunate, by the commerces of unclean spirits made up of the rites of wicked
curiosities, unlawful charms, and deprecations, and is abandoned and execrated
by all laws. Of this kind are those which we now adays call Necromancers, and
Witches. A people envied by the Gods, have skill,
Begot by the evil one, even at their will
The heavens for to blemish, and the things
Which are in heaven, and on earth to bring
Out of order, and the poles for to force,
And of the rivers for to turn the course,
The mountains level, and the sky to drive
Under the earth --


These therefore are they which call upon the souls of the dead, and those
which the Ancients called Epodi, who enchant boys, and bring them out into the
speech of the Oracle, and which carry about them familiar spirits, as we read
of Socrates and such, as it is said, they fed in glasses, by which they feign
themselves to prophecy. And all these proceed two ways. For some endeavor to
call and compel evil spirits, adjured by a certain power, especially of
divine names; for seeing every creature fears, and reverenceth the name of him
who made it, no marvel, if Goetians, Infidels, Pagans, Jews, Saracens, and men
of every profane sect and society do bind Devils by invocating the divine
name. Now there are some that are most impiously wicked indeed, that submit
themselves to Devils, sacrifice to, and adore them, and thereby become guilty
of Idolatry, and the basest abasement: to which crimes if the former are not
obnoxious, yet they expose themselves to manifest dangers. For even compelled
devils always deceive us whithersoever we go. Now from the sect of the
Goetians have proceeded all those books of darkness, which Vulpianus the Lawyer
calls books disallowed to be read, and forthwith appointed them to be
destroyed, of which sort the first is Zabulus reported to invent, who was given
to unlawful arts, then Barnabas a certain Cyprian; and now in these days
there are carried about books with feigned titles, under the names of Adam,
Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon, also Paul, Honorius, Cyprianus, Albertus, Thomas
Hierome, and of a certain man of York, whose toies Alphousus King of Castile,
Robert an English man, Bacon, and Apponus, and many other men of a deplored wit
have foolishly followed. Moreover they have not made men only and Saints, and
Patriarchs, and the angels of God, the authors of such execrable opinions, but
they boast also that those books were dilivered by Raziel. and Raphael the
Angels of Adam and Tobias; Which books openly betray themselves to him that
looks narrowly into them, to be a rule, rite, and custom of their precepts,
and a kind of words, and characters, an order of extruction, an empty phrase,
and to contain nothing but mere toys, and impostures, and to be made in latter
times by men ignorant of all ancient Magic, and forlorn artists of pernicious
art, of profane observations mixed with the ceremonies of our religion, with
many unknown names, and seals intermixed, that thereby they may terrify and
astonish the simple, and ignorant. Moreover it does not yet appear that these
arts are fables: for unless there were such indeed, and by them many wonderful
and hurtful things done, there would not be such strict, divine, and humane
laws made concerning them, for the utter exterminating of them. And why do the
Goetians use those evil spirits only, but because good Angels will hardly
appear, expecting the command of God, and come not but to men pure in heart,
and holy in life: but the evil are easily called up, favoring him that is
false, and counterfeiting holiness are always ready to deceive with their
craft, that they may be worshipped, and adored: and because women are most
desirous of secrets, and less cautious, and prone to superstition, they are the
more easily deceived, and therefore give up themselves the more readily to
them, and do great prodigies. The poets sing of Circe, Medea, and others of
this sort; Cicero, Pliny, Seneca, Austin, and many others as well Philosophers
as Catholic Doctors, and Historians, also the Scriptues testify the like. For
in the books of the Kings we read, that a woman who lived at Endor, called up
the soul of Samuel the Prophet, although many interpret it not to be the soul
of the Prophet, but an evil spirit, which took upon him his shape. Yet the
Hebrew masters say that Austin to Simplicianus does not deny but it might be
the true spirit of Samuel, which might easily be called up from its body before
a complete year after his departure, as also the Goetians teach. Also Magician
Necromancers suppose that might be done by certain natural powers and bonds, as
we have said in our books of Occult Philosophy. Therefore the ancient Fathers,
skillful of spiritual things, did not without cause ordain that the bodies of
the dead should be buried in a holy place, and be accompanied with lights, and
sprinkled with holy water, and be perfumed with frankincense, and incense, and
be expiated by prayers as long as they continued above ground. For as the
Masters of the Hebrews say, All our body and carnal Animal, and whatsoever in
us depends upon the matter of the flesh being ill disposed is left for meat to
the Serpent, and as they called it, to Azazel, who is the Lord of the flesh and
blood, and the Prince of this world, and is called in Leviticus the Prince of
deserts, to whom it is said in Genesis, Thou shall eat dust all the days of
thy life. And in Isaiah, Dust thy bread i. e. our body created of the dust of
the earth, so long as it shall not be sanctified, and turned into better, that
it be no longer an effect of the serpent, but of God, viz. a spiritual made of
carnal, according to the word of Paul, saying, that which is sowed a carnal,
shall arise a spitual; and else where, All indeed shall rise, but all shall not
be changed, because many shall remain for ever as meat of the Serpent. This
filthy and horrid matter of the flesh and meat of the Serpent we therefore cast
off by death, changing it for a better and spiritual, which shall be in the
resurrection of the dead; and is already done in those, who have tasted of the
first fruits of the resurrection, and many have already attained to, by the
virtue of the divine spirit in this life, as Enoch, Eliah, and Moses, whose
bodies were changed into a spiritual nature, and have not seen corruption;
neither are their carcasses left to the power of the Serpent. And this was that
dispute of the devil with Michael the Archangel, concerning the body of Moses,
of which Jude makes mention in his Epistle. But of Goetia, and Necromany let
these suffice.

Of Theurgia.
NOw many think that Theurgia is not unlawful, as if this be governed by good
Angels, and a divine diety, when as yet oftentimes it is under the names of
God, and the fallacies of evil Angels obstringed by the wicked fallacies of the
devils. For we do procure, and attract not by natural powers only, but also by
certain rites, and ceremonies, celestials, and by them divine virtues to our
selves; Of which together with many rules the ancient Magicians did treat in
many volumes. But the greatest part of all ceremonies consists in observing
cleanness, and purity, first of the mind, then of the body, and of those things
which are about the body, as in the skin, in garments, in habitations, in
vessels, utensils, oblations, sacrifices, the purity of which disposes to the
acquaintance with and beholding of divine things, and is very much required in
sacred things, according to the word of Isaiah, Be ye washed, and made clean,
and take away the evil of your thoughts. Now impurity, because if oftentimes
infects the air, and man, disturbes that most pure influence of Celestial and
divine things, and chafeth away the pure spirits of God. But sometimes impure
spirits, and deceiving powers, that they be worshipped, and adored for gods,
require also this purity. Therefore here is great need of caution, as we have
lately discoursed at large in our books of Occult Philosophy. But of this
Theurgia, or Magic of divine things Porphyrie disputing at large, at length
concludes that by Theurgicall consecrations the soul of man may be sitted to
receive spirits, and Angels, and to see God: but he altogether denies that we
can by this art return to God. Of his School therefore is the Art Almadel, the
Notary art, the Pauline Art, the art of Revelations, and many such like
superstitions, which are so much the more pernicious, by how much they seem the
more divine to the ignorant.

Of Cabalie.
HEre the words of Pliny come into my mind, who says the faction of Magic
depends upon Moses and Lutopea, being Jews; which words put me in mind of the
Cabalie of the Jews, which the Hebrews are of opinion was delivered to Moses by
God himself on mount Sinai, and then by degrees of succession without the
monuments of letters was until the times of Esara delivered to others by word
of mouth only as the Pythagorian opinions were formerly delivered by Archippus,
and Lysiaus, who had chools at Thebes in Greece, in which the Scholars keeping
the precepts of their masters in their memory, did use their wit, and memory
in stead of books: So certain Jews despising literature, placed this in
memory, and observations, and vocal traditions, whence Cabalie was by the
Hebrews called as it were the reception of any thing from another only by
hearing. That art (as it is reported) is very ancient, but the name was known
but of late times amongst Christians: They deliver a double science therefore,
the one of Bresith, which they call Cosmologie, viz explaining the powers of
things created natural, and Celestial and expounding the secrets of the Law
and Bible by Philosophical reasons: which truly upon this account differs
nothing at all from natural Magic, in which we believe K. Solomon excelled.
For it is read in the sacred Histories of the Hebrews, that he was skilled in
all things, even from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssop that grows upon the
wall: also in cattle, birds, creeping things, and fishes; all which show that he
knew the Magical virtues of nature. Moses the Egyptian, amongst the later
writers followed after this in his exposition upon the Pentacles; also many
more Talmudists. They call the other Science thereof of Mercara, which is
concerning the more sublime contemplations of divine and Angelick virtues, and
of sacred names, and seals, being a certain Symbolical divinity, in which
letters, numbers, figures, things, and names, and tops of elements, and lines,
points, and accents, are all significative of most profound things, and great
secrets. This again they divide into Arithmancy, viz. that which is called
Notariacon, treating of Angelical virtues, names, and seals, also of the
conditions of spirits, and souls, and into Theomancy, which searches into the
mysteries of divine majesty, as the emanations thereof, and sacred names, and
Pentacles, which he that knows may excel with wonderful virtues; as that when
he pleases, he may foreknow all future things, and command whole nature, have
power over devils, and Angels, and do miracles. By this they suppose, that
Moses did show so many signs, and turned the rod into a Serpent, and the waters
into blood, and that he sent Frogs, Flies, Lice, Locusts, Caterpillars, fire
with hail, botches and boyls on the Egyptians, and slew every first born of man
and beast; and that he opened the Seas, and carried his through, and brought
fountains out of the rock, and quails from Heaven, that he sent before his,
clouds and lightnings by day, a pillar of fire by night, and called down from
Heaven the voice of the living God to the people, and did strike the haughty
with fire, and those that murmured with the Leprosy; and on the ill deserving
brought sudden destruction; the earth gaping and swallowing them up; further
he fed the people with heavenly food; pacified Serpents, cured the envenomed,
preserved the numerous multitude from infirmity, and their garments from
wearing out, and made them victors over their enemies. To conclude, by this art
of miracles Joshua commanded the Sun to stand still, Eliah called down fire
from Heaven upon his enemies, restored a dead child to life; Daniel stopped the
mouths of the Lions; The three children sang songs in the fiery Oven; moreover
by this art the incerdulous Jews affirm, that even Christ did do so many
miracles; Solomon also very well knew this art, and delivered charms against
devils, and their bonds, and the manner of conjurations, and against diseases,
as Joseph reports, but as I doubt not but that God revealed to Moses many
secrets, contained under the bark of the words of the Law, which were not to be
revealed to the profane vulgar. So I acknowledge that this Cabalisticall art,
which the Hebrews brag of, and I sometimes diligently and laboriously sought
after, is nothing else than a mere rapsody of superstition, and a certain
Theurgicall Magic, but if it proceeded from God (as the Jews boast) and
conduces to the perfection of life, health of men, to the worship of God, and
to the truth of understanding; truly that spirit of truth, which has left this
Synagogue, and come to teach us all truth, would not have concealed it from his
Church even until these last times, which indeed knows all things that are
of God, whose benediction, baptism, and other mysteries of salvation are
revealed and perfected in every tongue, for every tongue has the same equal
power, if so be that there be the same equal piety, neither is there any name,
either in heaven or earth, by the which we must be saved, and by which we work
miracles, besides this one name Jesus, in which all things are recapitulated
and contained. Hence it is, that the Jews, who are most skilful in using the
names of God, can operate little or nothing after Christ, as their ancient
fathers did; but that we by experience find, and see, that by the revolution of
this art (as they call them) oftentimes wonderful sentences, full of great
mysteries, are wrested from the holy Scriptures, this is nothing else then a
certain playing upon Allegories, which idle men busying themselves with all the
points, letters, and numbers, which this tongue and the custom of writing do
easily suffer, do fain and disguise at their pleasures; which although
sometimes they hold forth great mysteries, yet they can neither prove nor
evince any thing; but we may (according to the words of Gregory) with the same
facility contemn them, as they are affirmed. Rabanus the Monk, by the same
artifice has fained many things, but in Latin Characters and verses, with
certain pictures inserted, which being read any way by the delineations of the
superficies and pictures, do declare some sacred mystery, representing the
Histories of the things painted; which also may without doubt be wrested from
profane writings, as every one may know, who has read the Cantones of Valeria
Proba, composed out of the verses of Virgil, concerning Christ; All things of
this kind are the speculations of idle brains, but what belongs to the
working of miracles, there is none of you, I suppose, of so foolish an
understanding, who believes that they have any art or science of them;
therefore this Cabala of the Jews is nothing else than a most pernicious
superstition, by the which they gather at their pleasure, divide, transfer
words, names and letters, scatteringly put in the holy Scriptures, and by
making one thing out of another, they dissolve the connections of the truth,
the speeches, inductions and parables, and here and there construing them by
their own fictions, would bring the words of God to their follies, defaming the
Scriptures, and saying that their fictions have foundation on them. They
calumniate the Law of God, and by the supputations of words, syllables,
letters, numbers impudently extorted, they assay to bring violent and
blasphemous proofs for their unbelief. Besides, they being puffed up by these
trifles, do boast that they find and search out the unspeakable mysteries of
God, and secrets, which are above the Scriptures, by the which also they
impudently affirm, and without blushing, that they can even prophecy, and do
miracles and wonders; but it happens to them, as to Aesops Dog, who leaving
his bread, and gaping after the shadow, lost his food; so this perfidious and
stiff necked people, being always busied in the shadows of the Scriptures, and
about their own vanities, and doing violence by their artificial, but
superstitious Cabala, do loose the bread of eternal life, and being fed with
vain words, do destroy the word of truth; from this Judaicall ferment o
Cabalisticall superstition proceeded (as I suppose) the Ophitane, Gnostican,
and Valentinian Heretics, who together with their disciples, fained a certain
Greek Cabala, perverting all the mysteries of the Christian faith, and by their
heretical corruption wresting them to the Greek letters and numbers, by the
which they constituted a body of truth (as they call it) and taught, that
without these mysteries of letters and numbers the truth could not be found in
the Gospel, because that the writings thereof are various, and sometimes
repugnant to themselves, and full of parables; that they who see, might not
see, and that they who hear, might not hear, and that they who understand,
might not understand, and that they are propounded to the blind and erroneous,
according to the capacity of their blindness and error; But that the sincere
truth lying hid under these things, is committed to the perfect only, not by
writings, but by word of mouth, and that this is that Alphebetary and
Arithmetical Theology which Christ in private manifested to his Apostles; and
which Paul speaks to the perfect only; for seeing that these are the highest
mysteries, therefore they are not written, nor ought so to be, but to be kept
in secret amongst wise men; but no man is a wise man amongst them, who knows
not to refrain the greatest monsters of Heresy.

Of Juggling or Legerdemain.
BUt let us return to that Magic, part of which is an art of jugglings (e. i.)
delusions, which are made according to appearance only, by which Magicians show
phantasmes, and play many miracles by circulatory frauds, and cause dreams,
which they do not so much by Geotick enchantments, and imprecations, and
deceits of devils, as by certain vapors, perfumes, lights, love-medicines,
collyries, alligations, and suspensions, also by rings, images, glasses, and
such like drugs, and instruments of Magical art, and a natural and Celestial
power. Also many things are done daily by slieght of hand, of which sort we see
some are done daily by stage players, and sporters which we call Chirosophers
(e. i.) skilful in sleight of hand. There are extant concerning this art, books
of the Legerdemain of Hermes, and some others. We read also of a certain man
called Paseton, a most notable juglar, that was wont to show a banquet to
guests, and when he pleased, to make it vanish away again, all rising with
hunger, and thirst, being deluded. We read that Numa Pompilius did use these
kinds of jugglings, and also that most learned Pythagoras did sometimes do this
toy, that what things he pleased, he would write in a glass, which being set
against the full Moon, he would show to any one that stood behind it, those
things represented in the Globe of the Moon; Hither belongs whatsoever Poets
sing of the transmutations of men, which also is delivered by Historians, and
by some Christian Divines, and also is recorded in the Scripture. So men may
appear like Asses, or horses, or other Animals with fascinated eyes, or a
troubled medium, and that by a natural art. Sometimes these are done by good
and evil spirits, or by God himself at the request of some good men, as in the
Scripture we read of Elisha the Prophet beset by an Army of the King fortifying
Dotham. But to pure eyes, and such as be opened by God, those cannot deceive;
so that woman which was judged to be a kind of cattle, did seem to Hilario to
be not any such thing, but a woman. These things therefore which are done
according to appearance only, are called jugglers.

But those things which are done by the Art of transmuting, or translating, as
of Nebuchadnezar, or of Corn carried to another field, we have spoke of before;
but of this art of juggling, thus says Jamblicus, These things which are
supposed to be juggled or bewitched, besides imagination, have no truth of
action or essence. The end of these is but to hold forth things to the
imagination according to appearance, of which there presently remains no
footsteps or signs. Now by what has been said, it is manifest that Magic is
nothing else but a collection of Idolatry, Astrology, and superstitious
medicines; And now there is by Magicians raised a great company of heretics in
the Church, who as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, do in the like manner
resist the Apostolical truth. The chief of these was Simon the Samaritan, on
whom by reason of this art was bestowed at Rome in Claudius Cesars time, a
Statue, with this Inscription, To Simon the holy God. Of his blasphemies
Clemens Eusebius, and Irenaeus make mention. From this Simon, as from a
Seminary of all Heresies proceeded by successions the monstrous Ophites, the
filthy Gnostics, the impious Valentinians, Cerdonians, Marcionists,
Montanians, and many other Heretics, lying against God for gain and vain
glory, doing no good to men, but deceiving them, and drawing them into
destruction and error, to whom they that give credit shall be confounded in the
judgment of God. But of Magic I wrote whilst I was very young three large
books, which I called Of Occult Philosophy, in which what was then through the
curiosity of my youth erroneous, I now being more advised, am willing to have
retracted, by this recantation; I formerly spent much time and costs in these
vanities. At last I grew so wise as to be able to dissuade others from this
destruction; For whosoever do not in the truth, nor in the power of God, but in
the deceits of devils, according to the operation of wicked spirits presume to
divine and prophecy, and practicing through Magical vanities, exorcismes,
incantions and other demoniacall works and deceits of Idolatry, boasting of
delusions, and phantasmes presently ceasing, brag that they can do miracles, I
say all these shall with Jannes, and Jambres, and Simon Magus, be destinated to
the torments of eternal Fire.

Of the Occult Philosophy of Henry Cornelius Agrippa, FINIS.
Anno M. D. XXXIII. In the Month of July.
An INDEX of all the CHAPTERS which are contained in this WORK.
Book I.
CHAP. I. HOW Magicians Collect virtues from the threefold World, is declared
in these three Books. page 1

Chap. 2. What Magic is, what are the Parts thereof, and how the Professors
thereof must be qualified. page 2

Chap. 3. Of the four Elements, their qualities, and mutual mixtions. page 6

Chap. 4. Of a threefold consideration of the Elements. page 7

Chap. 5. Of the wonderful Natures of Fire, and Earth. page 9

Chap. 6. Of the wonderful Natures of Water, Air, and Winds. page 11

Chap. 7. Of the kinds of compounds, what relation they stand in to the
Elements, and what relation there is betwixt the Elements themselves, and the
soul, senses, and dispositions of men. page 18

Chap. 8. How the Elements are in the Heavens, in Stars, in Devils, in Angels,
and lastly in God himself. page 20

Chap. 9. Of the virtues of things Natural, depending immediately upon
Elements. page 22

Chap. 10. Of the occult Virtues of things. page 24

Chap. 11. How Occult Virtues are infused into the several kinds of things by
Idea's, through the help of the Soul of the World, and rays of the Stars: and
what things abound most with this Virtue. page 26

Chap. 12. How it is that particular Virtues are infused into particular
Individuals, even of the same Species. page 27

Chap. 13. Whence the Occult Virtues of things proceed. page 29

Chap. 14. Of the Spirit of the World, what it is, and how by way of medium it
unites occult Virtues to their subjects. page 32

Chap. 15. How we must find out, and examine the Virtues of things by way of
similitude. page 34

Chap. 16. How the operations of several Virtues pass from one thing into
another, and are communicated one to the other. page 36

Chap. 17. How by enmity and friendship the virtues of things are to be tried,
and found out. page 37

Chap. 18. Of the Inclinations of Enmities. page 40

Chap. 19. How the Virtues of things are to be tried and found out, which are
in them specifically, or any one Individual by way of special gift. page 43

Chap. 20. That natural Virtues are in some things throughout their whole
substance, and inother things in certain parts, and members. page 44

Chap. 21. Of the Virtues of things which are in them only in their life time,
and such as remain in them even after their death. page 45

Chap. 22. How inferior things are subjected to superior bodies, and how the
bodies, the actions, and dispositions of men are ascribed to Stars, and Signs.
page 48

Chap. 23. How we shall know what Stars natural things are under, and what
things are under the Sun, which are called Solary. page 50

Chap. 24. What things are Lunary, or under the power of the Moon. page 54

Chap. 25. What things are Saturnine, or under the power of Saturn. page 55

Chap. 26. What things are under the power of Jupiter, and are called Jovial.
page 57

Chap. 27. What things are under the power of Mars, and are called Martial.
page 58

Chap 28. What things are under the power of Venus, and are called Venereall.
page 59

Chap 29. What things are under the power of Mercury, and are called
Mercuriall. cap. 60

Chap. 30. That the whole sublunary World, and those things which are in it,
are distributed to Planets. page 61

Chap. 31. How Provinces, and Kingdoms are distributed to Planets. page 62

Chap. 32. What things are under the Signs; the fixed Stars, and their Images.
page 63

Chap. 33. Of the Seals, and Characters of Natural things. page 65

Chap. 34. How by Natural things, and their virtues we may draw forth and
attract the influences, and virtues of Celestial bodies. page 69

Chap. 35. Of the Mixtions of natural things one with another, and their
benefit. page 70

Chap. 36. Of the Union of mixed things, and the introduction of a more noble
form, and the senses of life. page 72

Chap. 37. How by some certain natural, and artificial preparations we may
attract certain Celestial, and vital gifts. page 73

Chap. 38. How we may draw not only Celestial, and vital, but also certain
Intellectual, and divine gifts from above. page 75

Chap. 39. That we may by some certain matters of the world stir up the Gods of
the world, and their ministering spirits. page 77

Chap. 40. Of bindings, what sort they are of, and in what ways they are wont
to be done. page 78

Chap. 41. Of Sorceries, and their power. page 79

Chap. 42. Of the wonderful virtues of some kinds of Sorceries. page 81

Chap. 43. Of perfumes, or Suffumigations, their manner, and power. page 85

Chap. 44. The composition of some fumes appropriated to the Planets. page 88

Chap. 45. Of Collyries, Unctions, Love-Medicines, and their virtues. page 90

Chap. 46. Of natural alligations, and suspensions. page 92

Chap. 47. Of Rings, and their compositions. page 94

Chap. 48. Of the virtue of places, and what places are suitable to every Star.
page 95

Chap. 49. Of Light, Colors, Candles, and Lamps, and to what Stars, Houses,
and Elements several colors are ascribed. page 97

Chap. 50. Of Fascination, and the Art thereof. page 101

Chap. 51. Of certain observations producing wonderful Virtues. page 102

Chap. 52. Of the Countenance, and Gesture, the Habit, and Figure of the Body,
and what Stars any of these do answer; whence Physiognomy, and Metoposcopy, and
Chiromancy, Arts of divination, have their grounds. page 105

Chap. 53. Of Divination, and its kinds. page 108

Chap. 54. Of diverse certain Animals, and other things which have a
signification in Auguria's. page 110

Chap. 55. How Auspicia's are verified by the light of Natural instinct, and
of some rules of finding of it out. page 117

Chap. 56. Of the Soothsayings of Flashes, and Lightnings, and how monstrous
and prodigious things are to be interpreted. page 123

Chap. 57. Of Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, Pyromancy, four Divinations of
Elements. page 125

Chap. 58. Of the reviving of the dead, and of sleeping, and wanting victuals
many years together. page 127

Chap. 59. Of divination by dreams. page 131

Chap. 60. Of Madness, and Divinations which are made when men are awake, and
of the power of a Melancholy humor, by which Spirits are sometimes induced into
men's bodies. page 132

Chap. 61. Of the forming of Man of the external Senses, and also the Inward,
and the mind: of the threefold appetite of the Soul, and passions of the Will.
page 136

Chap. 62. Of the Passions of the Mind, their Original, difference, and kinds,
page 139

Chap. 63. How the passions of the mind change the proper body, by changing the
Accidents, and moving the spirit. page 141

Chap. 64. How the passions of the mind change the body by way of imitation
from some resemblance; Also of the transforming, and translating of men, and
what force the imaginative power has not only over the body, but the soul.
page 142

Chap. 65. How the Passions of the Mind can work out of themselves upon
another Body. page 145

Chap. 66. That the Passions of the mind are helped by a Celestial season, and
how necessary the Constancy of the mind is in every work. page 147

Chap. 67. How man's mind may be joined with the mind and Intelligences of the
Celestials, and together with them impress certain wonderful virtues upon
inferior things. page 149

Chap. 68. How our mind can change, and bind inferior things to that which it
desires. page 150

Chap. 69. Of Speech, and the virtue of Words. page 151

Chap. 70. Of the virtue of proper names. page 153

Chap. 71. Of many words joined together, as in sentences, and verses; and of
the virtues, and astrictions of charms. page 155

Chap. 72. Of the wonderful power of Enchantments. page 157

Chap. 73. Of the virtue of writing, and of making imprecations, and
inscriptions. page 159

Chap. 74. Of the proportion, correspondency, reduction of Letters to the
Celestial Signs, and Planets, according to various tongues, with a Table
showing this. page 160

BOOK II.
CHAP. I. OF the necessity of Mathematical learning, and of the many
wonderful works which are done by Mathematical Arts only. page 167

Chap. 2. Of Numbers, and of their power, and virtue. page 170

Chap. 3. How great virtues Numbers have, as well in Natural things, as in
Supernatural. page 172

Chap. 4. Of Unity, and the Scale thereof. page 174

Chap. 5. Of the Number of Two, and the Scale thereof. page 177

Chap. 6. Of the Number of three, and the Scale shereof. page 179

Chap. 7. Of the Number of Four, and the Scale thereof. page 183

Chap. 8. Of the Number Five, and the Scale thoreof. page 188

Chap. 9. Of the Number six, and the Scale thereof. page 191

Chap. 10. Of the Number Seven, and the Scale thereof. page 193

Chap. 11. Of the Number of Eight, and the Scale thereof. page 206

Chap. 12. Of the Number of Nine, and the Scale thereof. page 208

Chap. 13. Of the Number Ten, and the Scale thereof. page 210

Chap. 14. Of the Number eleven, and the number twelve; with a double Scale of
the Number twelve Cabalisticall, and Orphicall. page 216

Chap. 15. Of the Numbers which are above twelve, and of their powers, and
virtues. page 222

Chap. 16. Of the notes of numbers, placed in certain gesturings. page 226

Chap. 17. Of the various notes of numbers observed amongst the Romans. page 228

Chap. 18. Of the notes or figures of the Graecians. page 230

Chap. 19. Of the notes of the Hebrews, and Caldeans, and certain other notes
of Magicians. page 232

Chap. 20. What numbers are attributed to letters; and of divineing by the
same. page 233

Chap. 21. What numbers are consecrated to the Gods, and which are ascribed,
and to what Elements. page 237

Chap. 22. Of the tables of the Planets, their virtues, forms, and what Divine
names, Intelligences, and Spirits are set over them. page 239

Chap. 23. Of Geometrical figures and Bodies, by what virtue they are prwerful
in Magic, and which are agreeable to each Element, and the Heaven. page 253

Chap. 24. Of Musical Harmony, of the force and power thereof. page 255

Chap. 25. Of sound and Harmony, and whence their wonderfulness in operation.
page 257

Chap. 26. Concerning the agreement of them with the Celestial bodies, and what
harmony and sound is correspondent to every Star. page 259.

Chap. 27. Of the proportion, measure, and Harmony of man's body. page 263

Chap. 28. Of the Composition and Harmony of the humane soul. page 277

Chap. 29. Of the Observation of Celestials, necessary in every Magical Work.
page 278

Chap. 30. When Planets are of most powerful influence. page 280

Chap. 31. Of the Observation of the fixed Stars, and of their Natures. page 281

Chap. 32. Of the Sun, and Moon, and their Magical considerations. page 283

Chap. 33. Of the twenty eight Mansions of the Moon, and their virtues. page 285

Chap. 34. Of the true motion of the heavenly bodies to be observed in the
eighth sphere, and of the ground of Planetary hours. page 289

Chap. 35. How some artificial things, as Images, Seals, and such like, may
obtain some virtue from the Celestial bodies. page 290

Chap. 36. Of the Images of the Zodiac, what virtues, they being engraven,
receive from the Stars. page 292

Chap. 37. Of the Images of the Faces, and of those Images, which are without
the Zodiac. page 293

Chap. 38. Of the Images of Saturn. page 298

Chap. 39. Of the Images of Jupiter. page 399

Chap. 40. Of the Images of Mars. page 300

Chap. 41. Of the Images of the Sun. page ibid.

Chap. 42. Of the Images of Venus. page 301

Chap. 43. Of the Images of Mercury. page 302

Chap. 44. Of the Images of the Moon. ibid.

Chap. 45. Of the Images of the head and Tail of the Dragon of the Moon. page
303

Chap. 46. Of the Images of the Mansions of the Moon. page 304

Chap. 47. Of the Images of the fixed Behenian Stars. page 307

Chap. 48. Of Geomanticall Figures, which are the middle betwixt Images and
Characters. page 309

Cha. 49. Of Images, the figure whereof is not after the likeness of any
Celestial figure, but after the likeness of that which the mind of the worker
desires. page 311

Chap. 50. Of certain Celestial observations, and the practice of some Images.
page 312

Chap. 51. Of Characters which are made after the rule and imitation of
Celestials, and how with the table thereof they are deduced out of Geomantical
figures. page 316

Chap. 52. Of Characters which are drawn from things themselves by a certain
likeness. page 320

Chap. 53. That no Divination without Astrology is perfect. p. 323

Chap. 54. Of Lottery, when, and whence the virtue of Divining is incident to
it. page 325

Chap. 55. Of the soul of the World, and of the Celestials, according to the
traditons of the Poets, and Philosophers. page 327

Chap. 56. The same is confirmed by reason. page 329

Chap. 57. That the soul of the world, and the Celestial souls are rational,
and partake of divine understanding. page 330

Chap 58. Of the names of the Celestials, and their rule over this inferior
world, viz. Man. page 331

Chap. 59. Of the seven governers of the world, the Planets, and of their
various names serving to Magical speeches. page 434.

Chap. 60. That humane imprecations do naturally impress their powers upon
external things; And how man's mind through each degree of dependencies ascends
into the intelligible world, and becomes like to the more sublime spirits, and
Intelligences. page 337

BOOK III.
CHAP. I. OF the necessity, power, and profit of Religion. page 345

Chap. 2. Of concealing of those thing which are secret in Religion. page 346

Chap. 3. What dignification is required, that one may be a true Magician and a
worker of miracles. page 340

Chap. 4. Of the two helps of Ceremonial Magic, Religion and Superstition.
page 352

Chap. 5. Of the three Guides of Religion, which bring us to the path of Truth.
page 355

Chap. 6. How by these guides the soul of man ascends up into the Divine
nature, and is made a worker of Miracles. page 357

Chap. 7. That the knowledge of the true God is necessary for a Magician and
what the old Magicians and Philosophers have thought concerning God. page 358.

Chap. 8. What the Ancient Philosophers have thought concerning the Divine
Trinity. page 361.

Chap. 9. What the true and most Orthodox faith is concerning God and the most
holy Trinity. page 365.

Cha. 10. Of divine emanations, whith the Hebrews call Numerations, others
attributes; The Gentiles gods and Dieties; and of the ten Sephiroths and ten
most sacred names of God which rule them, and the interpretation of them. page
366

Chap. 11. Of the Divine names, and their power and virtue. page 370

Chap. 12. Of the influence of the divine names through all the middle causes
into these inferior things. page 379

Chap. 13. Of the numbers of God, and of their influence on our members. page
382

Chap. 14. Of the Gods of the Gentiles, and souls of the Celestial bodies, and
what places were consecrated in times past, and to what Dieties. page 384

Chap. 15. What our Theologians think concerning the Celestial souls. page 389.

Chap. 16. Of Intelligences and spirits, and of the threefold kind of them, and
of their diverse names, and of Infernal and subterraneal spirits. page 390

Chap. 17. Of these according to the opinion of the Theologians. page 395

Chap. 18. Of the orders of evil spirits, and of their fall, and diverse
natures. page 397

Chap. 19. Of the bodies of the Devils. page 402

Chap. 20. Of the anoyance of evil spirits, and the preservation we have by
good spirits. page 405

Chap. 21. Of obeying a proper Genius, and of the searrhing out the nature
thereof. page 408.

Chap. 22. That there is a threefold keeper of man, and from whence each of
them proceed. page 410

Chap. 23. Of the tongue of Angels, and of their speaking amongst themselves,
and with us. page 412

Chap. 24. Of the names of Spirits. and their various imposition; and of the
Spirits that are set over the Stars, Signs, Corners of the Heaven, and the
Element. page 414

Chap. 25. How the Hebrew Mecubals draw forth the sacred names of Angels out of
the sacred writ, and of the seventie two Angels, which bear the name of God,
with the Tables of Ziruph, and the Commutations of letters and numbers. page 417

Chap. 26. Of finding out of the names of spirits, and Genius's from the
disposition of Celestial bodies. page 428

Chap. 27. Of the calculating Art of such names by the tradition of Cabalists.
page 430

Chap. 28. How sometimes names of Spirits are taken from those things over
which they are set. page 435

Chap. 29 Of the Characters and Seals of spirits. page 437

Chap. 30. Another manner of making Characters, delivered by Cabalists. page 439

Chap. 31. There is yet another fashion of Characters, and concerning marks of
spirits which are received only by revelation. p. 445

Chap. 32. How good spirits may be called up by us, and how evil spirits may be
overcome by us. page 447

Chap. 33. Of the bonds of spirits, and of their adjurations, and castings out.
page 451

Chap. 34. Of the Animastical order, and the Heroes. page 453

Chap. 35. Of the Mortal and Terrestrial Gods. page 455

Chap. 36. Of man, how he was created after the Image of God. page 457

Chap. 37. Of man's soul, and through what means it is joined to the body. page
465

Chap. 38. What Divine gifts man receives from above, from the several orders
of the Intelligences and the heavens. page 466

Chap. 39. How the superior Influences, seeing they are good by nature, are
depraved in these inferior things, and are made causes of evil. page 469

Chap. 40. That on every man a divine Character is imprinted, by the virtue of
which man can attain the working of miracles. pa. 471

Chap. 41. What concerning man after death, diverse Opinions. p. 473

Chap. 42. By what ways the Magicians and Necromancers do think they can call
forth the souls of the dead. page 488

Chap. 43. Of the power of man's soul, in the mind, reason and imagination. page
492

Chap. 44. Of the degrees of souls, and their destruction, or Immortality. page
496

Chap. 45. Of Soothsaying, and Frenzy. page 499

Chap. 46. Of the first kind of frenzy from the Muses. page 500

Chap. 47. Of the second kind from Dionysius. page 503

Chap. 48. Of the third kind of frenzy from Apollo. page 504

Chap. 49. Of the fourth kind of Frenzy, from Venus. page 507

Chap. 50. Of rapture, and ecstasy, and soothsayings, which happen to them
which are taken with the falling sickness, or with a swoune, or to them in an
agony. page 508.

Chap. 51. Of Prophetical Dreams. page 511

Chap. 52. Of Lots and marks possessing the sure power of Oracles. page 515

Chap. 53. How he that will receive Oracles must dispose himself. page 517

Chap. 54. Of cleanness, and how to be observed. page 520

Chap. 55. Of abstinence, fastings, chastity, solitariness, the tranquillity
and ascent of the mind. page 522

Chap. 56. Of Penitency, and Alms. page 526

Chap. 57. Of those things which being outwardly administered conduce to
Expiation. page 527

Chap. 58. Of adorations, and vows. page 529

Chap. 59. Of sacrifices and oblations, and their kinds and manners. page 532

Chap. 60. What imprecations and rites the ancient, were wont to use in
sacrifices, and oblations. page 537

Chap. 61. How these things must be performed, as to God, so to inferior
dieties. page 538

Chap. 62. Of consecrations, and their manner. page 540

Chap. 63. What things may be called holy, what consecrated, and how these
become so betwixt us and the Dieties; and of sacred times. page 543

Chap. 64. Of certain Religious observations, ceremonies, and rites of
perfumings, unctions, and such like. page 548

Chap. 65. The Conclusion of the whole work. page 555

FINIS.

