No POST from HEAVEN, Nor yet from HELL: But a true Relation, and
Animadversions, written, and sent as an Antidote, to all Unbelieving Brownists,
Profane Anabaptists, Schismatic Monsters,
And such like Incendiaries of the STATE.

Proving by Histories, Records, and Examples, That his Majestes Taxations have
not been unusual, nor his Government Tyrannical, though falsely so imputed,
invented, divulged and scattered abroad.

Collected by Sir ROBERT COTTON.

And now put to press, and Dedicated to His Sacred MAJESTY: By G. A. Gent.

Printed at OXFORD, 1643.

TO THE High and Mighty Monarch CHARLES, King of great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defend. of the Faith, etc. Wishing a glorious Conquest on Earth, and a
triumphant Victory in He^^^^
Great SIR,
APPELLES having drawn an exquisite picture, ambition tickling Fancy, set it to
the view of Censure, and covertly concealed himself; Time, brought to light an
Artist, more curious than Acute, he sees, dislikes, Appelles mends, and puts ^
to the view again; in short time after, he returns, reviews, (...)nd still
dislikes; Appelles marking his transcendency, and find^ng his imbecility,
dislodges himself and suddenly lets slip this ^itter Curb, Suitor ne ultra
crepidam.

So, if I, Oh King, like to this unskilful Artist, have presumed, Icarus-like
to soar above my pitch, and Phaeton-like to mount the Chariot of the Golden
Sun; Let it, I beseech you, be im^uted to Error Amoris, which I am always bound
to offer, and not to Amor Erroris, which I may not, I must not, nay, I dare not
proffer.

Be pleased then, to cast your Princely eye, upon this undigested lump of
Virgins wax, and do but grace it with one Royal smile, and then you Arm, and
make him able to encounter with that triple headed Monster, base ingratitude,
(at this present your Majesty's greatest and heaviest enemy) but, could it
infuse into me the strength of Sampson, I would tie those Foxes tails
together, (that go about to disturb your Peace) and drive them into a Desert,
where they should never return again, either to destroy your Corn, or hurt
your Pasture; but, Oh my good wishes, fall short of my true hearts intention:
howsoever this vigor it will add unto me, that I shall neither expect the
hopes of any, nor fear the votes of many; but merrily chant this Miscellany;
Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo: And so upon the bended knees of my heart,
praying for your Majesty's long and happy Reign over us, I humbly kiss your
Royal hand:

Your Majesty's poor, and unfortunate, yet most true, and loyal Subject. G. A.

NO POST FROM HEAVEN, Nor yet from Hell: But a true Relation and Animadversion,
written and sent, as an Antidote, to all unbelieving Brownists, Profane,
Anabaptists, Schismatic Monsters, and such like Incendiaries of the State,
etc.
TO search for foreign Stories, or to trace into the footsteps of Royal and
regal governements, of remote and far Countries and Kingdoms, for proofs
to make good my Assertions, unlese, I can by some of our own domestique, and
authentic records and examples make them first appear, were but Nodum in
scripo quaerere, and would rather savor of too much curiosity, than give any
true relish unto verity.

My first intention therefore was to have both fully and at large set down all
the exactions, impositions, taxes, and loanes, that have been, either by
prerogative, power, or general grant, exacted, leavyed, taken, and set upon
this State, from William the Conquerors time to King James; But having
sithence, propounded to my self brevity, and to shun prolixity, I will
therefore only with as light a hand, and in as short a way as possibly I can,
summarily draw up those, which do most concern and conduce to this present
discourse, and cursorily run over the residue, that so the curious, and the
carping may perceive, and the judicicus and religious judge, that His Majesty
has not so far transcended his bounds of government, as is most scandalously,
and most injuriously cast upon him.

2 Then will I, in a short Method, and very briefly compare His Majesty's
taxations, and theirs together.

3 And lastly, I shall compendiously touch those Exactions, Impositions, and
Gabells, practiced, used and taken in foreign States, and Kingdoms, that so
these Sons of Belial, Those that have Jacob's voice, but Esau's hands, whose
broyling spirits do nothing but fling firebrarnds, and heap on wood, to set
Kingdoms in combustion; those that are a nurcery of war, a Seminary of
Schism, whose very thoughts are barbarous, and their actions bloody, the
children of darkness, and the very spawne and offspring of cursed Cham, may
see their nakedness, consesse their Error, fly for covert, crave for mercy,
and pray for repentance.

William the Conqueror.
ANd first to begin with William the Conqueror, who in the entrance of his
Government, took of every Hideland twelve pence, as due from the Subject to
their Sovereign, both before and since the Conquest, to defray such charge, as
either the defense of the land from spoil, or the Sea from piracy, should
expose the Prince unto.

And it was called Danegeld, Gelda Regis, or Hidage; and was sessed by the
Hide, or plough-land, like to that Ingrata per Iugerae in Rome; yet by no rate
definite.

He also took other Exactions, (as the Monk of St. Albans says) Sive per fas,
sive per nefas: And into this list also of charge, he racked the Bishops, and
Abbots, seizing upon them; and at their charge a proportion of soldiers for
his service; exiling many worthy men, that opposed (as they then thought) his
thraldom.

William Rufus.
THe next is Will. Rufus, who in the An. 7. set upon the Heads of so many as he
mustered up for the French wars 10. (...) man, and so discharged them.

And in Anno the 9. he spoiled the Churches of their Ornaments and holy
vessels, and leavyed four Hidages of every plough Land, Tribut is Angliam modo,
non abradens, sed extorciens. Ex antiquilegibus Anglia.


And so wearyed with wars, taxations, and expense, Ne respirare potuit Anglia,
sub ipso suffocata, quid jam non Regibus ausum, aut quid jam Regni restat
scelus, in this Kings time.

Henry the first.
THen Henry the first, who in Anno quinto magnam a Regno exegit pecuniam. Hist.
Gualt. Gisbourne.


And by this means, gravabitur terra Angliae opressionibus multis. Hist. Matthew:
Par. Hen. Huntingdon.


He took also in the 10. year six shillings danegeld; and the 17. year, Anglia
fuit variis depressa, exactionibus, and bonis, sine peccato spoliata.

King Stephen.
FOr King Stephen, there needs no more, but the words of the Monk of Gisbourn,
Post annum sext. pax nulla; omnes parts torrebat violenta praedatio.

Henry the second.
HEnry the second, alluding, and not unlike to the Feoda given the Erem ites in
the decline of the Empire, as Salaries, continued the policy of his
Progenitors, who allotted the land into such, and so many equal portions, as
might seem competent for the supportation of a Knight or man at arms, from whom
as occasion required, he received either service or contribution.

This tenure, now esteemed a thraldom, began upon a voluntary submission; and
therefore respecting their first immediate dependancy upon the Crown, which is
a great part of the Kings honor, their duties and escheats a great benefit,
and their attendance by tenure in war, at their nown charge, to the number of
60216. at the least, (for the Knights sees in England are no less) a great
case and strength to his State; for they are Totidom hostagia, B(...).
as Bracton says, It were a thing perilous now to alter after such a current
of time and custom.

He in the beginning of his Reign took a Scutage, whereof there is no record.

But the second Scutage, which was in Anno quinto, amounted to 124 Millia
Librarum Argenti, which reduced to the Standard of our moneys to 5. s. the
Ounce; whereas that was not five groats, will amount to near 400000. l.

In Anno the 7. Scutagium fuit Assessum, and duas Marcas, which if summed up,
by the received number of Knights sees, being 60216. in the hands of the Layety
cannot be less than 250000 l. Ex lib. Rub. in sc.


The like in the next year; and in An. the 11. there was an aid of two pence,
de unaquaque Libra.

And quatuor sequentibus Annis de singulis libris, singulas denarias was taken
of all men, and their estates and full fortunes, being delivered upon their
oaths. Cerv. Dorob.


And in the 14. year, a Scutage was assessed, ad marcam unam, de singulis
feodis. Rub. lib. in Sc:


And in the 18. year, Scutagium pro quolibet Feoda. Hist. Roffens. Matthew. Par.


And in the 35. of his Reign, a tenth of all men's movables was granted; In
which dying 900. Millia libr. in Auro, and Argento praeter utensilia and
Jocaliaretulit.

Richard the first.
RIchard the first, in the beginning of his Reign, besides Scutagium Walliae
assessum, at ten shillings leavied, (as in the succor of the holy Land) a
Subsidy out of all the movables in the Realm to his own use: Rub. lib. in Sc,
Hist Matt. Paris.
Et Eleeno sine titulo vitium rapacitatis inclusit.

A Coutribution there was in his sixth year of 150 Millia Marcarum Argenti, to
pay his ransom, as also a Scutage assessed at 20. s.

And in the 7. year, he imposes a contribution, called Tenementale, extremity
inventing, Nova and varia praedandi vecabula; and this was 2 s. of every
plough-land from the husbandman, and from the gentry and nobility, the 3. part
of their Military service. Ex Johan. de Eversden.


He enforced the Cistertian Monks, to redeem their Wools, sine Coriaria,
assessed a Scutage at 20 s. and four years after of every plough Land 5
shillings, and of every Borough and City. Walt. Coventry. Mat. Paris.
Duos Palfridos, and totidem summarias, and of every Abbot, half as much; than
loosing of purpose his great seal, proclaimed that, Omnes Chartae and
Confirmationes, quae Prioris sigilli impressione roboraverat, should be void,
whereby he drew from all men a composition of their Liberties. ex Charta orig.


This fashion was afterward taken up by some of, his successors, exhist. Mat.
Paris, page 29
as in the eleventh of Henry the thirds reign, and therefore, some reason
Richard had in the end to become a gatherer, that had not long before, by
account of his Chancellor Hubert then Archbishop, spent Intra biennium undecies
centena millia Marcarum argenti de regno Angliae.

King John.
HIs Brother King John succeeding, took in the first year of his reign, a
Scutage assessed at two marcks for the two next years, three shillings of
every plough-Land; Rud. Coggeshall, lib. Rub. in Sc. Rog. Horeden, Matthew. Paris.
and the year following, besides a Scutage, the fourtieth of the revenues of
the Clergy, and laity.

In the fourth year, he took the like Scutage, and the seventh part of the
Movables of the Barons, and Clergy; and in Anno quinto a Scutage assessed at
two marcks. Lib. Rub. in Sc. Matthew. Paris, and Rud. Coggeshall.


The like in his six and seventh years, twenty shillings Scutage, and the
thirteenth part of the Movables, as well of the Clergy, as the laity in the
year following.

In Anno the ninth, he exacted by redemption of the concubines of the Clergy, a
great sum; Rud. Coggeshall Mat. Paris.
and in the eleventh, (Extorsit tributum grave) videlicet 140 millia librarum,
a viris Ecclesiasticis and Clericorum horreum invadit.

In the 12 a Scutage assessed at two marcks, besides the exaction of 22000 l.
from the Cistertians.

He took in the 13 year, a Scutage of 20 shillings. Rud. Coggeshall, Lib. Rub.
in Sc. and Math. Paris, hist, Minor.


In the year following, from the Ministers of the Church, 40000 marcks.

And in the 16 year, Scutagium assessum ad tres Marcas.

Thus, in the space of 17 years, was the State delivered but thrice from
impositions.

Henry the third.
ANd now for Henry the third, there was in his time assessed upon the Clergy,
Nobility, and Gentry, fifteen Scutages, one at ten shillings, two at 20
shillings, eight at two marcks, and four at forty shillings the Knights see.

The Land of the Inferior were twice taxed at half a marck the plough, and two
tallages upon the Land of the Crown. Claus. anno 19 H: 3. and Math. West minst.
Ex Stat. an. 4, ca. 17. dors. Claus. anno 16, H. 3, and Eversden. Ex li, Cant.
Epi. Ex Eversd. and Paris


From out of the moveable goods of the lay Subjects, have been taken five
times, as sometimes the fourtyth, thirtyth, twentyth, and fifteenth parts, and
once the sixteenth of the Clergy, for this King.

He likewise imposed nine times a tenth upon the Church, six times for a year
only, and by it self, once accompanied with the first fruits, once for three
years, and once for five, besides two Aides, the one Moderate, the other
called gravis Exactio, and that worthily, if to the eight hundred marcks,
imposed upon Saint Edmonds-Bury, all the other Abbyes were rated accordingly.

And by the account of William de Middleton, he received in the time of his
government, de exitu Scutagium, four millions and 20000 l.

And, as in all the 56 years of his reign, (excepting five) either the Church
or Commonwealth were charged, with contribution and taxes; so were they
grieved with other exactions, either for carriages, victuals, or personal
attendance. Ex Eversd.
Dorsis Clan, anno 16. H. 3, ex Walt. Gisborne. Eversden and Paris. ex li
Chart. Cant. Epi. 8 H; 6 Parl anno 3 Ed, 1 and Rot; Claus, anno 26H: 3 Mat.
Paris pa. 517 Dorsis Claus anno 14, H; 3, M; 8, and Claus 12, H 3, M; 2 Claus,
an, 14 H; 3, au. 7 Claus. anno 16 H; 3 M; 11


For in his sixteenth year, the inhabitants of Winchelsey were enjoined, ut
providerent december bonas naves and magnas.

And at another time, for twenty, Dunwich and Ipswich, five a piece, and all
the ports proportionably at their own charge.

And in the same year, there was taken, and transported 100000 quarters of
wheat, 5000 of oats, and many Bacons, the Church not forborne in those
charges, for, from Winchester was taken 2000 quarters of wheat and oars, and
10000 of Bacons, the other Bishops and Clergy, bearing their charges of
victuals, in the like taxations, coming, ut unda supervenit undae, ac si esset
Anglia puteus inexhaustus.

And in the twelventh and fourteenth, the King levieth Soldiers for his wars
beyond Sea, collecting, Pro runcata sui, de singulis duobus hidis curi; and to
bring secum victualia and those that were dispensed withal, to contribute for
victuals to those that went for forty days, commanding the Sheriffs to
swear all, Ad arma etc. as were sworn in the time of K. John his Father; by
with ordinance, all able Subjects from youth to decripit age, were bound to arm
themselves and be in continual readiness (a sero usque ad mane) for so the
record is to attend the Kings pleasure; and these men thus sworn to bring with
them, Lericas, Ha^bioues, etc. and to such, as neglected, he sent out his
writs, reprehending at first, Iurgatoriae eo quod, etc. and after finding them,
Rot. Finium 26 H. 3 M. 4.
according to their abilities and tenures, as taking in Anno the 26 of William
de Umfrevile 100 marcks, and so in proportion of many others.

Edward the first.
EDward the first, exacted from the Lands of his Subjects four times Scutage,
assessed at every time 40 shillings the Knights fee, and once an aid, called
Auxilium novum, which he farmed out for ready money.

Out of the rents of the Clergy, he took a tenth part, twice for one year,
and once for six, and the twentyth part twice from both the Provinces, and once
for two years from Canterbury only, and seized once into his own hands the
possessions of the Priors Aliens.

Of the goods of the Clergy, he took the thirtieth, fifteenth, and the fifth
part once, the moity three times, and the tenth seven times, first, for two
years, and then for three years, and once for six years.

Of the goods of the Commons, the eighth, the ninth, and the twelveth part he
took once; twice severally the tenth and 11h, the Sessors being sworn to leavy
and rate truly. Rot. Parl. anno 25 Ed. 1 Mem. 3 Sched.


Three times he had the fifteenth part, and once the moity of a fifteenth from
the Clergy and laity together.

And this King had granted of the movables a tenth, a fifteenth, and a third
part of the Cities and Boroughs, besides a great loan on the seventh and
eighth, and twice the sixth part from the Merchants, and a twentyth and seven
portion, once of there commodities, imposing a new custom of a Noble uponevery
sack of wool, which he let out to farm.

And under pretense of some breach of amity with those parts, whither his
Merchants traded, he seized in Anno the 22. all the wools into his hands, and
made of them instant sale to the best value, leaving them upon security to a
short price, and a long day of payment. Rot. Vasco. anno 22 Ed. 1 M. 8


He took the same year to the distaste of the Pope, and murmur of the Clergy,
Rot. Vasco. anno 22 Ed. 1 M. 17
all the money gathered In Subsidium Terre Sanctae.

And lastly, upon the persons of his Subjects, he imposed one tallage, sessed
either in Communi, or per capita, and twice the like upon the Jews, whereof the
one amounted to 5000 marcks. Rot. Vasco. an. 22 Ed. 1


Neither were his people freed from attendance in their persons, or exactions
in their estates all his reign; for there was but one year of intermission
from continual payments; for in record, Rot. Parli. an. 31 Ed. 1 Exhist. Ioh.
Eversden.
there appear his writs to the Sheriffs, as in Anno the 31 De peditibus
eligendis de tota Anglia, and to be found by their several Countries, calling
his Earls, Barons, and Knights to personal service, according to their
Tenures.

Edward the second.
EDward the second, his Son, assessed upon the Lands of his Subjects, one or
two Marcks at once, at ten shillings the Knights fee.

From the revenues of the Clergy, rated by the book of tenths, he at distinct
times, took 4, 5, and 6d. in the marck, and once a fifteenth part of the whole.

From the goods of the Clergy, a tenth for three years, and twice a loan from
the Abbots and Bishops.

From the laity, (besides a tallage of their movables) in Cities and Boroughs,
once a tenth, twice a fifteenth, and twice a twentieth part of their goods,
besides a loan from the Commons, and ten shillings borrowed upon every sack of
wool from merchant strangers, and a Noble from others, Clergy and laity
together. Claus. anno 8 Ed; 2 M. 9


Of their goods a tenth, a fifteenth, and twice an eighteenth part besides a
loan. Claus. anno 16 Ed. 2 Claus. anno 12 Ed 2


He augmented his Fathers new Custom, with an imposition of a Noble more upon
every sack of wool.

And in Anno decimo, because he was infinitam pecuniam effundere, he seiseth
and increases an imposition upon all commodities inward and outward, to an
extreme rate, and causes the Commons in every shire, to lay down moneys in
deposito, to pay his Soldiers.

And took from the Nobility, and Gentry, a large contribution, Rot. Vase. An
22. Ed: M. 13. in Sched.
and seized Omnes lanas, and coria mercatorum, etc.

He charged the Ports, and Sea-Towns twelve several years, Adcostos suos, and
sumptibus villarum, (as the Record says) to set to sea in his service, ships
furnished Armis and victualibus; sometimes for one months space, as in Anno
the 11. Rot. Scot. An. 11. M. 1


Sometimes for four, as in Anno the twelfth. Sometimes for seven. And Anno
quarto, the number of ships, more or less occasion required. An. 12. M. 8:
Rot. Parl. An. 4. Ed. 2. Dors. Claus an. 17. Ed. 2. M. 11.


And in Anno the seventeenth, Southampton was charged with six, and 180.
Sea-townes more with ratable proportions for the Kings service.

And in Anno the 18. imbarguing all the ships that were in any Port, Claus,
anno 18. M. 34. and Rot. Wast. M. 29.
that were of 40 Tuns and upwards, or of 50 Tuns and upwards.

And in Anno 2. causing the Town of Southampton to build a Gally for himself of
120. Oars; and commanding all the Sheriffs for provision of victuals. Claus.
an. 2. M: 11. Claus, an. 6. Ed. 2. Rot. Scot. an. 1, 2, 3. M. 10. and an. 4. M.
5. and an. 9. Rot. Parl. an: 10. M. 12. Rot. Parl. an. 16 M. 3. Rot. Scot.
Dors. An. 7. M: 8. Dors. Claus. an. 16 M. 3. Rot. Scot. an. 2, 3. M. 8. Rot.
Scot. an. 8. Ed. 2. Dors. Claus: an. 9. Claus. 16. Ed. 2: M 7. Claus. an: 16:
M: 20: Claus: an; 16; M. 11.


And in An. 1. 4. and 9. To provide De exitibus Comitatus ad certum pretium.
Sometimes to the proportion of 3500 quarters of Corn: and many Bacons, as An.
the 16. and to send them to the Kings Army; as also Carrecta, and Carra cum
equis, and Bobus, out of every several County.

Sometimes he made the Forts to send provision themselves, as An. the 7. and
not to suffer any ship with victuals, Ibidem discariari; And herein, not
sparing the Church, exacted the first three years, Fermenta and alia victualia
from them.

Besides the former charges, the persons of all men, as well of the Nobility as
meaner Rank, were at their own charges often enjoined to serve, as in the 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, and 16 of this King, when they were called singulatim; as well
Knights and Noblemen, as such as held 40 pound land, according to their
Tenures, subforisfactur. Terrarum, and Cattallorum equis and Armis sumpti. bus
propriis, etc. And of this the Clergy were not exempted, as in Anno the 16. of
this King.

And in the first three years of this King, out of one Town one, umptibus
propriis, for forty days: As Anno the 5. one: Or for 16. days; as Anno novo
one; or proseptem septimanis one, as Anno quarto. Sometimes a thousand in one
Country, as Anno 3. Sometimes an entire Army of 18300, as in An. the 11. And
48. thousand 800. at the charge of all the Countries.

And An. decimo quinto, London, sumptibus Civitatis, sound 500 men for 40
days. And the like An. the 18. Rot. Parl. An. 15. M. 19. Claus. an. 18. M. 13.
Rot. Parl. an. 16. M. 27. Rot. Parl. an no 9. M. 21. Rot. Claus. an. 10. M. 13.
and an. 16. M. 27. Rot. Scot. an. 13. M. 12. Dorf. Claus. an. 6. M. 28: Rot.
Scot. an. 7. M: 20. Claus an 8. M. 30. Rot. Scot. an. 2. M 6. Claus. anno 16:
M. 12. Claus, An. 15. Ed. 3. M. 14. Rot. Fin. an. 15 M: 16 Rot. Claus. an. 9 M.
1; Rot. Parl. An. 16 M: 12 Rot. Claus. an. 15 M. 19 Rot: Scot. an. 13. M. 1.
and Claus. an 13. Memb. 10.


The King likewise commanded Anno the sixteenth, that all men of forty
shillings Lands and upwards, should rateably send to his service Men: And Annis
9, 10, 15. and 16. that all jurati ad arma: or from 16, to 60. secundum Stat.
Wincestriae should attend his service.

And An. the 13. enjoined all from 20. to 60. armed and victualled at their
own charge.

And commanded the Sheriffs An. 6, 7, 8, 12, 16. and 18. to see all able men,
that parati sint and muniti ad veniendum ad Regem quando vocati suerint; their
weapons to be provided ad sumptus incolarum; and themselves enjoined to muster
and train every six weeks.

If any neglected his appointed service, there was sent to the Sheriffs a writ
De habendis illis coram concilio qui praemonitinon venerunt in expeditione
Regis, as An. quinto one; the parties imprisoned, and their goods seized into
the Kings hands, as An, the ninth and sixteenth; or else redemption by Fine, as
the Sheriffs of Bedford, and Buckingham did their men, for six hundred Marks in
Anno decimo quinto: And the owner of forty pound land, at his first fault, was
punished cum tertia part bonorum; for his second, Cum tota residua; and for
his third, fuit corpora eorum ad voluntat. Regis: and of Knights twenty pounds
de qualibet Hida, as in Anno the 13.

I have the longer insisted upon this Kings Reign, that tanquam in speculo, we
may behold the intolerable miseries and exactions charged and cast upon the
Nobility, Clergy, and Commons in former time.

Edward the third.
EDward the third charged the Lands of his Subjects twice forty shillings of
every Knights Fee; and five pounds sixteen shillings of every parish: Rot.
Parl. an no 48; Ed; 3; M; 10.
And in the 48. of his Reign, out of the goods of the Commons he took once the
ninth part, and the fifteenth part of Forests and wastes, twice the tenth, 13.
times the fifteenth for one year, and twice for three years, and once the
twentieth part of all movables, and 30000. Sacks of Wool.

Of the Burroughes and Cities, four tenths, and one for three years.

From the Temporal Lords, the tenth sheafe, Lamb, and fleece, who with the
Bishops and Knights granted 20000 Sacks of Wool, etc.

Of the Clergy alone one tenth, for four years; besides a contribution in the
twelfth year of his Reign. seizing the same year all the goods of the Clunny
and Cistertian Monks.

Of the Church and Laity together, he received six times the tenth of all their
movables.

And from the Merchants and Staple, a Subsidy of wool for three years.

Imposing in Anno the 33. six and twenty shillings and eight pence upon every
Sack of wool transported, which doubled the Impositions of his father, and
grandfather, advancing it after for six years to 40 s.

And in An. the 38. (being the year he resumed his style of France to 46. s.
4. d. the sack of wool: taking poundage of all commodities six pence inward
and outward; and joining the Merchants for every sampler of wool transported
to return in 40 s. Bullyon in his Mint, himself becoming Merchant of all the
Tin in Devon-shire, and Cornwall in An. the 12. Rot. Al. man. An 12. M. 7.


And in An. the 15 assessed upon the heads of his subjects a fine of four pence
severally.

Besides, in Anno the 20. he took a Loan of all the Bishops, Abbots, Justices,
and aliis potentioribus Regnide diversis pecuniarum summis, inter summas, of
one hundred thousand and forty pounds. Claus. An. 20. Ed. 3. M. 22: in dors.


In the first year of his Reign, he commanded all the Sea-Townes, Claus. all.
1. Ed. 3. M. 22. indors.
to attend with ships his service, sumptibus propriis, and auplici
Eskippamento; and to provide them of 60. Towns, and upwards.

And in the year following, lays the like charge upon 76. Port Towns, for
all ships of forty Tuns, and more. Claus. an. 2 Ed. 3.


And in Anno the tenth the like at their own charge; besides a contribution of
money for payment; whereof the Officers are commanded, Claus. an 10 Ed. and
Rot. Scot. an. 10. Memb. 9. Rot Al. anno 12. Rot. Scot. an. 10. M. 15
Ut eos per districtiones, et alias punitiones prout expedire viderint,
compellant; enjoining such Merchants of London, Qui ex transmarinis passagiis,
lucra adquirunt, To furnish Ships for war at their own charge.

And in Anno the 14. the Cinque Ports set out to Sea thirty ships, and
maintained them during the service, half at their own, and half at the
Countries charge, eighty being furnished and defrayed by the out-Ports, and the
Admiral being directed to Imbargue all the other ships for the Kings service.

And although the Subjects found this an infinite grievance yet could they not,
upon humble complaint in Parliament, receive any further relief, but that the
King would not have it otherwise than before. Rot. Alm. anno 1. Ed. 3. Mem. 2.


For provision he took of his subjects 19000 Quarters of Grain, 2200. Oxen
salted, and 3000 Bacons; Rot. Scot. anno 10. M. 17.
besides of other provisions an infinite quantity: and the like was very
frequent all his Reign.

The persons of all meaner subjects from sixteen to sixty he caused to be armed
in a readiness, and the Gentry and Nobility, Rot. Scot. an 1. M. 2. Parl. anno
14. Ed. 3.
supplying the King at their own charges with seven hundred or eight hundred
men at Arms, and two thousand, or three thousand. Archers: as An. the 14. with
other proportions for diverse years following.

And the Bishops ordered to furnish, Armis et equis competentibus; Rot. Franc.
anno 46.
so many as occasion required; So that seeing these things were so grievous and
burdensome unto them, they in the 22. year of his Reign complained in
Parliament of the miseries they underwent thereby; as of their ayds, advanced
to forty shillings fine, that in Law should be: but twenty shillings: Anno 21.
Ed. 3.
Their setting forth of men, and the Kings taking of their victuals without
payment, the Sea left to the charge of their keeping. And from their Woolls by
way of Subsidy, there was 6000l. yearly exacted without Law, (besides the
lending of ^onyes) and themselves restrained from transporting any, yet ^^ch
was the necessity of those times, that they neither had re^resse of their
complaint, nor the State one year free, or dischar^ed of contributions,
impositions, and exactions all his reign.

Richard the second.
RIchard the second succeeding his Grandfather, took of the Clergy and laity,
once the tenth of all their Lands, and ^hrice the goods of the Comm. the like
entirely, and 6 times the ^alf, twelve times a fifteenth, and 6 times the
moity. Parl. anno 2 and 14 R. 2 ^ui^.


And had Anno the 21, granted one tenth to him, and a fifteenth and a half of
either of them yearly for term of life.

From out of the Boroughs and Cities, thrice a full tenth, and ^nce a moity.

Out of all merchandise, he received three years six pence in the ^ound, and
once twelve pence.

And for every tonne of wine and such commodities, six pence ^or two years,
doubling it for as many, and trebling it for as many.

The custom of wools, rated by Edward the first, at a Noble a ^^ck, and under
his Son increased as much more, was to this King ^wo shillings and eight pence,
which single for eight years, he ^ad granted unto him, besides once for three
years, and once for ^ure, having after improved it to four and thirty
shillings and ^ure pence the sack.

The sum of these Subsidies, in Anno decimo quarto, amounted un^ 160000 pounds.

From out of the goods of the Clergy, he had eight tenths and a ^alfe, and once
out of them and the laity together, besides a loan (...) Anno quinto of 6000l.

By the Poll, or Heads of all his people, from above fifteen years, ^e
collected twice a contribution assessed proportionably from the Beggar to the
Duke.

Besides, in strength of prerogative only, of every ship and fish^r man six
pence.

The like of New Castle coals, and of every last of corn, inwards and
outward the like sum.

He also took their horses, armor, and cattle, (hinc factus est subditis
invisus, says the Bishop of London) and so it seemed, for at his deposing, it
was one of the objected Articles, against him.

He, the first year of his reign, imposed upon his Subjects, as formerly his
Ancestors had done, a personal service, as Anno primo, that all the Clergy
shall array, Armis and equis competentibus, from the age of 16 to 60. and eos
millenis and centenis provisos facient.

Thus under grievous burdens, the State labored continually for his treasury,
being wastfully emptyed, was (as Tacitus says) of Tyberius, scelere replendum,
by which he meant the intolerable racking of the people. Tacit. lib. 2


And therefore crave to have his present Officers removed, and very hardly
would be drawn any more to tax themselves, but conditionally, and with this
limitation, that their money should be received, expended, and accounted for to
themselves, and by Treasurers of their own election, and are content in the end
to load his poor dejected fortunes, with the reproachful weight of these
their many burdens. Rot. Parlia. anno 1 H. 4 nu, 2


Thus, you see, this unfortunate Prince, first brought into want, than into
contempt, and last of all deposed; a most remarkable President, for these our
times, had actions, and occasions, fitted opportunity and intentions.

Henry the fourth.
HEnry the fourth, in 13 years, out of the Lands of his people received twice
relief, once Auxilium de medietate feodorum and again, a Noble out of every
twenty pounds, throughout all his Realm.

Out of the goods of the Commons, four times a tenth, besides one for three
years, and the like one and a half for two, and for three years, a poundage
at eight pence once, and four times twelve pence, whereof the last was for
four years.

The like number and years of the tonnage, the first only rated at two
shillings, the rest at 4 shillings the tonne. Out of the movables of the
Clergy, thrice a tenth, and twice a moity.

As also out of every Stipendary Minister, Friar, and such manner of persons
six shillings and eight pence a piece.

Besides all these, of all he took Anno octaevo, a contribution, It a gravia,
that it was granted, Ea condition, ne trahatur in exemplum, and ut eandem post
datum computum cremareutur. Hist. Thora, Walsingh.


Henry the fifth.
HEnry the fifth his Son next succeeded him, in whose nine years reign, I
find no charge imposed upon the Lands of his Subjects.

Out of the goods of the Commons, he received six times the tenth and a
fifteenth entirely, and once 2 thirds of Staple. Wares, once for sour years,
and after for life.

Three shillings tonnage and twelve pence poundage, thrice he had the tenth of
his Clergy.

And in the eighth year of his reign, when the Chancellor bewailed to him in
Parliament the feebleness and poverty of the people, he, who of as many
attempts as he undertook, Totidem fecit Monumenta Victoriae, yet for redress,
and ease of those miseries, as Livy says of an excellent Soldier, pacem
voluit, quia vincere potuit, and left in the ninth year of his reign, a
peaceable successor and heir.

Henry the sixth.
HEnry the sixth, Nimium foelix malo suo, as the event proved; for retaining
paternae Majestatis, nihil praeter speciem nominis, By fear, and facility laid
the way open to his factious and ambitious kindred, to work themselves into
popular favor, and himself into contempt, which was soon done by leading the
easy King by expense into extremity.

For, besides the resumption, he took on his own and his Fathers grants, which
was of purpose plotted to make a consumption of duty, and affection toward
him, he, out of the old inheritance of his Subjects, exacted six pence in the
pound, in Anno the 14 and doubled twice that valuation, not only of all Lands
purchased from the entrance of Edward the first, but all freehold and
copyhold, under 200l. and two in twenty of all above.

He further imposed, first 6s. 8d. and then 20s. upon every Knights fee.

Out of the goods of the Commons, he had six tenths, whereof, one for three
years besides three moities, and one third of fifteens, three halfes, one
third, and eighth entire.

Besides these former, out of the wools he had 37 thousand, 1071 raised by a
moity of a tenth.

And again, of all goods 6 shillings and 8 pence in the pound of the
merchants. Of Subsidies, rated as in former times, he had then by grant, once,
but for a year trebled; for three and a half this Subsidy was advanced to
33s. and 4 pence of denizens, and 53s. 4 pence of Aliens.

Besides a Subsidy, a loan of Aliens goods, tonnage, and poundage, improved
to 6 shillings and eight pence. He took in his 18; year, and after the rates
of his Fathers time, he took it first, thrice 10 years, then, as often for two
years, and again by a new grant for five years, and in the end for term of
his life.

Of the Clergy, he had besides one half of Dismees, four entire tenths, and by
the State in general in Anno the 31. of Hen. 6. Anno 3i H; 5
2000 Archers maintained for half a year at the Common charge.

By the Poll, he exacted in Anno the eighteenth of every merchant stranger, if
an householder 16 shillings a piece, if none six shillings. Anno 18 H; 6


And in Anno the 27; 6 shillings 8 pence of every such stranger, Anno 27 H; 6
and 20d. of their Clerks.

In Anno the 13, he had granted for term of his life 10l. a year of all
inhabitants, mere denizens, and 20s. of every stranger merchant that came into
the Land. Anno 13 H; 6


The first Monopolies I find, were grounded upon the extremity of these times.
The first Monopolies


For in Anno the the 29, th Spinalloes Merchants of Genoa had by grant for 8
thousand pounds, the Sole trade of many Staple commodities, as the merchants of
Southampton had all Allome for the same sum.

Thus was this unhappy Princes Reign all war and waste, and in the end, as one
says of Lepidus, A Militibus, and a fortuna deseritur, (...) Patereu^ (...)*
he was left a while to a disgraced life, Spoliata quam tueri non poter at
dignitate, A woeful example, and still fresh bleeding in our memories.

Edward the fourth
EDward the fourth, besides two Resumptions, not only of the grants of such
Kings, as he accounted de factor: and not de jure to reign: But also of those
made by himself, a sea of profit, that by infinite attainders flowed daily into
his Treasury, took not withstanding of the Lords spiritual and temporal
only a tenth of their yearly possessions, and of the Commons six tenthes,
three quarters, and the like proportion of fifteens.

A Benevolence in An. the 14. which Fabian calls a new contribution, and
charge them in An. the 12. with the wages of his Archers, to the sum of
51117. l. Chron. Fabian Rot. Parl. anno 12. Ed. 4. nu. 8.


Of the Merchants he took Tonnage and Poundage, for term of life; Besides of
Merchants, as well Denizens as strangers a Subsidy, the two and twentieth of
his reign, leaving his kingdom in the next, to the few days of his son.

Edward the fifth.
FOr, Ostendunt Terris hunc tantum fata; nec ultra esse sinent.

Richard the third.
RIchard the third his Uncle succeeded, homo ingeniosissimee nequam, and
facundus malo publico; full of art to beguile the people; he to make a just
semblance of his unjust entry, besides his act of Parliament full of dangerous
untruthes, dissembled the part of an excellent Prince, making the Commons
believe by a statute, to which he gave first form of life, discharged them for
ever of all exactions, called benevolences; so that in all his short and wicked
reign I find recorded but once any tax upon the people, and that was tenths
granted by the Clergy of both Provinces.

Henry the seventh.
HEnry the seventh succeeding, resumed in the third of his Reign, most of the
grants of Offices made by his brother, and assessed upon the Lands, only of
his Subjects, but one aid, in Anno the 19. out of their goods and lands, a
tenth penny, and fifteenth, arising to the sum of 120000.

He took three Subsidies, whereof the last was not above 36000. pounds.

And one benevolence, and an entire sum of the City of Land. of 9688. l. 17. s.
4. d.

Of the Clergy he had twice the tenth and 25000, pound, by way of Subsidy, and
of them and the Commons two Loans, the City of London rated at 6000. l. the
other not definite in proportion, Ex litera missa. Abatistae Barking manu regis
H. 7 Ex lib. Aquiet inter regem and Dudley
but so assessed, as the Commissioners and the Lenders could agree, etc.

But that whereby he heaped up his Mass of Treasure: for he left in Bullion
four Millions and a half, besides his plate jewels, and rich attire of house,
was by sale of Offices, Redemption of penalties, dispensing with Laws, and
such like, to the yearly value of 120000. l.

Henry the eighth.
Henry the eighth his successor, reaping the fruit of his Fathers Labor, gave
ease of burden to his Subjects, his first two years, taking within the
compass of his other thirty four, three tenths of the Commons, four
fifteens, six Subsidies, whereof that in An. quarto amounted to 160000 l. And
that in An. the 7. to 110000. l.

Tonnage he had and poundage also, besides many other taxatious, loans, and
benevolences, which I here purposely omit, because I hasten to an end; I will
therefore touch two of the most remarkable; and those were taken by strength of
prerogative also, etc.

The one was that in Anno the 17. acted by Commissioners, who as themselves
were sworn to the service: so were they to swear all those with whom they did
confer or contract, the rates directed by instructions, as the thirds of all
goods, Offices and lands above ten pounds, and the fourth under.

The other about An. the 36. Exacteth out of all goods, Offices, and lands,
from 40 pounds to twenty, eight pence in the pound: and of all above twelve
pence in the pound.

And amongst the many Loans, there is none more notorious than that of the 14.
which was ten pound in the hundred, Ex instruct: orig. an. 14. H. 8.
of all goods, jewels, utensils, and Land from twenty to three hundred pounds,
and twenty Marcks of all above, as far as the Subjects fortune revealed by
the extremity of his oath would reveal.

And to the Revenues of his Crown, he added a mass of treasure, by an inhumane
spoil of sacred Monuments, and impious ruin of holy Churches, if Gods
blessing could have accompanied so foul an act.

Edward the sixth.
EDward the sixth his son, besides Tonnage and Poundage for life, in Anno the
1. received of his Lay subjects six fifteens; and of both three Subsidies,
leaving one of the temporality ungathered with his sister.

Queen Marie.
QVeen Marie remitted in Anno primo of her Reign, yet was she enforced to
press upon her people; and besides the Loan in Anno 1. for term of life
granted unto her by Parliament, she laid an imposition of six shillings
eight-pence upon Wines; and a new imposition upon French Wines, and took
besides five fifteens of the Commons: and of them, and of the Clergy three
years Subsidies.

Queen Elizabeth:
QVeen Elizabeth her Sister, of happy memory succeeding, besides diverse Loans
of her people, and others in foreign parts, with the imposition upon clothes
and French wines, had by grant of her subjects thirty eight fiftteens, twenty
Subsidies, of the Commons, and eight and twenty of the Clergy: All which
together rose to a sum of two Millions and 800000. pounds.

Thus having at the last drawn down the many and mighty pressing burdens of
this Commonweal, which were, and have bin taken, either by prerogative power,
or by general grant, I hope by this time you perceive that His Majesty's
Taxations are not, nay have not been so frequent or usual, so many or
intolerable; nor yet, either in quantity or quality to them in any degree
comparable.

Let us then see, in what or wherein His Majesty has transcended: or wherein,
or by what means those few (compared to this multitude) should lie so heavy,
and be such a gnawing corrosive unto the subjects heart, that he, and he alone
of all his Predecessors (excepting two and they had Competitors) must be by
these firebrarnds of strife, and the very tempests of sedition, thus hatefully
detracted; scorned and vilified.

Is it for Tonnage, or Poundage? why that was taken by Edw. the second, Edward
the third, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, Edw. the fourth,
Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth, and Edw. the sixth.

Is it for ships, or ship money? why that was taken likewise by Will. the
Conqueror, Ed. the second, Ed. the third, and Rich. the second.

Is it for Monopolies? why that was first invented by Henry the sixth, and so
has since continued.

Is it for ^essing all men by the Poll, or head? why that was done by Edward
the first, Richard the second, and Henry the sixth.

And yet I pray you, understand how it came to him, and observe the cause that
first drew him into this want, and thus exhausted his Treasure, it was by
reason of our good Brethren of Scotlands rising, (mistake me not, for I do not
mean their fleshly, but their spiritual rising) who, like the Ammonites and
Moabites were to the children of Israel, so were they at that present to us,
like Thorns in our eyes, and Goads in our sides.

And thus, you see how far short his Majesty is, or has been of his
Predecessors to lay unusual, and unheard of taxations upon us; their little
fingers having been heavier to them, than hitherto his Majesty's loins have
been to us.

If then Hidage and Scutage, corn, wool, fleece, lamb, and other provisions;
if tonnage and poundage, if ships, shipping, men, and moneys, if fessing by the
Parish, by Cities and Boroughs, by Cenementale, or per Capita hominum, from the
Beggar to the Duke, if new Aides and Monopolies, if the twentieth, thirtieth,
fourtieth, fifteenth, thirteenth, twelfth, tenth, ninth, eighth, seventh,
fifth, and a third part of our Estates, goods, lands, and movables; if these,
I say, and many other grievous and heavy impositions, and Burdens (as yet by
him unpractised) have been heretofore frequently and usually taken, and
leavied, as well by prerogative power, as general grant; how then can his
Majesty's taxations be accounted unusual, his proceedi illegal, and his
government tyrannical.

Has he pawned the Imperial Crown of the Land, as Ed. the 3. and Hen. the 5
did.

Has he laid to gage his royal Robes and Kingly ornaments, as Hen. the 3. did.

Has he to repair the breach of his own revenues, resumed the possessions of
his people, as Ed. the 2. R. the 2. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Ed. 4. and Hen. the seventh
has done.

Has he of purpose, lost his great Seal, thereby enforcing you to buy your
Liberties, as Rich. the first did.

Has he alienated, or sold the possessions of the Crown, as H. the 3. Hen. the
8. and Queen Elizabeth did.

Has he done these things, is he guilty, or can he be justly charged with
them, if not, seek ye not then to manacle his hands, or tie his feet in
fetters, because it is unlawful to touch the Lords anointed; and do but
remember that he is our King, a man, and no God.

But put case be has, why, when neither frugality, or sale of Lands, would
stop the gulf of want; our Princes have been so near beset, as with N^^^^^
and Anthonius the Emperors to sell and pawn their Jewels, as for example:

The Archbishop of York had power from Hen. the 3. in Anno the 26. (he then
being in Wars beyond Sea) Impignorandi, Jocalia Regis, ubicunque in Anglia, pro
pecunia perquirenda. Rot. Parl. anno 26 H; 3 M; 1 Rot. Parl. Claus. anno 2 Ed.
1 M; 7 Parl. anno 3 H; 4


Edward the first sends Aegidius Andevar, Ad Iocaliasua impignoranda.

Hen. the 4. in Anno the 3. to a Merchant for money, Invadiavit Tabellam, and
Tressellas suas Argenteas de Hispania.

Hen. the 6. gageth and sells to the Cardinal of Winchester, and others, in
Anno the 10. many parcels of his rich Jewels. Parl. anno 10 H; 6 M; 13.


And the late Queen Elizabeth, in the end of her days did the like, to ease her
Subjects with many in the tower.

And yet me thinks, I hear some whisper in mine ear, and say, that his
Fathers funeral, and his engagements left in his owre Royal Marriage, and the
Queens entertainment, his Princely Childrens Births, and their Royal
Educations, his Sisters calamities, and his Nephews infortunities, his
Ambassadors sending, and Ambassadors coming, the repair of the Queen Mother,
and her sending away, (a Sea of treasure this way exhausted from him) are
sufficient Arguments herein, (if there were none other as there are many) to
clear his actions and innocence, and utterly condemn their malice and
impudency.

And thus having, I hope, fully cleared this point by our own examples and
authorities, let us, I pray you, throw our selves a little further, and
observe, and mark the State, practice, and government of foreign Nations
herein, and it will express a little more life, and add a true luster to it.

And first, to begin with the Romans when they had gained the Monarchy of the
world, so, as all Kingly power did rest in their Emperor.

Julius Caesar.
Julius Caesar laid the first imposition upon foreign merchandises (says
Suetonius) and that imposition was, Octava rerum pars, which is more by a fifth
part, than our highest imposition in England, for it is 2s. 6 pence upon the
pound.

Augustus Caesar.
Next, Augustus Caesar, about the time of our Saviors Birth, sent out an
Edict, whereby he did tax all the world, and that tax was Capitatio, or an
imposition super Capita hominum, though the certainty thereof does not appear,
but the Poll money, which our Savior himself did pay, and wrought a miracle to
pay it, seems to be a high imposition, for the piece of money taken out of the
fishes mouth, which is called a Dedrachma or Stater, is said to be worth 2s.
6d. sterling, which being for himself and Peter, that is 15d. sterling was
given for a Poll, which must needs amount to an infinite thing, if it were
collected out of all the world, then subject to the Roman Empire.

Tyberius.
Then Tyberius, who succeeded Augustus, took the 100 part of the price of all
things bought and fold within the Empire.

Caligula.
After him Caligula the Emperor laid an imposition upon all Suits in Law, and
took the fortiet part of the things sued for, set a price upon the Plaintive,
if he compounded, or were nonsuited; and set a tax upon every Marriage
contracted, or made within the whole Empire.

Vespasian.
Vespasian took more meaner, and homelier matters, for he took by way of
imposition, a part of every poor man's labor, and Beggars Alms, and likewise
set an Impost upon Urine and pleased himself with this Apothegme, Dulcis Odor
lacri, ex re qualibet.

Severus.
Severus the Emperor did impose upon the dishonest gain of the Stews, and took
a part of the prostituts hier, ((...) the Bishop of Rome does at this day) and
all the Emperors before Tr^^^^, took the twentieth part of all legacies, and
Lands, descended as things unlookt for, and therefore the Heirs and Legatories
might spare a part thereof.

Nicephorus.
Nicephorus, one of the Emperors of the East, did not only take (Fumaria
Tributa) smoke money out of every chimny, but he laid an imposition upon every
man's estate, that grew suddenly rich upon a strong presumption, he had found
some hiden treasure, which did belong to the Emperor by prerogative.

I could with a little more search, find out other impositions of several
kinds, set by the Ancient Emperors upon the Heads of Beasts, upon the Tyles of
houses, and upon every pane of glass in windows; but let this suffice, how
high they esteemed, and how far they extended their prerogative in point of
impositions.

I come now to the Kings and Princes of other Countries round about us, and let
us see whether they have not, or do not make more profitable use of their
prerogative than his Majesty has done.

France.
And first for France, the most ancient and chiefest of the Neighbor
Kingdoms, the impost, not only upon Merchandises, but also upon Lands goods
and persons within the realm, are so many in number and in nature, so diverse
as it is a pain to collect them all.

La Tallie, Le Tallon, Les Aides, Les equibolents, Les equipolents, Les Crues,
or Augmentations of diverse kinds, Le Tropi, or Benevolence, La Gabelle, upon
Salt, amounting to an exceeding great value, the impost of Wines, Le haulte
passage, or demaine Foreign, La Marchandises, exported, Le solid de
cinequantes, with many other, which for brevity I pass over, that are laid and
leavyed upon the Subjects, by the absolute power and prerogative of the King.

Spain.
The next is Spain, where there is a general Imposition, by the name of
Alcavala, imposed as well upon the Nobility as the Commons, which was at first
raised by Alphonsus the twelfth, to expel the Moors; but afterward it was
made perpetual, and is now a principal part of the Royal patrimony.

Guttieres de Gabellis: this imposition was at first but the twentieth part;
but afterward it was raised to the tenth part of every man's estate, which does
far surmount the highest imposition that ever was laid in England by the
Kings prerogative, without consent of Parliament.

This Alcavella is an imposition within the Land: but the imposition upon
Merchandises exported and imported are far more higher; for upon the In-gate
of Indian spices into Portugal the King of Spain laid the greatest rates that
ever were set in Christendom: although upon the out-gate they were more
moderate.

Italy.
In Italy the Impositions and Gabell set upon every kind of thing by the States
and Princes there, are intolerable; and in especial, upon the Towns and
Territories that are subject to the great Duke of Tuscany, where there is not a
root nor an herb, nor the least thing that is necessary for the life of man
bought or sold in any Town, but there is a Gabell or Imposition paid for it,
where no Inne-holder, Baker, Brewer, or Artificer can exercise his trade, but
the great Duke will share with him in his gain, where no man can travail by
Land or by Water, but at every Barge, at every Ferry, at every Wharf or Key;
and at every gate of a Town, the Gabeller arrests him; and is ready to set upon
him naked, to search what goods he has about him, for which he ought to pay a
Gabell.

The Popes Territories.
In the Popes Territories, the impositions which his Holiness does lay upon
his Subjects, as a temporal Prince, are as many and as heavy as those that are
leavyed by the Duke of Tuscany.

I will therefore omit to speak of the Exactions of the Court of Rome, which
are infinite and in another kind, which long lay heavy upon all the Western
Countries of Christendom, until of late years some nations did free
themselves thereof, by rejecting the yoke of the Bishop of Rome.

The Seigniorie of Venice.
In the Seigniory of Venice, the Gabells upon the Land are more moderate; than
in other parts of Italy, wherein they observe a profitable and politic
course; for upon the commodities of other nations, which are of goods in their
Commonwealth, they lay the easier impositions, sometimes five, sometimes
seven, sometimes ten in the hundred; and upon all Manufactures imported out of
other Countries, they do lay fifteen shillings of the hundred, which does
exceed the highest imposition in England five in the hundred at the least.

The grand Seignior of Turkey.
The grand Seignior of Turkey does impose sometimes ten, sometimes twenty of
the hundred upon Merchant strangers, who trade into the Levant. And I could
speak of his other Exactions and impositions upon his vassalls; But, that I
think it not meet to compare that Regions Tyrant with the States and Princes of
Christendom.

Denmark.
I could speak of the great Toll which the King of Denmark takes of every
ship, that passes into the Sound, whereas the King of England being the
undoubted Lord of the narrow seas, might take the like Toll, and by the same
right of prerogative, if it pleased him.

The Low Countries.
And last of all, for the Low Countries, those Impositions which they call
Excises paid by the Retailor of Wines, and other Commodities, and not by the
Merchant are the highest, and heaviest in all Christendom (yet grow they rich,
and therefore to draw, trade, and to invite all nations to commerce with them;
and so to make their Country a staple, storehouse, or Magazine for all
Europe; They do set, but easy rates upon Merchandises imported; but when they
have once gotten the commodity into their Country, if any Merchant or other
will export the same again, he shall pay a greater custom.

Thus may it evidently be seen by these foreign examples, and comparisons;
that his Majesty's taxations have been far short of these designs; although I
must confess, that his Majesty of England, is as absolute a Monarch as any
Emperor or King in the world, and has as many prerogatives incendent, and
adherent unto his Crown than any whatsoever, yet does he not hold his Subjects
fit to be beaten with Rehoboams rod, and esteems them too good to be whipped
with Scorpions; And therefore (God be blessed) we have not in England a
Gabellor standing at every Towns-end; we have not a Publican in every Market;
neither do we pay for every bunch of Radish, or branch of Rosemary sold in
Cheap Side; Neither have we any of those devouring Harpies amongst us which do
swarm in other Countries. Nam sordidum putandum est Aurum, quod est lachrimis
Oritur.

And thus having now at length, both by foreign and domestique examples, as
well out of History as Record, plainly proved, and made clear that his
Majesty's Taxations, neither were unusall, his proceedings illegal, nor (as
hitherto) his government tyrannical: Let us I pray you search a little
further, and see if we can find that wedge of gold, or that Babylonish garment,
that throws him into this contempt, and renders him thus odious in the eyes of
his too too zealous people (for true Subjects I dare not call them.)

Me thinks, I hear some lost wretch say, Religion and Liberty.

Rebellion I must confess had never but two Engines to put in practice their
wicked and facinorous designs; and these are they which Machiavillian-like,
under the shadow of fears and jealousies draws the giddy-headed multitude unto
them, to their own confusion: for it has always been a rule in reason, a
trial in experience, and an authority confirmed by the best, that Rebellion
produces horrible effects: for men that are weak in wisdom, violent in will,
weary of quiet, and desirous of change, are easily made serviceable to every
aspiring mind.

But let us see in which of them, or of the breach of which of them, his
Majesty may be found guilty of.

1. Liberty.
And first for Liberty: whose sheep or Oxen has he injuriously taken away?
whole Vineyard, or possessions has he wrongfully detayned? whose wise or
daughter has he ravished or defloured? or whom has he wittingly or willingly
put to death? Nay, has not (in a manner) the very sword of lustice been
snatched from him, and he enforced perforce to yield to that, (which upon my
very soul) his own heart now lamenteth for.

Has he any ways infringed your Magna Charta? Has he trampled upon your
Fundamental Laws or customs? Has he removed your Landmarks, or demolished
your buildings? Is not your Meum and Tuum in your goods, your Lands, and your
estates, your own to dispose of to whom you will, to sell to whom you will, or
consume how you will? has he altered or done any of these things? or is he
about to alter, or do any of them? if not, what makes these mutinies? what
these aspersions? and what these inhumane dissentions?

Oh, but we fear invasion and a sorraign enemy: Be ashamed, o ye of little
wit, and fear not such umbragious shadows, which have hit herto cast you into a
Lethargy of dullness, and stupidity. Open your eyes, and do but consider (if
such a thing should be) who should sustain the greatest loss, his Majesty or
you.

His Majesty a free borne Prince, and Monarchy, to which nothing can be added
more.

Yourselves, subjects; and if invaded and conquered, could be but subjects
still.

His Majesty, a King hereditarily, possessing three Kingdoms, should, for I
know not what, and I know not to whom, subjugate himself, ruin his posterity,
and lose his Kingdoms, which if once lost were never to be regained, nor he,
nor his posterity, ever to be established, but utterly destroyed, and
consounded.

You, as Subjects, if such a thing should be, for I hold it worthy of an if
(because I hold it ridiculous) what lose you, a poor private estate, which
otherwise may soon be lost, and as soon recovered.

He is our King, and borne to command; we are his Subjects, and bound to obey;
would we not then think it mere folly, and madness in him to disinvest, and
utterly throw away from him and his posterity, this Royal Sovereignty, and
willingly yield to base servility, I think we should, as if the greatest
Princes in the world should envy the estate of some poor deformed Pilgrim.

Oh, but here lies the Riddle, here lies Anguis in herba and this is the Ivy
knot for which I want a Mawle to penetrate and break in sunder: But sure it is
a bone the Devil has cast in among you to gnaw upon, which I hope God in his
good time will break in sunder, or else break his jaws that first threw it in.

For take away Sovereign authority and government, and then shall ambition
strike free home; Pride shall disdain obedience, malice proceed to murder,
theft deprive true possessors, idleness neglect labor, impiety scorn
Religion, raging Tumult violate peace, and turn a happy state into miserable
confusion; whereupon ensues, that open Rebellion is often raised, Virgins
deflowred, holy places polluted, houses burned, Cities defaced, Laws despised,
the whole earth confounded, and the power of God, and Majesty of Kings, either
little regarded, or utterly forgotten: And thus much for your liberty.

Religion.
I come now to Religion, has he not commanded that all the Laws and Statutes
made against Recusants should severely be put in execution? runs not the
current of the Law free? has he not willed, and does he not will, that the
true Protestant Religion established and practiced in Queen Elizabeth's time of
famous memory, should be maintained and professed? Nay, has he not sworn, as
he is a King, and as he hopes for mercy or favor to be shown either to him or
his from God, (a greater asseveration, and from a greater person, I think
cannot be) never to receive any, if he does not really maintain, and seriously
profess the true Protestant Religion, formerly established; and shall we then
doubt? no, God forbid; for seeing in Conscience we are bound to believe an oath
taken by a mean and ordinary subject, how much more are we bound to believe it
coming from so great and good a King?

I cannot dive into the secret thoughts of man, his heart being open unto none:
Bat to the all-seeing eye of God: yet for me to believe otherwise, I should
altogether condemn my self of Barbarism; and in some manner of Atheism;
howsoever I know you have read both his many and often Protestations made in
this matter. To the which I refer you seriously to consider, and Christian-like
to construe, for your further and better satisfaction; and leave the event to
him who far better knows when and where to give, than we know how, or what
to ask.

And be not like to those greedy Fowls, that would have eaten up the Sacrifice
of Abraham, before it could be offered with due solemnity unto God; Nor to that
cruel murderer in Egypt, that went about to stifle infants in their birth: Nor
like to that envious Sanballat, which suggested slanderous suspicions against
the builders of the Temple, before the Scaffolds were set up. But stay your
time, firmly believe, and God will give a remedy if there be a fault: and do
not nuzzell up your selves in that horrid and hellish Doctrine, That it is
lawful for a Subject (either in point of Liberty or Religion) to take up Arms
against their lawful and anointed Sovereign: for let me tell you, (and that
truly) that it is but a very deceitful, and mere Jesuitical position, it
being neither justifiable by the Law of God, tolerable by the Law of Nations,
nor yet commendable by the Law of Nature; for Nature should abhor it, all
nations (excepting Rebels) do detest it, and the very word of God it self
does utterly forbid it, and condemn it: And thus much for our Religion.

And now having finished what my intentions were, and finding that neither
Taxations, Proceedings, Government, Liberty, of Religion can be, or are the
true grounds (although sinisterly imagined) of these growing evils, these
distraction (...)ares, and jealousses, what shall I say, nay what may be said?
Nam quo me vertam nescio: Be amazed therefore ye o heavens, and startle o ye
earth, to think, that Cassius, yea, and Brutus should stab Caesar too:
Wherefore, as the Prophet Jeremiah says, so I conclude; O that my head were a
fountain of water, and mine eyes a river of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the sins of this people; and to send a period to these evils.

FINIS.

