THE Ages of Sin, or Sins Birth and grows. With the Stepps, and Degrees of
Sin, from thought to final Impenitencie.
emblem of Suggestion
1 Suggestion.
Original -- Concupiscence Does make
Our Nature like a foul great -- Bellyed Snake:
For, were not Satan apt to tempt to Sin;
Yett, Lustful -- Thoughts would breed and brood, Within:
But, happy. He, that takes These Little- Ones,
To Dash their Brains (Soon) against repentant -- Stones.
emblem of Rumination
2. Rumination.
When lust has (thus) Conceived It brings forth Sin,
And Ruminating-thoughts Its Shape begin.
Like as the Bears oft-licking of her whelps,
That foul deformed Creatures Shape much helps.
The danger's great, our Sinful thoughts to Cherish,
(...) stop thire growth, or thy poor Soul will perish.
emblem of Delectation
DELECTATION. 3
Jf, Sinful Thoughts (once) nestle in man's heart --,
The Sluice is open, Delight (then) plays its part:
Then, like the old-Ape hugging in his arms,
His Apish-young-Ones; Sin, the Soul be charms:
And, when our Apish impious-Thoughts delight us,
Oh, then, (alas) most mortally They bite us.
emblem of Consent
CONSENT. 4
For, where Sin works Content, Consent will follow;
And, This, the Soul, into Sins Gulf, does swollow.
For, as two rav'ning Wolves (for, it is their kind)
To suck Lambs-blood, do hunt with Equall-minde:
Even so, the Soul and Sin Consent, in One,
Till, Soul and Body be quite overthrown.
emblem of Act
5 Act.
Sin and the Soul (thus) having stricken Hands,
The Sinner (now) for Action ready stands;
And Tyger-like swallowes-up, at One-bitt,
What ever impious Prey his Heart does fit:
Committing Sin, with eager greedyness,
Selling his Soul to work All wickedness.
emblem of Iteration
Iteration. 6
From eager -- Acting Sin, comes Iteration,
Or, frequent Custom of Sins perpetration;
Which, like great Flesh-Flies liting on raw-Flesh,
Though often beat-off, (if not killed) come afresh:
Hence, Be'lzebub is termed Prince of fflesh-fflies,
'Cause Sin, still, Acts, until (by Grace) It Dies.
emblem of Gloriation
GLORIATION. 7
Custom in Sin takes Sense of Sin away,
This makes All-Sin seem but a Sport, a play:
Yea, like a rampant-Lyon, proud and Stout,
Jnsulting* over his Prey, staulking about,
The Saucy-Sinner boasts and braggs of Sin.
As One (oh woe) that does a City win.
emblem of Obduration
8 Obduration.
When Sin brings Sinners to this fearful pass,
What follows, but a hard Heart -- * Brow of brass*
A Heart (I say) more hard then Tortess-back;
Which, nether Sword nor Axe can hew or hack;
Judgments nor Mercies, Treats nor threats can cause
To leave-off Sin. To love or fear Gods Laws.
emblem of Impenitency
9 FINALL-IMPENITENCY.
And (now, alas) what is Sins last Extent?
A hard-Heart makes a Heart Jmpenitent.
For, can a Leopard change his Spotted Skin?
No, Nor a Heart accustomed (thus), his Sin
Then, Conscience, headlong, casts Jmpenitence,
With horrid ffrights of Hellish Recompense.
^a. v. L. fecit*

