AESOP Improved OR, Above three hundred and fifty FABLES, MOSTLY AESOP'S.

With their MORALS, Paraphrased in English VERSE.

Amounting to about one hundred and fifty more than do appear to have been so
rendered by any other Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside
near to Mercers-Chappel, and at the Bible on London Bridge under the Gate. 1673.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
It Is commonly acknowledged by learned men, that Aesops Fables, or the Book so
called, is one of the wisest, as well as pleasantest moral books of its
bigness, in the world. [It was so generally read in old time as that it became
a Proverb when they would say such a one was a very Idiot, or Ignoramus, to say
to him (...), that is, thou have not yet read Aesop. [That it is commonly read
in Grammar Schools ought to be taken for no disparagement to it, seeing the
like may be said of Tullie's Offices, a book of so profound wisdom, that a
famous Privy Counsel-Ior to Qu. Elizabeth is said to have always carried it
about him. [Men, and children, may read the same books, but for different ends
and purposes. Men may read those books for their Profundity which Children read
for their pleasantness. Or men may read the same books for their Solidity
wisdom, and Judgment, which is in them, which children are taught merely for
their fancy, style, and language. [Doubtless the famous Oglesby had never
provided so elaborate a Translation for but one hundred and twenty Fables, or
thereabouts, or found encouragement to print but such a number in two volumes,
with excellent Sculptures at a very great charge, and price, if notwithstandlng
the seeming prostitution of that book to the use of children, it had not had a
very great esteem, amongst the wiser sort of mankind. [I am bold to say it is
not beneath the wisest and best man in the world to read Aesops Fables. Else
why are they frequently quoted by one of the greatest Oracles for Learning, and
wisdom, that ever England, if not the world, had, viz. the Lord Verulam, in
his Essays, and other of his excellent writings? [Moreover I could give
instance of several Fables which, as their own Morals do construe them, Ex Gr.
Fab. 194. and Fab. 218.
are of a very pious, and religious import, (as almost all the rest are very
grave prudent, and sober,) and thence it was that I have presumed to say it
would not misbecome, or dishonor the best, as well as the wisest man in the
world to read what Aesop has written.

It has been said that though a person by the name of Aesop, was doubtless the
Author of some of those Fables which go by his name, yet that the book which we
call Aesop's Fable (though they were not all his) is a kind of System or
Pandect, of the choicest Observations of several Ages, delivered to the world
by way of Fables.

Certainly Aesop's Fables is a book not only to be read, and contemplated but
to be followed and practiced; and may serve to guide and govern our civil,
domestical, and political affairs, (in many cases) as the Mariners compass
does direct his Steerage, and conduct his voyage.

Give me leave to say that a due observation of some few Fables in this little
book, I mean a due compliance with the wise directions therein given, had
preserved diverse individual persons, and not only persons but Families, not
only Families but kingdoms, and nations, from those courses which have proved
to be their ruin.

Socrates that great Moral Philosopher (who in the judgment of Apollo was the
wisest man on earth) but a little before his death, translated one or more of
Aesops Fables into Greek verse.

All which things considered no man's Profession can be too grave, solemn or
sacred to permit him the reading, translating, or improving of Aesops Fables.
Yet I my self, I think, should hardly have done it, had I not been constrained
to concern my self for some time with the education of youth, and thereby
invited to it, both for their advantage, and my own diversion. [True it is that
Mr. Oglesby has helped the world to a Translation of some part of Aesops
Fables, which is incomparably good; for such as can reach the sense and price
of it, but certainly to understand so lofty a Poem as that is, requires a
better capacity, and more skill in Poetical phrases, and Fictions, than the
generality of those who are willing to read Aesop's Fables are endowed with.
And doubtless the price of his two excellent Folio's upon Aesop, does as much
exceed most men's purses, as the Style and language thereof does their
capacities. [Moreover there are not above one hundred and thirty two Fables of
that excellent Translation, whereas the book which is now in thy hand
contains about three hundred and fifty.

I have turned the same number of Fables into Latin Hexameter and Pentameter.
If that version by a tolerable acceptance of this shall receive encouragement
to come forth into the world, I purpose that the numbers of both of them shall
exactly answer each to other, that with so much more ease and expedition they
may be read together by such as shall desire it.

The Advantages which I have aimed at in turning Aesops Fables into verse are
first to fix the contents thereof more indelibly upon the minds, and memories
of such as shall read them, common experience showing us that it is easier for
men (to be sure for children) to remember Meter, than Prose; For that reason I
suppose it was that Lilly, and several other Grammarians have put diverse of
their Rules into Verse. Secondly, To insinuate the excellent sense and grave
counsels, therein contained into the minds of old and young with more delight
and pleasure.

As for the Morals of each Fable I have generally kept to those which are
annexed to the Fables in Latin (as seeming to be most authentic) but where I
found any moral (as I thought) short and defective, I have taken the liberty to
add to it, where dark and obscure, I have labored to explain it, and where I
found the same Morals repeated over and over, I have presented thee with some
variety, which I hope may render the work more profitable, than it would
otherwise have been, as the putting of it into meter with some little admixture
of humor and fancy, (at leastwise attempted) was designed to render it more
pleasant. [This is generally printed as correctly as other English books are,
but here and there a fault has escaped the press which has perverted the
sense, and is such as I am heartily ashamed of, for which the best amends. I
could make thee was to put such mistakes into a Table of Errata where thou
may see them corrected. [I hope a small Apology may serve; for having brought
in Aesop at several turns speaking like one of us, or according to the English
mode and dialect, or using Expressions and Allusions much more novel and
modern, than was the time he lived in; for why should that be more a Solecism
than to make him speak English? (which was never his language) or by what means
could we cause his drift and scope to be better understood by English men? (who
best apprehend and are most pleased with their own Idioms) moreover I think our
so doing is very justifiable by the Figure Prosopopeia which is greatly usual
amongst those whose way of writing is any thing toward Burlesque.

I have heard of a master, who told one that was his Scholar, that he would
never be able sufficiently to requite him for that he first taught him to know
the worth of Horace. I am bold to say he that shall bring any person to know
the worth of Aesops Fables so as to make the best use that may be made thereof,
shall by that oblige and serve him altogether as much, as he did his pupil who
brought him in love with Horace. For he that shall steer his course by the wise
directions given in Aesops Fables, will be thought by them that know him, to be
as prudent, as Aesop himself was wise and witty. Reader it is at thy choice in
what language (of those thou understandest) thou will read Aesop (for I think
he is in most) or whether thou will read him in Verse, or in Prose, and if in
verse, whether in this Translation, or in another [only 150 of these Fables I
think thou can not find translated into English meter, any where else) but
one way or other thou should read Aesop over and over, if I were worthy to
advise thee; Let thy Sex, Capacity, Quality, (I was about to add profession, or
Age) be what it will be, and be guided by him as an Oracle in many cases, which
being done, I have little doubt, but Aesop may leave thee both wiser and better
than he found thee.

HAving perused this Version of Aesops Fables in English Verse, We think it
very worthy the Reading of all sorts of Persons, and therefore of Public View,

Tho. Singleton. Tho. Houghton, Master of the Haberdashers Free School on
Bunhill.


A Table of the principal Errata.
Good Reader,
Be pleased not to censure any thing in this book, which thou do stumble at,
till thou have consulted the Table of Errata, and be so just, as not to charge
any thing upon the Author which is corrected in this Table.

PAge 5. line 1. leng-ears, read Long-ears. Fab. 8. l. 2. r. At him he laugh't
and jear'd most scornfully. Fab. 9. have you those, r. these? Fab. 14. Mor.
fools, r. folks. Fab. 23. hair-brained, r. hare-braind. Fab. 27. as that the
fox, r. At that the Fox. Fab. 29. nubled, r. nubbled. Fab. 30. Lovers, r.
Louvres. Fab. 31. 'Tia not, r. It Is not. Fab. 35. That to surprise a Fox, r. a
Wolf. Fab. 38. their dogs, r. your dogs. Fab. 45. poor hearts, r. poor naggs.
Fab. 46. believe her, r. believe hur. Fab. 55. He said, r. one cried. F. 68.
the bruit, r. the brute. Fab. 71. And o expect, r. and to expect, Fab. 87. An
Eagle hires, put a comma there. Fab. 106. l. 7, r. All Is well as yet, said she,
but when by some. Fab. 113. They heap, r. They keep. Fab. 123. Eremine, r.
Ermine. Fab. 128. from forfeiting, r. surfeiting. Fab. 138. mariners, r.
mariners. ibid. Elah, r. Ela. ibid. Mor. r. Orpheus be. Fab. 141. scrobbed, r.
scrubbed. prichy, r. prickly. but but, dele one but. Fab. 142. Wigeon, r.
Widgeon. Fab. 43. l. ult. r. The swallow, (though such nets were not his
match.) Fab. 148. All the Dogs (put in) at me. Fab. 150. In days of yer, r.
yore. Fab. 151. Down goes, r. Down go. Fab. 173. l. ult. r. masters. Fab. 181.
Thee to beg silver, r. shillings. Fab. 181. Mor. stringy, r. stingy. Fab. 203.
in, r. near the Dog Days. Fab. 205. l. 2. humble, r. tumble. Fab. 201. l. 2. r.
glad. Fab. 3. lib. 2. r. of the Cock and the Partridges. Fab. 4. lib. 2. of the
dog, r. of the bag that was found. Fab. 18. lib. 2. have brutes, r. have leave.
Fab. 20. lib. 2. Mor. puts, r. do put. p. 161. l. 3. r. wives. Fab. 36. lib. 2.
l. 4. mother, r. father. Fab. 41. lib. 2. Mor. any, r. many.

An Index of the ensuing Fables, the first number shows the Book, and the
second the Fable in it.
A
Ambassador and the Trumpeters. 1.161. Ape and her Cubs. 1.119. Ape and her
young. 1.99. Ape and the Dolphin. 2.94. Ape and the Fox. 2.33. Arion and the
Dolphin. 1.138. Ass. 1.90. and 75. Asses. 2.117. Ass and the Calf. 1.147. Ass
the Ape and the Mole. 1.157. Ass and the Fox. 2.118. and 1.41. Ass and the
Hare. 1.229. Ass and the Horse. 1.77. Ass and the Jeaster. 1.193. Ass and
Jupiter. 1.205. Ass and the Lion. 2.75. Ass that found no end of his toil.
1.203. Ass that served a bad master. 1.205. Ass and the Traveller. 1.127. Ass
and the Wolf. 1.201. Sick Ass and the Wolves. 1.201. Ass and the Frogs. 2.119.
Ass and the Raven. 2.120. Ass and the Fox. 2.121. Ass that was the Trumpeter.
1.129.
B
BAt, the Bramble, and the Cormorant. 2.67. Bat and the Weasel. 2.114. Bald
man. 1.95. Bear and the Bees. 1.175. Beasts and the Fish. 1.160. Beaver. 2.5.
Be master. 2.91. Be and Jupiter. 2.45. Beetle and the Eagle. 1.130. Birds.
1.196. Birds and Beetles. 1.174. Birds and Beasts. 1.34. Birds and the Owl.
1.133. Bird and her young ones. 1.106. Blackamore. 2.84. Boar and the Ass. 1.8.
Boar and the Countreyman. 1.114. Wild-Boar and the Fox. 2.68. Boy and Fortune.
2.31. Boy that kept sheep. Boy and his Mother. 2.12. Boy and the Thief. 1.111.
Bull and the Goat. 1.98. Bulls and the Lion. 1.103. Bull and the Mouse. 1.115.
C
CAlf and the Hind. 2.44. Camel. 1.93.2.123. Cardinal. 1.162. Fat Capons and
the lean. 1.149. Cat and the Cock. 2.18. Cat turned into a Woman. 1.50. City
Mouse and Country mouse. 1.9. Cock. 1.1. Cock and the Cat. 1.61. Cocks and the
Patridg. 2.3. Two Cocks that fought. 2.44. Cockles. 2.87. Collier and the
Fuller. 1.53. Covetous man. 2.70. Covetous and the envious man. 1.107. Country
fellow and the Lawyer. 1.224. Country man and the Apple. 1.68. Country man
and the Bullock. 1.100. Countreyman and Fortune. 1.97. Countreyman and
Hercules. 1.100. Countreyman and the Horse. 1.5. Countreyman and the mouse.
1.167. Countreyman and the Snake. 1.78. Countreyman and the River. 1.144.
Countreyman and the Wheat. 1.104. Cornish Chough. 1.29. Crab-fishes. 1.88. Crab
and the Fox. 2.101. Crow and the dog. 2.105. Crow and the Fox. 1.11. Crow and
the Pitcher. 1.109. Crow and the Raven. 2.104. Crow and the Wolves. 1.135.
Cuckoo and the Hawk. 1.146.
D
DOg and the Ass. 1.13. Dog and the Cock. 2.65. Dog and the Butcher. 1.47. Dog
and the Lion. City-dogs and Country dogs. 1.169. Dogs. 2.97. Dog that would
bite. 1.92. Dog that was invited to Supper. Dog and his master. 1.173. Dog that
worried his masters Sheep. 1.213. Dog and the Ox. 1.64. Dog and the Sheep.
1.48. Dog and the Wolf. 2.38. Dog and the Shadow. 1.4. Dormice and the Oak.
1.172.
E
EAgle. 2.130. Eagle and the Conie. 1.216. Eagle and the Beetle. 1.130. Eagle
and the Crow. 1.63. Eagle and the Fox. 2.15. Eagle and the Jack-daw. 1.10.
Eagle and the Magpie. 1.165. Eagle and the man. Eagle and the Raven. 2.16.
Earths labor. 1.21. Eele. 1.156. Elm and the Osier. 1.82. and 101. Two
enemies. 2.30.

F
FAther that persuaded his Son in vain. 1.212. Fellow that refused a Clyster.
1.200. Fir Tree and the Bramble. 1.104. Fishes. 1.122. Fish that leaped out of
the Drying Pan. 1.159. Fisherman. 2.25. Fishermen. 1.128. and 2.93. Fisherman
and the little Fish. 1.82. Flea. 2.60. Flea and the man. 2.61. Fly. 1.155.2.46.
Flies. 2.100. Fly and the Pismire. 1.30. Fox. 2.152. Fox and the Bramble. 2.19.
Fox and the Cat. 1.125. Fox and the Crocodile. 2.20. Fox and the Eagle. 1.59.
Fox and the Grapes. Fox and the He-goat. 2.1. Fox and the Hunters. 2.22. Fox
and the Libard Fox and the Lion. 1.48. Fox and the Stork. 1.27. Fox that had
lost his tail. Fox and the Weasel. 1.44. Fox and the women. 1.148. Fox and the
Ass. 2.121. Fox that commended Hares flesh. 1.221. Fox that was hungry. Fortune
teller. 2.8. Fowler. Fowler and the Blackbird. 2.10. Fowler and the Chaffinch.
1.176. Fowler and the Partridge. 2.53. Fowler and the Ring-dove. 1.54. Fowler
and the Viper. 1.54 Friends and the Bear, 1.94 Frogs, 2.64. Two frogs, 2.90.
Frog and the Fox, 1.91. Frogs and their King, 1.17. Frog and the Ox, 1.31.
G
GArdener and his dog, 2.76. Goat and the Wolf, 2.99. Geese, 1.80. Geese and
the Cranes, 1.80. Goat and the Lion, Gnat and Lion, 2.133. Goose, 1.117.
Governor that took Bribes, 1.231. Gourd and the Pine Tree, 1.134. Grasshopper
and the Pismire. Gnat and Be, 1.228.
H
HAre and Tortoise, 2.54 Hares, 2.112. Hare and the Fox, 1.222. Hares and the
Frogs, 2.49. and 1.23. Hare and the Sheep, 1.25. Heart, 1.36. Heart and the Lion.
Harper, 2.103. Hawk and the Pidgeon, 1.142 Hawks that fell out, 1.230.
Hedg-hog, 1.209. Heifer and the Ox, 1.120. Hen that laid golden eggs. Hen and
the Fox, 2.151. Hen and the Swallow, 2.122 Hermit and the Soldier, 1.187.
Hind, 2.72. Hind Calf. Hind and the Lion, 2.73. Hind and the Vine, 2.74. Horse
and the Ass, 1.33. Horse and the Lion, 1.32. Horse and those that mocked him,
1.223. Hog and the horse, 1.185. Horse and the Stag, 1.45. Hound that was
despised, 1.22. Howpe, 1.182. Jealous husband, 1.199. Husband and the wife,
1.199. and 2.99. Husband and his two wives, 2.62. Husbandman, 1.192. Husbandman
and the dogs, 1.57. Husbandman and his sons, 2.24.1.51. Husbandman and the
Stork, 1.60. Husbandman, and the Poet, 1.210.
I
JAckdaw, 2.108. Jackdaw and the Pidgeon 2.107. Jackdaw and the Sheep, 1.65.
Jester, 1.193. Jester and the Bishop, 1.181. Jupiter, 2.110. and 59. Jupiter
and the Ape, 1.81. Jupiter and the Crow, 2.34.
K
KId and the Wolf, 1.24- and 74. King and the Apes, 1.126. Kings-Fisher, 2.92.
Sick Kite, 1.15. Bald Knight, 1.95.
L
LArk, 2.69. Lamb and the Wolf, 1.49. Lark and her young, 1.106. Libard and the
Fox, 1.123. Linnet and the Boy, 1.180. Log and the Oxen, 1.179. Lion; the Ass
and the Fox. Lion and the Bear, 2.66. Lion and the Bull, 1.85.2 39. Lion and
the Fox, 1.43. Lion and the Frog, 1.69. Lion and the Hunter, 1.110. Lion and
the Hog, 1.227. Lion and the Man. Lion and the Mouse, 1.189. and 1.14. Lion and
other beasts, 1.5. and 73. Lion the She Goat, 1.78. Lion that was past his
strength 1.12. Lion that loved a Countreymans daughter, 2.40. Lioness and the
Fox, 2.41. Lion and the Wolf, 2.81. Lion and the Horse, 1.32.
M
MAn and Apollo, 2.4. Man and his friends, 1.220. Man and his Money-bags,
1.233. Man and his wooden-god, 2.21. Man and the Satyr, 1.113. Man and his
Wife, 1.188. Mercury and Tiresias, 2.96. Members and the belly, 1.40. Mercury
and the Statuary, 2.95. Mice and the Cat, 2.32. Mountains bringing forth, 1.21
Mouse and the Cat, 1.204. Mouse that was bred in a chest, 1.140. Mouse and the
Frog, 1.3. Mouse and the Kite, 1.207. City-Mouse and Countrey-mouse. Mule,
2.36. Mule and the horse, Mole and its Dam. 2.57.
N
NEat-herd, 2.129. Nightingal and the Hawk, 1.226.2.17. Nurse and the Wolf,
1.86. Nut-tree, Ass and the woman, 1.202.
O
OAk and the Reed, 1.82. and 101. Old man, 1.164. Old man and death, 1.232. and
2.28. Old man and the young fellow that stole his Apples, 1.225. Old man's son
and the Lion, 2.14. Old Woman and the Devil, 1.170. Old woman and the Maids,
1.76. Owl, 2.86. Ox and the Steer, 1.120.
P
PEach tree and the Appletree, 2.56. Peacock and the Crane, 1.99. Peacock and
the Jackdaw, Peacock and the Magpy, 1.71. Peacock and the Nightingal, 1.66.
Pidgeon, 2.125. Pidgeon and Kite, 2.126. Pigeons and the Kite, 1.18. Pidgeon
and the Magpy, 1.145 Pismire and the Grasshopper, 1.84. Pismire, 2.113. and
1.70. Pismire and the Pidgeon, Physician, 2.37. Pots, 1.96. Priest and the
Pears. 1.183. Pike. 1.217. Pigeon and the Crow. Of one that promised
Impossibilities. 2.63.
R.
RAven and the Fox. 1.11. Raven and the Serpent. 2.106. Sick Raven. Ram and the
Bull. 1.214. Reed and the Olive tree. Rich man. 2.127. Rich man and his
servant. 1.168. River, and its Spring. 1.198.
S.
SAllow and the Axe. 2.55. Satyr and the Countryman. Satyr and the Traveller.
1.113. Seamen. 1.153. Serpent. 2.124. Serpent and the Husbandmen. 2.50. Sheep
and the Shepherd. 1.218. Shepherd. 2.128. Shepherd that turned Seaman. Shepherd
and the Husbandman 1.62. Serpent and the Crab. 2.79. Shepherd and the Sea.
2.13. Shepherd and the Wolf. 2.80. Sick man and the Doctor. 2.9. and 1.72.
Smith and his Dog. 2.35. Snail. 1.208. Soldier and his Horses. 1.177. Sow and
the Bitch. 2.78. Spider and the Gout. 1.139. Spider and Swallow. 1.143. Stag
and the Oxen. 1.42. Sun and the North Wind. 1.89. Swallow and the Crow. 2.85.
Swallow and other Birds. 1.16 Swan. 1.152. and 2.83. Swine and the Dog. 1.178.
and 2.77.
T.
TAnner and Hunter. 1.186. Thief and the Dog. 1.19 Thieves. 2.102. Thrush and
the Swallow. 166. Tiger and the Fox. 1.102. Timber and the Oxen. 1.150.
Tortoise and the Eagle. 1.87. and 2.71. Tortoise and Frogs. 1.171. Travelers.
2.115. Traveller and the Bag of Dates. 2.11. Travelers. 2.89. Trees. 1.151.
Trumpeter. 1.55. Tunie and the Dolphin. 2.7.
V.
VIper and the File. 1.37. Vulture and the Birds. 1, 79.
W.
VVAgoner and Wheels. 1, 219. Wasps, the Partridge and the Husbandman. 2.58.
Wax. 1.191. Weesel and the Mice. 1.67. Wicked man and the Devil. 1.194. Widow
and the green Ass. 1.215. Wild Ass. 2.116. Witch. 2.88. Woman. 2.82. Woman and
the Hen. 2.5. Woman and her husband. 1.197 Woman and her dying Husband. 1.153.
Woman and her Lover. 1.154. Woman and her Maids. 1.76. Woman and the Physician.
2.29. Wood-man. 2.48. Wood and the Countreyman. 1.39. Wolf and the Crane. 1.6.
Wolf and the Dog. 1.56. Wolf and the Lamb. 2.42. and 1.2. Wolf and the Fox.
Wolf and the painted head. 1.28 Wolf and the Porcupine. 1.206. Wolf and the
Sheep. 2.111. Wolf in the Sheep's skin. 1.211. Wolf and the young sow. 1.20
Wolf and the old woman. 2.132. Wolves and the Lambs. 1.38. Worms and the Fox.
2.131. and 1.35.
Y.
YOung fellow that sang at his Mothers funeral. 1.198. Young fellow and the
Cook. Young man and the Cat. 1.50. Young man and the swallow. 2.47. Young man.
Youth that mocked the old man. 1.163. Two young men. 1.46.
AESOP'S Fables.
FAB. I. Of the Cock.
A Dunghil-raking Cock a Jewel found,
Wished with a barley corn his labor crowned
Rather than orient gem, and would exchange
Jewels for barley, that was not so strange:
But Coxecomb as he was, it might have born
Not a grain, but a Granary full of corn.
Mor.
If by base spirits things be valued,
They Will part with Gems, take a grain in their stead.
For their simplicity I have this pique
At them, let them exchange for what they like.
The world's a Dunghill, he a dunghil-cock.
Whoever prefers a morsel to a stock.
A precious pearl's a stock, who cannot epsy
Its worth, has, or deserves, one in his eye.
FAB. 2. Of the Wolf and the Lamb.
A Thirsty Wolf drank at the Fountain head,
A Lamb beneath, who the fierce wolf did dread.
Then came the Wolf, and chid the Lamb, for why
He was resolved he, right or wrong, should die.
May't please you Sir, said th'Lamb, I drank below,
From whence no harm could to your worship flow.
Nay said the Wolf thou muddy did the water,
Of Sire and Dam that hate me you are the daughter.
All the Lambs meek-apologies he scorns,
What if the Woolf will say th'Lambs ears are horns?
Mor.
When small folks to undo it is great ones mind,
With a wet finger they pretenses find.
FAB. 3. Of the Mouse and the Frog.
A Mouse and Frog about the Fens contend,
By dint of spear will bring it to an end.
Each for a spear betakes him to a rush,
They' I fight it out, and no more beat the bush.
But whilst these mighty warriors struggling were
In midst of battle over head and ear,
The Kite, as Lord ot'h manor, in those days
Did seize them both for his, as wafts and strayes.
Mor.
It often happens when two disagree
In comes a third, and both his Vassals be.
FAB. 4. Of the Dog and the Shadow.
A Dog with flesh in's mouth a pond swam over,
Yet his mouth was not stopped, for he craved more.
His mouth did water at an empty shade,
Which the Sun shining on the river made:
(Like cloud for Juno) whilst he searched about
For that, the flesh within his jaws dropped out.
'Twixt cup and lip they say some things are lost,
Nay what is betwixt out lips w' have but almost.
This for my greediness did me befall,
Said he, who wished for to have more than all.
Mor.
They who have Substance and Court shadows too,
Coveting both, do often themselves undo.
He that would cure a dog-like appetite,
Cannot satiate, but must destroy't out right.
FAB. 5. Of the Lion and some other Beasts.
THe King of beasts with some of's subjects went
A hunting, promised, what he never meant,
They should have equal shares of what he took
By Gavell-kind, he for no more would look.
They took a Stag, dividing bred division,
They would have part, but he the whole provision;
I Will have one fourth, said he, as I am best:
A second fourth because I am strongest:
A third, because I took the greatest pain:
And a fourth quarter friendship to maintain.
Mor.
Who hunts with Lion, honey eats with Bear,
Will be made know that they his betters are;
To dwell with thy Superiour's Capital,
Equals will share, but Betters will have all.
FAB. 6. Of the Wolf and the Crane.
A Wolf devoured a Lamb, but make no bones
Of him he could not, for he made sad moanes
A bone stuck in his throat, did howl, and cry,
The other beasts laughed at his misery.
For why, for him their flocks men could not keep,
For he loved mutton, and would run at sheep;
The Crane alone, with long neck, wit as short,
Pitied the Wolf, seeing him all amort,
Put his neck in his throat, cran'd up the bone,
For which some wished it had stuck in his own.
That done, the Crane looked for a recompense:
To expect more, said the wolf, there is no sense;
I spared thy neck which I might have bit off,
More fool the Crane to put it in his trough.
Mor.
Ungrateful mountains midwife, and a mouse
Is thy reward, Sue beggars have a lowse:
Save some men, and if they destroy thee not,
They think it a kindness never to be forgot.
FAB. 7. Of the Country man and the Snake.
A Country man took pity on a snake
Was almost froze to death, him home did take
And laid him by the fire, he felt the heat
So much at last it forced him to retreat.
And then in heat of passion too was he,
Plucked out his sting, as who revenged would be,
And at his Landlord did begin to hiss
(As filled with scorn) deserved it not I wiss.
Said he, when thou were almost dead alas
I ken'd thee not, thou were like snake in the grass.
But now you are come toth' self thou make me say
Woe's me that did a snake in bosom lay.
Mor.
Although the proverb would have folks more wise,
Some bring up birds to pluck out their own eyes.
FAB. 8. Of the Boar and Ass.
Whether long-ears the Boars great tusks did spy,
He laughed to scorn that Duke of Tuscany;
E'ne laugh thy fill, the Boor replied, alas
I scorn to touch thee, cause thou art an ass.
Mor.
Women may talk, some better (I allege)
May steal a horse than some look over the hedge.
FAB. 9. Of the City mouse, and Country mouse.
THe Countrey-mouse the City-mouse invited
Which came to take the air, his fare he slighted
Though he provided of the very best,
His guest was proud (that was the cream 'oth jest.)
Thou honest Boor, said he, when thou to London
Come, thou must visit me, or I am undone,
See City cheer, how tables there are spread:
He came, but heard a noise which he did dread
In the Keyhole, have you these, now and then
Said he, if so, were I at home again.
Rather than scared I Would be with noise like these,
I Would always live like a mouse in a cheese.
Mor.
Poor Country folks have this great happiness,
Though they fare worse they commonly fear less
Than Citizens who do abound in wealth,
Never secure lest't should be lost by stealth,
Or otherwise; whereas at thieves they use
To laugh, who know that they have naught to loose.
No noises in their Key-holes use to be,
Well known to have a Guard of Poverty.
Eutrapelus, with Riches load would he
His foes, that they might not light hearted be,
Nor whistle, like the Cobbler in his stall,
That never could do it, when h' had left his awl
Translated to a rich man; then his nature
Most merry was, when he a poor translatour.
FAB. 10. Of the Eagle and Jack-daw.
THe King of birds had got a nut to crack
To get its Kernel, he both teeth did lack
And skill, I mean, a fish, he could not tell
How to come at, 'twas shut up in a shell.
Jack-daw made bold to offer his advice,
That he to a high Tower would take his rise,
And throw it down from thence, it then would break:
Watching its downfall, he did stand and peak.
He took his counsel, and did throw it down,
The Jack-daw snatched it up being a clown
And a Rook too, who studied to inveagle
His Sovereign Lord and King, by name Mounteagle.
The Eagle said, I Would wont good sight to have,
Now bless my eyes as I do spy a knave;
A due mistrustful foresight I did lack
Who would have thought Jack-daw so arch a crack?
Mor.
Let men take warning by this cheating Elfe,
Lest he that counsel gives, aim at himself.
FAB. 11. Of the Raven and the Fox.
A Raven, that had got a goodly prey,
A Fox came to, gave him the time of day,
Saluted him with many a good morrow,
For Fame's abusing him expressed much sorrow:
Fame says you are black says he, I say you are white
As Swans, or Snow, more like to day than night.
If you can sing as well as you are fair,
Then you have two endowments choice, and rare.
At this did the Raven strut like Crow in Gutter,
And his melodious notes began to utter.
The Proverb, black and proud, did verify,
As proud as black, as black as proud was he.
That done, his meat did soon forsake his mouth,
At which he soon became sad, and uncouth.
That I a Raven such an Ass should be,
He said, to let a Fox crow over me!
Mor.
Thus flatterers are wont to speak us fair
When their intentions to beguile us are.
Fox-lungs consumed the Raven, a presumption
Though It be Fox-lungs are good for a Consumption.
FAB. 12. Of the Lion that was past his strength for Age.
THe Lion, who when young no creature fears,
When old, had all the beasts about his ears:
Boar with his tusks, and with his horns the Bull,
The silly Ass too kicked his belly full:
Calling to mind how cruel he had been
To some of them, it is just says he, I mean
From some of those, and but Retaliation
They whom I vexed should give me this vexation:
But that which greatly does perplex my mind,
Is, their unkindness to whom I was kind.
Mor.
Nor friends, nor foes we ought to multiply
Without cause, or without necessity.
This always ought for to be understood,
True foes will do us hurt, false friends no good.
FAB. 13. Of the Dog and the Ass.
THe silly Ass harpt much on that sad string;
Fawning Dog was made of, like any thing,
By master, and by servants, both, though he
Idle as any Dog had wont to be:
But the poor Ass was laded with Pack-saddles,
And made to carry all their Fiddle-faddles.
Thinks he, if fawning be so good a trade,
I Will take it up my self, and I am made.
His Ass-ship did, at his return, I wiss
Pope-like his master, give his foot to kiss.
For that Dog-trick his master club'd him soundly:
Asses may not, where Dogs may come off roundly.
Mor.
All may not make bold alike, under the rose
Be It said, with most, Kissing by favor goes:
Dogs may be bedfellows, to whom no Peers,
Where the Ass dare not lie, no, for his ears.
FAB. 14. Of the Lion, and the Mouse.
OVer the Lions back some mice did creep,
As he upon green leaves lay fast asleep;
All escaped but one, but one he woke, and took
To make example of, by hook or crook.
Mouse pleaded hard, and this was his great plea,
Lyon's a King, must not a Mouse-trap be;
I know thou could destroy me in a trice
But Eagles catch no flies, Lions no mice.
He gave him quarter, and his liberty
Though he the Lion rid, set him scot-free.
Soon after was the Lion in a snare,
The thankful mouse espied him unaware;
He could do feats, although he could not blunder,
To him he ran, and bit the Knots asunder.
Mor.
Treat poor fools kindly, stroy no mice, for why on
Occasion offered, mice may save a Lion.
FAB. 15. Of the sick Kite.
A Kite was like to die, how I don't know,
For why, they say, no Carrion kills a Crow.
(If he had di'd, well spared have been he might,
One Larks leg's worth the body of a Kite:)
He prays his mother for to pray the Gods
That he might live, else he should die, 'twas ods.
Said she on thy behalf they will not hear me
Though I be earnest, therefore do not jear me;
How often have thou snatched the meat from their Table,
I mean their Altar, when that thou were able?
Mor.
Would thou in trouble, that Heaven should thee stand by?
Be not profane in thy prosperity.
FAB. 16. Of the Swallow and other Birds.
THe Swallow by his wise advice, was known
To spoil the Linseed, when it was first sown;
When it was green, he counseled them again,
But the Birds withstood his counsel, might and main:
When that the Line was come to its maturity,
Spoil it, says he again, for your security.
Having so often bid them to beware
(For he well knew 'twas planted for a snare)
Seeing no counsel would take place, why then
Farewell to Beasts said he, I Will dwell with men.
They seem to me more reasonable of the two,
To dwell with, though in the chimney dwell I do.
Mor.
They who run on when th'banes forbid thrice be,
Even let them wed (as they do) misery.
Who often warned of danger, will not fly,
It Is safest to quit their society,
FAB. 17. Of the Frogs and their King.
FRogs swelled like Toads with Pride croakt for a King,
Thinking a Commonwealth but a mean thing;
Jove gave them a great Beam, King good enough
For them, but that it is said they took in snuff;
Though scared, when first he did the waters jog,
They scorned him when they saw he was a Log:
An active King they want, and cannot settle
Unless that Jove give them a King of mettle.
Then came a Crane which soon began to rout 'em
For why the crabbed Crane did lay about 'em:
They soon discerned which was best of the twain,
A harmless beam or a devouring Crane.
Mor.
Too mild is a good fault in them that rule,
(If any fault be good,) and they who pule
And whine at Rulers too great clemency,
Deserve to feel the smart of tyranny.
A beam does nothing like a Crane annoy:
If it cannot save, neither will it destroy.
FAB. 18. Of the Pigeons, and the Kite.
TIme was with Kite the Pigeons had a war,
Without a King they thought he would them mar;
They chose the Hawk, (that bird with Roman nose)
That by his help they might withstand their foes.
But afterward they found that they were widgeons,
For why like Patridges he used the Pigeons.
His tyranny was worse than war with the Kite
Sovereignty armed his fierceness besides might:
One claw of the Hawk worse than the Kites whole body,
Which made each Pigeon call himself a noddy.
Mor.
Change of condition like to change of Air
Some think will mend them, who then worst do fare.
If it be not too bad, this thou should do,
Keep thy old State, rather than seek a new.
FAB. 19. Of the Thief, and the Dog.
A Thief unto a barking Dog was kind,
Would fill his mouth with bread, he knew his mind
It was to stop his mouth, to bark he might
Not able be, I Will bark if I cannot bite,
Said he, for else thou wilt surely rob this house;
On that account thy breads' not worth a louse.
Mor.
Who gets small gains with utmost hazard, he
Pound-foolish, penny-wise is said to be:
No man that is wise will venture wine for dregs,
Or set his house on fire to roast his Eggs.
Base men for bribes have let great spoil be done,
Some dogs so generous are that they will take none.
FAB. 20. Of the Wolf and the young Sow.
DAme Sow lay in, a wolf so kind and mild
Offered her service for to nurse her child;
A wolf faith she was Nurse to Romulus,
And Remus too, let me be thine-Dame Sus.
Though I have many pigs, yet I have none,
Said the Sow, for Wolves, scarce for our Parson one
These sucking Pigs with me shall go about,
When, as I have pig'd in, I shall pig out
Of the Straw, I wish thou were as far as York,
Old wolf, for why I see thou love young pork.
Mor.
When folks are too officious, I mistrust
Some slippery trick they will serve us when they lust.
For Woolves, and such like never to come to us,
Is sure the greatest kindness they can do us.
I say that greatest kindness is, for why
Their room is better than their company.
FAB. 21. Of the mountains bringing forth young.
MOuntains in Travail fell, and they did lack
An Atlas sure, who else could hold their back?
Or little hills, or Giants they would produce
'Twas thought, at length came forth a little mouse:
Old laughing then, twelve pence a piece there might
Be given for to see that wondrous sight.
Mor.
Great talkers often wander from their scope,
Though they never speak but when their mouth does open;
Often instances of men each age affords,
Sparing in deeds, but lavish in their words.
FAB. 22. Of the Hound despised by his master.
AN aged Hound could not as he had wont
Course Deer, or with his teeth so fasten on it;
For he had almost none: he caught a deer
And let him go again, his master here,
Was full of wrath, chid him, and paid his hide:
But thus he reasoned (taking him aside)
What I was in my youth you may remember,
None July-flowers do look for in December;
Though now I service little do, or none,
Love me for what I formerly have done.
You would be loath ('it is fit you should be told)
To be so served your self when you are old.
Mor.
Good turns should be remembered whilst they last
That did them, though the benefit be past;
It Is a base mind (we ought for to believe)
No longer to pay thanks, than we receive.
FAB. 23. Of the Hares and the Frogs.
In The shady wood the fearful Hares did hear
A certain whirlwind that blew unaware;
At which they start, and quickly run away:
One wiser than the rest, wished them to stay,
'Twas but a wind was whistling for a spurt
That made them dance away, worse scared than hurt.
But the truth was, they then could fly no more,
There was a Fen that they could not get over:
And several Frogs did there lie under water,
Which they supposed betoken'd some great slaughter;
So hair-brained were the Hares and full of fears:
For which one wiser than the rest them jears.
It Is well, says he, that we are swift of foot,
But it were good to add some courage to it.
By Cowardice the Hares their ears have lost,
For Pigs with ears, but Hares without we roast.
Mor.
Who Cowards are, no great feats can go thorough,
But must needs live like Conies in a borough.
FAB. 24. Of the Kid and the Wolf.
A Goat went out to feed, and warned her Kid
Till she came back again for to lie hid,
Kept under lock and key, and open to none;
The wolf o'reheard it, came when she was gone,
And looked for to return, with voice like the dam
Cried, open to me, for I thy mother am:
But the Kid through a chink the wolf did spy,
Kept the door shut, knowing the fallacy.
Mor.
It Is good for children parents to obey,
For doing so, keep out the wolf they may:
Though goats by wolves have counterfeited been,
Through certain crevices they might be seen.
FAB. 25. Of the Heart and the Sheep.
AN action of debt a Heart did bring
Against a Sheep, before a wolf, the thing
The sheep did not deny, the wolf was there,
Though against her the Heart did falsely swear
That she of wheat a bushel him did owe,
Though not one grain she very well did know.
When the wolf was gone, art thou there with thy bears
Sweet Heart said he, now I will have thy ears.
Mor.
To save thy life, or so, go from thy right,
When so it is that Right's overcome by might:
But if thou cheated be by any man,
What is so got, come by it how he can.
FAB. 26. Of the Countryman and the Snake.
A Countryman was angry with a snake,
And to revenge himself an Axe did take;
So wounded him he thought that he would die,
(Though by the Axe seldome's Snakes destiny.)
The countryman became exceeding poor,
After the Snake h' had beaten out of door;
And thought it was for that, invites' the snake
To dwell with him again, who would not take
His offer, for says he, though well I wax,
I dare not dwell so near thee, and thy Axe.
Mor.
When a man's conscience misery does awake,
'Twill irk him to have wronged a very snake.
Though those that injure us, forgive we must,
Yet such we should take care how we do trust.
FAB. 27. Of the Fox, and the Stork.
A little Fox to Supper did invite,
A Stork, it proved his Supper was but light:
(Light Suppers make clean sheets) upon the table
He poured thin White-pot, which the Stork not able
To gather up, the Fox alone did sup
(They say Fox-lungs are rare for to lick up)
The Stork full empty went, empty, but full
Of heaviness, fasting made him less dull.
Resolved to bring the Fox to an arraignment
Or first, or last, for that his entertainment.
When it was time that passage to forget,
Then for the Fox the Stork did spread a net.
Sr. Reynard he desired to be his guest,
His kindness to requite he did his best.
In long-neck't glass with narrow mouth (I trow)
He put his food, good Mr. Fox fall to
Said he, your long and slender neck was made
On purpose sure to fit you for this trade.
His neck was short, and thick, the Stork at last
Told him he must, or stretch his neck, or fast.
At that the Fox was out of countenance
And did conclude he hungry home must dance.
He blushed himself as red as any Fox,
And swelled himself in bigness to an Ox,
As near as e're he could, 'twould not avail,
The Stork h' had flopt in the mouth with a Fox-tail.
Mor.
They say, one good turn does require another,
And when ill turns are done men keep a pother
For to requite them too, a common thing
It is, to give folks as good as they bring.
FAB. 28. Of the Wolf, and the painted head.
A Wolf into a Gravers shop did look,
Whether a Statue for a sheep he took
As he passed by, tumbling about he found
A painted head, whether 'twere square or round,
He found it empty was, and void of sense
And Brains, at which he laughter did commence;
But what I thought, thou art, quoth he, I wiss
A painted head, but an ill headpiece it is.
Mor.
A thick-scull'd fellow that does look acute,
Goes for a wise man whilst that he is mute:
But when he speaks, folks cry that they mistook
Him to be wise, he had a promising look;
Deformed folly is past over lighter,
Folly in beauty set, shines so much brighter.
A well-look'd Coxecomb's a most scorned tool:
Either be wise, or else look like a fool.
FAB. 29. Of the Cornish Chough.
THe Jay with Peacocks feathers decked was proud,
Then all his kindred quickly disavow'd,
With Peacocks joined himself, Birds of a feather
As who should say are wont to flock together.
He was no Peacock though he took their plumes,
At which the real Peacock storms and sumes;
That he who was none of their company,
Presumed for to wear their Livery.
Over his ears he plucked his borrowed gown,
Than common Jays left him no more renown.
Cufft him to boot, and nubled well his nose,
Now go faith he chatter amongst the Choughes.
Mor.
From warning South-sayers has the prattling Jay
His Latin name, as called Monedula;
From them may others also warning take,
Their betters their companions not to make.
Who Have only Peacocks plumes have not their thirds,
Fine feather's make birds fine, but not fine birds.
Associate with Superiors, is they will do,
Strip thee of thy fine plumes, and scorn thee too.
FAB. 30. Of the Fly, and the Pismire.
A Buisie Fly contested with an Ant,
Himself far better of the two did vaunt;
Boasted his pedigree, and great Allies
Come of the noble family of the Flies.
Whereas the Pismire shows by his name,
That of base Sire and Dam his meanness came.
His habitation next to mind he calls,
In White-halls, Louvres, and Escurials.
In Mole-hills, Ants, and little dunghills dwell,
Earth's warts, or Earth's imposthums, are their cells.
Fly said he, Angel-like, had wings and flew,
But Ants did crawl and creep as all men knew.
He fed on Pasties and did drink good wine,
Claret, and Rhenish, Sack, and Muscadine.
He lived in ease and pleasure, yea he said
He played with Fortune, Fortune with him played:
Quoth Ant, Sir Fly, whereas with my descent
You me upbraid, I am therewith content.
An honest Sire I had as ever pist,
My Dam was Earth, mother of all I wist;
My Lodgings I confess are under ground,
I think that thou have none but go the round:
Thy Pasties and thy wine I do not matter,
For I can feed as well on bread and water;
I know folks do begrudge you every bit
You eat, and drop you drink, me never a whit.
And wish you might be choked with your meat,
They say you spoil more victuals than you eat.
Of Flies great havoc made Domitian,
Hated they were, and are by every man.
All things considered which of you are known,
Sir Fly you have no cause to be fly-blown.
Mor.
An empty cracking Traveller is the Fly,
Who claims a privilege to brag and lie;
And buzzeth idle stories in each ear,
So doing, makes a shift to get good cheer.
Beyond sea, tells his father was a Duke,
Which they that know not false cannot rebuke;
Knowing if Lies will please that he can tell some,
Thrusts into Princes Courts as bold, as welcome:
Goes all a mode, although he be waylaid for,
For why the clothes on's back are yet not paid for.
But the Ant is an honest laboring man,
For bread, and small drink, working as he can.
Besides from hand to mouth has some small store,
Some Corn in's barn, some flitches hanging over
His head, for fuel, some straw and some wood,
Can make his friend eat and drink what is good.
Lives a great while whilst that the vapouring Fly
Or starves, or else for stealing comes to dye.
Whosoever devotes himself for to upbraid,
Meets with his match, grows weary of the trade.
FAB. 31. Of the Frog and the Ox.
A Frog by swelling tried what he could do,
As big and portly as an Ox to grow;
Her daughter it should seem was more a Fox,
And cried alas, what is a Frog to an Ox?
E're thou can equallize an ox thou first
By so much swelling wilt go nigh to burst.
She swelled, and swelled, and swelled, twice and again,
And so at length she fairly burst in twain.
Mor.
To be content with what we are, is meet,
It Is not Jove's pleasure that all should be great.
FAB. 32. Of the Lion and the Horse.
AN aged Lion found his strength decay,
Yet could eat horseflesh (get it how he may.)
He did forecast, Horse-Doctor to profess
Himself, the best expedient he did guess.
Many diseases horses have, he meant
The credulous horse should be his patient;
His patient the horse pretended for to be,
And said, good Doctor you're come seasonably.
A thorn is got into my foot said he,
Be pleased to pull it out, here is your fee.
Then said the Doctor pray the place me show,
He puts on's spectacles and did it view:
And poring as he was, the horse I wiss
Pope-like, the Lion gave his toe to kiss:
So stunned all Cordials hardly could him quicken,
And then 'twas plain, the Lion was well stricken.
Mor.
Thanks to my self said he for my deceit,
Cheating's the best reward of them that cheat.
FAB. 33. Of the Horse and the Ass.
A Prancing horse proud as himself came by,
Adorned with all kind of finery;
Brave as a Lord Mayors horse on Lord Mayors day,
A silly Ass chanced to stand in his way;
Be gone says he, and forthwith give me place,
Or else I Will crop your ears, not bate an ace.
If fair means will not do I shall use force,
Think not to make an Ass of such a horse;
The frighted Ass durst neither quitch nor bray,
He starts aside and forthwith gives him way.
Frisking the horses belly did come down
And then his stomach too, he came to Town
Soon after in a carr; the Ass did laugh,
To see him then as plain as a Pike-staff.
Quoth he, are these your trappings? I did find
By your great cracking you would break your wind.
And when I found you were so proud and cursed,
I said you swelled so much that you would burst.
Mor.
He Is drunk as any man that you see reel,
Who does forget that fortune is a wheel;
The highest spoke may soon be in the dirt:
If men in their prosperity will flurt,
And flout at them who now are under hatches;
He may be Mayor of Quinborough who now thatches.
FAB. 34. Of the birds and four-footed beasts.
'TWixt beasts and birds a dreadful war befell,
That the beasts would victors be, bats did foretell;
Fell to the stronger side, the birds forsook,
Who victors proved, the Eagle their part took;
The conquering birds decree the Bat to banish,
And make that Renogado bird to vanish
From their Society, and from the light,
Thence Bats are stirring only in the night.
Mor.
Swallows alone in smoking chimneys dwell,
One cause thereof (as we may guess) I Will tell;
Unto the warmer months alone she stints her,
She Will summer with us but she will not winter:
Share of each state with us ought every wight,
Let them not share our day will not share our night.
FAB. 35. Of the Wolf and the Fox.
A Wolf was full of prey and lived at ease,
That he so did, did not the Fox well please;
Sir Reynard came to visit him, and then
He asked the Wolf what made him keep his den?
He said (with nightcap on) I am not well,
What to reply the Fox then could not tell;
Away he went, a neighboring shepherd told
That to surprise a Fox he might be bold.
His den is open, and unawares he caught
May be said he, he said it not for naught.
The Shepherd killed the wolf but never the less
The prey did leave, which the Fox did possess.
But soon he came again, and sans confession
He killed the Fox which he found in possession.
Mor.
Others to out that so we may receive
Their incomes, is flat knavery by your leave.
Though the wolfs den and prey the Fox possessed,
He was turned out so soon as warm in's nest.
FAB. 36. Of the Heart.
STag Wittal-like, was pleased with his horn
Seen in the water, thought it did adorn;
Mislik'd his Legs, as Peacocks do their feet,
Thought them too slender wished they had been great.
But chased, his horns in thickets him perplexed,
Then with his horns more than his feet was vexed:
His feet assisted his deliverance,
His horns were like to ruin him by chance.
Mor.
A man is often proud even of his chains,
And of those things which give him ease complains;
Ashamed of that which proud (if pride might be)
He should be of, proud of his shame is he;
And whilst his useful feet he vainly scorus,
He seems to glory in things like to horns.
FAB. 37. Of the Viper and the File.
A Viper with his teeth a File to file
Asunder went, at which it did but smile
And said, gnaw on, please you with all your might,
Well may you show your teeth but cannot bite:
I conquer brass, and crumble iron to dust,
Therefore your bonny teeth to me yield must.
Mor.
Who says he Iron conquered has with bone,
Offer him not a File, but a Whetstone;
For to attempt what is not to be done,
Is but like dogs to bark against the moon.
To fight with those that are more than our match,
But calls to mind a war 'twixt fire and thatch.
FAB. 38. Of the Wolfs and the Lambs.
A Peace concluded was 'twixt wolfs and sheep,
Their Dams gave Hostages the same to keep;
The wolfs their whelps they say did leave in pawn,
The sheep their Dogs, who merely in were drawn.
The little wolfs did soon begin to howl
After their Dams, which cry the sheep deal foul,
Wronging their hostages, and might say on
E'ne what they please, because their Dogs were gone.
Mor.
Observe in dealing with an Enemy,
Give not for his what is thy security;
Pledge your Lambs, not their Dogs, if you are wise Dams;
Dogs may defend the sheep, retrive the Lambs.
FAB. 39. Of the Wood and the Countryman.
A Countryman a handle for his axe
Did want, to the wood he went which did not tax
Him with an ill intent, but for to take
Gave him free leave, what would a handle make;
A handle he put on (for he could do it)
Went to the wood again, and then fell to it
To cut down trees, the wood stood and looked on
Shaking her trembling leaves, cried I Am undone,
And her own folly very much did tax,
That she would trust a Labourer with an axe.
Mor.
Some Axes have, but handles they have none,
Give them but them, and you are quite undone,
No wise man will give handles, he is a fool
Will arm an enemy with an edge-tool.
FAB. 40. Of the Members and the Belly.
THe members grudg the belly its good cheer,
For to hear murmurings bellies have no ear,
Yet they paid dearly for their murmuring
Who did allow it for to eat nothing
Because it wrought not, though it dresst their meat,
And upon that account deserved to eat.
Yet they resolved that Kitchen not to use,
And in so doing did themselves abuse;
For they can dress it no where else, and they
Strangely began to waste, and pine away.
Surely 'twas a plain case, 'twas no problem,
As they the belly fed, so it fed them.
For the belly, hands, and feet to work do use,
'Twas strange their masters service to refuse;
Nay, without hands, and feet I need not tell you
Some folks do work, but not without a belly.
Mor.
It looks like to a Levellers demands,
That none should live but they that work with hands
Or feet; whereas there is no man but knows,
Bellies and Heads work without Hands and Toes.
Bellies are Laboratories for our food,
For to digest it in, and turn't to blood:
Intestines, Liver, Spleen, veins great and small,
Milkie and mesaraicks, there are all
Belabouring Chyle, and still renewing blood,
And proper nourishment as they see good.
He had a woeful sconce, that did contrive
Bellies should starve and other parts should live.
Would thou that handicrafts alone be fed?
Try the conclusion, and cut off thy head.
Statesmen and Scholars who despise, I tell ye,
Are like the mutiners against the belly.
FAB. 41. Of the Ape and the Fox.
THe modest Ape, or whether Ape mankind
She only did, seemed grieved that bare behind
She was, and begged a piece of Foxes tail
(What he could spare) her nakedness to vail:
In part of that same tail I should take pride,
Which cumbers thee, 'twould cover my backside
Said she, but churlish fox gave this rebound,
Rather than so, said he, 't shall sweep the ground.
Mor.
Too many, Fox-like, want the ingenuity
To succor others with their superfluity;
And whilst in robes that sweep the ground they dress
Themselves, they will not cloathe others nakedness.
FAB. 42. Of the Stag, and the Oxen.
A Stag pursued, craved oxens leave to hide
With them in the Stable, it was not denied:
But an old Ox did say, 'twould not be safe,
For though he might escape Tom, Will and Ralph,
Three heedless servants, yet the masters eye
Would find him out, who coming by and by
Groapt in the hay, and felt a certain horn,
I Am sure, says he, this is nor hay, nor corn^
I have not far to hunt, says he, what is here?
I Will lay a Venison-Pasty it is a Deer:
To lay the wager he was not too hasty,
It proved a deer, he had his venison-Pastie.
Mor.
Whether by fear pursued, or ill chance rid,
It Is hard for men in misery to be hid.
Be Argos-proof, for Mole-proof is but ill;
Where Servants don't spy faults yet masters will.
FAB. 43. Of the Lion and the Fox.
A Lion went for sick, for so he made
Himself to be, pursuing the old trade.
To visit him all the beasts but Reynard came,
He then was not more sick than mild, and tame:
Where Is my dear Fox, said he, for him alone
I miss, to fetch him hither pray send one.
Tell him the Lion is his very friend,
And very sick to boot, and near his end.
And much desires to see him e're he die,
Has made his will, left him a Legacy.
The Fox this heard, I shall pray for his health,
Long life, says he, prosperity, and wealth.
But as to visits pray excuse me, when
I see no footsteps leading from his den,
Though many leading to it round about
Many go in, it seems, but none come out.
Mor.
Foxes suspect that Lions may be strong,
When they seem sick, and weak, and do but long
For some good thing, get it (if they can do it)
Like any thing in health they will fall to it:
Foxes are not soon made their paws to burn,
They love to go from whence they may return.
Women, though dead, one Proverb says, don't trust,
Lions much less, seeming but sick, we must.
Like to the Lions den are Nunneries,
Which none to go into I would advise;
For once got in, though they repent amain,
I wiss there is no getting out again.
FAB. 44. Of the Fox and the Weasel.
A Fox when lean, crept into a corn wicket;
When fat, did strive to get out of that thicket,
But was too big: old weasel said, if wind
Your self out thence you would, then leave behind
Your fat, grow lean again, in that distress
There is no help for you, but to grow less.
Mor.
Rich folks in trouble, who have poor folks been,
May best creep out they say as they crept in.
Poor Clients, Patients, and Amor's one straw
Who minds? be poor, and fear nor Love nor Law
Nor Physic, none will press thee unto that:
Sometimes it is better to be lean than fat.
FAB. 45. Of the Horse and the Stag.
A Horse, they say, was beaten by a Stag,
And made to quit the field, the conquered nag
Meeting a man courted his company,
Who went, and helped him to the victory:
On foot, it seems, the man did thither come,
Now weary, did desire he might ride home
Upon his back, the Horse could not deny
To the man, his second, such a courtesy.
He fairly took the saddle and the bridle,
And then for all his conquest might go fiddle:
The man made bold to ride him, of the bit
Once in his mouth he never could be quit.
That the man conquered, cannot be denied,
Who then but he in triumph ought to ride
Over both Stag and Horse? and so he did;
They that can ride and ought, will not be rid.
This plainly was the poor hearts misery,
Conquering by man, he lost his liberty.
Mor.
Some by the Stag think poverty is meant,
Which to set out by venison, wonderment
May cause, rather by the horse that caught the Deer
He that is grown rich, and now commands good cheer.
The horse o'recame the Stag, the man the horse,
Then with the conquering nag it was far worse;
For of a victor he became a slave,
The man got up, and he his will would have
Of him he helped to conquer; for what else
E're made a conquest and not for himself?
When some have Riches got by their endeavor,
They find themselves to be more slaves than ever.
The horse had better kept him to his grass,
To aim at Venison be was but an Ass.
To use man's help for Venison he was addle,
The man would win the horse or loose the saddle;
And have the Venison too, it was a man's meat,
He Would ride the horse, and give him hay to eat.
FAB. 46. Of two young men.
TO a Cooks-shop, they say, two young men came,
Stole away meat, and then denied the same.
Each swore by Jove that the Cook might believe her,
One was the thief the other the Receiver;
The thief did swear, himself no meat to have,
But the Receiver thus did play the knave,
I stole no meat, said he, yet our belief
It is, Receiver is the same with Thief.
The thick-scull'd Cook could not find out the cheat,
Said Jove by whom you swear knows your deceit.
Mor.
Those subtle frauds which men cannot espy,
Lie open to his view, who is all eye.
FAB. 47. Of the Dog and the Butcher.
A Hungry Dog made a good joint of meat
Out of a Butchers shop, hastened to eat
It far from thence, the Butcher saw him run,
At first said naught, for he was in a stun.
He looked so sillily, and so uncouth,
As when he sought his knife and 'twas in's mouth.
At length he spoke and said, I cannot come to thee
Thou art a nimble rogue, much good may't do thee:
He Is an ill Cook, that cannot his fingers lick,
Next time we will take more heed for that Dog-trick.
Mor.
The Butcher should have watched the dog before,
When the Steed's stole men shut the Stable door:
Till wit be bought and paid for, it is never good
They say, by contraries be it understood:
It Is good to ride the fore-horse, after wit
They only have, that have been sorely bit.
FAB. 48. Of the Dog and the Sheep.
A Dog against a Sheep his action brought,
That he a loaf (time was he lent him) ought.
Sheep eat no loaves, she stiffly did deny
The debt, Kite, Wolf, and Vultur testify
'Twas a true debt; the verdict went at last
For the Dog Plaintiff, and the Sheep was cast.
Cast to the dog, I know not by what Jury,
He took the Sheep, and flayed him in his fury.
Mor.
Many an honest cause is overborne
Whilst desperate foes false witnesses suborn.
FAB. 49. Of the Lamb and the Wolf.
A Lamb that followed a He-goat, was met
By a stern Wolf, who thus upon him set:
Follow thy Dam, said he, not stinking Goat,
But the Lamb-thought he understood his note.
Sir wolf, said he, what you mean I conjecture,
My Dam has made this He-goat my Protector.
When Foxes preach, Geese to themselves must look,
And wolfs advice by Lambs must not be took.
Mor.
When he that counsels is thine enemy
Always suspect the bottom's treachery.
Will Not foes do so? when now and then our friends
Advise what is not for ours, but their own ends.
FAB. 50. Of a young man, and a Cat.
A Cat was pretty, as a Cat could be,
A Youth there was, in love with her was he.
Venus, said he, thou have deprived us
Of a fine woman, making her a Pus:
O turn her to a woman good sweet Venus,
For I confess there is much Love between us.
Sh' has caught a man, let her no more catch mice,
Thou can a woman make her in a trice.
Then Venus her a woman soon did dub,
She rose up woman, as sure as a club.
And brided it as well at the boards end,
Carved well, paid due respects to every friend:
Until anon a mouse chanced to pass by,
Dear mouse, said she, though I sit here it is I;
There is no meat to thee nor no play-fellow,
Thou playest so prettily and eatst so mellow.
I Am young with child for I did lately marry,
Thou must my longing save, or I miscarry.
If that my husband break, I Will seek my rise
By midwifery, deliver Alps of mice:
Above all other babes, I love those same;
The first I have, him Musculus I Will name.
Mor.
Nature cannot long be hid, Temptation's that,
Will show what seemed a woman, was a cat.
Nature dissembled with great art, and toil,
Let but a mouse appear, will soon recoil.
FAB. 51. Of the Husbandman and his Sons.
A Countryman wished his sons to agree,
Which they did not it seems, so well as he
Did wish they should, to further that intent
A bundle of sticks did to them present:
Break these sticks if you can, said he, thus bound,
They tried to break them, and they tried it round,
But could not, whilst that they were tied in one;
Then gave u'm stick by stick, and 'twas soon done,
Then like to rotten tow, they snapt asunder,
Strength disunited is weak to a wonder.
Mor.
Rule over others soon thou may, divide
Them if thou can, and they on to other side
Rule over thee; if so, therefore unite
And break thee then who can, a fig for spite.
Discords are Corporations rocks, and shelves,
Which seldom break, till they first break themselves.
FAB. 52. Of the Countryman and the Horse.
A Countryman did with a lere-horse come,
But with an Ass was laden to his bum;
The Ass complained his back he thought would break,
His burden was so great, and he so weak,
That he must die if that he had no ease,
Besought the lere-horse, help him he would please.
Give the Ass his load, said he, I Will bear no part,
It was too much, and soon it broke his heart.
He di'd, and dying his whole load was laid
On the lere-horse, and his skin too when flayed.
Then said, fool I, naught for the Ass would do,
Now bear his burdens must, and his hide too.
Mor.
Help those who with a little help could bear
Their charge themselves; if quite undone they are,
When they are quite undone thou wilt be put to it
To keep their charge, and to keep them to boot.
Some that could live, if they were helped at all;
Not helped, both they, and theirs to the Parish fall.
FAB. 53. Of the Collier and the Fuller.
THe Collier made a motion for to dwell
Within a Fullers house, he could not tell
How to consent, for why my Trade is white
Says he, thine black, differ like day and night:
Black clothes don't love white walls, nor white things black,
Save only pepper which has a good smack,
And keeps its blackness to its self, thou wilt stain;
My clothes, if near thee, will be black in grain.
Mor.
Dwell not with those that are quite contrary,
For ten to one that you will never agree.
FAB. 54. Of the Fowler and the Ring-dove.
FOwlers to birds are enemies by profession;
One saw a Dove had newly took possession
Of a high tree, laid his snares by and by
For him, (although a Dove, and his nest high;)
Whilst so employed he trod upon a snake
Which turned again, for it she would not take,
But bit him soundly, made him stare again;
Catching a Dove, said he, I Have caught my ban^.
Mor.
Harm watch, harm catch, a mischief be their speed
Of barmless Doves Trapanners are indeed.
FAB. 55. Of the Trumpeter.
A Blub-cheekt Trumpeter in war was took;
Such was his plea, for pardon he did look,
I never killed a man, nor could, nor would
Said he, my Life to beg I Am therefore bold:
All that I did was only for to toot,
I never Bullets did, nor powder shoot.
It Is true, but something else I have to tell you on
He said, you are Trumpeter to the Rebellion.
The sighs and groans which had men made afraid
TO engage in war, by your shrill sounds were laid:
You made men's blood to frisk, and spirits caper,
Which sure enough had sunk but for your vapor.
No man does mischief like the Trumpeter,
By his encouragement he inflames the war;
He mocks men's sighs, he spirit does the feeble,
When men groan out the base, he sounds the treble,
Of sighs and groans the music I Will thee learn,
Others shall trumpet, that no bowels yearn.
Mor.
Who stirs up others he is most in fault,
And dearest ought to pay, if he be caught.
No Trumpeter no war; who ill dispose
The minds of Princes, they are most our foes:
Wish them to draw their swords, flatter them so,
Say all is well that Princes please to do.
When such like fawning flatterers shall cease,
Then, not till then, there is hope to have all in peace.
FAB. 56. Of the Wolf and the Dog.
E're it were day, a wolf a dog did meet;
With usual ceremonies they did greet.
The wolf would know what made the Dog so slick:
For that matter, says he, I have a trick
An easy trick, a fawning way whereby
I please my master, and the family;
And by so doing, purchase many a bit
Warm from the Table, or warm from the spit.
Sweet Cur, says he, since thou have so good pasture
Help me into the service of thy master.
Lay down thy fierceness, and I shall prevail,
Said he, for thee, with the wagging of my tail.
They laid their heads together till 'twere light,
Then the wolf saw what he could not by night,
That the dogs neck was very raw and sore,
And thereupon asked him one question more;
What ails thy neck, said he, to be so bare?
For I of that, says he, was not aware.
O Sir, said he, my manner was to bite
My masters friends, as well by day, as night:
Thereby I have incurred a thousand dangers,
Enjoined to bark only at wolfs and strangers.
I through my fierceness breaking that commission
Have brought my self into this sad condition.
Then said the wolf, if thou art at that lock
For to be fed with a bit and a knock,
Much good may do thee, I Will serve no such masters,
I now begin to pity thy disasters.
I Will not retain to him if that I might,
I am no Spannel, to love those that fight.
I Will live in woods, and any course food eat,
Rather than fare as you, and be so beat:
I Will not advance my self by flattery,
To venture neck, and loose my liberty:
I thought h' had used thee like a child, a hog
I see he is, and beats thee like a dog.
Mor.
Some great ones cruel are to them that need u'm,
Give me a poor thatched Cottage, with my freedom.
If great ones have their servants, on those hanks
Injuries they must receive, and then give thanks.
FAB. 57. Of the Husbandman and the Dogs.
'Twas a hard winter with a Countryman;
Must kill his stock, or not subsist he can.
And first he killed his sheep, (the best go first)
His He-goats next, and then he was so cursed,
(For hunger made him so) his laboring ox
He slew, he had a dog, that was a Fox,
Fox-dogs there are, a fox his Sire might be;
When he saw that, away went subtle he:
If I stay here my master will me eat,
Said he, in famine Dogs are thought good meat.
Mor.
Embrace not every service, an ill master
Whoever serves, will find a great disaster.
FAB. 58. Of the Fox and the Lion.
When first a subtle Fox a Lion saw,
He had a mighty reverence for his paw,
And his grave beard, which might serve a Philosopher
So great as had read Alexander Ross over:
He saw him twice, or thrice, and then grew bold,
Stare in his face, or play with his beard he could.
Mor.
Use has this property with it, I wiss,
Makes men not fear what is not, nor what is.
They fear no dangers who are used to wars,
Nor Devils to whom they are familiars.
FAB. 59. Of the Fox and the Eagle.
AN Eagle caught a Fox, they are seldom caught,
But 'twas a young one that was newly hatch
The old Fox on her knees begged for her Cub,
The Eagle would not yield, but did her snub.
Away he went carrying it to his nest,
To play with his young Eagles, but the Jest
Was this, the Fox came flying (Love has wings)
To the Eagles nest, and then the Eagle sings
Another note, down on his knees, and said,
O'th Firebrand in thy hand I am afraid.
Burn not my nest, Sir Fox, here is thy Cub,
Whom were I King of beasts, a Knight I Would dub.
Take thine own young, and mine be pleased to spare,
I and my young ones, all thy servants are.
Mor.
Poor folks have often great opportunities
With rich men to be quit for injuries.
FAB. 60. Of the Husbandman and the Stork.
THe Geese and Cranes were taken in the Corn,
A Stork with them was taken, as forlorn
Was he, as they, although he hard did plead,
His Parents he did succor in their need,
And was the best of birds, as to good nature:
That would not serve his turn, the clown this Satyr
Returned in answer, O Stork, you must die
For thou were taken in their company.
Mor.
Not to be found with Rakebels be you wary,
For in some cases none are accessory.
FAB. 61. Of the Cock and the Cat.
THe Cock a Cat accused, folks could not sleep
For his loud voice before the day did peep;
And with his mother lay incestuously,
That to devour him she might show cause why.
Mor.
Surely that man's invention is but small,
Cannot find a stick to beat a dog withal.
FAB. 62. Of the Shepherd and the Husbandmen.
A Shepherd-boy alarmed the country round
Crying a wolf, a wolf, when none was found;
He diverse times such false alarums gave,
Wolf came at last, and he no help could have:
Not to regard his cries he had them taught,
Having alarmed them so often for naught.
Mor.
This misery attend all Liars does,
They Are not believed when they do tell the truth.
FAB. 63. Of the Eagle and the Crow.
FRom a high Rock an Eagle did come down
On a Lambs back, did not so much as frown
At his so doing, or show discontent,
('It Is not for Eagles for to complement
And say by're leave, because they princes are,)
At this the crow began to gaze, and stare,
Thought he might do the same, on a Rams back
He gets, and rides, who cried what do you lack?
Arrested him, in whatsoever name,
A trespasser, for on his ground he came;
For to make me thy Ass is too much pride,
Eagles on Lambs, not Crows on Rams, may ride.
Mor.
Do such things as thou caust, shun what is past
Thy strength, a Cobbler may not exceed his Last.
FAB. 64. Of the envious Dog and the Ox.
AN envious dog in a full manger lay,
Nor could himself, nor would let the Ox eat hay.
Glad the Ox would have been this dog to bear,
Would neither eat himself, nor let him eat.
Mor.
Some will not suffer others to enjoy
Those good things which themselves cannot employ.
Who keeps from others what there is no danger
Of his own wanting, he is the dog in the manger.
FAB. 65. Of the Jack-daw and the Sheep.
A Prattling Daw sat upon a Sheeps back,
Go ride upon a dog, quoth he, Sir Jack.
Jack-daw replied, he need not to be told
With whom he might, or he might not, be bold:
Had I on Hedgehog sat, or Porcupine,
I Would sat on thorns, but thy soft place is mine.
Mor.
Jack-daws dare ride on Sheep, but not on dogs;
Currishness, as to aeceptation, clogs
Men greatly, but is often a great defense
From harms, that light on patient innocence.
FAB. 66. Of the Peacock and the Nightingal.
PRoud Peacock unto Juno made her moan
The Nightingal sang sweetly, but her own
Voice was ridiculous, Juno replied
The equal Gods have voice to thee denied,
But given thee curious plumes, for ornament,
Considering that thou oughtst to be content.
Mor.
Let no man envious be, and let none vaunt,
Since all some good things have, none all do want.
He whom thou scornst, or enviest, excells thee,
And by thy self again excelled is he.
FAB. 67. Of the old Weasel and the mice.
NOw madam Weasel, weasel-fac'd was grown,
And loss of former swiftness did bemoan;
Hunt mice she could not, as in youthful days,
Therefore bethought her self of other ways.
No plot like lurking in a heap of meal,
And there she caught the thieves that came to steal.
Furnished her self with store of pleasant meat,
Eating up those, who thither came to eat.
Mor.
Where the Lions skin falls short, piec't out we must
With the Fox-skin; who to his strength cannot trust,
Must use his wits, and he shall find e're long
It Is the same thing, for to be wise, as strong.
FAB. 68. Of the Countryman and the Appletree.
THe City-Landlord's tree choice pippins bare,
The Tenant rost-meat cried who well did fare;
He to his Landlord carried of the best,
Which made him for to covet all the rest.
If that my Apple so transcendent be,
Thinks he, the fruit shall not serve, I Will have the tree.
The tree he had, and this befell the bruit,
Plucked up, it withered, and bore no bore fruit.
Mor.
Woe to the man has such a craving paunch
That naught will serve his turn, but root and branch.
Transplant the tree, and thou may loose the fruit,
Trees often wither when plucked up by the root.
Take from thy cravings, add not to thy store,
Thou may have naught perhaps, by craving more.
FAB. 69. Of the Lion and the Frog.
What noise was that did the stout Lion scare?
A Frog forsooth, was croaking unaware
As if a Cock had crow'd, at that he started:
And looked as if he would have straight departed.
Forthwith he saw the Frog that vexed his ears.
Crushed her, and said, Are you there with your bears?
Mor.
Knew we some things we dread, we should cry fie on
Our cowardice, here a Frog scared a Lion.
Man's vainly timorous, and vainly bold,
Fears, what he should not, fears not, what he should.
FAB. 70. Of the Prismire.
A Thirsty Ant into a well did fall,
Dove threw a bough, and saved her therewithal:
A Fowler came at length the Dove to steal,
The thankful Prismire bit him by the heel.
Mor.
Who in distress a faithful friend shall be,
Shall Not want a friend in his adversity.
FAB. 71. Of the Peacock and the Magpy.
PEacocks fine tail made him the head of Fowls,
And o expect it, but the Magpy scowls
To see him King of Birds, whose headless tail,
Come the Eagle, was no fence against a flail.
Mor.
Beauty, and wisdom twins not always are,
They say some are but foolish that are fair.
In case a Beauty govern, that is a block,
Thereby he is but made a Gazing-stock.
He Is wise, and great, that is fit to make a King;
Beautie's a little, though a pretty thing.
FAB. 72. Of the sick man and the Physician.
SIck man on's legs was set, but he command
Drunkenness could not, and so he could not stand,
But soon relapsed, then said the Physician,
'Twas mere intemperance that killed this man.
Mor.
Bacchus and Venus lead men such a dance,
Or die they must, or leave intemperance.
That life may merry be, but short, I tell ye,
When a man is devoted to his belly.
FAB. 73. Of the Lion and others.
'Twixt Lion, Ass, and Fox, a prey was took;
The Ass to the dividing was to look.
He, like himself, parts it in equal shares,
For that the Lion him in pieces tears.
The Fox saw that and therefore held it best
TO have but a bit, and give him all the rest.
Mor.
An Ass may teach a Fox his course to vary;
Happy is he whom others harms make wary.
The Fox had been an Ass, if Gavel-kind
H' had stood upon, knowing the Lions mind.
FAB. 74. Of the Kid and the Wolf.
A Kid, a Wolf through a window did disgrace,
Said he, it is not the Kid, but the safe place.
Mor.
Out of a window some dare show their head
To them, whom were their bodies out, they would dread,
Men are made bold by certain times and places,
Who otherwise, dare hardly show their faces.
FAB. 75. Of the Ass.
THe silly Ass did serve a Gardener first,
And of his service to be free did thirst:
Next time a Bricklayer, who did load his back
With tiles (like roof of house) ready to crack;
Prays for a third, thinking a worse than he
Cannot come, but found the proverb true to be
That seldom comes a better, for infest
Him did the last much more than all the rest;
For him, a Tanner, he could not abide,
Saying he will flay my skin, and tan my hide.
Mor.
Folks restless are, and it is a common curse,
They that change often, often change for the worse.
Four mates would turn ones stomach, if 'twere squeazy;
Some have been shod round, each time, more uneasy.
FAB. 76. Of the old woman and the Maids.
AN ancient woman only had a Cock
To wake her servants, which served for a clock,
Broke off their rest by it, by break of day;
They did resolve to make the Cock away,
And did; but then the mistress was so wise,
She caused her maids at midnight for to rise:
Who seeing what was done, desired then
TO have kept the cock, rather than the old hen.
Mor.
Old women are old birds, which catch with chaff
None can, at young folks projects they do laugh.
Some sink more into misery whilst they
Seek to get out, but take not the right way;
Cut off Cocks heads, the course which they have taken
Succeeds so ill, they wish u'm on again.
FAB. 77. Of the Ass and the Horse.
THe Ass his case full sadly did bemoan,
Must carry all things, but flesh of his own;
Idle, and fat, the horse; but when that he
Heard Trumpets sound, a trooper he must be;
Then said the Ass, I now have no remorse,
I were an Ass, if I would be a horse.
Mor.
This little Fable surely serves to tell,
Most people know not when that they are well.
FAB. 78. Of the Lion and the She-goat.
THe climbing Goat upon a high Rock got;
There to remain the Lion wished her not,
But into pleasant meadows to descend:
Who then shall me, from thee, said she, defend?
Mor.
He that has so much wit as Goat's have beard,
Will Not think a Lion fit for to be heard,
When he does preach to Goats; 'ware whose advice
You take, or you will be ruined in a trice.
FAB. 79. Of the Vulture and other Birds.
A Miser's feast the vulture seemed to make,
And would the little birds should all partake:
A miserable feast 'twas, not a miser's;
Cost them their lives, because they were no wiser
Than for to trust a hollow bird of prey;
Nor more sincere, than to keep his birthday.
Mor.
If that a Vulture make an invitation,
Suspect there is treachery in that Coliation:
More courtesy, more craft; when some invite
They do it not in kindness, but in spite.
FAB. 80. Of the Geese.
THe Cranes, and Geese both met in one bad plot,
The Cranes escaped, the silly Geese did not:
The bodies of the Geese were not so light,
The Cranes less heavy, and more fit for flight.
Mor.
Great bodies slowly move, rich men cannot fly
In time of war, then well fare poverty.
FAB. 81. Of Jupiter and the Ape.
Which had the fairest brood, Jove willed to know,
Called Birds, and beasts, their young ones for to show:
Then came the Ape hugging her Cub in arm,
Appealed to Jove its beauty was the charm:
Jove smiled at that, and almost laughed out right;
So of its own, think best, does every wight.
Mor.
Crows think their Birds the fairest, every one
Almost, is apt to think his Goose a Swan.
FAB. 82. Of the Oak and the Reed.
THe Oak had no more wit than for to set
His strength against a reed, would had him met
To fight him, as if he would take the field
Against an oak, with spear of rush, no shield.
With Boreas encounter both, said he,
Let us, and he that stands, shall victor be.
They did, and then the oak came up by the root,
But the Reed stood, which made spectators hoot.
Mor.
Who gives the challenge, he is often beat,
And the Insultor is made to retreat.
A Reed may stand in spite of Boreas,
When an Oaks blown up by the root alas.
More stout, less strong; it is good for to be meek:
More than thy match will make thee bend, or break.
FAB. 83. Of the Fisherman and the little Fish.
A Little Fish begged hard to be let go,
And for the Fishers use to live, and grow:
I care not for thy plea, said he, one rush;
One bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
Mor.
Make sure of what thou have, if a wise man;)
Let a fish go, and catch him when you can.
FAB. 84. Of the Pismire and the Grasshopper.
THe Grasshopper, like Friar mendicant,
Came to the Pismire for some good provant:
At which the Pismire thus began to bristle,
Or work, or live by singing, or go whistle.
Mor.
Who like the Grasshopper plays up and down,
Must naked go, or have but a green gown;
Yea starve he must, or have provision scant:
Whosoever would live, must do as does the Ant.
FAB. 85. Of the Lion and the Bull.
THe roaring Bull for very fear did roar
Of the Goats horns, and frowns, which he no more
Had done than Giant little child would dread;
But chased by Lion he was ill bestead:
But had the Lion absent been, I think
The Bull had made him worse than Goat to stink.
Mor.
Some creeping folks that over no hedge can go,
Yet trample will when e're the hedge is low.
FAB. 86. Of the nurse and the Wolf.
AN Infant cried, to the Wolf I will thee throw
Said the nurse, with that, he tried to sleep to go.
The Wolf heard the Nurse, and thought that by and by
His prey would come, but vainly did rely
Upon her words, went back and said, we must
Henceforward by no means a woman trust.
Were Aesop such a man as most describe him,
He might gibe women for sure they did gibe him.
Mor.
If we may credit what this Author says,
A woman's word is like the Public faith.
FAB. 87. Of the Tortoise and the Eagle.
THe Tortoise always used to keep his shell,
But now affects the Stars, more than his cell;
An Eagle hires him on his back to mount
To heaven, which done he calls him to account
For his reward, who having naught to give,
Quoth the Eagle, Tortoise then thou shall not live.
Why should the Tortoise to the stars incline,
Who Is only fit midst glowworms for to shine?
Mor.
To live amongst the Stars (it has been tried)
Some that aspired, amongst the Stars have di'd.
Let every creature keep its Element:
If earth be it, be therewithal content.
With the Globe Celestial they do not agree,
Of the terrestrial who were made to be.
Tortoises are more safe upon the ground
Then amongst glorious stars if they were found.
FAB. 88. Of the Crab-fishes, the old one and the young one.
HEr Dam bid the Crab-fish forward for to go;
Follow I will, said he, you will first I trow.
Mor.
Others with backward gate they may not upbraid,
All whose own motion is retrograde.
FAB. 89. Of the Sun and the Northwind.
THe Sun and wind did with each other vie,
Which of they two should get the mastery.
The Northwind ruffled, which the man his cloak
Made to gird close, but the Sun made him Smoke
With silent beams, yea to cast off the same,
Fearing that else he should be in a flame.
Mor.
Fair means may do, when all fowl proves too weak,
A cushion needful is a flint to break.
FAB. 90. Of the Ass.
AN Ass by chance a Lions skin put on,
Scared all the Cattle when he had so done:
His master sought the Ass that found the skin,
And knew the Ass to be an ass within;
And his, for by his ears he that could tell:
Said he, for all thy skin, I know thee well.
Mor.
Seem what thou art, for why it is vain alas.
To seem a Lion if thou be an Ass.
FAB. 91. Of the Frog and the Fox.
LEaving the Fens, the Fox turned Doctor brave
(Though Doctors in the Fens most practice have)
'Twas sport alone to the old merry Fox,
A Frog should vie in skill with Bates, and Coxe:
Frog, that about the mouth looks pale, and wan,
First cure your self, said he, Sir, if you can.
Mor.
He that cannot cure himself may keep a pother,
But who will think that he can cure another?
FAB. 92. Of the Dog that would bite.
Abiting Cur had wont a bell to wear,
That strangers his cursed qualities might fear:
He thought that he did bear the bell away
For honors sake, but his master said nay.
Mor.
To the account of honor proud men place
Those things, which were intended for disgrace.
FAB. 93. Of the Camel.
FOr want of horns a Camel did complain
(Such as Bulls have) to the great Sovereign:
When that complaint (which few would make) he hears,
In stead of giving horns he cropped his ears.
Mor.
By which Ear-mark great Jove would let us see,
If some folks had their wills, they worse would be.
FAB. 94. Of the two Friends and the Bear.
TWo Friends a Bear did meet, one climbed a tree
To get out of his reach, the other he
Met him full butt, and fell upon his face
Lying for dead, for Bears will not disgrace
Themselves with Carcasses; Bear, with his head
Lay close, and check by Joal, trying, if dead,
He Is dead quoth he, for why I cannot hear
Him breathe, although full close I lay my ear.
Wist not he held his breath, but went away.
And then his Friend from the tree top did say,
What was it thy friend did whisper in thine ears?
Trust not such friends, said he, lest you meet Bears.
Mor.
The trial of a Friend's Adversity;
Fire parts what don't, more joins what does agree.
FAB. 95. Of the bald Knight.
A Knight was bald, as Opportunity,
The Northwind made his Periwig to fly:
At that bald business some began to flear,
The worthy knight knew how to slight a jear;
Since my own hair says he did me forsake,
That others serve me so, I Will not ill take.
Mor.
When we are played upon, it is ever best
Not to fall out, but fall in, with a jest.
FAB. 96. Of the two Pots.
TWo Pots were swimming, one was made of brass,
TO other of earth; the earthen cried Alas!
For Terrae filius had the wit to know
He should be broke did they together go.
Said Brazen-face I Will promise you shall not,
Clay answered, if we hit I must to pot.
Mor.
Never associate with any Elfe
That loves thee not, and's stronger than thy self.
FAB. 97. Of the Country man and Fortune.
A Plowman plowing found a goodly treasure,
To the earth to pay his thanks, it was his pleasure.
Fortune exceptions took, for why she knew
Not to the earth, but her, the thanks were due.
Had you a treasure lost, says she, then I
Had been invoked, to find it fortunately.
Mor.
Thanks must be paid where due, or we do worse;
And the saddle always set on the right horse.
FAB. 98. Of the Bull and the Goat.
THe Bull by Lion hunted came to a Cave,
From danger hoping shelter there to have,
The insulting Goat kept him off with his horn;
At which the Bull did thus express his scorn,
Were the dread Sovereign of beasts away,
Spite of thy beard and horns thou were my prey.
Mor.
Who scorns his betters, when in woeful straight,
May chance repent it when it is too late.
FAB. 99. Vide 81. FAB. 100. Of the Peacock and the Crane.
OVer the Crane the Peacock did insult,
Boasting his plumes; the Crane could not him mulct
Save only thus, says he, I soar on high,
Thou to a poor housetop can hardly fly.
None ought to boast themselves beyond their teathers
I Have the best wings though thou the finest feathers.
Mor.
All are not Peacocks, that is, not so fine
As they; but with some virtues all do shine.
Thou have what others want, and thou want too
What others have, to be proud will not do.
FAB. 101. Of the Oak and the Reed.
INto a River by a Hurricane
An Oak was thrown, it puzzled her amain
To see a puny Reed stand firm, and fast
As if it could be mastered by no blast.
Desired to know what might the reason be;
Her answer was, it was by yielding she
Maintained her standing; the oak was stiff, and stout,
And thence with whirlwinds had such a tough bout:
The Oak refused to bow, and so did break;
Though 'twant so brave, she found it safe to sneak,
And turn with every wind, like the Weathercock,
Else said she never had stood many a shock
Which she had stood: who strives against the stream,
And wind, and hopes to thrive, is in a dream.
Mor.
Who stout, and sturdy are, fare like the Oak;
They, like the Reed, who quickly are bespoke
For to comply with reason, some don't stick
To call Oaks honest but Reeds politic.
Be honest and wise both, therefore take heed
To be sometimes an Oak, sometimes a Reed.
They show themselves both wise, and honest folks
Whose wills are Reeds, whose consciences are Oaks.
FAB. 102. Of the Tiger and Fox.
WHen the Hunter shot at beasts indifferently,
Said the Tiger, stand for all the rest will I.
A Fowler shot and hit the Braggadochia,
Surely Said the Fox thy Country is Boeotia
Great Tiger, that thou had so little wit
To wish the Hunter thee alone might hit.
This was not courage, herein thou were tardy,
Prudence, and courage meet, but thour't foolhardy.
Further, said the Fox, pray tell me if you can
Who wounded thee? I think it was a man
By the deep wound, said he, men us do watch;
It is their wit makes them our overmatch.
Mor.
Strong men are rash, but further goes at length
An Inch of wisdom than an Ell of strength.
FAB. 103. Of the Bulls and the Lion.
THe King of beasts seeing four Bulls together,
Thought that eight horns at once he could not weather,
But two, by two, to master did not doubt,
Could he by any charm make them come out
One from another, some contrivance took
First to divide, and then to rule did look.
A mess of Bulls at once he could not tame,
One at a time he quickly overcame.
Mor.
Had men the strength of Bulls (which they have not,)
Let them divide, and they shall go to pot.
FAB. 104. Of the Fir Tree and the Bramble.
THe towering Fir Tree scorned the humble bush;
All things considered, he cared not a rush:
For when, says he, the fatal axe shall come,
You Will wish your highness, in my lowness room.
Mor.
Men ought the less for to affect grandeur
Because a low estate is more secure.
FAB. 105. Vide 83. FAB. 106. Of the Bird and her young ones.
A Bird her young ones left in the corn a keeping;
Wished them to listen if they talked of reaping:
At her return said they, the owner spoke
To reap this field his neighbors should care take:
Fear naught as yet, said she; next hue and cry
His friends to reap it were, abroad did fly:
As yet we 're well enough, said she, but when
His son and self were said to intend to come.
Come now, said she, it is high time to be gone;
When folks mind their own business 'twill be done.
Mor.
Trust the Ostler for to feed thy horse, they say
Before that he has dined he 'll take away.
It is the masters eye must fat the horse,
He must give him his oats, or he 'll fare worse.
Trust others with thy work, 'twill never be done,
It Is all that men will do to mind their own.
FAB. 107. Of the Covetous man and the Envious man.
JOve to the Miser, and the envious man
Said, I Will grant your request, as what you can,
Provided what one asks, the other double
To him shall have, which gave the miser trouble.
He could not think to ask enough, for why
All he could ask, was but a moity.
The envious man declared it was his mind
To loose one eye, so the miser might be blind.
Mor.
A covetous man never thinks he has enough,
He that is envious, is most asnuff
That others have: that which gives him a feast,
Is not when he has most, but others least.
FAB. 108. vide Of the Lion and He-goat. FAB. 109. Of the Crow and the Pitcher.
THe thirsty Crow did water want, not wit
The water lying deep to come at it.
Either the pot must fall, or the water rise,
The first he could not make, then did devise
To raise the water higher, for he cast
In pibbles, and so did effect the last.
Mor.
Small strength and stature serve if there be wit;
Else steeple-height will not compensate it.
FAB. 110. Of the Lion and the Hunter.
WHether the Beasts or Lions King were strongest
It held a strong debate, though none of the longest:
Lion's the King of beasts, man Lions King,
Yet thought the Lion strength's another thing:
I may be stronger than my King, thought he,
Nay, quoth the man, I Will prove you weaker be;
Come see the Picture of your common hap,
A Lion's severed head in a man's lap.
Thanks to the Painter, quoth the Lion then,
If we were Painters we would so serve men,
(Painting a man's head in a Lions paw)
Paint what you please that will not keep us in awe.
Mor.
This Fable is so plain, we may soon spell it,
Every man's tale is good, if he may tell it.
Who to himself cannot a good word give,
Surely does by the worst of neighbors live.
If his own Limner any man may be,
The best of features give himself will he.
FAB. 111. Of the boy, and the thief.
A Thief a boy saw crying at a well,
What made him dry desired him for to tell;
There Is gold in the case said he, for a rope brake,
Pitcher of gold fell in, 't is for its sake
I cry: is crying all? do no more mind her
Thinks he, I Will strip my self, and turn Gold-finder.
He dived, and finding none, up again came,
But then his coat was lost, he was to blame
The boys gold for to covet (though remote)
But in pursuit thereof he lost his coat
As well as mist the gold, he would have thiev'd;
So often deceivers are themselves deceived.
Mor.
Knaves with their match somotimes do chance to meet,
Here a young knave outwitted an old cheat:
If he no cloak had for his knavery,
A coat he had of a thief that past by.
Who stripped himself for to dive for his gold,
That done, he mean time with his coat made bold.
FAB. 112. Of the Countryman, and the Bullock.
NO ties, no yoaks a Bullock could subdue,
Do what the Plowman could still out he flew;
He cropped his horns, for he had wont to strike,
Do so again said he, as that you like;
Fearing his feet, put him into a plow,
Now play more tricks, said he, if you know how:
Shuffling his feet, he cast about the sand
Upon his face, his head, his eyes, his hand.
Mor.
He is a man of great renown and name,
Who a wild heifer does know how to tame.
Some folks we cannot govern for our ears,
They have as many tricks as dancing bears.
FAB. 113. Of the Satyr and the Traveller.
A Hairy Satyr (they, as Poets sing,
Are Gods of woods and Groves) did a kind thing;
A traveller was almost dead with cold,
Him he would take home to his own house he told;
And did, they heap good fires (the woods are theirs)
Made much of him, but something did break squares
Betwixt them, and 'twas this, he blew his hand,
Of which the cause the Satyr did demand:
It is says he, that I may make it warm,
He spoke it honestly, and meant no harm.
But by, and by, his barley he did blow,
The cause of which the Satyr would needs know;
To cool my barley I do use my breath,
Said he; thou shall pack hence, as sure as death.
Thou have a very false mouth of thy own,
For thou to blow both hot and cold art known.
Get hence false loon, double tongue, errand knave you,
You shall not stay here, I know not where to have you.
Mor.
Trust not a man if credibly you're told,
His manner is for to blow hot and cold.
FAB. 114. Of the Boar, and the Countryman.
A Boar that trusted too much to his tusks,
Would feed on corn, and no more live on husks.
It cost him both his ears, (not at once twain)
He lost one the first time, then came again:
'Ware the third time, the Boar like Ass or Mule
Would not observe, though it is a common rule.
With his cropped ears a third time came the noddy
And then the Tenant quickly seized his body,
And to his Landlords table did present him,
For it had been in vain to have only shent him.
For he could take no counsel for his ears,
For they were lost, and he still void of fears.
One would have thought this boar all heart had been,
Yet as they say, no heart of his was seen
When he was brought unto his Landlords table,
Which made his Landlord greatly chide and squabble;
Where is his heart said he, there are heart-stealers
Too many, I have met with some such dealers.
He had no heart the Countryman replied,
Or it never lived, or it before him di'd.
Though hearts they say, live first, and last do die,
Him void of heart spoke his simplicity;
Would not be warned when both his ears in pawn
Were had, which showed had he a heart 'twas brawn.
Hearing him say it had no heart, each guest
Burst our a laughing, but w' have lost the jest,
We heart for wisdom don't in English take;
He had no head, if so, our jest must make.
Mor.
Some are so void of courage, and of parts,
It may be thought they 've neither heads nor hearts.
FAB. 115. Of the Bull, and the Mouse.
A Creeping mouse did bite a Rampant Bull
Upon his feet; with indignation full,
He shook his stately head, and dismal horns,
Could not come at the enemy he scorns:
For he into a mouse-hole could not creep,
Where the small mouse in a whole skin did sleep.
What he would do if he could catch the mouse;
Safe in his hole, he did not take care a louse.
Mor.
Despise not an unlikely enemy,
He whom thou scorn'st, may get the victory.
FAB. 116. Of the Countryman and Hercules.
A Countryman whose Cart stuck in the dirt,
Calling on Hercules received this flurt;
Fool, whip thy horse, and shoulder up thy wheels,
For Hercules will not lacquey at the heels
Of idle drones, be thou a good Pains-taker,
If thy Cart will not wag, Hercules will make her.
Mor.
To this pass all must come, there is no doubt,
To lie in the dirt, or take pains to get out.
It is in vain for those who swim in ease
For to cry out help, O help Hercules.
FAB. 117. Of the Goose.
A Certain Hen some golden eggs did lay;
Thinking she was a mine, the owner slay
Her did, hoping to find her belly full
Of eggs, and his own too; his hopes were null:
Having so done he afterward did need her,
He found no eggs, and he had lost the breeder.
Mor.
Let no man hasten too much to be rich,
Blind puppies are produced by hasty bitch.
He that goes so to work; the question begs;
Who kills the Hen, must look for no more Eggs.
FAB. 118. vide FAB. 119. Of the Ape and her two Cubs.
AN Ape had twins; she dearly did love one,
Seemed not to care if to other were undone.
There came a fright, her darling in her arm
She took brim full of care, to might take no harm.
The other like unto a Pedlers pack
Or beggars brat, she fastened to her back.
She made more haste, it seemed, than good speed,
So spoiled the Cub she loved more than she need:
Dashed him against a cragged rock, until
His brains gushed out, full sore against her will.
That on her back, was safe as safe could be,
A Jolly Cub, not like a twin was he.
Mor.
It is no slander to charge Love with blindness,
Doubtless not a few folks are killed with kindness:
So the Ape hugs her young ones e'ne to death,
And so embraces themshe stops their breath.
The children parents don't regard a fiddle,
Are usually those that are in the middle;
Whom so good fortune many times attends,
They need not care a fiddle for their friends.
FAB. 120. Of the Ox, and the Steer.
AN aged Ox was toyling at the plow,
Whom the wanton heifer saw I know not how;
Reviled him sorely, Plow-jogger quoth he,
Not for a million I Would in thy case be;
I frisk about the Pastures, live at ease,
Despise all yoaks, and bands, do what I please:
You Are like a ragged Colt, I smooth, and slick;
Do nothing else but eat, and wince, and kick.
The prudent Ox thought then few words were best,
To pass it by, as if he spoke in jest;
Soon after came the heifer with a halter,
About his neck, marching toward the Altar.
This seen, the Ox did thus the Steer accost
If this be all, you have no cause to boast;
To have thy ease and liberty I wiss,
Is no such purchase if it come to this.
Mor.
Of ease and wantonness there comes no good;
If what it ends in be well understood,
It will be seen at last that they are broke,
Not who put on, but who cast off the yoke.
FAB. 121. Of the Dog and the Lion. vide 102. FAB. 122. Of the Fishes.
WHat made the fresh fish vaunt their pedigree
Above all fishes that do use the Sea
Is hard to say, but in Nobility
They did pretend all Seafish to outvie.
Phocas took't ill, an Emperor of that name
Had been, and he did look to be the same
Amongst the fishes, estimate the rise
Of each we will, said he, by the Market-price.
Expose to sale the Seal, and River fish
At once, said he, which sells for the best dish,
Accounted be the noblest of the two;
If that will not, I know not what will do:
To bring this business fairly to an end
He that is cheapest let no more pretend
To be the best the best, men dearest buy,
Our best appeal is to vox populi.
Mor.
If men were their own judges, every man
Were best: but surely he is best that can
Approve himself to mankind to be such,
Whom most vote so, no person ought to grutch.
FAB. 123. Of the Libbard and the Fox,
ALibbard, Lady-like, was proud of spots,
He better might, for black ones are but blots,
His Eremin like, his purely natural,
Their's more like dirt, and artificial.
He thought himself of all the beasts the best,
Despised them all, Lions amongst the rest:
Then said the Fox thy beauty's in thy skin
Give me that beauty which does lodge within.
Thy beauty-spots thy wretched folly stains,
Thou have some beauty but the Fox more brains.
Mor.
There are degrees it must be understood
Of goodness in those things which we count good.
Health's before wealth, and wisdom before beauty,
That Venus yield to Pallas is her duty.
FAB. 124. vide 123. FAB. 125. Of the Fox and the Cat.
REynard's a subtle youth, a witty wag,
But of a Hair, some say, is apt to brag.
Mountebank-like, what tricks himself could show
He boasted, and desired Dame Puss might know;
A while sat still Puss in her Majesty:
Then said, (Sr. Fox) one only trick have I,
She quickly showed it, for a pack of hounds
Came by soon after, as they went the rounds;
She quickly whipped into a lofty tree
That did her work, for there full safe was she.
Whilst Fox though full of tricks, as dancing bears,
Could not escape the hounds not for his ears.
From the tree top she called, good Reynard wrestle
With me no more I Am now in Baynards castle,
You Are gone to the dogs, thine be no Arsenal,
Puss has one dog-trick, that is worth 'um all.
Mor.
One trade that is good is worth a many small trades,
He Is seldom rich, who is a Jack of all trades.
Give me not many Mouse-traps but one mouser
Is worth 'um all, that will bestir and rouse her,
To multitudes as such, a fool consents,
One good one's worth a thousand arguments.
FAB. 126. Of the King and the Apes.
SOme Apes to dance a King of Egypt taught,
To do it very neatly, they were brought;
Were clad in purple robes, put in disguise,
They went for boys, none could see otherwise,
Till an Arch-crack that had a power of nuts
In's pocket, thought to try them by their guts.
Threw them amongst them, now my masters scamble
For this fine banquet, that was his preamble.
They quickly stripped themselves, and went to work
And then the Ape appeared, before did lurk.
At this the people all began to flear
Apes will be apes so soon as nuts appear.
A Jack an Apes, who rides like some great Count,
On a bears back, for nuts shall soon dismount.
Mor.
What Art does come as with a fork to seatter,
To rake together nature makes no matter.
Nature suppresst, first, or last, out will burst;
The second nature will yield to the first.
Nature's shut up in custom, as kernel
In shells enclosed, temptation breaks the shell.
FAB. 127. Of the Ass and the Travelers.
TWo Asses in a Desert, caught a third,
And each to make it his himself bestir'd;
It Is mine said one, I took it, so did I
Said to other, Fortune gave it equally.
It Is much they thought not to divide the Ass,
Each would have all, great pity 'twas alas.
The Ass less Ass than they seeing their strife,
Gave them the slip and ran as for his life.
Mor.
Thus it does fare with men when out they fall,
About their parting stakes, that both loose all.
FAB. 128. Of the Fishermen.
All Is Fish with fishermen that comes to net;
Fishing, some Tortoises they chanced to get.
Made hungry by the water, so they fall
Aboard of them, as who'de eat shells and all.
It seems their eyes were bigger than their belly
For they had almost surfeited, I tell you.
And several yet were left, though a conceit
They had, that more than all they could have eat.
As this was doing, by past Mercury,
May't please your Godship, for to do as we,
Said they to him; he saw they had enough
If not too much; and thereupon took snuff:
They should invite him, for no other thing
Than to preserve themselves from forfeiting.
'Twas a raw complement, and no more boiled
Than theirs, that say, eat this lest it be spoiled
Or lest we spoil our selves eating too much,
Who all but overplus do seem to grutch.
Mor.
Gods will not accept men's leavings, feed on scraps,
Who serve them so may feel their thunder claps.
FAB. 129. vide FAB. 130. Of the Beetle and the Eagle.
A Beetle at an Eagle took offense,
Thought a revenge in due time to commence;
Got to his nest, and thence threw down his eggs;
The Eagle could not stand on his own legs
Against the Beetle; but did make his moans
To the great Jove, who heard his sighs, and groans,
My lap shall be thy nest said he henceforth,
Lay thy eggs there, for they are of great worth,
The Beetle still persisted him to nettle,
None so bold as blind Bayard, and blind Beetle.
He crept by welts, and seames, and lay below
The eggs, which stirred, Jove himself knew not how.
Scared Jove himself and made the thunderer start,
And shake his lap, and self, and cry what art?
Shaking his lap, the eggs did all fall out
And then the whites and yolks did run about.
Mor.
If there be earthly Joves, as there be some
So called; though they are neither deaf, nor dumb
Toward their subjects, malice to provoke
Is no man's wisdom, though in little folk.
It Is pride, and passion which to that inveagles,
Beetles may come to be revenged on Eagles.
Kindle no coals, but always court men's love,
From malice none can save but Jove above.
FAB. 131. vide 113. FAB. 132. vide 106. FAB. 133. Of the Birds and the Owl.
THe little birds, the graver owl advise,
Though he from Athens came, and should be wise,
And so he was (though he looked like an owl
(That Is like himself) and so are some that scowl
And look ill favour'dly, which makes some say
It Is pity they should e're be seen by day.)
Good sweet-fac'd Owl, say they, lodge not in roof
Of house, for it were far more thy behoof
To lodge in trees, take to the Royal oak
Be thou secure from danger and from smoke.
The falling sickness I have not I trow,
Said he, o'th Oak I need no missletoe.
That is the plant wherewith men undermine us,
Give epileptick folks, viscus quercinus.
Mag Howlet gave good counsel and bestir'd
Her self, as well became Minerva's bird.
But the birds took the counsel, which they gave;
They in a tender oak, their nests would have.
The Oak grew up, and therewith grew their snare
Of which the silly birds were not aware,
Until such time as in the Lime they stuck,
And by no means their feet from thence could pluck:
And then they wished their nests in roof of house,
Or in a little hole with any mouse.
Rather than there, or in an Ivy-bush;
Touching the Oak they were all still and hush,
They had been very mad and conceited
But the Plaster to their feet had cured their head.
Then Senior Owl was counted their Apollo,
His words an Oracle for them to follow.
Then the birds vote, as often as they do meet
The Owl, him, with much complement to greet:
Which is the reason why they flock about him,
To pay him homage not to jear and flout him.
Nay further they agreed, we may conjecture,
To make the owl, his highness, their Protector.
Mor.
Owls must be hearkened to, they see by night,
Though others cannot see but when it is light.
Things must be took in time, too late 'twill be
To fly when stuck in lime, Rig Ships, at Sea;
A man is happy if good warning make him
Fly from an Oak before the bird-lime take him.
FAB. 134. Of the Gourd and the Pine Tree.
AN upstart Gourd grew near to a great Pine,
Said to him, the pre-eminence is mine.
In leaves, and flowers, and fruits I do excel
My neighbor Pine, his greenness knows full well:
Used him at pleasure, crept into his branches,
O'retopt him, and in injuries further launches.
The patient Pine was by this time provoked,
Now speak he must, or else he must be choked
With endless taunts, good Gourd, be not so loud
Said he, you have no such cause to be proud:
Alas you sprang up but the other day
Come nipping weather, wither soon you may.
And must, whereas the Pine, time out of mind
Has kept its verdure, spite of frost and wind.
Summer, nor winter, heat nor cold could blast
The Pine, whereas thy beauty will not long last.
Thou will come blewly off, after one frost
Thy greenness and thy glory will be lost.
Mor.
Such as the boasting Gourd is every Scoundrel,
Who lately started up but from the dunghill;
Now better men than they would seem to be
Who from the Conqueror fetch their pedigree:
Whose ancient families have kept their fame,
For many ages, and are still the same;
Whereas some who in have Estates have gotten,
May find the Proverb true, soon ripe soon rotten.
FAB. 135. Of the Crow and the Wolves.
A Crow the Wolves did far and near attend,
(A serving-man in black) this was the end.
When the Wolves were full of prey, they gave him none
Though he begged earnestly, when all was done
In hope of prey, we had thy company
Said they, thou would eat us if we should die.
Nay was it not in hope thou should survive
And eat us dead, whom thou could not alive?
To relieve thee's no charity I trow,
Eat dirt, no carrion will kill a crow.
Mor.
It every one behooves to attend
Not to his actions only, but his end;
For why, this point of wisdom all are taught,
Not to accept their Acts whose ends are naught.
FAB. 136, 137. Vide FAB. 21. and 40. FAB. 138. Of Arion and the Dolphin.
ARion was a Fiddler of renown,
The King of Corinth loved him as his crown:
Yet he from thence to Sicily would go
And Italy, those countries for to know.
Ravished all people, wheresoever he came
With his rare notes, and got himself a name.
And gold, and silver, to a mighty sum;
Then back again to Corinth he would come:
Inexorable fates no music charms,
The musical Arion meets with harms;
His notes might chain men's ears, but not their hands,
Money subjects him, which all things commands,
To the Avarice of greedy mariners,
Kill him they would his money might be theirs;
He gave them all he had, besought that he
Might live, got leave to leap into the sea
With his clothes on, but first like dying Swan
Might sing one song, to cheer him if it can.
Seamen love music, and they gave him leave
To sing, and play, it was but a reprieve.
He must to water go, that lived by Air,
Notes above Elah made the Seamen stare;
Such were the Orphean notes which he did sing,
Which their hard hearts to spare him could not bring.
Raised by his fiddle, since it so must be,
He boldly threw himself into the Sea.
Girt as he used with his fiddle in his hand,
A courteous Dolphin brought him safe to land;
The Seamen made no doubt but in the deep
Arion with his fiddle lay asleep.
But he on Dolphins back to Taenarus
Was safely carried, as on Pegasus:
From thence Arion unto Corinth went,
King Periander for to complement;
First kissed his hand, then told him by and by,
The-Dolphins kindness seamens cruelty.
The King could not believe one of the two,
But said Arion should to prison go,
For so imposing on his friend a King,
Until he better understood the thing.
Sent for the Mariners (his subjects, they
Were all) Arion least in sight did play:
Whilst he examined them of what they knew
Touching Arion, who said it was true.
He was in Italy in great request,
Beloved of all, kept company with the best.
Rich to a Proverb, in their own defense,
They said they left him there when they came thence.
Out stepped Arion hearing them say so,
Whom by his harp and habit they did know.
The same with which into the sea he leapt,
The Seamen could into a mouse hole crept
For fear, and shame, and nothing could reply
For then it was too late for to deny.
That it was he, the world could not gainsay
Did he but sing one song, one lesson play.
Mor.
This tells some bruits have more humanity
Than men, who naught but money deify;
Who can be rich and safe? riches they say,
Will make a very Orpheus a prey;
Or an Arion spite of melody.
Most strangely comes to light men's villainy.
FAB. 139. Of the Spider and the Gout.
THe Gout and Spider met upon the rode,
In the same town they both made their abode;
Spider whom Pride no less than poison swells,
Thought rich men's houses were the only cells
Fit for a person of his quality,
And told the Gout e'ne quarter there will I.
There he set up his looms and fell to work,
Was so secure, he feared nor Pope nor Turk;
There he was weaving webs, had great affinity,
With airy Schoolmens over-nice divinity:
Till new broom came, which they say clean does sweep,
Then he his quarters could not longer keep.
For to give over working he is made,
Though once there was an Emperor of his trade;
He meets with many a brush, and many a check,
Escaped narrowly the breaking of his neck.
Thrown down from high roof'd houses like Pauls-steeple,
Sorely affronted before all the people;
The Gout was got into a poor man's hutch,
There the tormentor was tormented much.
Truth is, was almost starved, nor bed nor board
Fit for so tender guest, he could afford:
Like prisoner he was fed with bread and water,
Laid upon boards and straw, enough to slaughter
One that had limbs as soft as any silk,
That called for Poultesses of bread and milk;
They were so sore with great pain and hard travel,
But there he lay as he had lain on gravel.
Spider and Gout the next day met again
And told sad stories, where they each had lain,
Such as were told before, thought how they might
Their quarters mend, before another night.
Vexation which does understanding give,
Told them that spiders must with poor men live;
The Gout with rich, Spiders were safe in Hutches,
And Gouts used kindly when in rich men's clutches;
They did but shift their lodgings both were well,
And better how to be they could not tell.
The Gout went next into a rich man's hall,
And found the master very complemental:
Though he came limping in, not like a Cripple
Was he there used, the Master far from gripple
He found toward him, he spared for no cost
As who should say he feared he might have lost
So good a guest, had he not been so kind,
But always to enjoy him was his mind.
If hold him by the teeth he might to eat
He should not grudg him, the best of all meat.
Call for his drink he might, Claret, or Sack
Or Hippocras, or what he seemed to lack.
(If Claret and red-herring cure a cold,
And hoarseness, Gout with Claret may be bold)
'Twere endless to tell all, but in a word,
The rich man used his Gout like any Lord.
The Spider in his Cottage sped as well,
He to the Gout when they next meet did tell;
(Perhaps it was a Brother weavers stye,
Who for that cause might like his company.)
He said his Landlord kept no mighty table,
For being poor said he, he is not able:
Nor for to see much meat does please my eyes,
Let me but have my belly full of flies.
For they are meat and cloth as all can tell
To me, and there is enough where I do dwell.
When I reduced am to lowest ebs
Of them I can make meat, and also webs:
Both as to force and fraud I Am free from fear,
There Is not a besom stirring all the year;
There I can safely make and safely mend,
For one poor man another will defend.
I do not care for wainscoat as do some,
For I do hang my room where-e're I come;
This said, the conference came to this event,
They made a bargain to their joint content:
The Spider should in cottages abide,
And the Gout amongst rich men should reside;
And so it has continued ever since,
Spiders a Peasant, and Gout is a prince.
Mor.
What this same Fable means to know who pleases,
Consider must that rich men feed diseases;
They pamper agues and make much of Gout,
Whereas your poor men use to starve them out.
Again each soil does not withal agree
Alike, one's meat may to others poison be.
Rather than Venison some will fall to pottage,
And some to Palaces prefer a Cottage.
FAB. 140. Of the mouse that was bred in a Chest.
A Mouse had always lived within a chest,
There was a stock of nuts, she liked her nest:
Once she peak'd over, and chanced to fall down,
Found as good cheer as was in all the town;
Thinks she a fool was I to make abode
Within a chest, there is better food abroad.
Mor.
Some think that far from home they cannot live well,
Cockneys would be within sound of Bow-bell;
But they that mean unto estates to come,
Sometimes like Foxes must hunt far from home:
Folks wish not for the things they never knew,
As what the eye don't see the heart don't rue.
FAB. 141. Of the Countryman that had obtained that Wheat might grow without
beards.
Wheat is called Ceres, Ceres with a beard
Seems strange, a bearded woman's seldom heard:
That wheat had beards the Rustic did bemoan,
Shall Ceres have a beard, Apollo none?
But the true cause was this, Wheat's scrobbed beard
So pricly was, the good man was afraid
To touch it, therefore beardless he would have her,
But in so wishing proved but but a mad shaver.
With much ado, wheat without beards to grow
He did obtain, repented it was so:
For then came birds and did the wheat devour,
The beard of wheat its fortress is and tower;
I mean its safeguard, that once lost and gone,
The birds will beard it when it wants its own.
Mor.
Bear with small faults or you must bear with greater,
There Is pain, but much more profit in Catheter;
The prickly parts of things keeps off the birds,
(Would rob, not give us so much as the thirds;)
Shells preserve nuts, though troublesome to crack,
But for the beards we whcat its self should lack.
It Is better to endure in Lawyers sense
A mischief than an inconvenience;
They that blame pain sometimes complain of ease,
Gout's now and then a seasonable disease.
FAB. 142. Of the Hawk that pursued the Pigeon.
A Hawk with eager flight pursued a dove,
Took by a Farmer, begged him of all love
To let him go, he had done him no hurt,
The Hawk did plead, the answer was but curt
Nor the Dove thee, I know 'twas thy intent
To kill him though thou knewst him innocent.
Mor.
They Are justly punished from whom no defense
Can be obtained by folks innocence,
Take birds of prey, he were a very wigeon
Would spare a Hawk, a hawk will not spare a pigeon.
FAB. 143. Of the Spider and the Swallow.
A Spider at a swallow did take pet,
Who now and then some of his flies did get.
A fellow-commoner she did not love,
That hindered them from being hand and glove.
In The love of flies consenting for to be.
They happened, and therefore could not agree:
So in one third they happening for to be
Agreeing, for that cause could not agree;
The Spider spread his Cobweb-nets to catch
The Swallow, so soon as he drew the latch
All the door over, then the swallow came,
Such slender threads such a bird could not tame.
He brake his looms (as power a press might break)
Then for a dwelling, spider was to seek:
Hung in the air, and thought himself undone
Till from his bowels a new house were spun.
Mor.
At weak attempts all wise folks do but laugh,
Old birds they say will not be caught with chaff:
Let no man think that he may enterprise
For to catch Swallows, who can catch but flies.
FAB. 144. Of the Countryman that was to pass over a River.
A River swelled with showers, a Countryman
Sought to pass over, where he safely can;
And where he found the waters were most still
There is the ford thinks he, there pass I will.
But had the wit the waters first to sound,
And where most still there them most deep he found;
But found them shallowest where they roared like seas,
Said, lowdest waters are past with most ease.
Mor.
At wordy enemies wise men have laughed,
It Is the still sow that eats up all the draught;
Anger that makes a noise is found but light,
A barking dog they say does seldom bite:
They Are not so bitter that are not so grave.
Your silent natures settled malice have.
FAB. 145. Of the Pigeon and the Magpy.
MAgpy would know why doves one nest would keep
Where their young in a whole skin could not sleep,
The Dove spoke like her self, showed no cause why
But this, it is long of our simplicity.
Mor.
This false conceit often spoils the innocent,
Who mean no hurt, do think no burt is meant,
FAB. 146. Of the Cuokow and the Hawk.
A Hawk the sordid Cuckoo did abuse,
That for his diet he earthworms would use;
Big as himself, in color not unlike him
That he would not fly at birds he could e'ne strike him:
Great Booby as he was, himself are Pigeons,
Cuckows to feed on earthworms were mere wigeons;
Cuckoo past by, soon after saw the Hawk
Hanging so plain, the sight he could not bawk;
From a high turret, and good reason why,
He was condemned for his Robbery.
Pigeons he loved and those he used to steal,
Then to the surviving hawks he did appeal.
Should we not to our appetites give check,
Rather than venture to hang by the neck?
Give me to live in safety on a Heath;
You birds of prey dig your graves with your teeth.
Mor.
A thief's the hawk, a merry life though short
He does affect, he cannot cat an ort;
Feed high he must on those things he loves most,
He Will have some hollow birds whatever they cost;
Take what is thine own, this saying often rehearse,
Better eat Neck-beef than come to neck-verse.
FAB. 147. Of the Ass and the Calf.
AN Ass and Calf well sorted for their wit,
To feed together in one Pasture hit,
By sound o'th trumpet knew an enemy
Approaching was, said the Calf now let us fly;
Then said the Ass to the Calf, thou art good meat,
Fly thou, thee if they catch they will kill and eat:
I for my part will here make my abode,
Whoever I serve I shall have but my load.
Mor.
Masters if they prove Captives loose their will,
Vassals if taken are but vassals still:
Servants in time of war have less disaster,
They can but drudge whoever be their master.
FAB. 148. Of the Fox and the women that eat the Hens.
A Fox that saw some women Gossipping
With hens, and eggs that might befit a King;
(To see such sights, we need no long way wander
They say, that is good for Goose, that is good for gander:)
Called unto them and said should I so fare,
How all the Dogs would bark and tear?
You rogue said one it is fit you should have none,
You steal both eggs and hens, we eat our own.
Mor.
Who have it of their own may eat the best,
But they that have it not, may not use to feast.
FAB. 149. Of the fat Capons and the lean one.
Whipped Chickens or whipped Capons had a man
Upon a time, (some fat 'em that way can)
All saving one, as fat as fat could be,
A very Rascal of his body he.
This poor lean Rascal all the rest abuse,
Thought him not worthy for to wipe their shoes;
Then came the Misers feast, the fat must die,
The lean one was a mere Anatomy.
And so he escaped, it often happens that
It Is better to be lean, than to be fat.
Mor.
It Is sometimes safer to be cheap than dear,
And good sense, well fare nothing once a year.
FAB. 150. Of the piece of Timber and the Oxen that drew it.
A Load of Elm which certain Oxen drew,
Took it unkindly upon the review
Of what themselves had for the oxen done
In days of yer, (those days were past and gone)
When that the Oxen upon their green boughs
Had leave, and liberty to graze, and browse:
That they should drag them through the dirt and mire,
Pardon from the Elms the Oxen did desire:
Full sore against our wills we draw this cart
They say, our groans may show, it breaks our heart.
Mor.
Who injures thee full sore against his mind,
Think him unhappy, think him not unkind.
FAB. 151. Of the goodly trees and the ill-favored one.
THere was a parcel of most curious trees,
Both rare for use and every eye to please;
A dwarf amongst them whose deformity
Made him a scorn, they say, to every eye.
Spirit of building on the owner fell,
A fatal spirit as the Welch-men tell.
Down goes the trees that tall and handsome were,
And fit for building, the dwarf had no fear
But he might stand, and did, for none would take hin
His ugliness a mere eye-fore did make him.
Then said the dwarf nature I must not blame,
Had I been handsome I had ru'd the same.
Mor.
With homeliness to be content's a duty,
Some have seen cause for to repent their beauty.
FAB. 152. Of the Swan that sang at her death and was blamed by the Stork.
A Stork was by, and heard a dying Swan
Sing better than in health, they use, or can.
Thought it was then no time for him to sing,
For death most count is no such pleasant thing;
Would know the cause she said now of my cares?
I grow toward an end, and of my snares.
Mor.
We came from dust and must go back to dirt,
Some folks by death are much more scared than hurt;
Black Swans they say have seldom seen the light,
Well may they sing at death that are pure white:
To good men it is a privilege to die,
Come death, they have more cause to sing than cry.
FAB. 153. Of the woman that wailed for her dying Husband.
A Man late married lay at point of death,
His poor young wife took on whilst he had breath;
And would admit no comfort, though her mother
Told her that she would soon procure another
Husband for her, much handsomer of the two,
She was so much in grief it would not do.
Yea to be vexed with her she said, was reasonable,
Because her mothers words were most unseasonable:
Her husband di'd soon after, on the biere
Was laid for burial, whilst the guests were there;
Mother said she, which is the Gentleman
You spoke of, I would see him if I can.
If that proposal may be for my good,
The thoughts of it may cheer my Widdow-hood.
Mor.
Husbands are soon forgot when they are dead,
And widows look to be soon married;
Some seem to grieve (so far as we can see)
Not to loose husbands but they widows be.
FAB. 154. Of a woman that wept for her Lovers departure.
A Minion did lament her Love was gone,
Seemed to grieve so as if confined to one;
(Though she had many) asked the reason why,
Said, I had all his things but's cloak want I;
It grieves me for his cloak, his cloak I want,
It Is that, not the loss of him, that does me daunt.
Mor.
Minions are sordid Muck worms, very dirt,
Grieve if they cannot strip you to your shirt.
FAB. 155. Of the Fly which sitting upon a Chariot, said that she had raised a
dust.
A Bragging Fly upon a Coach-wheel sat,
And seeing a great dust was proud of that;
How great a dust I raise said simple she,
Not knowing it from the Coach-wheels to be,
And from the horses heels, she a spectator,
Which gave no cause for pride, but 'twas her nature
To brag and crack, as if that she did all,
(No wonder then, proud folks we Fly-blown call.)
Boast as she pleases, yet this say we must,
Her self is scarce a thimble full of dust:
Let Flies be e're so proud, more than their match
A Spider is, them Eagles scorn to catch.
Mor.
It Is some folks humor though they did forbid it,
If ought prove well, to say 'twas they that did it.
FAB. 156. Of the Eele that complained that she was infested more than the
Serpent.
THe Eele and Serpent seem to be a kin.
They Are much alike, which made the Eele begin
To question, why men persecute the Eeles
But seldom follow serpents at the heels.
Dear Sister Eele said he, the reason's this,
Men dread a Sepent if he do but hiss.
No wonder they spare me whilst thee they take,
I am a Serpent, thou art a poor snake.
Mor.
They that would not be injured must arm them,
Some are not hurt, because none dare to harm them.
FAB. 157. Of the Ass, the Ape, and the Mole.
THere was an Ass, surely an Ass was he,
Complained for want of horns, cornute would be:
The first complaint had neither head nor tale,
Want of the latter did the Ape bewail;
He had a head, cared for no horns, a Tail
He greatly wanted, his backside to vail:
Then said the Mole, you're mad folks in my mind
To whine for horns and tails, you see I Am blind.
Mor.
They Will scarce complain of small things who inture
Themselves to know what other folks endure;
Whoever mourns for want of horns and tails,
Tell him the Mole the want of eyes bewails.
FAB. 158. Of the Seamen who implored the help of Saints.
A Protestant Tarpaulin was at Sea
And in a storm, midst Papists sure was he:
For why the Saints they forthwith did implore,
Whom their Religion teaches to adore.
Said he it is in vain to pray to Saints,
We shall be drowned e're they can know our wants;
Or come at Jove to have his gracious ear,
But Jupiter himself is always near:
Let us repair to him immediately,
They did, he heard and gave serenity.
Mor.
Whene're thou art in have this ever mark,
Go to the Justice, go not to his Clerk.
If thou do need dispatch, of this be wary,
Go to a King rather than Secretary:
It holds not true in all things though in some
It may, furthest about is nearest home.
FAB. 159. Of the Fish that leapt out of the Fryingpan, into the hot Coals.
THe Fishes that in scalding oil were frying,
(O cruel Cooks!) alive, for fear of dying
In pain unsufferable, in the pan
If they should stay, resolve if so they can
To get from thence, they leapt before they looked
Into the fire, and then were worse than hooked
By greedy Angler or by Fisherman,
Caught in a net, or than in the Drying Pan:
Out of the Drying Pan into the fire,
He that knows what it means, will not desire.
Mor.
Some over hasty to avoid one pain,
Into a greater quickly fall again;
Impatient of the Gout but in a toe,
Repel, till to the head and heart it go:
Here the old saying think of if you please,
The remedy is worse than the disease.
FAB. 160. Of the fourfooted Beasts that made a League with the fishes against
the birds.
FOur-footed beasts with fishes entered League,
They Would war with birds, and that was the intrigue;
Ready to fight, their help they did demand,
Who sent them word, they could not come by land.
Mor.
Help too remote we always should despise,
And nearer hand make choice of our Allies.
FAB. 161. Of the Covetous Ambassador that beguiled the Trumpeter.
A Stingy Legate Trumpeters did cheat,
Who came his Excellency for to greet,
With sound of Trumpets for to fill his ear,
And their own purse: the charge he would not bear
Found out this shift, in heaviness am I
Said he, and therefore love no melody:
Alas says he, you cannot now be sped
For my dear mother's dead, and buried;
One of his Lordships friends came to condole
His woeful loss, (and find him in a hole
Crying he thought he should) and then made bold,
To ask him when she died, who plainly told
His friend, it was full forty years ago,
Could not but laugh to think h' had served them so.
Mor.
To a Muck-worm his gold is sweet as honey,
He Will have a thousand tricks to save his money.
FAB. 162. Of a man that came to a Cardinal that was newly created to bid him
joy.
CArdinal to be made one had the hap,
A friend came to congratulate his cap
Newly put on, Sweetheart, I crave your name
Says he, I know you not, he was the same
That e're he was, the Cardinal was not so,
He was become too great old friends to know;
Then said his friend, it comes into my mind,
To pity Cardinals, they are deaf and blind;
Their caps come over their eyes they cannot see,
Their former friends how good soever they be.
Mor.
It is a blindness that does often attend
Great Vpstarts, they cannot see a former friend.
FAB. 163. Of a youth that mocked at an old man's crookedness.
AN ancient man had on his back a bow,
If 'twere to sell a jearing youth would know:
Him that old man (like others) would not curse,
Asked if his money did burn in his purse?
Fools and their money quickly part, if so
You Will stay a while you need not buy a bow;
Nature will give you one, meaning a bent,
E're to another world a token sent.
Mor.
Boys that deride crooked old men must know,
Nature in time will bring them to her bow.
Who jear old age its weakness must be told,
If they live long enough they will be old.
FAB. 164. Of an old man that married a young Girl.
A Batchelour of threescore years and ten,
('It Was much if he were honest until then)
Upon a certain Girl did chance to dote,
He Would have her for his wife was all his note;
Bad as his word, at length he did her wed,
The married maid was never brought to bed:
But did remain a virgin all his life,
She had no husband, though he had a wife;
Bewailed his folly when it was too late,
That then he was too old to have a mate.
Mor.
If to be married thou have a mind,
Take time by the forelock for it is bald behind;
Do that and all things else in proper season,
The proverb says in all things there is reason.
FAB. 165. Of the Eagle and the Magpye.
TO serve an Eagle Magpy had ambition,
Thought her self qualified for that condition;
A goodly person, had a gallant tongue,
To the life for errands, was so bravely hung:
Thou have a tongue I know, the Eagle said,
But thou'st too much, my things will be bewrayed;
Then for to choose thee I must be more wary,
A pratler as thou art my Secretary.
Mor.
Admit him not thy servant whom thou think
To have a blab-tongue, or breast full of chinks;
Upon a Magpye always look asquint,
Pica's a Letter and puts things in print.
FAB. 166. Of the Thrush that made Friendship with the Swallow.
A THrush was proud a single League was made
'Twixt him and the Swallows, 'twas a subtle trade:
But his wise mother saw it would not do,
For as your meat, so your selves two ways go.
One loves the frigid, the other torrid Zone,
Who can live at that distance and be one?
You are Antipodes and will not agree,
Where is no concord there will discord be.
Mor.
They Will make ill friends who vastly disagree,
It Is suitableness makes good company.
FAB. 167. Of the Countryman and the Mouse.
A Countryman was so much given to jest,
He could not hold when fire was on his nest;
I mean a desperate fire upon his house,
He jeasted at the wagging of a mouse.
A mouse a Martyr that was loath to be,
Scaping for life forthwith surprise did he.
Leave us said he when misery does attend
Will you? who formerly did seem our friend:
And we were yours, a friend's a friend all weather,
If we must burn, then we will burn together.
Mor.
Who Is like to Mice is no true friend at all,
They Will leave a house if it be like to fall.
FAB. 168. Of a Rich man and his servant.
A Thick-scull'd servant had a wealthy man,
He King of Fools would call him now and than,
He took it ill and answered sawcily,
I greatly wish that King of fools were I:
No Empire then would be so large as mine,
Thou Would be my Subject too, as I am thine.
Mor.
One's King of Oranges, and one of mules,
His kingdom's largest that is King of fools:
Fools are so common 'twant too true I wish,
Fools every where do meet us in our dish.
FAB. 169. Of the City-dog that pursued the Countrey-dog.
'Twas ods at football when a pack of dogs
Pursued one poor one, cowardly as hogs:
He fled and fled and still they did pursue,
And when he saw his flying would not do
He turned about, and them his teeth he showed,
Threatening to have them in their blood imbrued
If they did not desist; they made a pause
When they saw that, fearing his hungry jaws.
A General past that way, then soldiers fight
Said he, you see most danger is in flight.
Mor.
Look what the proverb says that fame does do,
That enemie's who fly them they pursue,
And who pursue them those again they fly,
Courage must save thee from an enemy.
FAB. 170. Of an old woman that blamed the Devil.
THey say an ancient woman climbed a tree,
Was she a witch they in Cats shape may be;
Cats are old dog at climbing, it is no matter
Woman or Cat, the devil to bespatter;
Her resolution was, in case she fell
It was by his persuasion she would tell.
But he took witness in convenient time,
He bad her not without her shoes to climb:
She climbed without her shoes received a check,
For the truth is she would almost broke her neck;
Telling, the devil bid her climb the tree,
Old Nick, said, you are a Liar, like to me.
Mor.
Some folks what'ere they do that is plainly evil,
Cast all the blame thereof upon the devil.
FAB. 171. Of the Tortoise and the Frogs.
A Tortoise that was burdened with his shell,
For that same burden nature blamed they tell;
Envied the Frogs did leap and skip about,
After a while he found that he was out:
Frogs were a prey to Eeles, and every blow
He armed Cap a pee with shell not so.
Mor.
We quarrel natures kindnesses too often,
Hard things may do us far more good than soft:
Tortoises bless themselves when Eeles do wrestle
With Frogs, to think their burden is their castle.
FAB. 172. Of the Dormouse that would grub up an Oak.
DOrmouse loves Acorns, thought the Oak too high,
He could not come at them so easily
As he could wish, resolved with teeth to grub it,
And therewithal did make a shift to stub it;
Once stub'd, the Oak Acorns no more would bear,
He wished that he the Oak once more could rear:
It was in vain, he hoped to spare some pains,
Pound-foolish, penny-wise, he lost his gains.
Mor.
He that spends all at once shall soon know sorrow,
So live to day as thou may live to morrow:
Men must mind futures, having more than sense
It Is brutish, to be all for the Present tense.
FAB. 173. Of the Dog and his Master.
ONe kept a Dog which himself always fed,
Unti'd his chain and with kind usage bred;
To make him so much more to love his master,
From his hand there proceeded no disaster:
But his man chained and beat him as he pleased,
At which the Dog finding himself diseased
E'ne fairly ran away, was took again,
His master pleaded he never gave him pain
Or angry word, why should he run away,
'Twas his ingratitude he pleased to say;
To serve him so what came into his mind,
To leave his master had been always kind?
'Twas all a case said he, 'twas a^ Trappan,
You beat me not your self, (but bid your man.)
Since I was struck and chained by your command,
I had as lieve you would done it with your hand;
If we must meet with blows and such disasters,
They Are worse from fellow servants, than from master.
Mor.
Some by their Policies think to defeat us,
Stroke us themselves, but others set to beat us.
FAB. 174. Of the Birds that beat the Beetles.
BEetles upon their Dunghils bullets made,
Of which the fearful birds were sore afraid;
They said they will Cross-bows get and shoot at us,
They dreaded them as mice do dread a Puss.
There was a Sparrow wiser than the rest
Beetle kill Birds? said he, you do but jest:
We fly, they drag their bullets on the ground
So slow, and softly that they never rebound.
Mor.
A witless enemy fear not, cause such
Some fear too little, others, fear too much.
FAB. 175. Of the Bear and the Bees.
A Waspish Be made bold a Bear to sting,
Honey he loved, but revenge was a thing
Sweeter than that, revenged he would be
On all the tribe, a Giant such as he
By one poor legless Pigmy Be had been,
Stung, he will be quit, or he will never be seen:
I Will spoil their Hives, their honey, and their young,
Make them repent that e're a Bear was stung.
Which e're presumed to affront one like me,
Out of all question was no humble Be;
It was but one I know, but it is my mind
To let them know, Hatred's against the kind.
He said it and the Bees took the alarm,
And cried out Fellow Soldiers, Arm, Arm;
Your selves, and your young nymphs if you would save,
The Bears resolved our Hives and lives to have.
These are no false Alarums or vain jears,
The enemie's here in earnest with his Bears:
Make your stings ready, stand upon your guard,
Stand to your tackling, or we all are marred:
They did, they ran him down and rode the bear
As Jackanapes might do, so he paid dear,
Who brought a multitude about his ears
Too hard for one, though not for many bears.
Mor.
It Is dangerous to provoke a multitude,
Who can do wonders if they take a feud.
Wise folks will take heed how they do such things
For flies have spleens, Bees to be sure have stings;
Men strive with hazard whole Tribes to undo,
To reak their malice upon one or two.
FAB. 176. Of the Fowler and the Chaffinch.
A Fowler had dispersed great store of meat,
Hoping the birds would thither come and eat;
They came, but only some few at a time,
The Bells he rang, he hoped all in to chime:
E're he had done, he scorned to take a few,
To have at all a generous mind might show;
He thought, their manner was, some went, some
To wave a few his mind was still the same:
At length night came, who would have all or none,
Found the remainder for to be but one.
Mor.
It Is n't good to grasp at all, lest all we loose,
Something a man would have in hand to choose;
At one bird in the hand do not cry tash,
Thou may hereafter catch ten more in the bush:
Been't all for presents, nor yet all for futures;
(Both before and behind thy head has sutures
To make all fast) wise men are best content
To take some Fine, and to receive some Rent.
FAB. 177. Of the Soldier and the two Horses.
A Trooper had one horse, and bought a worse,
Tended his meaner horse like any nurse:
Did not much mind the former, darling said
Thou art the better horse, why so much made
Of me, I cannot tell, who all men I see,
In strength and beauty do come short of thee.
His better said, men mind not who are best,
But provide greatest cheer for newest guest:
From my worse usage I suspect no danger,
I am used like a friend, thou like a stranger.
Mor.
Men commonly most love a second fetter
Though it be true, that seldom comes a better.
FAB. 178. Of the Swine and the Dog.
A Spaniel was derided by a Sow,
Wondered to fawn and flatter he knew how;
Upon a master gave him many a blow,
That to set Birds he might bring him to know:
Often lug'd his ears, and made him fear and start,
That he might make him master of his Art.
Yea the poor Spaniel seemed to love him so,
As had he been obliged by every blow
To vindicate himself, the Spaniel said,
Thereby I come to understand a trade;
So sure and good that whilst another fails,
I may be fed with Partridge and with Q^ails.
Mor.
Sharp usage is sometimes no injury,
Some owe a great deal to severity;
Who if their masters more of them had made,
Themselves had never been masters of their trade.
FAB. 179. Of the Log that blamed the Oxens slowness.
WHen Logs could speak (as Logger-heads can do)
The timber said the Oxen were too slow;
It seems they did affect a Scholars pace,
And thought the Oxen might have run a race
With load so light as they, pray do not jear
Good Oxen said, the logs we shall not bear
You long upon our backs, but set you down,
Then you must bear the burden in the town
As well as we, and have upon your back
Some office that may chance to make it crack:
Perhaps the weight of some most heavy leads
Or building, which oppress you much must needs;
That heard, the Timber had no more to say
Convinced, endure as much themselves they may.
Mor.
This warns men of an insulting mind,
Who usually are paid off in their kind;
The world is slippery as a very Eele,
He Will never insult that knows the world's a wheel:
The Spokes whereof that now are uppermost,
May soon come down and light into the dust.
FAB. 180. Of the Linnet and the Boy.
A Linnet was inquired of by a boy
Had fed her high, and kept her as a toy
Within a Cage, why being got from thence
His Pensioner she would no more commence
And to her eage return, where all good cheer
She might be sure of, howsoever dear:
Sir boy said she, I fared well when thy Page
But give me liberty before a cage;
To eat and drink, go and do as I please,
Gives me content more than good cheer and ease.
Mor.
No chains are best about our Legs and hands,
Whether they silken be or golden bands;
Man has a great ambition to be free,
Can spare most things, better than liberty.
FAB. 181. Of the Jeaster and the Bishop.
A Jester comes to a great Clergyman,
On Newyears-day, to try if that he can
Obtain a Ginny for a New Years gift
Of him, to help himself at a dead lift:
Said the great man, that is a great sum indeed,
Were I so prodigal I my self might need.
Then my good Lord, in the next place said the Jester,
Give me a shilling, or give me a teaster:
Said he, that is silver and it is no sense
Thee to beg silver, Peter has but pence.
Then my good Lord said he, one farthing give,
A token of your love, and whilst I live
I shall pray for you. Farthing said he is money,
A farthing worth of Album with some honey,
May cure a soar throat, whosoever please to lick it,
Your blessing then said he, there he did nick it.
My blessing, my paternal blessing crave
Seeing you do, my blessing you shall have:
He scorned it, when that he had not forbad it,
Said were it worth one farthing I Would never had it.
Postscript.
This Fable's but a Fable as to that,
Divines are stringy, too free to be fat,
They use to be, give more cause for remorse,
They keep themselves as scholars keep their horse;
So bare, so out of case, or like Tythe-pig,
It Is rare amongst them for to find one Trig;
Or in such plight as he, body or purse,
Few them for grippleness have cause to curse:
To say this of a Bishop was Extatick,
'Twould make one think Aesop was a Fanatic.
Mor.
But a good Moral may be taken from hence,
Some called Divines are so immersed in sense
Sooner then part with money they will bless
Earth, they don't value much, but heaven less.
Such is their Atheism, such their cruel dotage,
They count their blessing cheaper than their pottage:
And then as for the blessings of all such,
As slight their own, others slight them as much.
FAB. 182. Of the Howpe that was unworthily preferred.
THey say the Eagle made a Wedding-feast
Most birds invited, and amongst the rest
The Howpe, which there was Cock a hoop, for he
Set above all the rest happened to be:
Because he had a crown upon his head,
And with most curious feathers was decked;
Though amongst dung and filth she used to fly,
This did procure to her no small envy.
Mor.
Do not thy habit utterly neglect,
Good clothes may help to purchase some respect;
Many a man the world with good clothes weathers,
Which takes all for fine birds that have fine feathers.
FAB. 183. Of the Priest and the Pears.
ON his way to a wedding was a Priest,
What at another time would make a feast;
He found by chance a curious heap of pears,
Durst not at that time eat one for his ears:
Lest it should pall his stomach and forestall
His Appetite, who aimed to have at all.
(Sorne say it is good with Appetite to rise,
To eat therewith all agree that are wise)
And so would he, in's pockets should he bring,
Those pears they might prevent some better thing
He might convey from thence, leave them behind
It grieved him, lest them other folks should find
And eat them, what himself could not employ,
It was his mind others should not enjoy
Upon good terms, therefore on them did piss,
Acting an envious Slovens part I wiss.
Then on he went but found the waters up,
He could not pass either to dine or sup
With the new-married folks, Bridegroom and Bride
Came back a hungry, having all ways tried
To pass and could not, in his way he found
The heap of pears which he in piss had drowned;
Snapt at them, though they were in such a pickle,
Hungry dogs fancies, dirty puddings tickle.
Mor.
Be not thou full of scorn, when full in purse,
For thou may cat thy words or else eat worse;
Slight not inferiors for when all is done,
Thou may need those that thou have pissed upon.
FAB. 184. vide FAB. 33. FAB. 185. Of the Hog and the Horse.
A Hog espied a War-horse to the Battle,
Made have, thought them a simple sort of cattle;
Would run post-hast into the jaws of death
He saw his error, might have saved his breath:
In saying so, thou shall die by a knife
Said the horse, when thou have lead a shameful life:
Lived like thy self, that is lived like a hog,
Thy throat to cut some Butcher will thee dog;
When I shall dye upon the bed of honor,
Naught but disgrace the Swine shall have upon her:
Pampered with offals, shortly die you must,
You Are living dirt, dead, will it be merely dust.
Mor.
Who lives long obscure is all amort,
Choose then a glorious life though it be short.
FAB. 186. Of a Tanner that bought of a Hunter the skin of a Bear that was not
yet caught.
A Tanner of a Hunter bought a Hide
Belonging to a Bear, that never yet died;
Nor was so much as caught, his money paid,
Down on the nail, in which the fool he played.
Said he, have patience till the Bear I kill,
And then the skin you bought make good I will:
Next day the Tanner and the Hunter went
Into the wood, hoping for good content
The Hunter with his dogs went to a cave,
The Tanner to see what success he would have
Clombe up a tree, the hunter saw fall down
Before a Bear, as dead, or in a sown:
If dead, he by his nose did try to know,
Thinking he was, he made no more ado
But left him on the place, (for bears will not tarry on,
A body which they take to be mere carrion.)
Down came the Tanner bid the hunter rise,
Said, he was now secure from enemies;
But let me know said he what in thine ear
The Bear did whisper, for I could not hear
Said he, he said no more but this (I thought)
Sell no more Bear-skins till the bear be caught;
He to the Tanner might have said as well,
Buy no more skins of them that han't to sell.
Mor.
Count not upon uncertains, lest you loose
Your hopes, it is ill to wait for dead men's shoes:
A live bears hide is hardly worth a pin
If living, he may sleep in a whole skin;
Buy what is ready, but not things bespoke,
Wise men will not purchase a pig in a poke.
FAB. 187. Of the Hermit and the Soldier.
A Soldier, holy Hermit, would persuade
For to turn Hermit, and leave off his trade;
Both for his bodies safety and souls health,
Truth is said he, we get but little wealth
Now by our arms, both plunders dead, and pay,
Small heart to kill men, for twelve pence a day.
All one of us is promised when he enters,
Besides that we are forced to sell debenters.
Mor.
Interest takes off some men, whose hearts do cleave
To vice, they leave not it, it does them leave.
FAB. 188. Of the man and the wife that had been twice married.
A Widdower and a Widow made a match,
Mutually to be quit they lay at catch;
She Would with her former husband him upbraid,
He Would tell how good a wife the former made:
There was a capon roasted for their meal,
She to a beggar part of it did deal
To pray for her first husband, and her best
He overheard, and gave him all the rest
To pray for his first wife, her soul departed,
So she got little who her husband thwarted:
For her first husband she gave part (sad story)
He all, to pray his wife from purgatory.
Mor.
To vex those people never lie at catch,
Who will be found to be more than thy match.
FAB. 189. Of the Lion and the mouse.
A Lion that was taken in a snare,
It to untie did beg a mouse his care;
He set him free, and when he had so done,
Did hope the Lions daughter to have won:
He begged her for his wife, and had consent
Of the old Lion, who did say content.
Gain but the maids good will and it is done,
When Parents are agreed, maids are soon won;
Soon after came the Bride to the Bridegrooms house,
Unsight unseen, she trod upon the mouse:
Who came to meet her, crushed him all to bits,
Heard say her husband's dead, fell into fits:
But afterward she did not care a louse,
When once she understood he was a mouse.
Mor.
Thus it is when mouse-like men wed Lionesses,
They Would better be content with Jones and Besses:
They Will tread 'em under foot, and make the house
Too hot, the man will not be known from a mouse;
In marriages regard equality,
Or ten to one that you shall never agree.
FAB. 190. vide FAB. 82. FAB. 191. Of the wax that desired to be hard.
IT melted wax to see its self so soft,
Melted it into tears considering often;
How hard were bricks, made of a certain clay
More soft than wax, after a while that they
Had lain in fiery Kills, so firm, and sure,
Were they as many ages might endure:
At this the wax threw its self into the fire,
To be as hard as bricks it did aspire
But there't did waste, did not wax hard but wan,
After a while it in the fire had lain.
Mor.
One medicine Doctors Mountebanks we call,
It will not have the same effect on all:
On different subjects, different effects,
The same things have, which whosoever rejects
May know without much skill in arts or tongues,
Those waters help the spleen, which hurt the lungs.
FAB. 192. Of the Husbandman that would be a Soldier and a Merchant
AN honest Farmer took a world of pains,
Could hardly pay his rent, so far from gains;
He thought a Soldier lived a gallant life,
Went brave, fed high, he almost starved his wife
And children, thereupon he did intend
Unto a soldiers life himself to bend.
He sold his stock, and put himself in arms,
But oh the many mischiefs and the harms
Befell him, for the Army soon was routed,
And then himself and all the rest were outed:
Wounded to boot, then Merchant he would be,
He sold his Land and ventured all to sea;
The next news was the Ship was cast away,
That he and all his goods in the Ocean lay.
Mor.
This Fable aims to prove this Proposition,
Thinking to mend, folks often mar their condition;
Aiming at gain, they often come off with loss,
The Rowling-stone they say gathers no moss.
FAB. 193. Of the Jester.
A Man there was that always was in ^est,
Was bravely clad in's tunick and his vest;
And who but he? what he would he might have,
They call him the Fool, he was less fool than knave:
The farts he let (so Aesop calls a jest)
They were the things which brought him in request:
Saving your presence if by farts men thrive,
Said the Ass, than I there is none should better live;
Surely there is no Rump can crack like me
I do it so sweet, and so innocently.
Mor.
The Fable stinks the Moral may be sweet,
Buffoons are valued far more than is meet.
FAB. 194. Of the River that reviled its own spring.
PRoud River did fall foul on its own spring,
And said it was an idle useless thing;
It did not move, it did contain no fish,
These were the things it did cast in its dish.
Boasted he ran, and did with fish abound,
And what else to his honor might redound.
The Spring was vexed, its water did withold,
Would teach the River for to be so bold:
Made his fish die, and made his waters fail,
Took what he gave, then the River did bewail
Its great ungratefulness, folly, and pride,
The Fountain of its waters to deride.
Mor.
By this same Fable Aesop seems divine,
What Is due to God is pride for to call thine.
He is the fountain thou the Rivulet,
If thou despise him thou shall nothing get:
Thereby, for first or last, he will make thee know
That all thou have, and art, does from him flow.
FAB. 195. Of the wicked man and the devil.
A Gaol-bird that had often been in Gaol,
And found a Devils help did much avail
To bring him out, besought his help again,
To try how to break's prison was in vain:
He in the hole or dungeon all amort is,
For Iron-bars he had no Aqua fortis;
Good devil help said he, or I Am undone,
To help him his familiar was not won;
His back was loaded with old worn out shoes,
What was the reason might the man amuze;
He told him he had travailed all about,
To help him till those shoes all were worn out:
Had none to wear, nor money to buy shoes,
Wher't cannot be had, Princes their right must loose
Prisoners much more,) go and be hanged for me
The Devil said, I can no more help thee.
Mor.
The Moral's good, whom devils do befriend
Time after time, they will fail 'em in the end.
When they are past their work gone to decay,
E'ne then says he, hang them out of the way.
Though often for to escape a Caitives lot be,
They must not think they shall go always scot-free.
FAB. 196. Of the Birds that would choose more Kings.
BIrds that forgot their due allegiance,
Consulted how more Kings for to advance
Besides the Eagle, he could not inspect
Them all they said, they did not him reject
From being King, but for sole king refuse,
Not depose him, but others they would choose.
More eyes see more they thought, though Eagles eyes
They be, wished more, but did not his despise:
The Crow as wise as black, would not consent
To have more kings, for one gives best content
Said he, more kings than one will never do,
It Is easier for to fill one purse than two.
Mor.
Kings pluralists are very happy things,
But give us no plurallity of kings.
FAB. 197. Of the woman that would die for her husband.
A Tender wife almost cried out her eyes
For her sick husband, bear it if he dies
She cannot, therefore said if thou wilt have one,
Good death take me and let the man alone.
Death, looking like himself, soon after came,
You wished for death, said he, I am the same;
Sir Death said she, it is not to me you would speak,
I Will bring you to the party whom you seek;
He Is sick a bed, and very ill at ease
Waits for your coming take him if you please.
Mor.
This woman was a measure of the rest,
She loved her husband well, but her self best;
If both might live she thinks 'twould happiest be,
If one must die, sh' had rather he than she.
FAB. 198. Of the young man that sang at his Mothers burial.
A Young man sang at's mothers Funeral,
His father saw't, and asked if that were all
The moan he made, his mother for to see
Upon the biere, an own mother was she.
Mother in law they count a very Thistle,
Makes children sing when dead, alive go whistle:
But an own mother is another thing,
Who showrs of tears to her death does not bring,
But that that sides so sure, there is no fear
I should go nigh to say a Bastard were:
She was no Stepmother I do confess,
Sing at her Funeral I might never the less.
Said the young man, you priests (whatever your rate is
Hire there to sing, and why may not I sing gratis:
The father said Priests may sing there not you,
When you are a Priest, then you as Priests may do.
Mor.
As one man's meat another's poison is,
One's ornament's another blot I wiss;
Who acts out of his place a fool is he,
Stood thy heels where thy head thoud'st monstrous be,
FAB. 199. Of the jealous Husband that had put his wife to be looked to.
ONe had a wife a Lady was of pleasure,
To watch her as he need he had not leisure;
He chose a Keeper, promised a reward,
Unto her honesty to be a guard:
Argus he should have been, whoever he were,
This subtle woman had more eyes by far,
Woman-craft is a mighty thing, a Sack
Of fleas he said, he would carry at his back;
Pour them upon a meadow, let 'em feed,
Then be at pains to rally all the breed
And bring them back, rather than to attend
One wanton Miss, of which there is no end.
Mor.
Like wantons nought's Mercurial I assure,
Mercury is their temper, and their cure;
Marry chaste women, and take care no more
But spite of fate, a whore will be a whore,
FAB. 200. Of the Fellow that refused Glysters.
MOst folks are scared with Pigeons and with blisters,
But few there are that have much dread of glysters;
Some such have been, amongst which a High-dutch-man,
Get him a Glyster take there is none that can.
A College of Physicians did advise,
He seemed to think that they were not so wise;
Let me alone says he I you beseech,
Whilst it is my head that aches you would cure my breech.
Mor.
By folks unskilful it will be rejected,
If you would apply to the part that is not affected;
In their opinion it does madly sound,
Bid them the weapon 'noint to cure the wound:
Men with their own spears ought to be content,
Like Bedlams talk out of their element.
FAB. 201. Of the Ass that was sick, and the Wolves came to visit him.
AN Ass was sick, who but the wolfs and dogs
Came for to visit him? they were no hogs:
How he did do they kindly seemed to enquire,
Though to hear he was dead was their desire;
Asking the question, thus he answered,
I Am better than you would wish, for I Am not dead:
Some seem concerned for our recovery,
Who wish with all their hearts that we might die.
Mor.
With groundless jealousy don't thy mind clog,
Yet doubt not to suspect a Wolf or dog.
FAB. 202. Of the Nut tree, the Ass, and the Woman.
A Wallnut-tree was often pelted at,
It stood in the highway, 'twas long of that.
There was a woman that did please to jear
That tree, the more 'twas beat, the more 't did bear,
At lestwise yield, gave fruit for every blow;
Thou have more fruit than wit, said she I trow
Walnut, the woman said, were I as thee
So beat, my fruit should rot upon the tree:
Mistress says he, you would not thus disgrace
Me if you knew a proverb in the case;
One self same law they say, does surely bind
These three, the Nut, the Ass, the womankind.
There Is none of these (they say) that rightly does,
Unless sometimes we men do give 'em blows.
Mor.
Folks by this Fable to spare jears are taught,
She from the tree had as good as she brought;
That tree knew how to answer scoffing Shrows,
Which its self used for to give nuts for blows.
FAB. 203. Of the Ass that found no end of his labors.
AN Ass was almost killed with cold and chaff
In The dead of winter, that he could not laugh
Til the Spring came, and wished the Spring were near,
Then earth, brick, wood, and Tiles was forced to bear:
Weary of Spring, for Summer he did long,
But then his master made him work ding dong;
Carrying in new Corn, and carrying out old,
Did he stand still his master straight would scold;
Then longed for Autumn, 'twill me ease he says,
But few there are who mend in the Dog Days:
Then wine, and wood, and apples he must carry,
So longed for winter, that he could not tarry;
Nothing like frost and snow would do the fear,
It helps down weeds, kills worms, makes turnips sweet:
Winter returns and then he cannot laugh,
For he was froze with cold and fed with chaff.
Mor.
We never are well in this would full nor fasting,
Summer or winter, Spring or Fall, but casting
About, how every one his state may mend,
'Twas best at first, men often say in the end.
FAB. 204. Of the mouse that would make a League of Amity with the Cat.
A Mouse more forward than the rest, would make
League with a Cat, her countenance did so take
And win upon him, she did look so grave,
Demure, devout, he by all means would have
Her his familiar (friend, I mean) to be
But of the friendship weary soon was he;
Though she so looked that some would even swear
Where mice would melt, butter would not melt there
She loved the mouse so well she could e'ne eat her,
And did, the rest, so vexed they could have beat her
But that they could not, for if mice and Rats
Make League with Puss, they will sort like Dogs and cats.
Mor.
Trust not folks looks, you may too often find
An honest face with a dishonest mind:
Let Cats look how they will, they in a trice
Will show that they must needs fall fowl on mice.
FAB. 205. Of the Ass that served an ungrateful master.
It Was a good Ass d^d all his time never stumble
Save once, through too much load he chanced to humble,
With blows enough to fell him though he stood
His master tried to raise him, made the blood
Boil all about him, was in such a rage
All his great services could not assuage;
Called him dull Ass, dull Animal, what not?
He that did ill but once went thus to pot:
This Ass had works of Super-erogation,
For which he then had no consideration;
He then bewailed it as his great disaster,
So good a servant had so bad a master:
Once did I ill says he, that hear I ever,
Often did I well, of that I do hear never;
(As says the proverb) O ungrateful man
Bear what I bear who but a mere Ass can?
Mor.
It Is a base humor quickly to forget
A thousand good turns, but not to remit
One injury, nay though it came by chance,
Service to slight, Disservice to advance;
With all the aggravations can be thought
May they no servants have but what are naught.
FAB. 206. Of the Wolf that persuaded the Porcupine to lay aside his weapons.
A Fox-like wolf advised a Porcupine,
His back with Arrows not so thick to line
In time of peace, they a mere burden are,
Archers lay up theirs for a time of war.
Call for their quiver just before a battle,
But make it not in time of peace to rattle:
Sir wolf said he, it is always time to fight
When a wolf (like thy self) does come in sight.
Mor.
Arm, arm, when wolves appear, and do not stay
Till they have fastened, and made thee their prey;
Prepared to meet with enemies be ever,
Or in good time, too late's as bad as never.
FAB. 207. Of the mouse that set the Kite at liberty.
AMouse did gnaw a Kite out of a snare,
Though Kites from mice deserve not such a care;
They are their foes nor was this Kite his friend,
Once free, the mouse he with his claws did rend
And tear in pieces most ungratefully,
Hence forward Kites for mice, in snares may dye.
Mor.
Be friends to some, do them a courtesy,
They Will be your foes, do you an injury;
What kindness to requite some cannot devise,
They Will recompense by picking out your eyes.
FAB. 208. Of the Snail that begged of Jupiter that she might bear her house
about with her.
JVpiter to each creature gave its choice,
Of one good thing, and he would hear its voice;
The Snail did say great Jove, I only lack
Thy leave, my house to carry at my back.
That said, the Thunderer would know cause why
The Snail made that request, he did reply,
I wish that burden rather at my back,
Than against bad neighbors a good fence to lack.
Mor.
Great privilege is good vicinity,
Nought's worse in nature than bad company;
First is a kind of heaven, the last of Hell
'Twixt both it is, to live like Snail in shell.
FAB. 209. Of the Hedg-hog that thrust the Viper her Host out of doors.
VVInter came on, the Hedg-hog was to seek
For a warm lodging, did to the viper sneak
To be his Inmate, Vipers then had pity,
He gave consent hearing his mournful ditty:
But soon was weary of his company,
The worst of bedfellows one could lie by.
Tosses and tumbles, and his prickles starts,
And sticks his bedfellow as full of darts
As the man in the Almanac we see,
Poor viper nothing else but wounds is he.
The wounded viper weeping tears of blood,
Hedg-hog besought that he would be so good
As to provide himself another place
To lodge in, Hedg-hog would not bate an ace
Of what he now possessed, let him be gone
That Is weary first said he, I shall make one
Here to abide, whoever be the other,
Possession I Will not quit to serve a brother.
With Hedgehog there is no living, viper thought,
Seeing he will not go, surely I ought
And must, for if with him I still do keep,
I never expect in a whole skin to sleep.
Mor.
'Ware Hedg-hogs, they their bedfellows will rout,
Never take him in, who is like to cast thee out.
FAB. 210. Of the Husbandman and the Poet.
A Plowman came a Poet for to see,
In's study found him busy for to be
And by himself, what says he all alone?
I cannot but thy lonesomness bemoan:
Then said the Poet I alone have been
No longer than since you your self came in.
Mor.
A Scholar in a noble Library
Is not alone, nor in society
When that illiterate Idiots are by,
H' had rather have their room than company:
An Idiot to a wise man once did say
In a brown study, tell me I thee pray
If I disturb thee not? I shall have done
Talking, not so, said the wise man, I Am alone.
FAB. 211. Of the wolf that was clad in a Sheeps-skin which worried the flock.
A Certain wolf was in a sheeps-skin clad
Made one amongst the flock, which was not g^^^
His worship to enjoy, for he ^ed high,
He killed one sheep a day most constantly.
At length the shepherd chanced to find him out,
And was resolved with him to have a bout;
Took him and hanged him on a huge high tree,
That he to others might a warning be;
Some that passed by would cry what hang a sheep?
And Shepherd hangman that used them to keep?
The Shepherd heard and smiled, it is a sheepskin
Said he, indeed, but it is a wolf within:
He in a stolen sheeps fleece himself had hid,
A wolf he was, for a wolfs work he did.
Mor.
Never trust folks habits, for a wolf that lurks
Is known not by his habit, but his works.
FAB. 212. Of the Father that in vain persuaded his son to virtue.
AVertuous father did his son advise,
That he a virtuous course would enterprise
Both for his fathers credit, and his own,
But he his fruitless labor did bemoan:
The youth his father wished his pains to spare,
In Pulpits such like counsels were not rare:
Though far more rare than his, in to other sense,
Yet he from them no convert did commence.
Mor.
Persuade some men who will, they will do no good,
Parents, or priests, it is to be understood
They Are knaves in grain, their color will not fade,
Stir them you cannot although the Pope should aid
And all his Cardinals, such their disease,
Say whatfolks can, they will do what they please;
They are past grace, at least they are past shame,
Say who will what they will, they are the same.
FAB. 213. Of the Dog that killed his masters sheep, who hanged him for it
IT was a Shepherds pleasure that a dog
Should be his Deputy, he would not clog
Himself with constant care of all the flock,
But soon he found that he impaired his stock;
One, after one, killed up his harmless sheep,
Hang him the Shepherd said, I will not him keep
To serve me so, his belly full of meat
I don't him grudg, and yet he will eat my sheep:
When the Shepherd Hangman-like with Rope and noose
The Dog did see, will thou a servant loose
Said he upon those terms? the wolf you know
Kills your sheep too, kill him, and let me go.
Excuse me Sir said he I shall not do that,
You are the worser enemy, that is flat;
Wolf is an open enemy, thou a friend
Pretend'st to be, and mischief do intend.
Mor.
Be it a rule who ever Scotfree goes,
Pay them who seem thy friends and are thy foes.
FAB. 214. Of the Ram that fought with a Bull.
A Ram there was, for every other Ram
Too hard, all them in fight he overcame;
Then doubted not for to engage a Bull,
E're he had done, he had his belly full:
That Bull had horns what e're the Popes Bulls have,
A deadly blow therewith to the Ram he gave;
He could just speak, and said, a fool was I
With one so much above my match to vie.
Mor.
Strive not at all, or else strive with thy Peers,
With Underlings or Betters breeds but jears.
FAB. 215. Of the Widow and the Green Ass.
THey say one Widow loathed a single life,
But for folks talking she would have been a wife;
It seems in those days folks with scorn did carry,
Toward those widows that made haste to marry;
A Gossip taught her how to slight solks thunder,
I mean their talk, said 'twas but nine days wonder.
To make that out a thing was never seen
She Would do, which was she would paint a white Ass green:
And have that green Ass through the city led,
'Twas done, and all the people wondered
Both young and old, followed the Ass about
For a few days, it made a fearful rout;
As had the paint worn off, after those days
At him did people no more stare, and gaze.
Have but the patience a few days to tarry
So it will be with you in case you marry;
Said her good Gossip who knew how to please her,
Those comfortable words no doubt did ease her.
Nine days will end the wonder if you have
A second, e're your first be cold in's grave.
Mor.
When time has snow'd a little on the hair
Of things, great wonders, no more wonders are.
FAB. 216. Of the Eagle that snatched away the Conies young ones.
EAgle will catch no flies, but he loves Conies,
Did snatch the young which were their mothers honeys
He scorned her words, and furiously said no:
That was not all, limb-meal he did them tear
Before her face, and gave them to his dear
Young Eagles, for to eat, whom she did love
As he loved them, he thought himself above
The reach of conies, fearful, feeble souls
Terrestrial animals, that lurk in holes.
He king of birds, had built his nest on high,
Where conies could not come, they could not fly:
Did therefore as he did, do they their worst
They could not hurt him, he could but be cursed;
And that he cared not for, as for their love
It he regarded not, he dwelt above.
Them no way of revenge he thought to have,
What nature had denied, vexation gave,
The tree, where lay his nest she by the roots
Dig'd up, then he was over shoes and boots;
Next blast it tumbled down, down came her young
Unfleg'd, and feeble, lay the beasts among
Who ate them up, the Conie she had none,
But better did digest sh' had lost her own.
Mor.
Let great ones fear to carry 't insolently,
Conies may grub the tree that is never so high;
One time or other fortune way does make
For them that watch their time, revenge to take.
Greatness to injured mean folks may not inveagle,
Gonies may come for to check-mate an Eagle.
FAB. 217. Of the Pike a River-fish that desired to be King of the Sea.
THe Fish of fishes was a certain Pike,
In the fresh water, there was not his like,
For fairness, greatness, and for wondrous strength;
He knew't too well, made him presume at length
To go into the Sea; Dolphin was there
King of that place, he at him with his spear,
Into the Rivers mouth retreat did he
With much ado, he would go no more to Sea.
Mor.
Be not ambitious, it is a false notion,
Chief of a River may be chief in the Ocean;
That in a City-church perhaps will not do,
Which in a Countrey-church makes a fine show:
There Is difference 'twixt Mayor and Mayor I trow,
A Mayor of London, and of Quinborough.
FAB. 218. Of the Sheep that railed upon the Shepherd,
It Is strange, a sheep they say, was heard to rail
Against her Shepherd, hugely did bewail
That he not only took her milk, but fleece,
For to do both she thought a cruel piece:
He vexed at that, did kill her young ones too,
Then she said he had done all he could do
To mischief her, and could do nothing more,
Thereby the Shepherd was enraged full sore
Not so said he, for I thy self could slay
To Wolfs and dogs, thy carcass make a prey;
That said, the sheep as any fish was mute,
He could see things far worse, though but a bru^
Mor.
Doubtless it is not safe for any man
To say, or think God has done all he can
To punish him, although he has done much,
God has worse Thunderbolts in store for such:
Should God contend with men as he is able
Who e're is most, would be more miscerable.
FAB. 219. Of the Wagoner and the Wagon-wheel that whined.
THey say a Wagoner did ask his wheel
Why the worst whin'd, the other did not deal
So with him, they less trouble gave, more gain,
She roundly answered, sick folks will complain.
Mor.
It Is common, but it is against all sense
That makes folks pensive, should teach patience;
The reason is not hard for to divine,
The weaker people are more apt to whine.
FAB. 220. Of the man that would try his friends.
A Man of honor that was every inch
A Gentleman and one that scorned to pinch;
Kept a most noble house, welcomed his friends,
Had many visiters, for their own ends:
He had good flesh, good fish, Claret and Sack
For rack and manger, nothing they did lack.
He had a mind to try his friends, did fear
They were not friends to him, but his good cheer
He made a solemn feast, invited all
His friends at once (say it were to Gout-hall)
(Gave 'em French-wine enough to bring the Gout
Or cure it as some say, if they been't out.)
Then told his case, a war he must commence
Of some great injuries he had a sense;
He had received such as he could not bear
Said, all would take his part, that his friends were.
Then all excuses made save only two,
And passed such complements as would not do.
Those two he looked upon to be his friends,
Cast off the rest were all for their own ends.
Mor.
Until affliction comes no mortal knows
Who are his real friends, and who his foes.
FAB. 221. Of the Fox that commended Hares flesh to the Dog
FOx to the dogs did fear to be a martyr,
Seeing his danger he did beg for quarter;
Ah Sir said he, my flesh is no good meat,
'Twere at your service, if 'twere good to eat;
There is a curious Hare, I need not tell you,
No better meat can come into your belly.
Then strove the dog to make the Hare his prey,
He proved too swift, (there went the Hare away)
The Fox and Hare soon after chanced to meet,
Why did you wish the dogs my flesh to eat;
Sir Reynard, said the Hare, I did commend
Your flesh said the Fox, what to your praise does tend.
If you cannot bear, how can you bear disgrace?
What if I had reviled you to your face?
Mor.
Some give good words that thereby they ill deeds
May bring to pass, Praise they know, envy breeds:
Extol in words whom they in heart do scoff,
As men their worst wares praise, to put them off:
Let no man say of thee at thy request
You Are a brave Seaman, then thou will be pressed.
FAB. 222. Of the Hare that begged craftiness, and the Fox that begged speed of
Jupiter.
HAres are more swift, but Foxes more unlucky,
The Fox as swift, the Hare as much a Jockey
Desired to be, each wished accomplishment,
Jupiter wished them both to be content.
I give impartially, not all to one
Said he, if so, all the rest must have none:
How shall Jove please the world? each would be best,
Please one, and he must displease all the rest.
Mor.
Stand to Jove's dividend, who e^r you are,
It is more equal then you are aware;
It is his pleasure things thus out should fall,
All should have something, but none should have all.
FAB. 223. Of the Horse that was unhandsome but swift.
THere was a horse as plain as a Pike-staff,
They that had trappings at that horse did laugh;
A Race was to be run, that homely Jade
They thought was never cut out for that trade;
They start, and so did he, he made 'em stare
To see that worse than he, all themselves were:
He to the Goal came sooner than the rest,
Though worse to see, that made him to hear best.
Mor.
A plain Jade is a very hateful thing,
But a brave horse though plain may serve a king;
We say they handsome are that handsome do,
Although a handsome horse and metal too
Is best of all, if fortune shall divide
Them two, the swifter horse, I Would choose to ride.
FAB. 224. Of the Country fellow that was suffered to come to a Lawyer by the
bleating of a Kid.
ONe had a friend a Lawyer, and he
Being in suit, his Client needs would be;
He came, and came, and still he was put off,
Who without money come, Lawyers do scoff:
He busy was, his Clerk did still infist,
He only wanted greasing in the fist.
The cunning Swain a fat and lusty kid
Soon after brought, him bleat he need not bid;
He pinched him so that he was forced to bleat,
Then open the door said he, that is good to eat:
Some call it Venison, I do love it well,
That I am now at perfect leisure tell
The honest man, him very welcome bid,
He comes with meat in's mouth, I hear the Kid.
Mor.
All doors will open though e're so close they be,
Try but to do it with a silver key;
Fring but good fees, and it is the Lawyers pleasure
To be always at home, always at leisure.
FAB. 225. Of an old man that ston^d a young fellow down that stole his Apples.
ANaughty boy was got into a tree,
To rob an old man's orchard there was he,
Whether the old man his Spectacles had on,
He spied a Thief his Apple Tree upon:
Called to him, good Sweet heart prithee come down,
Those words were too too soft to give a clown.
He took up grass when his words would not do
To throw at him, in herbs there is virtue too
Said he, then cried the boy the old man's mad
Flings grass, then he to take up flints was glad;
And when to crack his crown he made no bones,
I Will try said he what virtue is in stones.
Mor.
Go not to war till all things else be done,
Turn every stone for peace e're you throw one;
First try what words will do, and then what grass,
S^ines are the worst of remedies alas.
FAB. 226. Of the Nightingal that promised the Hawk a Song for her life.
Awarbling Nightingal caught by a Hawk,
Could by no melody his clutches bawk;
Dear Sir, said he, be pleased to let me go,
How thankful I shall be I Will let you know;
I Will fill your ears with many a pleasant song,
Spare but my life and do me but no wrong:
You fill my ears said he? pray fill my belly
That must be filled, that has no ears I tell you,
I can well fast from songs, all the year round,
But not from meat, for that would soon redound
To my great hurt, (in sour and twenty hours)
My bowels yearn for you, as I am yours.
Mor.
Let Minstrels stand behind, it is a disease
Less to mind what will profit than will please.
FAB. 227. Of the Lion that chose the Hog for his Companion.
MOst creatures to the Lion did make court
To bear him company, 'twas not in sport
But in good earnest, he refused 'em all
Saving the hog, him he did kindly call.
(Much good may do him with his cleanly mate,
A kin for that to some who swines flesh hate.)
His reason was hogs always friends have been,
That would go with their friends through thick and thin;
He truly said, 'twas no abusive flurt
A hog will not leave me when I Am in the dirt.
Mor.
Him for thy friend to take there is no cause why,
That will not be so in thine adversity.
FAB. 228. Of the Gnat that begged meat and Lodging of a Be.
AGnat with cold and hunger in great danger,
Begged with the Bees to be at rack and manger;
Take me into your hives said he, and I
Will teach your young ones curious melody,
I am a Fiddler. Bees this answer made
Not so, we will teach our young ones our own trade
To get their living, it is to us a riddle
Who are concerned to live, should merely siddle.
Mor.
To childrens education this care give
So bring them up, they may know how to live.
FAB. 229. Of an Ass that was the Trumpeter, and a Hare that was the Letter
post.
THe King of beasts with birds commenced a war,
He to the earth belongs, they to the air;
They of two elements could not agree,
He Would have the Ass and Hare his soldiers be:
The Hare is fearful, and the Ass is slow,
The Bear alleged neither of them will do;
Said the Lion, Ass my Trumpeter shall be,
The Hare my Letter-post, for swift is he.
Mor.
All are of use, know we but how to use 'em,
As all may hurt us, if we do abuse 'em:
Though it may seem in war they useless are,
Lion knows what to do with the Ass and Hare.
FAB. 230. Of the Hawks which fell out amongst themselves, which the Pigeons
made friends.
THe Hawks among themselves had wont to jar,
The silly Pigeons laid to heart that war;
Made peace betwixt them at a solemn diet,
But then the other birds could not be quiet:
They least of all as who should say a spite
They ought them, cause they would not let them fight;
But hushed their civil wars, and made a close,
Hawks would be fighting, witness the hawks nose.
Mor.
Help Hawks for to fall out, hinder them not
If they agree, Pigeons must go to pot;
When they have civil wars laugh in your hoods,
When Thieves fall out, true neen come by their goods.
FAB. 231. Of the Governor that was condemned of money unjustly taken.
AGriping Praetor feathered had his nest,
For his exaction was called to the test;
He was a Sponge did hugely suck and suck,
Was full as he could hold of wealth and muck:
Came to be squeezed, (such sponges squeezed must be)
Forced to restore his ill-got wealth was he;
They that first get then loose unlawful gain,
Conceive with pleasure, but bring forth with pain,
As women do, one said, that understood,
He lost what he had got, like drops of blood.
Mor.
Stolen goods are sweet when they at first are taken,
Bitter as gall, when they are cast up again.
FAB. 232. Of the old man that would put off Death.
TO an old man death himself did appear,
Thou must pack hence said he, as I am here;
Good Death said he, be patient until
You give me time, at least to make my Will:
And for so great a journey to provide
He did beg as for life, but was denied,
Said he, great patience 'twas I did not take
Thee hence e're now, Is thy Will yet to make?
Time after time I did thee warning give,
It Is next a miracle, that thou do live.
Your face said he I never saw before,
Spare me a while, and I Will entreat no more.
Never saw my face? said death, will you say so?
Who men like grass use with my Sithe to mow;
Men younger than your self, and children too;
You must never think such an excuse will do;
Nay in thy self I a long time have dwelt,
Me in thine eyes and ears thou might have felt;
Death in thy limbs, and death in all thy senses,
No warning to have had are vain pretenses;
Life's part in thee death's more than countervail
Did, though not yet, you are dead as a door nail.
Therefore old man, let not vain hopes abuse thee,
March off thou must and shall, I Will not excuse thee.
Mor.
Death till it come in earnest is derided,
And when it comes finds most men unprovided;
Though many warning Arrows it does dart,
They will not be took men play loath to depart.
FAB. 233. Of the Man that spoke to his bags of money.
AN old Syncator ready for to die,
Had got his wealth by fraud and bribery;
Before he di'd would parley with his bag,
How he came by it he would no cause to brag:
But how it should be spent he wished to know,
Whom to make merry it at last should go.
The bag made answer to his small content
E'ne upon feasts and whores it will be spent;
And Pluto to in rich, that great tormentor,
More fool were thou, to get it at a venture.
Mor.
It Is a great vanity that is found in some,
Fathers with rakes, their sons with pitchforks come;
Those children mostly richest are they tell,
Whose parents for their sakes do go to hell,
What parents toil for till they come to die,
Children for wine, and women make to fly;
Who hardly gets his wealth its value knows
Too well, but what comes lightly, lightly goes.
LIB. II.
FAB. 1. Of the Fox and the He-goat.
A Fox and He-goat both were much athirst,
Went down into a well ('it was much they durst)
'Twas easy to get in, but to get out
That was the business, it was a tough bout:
Sir Reynard was a Fox, and he could tell
How to convey himself out of the well.
Sir Goat says he, mount your feet on the wall,
Lower your back, (for now you are too tall.)
Then clap your head and horns close to your breast,
When that is done leave me to do the rest:
I Will leap upon your back and so get out,
To pluck you after me I do not doubt.
Thanks to the goat the Fox escaped full well,
But how the goat should 'scape he could not tell;
Then Fox the Carrot-monger, laughed in's sleeve,
To see how he the goat in the lurch did leave;
Good Sir said he, from henceforth have a care
How you go in, until that sure you are
How to get out again, one shunned it, when
He saw no steps were from the Lions den.
Mor.
Whatsoever you undertake always attend
Not the beginning only, but the end.
FAB. 2. Of the Fox and the Lion, vide FAB. 3. Of the Fox and the Patridges.
ONe who had store of Cocks a Patridge bought,
But they with him perpetually fought
And beat him out of heart, he said they use
Because I am no cock, me to abuse.
But he soon saw because he was no brother
'Twas not, for they did peck at one another,
He said, when they did peck at one another,
I Am well content, they use me like a brother.
Mor.
If Foreigners abuse thee make no pother,
Since Contrymen deal so with one another.
FAB. 4. Of the man that tempted Apollo.
A Knavish fellow came to try Apollo,
Thinking to prove his Oracles were hollow;
Pretended for to know what they knew not,
He thought that he had a great purchase got
Under his cloak a bird, tell me said he,
Whether this bird alive or dead now be:
He meant to kill it if he said alive,
If he said dead, he meant it should survive;
It is said he, whether of them you will,
It you may keep alive, or you may kill.
Mor.
Idle conceits do those vain persons follow
Who think by any means to cheat Apollo;
No cloak can hide things from omnisciency,
God must see all things, for God is all-eye.
FAB. 5. Of the Woman and the Hen.
A Woman had a Hen which every day
As the days came about, one egg did lay;
Give her more meat thought she, and she will lay two,
She fed her twice for once, but would not do:
Then she grew fat and would not lay at all,
Crammed like a Capon, barren was withal.
Mor.
Some folks do take great pains estates to get,
The Fish once caught they throw away the nee;
What some Divines do do this tale does teach,
More Livings that they have, the less they preach.
FAB. 6. Of the Beaver that geldeth himself.
BEavers they say are hunted for their stones
For medicinal virtues, they are precious one
A Beaver that was eagerly pursued,
Did know it was because he was endu'd
With stones of value, he did make no bones
To geld, and throw to the Pursuivant his stones.
'Twas to prevent a far more great disaster,
The Beaver chose to be a Demy-castor;
Eunucht himself to use the Logic Idiom
Let the Species go, to keep the Individuum.
Mor.
Ransom thy life with gold and precious stones,
To part with all for that make thou no bones;
Men drown their goods that they may not sink their Barges,
Sure none but fools will die for to save charges.
FAB. 7. Of the Tunie and the Dolphin.
A Tunie by a Dolphin sorely chased,
Did wind himself into a Creek at last;
The Dolphin did so too, wounded was he,
The Tunie overjoyed that sight to see:
Cried out, with all my wounds much good may do
My self, now I do see thee wounded too.
Mor.
It does assuage men's griefs, lighten their woe*
If they have company, and they their foes.
FAB. 8. Of the Fortune Tellers.
A Gypsy used folks fortunes for to tell,
If others, she her own knew not so well
Whilst she at market was, telling the maids
What husbands they should have, the men what trades:
How long this boy, and the other Girl should live,
A large account of things to come did give;
One came and told a story made her sad,
Her house was robbed, Thieves had took all she had;
Then wa is me said she, Ahone Ahone,
I can tell others fortunes not my own.
Mor.
Too many Gypsies in the world there are,
That of their own concerns do take no care;
Mind other folks, in them they spy all motes,
Tug at the Oars they have in others boats:
Neglect their own, to them all dooms seem known
Of other folks, but they don't know their own.
FAB. 9. Of the sick man and the Doctor.
A Man of Galen's trade, to one was sick
Did come, he felt his pulse, found it too quick:
He asked him how he did? in a great sweat
Said he, O that is good, if you do get
No cold upon it, said his loving Quack,
Or drink cold beer, rather a cup of Sack.
Next time he came, he found him cold and chill,
That Is very good said he, I like you still;
Better, and better, came for a third see
Then he a looseness had, that is good said he:
That as one said, Apochirotonize
May the morbifick cause if you be wise;
One asked the man himself, who loved no lying,
Said he, Quack says I Am well, but I am dying.
Mor.
All flatterers sneak, but the worst of flattery
Is to delude folks when about to die.
FAB. 10. Of the Fowler, and the Blackbird.
A Blackbird did a Fowler see full well
Spreading a net, what 't meant he could not tell;
Made bold to ask, but such it seems his wit is,
He made him to believe that he built cities:
He went into the snare (wise-acres he)
Then greatly longed forthwith released to be;
The Fowler came again, and saw him there,
That this your city was, I'se not aware;
Said he, who ever such a city grants
Shall surely have but few Inhabitants.
Mor.
Who stirs up fierceness can show no cause why,
Cities have never grown by cruelty;
Who places fill with snares, gins and distresses,
Do turn great Cities into wildernesses.
FAB. 11. Of the Traveller and the Dog that was found.
A Longsome Journey one had undertook,
He sought relief from Jove by hook or crook;
Promised whatever he found he half should have,
But in conclusion he played the knave:
He Dates and Almonds found (perhaps 'twas Lent)
But all of them upon himself he spent;
Only the Almond husks, and stones of dates,
To Jupiter he boldly dedicates:
Saying great Jove, I pray thee be content,
Outsides and insides both, I thee present.
Mor.
Some men they say are so in love with pelf,
So cunning too, they will cheat the Devil himself;
Nay which is worse, some Jove himself would cheat,
Give him the stones, and husks, and keep the meat.
FAB. 12. Of the boy and his mother.
A Woman had a son a Horn-book stole,
As boldly as a Miller might take tole;
She knew it, so unkindly fond was she
She whipped him not, for his thefts ABC.
He quickly stole Primmers, and Testaments,
And Bibles too, not minding their contents;
He grew a thief at length, would have at all,
Worthy to have memoirs such as Du vall:
Came to this end had sentence for to stretch,
His mother bare him company, the wretch
Got leave to whisper in his mothers ear,
As who was loath that other folks should hear;
And though a woman's ears been't good to eat,
Fastening on hers he made his teeth to meet.
I Will have thee by the ears, said he, because
Thou did permit me for to break the laws
Of God, and men, sparing thy cruel rod,
Cruel, because 'twas spared, in grace of God
I might have come to good, if thou had whipped me
And in the bud, when I stole Horn-books, nipt me;
Thy seeming kindness was flat cruelty
Thanks to thy fondness, I come thus to die.
Mor.
For less offenses early punishment
Far greater crimes, and the Gallows may prevent.
FAB. 13. Of the Shepherd that turned Seaman.
A Shepherd kept his sheep near to the Sea,
Which when he saw exceeding calm to be,
Quoth he, I Will sell my sheep and merchandise,
He dealt in Dates, and thought to have a prize;
But a storm did arise, a mighty storm,
He was compelled to the tempest to conform.
Which would have all his Lading, if his life
It spared, thinks he life's sweet, I have a wife
And children that will miss me, Sea, take all
But promise that come safe to shore I shall.
He safely came to shore, soon after saw
One wondering that the Sea did stand in awe
As 'twere, it was so very still and grave,
The Shepherd said, the Sea more Dates would have.
Mor.
When malt and hops and fuel all are cheap,
Into a Brewhouse every one would leap;
But when all these begin to rise amain,
Then O cries he, that I were out again.
Calm times trappan men, make 'em go to Sea,
Come storms, and they of other minds will be.
FAB. 14. Of an old man's Son and a Lion.
ONe to his Son had a young Gentleman,
From danger he would keep him if he can;
He dreamt he by a Lion should be killed,
Was thereupon with dread and terror filled:
Built him a Palace, kept him always there,
Of Lions in that place he had no fear:
All sorts of beasts he painted on the wall,
Hoping for to delight him therewithal.
(Because he loved to hunt) Lion was one,
He soon repented that he had so done;
His son the Lion saw, had heard his fame
And fathers dream, his color went and came:
Thinks he the Lion in my fathers dream
Has so confined me, I a prisoner seem;
My father for his sake does me immure,
He dreams of Lions, sends me to the Tower:
The picture of a Lion I do hate,
Dreams pictures are, upon a dream I wait;
A Lion pictured in my fathers mind
When fast asleep, has made him thus unkind
To keep me here, thus his poor son to harras,
I Will be revenged oth' Lion in the Arras.
Up went his fist, at him with all his might
He struck, his hand upon a nail did light:
A wretched nail which woefully did pester
His tender hand, it thereupon did fester:
Brought him into a fever, by, and by
In spite of Doctors the young man did die;
Those towering walls could not preserve his breath,
When all was done, a Lion was his death.
Mor.
Divine Decrees will certainly commence,
None can anticipate Gods providence.
FAB. 15. Of the Eagle and the Fox.
EAgle and Fox, agreed to dwell close by
Each other, to confirm their amity;
The Eagle in a tree his house bespoke,
Fox his within a mile of the same oak:
Yea at the bottom of the Eagles tree,
Loath at a greater distance for to be.
Fox went abroad, (Foxes hunt far from home)
Mean time did the Eagle to her Kennel come;
Took all her Cubs, being to seek for meat,
Them, she, and hers, forthwith made shift to eat.
Reynard came back, and found an empty box
And seeing that, looked as red as a Fox:
And poured out curses, long as his own tail,
Whilst she her Cubs did passionately bewall;
After this Eagle stole part of a Kid,
(Was slain for Sacrifice) and therewith hid
An unknown firebrand, in his grassie nest,
Then Fox that cursed the Eagle himself blessed.
The nest was fired, the Eagles could not fly,
Could not be helped they must fall down and die;
And did, Sir Reynard smiled, and said if it fall,
(As the nest was tumbling) I will catch it pit-fall;
Good as his word was he, Eagle's brave meat
Quoth he, when they good store of Foxes eat:
They Are very young, how tenderly they eat?
Methinks I never tasted better meat
Than is an Eagle larded with a Fox,
It Is better than the Surloin of an ox,
This pleases me the best of all I tell you,
My young ones are come back into my belly.
Mor.
Who friendship violates and wrongs allies,
Will find ith upshot he has got no prize;
If humane justice he shall chance to fly,
By a just hand from heaven he is like to die.
To devour sacrifices is no jest,
Who steals from the Altar he will fire his nest.
FAB. 16. Of the Eagle and the Raven.
EAgle's a King, and can do what he will,
It was his pleasure a brave sheep to kill;
The Raven thought that he might do so too,
He got upon a sheep, it would not do;
To clap upon his back that was the best
That he could do, the sheep did him arrest;
Made him for to continue where he found him,
With Cords of wool to's good behavior bound him:
Then cut his wings and threw him to the boys,
To play with him, as they do use with toys;
Then one passed by and asked what bird was he?
I took my self an Eagle for to be:
His answer was, that fancied foolishly
But a poor Raven, without wings am I.
Mor.
'Twill cost thy wings if Pride thee so inveagle,
To think thou but a Raven, art an Eagle.
FAB. 17. Of the Nightingal and the Hawk.
THe Nightingal sang sweetly all alone,
The Hawk did change his note and made him moa^,
Nothing would serve his turn, but he would kill him,
He said I Am but a bit, and cannot fill him:
To fill your ears with music I Will take care,
I Am no Camelion for to feed on air
Said he, my hungry stomach craves for meat,
A Nightingal is good for Hawks to eat:
I Am but a mouthful cannot your belly fill,
Said he I shall slide down like a mere pill;
The greater birds are all at your command,
His answer was give me a bird in the hand.
Mor.
Possession's eleven points of the law,
Reversions will not fill a hungry maw;
Something some savor has to break ones fast,
A hungry belly's evermore in haste.
FAB. 18. Of the Cat, and the Cock.
PUss longed for Cocks, her longing for to save
As many tricks as dancing bear to have
She was resolved; first said folks could not sleep
For him, because he such a noise did keep:
No cause said he, you that so ill should take,
You know it is my work the folks to wake;
You carnally do know Sister and mother
Said he, if you will have reasons there is another.
We Bruits have Bruets said he, whereby we may
Lie with each other, else we cannot lay
Eggs as we do, the Cat the question begs
That thinks if we don't so we may lay eggs;
Full of excuses said the Cat at last
Methinks you are, but I don't mean to fast.
Mor.
With some excuses every one would cloak
The worst things that he does, and yet revoke
What they intended, some will not, although
They nothing signify, they are made to know.
When all pleas fail, some openly profess
They will do what they list, nevertheless:
Some know no law or reason but their will
Baffle all they can say, they are the same still.
FAB. 19. Of the Fox and the Bramble.
A Fox distressed upon a Bramble got,
There chanced to meet what he expected not:
His foot was sorely pricked, feeling his danger,
Said he, is this your kindness to a stranger?
Sir Bramble, I for refuge hither fled,
You have so wounded me I Am almost dead.
You are a Fox said he, and must be scratched,
Brambles like other creatures cannot be caught;
They catch, if you to me for succor call
I am a Hedge, I Am not an Hospital:
It Is not for them that such fine skins do wear
As you, but for Hedge-hogs to quarter here.
Mor.
Foxes may loose their wits by great distress,
Else to a bramble which is merciless
A Fox had never gone to beg his aid,
Some folks appear without all bowels made:
Their nature's to do hurt not to do good,
To seek to them it must be understood
For helps in vain, they will hinder if they can
Or scratch or tear (that brambles many a man;)
They Are woefully put to it to shift and scramble,
Who for relief make suit unto a bramble.
FAB. 20. Of the Fox and the Crocodile.
TIme was a Fox and Crocodile contended
Which of them two more nobly was descended;
Crocodile said, he was, his pedigree
So ancient was, Nilus's head might be
As soon found out as the original,
Of the house whence he came, the Fox did call
His skin to witness, (as it were a Coat
Of Arms) his house long since, was of no note:
Said the Fox by that thy skin it may be seen,
Stripped of thy glory thou a long time have been.
Mor.
H' has led no easy life, doubt not to pawn
All thou art worth, whose hands are hard as brawn;
Some marks in things puts all out of doubt,
Words may be spared, when things themselves speak out:
Who can be made believe a horse his youth
That sees the mark is quite out of his mouth?
FAB. 21. Of the man and the wooden God.
ONe had a wooden God to whom he prayed
For gold and silver, as he wanted aid;
To him the more he prayed, the less he had,
That made the man become stark staring mad.
He took his God by the heels swong him about,
Threw him against the stones, dashed his brains out:
And this he had to recompense his pains,
Bursting his seull, there he found gold for brains.
Mor.
Whosoever to wooden Gods do pray, speed worse,
He rather shall be blessed who such does curse.
FAB. 22. Of the Fox and the Hunters.
A Fox was hunted, to a Woodman he
Did fly from the pursuit secured to be;
Good Sir said he, tell me where I may hide,
He pressed it hard, and it was not denied:
Hide there said he, there you may be secure,
He seemed in earnest for he looked demure:
The Hunter came he would not himself disgrace
By saying ought, but pointed to the place.
Mor.
Some undo with their hands what with their tongues
They did, bad fingers have, if not bad lungs;
Seem to do good, but do hurt in the main,
Red Cows give good milk, kick it down again.
FAB. 24. Of the Husbandman.
A Wealthy Yeoman when he lay a dying,
His children came about him all a crying;
And where his bags were, much desired to know,
But durst not say a word to him I trow:
He said to them, When I am dead I bid
You dig the Vineyard well, there I have hid
My gold and silver, and my other treasure,
They dig'd and dig'd and dig'd without all measure:
But found no money there, but money worth
For then, the Vineyard a huge crop brought forth.
Mor.
It Is better for to teach thy Son a Spade
How for to use, than bring him up a Blade;
For Blades will spend, whilst Diggers force the earth
To yield its fruit, and need not fear a dearth;
If you can do no more care not a fig,
Leave Sons a Vineyard, say, go dig, go dig.
FAB. 25. Of the Fisherman.
A Fisherman no master of his Art
For to catch fish, did set himself apart;
For to catch fish, on a pipe he did play,
That by his music come to hand would they
He thought, why might not he draw Pike and Carp,
As Orpheus drew Beasts, and trees with his harp;
The Fish as listening to his pipe lay still,
And would not stir at all, which he took ill.
He then put up his pipes, used them no more,
Then he threw in his net, caught fish good store;
Which when he ceased to pipe would skip and dance,
But when he pip'd would not one step advance:
He saw them dance when put out of the net,
Ashore, which he with piping could not get
Them for to do in their own element,
He thought 'em cross, and took great discontent.
Mor.
Fishes are mutes and silence they love best,
With them no noise or musicks in request;
His great mistake will be cast in his dish,
Who uses pipes for nets when he would fish:
Who entertains a fish with noise does dare him,
The way to catch a fish is not to scare him;
The humor of some Customers is such,
They Will give your price if, you don't talk too much;
With silence toward some we must advance,
We must not pipe if we'd have fish to dance.
FAB. 26. Of the Fishermen.
FIshermen have a name for patience,
Without it to attempt that trade's no sense;
Yet some of them out of all patience were,
They Would sped so ill that they could not forbear
For to repine, weary as horses, they
And hungry were, and yet had caught no prey
Packing up to be gone, a Fish there came
Of no small bulk, and price, so very tame
That it did leap into their Peter boat,
'Twas hunted by another you must note,
That one was worth a power of other fish,
'Twas dear sold, for 'twould make a lovely dish:
What pains would do the Fisherman had tried,
Fortune performed, what industry denied.
Mor.
Industrious men use to have best success,
Though fortune without pains seems them to bless;
She would be thanked alone and therefore she
Cries, give men luck, and throw them into the sea.
FAB. 27. Of the Fishermen.
SOme Fishermen were overjoyed, their net
In The Sea so heavy felt, did hope to get
A mighty booty when it came to land,
It proved another thing, when it came to hand;
But the great weight may't please you was a stone,
That for a Salmon how did they bemoan.
A stone was then the most that they could get,
They found that all is not fish, that comes to net:
One wiser than the rest, bid them employ
Their minds to think, Sorrow's a kin to joy:
This was a stone the next a fish may be,
Humane vicissitudes we must foresee.
Mor.
Man's married to fate and it is his curse,
H' accepts it not for better and for worse;
Every man's case is very agauish,
Sometimes we meet with stones sometimes with fish.
FAB. 28. Of an old man that wished for Death.
AN aged man, like the man in the moon
Loaded with sticks, cried out he was undone;
He seemed to wish for death, tired out of measure
Death quickly came, desired to know his pleasure:
Sir death said he, I nothing else do lack
But that you would lift my burden on my back:
I laid it down cannot get it up again,
Refreshed, I Am willing to renew my pain.
Mor.
Life upon any terms most men would have,
They have a strong aversion to the grave;
Wishing for death they say they know not what,
For when death comes, then any thing but that.
FAB. 29. Of the woman and the Physician.
A Woman's eyes were very much enflamed,
The course-she took was no ways to be blamed;
Sought to a Doctor for his best advice,
In case he cured her promised a great price
For all his pains, but if she cured were not
By his endeavors, nothing should be got.
He went to work, bled her, and Issues made,
And did what else did belong to his trade;
He closed her eyes, lest the light should offend
Or her or him, her Goods he did intend
And took them all away, though by degrees
And in so doing paid himself large fees:
When that was done, he told her that she saw,
But she said no, and so they went to law;
This argument she used ('it was all in one)
Before I could see Goods now can see none.
Mor.
They Will contradict themselves who have a mind
To save their money, she said she was blind;
And yet she saw her goods were took away,
Covetous people care not what they say.
FAB. 30. Of the two Enemies.
TWo men there were whom one house could not hold
(Though one Ship did) they were so apt to scold;
Their enmity was easy to discern,
One got to the Prow, the other to the Stern:
'Twas come to that, they had cause to mistrust
Whom one house could not hold, one Sea soon must:
Of being cast away began to think,
He at the Prow did ask which side would sink
First of the two, the Pilot said the stern,
'Twas like a mighty Cordial from Mayem;
With a good courage follow him I durst
Said he, if I may but see him go first.
Mor.
Some are so bent their enemies to undo,
They say we will perish may they perish too;
Revenge on some men has so great a charm,
Their own good's less to them than their foe's harm.
FAB. 31. Of the Boy and Fortune.
BLind fortune spied a boy asleep to be
Close by a well, (strange blind and yet did see)
Sweet heart to call thee hence I hither came
Said he, should thou fall in, I'se bear the blame.
Mor.
Some that they might pretend to innocence,
Cast all their faults upon Gods providence.
FAB. 32. Of the mice and the Cat.
A Cat perceived a magazine of mice
In a good house, went thither in a trice;
Made woeful havoc did her belly fill,
Reserved the rest time after time to kill.
Therefore the mice in a full number met,
To that same trade resolved some bounds to set.
It us behooves as our selves we love
Not to go down, say they, but keep above
Out of the reach of Puss, where she cannot come
Or she will kill all the mice, as she has some:
Puss knew their plot, and forthwith did project
How she might make it be of none effect;
Hung her self by the heels upon a post
Not by the neck, she was a cunning tossed;
When they shall see Puss hanged they will think she is dead
Thought she, One mouse had more wit in his head,
If that be the Cat I doubt she is not dead
Quoth he, she hangs by the heels not by the head.
The Proverb says, Dead women do not trust,
Then were she dead, dead Cat much less I must;
Nay though the eighth time dead, for though men's wives
Do live but once, they say Cats have nine lives.
Mor.
Less than a mouse is he that will believe
A cheating knave that did him once deceive;
Who cheats me once, a knave shall be his name,
Mine fool, if I Am twice cheated by the same:
Of whom by one cheat I have warning taken,
Though'd hang himself shall not cheat me again.
FAB. 33. Of the Ape and the Fox.
AN Ape so neatly danced, they made him king,
'Twas a brave dance that made a royal thing;
The Fox did think his wit might him advance
No less than did the Ape his skilful dance:
'Twould make a Fox look red, to see an Ape
Preferred before him, though he have a shape
More like to man's, that said, an Ape's an Ape
And a Fox is a Fox, for all his shape.
Fox led the APe (Foxes Apes use to lead)
The Ape as void of Head as tail, no dread
Had of the Fox, he led him to a ditch
Where some body flesh with a snare did pitch;
That is a treasure which belongs to kings
Said the Fox to the Ape, therefore those things
Are thine, be pleased to seize them to thy use;
He caught at them, was caught, soon saw the abuse
The Fox had put upon him, and complained
Of his deceit, but thereby only gained
This answer, thou have well deserved this thing,
For thinking thou deserv'dst to be a king.
Mor.
Ambition ends in scorn, when an Ape dares
Accept of Kingship, Foxes will lay snares;
Aim not too high, nor dare to fly at all,
Who vainly soar, take but the greater fall.
FAB. 34. Of Jupiter and the Crow.
OF Birds a great assembly Jove did call,
To try which was the finest bird of all;
The finest bird he did intend for King,
(For personage in a Prince is a good thing)
The Crow had notice what was to be done,
He a Competitor would be for one.
Of every handsome bird he got a feather,
Preparing of himself for to go thither
Came finest of 'em all, for he had all
The finenesses of birds, both great and small:
He did outshine them all at the first sight,
With their own feathers, which did raise great spite;
Then every one made bold to take his own,
When that was done, so ugly there was none
As was the Crow, like Negroe that had been
Clad in fine clothes, but now stripped to the skin.
Thou fool said they, did thou aim to be king?
Because thou had got this and that fine thing;
Which thou from others borrowed had, or stole,
Now having but thy own, you are a sad tool.
Mor.
The man that is all Quotations is a Crow
Full of fine feathers, other folk's, I trow.
If stripped of them he and his writings be,
As black and ugly as a Crow is he;
Let not men seem to exceed their own tethers,
They Are only fine, who are fine in their own feathers.
FAB. 35. Of the Smith and the Dog.
SMug had a dog full slick and smug might be,
Whilst Smug wrought hard, idle as dog was he;
Under the Anvil he did lie and snort,
All the while that his master had resort
With His Hammer thereunto, about his work
As one was unconcerned, there he did lurk:
Until to dine his master did betake him,
When that time came he needed none to wake him
From under the Anvil, he got under the table,
He made no bones of bones, he was so able
Them first to chew, and then for to digest,
The Smith observing this himself thus blessed:
Bless me said he, how shall poor I find meat?
For a Dog will never work but always eat.
Mor.
The dog that will not work let him not eat,
Why should one live upon another sweat.
FAB. 36. Of a Mule.
THe Son of Monsieur Ass, and Madam mare
Called Mule, was wanton made with too good fare;
Then said my father a great Courser was,
But quite forgot his mother was an Ass:
I am as like him as e're I can look
Said he, and for my father have been took;
He was to run a race, no race could run,
He soon desisted after he begun:
Then said no wonder I so soon do tire,
Now I remember an Ass was my Sire.
Mor.
Folks in prosperity often play the fools,
Think themselves horses, when they are but mules.
FAB. 37 Of a Physician.
A Doctors Patient happened for to die,
Unto his friends he would needs show cause why;
It was he said, because he would drink wine
And take no Clysters, else he did divine
He might have lived, one said it was too late
To say this now, Inexorable fate
Had done its work, this counsel you should give
Your Patients, said they, whilst they do live.
Mor.
Who gives advice, does but his friends befool,
To shut the Stable, when the Steed is stole.
FAB. 38. Of the Dog and the Wolf.
A Wolf had seized a dog that was but thin,
A Rascal of his body, but mere skin
And bone, who pleaded he was yet but carrion,
Besought that him some longer time he would tarry on:
His master shortly was to have a feast,
Would cost the life of many a bird and beast;
A Wedding-feast he said, spare the poor dog
Til then, 'twill make him fat as any hog.
And then my flesh said he will be rare meat,
As sweet and short as venison it will eat;
Knowing the honesty of dogs, the wolf
Suffered him for that time to shoot the Gulf
And to escape, not doubting but his tongue
Was right, there is such virtue in his dung:
It cures those persons that sore mouths bemoan,
Blister by lying he will not his own;
Soon as he thought the dog was fat indeed
The wolf did come, not without hope to speed:
When he came first, the dog slept at the door,
But took such warning he would sleep there no more
But slept within; then called the wolf, Sir Dog
Make good your word, you are now fat as a hog;
It may be so said he, take the other bout
With me, when you do see me sleep without:
If at the door you find me, in a mortar
Beat me the second time, I Will crave no quarter.
Mor.
Wise men take warning, and will come no more
Abroad, if they cannot keep the wolf from the door.
FAB. 39. Of the Lion and the Bull.
TO bate a Bull A Lion, did design
And eat him then, his policy was fine:
Meaning to sup with him, with him to sup
Invited him, thinking to eat him up;
Sir Bull said he, I have a curious sheep,
Help me to eat it, for it will not keep.
(A compelment some use) Sir Bull loved mutton,
Did he or not, Lion cared not a Button:
'Twas Beef he longed for, Beef is King of meat,
Bull was called to be eaten, not to eat.
Which he discerned not, till he saw no sheep
IN the Lions tent, then he began to peep
Seeing huge fires and spits, in a wrong box
Am I said he, here is fire to roast an Ox;
A way he trudged, seeing the Lion gull
Him merely with a sheep, it was a Bull
By all those fires, Caldrons, and spits, he would have;
When he was out of reach, he called him knave.
Mor.
If some lay snares, some again are as wise
For to escape all snares which they devise.
FAB. 40 Of the Lion that loved a Countrey-mans daughter.
A Lion greatly loved a Countrey-Lass,
How to get friends consent all his care was;
He prayed her father would consent at least,
I Will not my daughter marry to a beast
Said he, then did the Lion frown, and roar,
When he saw that, he durst refuse no more.
Part from thy teeth said he, and pare thy paws,
My daughter shall be thine, in spite of laws;
But of those things she is really afraid,
He that would marry must not scare the maid:
Lion yields every thing for which he calls;
Parts with his keys to gain her Virginals;
And pared his paws, to shake her by the hand,
That done, she was no more at his command.
Said he, not then shall I my daughter wed
To an old beast has never a tooth in's head;
Sir Lion if that now you rampant be,
I Will make you couchant e're I Have done with you:
Stood over him like Hercules with a club,
Basted his son in law, as a young Cub.
Mor.
Lions are Lions because such provision
Of arms they have, or they would be a derision;
Whosoever disarms himself does merely dote,
Let enemies know it, and they will cut his throat:
He worthy is to be received with laughter,
Will to a Beast, though a Lion match his daughter.
FAB. 41. Of the Lioness and the Fox.
A Fox made bold to jear a Lioness,
Although a Queen, like a mere Joan or Bess;
The cause was slight, but one whelp at a Litter
She had, but yet her taunts were very bitter:
There is no cause why me thou should cry fie on
For one whelp at a time since it is a Lion,
Said the brave Lioness, a royal Babe
It is, thou have but Cubs thou foul-mouthed drab.
Mor.
This as a certain rule be understood;
It matters not how many but how good;
What holds in wives, may it not hold in any
Thing else? one good's enough, one bad's too many.
FAB. 42. Of the Wolf and the Lamb.
A Wolf with harmless Lamb would please his gust,
He would do that, and yet he would seem just;
Erected a high Court, did him indite,
That he of old had done him great despite:
Then said the Lamb, that surely is not true,
For then before I was I hurt did do.
My grass you eat, Lamb was not so much an Ass
But he could say, I Have no teeth to eat grass:
You drink my water, with words soft as silk
He said, may't please you I drink naught but milk;
Though by your words you innocent appear
Said the wolf, I am resolved to have good cheer.
Mor.
Who Innocents are minded to abuse,
Them in the first place study to accuse
Of no small crimes, to justify the same,
Are much concerned to ruin their good name:
Though all be false they spread reproaches thick,
Throw dirt enough, think they, something will stick.
FAB. 43. Of the two Cocks that fought one with another.
IT is a common thing for Cocks to fight
One with another, Hens have not less spite
But want their courage, time was two Cocks fought,
One with the others Hen would needs be naught;
Cock the Whore-master Chanced for to prevail,
Which made the honest cock himself bewail;
For to appear abroad he thought unmeet,
Cause he a Cuckold was, and also beat:
The conquering Cock scorned to abide below,
From the Housetop did 'ore the conquered crow
Clapping his wings, great insolency when
He did both tread the cock and tread his hen.
Then a great Eagle with a mighty force
Came down upon him, bid him take his course
Help himself as he could, out of his claw,
How he abused the conquered cock he saw:
He Would give him to his young ones for to eat,
A lusty Cock with Bacon is good meat;
The Cuckold cock all these things saw and heard,
His Rival gone, himself was not afraid
For to appear, and own his ravished hen;
Over his conquered foe he triumphed then.
Mor.
When thou do prosper be not Cock on hoop
Over others, time may come when thou may droop;
The upper spokes come down, the lower rise,
No man's at once both insolent and wise:
An Eagle may have thee at a bad lock,
And punish wrongs done to a shiftless cock.
FAB. 44. Of the Calf and the Hind.
WAs not the Hind a Calf? whom calves did jear,
That he the little dogs would dread and fear;
The dogs are less and have no horns to fight
Withal, said they, why should the dogs thee fright?
Thou art more swift, have better feet than they,
And come the worst to the worst, can run away:
Though this be true, Nature has me so made
Said he, that when dogs bark I am afraid.
Mor.
Though they in bulk and strength exceed, yet scarce
Cowardly natures will make sons of Mars.
FAB. 45. Of the Be and Jupiter.
THe waxie Bees with honey Jove presented,
He them a good reward if but contented
With reason meant to give, ask what you will,
Said he, that is just, I Will your request fulfill.
It seems they thought revenge as honey sweet,
And did ask more revenge than Jove thought meet.
Jove is a God that hates revenge and strife,
They said, who steals our honey take his life;
But Jove has love for men and for their lives,
Will Not have them die merely for emptying hives:
Showing his great dislike of what they said,
Rather than so, this good law shall be made
Said he, if ye sting men and loose your sting
Thereby, I Will with your death avenge the thing.
Mor.
Some to themselves procure an evil fate,
Whilst spightfully they others imprecate.
FAB. 46. Of the Fly.
A Fly into a mess of pottage fell,
How to get out again he could not tell;
To put a good face on it he thought was best,
And so he passed it over with a jest:
Having so eat, so drunk, so bathed, to die
I Am well content, said he, worms take the fly;
Now he is good meat, and fat as e're he will be,
You Will wish him now if when you're well you see.
Mor.
Never seem hard things too much to heart to take,
Always the best of a bad Market make.
FAB. 47. Of the young man and the Swallow.
A Wastful Heir had brought himself to lack
All necessaries but clothes to his back;
Seeing one Swallow fly, the time of year
He guessed from thence, and said Summer was near:
I Will sell my clothes said he, his clothes he sold,
'Twas not mid-winter yet, proved very cold.
Swallow soon after came that way again,
He had undone him the young man did complain
And himself too, the cold had almost killed him,
Thenceforth to serve him so no more he willed him.
Mor.
Who would conclude a war seeing one Drummer?
One Swallow (as they say) don't make a Summer;
Such a poor inference Reason would have thwarted,
But a fool and his money are soon parted.
FAB. 48. Of a Woodman.
A Woodman felled a tree which did grow nigh
A River dedicate to Mercury,
His axe did chance to fall into the River,
He prayed to Meercury it to deliver;
Then Mercury brought an Axe of pure gold made,
This yours said he? 'twas none of his he said;
A silver axe he brought in the next place,
To say that that was his h' had not the face:
Then take them both for yours said Mercury,
I love thee well because thou would not lie.
Another Woodman confident did wax
By this, into the River threw his axe;
Of his lost Axe he sadly did complain,
Prayed Mercury to help him to 't again:
( Mercury was like Mall-cut-purse in my mind,
It seems he could not only hide, but find)
Then Mercury brought him an axe of gold,
To say that that was his he did make bold;
Thou a gold Axe said he thou shall have none,
Who what was none of thine, did call thine own.
Mor.
As Poets feign amongst Numens there are ods,
Mercury was none of the most honest Gods;
Yet he rewarded virtue, and a Lie
Was here discountenanced by Mercury:
Few men so wicked are, such Gods are none,
Who wickedness in others will not disown.
FAB. 49. Of the Hares and the Frogs.
THe Hares were melancholy as a Cat,
Men, Eagles, dogs pursued them; it was that,
That every body was their enemy,
So troubled them they would drown themselves and die:
As they came by some Frogs did leap in first,
('It Was Cowardice, not courage that they durst)
Scared with the noise, one wiser than the rest
Said to the Hares, follow 'em we had not best;
For what we thought we find not true to be,
That of all creatures most distressed are we:
We do fear men and eagles and mad dogs,
There are that do fear us, to wit, the Frogs;
Unless most wretched of all things we were,
To drown our selves we 're mad as a March-Hare.
Mor.
Men think that bear their miseries they may,
If others seem to endure more than they.
FAB. 50. Of the Serpent and the Husbandman.
A Boy a Serpent struck, he bit the boy,
He di'd of's wounds that was his fathers joy;
He would have killed the Serpent, but did fail,
Aimed at his head but only cut his tail
With his sharp Axe, would after have been friends
When that was done, and made him some amends.
Took for that end Honey, Salt Water, meal,
Invites the Serpent, who'd not with him deal;
Excuse me Sir said he, your invitation
I cannot accept, there is some dissimulation,
To make us friends is a thing cannot be done,
Whilst I think of my tail, thou of thy son.
Mor.
It is not safe to trust thy self with those,
Unto whom mutual injuries thee expose.
FAB. 51. Of the Hen and the Fox.
TO a sick hen a Fox did make a visit,
Knocking at the door, the Hen cry'dout who is it
Knocks at my door? Sweet heart said Fox it is I;
I hear you are not well, Hen did reply
I shall be well enough when you are gone,
Hens cannot be well, whilst Foxes do look on.
Mor.
Whoever loves me not, if choose may I,
Give me his room, and not his company.
FAB. 52. Of the Fox.
THe Grapes were ripe enough for Foxes fast,
To strip the Vine Sir Reynard did make have;
Used all the wit he had to get a cluster
Or two, but could not do 't with all his bluster:
Then he resolved to come off with a jest,
Yet they are not fit to eat, but sour at best.
Mor.
Whosoever by Hunting cannot get to eat
A Hare, had best to cry she is but dry meat.
FAB. 53. Of the Fowler and the Partridge.
A Partridge far from meagre, (they are plump
You know,) by Fowler took, began to hump;
And whining said, Sir Fowler if that thou
Spar'st me, I Will bring thee Patridges enough:
Then the Fowler said, thou well deserve to die
Offering to spoil thy friends by Treachery.
Mor.
E'ne let him come to an untimely end,
Who is so base as to betray his friend.
FAB. 54. Of the Hare and the Tortoise.
A Hare did jear a Tortoise for his feet,
Boasted that he himself was far more fleet;
Then said the Tortoise let us run a race,
I am as swift as thou, will not bate the an ace:
It was agreed by mutual consent,
To stand to the Foxes wise arbitrament;
So 'twas a match, Tortoise did forthwith start,
The Hare did rest awhile, as swift as heart
Thinking her self to be, then to the Goal
She ran, but giving part she lost the whole:
Tortoise was got there first, for by the way
When the Hare made a halt, he did not stay.
Mor.
Ten to one he will prove best in the event,
Not who is most nimble, but most diligent.
FAB. 55. Of the Sallow and the Axe.
AXes not only fell trees with their edges,
But when that is done, do out of them make wedges
Wherewith to cleave themselves Sallow took't ill,
Wedges of Sallow should the Sallow spill;
Wood from her bowels should her bowels tear,
She thought such wedges most unnatural were:
It Is not so ill an Axe should fell a tree,
As by a Sallow wedge thus cleft should be.
Mor.
It Is not so sad to fall by enemies,
As when birds we brought up, pick out our eyes.
FAB. 56. Of the Peach tree and the Apple tree.
THe Peach and Apple Tree had great contest,
'Twas about that, which of them two were best;
The Bramble over heard the scoulding, he
Said the Law is chargeable, good friends agree.
Mor.
When quarrels among great ones do increase,
Sometimes poor Brambles may help to make peace.
FAB. 57. Of the Mole and its Dam.
A Proud young Mole (some moles are black and proud)
Unto his Dam was heard to say aloud
I smell a filthy scent, high chimneys see,
I hear a noise of hammers, he would be
Thought better than he was, and that he might
Be so, he did pretend not to want sight:
For all your have then said his Dam, I tell,
You seem to want both sight, and scent, and smell.
Mor.
As if they could do all things some make show,
But upon search are found can nothing do.
FAB. 58. Of the Wasps, the Patridge and the Husbandman.
A Patridge and a wasp were much athirst,
Both gave good words, though wasps use to be cursed;
They gave good words to a poor Countryman,
If help them to a little drink he can,
And will, one promised he would dig his ground,
His vines to greater profit should redound.
The waspish Wasp did promise with his sting
To keep off Thieves, and to guard every thing;
I have two Oxen said the Countryman,
Which promise nothing yet do all they can;
For to give strangers drink, I cannot afford,
It Is for my Ox, He Is better than his word.
Mor.
Never give to them who can do naught but crack,
Who silently do all let them never lack.
FAB. 59. Of Jupiter.
When Jove his Wedding kept (for Gods had wives
As Poets seign, for the comfort of their lives;)
Him at that feast all creatures did present,
He in good part took each ones complement
Saving the Serpents, whom he did expose,
Who in his mouth to him did bring a Rose:
Roses from prickles we do not refuse,
But from a serpents mouth he would not use.
Mor.
Jove hates a Serpent, and man Serpentine,
Thy Rose does stink, said he, because it is thine.
FAB. 60. Of the Flea.
A Plea as brisk as any Body-lowse
Nipt a man's back, as he slept in his house;
Which made him wake, and cry who is that bites me?
May't please you Sir said he it is but a Flea:
Let it not greatly trouble you if he bite,
For what is less vexatious than a Flea-bite?
Or fleas must suck folks skins or else be starved,
Nature to them no other food has carved;
It is all one for that the good man said,
If you will flay my skin you shall be flayed;
Since you to folks asleep this trouble give,
It is a thousand pities fleas do live.
Mor.
If that to others thou injurious be,
'Twill not excuse thee that you are but a flea.
FAB. 61. Of the flea and the man.
A Skip Jack Flea bit a man's foot so hard
He downright angry was with him, amar'd,
Crush thee, I that I will, betwixt my nails
Said he, he did but say so, for he fails
Of doing as he said, Monsieur-le-frisk,
That nimble youth for's worship was too brisk,
After a fierce assault made his escape,
Whilst the bitter man did for his ruin gape:
A foolish man cried out O Hercules!
Would thou not with thy club keep off the fleas?
Would thou stand by and not do me that right?
What serves thy Club for if that fleas may bite?
Mor.
The Gods concern themselves (for so they pl^ase)
In smallest matters, e'ne as small as fleas;
What they will do, and what we may is ods,
For flea-bites we may not invoke the Gods.
FAB. 62. Of the Husband and his wives.
A Man of middle-age had over-done,
Married two wives, which were too much by one;
One was a young wife, to other was an old,
When two wives meet, it is much if they don't scold;
To please 'em both the Man had much ado,
For each to be his favorite did sue.
Each kemb'd his head, and laid it in her lap,
Betwixt 'em both, he soon came to's nightcap:
A cap he wanted for he had no hair,
The young one had plucked out all that gray were;
The old one all the black, thus pulled and hall'd,
In the conclusion he became quite bald.
Mor.
There is no end of pleasing every body,
He that shall offer that, shall prove a noddy
With a bald pate, young ones pull off the gray
Hairs from our heads, old wives the black ones, they
Have no more for to please than you needs must,
That you shall please too wives at once, never trust:
They Are best that without more contented are,
To please but one wise at a time is fair.
FAB. 63. Of one that promised impossibilities.
ONe that was hardly worth one single Cow
In all the world, when sick, to Jove did vow
But spare his life, a thousand oxen he
Would cause to him should sacrificed be.
When his wife said 'twas more than he could do
I Will save my oxen and my credit too
Said he, my will to live I do discover,
It Is ten to one that I shall not recover.
Mor.
An errand cheat we say would cheat his father,
But for an errand cheat account him rather
Who would cheat Jove, and make him to believe,
As if omniscience he could deceive.
FAB. 64. Of the Frogs.
FRogs must have liquor, wheresoever they dwell,
Troubled with dropsies as their looks do tell;
The Fen in which they dwelt was now grown dry,
In Summertime, and thereupon they fly
From thence, to seek another habitation
One of them spied a well, made Proclamation
Unto his fellow, that there was a place
Was for their turn, quoth he, bate me an ace
Of that, for if this Well shall dried up be
When we are in, then how get out shall we?
Mor.
They Whosoever venture have-but a bad bout,
Who when they are in know not how to get out.
FAB. 65. Of the Dog and the Cock.
TWixt Dog and Cock a League of amity
Concluded was, would near each other lie;
The winged Cock did roost upon a tree,
In The hollow root his lodging for to be
The dog did choose, the Cock crew in the night,
Fox heard him cant, and came e're it were light:
Professed a love for creatures that could sing
So well as he, said musick's a sweet thing;
Pray Sir come down said he I Would you embrace,
It Is a great joy to me to see your face;
Said the Cock I am shut in, and now before
I can get out, the Porter must open the door:
Good Fox to the Porter call said he, and I
Will wait upon your worship presently.
He woke the Porter, though it were too rare
The dog got up, did the Fox in pieces tear.
Mor.
Who acts like a Fox may chance to know,
He is no less a Fox that is his foe.
FAB. 66. Of the Lion and the Bear.
A Bear and Lion 'twixt them got a Fawn,
Fought whose it should be till the day did dawn;
Wounded each other almost mortally,
For want of Surgeons both were like to die:
And then they laid them down one by another,
Fawn lay in the midst as he had been a brother.
Soon after that, the Fox the Fawn did spy,
Said to himself, I Will at him presently;
The Fox snatched up the Fawn and ran away,
The Bear and Lion still, and half dead lay,
Alas said they, we have took all the pains,
The subtle Fox possesses all the gains.
Mor.
It is a common case, some great pains take
To win, and others all the advantage make.
FAB. 67. Of the Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant.
A Bat, a Bramble^, and a Cormorant,
Agreed that each of them would turn merchant;
Bat borrow'd-money, threw't into the stock,
The Bramble got a Suit of clothes, and Frock:
The Cormorants merchandise was all in brass,
They all did put to sea, but then alas
A mighty storm cast their ship on a strand,
And then with much ado they got to land:
Since that the Cormorant has dwelt nigh the Sea,
Watching if any brass thence cast up be;
Bat flies the light as being much in debt,
Lest upon him his Creditors should set;
Bramble at every bodies clothes does snatch,
Hoping in time his own again to catch.
Mor.
What folks have set their hearts upon, we find
On all occasions, will come to mind.
FAB. 68. Of the wild Boar and the Fox
A Boar stood by a tree and his tusks whet,
Fox passing by, said 'twas not time as yet
To whet his tusk, no enemy appeared,
For saying so the Fox the wild boar jear'd:
When enemies appear this is the state
Oth' case, to whet my tusks will be too late.
Mor.
Forewarned and fore-armed we ought to be,
Before such time as enemies we see.
FAB. 69. Of the Lark.
THe singing Lark (whose leg is worth a Kite)
Into a net unhappily did light;
Sang sweetly there yet not without regret,
But had no list for to dance in a net:
Said I am thrown in prison, know not why,
For no man's gold or silver stole have I
But some few grains of corn, was all she vowed
That she had took, grains used to be allowed.
Mor.
There are that sell their lives for an old song,
Adventuring to do some petty wrong
Great in the eye of the Law, they are no Sages
Will venture hanging, for but Hangmans wages.
FAB. 70. Of the Covetous man.
A Miserable Hunks bury needs must
His golden wedge in the earth, so dust to dust;
Therewith he buried his heart alive,
When Is gold was gone how could his heart survive?
He daily went a Pilgrim to that place,
How great soever was the distance of space.
That made a thief mistrust, or else a thief
By that mistrust was made, 'twas his belief
Some treasure there was hid, he went and took
It quite away, Its owner came to look
After it as he used, which missing there,
He 'gan to rage and storm, and tear his hair,
Till one passed by and said, you naught did use
That Is gone, therefore you had it not to loose:
Put a ^^one in its stead, and fancy there
A treasure is, and you will be as you were.
Mor.
We worse than want, whatever we do abuse,
And really have not what we don't use.
It comes to one to undergo a dearth
Of money, and to bury't in the earth.
FAB. 71. Of the Tortoise and the Eagle.
TO the Eagle Tortoise said, teach me to fly,
Approach the Sun like thee, how fain would I?
The Eagle said, do not this racket keep
At me for wings, nature would have thee creep;
Could he have flown at all, in the Eagles face
He would have flown, that his words had no place
With him, it forced him to fall a weeping,
The Eagle should tell him of always creeping:
That seen, the Eagle in his claws him snatched,
She wished to be so caught, and so was caught
About the middle Region, said, that I
Now will make trial, how that you can fly.
Betake you to your wings, I Will let you go,
What a brave bird you are you straight shall know:
Then let him go (as in a River him
A man might do, whom naught will serve but swim;
In spite of fate he will, I that he will,
Above his depth, then says he take thy fill.)
When thus let go his ruin was at hand,
He had no wings nor there on legs could stand;
He fell upon a rock, his brains flew out,
And that was all his flight, a dismal bout.
Mor.
When Eagle sighted people do advise,
We shall mind what they say if we be wise,
FAB. 72. Of the Hind.
ONly one seeing eye had a poor Hind
That fed on the Sea-shoar, to other was blind,
Thought with her self that for her safety she,
Had best turn her blind-side toward the sea;
A Sailer sailing by, saw she was blind,
She cannot see me said he, have at the Hind:
Then winking with one eye he did take aim,
And to her side a Bullet quickly came;
With that the wretched Hind was sadly checked,
A broadside on that side did not expect;
But on the other side looked for a foe,
But where 'twas looked for she received no blow.
Mor.
It is a common case to be undone,
By wrongs from those from whom we look for none;
And we often look for mischief for a spurt,
From those who never meant to do us hurt.
FAB. 73. Of the Hind and the Lion.
A Timorous Hind did from a Hunter fly,
Fearing lest else she by his hands should die;
Into the Fire out of the Drying Pan,
Knows not how she avoid the Lion can:
For in a Cave where she expected shelter,
Full butt she met him put her out of kelter.
Woe to the Hind says she, must make a Feast,
Shunning a man I Have lit on the worst beast;
(In point of cruelty) (they call him king,
Of Beasts) for mercy man's another thing.
Mor
Their often shiftings some have cause to curse,
They mend the matter so they make it worse;
Who fly the company of civil men,
Meeting with beasts are drawn into their den.
FAB. 74. Of the Hind and the Vine.
A Hind pursued took shelter from a Vine,
Whilst he feared danger had no list to dine;
When the Pursuivant was gone, began to browse
Upon the Vine, where he before did house;
And then the Hunter saw his hand appear,
For he looked back, and said, it is well you're there:
You think to eat your morsels all alone,
But by your favor I mean to make one.
But first I Will send and see if I can reach thee,
With my barb'd arrow, and more justice teach thee
Then to destroy the bridge, which thou went over,
So much ingratitude for to discover:
The Hind the Arrow hit, said the fault is mine,
The Vine did save me I would spoil the vine.
Mor.
A mischief be his speed whoe'res an actor,
To ruin him that is his Benefactor.
FAB. 75. Of the Ass and the Lion.
A Cock and Ass did chance to feed together,
The Lion wishd for both, but could get neither;
The Cock by crowing made him run away,
When Cocks do crow Lions do quake they say:
The Ass was such an Ass he thought 'twas he,
That made the Lion so afraid to be.
But more an Ass because he did pursue him,
Who doubtless watched a time for to undo him;
When the Cocks crowings he no more could hear,
Then the Lion did the Ass in pieces tear:
How worthy of my name said the Ass was I,
Who sprung from cowards did with Lion vie?
Mor.
A flying enemy may do the feat,
Parthians shoot arrows as they do retreat;
Lions that run have Asses at this lock,
They Will be no more pursued when rid oth' Cock;
Asses if they themselves would not undo,
Must not adventure Lions to pursue.
FAB. 76. Of the Gardener and his Dog.
A Gardiners Dog did fall into a Well,
How to get out again he could not tell;
In went the Gardener for to fetch him out,
The jealous dog did grin and turn about:
And made his teeth on him to meet, in spite
(Why should he show his teeth if he would not bite?)
He comes to sink me down further thought he,
Who only carne that drowned he might not be;
I Am rightly served said he would save an elf,
Whose resolution was to kill himself.
Mor.
Through jealousy men often misbehave 'em,
Thinking they come to sink who come to save 'em;
Groundless suspicion Reason so impairs,
Men seek their lives who seek for to save theirs.
FAB. 77. Of the Swine and the Dog.
A Swine and dog did rail at one another,
There Is no such ods they should make such a pother;
The Swine by Venus swore she would tear the dog;
You swear by Venus, Venus hates a hog,
Said the brisk Cur, does from her Chapel beat,
All those who Swines flesh do presume to eat.
Said the Swine that shows that Venus does us love,
For toward us she is harmless as a dove;
When other creatures she does kill and slay,
Touch one of us none of her Clergy may.
Mor.
By this a mighty Orator is tried,
What makes against him he makes on his side.
FAB. 78. Of the Sow and the Bitch.
A Sow and Bitch time was, had great con^^^^,
Which of them two should go for fruitfullest;
All creatures I excel in fruitfulness
Said the Proud Bitch, be humble never the less
Said the grave Swine, and call it to thy mind
Though thou have many whelps, they are all born blind,
Mor.
Whosoever is proud of any thing's a noddy,
There is enough to humble every body;
Too sudden things prove to be little worth,
The hasty bitch blind Puppies does bring forth.
FAB. 79. Of the Serpent and the Crab.
A Serpent and a Crab did enter League,
The Crab the Serpent found full of intrig^^
The Crab was plain would had the Serpent so,
Advised him to it but it would not do:
As well may weavers weave without a shuttle,
As Serpents serpents be, and not be subtle.
He could not for his life but turn and wind,
And thereupon when him the Crab did find
Asleep, he crushed him till he crushed him dead,
Saying, these brains of thine shall cost thy head;
Straight as an arrow then he was stretched out,
And thereupon the Crab gave him this flout:
If living thou had been as straight as now,
Thou had been living still, I know not how
It comes to pass you are never straight till dead,
If living thou would been so, thoud'st saved thy head.
Mor.
Serpentine tricks do put men in a chafe
(When known,) some are less subtle and more safe;
They who to other men are cunning foes,
By them are often destroyed by down right blows.
FAB. 80. Of the Shepherd and the Wolf.
A Shepherd a new litter'd wolf did find,
Him with his dogs to breed it was his mind;
When 'twas grown up if the wolf a sheep had caught,
With the dogs against the wolf he would have fought:
But if the wolf did happen to out run
The dogs, his company he would not shun.
But with the wolf he would go cheak by joal,
Hoping for to take part of what he stole;
Then to the dogs he would come back again,
And if he found that they had nothing taken
He Would get a sheep, and eat it with a dog,
(For though he was a wolf he was no hog
To eat his meat alone) the Shepherd knew
After that time, what he had wont to do;
The conscious wolf thought he would only bang him,
But the Shepherd in conclusion did hang him.
Mor.
Who both with dogs and wolfs keep company,
With dogs pursuing wolves, and wolfs that fly
Too fast for dogs eat sheep, which wolfs do take,
And feasts of sheep themselves have stole do make;
How they come by it do not care a button,
But come by it how they can they will have mutton:
It is no matter if their fate shall be,
To end their days upon the triple tree;
He acted like a wolf till he did die,
Though bred with dogs, for nature will not lie.
FAB. 81. Of the Lion and the Wolf.
When the king of beasts was sick, the wolf did mind
Him, that all creatures but the Fox were kind;
And had made visits to him, he alone
In all his time of sickness, had made none.
The Fox was nigh, and heard himself accused,
Apologiz'd and said he was abused:
They had no cause of him for to complain,
He said, for none such pains as he had taken.
Running from one Physician to another
For his advice, as were to save a brother;
At length a Sovereign medicine I have found,
Which to your health may very much redound:
Sweet Fox said the Lion, tell me that Receipt,
To thee I Will be as thankful as is meet;
Take a live wolf, forthwith pull off his skin,
When 'ts warm, be pleased to put thy self therein:
Then the Fox snear'd at the wolf, and thus he said,
Take heed how you hereafter folks upbraid.
Mor.
It Is common for to see them go to pot,
Who against others did design and plot.
FAB. 82. Of the Woman.
A Certain woman was in great distress,
Did much bewail her husbands drunkenness;
Finding him once dead drunk, upon her back
She took him, though he almost made it crack:
And to a place where folks were buried
She carried him, good reason, he was dead.
In a dead sleep at least, 'twas no strange story,
Therefore to lay him in a Dormitory:
At the door of the vault next day she knocked,
Whence he could not get out for it was locked;
Who Is there said he? One brings meat for the dead,
Said she, and those who here are buried:
We Are dry as dust said he, meat without drink
Is but cold comfort, for dead men I think:
Hearing him talk of drink his wife took on,
Said the grave its self will not mend him, I Am undone.
Mor.
Who drinks with his broth (we some such proverb have)
It will befall him to cough in his grave;
If that can be a Toper I aver,
Will call for drink when in his Sepulchre^
To a great custom every man's a slave,
And will go nigh to carry it to his grave.
FAB. 83. Of the Swan.
ALI some men's Geese are Swans, but one kept both,
Swans flesh and Geese their voice who does not loath?
He kept the Swans to sing, Geese for his table;
Drew a Swan for a Goose, not being able
In a dark night to know, one from the other
(When nights are dark as pitch who knows his brother
Until he hear him speak?) the Swan to kill
Taking him for a Goose he meant, fulfill
His purpose he did not, for why the Swan
Sang as melodiously as any man:
(Thinking his death was near) so, death did fly
'Twas plain, no Goose could make such melody.
Mor.
Some by their music have escaped death,
And so by spending, they have saved their breath.
FAB. 84. Of the Blackmore.
ONe bought a black thinking to make him white,
Thought 'twas ill keeping made him look like night;
He washed, and scrub'd and rubbed him every day,
Supposing he was made of as white clay
As other men, but sound himself deceived,
Blackness in Blackmores can not be retrieved.
Mor.
As well may you make day of what is night,
As wash a Blackmore till that he be white;
Whilst you use water it your Art will foil,
Though better colors might be laid in oil:
Nature, attempts to change it, does defy;
As interest, so nature will not lie.
FAB. 85. Of the Swallow and the Crow.
A Swallow and a Crow, had great contest
In point of beauty, which of them was best;
Wee'r not so black as Crows, the world can tell,
The Swallow said, though we in chimneys dwell:
The Crow as proud as black, said it is my duty
For to be pleased, I have a holding beauty.
And tell the Swallow, it does not become her
To brag, whose beautie's gone as soon as summer.
Mor.
Away with toys that soon are gone and past,
Give me those good things which will hold and last.
FAB. 86. Of the Owl.
A Bat to the owl did give an ugly check,
Out of a window that hung by the neck;
Sir Owl said he, I hope it is no treason,
Of your night singing for to ask the reason:
Seeing that you are silent all day long,
And make no noise as if you had no tongue.
In times of yo're said he, I sang by day,
But by so doing did my self betray
To great disasters, made me fly the light,
And ever since I use to sing by night:
You should have used day into night to turn
Said the Bat, e're you your fingers so did burn.
Mor.
Dangers betimes we must anticipate,
It Is folly to use means when it is too late,
When so it is an Owl hangs by the neck,
It Is then too late to's follies to give check.
FAB. 87. Of the Cockles.
WHen one was roasting Cockles by the fire,
As he did rule the roast, he did admire
To hear them chirp, are you there with your bears
Said he? what chirp and fire about your ears?
Mor.
What the boy said to the Cockles is good reason,
For nought's well done that is done out of season.
FAB. 88. Of the Witch.
A Certain witch there was so proud and pert,
She undertook Gods wrath for to avert;
(In spite of her folks might have gone to pot,
Devils were her familiars, God was not)
Many strange things she did by spells and charms,
Sometimes procured sometimes prevented harms:
Her own she could not, was condemned to die
As witches use to be, and could not fly;
She had her Imps, but could not imp her wings,
Whereby for to escape those fatal things;
Which did hang over her unhappy head,
The next news was by the halter she was dead:
As she went to it you frustrate Gods decrees?
(Said one) you cannot avert man's purposes.
Mor.
There Is mighty odds this Fable serves to show,
'Twixt what some say and what those folks can do.
FAB. 89. Of the Travelers.
AS two were traveling upon the road,
Fortune an Axe on one of them bestowed;
I Have found an Axe said he, say we have found
An axe his fellow said, that did redound
Unto his disadvantage as he thought,
His fellow Traveller should go halves for naught.
Soon after there did come a hue and cry,
Charged him that found the axe with felony;
Then the Axe finder said we are undone,
Do not say we said to other, thou alone
Did find, and take the Axe, it will not do
For to cry we, better one smart than two.
Mor.
This for a certain rule is always taken,
They will not go half in loss that don't in gain.
FAB. 90. Of the two Frogs.
Two Frogs were feeding, one in a deep pond,
Who of the other Frog seemed very fond
Which in a small plash fed, on the high way
Come over to my pond said she, I say:
That is more safe, there comes no cart nor coach,
Which may endanger you by its approach;
At her advice she would not change her plash,
Then came a wagon crushed her all to mash.
Mor.
Some have an eager love to their own home,
There they will encounter mischief if it come;
Homes home though homely as the proverb says,
Frogs will keep there if bred in the high ways:
Who gives us good advice makes us his debtour,
But some will never change though for the better.
FAB. 91. Of the Bee-master.
ONe that kept Bees to be out of the way
Occasion had, whilst he from home did stay
There came some liquorish thieves, and robbed the Hives,
The master mourned like men that loose their wives;
At his return into the hives did look,
Whose empty cells him with great sorrow struck:
Stung him almost to death, made him cry out
You Bees? you Wasps, pray how came this about
You let him go who honey came to steal?
On me your friend yo've raised a woeful wheal
Or blister, like an Epispastick plaster,
Although you know full well I am your master.
Mor.
Great mischief comes of too much jealousy,
Never suspect when you cannot show cause why.
FAB. 92. Of the Kings Fisher.
A Melancholy sort of Birds there be
Kings-Fishers called, which do dwell in the Sea:
(No wonder if those birds be malcontent
That never are in their own element)
For fear of being caught they build their nest
In Rocks, and fly to Sea lest they be pressed;
Upon a high Rock one of them brought forth
Her young, but found that refuge nothing worth:
For though so near the firmament they lay,
A swelling Sea did sweep them all away;
When she saw that, how did she rage and curse,
Saying I feared the land, but the Sea is worse.
Mor.
Who trust and fear transpose, come to such ends,
There are who trust their foes, and fear their friends.
FAB. 93. Of the Fisherman.
A Fisherman encompassed had a stream
With his Spread-Net, on every side 't should seem
Then plunged the waters with a hugy stone,
To scare the Fish, he might catch every one;
Whilst they fly from this danger they will fall
Into my net thought he, I shall have all.
He made one down right angry who lived near,
That he should mud the waters which were clear;
He could have no clear waters with his meat,
I must or mud the waters, or not eat
The Fisherman replied, the fish to slaughter
There Is no such fishing as in troubled water.
Mor.
In peace some cannot live they long for war,
Such Fishermen Soldiers of fortune are;
Some promote factions you must understand,
They must divide or they cannot command:
Some long for broils whom interest does instave,
As boys for winds, that they may wind falls have.
FAB. 94. Of the Ape and the Dolphin.
SAilers had wont to carry Apes to Sea,
That merry in their voyage they might be;
One sailing with an Ape was sadly wrackt,
His tackling and his Vessel hugely cracked:
The Passengers to save their lives did swim,
As for the Ape what shall become of him?
His master thought, but he at the same rate
With others swam, (can all things imitate)
A loving Dolphin (see how he mistook)
Upon him as a little man did look.
Be pleased said he to get upon my back,
Since other ways for to escape you lack:
Since of mankind, you may my help command,
I doubt not but to bring you safe to land.
Said he to Athens do you appertain?
Then the Ape himself did an Athenian feign;
Nobly descended, when that he said so
Good Sir, said he Pyraeeum do you know?
Pyraeeum was a road for ships, but he
Pyraeeum thought some Nobleman to be.
Then said the Ape my good acquaintance is
Pyraeeum, and my noble friend I wiss;
'Twas a loud lie, the Dolphin knew 'twas so,
A lie will not choke thee, what the Sea can do
I Will try the Dolphin said, duckt him in the Sea,
Forthwith as dead as a drowned mouse was he.
Mor.
Some shallow men think others to deceive
More knowing than themselves, whom make believe
Their lies they never can, when found to ape
What they are not, they hardly do escape
Their utmost fury, who hate to be cheated
An Ape when known will like an ape be treated.
Fain would an Ape seem an Athenian
One while, another while a noble man;
But ten to one some great absurdity,
Will bring to light his gross hypocrisy.
FAB. 95. Of Mercury and the Statuary.
HOw men esteemed him Mercury would know,
Desired a Statuary him to show;
Jove's Statue, and how he could it afford?
'Twould cost a groat he told him, at a word:
How rate you Juno's Statue, next said he?
He said that that would something dearer be.
But all this while Mercury was not known,
Because in humane shape, not in his own;
Then he did ask how sell you Mercury
His Statue? thereunto he did reply
Only the price I asked before, shall do it
Pay me for the other two, take that to boot.
Mor.
Thus it does often vain glorious men befall,
They get no credit whilst they fly at all,
Who vie with Jove and Juno and so forth,
Find others think them persons of no worth.
FAB. 96. Of Mercury and Tiresias.
FOr a great Prophet old Tiresias went,
And therefore Mercury to try him meant;
In order thereunto he stole his Cow,
When that was gone, he would see if he knew how.
Came to his house after that he had stole
His Cow, and seemed his loss for to condole:
Tiresias meant to conjure for his Cows,
When Mercury it was his lot to house;
He made it his request to Mercury,
For to afford him his good company;
Then out they went together to espy,
What they could learn by the birds which did fly:
A flying Eagle Mercury did see,
That naught Tiresias affirmed to be;
Then Mercury to see a Crow pretended,
Looked up and down her motion never ended:
Tiresias said, that Crow did swear by Jove,
By all things here below, and all above
That after all his fruitless toil and pain,
If Mercury pleased his Cows would come again.
Mor.
The Moral of this Fable in my mind
Is like our Proverb they that hide can find.
FAB. 97. Of the Dogs.
ONe had a brace of dogs, kept one to hunt,
TO other to keep the house, he was as sprunt
As the Hunter was, if on a prey he light,
He that kept house had always half of it;
This made the hunter grumble in his gizzard,
And thus he said, although he was no wizzard
You must not blame me, but must blame my master,
He bred you Caterer, me only Taster.
Mor.
Some guilty are of too great toleration
In breeding youth, spoil by their education
Let some keep home, and yet devour the meat,
Which others work for, they shall not work but eat.
FAB. 98. Of the Husband and his wife.
ONe had a wife did always disagree,
With every body in his family;
And thereupon he did resolve to try,
How with her fathers house she could comply
And there he pleased to stay, she soon came back,
Too soon for him, said he, what did you lack?
That at your fathers house you could not stay?
She said the Shepherds frowns drove her away;
Methinks for them quietly live you might,
Said he thei're never at home but morn and night;
If long of Shepherds there you could not stay,
With whom will you be quiet all the day.
Mor.
By little things great things are often made known,
That she of Shepherds frowns did make such moan;
They seldom come in sight, and are like sheep
Before their masters, that she could not keep
Her self from their affronts, it was asign
She was a Scold, it is well she was not thine:
Who with their own Relations cannot agree,
Never tell me that those folks good natured be.
FAB. 99. Of the Goat and the Wolf.
A Kid alone, whom all the Flock forsook
A wolf espied, and that advantage took
To seize upon him, thinking that for gloves
His skin should go, besought him of all loves
That he might hear him pipe, e're he did die,
He was disposed to suffer merrily.
Content said he, I Will pipe and you shall dance,
Toward your Goat-ship I Will so far advance,
E're he put up his Pipes the dogs did hear
Wolves music, came and said, what are you there?
As now you pipe, so we will make you dance,
And if they seized him not, 'twas a great chance
Her knows, said the wolf, the Goat does justly wipe her,
I was a Cook by trade, and I turned Piper.
Mor.
This little hint may many folks befriend,
Who change their trades misfortunes do attend.
FAB. 100. Of the Flies.
YOur Flies and Wasps have a great love for honey,
No less than Usurers themselves for money;
No wonder wasps are wasps, sweet things do breed,
Choler they say, and they will not take heed:
Some body did great store of honey spill,
Then came the Flies and did their bellies fill.
When they had ate so long as they could eat,
Sour sauce they had at last to their sweet meat;
As had it Birdlime been they stuck in honey,
Could not get out their feet for love or money:
And then the flies like meat which Flies do puff,
Swelled and were forthwith in a grievous huff;
What cautious person would not fear to eat?
Say they we die only for one meals meat.
Mor.
No wonder if intemperance kill a fly,
How many men have di'd by gluttony?
It Is an experiment too often tried,
If meat make feet to stick, drink makes 'em slide.
FAB. 101. Of the Crab and the Fox.
ACrab belonging to the Sea, did feed
Upon the land, a Fox of Fish had need
And loved them well, upon the Crab did seize
So served, he found himself in little ease:
And said, now I have wronged my self, not he
That I a Sea-crab, would a Land-Crab be.
Mor.
Folks often times see great cause for to lament,
With their own stations, they were not content.
FAB. 102. Of Thieves.
SOme Thieves that came to steal met with a Cock,
Let me alone said he, I am a clock
Or an alarm, tell how time does go,
That when to rise the men and maids may know
Said he, wheresoever I meet Cocks I Will take them,
I would have people sleep and they do wake them.
Mor.
For doing good ill people others curse,
From them by how much better they fare worse.
FAB. 103. Of the Harper.
A Bungling Harper sung within a house,
And though his singing were not worth a louse
The echo of the place made him so err,
He thought himself fit for a Theater:
There he presumed to sing until I wiss,
Him down from thence the company did hiss.
Mor.
Men of themselves too often false measures take,
Mere Rhetoricians will not Consuls make;
They whom fames echo has cried up for puns
In The Schools, in the world may prove no mighty Dons.
FAB. 104. Of the Crow and the Raven.
RAvens could prophecy, but Crows could not,
The envying Crow would croak, though she had not
The gift of Augury, to make believe
She was an Augur too, so did deceive
Some Passengers a while, who rode that way,
Who cried, Prophetic Raven cries, let us stay;
They laughed when they espied it was a crow,
Said, she of Divination naught does know.
Mor.
None more ridiculous deserve to be,
Then vain pretenders unto Prophecy.
FAB. 105. Of the Crow and the Dog.
A Crow did to Minerva sacrifice,
She seemed devout, but she was not so wise
To make a dog her ghest, he her devotion
Did but deride, would fill her with this notion
That her Minerva hated perfectly,
And would from her allow no Augury;
It may be so, said the Crow, but know my ends
In sacrificing, are to make her friends.
Mor.
If God be angry men must not make bold,
(As who should say they would spite him) to withold
Their Sacrifice, but offer it the rather
Thereby to pacify an angry father:
Some give the Fable thus, some counted wise
For Lucre's sake, will serve their enemies.
FAB. 106. Of the Raven and the Serpent.
A Hungry Raven saw a sleeping snake,
And it for his repast made bold to take;
To overcome a Serpent by a slight
Is a rare case, e're they will be bit they will bite:
He bit him till he made his teeth to meet,
If Ravens fight with them Serpents will beat;
Then said the Raven, I thought I had won
A treasure, but thereby I am undone.
Mor.
Let him be counted silly without measure,
Who ventureth his life for a small treasure.
FAB. 107. Of the Jack-daw, and the Pigeon.
A Jack-daw saw the Pigeons were well fed
In their Dove-house, he thinking to have sped
Like one of them, turned himself purely white
Whilst he could hold his peace, they did not fight
With him, believing that he was a Pigeon,
But when in chattering he played the wigeon
They thrust him out, he to the Jack-daws went,
With a Flea in his ear, they him back sent
Not knowing him, for he had changed his hue;
Jack would be Jack on both sides, 'twould not do.
Mor.
In point of policy he is a mere wigeon,
That will be sometimes Jack-daw, sometimes Pigeon.
FAB. 108. Of the Jack-daw.
ONe took a Jack-daw ti'd him with a string,
And gave him to his son as a fine thing
For boys to play withal, he soon got loose
But for so doing found he was a Goose;
For why the string about his legs did dangle,
In the boughs of his nest did so entangle
Him, he could not get out, then cried alas!
^th' company of men I happier was;
Of which I was impatient, but now
Iere I am like to die, ti'd to a bough.
Mor.
Some ban't the wit to know that they are well,
Till them, that they are worse, Experience tell.
FAB. 109. Of Mercury.
BY Jupiters appointment Mercury
Had a Receipt for to compound a lie;
Apothecary-like, for tradesmens use
He did it well, committed no abuse:
He dose'd 'em all alike, and gave to none
More of the Medicine than to every one;
Only one sort of Tradesmen were omitted
At the first distribution, they were fitted
At length, as well as any of the rest,
Who were last served did happen to fare best.
(If that were best) the Tailors they had most,
E'ne all was left, so they were double dofe'd
Mor.
What does belong to the main company
Of Tailors, I don't know, some will not lie
I do believe, there are who them envy,
And tell us that they have an evil eye;
It Is harder for to fill their eye, than belly,
If you will trust what angry people tell you:
Be thou impartial and thou must say then,
There Is but the shears, 'twixt them and other men.
FAB. 110. Of Jupiter.
JOve all Affections had placed in men,
Save only shame, at a great stand was then,
How he might get in shame, go in the crowd
Said he, to shame, she answered him aloud
I Will not go in, unless love leave the rout,
If love come in, be sure I will come out.
Mor.
He speaks of love, but I think he means lust,
Where that takes place depart from folks shame must;
If that of lust (as I do think) was meant,
It Is a plain case that whores are impudent.
FAB. 110. Of Jupiter.
WHen to Joves Wedding all invited were,
He saw that Tortoises came latest there;
Would know the reason why, my house said he
I dearly love, and there would choose to be;
Thinks he your house do you so dearly love,
As to think much for to attend on Jove
At such a time as this, since such thou art.
Says he thy house and thou shall never part.
Mor.
It Is to some people death to go from home,
Invite them e're so often they will never come;
They are the best who to extremes never swerved,
Some are too open, others too reserved.
FAB. 111. Of the wolf and the Sheep.
A Wolf was bit by dogs, and hunger-bit
At the same time, when on a sheep he light
Was passing by, a cup of drink he prayed
The Sheep to help him to, as for meat, said
He Would help himself, the sheep at his intent
Gave a shrewd guess, to feed on him he meant;
To part with drink, I would not care a button,
Said he, but thou seek'st me, for thou love mutton.
Mor.
Some have the confidence to ask a boon
Of us, whereby our selves may be undone;
They must drink if they eat, and would so cheat us,
To make us give them drink, that they may eat us.
FAB. 112. Of the Hares.
THe Hares would war with Eagles and the Fox,
To aid them, they were in great hopes to coax;
With all his heart he said, but that he knew
What Hares were, and with whom they had to do.
Mor.
With much thy betters, whosoever thou art,
Encountrest, wise folks never will take thy part;
Foxes to help weak sides, too cunning were,
Excused themselves, there went away the Hare.
FAB. 113. Of the Pismire.
THey which are Pismires now, were Husbandmen
In days of yo're, and took no small pains then
To till the earth, but thievishly inclined,
And robbed folks grounds, which made Jove in the mind
For to dethrone them from their former bliss,
And make them Ants by Metempsycosis.
Yet still they do retain the thieving trade,
And by no means to leave it can be made;
Yet filch and steal from the plowed grounds they will,
As lawful prize convey it to their hill.
Mor.
To theft themselves Pains takers seldom give,
Yet some take pains to steal, as some to live
In a just way, a Misers honest gains
Content him not, theft must eake out his pains.
Shapes don't change natures, be a thief a man,
Or but an Ant, he will steal still if he can.
FAB. 114. Of the Bat and the Weasel.
A Falling Bat was by a Weasel took,
Who told him plainly that he could not brook
Him, who a bird, was the birds enemy
To his own kind a traitor, he should die;
Seeing the Weasel at the top oth' house,
The Bat cried quarter, said he was a mouse:
'Twas but his kind so birds to love (or hate)
As he could eat them (mice are delicate)
That said she let him go, but by and by
He fell again, then as an enemy
To all the mice, another weasel seize
Him did, whom thus he labored to appease:
I am no mouse said he, I am a bat,
A bird loves mice no better than a Cat;
Then go thy way said she, since that I find
Thou hate none, but them that hate thy kind:
Thus shifting of his name, once and again,
He did escape, or else he had been taken.
Mor.
If Bats be partly birds, and partly mice,
I think that they may say with good advice
When questioned as birds, that mice they be,
That they are birds, when danger they do see;
In saying they are mice, they may choose whether
They Will call themselves, but must not say they are neither.
If they be Interpendents, no ill fame
Attends it, if they choose the safer name:
So Dutchman say not he is no Christian man,
Let him say that he is a Batavian.
FAB. 115. Of the Travelers.
SOme Travelers walking on the Seaside,
Did go into a Cave to watch the tide;
At a great distance they some boughs did see,
Floating, and thought them a great Ship to be:
When they came nearer thought 'em but a boat,
When 'twas hard by they soon did change their note,
And saw them only lops of trees to be,
Wondered it was but that which they did see.
Mor.
Some things and persons do astonish all,
That they should seem so great, and prove so small;
By some folks looks they who their worth would ken,
Would think them more, when they are less than men.
FAB. 116. Of the wild Ass.
A Tame Ass by a wild Ass envied was,
He saw at length for it there was no cause;
For he was fat and fed in sunny place,
He thought he lived at ease, bate me an ace
Of that, he quickly saw he burdens bore,
Would tire a horse, was beaten evermore.
I cease to envy thy felicity,
Said he, it is mixed with so much misery.
Mor.
Gold may be bought too dear, if some men's pains,
And cares, were known, there is none would grudg their gains.
FAB. 117. Of the Asses.
ASses are sensible of too much load,
To ease their burdens, Jupiter they wooed;
He said it should be done, so soon as he
Could find them piss so much as makes a Sea:
Hence it is, if one Ass piss, the rest do stale
There, thinking that in time it will prevail.
Mor.
If care be taken, wise folks may be pleased,
That Is all, for Asses sure are never eased;
Upon some promises they may rely,
Which are intended naught to signify.
FAB. 118. Of the Ass and the Fox.
AN Ass by chance had found a Lions skin,
And put it on, was still an Ass within;
And could not hold his peace, he every beast
Had frighted, but the Fox, that was the jest:
He had been frighted too, but he did say
Thou'xt Lion but skin-deep, I heard thee bray.
Mor.
Who hears them bray, cries you there with your bears?
Asses have too long tongues, as well as ears;
If fools could hold their tongues, they might have trophies,
Erected to their names, and pass for Sophies.
FAB. 119. Of the Ass and the Frogs.
AN Ass drew Timber in a moorish ground,
There to keep on his legs, 'twas hard he found;
He slipped, and fell, and could not rise again,
Then he began most sadly to complain:
When him the Frogs so much cast down did see,
What if you had been here so long as we:
(Said they) you many a fair fall had had,
Had our time been so short, we should be glad.
Mor.
At every Flea-bite^some folks use to vex,
A hundred times so much will not perplex
Some patient folks, great Asses grunt like hogs,
For trifles more's well born by little frogs.
FAB. 120. Of the Ass and the Raven.
A Gall-back'd Ass did in a meadow graze,
To him a Raven came, his business was
His sores not for to lick; but for to peck;
The driver of the Ass gave him no check
For doing so, but laughed as he looked on;
Wolf saw him, and did descant thereupon:
Woe to poor wolves, said he, if you them take,
Who of that Ass a laughing stock do make:
Though he be your own carrier and in pain,
It shall go hard if ever I be taken.
Mor.
Wise folks can spy great things in a small glass,
If but a driver laugh at his poor Ass;
Peckt by a Raven, and in misery,
See, he will do worse things to an enemy.
FAB. 121. Of the Fox and the Ass.
INto a League a Fox and Ass did enter,
And the Ass with the Fox to hunt did venture;
When Fox and Ass do meet it is Fox and Goose,
The Ass was hampered he could not get loose:
For when a Lion met them two together,
The Fox contrived how to make all fair weather
On his own side, in order thereunto
My Partner shall be yours, let me but go,
Sir Reynard said, drew the Ass into a net,
Hoping by that himself scot-free to get:
Now of the Ass the Lion said I Am sure,
Have at the Fox, treachery who can endure?
Mor.
They who to save themselves betray their friends,
Themselves do often come to the same ends.
FAB. 122. Of the Hen and the Swallow.
UPon a Serpents eggs a Hen did sit,
A Swallow told her that it was not fit
To hatch those eggs, from them great enemies
Unto her self hereafter would arise.
Mor.
Ill natured persons have those qualities,
Mischief they will return for courtesies;
Some eggs it is best to cast into the Jakes,
Whatever you do, be sure you never hatch snakes:
Always take heed upon what egg you sit,
Lest it so prove there be a snake in it.
FAB. 123. Of the Camel.
When that a mighty Camel first appeared,
By all the other creatures he was feared;
Lest them to the tower on his back he should send,
Unto his pleasure all beasts did attend:
When they drew near they saw that he was tame,
Said that his looks and nature wan't the same.
Into his quiet mouth they put a bridle,
Thought that so stout a beast should not be idle;
Then bid the boys to lead him up and down,
Made him a perfect scorn to all the town.
Mor.
Who appear much, from slights are not exempt,
Familiarity does breed contempt;
The Persian kings are thought of greater might
Far than they are, cause they never come in sight.
FAB. 124. Of the Serpent.
A Snake complained to Jove that every body
Trampled upon him, were you such a noddy,
Said he, as not to sting him who trod first?
If so, none other trod upon you durst;
You might defend your self, and not complain,
A worm if trod upon, will turn again.
Mor.
Revenge is naught, but duly to resent
Injuries at first, may help for to prevent
The like for time to come, make the first smart,
And by so doing more secure thou art.
FAB. 125. Of the Pigeon.
A Thirsty Pigeon saw a Water-pot
Painted upon a wall, and was so hot
Upon the business, for to drink in it,
Such haste he made, that he his wings did split
Against a post, having done so did lie
Upon the ground, a prey to them came by.
Mor.
For to think of that Proverb often we need,
More haste folks make, the worse they use to speed.
FAB. 126. Of the Pigeon and the Crow.
A Dove in a dove-coat was greatly proud,
That she was fruitful, but the Crow aloud
Unto the Dove did call, good Pigeon peace,
Boast not of what thy sorrows does increase.
Mor.
A Pigeon may rejoice in what does let her
From breeding, for the fewer slaves the better;
Pigeons are slaves and all their young ones such,
Better a little slavery than much.
FAB. 127. Of the Rich man.
A Man of quality two daughters had,
When one was dead, no person seemed so sad
As a poor woman that was hired to mourn,
'Twas customary mourners to suborn;
The daughter that survived, said to her mother,
More than our selves, why mourn should any other?
She was your daughter, and she was my sister,
We of all folks methinks should most have mist her;
And so we do, her mother said again,
But it is their trade to whine and to complain:
They do it merely profit to advance,
It Is but the copy of their countenance.
Mor.
It Is usual for Art for to outvie
Nature, which chooses mediocrity;
How can a woman cry if gain engage her?
None cry so much as who cry for a wager.
FAB. 128. Of the Shepherd.
INto a grove of oaks a Shepherd led
His flock, and there his sheep with Acorns fed;
He spread his coat below, and climbed the tree,
As who should say their Carpet that should be:
The hungry sheep as if that they did dote,
Besides their Acorns are the Shepherds coat.
(Sheep are a sort of creatures that bite close,
Pigs coat's good meat, but man's coat an ill dose)
(So Inns of Court men Students; if not Benchers,
Together with their meat do eat their Trenchers:)
Then came the Shepherd down, but when his Coat
He could not find, set up a doleful note:
Who said, (said he,) that sheep are innocent?
That great mistake my usage may prevent:
They Will strip their friends and cloth their enemies,
And what their meaning is I cannot devise;
They will to strangers their own coat resign,
I feed them, yet they will eat the coat that is mine.
Mor.
It is the way of some, they never mind
Who has obliged them most, but are unkind
To their best friends, but if that strangers lack,
Will give to them, the coat that is on their back.
FAB. 129. Of the Neatherd.
A Neat-herd lost a Calf, offered a Kid
To Jove to tell him where the thief was hid;
And let him see his face, a Lion Jove.
Caused him to see, lodged in an oaken Grove,
And said, he are your Kid, what say you to him?
He then afraid the Lion would undo him,
Said, let me see his face no more, and I
A Bull to Jove will offer by and by.
Mor.
Forward and backward some folks do complain,
Wish this and that, and then unwish again;
They are not well when full, and worse when fasting,
Still mischiev'd are by changes everlasting:
Fish would be in the not, but when once taken
Always think long for to be out again.
FAB. 130. Of the Eagle.
THe King of Birds was got upon a Rock,
Thinking to catch a Hare, but caught a knock
With a broad Arrow, he the feathers saw
Strutting before his eyes, and then could claw
Them out, he was so vexed that dart to see,
Impt with his wings that would his ruin be.
Mor.
Friends are our wings, and they should make us fly
Aloft, if they procure our misery,
And imptheshaft, which strikes us to the heart,
It Is many deaths to die by such a dart.
FAB. 131. Of the Worm and the Fox.
A Lousie worm new crept out of the ground,
In The number of Physicians would be found;
To the Gods, Physician Paeon did compare
Himself (so greatly proud worms sometimes are)
Thou a Physician said the Fox, I doubt
It much, and shall all thy pretensions rout.
Thou art a Liar, I believe, like fame,
Were thou a Doctor, thou would never be lame,
Who so unskilful, or unkind shall be
As not to cure himself, will never cure me.
Mor.
To some men's words no heed is to he had,
They Will crack and vapor as if they were mad;
There are too many such vain glorious spittles,
They are great talkers, but they are mere Doe-littles.
FAB. 132. Of the Wolf and the Old woman.
A Skilful nurse whose little child did cry,
Defir'd the Infant to go hush-a-by:
Hush, hush, said she, or thee to the wolf I Will throw,
She said that which she never meant to do;
Wolf had so little wit to think she meant it,
He watched in hope, and kindly did resent it.
In The Evening she said, sweet Lamb go sleep,
I Will kill the wolf if he chance here to peep;
This woman has a double tongue, said he,
Said first a child, then Death my lot shall be.
Mor.
A woman double tongued men take in snuff,
They say one tongue for women is enough;
For every such like Sister there is a brother,
Who will say one thing, and will do another.
FAB. 133. Of the Gnat and the Lion.
A Gnat came to a Lion and did say
I am as strong as thou, try it you may
E'ne when you please, though you have paws to rend
And teeth to bite, so women to defend,
Or else offend, have teeth as well as tongues,
And paws to boot, crack not, but spare thy lungs,
And show what you can do against Van-Gnat,
To me a Lyon's no more than a Cat;
I Will sound my Trumpet and we will go to work,
I do not fear the face of the great Turk.
This said, he made his trumpet sound a battle,
It made a sound as loud as Babies Rattle;
Then they went to it, the Gnat stuck cheek by joal,
Unto the Lion, bit him near the hole
Of his right nostril, where the place was bare,
For thereabouts it seems there grew no hair:
Tortured the Lion so with his smart jaws,
He made him tear himself with his own paws;
This victory obtained, the Gnat did sound
His Trumpet once again, and did abound
In triumphs, but oh the chance of a day
A Spider caught him, as he went away:
He knew there was no remedy for that
But die he must, if Spider catch a Gnat;
It vexed her sore this mischief should betide her,
Had quel'd a Lion, must die by a Spider.
Mor.
Needlessly the least enemy don't try on:
A Spider may kill him that killed a Lion.
FINIS.
Books to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Commentary on the Hebrews. By John Owen, D. D. fol. 49. Sermons upon the
whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians. By Mr. John Daille: Translated
into English by F. S. Tho. Taylor's Works, the first vol. fol. 2. An Exposition
of Temptation, on Mat. 4. verse 1. to the end of the 11th. Divine Characters in
two parts, distinguishing the Hypocrite in his best dress. By Samuel Crook, B.
D. A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the 1 Chapt. of the second Epistle to
the Corinthians. By Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol, A Commentary on the whole Epistle
of S. Paul to the Ephesians. By Mr. Paul Bain, fol. A practical Exposition on
the third Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, with the
Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. v. 6, 7, 8. By Anthony Burgess, fol. The dead
Saint, speaking to Saints and sinners living, in several Treatises. The first
on 2 Samuel 24.10. The second on Cant. 4.9. The third on John 1.50. The fourth on
Isa. 58.2. The fifth on Exodus 15.11. By Samuel Bolton, D. D. fol.
Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By Ephesians. Pagit, fol. These 7
Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock. 1. The Christian
Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones business, in Religious
Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family Directions, and
his own Recreation^ to be read in Families for their Instruction and
Edification. The first part. 2. Likewise a second Part; wherein Christians are
directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, in the conditions of Prosperity and Adversity. 3. The
third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein the Christian is
directed how to make Religion his business, in his dealings with all men, in
the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good Company, in bad Company,
in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a weekday from morning to night, in
visiting the sick on a Dying-bed; as also the means how a Christian may do
this, and some motives to it. 4. The Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of
Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True Christian
characterized. 6. The fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith: Or One
cast for Eternity, with the only way to throw it well. 7. The Incomparableness
of God in his Being, Attributes, Works and Word, opened and applied. All these
by Geo. Swinnock, M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism. By Stephen Scandret. A
learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul to
the Corinthians, to which is added, First, A Conference between Christ and
Mary. Second, the Spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles.
By Richard Sibbs, D. D. 4to. The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace
opened: Preached in New England. By Peter Bulkey, 4to.

