THE CHURCH Triumphant.

OR, A Comfortable Treatise, of the Amplitude and Largeness of the Kingdom of
CHRIST; Wherein is proved, by Scriptures and Reason, That the number of the
Damned is inferior to that of the Elect.

Ne Redarguas ea falsitatis de quorum contrariis non est demonstratio. Rabbi
Mos. By JOSEPH ALFORD, M. A. sometime of Oriell College in Oxford.

Exercere nos Deus vult diffi^ultate Quaestionis,
Non decipere falsitate sententiae. Augustine.
Printed by W. Bentley, for J. William^ at the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard.
Anno Domini 1649.

(...) with that useful observation of Irenaeus: who speaking of Prophecies,
and some other abstruse points in Religion says, Antequam effectum habent
aenigmata sunt, and ambiguitates hominibus; they are clouds in the eyes, and
riddles in the understandings of men, until they be explained. I humbly entreat
you therefore to accept my endeavors, and to suspend your judgment till you
have weighed the Reasons on both sides. Let not the seeming novelty of the
opinion retard your enquiry, for although Truth be the daughter of the most
High, and therefore there can be no new Truth: yet many Errors are ancient,
embraced, reverenced unsifted and uncontroverted, merely in regard of their
Antiquity: when notwithstanding some doctrines of great consolation may
languish and be suppressed under those errors. The treasures of Divine
knowledge are inexhaustible, and to the dissolution of the World, the Oracles
of God will suppeditate new matter, wherewith to recreate a holy diligence, to
confirm a doubting spirit, and to confound a saucy curiosity. If I have
delivered a truth unto the world, which has lien as an Embrion buried in the
womb of error, it is a wealthy blessing upon my poor endeavors. If I do
hallucinate in the prosecution of it, I am willing to be confuted without
obstinacy. I am not less desirous to demolish an error, than I am sollicitous
to hearken to a corrected judgment. Sir, I wish you felicities both temporal
and eternal, that when you have finished the progress of faith and hope, you
may be translated into this Church Triumphant together, Sir, with

Your most devoted servant JOS. ALFORD.

OF THE LARGENESS OF THE Church Triumphant.
IN the Mysteries of Theology some questions are not yet un-muffled from their
obscurity: This Doctrine concerning the Paucity or Multitude of the Elect,
fruitful of consolation, and conducible to the knowledge of God, has seemed
not only difficult, but inexplicable. The opinion of the Learned asserting the
Paucity, has augmented the Difficulty, as if the bare authority of men were
sufficient to prevail with after Ages without the concurrence of their reasons.
It has been inveloped with obscurity, by a surmize, that the knowledge of it
is hid in the secret council of God, and is to us unrevealed: neither has it
appeared what reasons can be raised from the Doctrine of Faith and good Works,
which might greatly persuade us to a belief of the greater number to be saved.
But the clouds of erroneous prejudice being dissipated, truth will be
man^fested in a more vigorous excellency.

What tidings can arrive more acceptable to a consternated spirit, laboring
under sin and an apprehension of eternal torments, than to receive an
assurance, that between the exhaustible mercy of his God, and his iniquities,
there is no proportion. That the goodness of God is not circumscribed in the
salvation of some few men, just, and perfect, and eminent for sanctity; but
that he will beautify innumerable others, lame, and infirm, and dislocated
members: On the other side, what can more incline the hearts of men to
desperation, than to feign God to be some severe and importunate Exactor, who
will admit none into his Heavenly Kingdom, but Enoch, Elias, Prophets, and
Apostles, and some few men of Angelical holiness. For as in the body all the
members are not Eyes, but the Ears, the Nose, the Hands, the Feet, and other
more ignoble parts, have their distinct and proper functions: So in the Body of
the Church Triumphant, whereof our Lord Christ is the Head, the members are
diverse and subordinate, some being dignified above others: and as in a well
constituted City, there are the chief Magistrates, men of middle ranks, and the
poorer sort: so in the City of God, which through his benignity is congregated,
and constituted by degrees in this world, there will be found not only
Prophets and Apostles, but also many inferior persons out of all Kingdoms,
People, and Nations. In the Tabernacle of Moses, and upon the building and
beautifying of that illustrious Temple of Solomon, they did not only bestow
gold, silver, and jewels, but they made use also of brass, wood, stones,
Badgers-skins, and Goat Skins: to let us understand no doubt, that into this
Heavenly Temple, whereof that was a shadow, some shall be received, who in the
judgment of men, want the austere conversation, and refined piety. But if any
man object, Nothing that is defiled and impure shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and that God has commanded us to be holy, even as He is holy: Let that
man also know, that he, who upon the Cross purified the thief, in the fire of
his own sacrifice and torments, will in like manner deal with all those that
are ordained to salvation. It is the commandment of God that we should be
perfect, but imperfect is that charity that refuses salvation to those that
have not fulfilled that commandment he commands what we are unable to
perform, that the riches of his mercy might abound, to make the whole world
obnoxious to his benignity: for by the fulfilling of the law, or the
accumulation of good works, no man can be perfectly just before him.

For this cause I have framed this Disputation of the Amplitude of the Kingdom
of God, conceiving it no less profitable than if it had consisted of the Mercy,
Goodness, Wisdom, Power, or in a word, of the Nature of God. For these things
are so concatenated, knit, and interwoven, that unless the confines of it
exceed the territories of the devil, we can neither truly apprehend his mercy,
nor those other attributes that declare his nature.

But such is the peevishness of some spirits, they choose rather to defend an
opinion with obstinacy which they dote upon, than to enquire what may be
steadfastly maintained without contumacy; but we who defend the better Cause, to
wit, the magnifying of the Mercy of God in the salvation of Mankind (for beyond
these we shall not proceed) are prepared to refute without pertinacity, and to
be convinced without passion.

I have not enterprised this Disputation with any secret end divided from the
glory of God, not to anticipate more able pens, nor to introduce any
superannuated Heresy; not to tyrannize over the judgments of men by an
upstart Opinion, nor to impose a necessity of belief upon the meanest capacity:
but to unbosom my Meditations to the Pious and the Learned, and to have this
liberty judged by the Church of Christ according to the Divine Oracles of
Truth; for in this case I wish not to hear the opinion of this or that man,
but, if it could be accomplished, of all men. If in the application of
Scriptures, mine seem discrepant from the understanding of another man, let him
not rashly reject it, but remember that all Christian Commonwealths have
indulged this priviledeg to a Writer, to produce his own persuasion without the
contumely of another judgment. For why should that liberty be prejudged by
him, who is at liberty to exercise it? Let them consider whether any thing be
alleged against the Analogy of Faith, or the precepts of good Life: any thing
inconsistent with the highest and most undoubted principles of Christian
Religion, or derogatory from the Majesty and glory of the Kingdom of Christ, of
Allegories and mistical Interpretations. I shall speak little, knowing with
what freedom all Writers have made use of them, provided they have not been
repugnant to the Doctrine of Christ. It was my desire to attempt whether this
Argument might not be published as a Paradox, and after the custom of the
ancient Schools discussed on both sides, that so from the success of reasoning,
there might out of things obscure and wonderful, flow matter probable and
common.

Whereas I said in the beginning, that some things in the secrets of Divinity
are not yet explained, this perhaps will not escape reprehension: for it may be
reinforced, That not only all things necessary to salvation are contained in
the Scriptures, but that all those things are unfolded and made plain both by
ancient and modern Writers: and therefore it appears a needless thing to
enquire after new lights.

I say therefore, that nothing more unchangeably ought to be believed, than
that God by the pens of his Prophets, Evangelists, and Prophets, has delivered
unto us in their writings, whatsoever it was his good pleasure we should know,
and observe: but I say also I have (I believe) reason to pawse upon the
consequence, that because there they are contained, they are therefore
explained, for this I suppose no judgment that is at leisure can believe; for
if there be a perfect Declaration of all those things, wherefore are our
precious hours punished with so many Commentaries? why are so many books
written to work down, smooth, and explicate the knotty questions in Religion?
why so many disputations, conferences, and controversies among the learned? for
whilst they emit Explications, Observations, Annotations, and Animadversions,
do they not discipline reason to preponder some things as yet intricate and
perplexed? and instruct a consideration that they labor to propagate belief to
things doubtful, and authority to things contemned? if any man will be so
licentious as to reply, that such polemical disceptations are spent for the
most part about matters of indifferency, besides the untruth of it, certainly
learned and wise men have reason to resent it as a horrible indignity to hear
themselves charged to wast their time in unnecessary altercations.

But what age may not make the same objection, that all things are abundantly
revealed? Antiquity might plead it, and then it had been a needless undertaking
to illustrate and declare the meaning of the Scriptures. Future generations
also that shall succeed us even to the worlds dissolution, may affirm the same
thing, so that by such a restraint all means of interpreting the mystical
places of Scripture, would be evermore precluded. That the sense of diverse
places of Scripture, has not been sufficiently declared in any age, is
sufficiently declared by the words of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where he has
ordained prophecy to continue in the Church for ever: by this means to inform
our understandings, that the enucleation of some abstruse matters has the
pre-eminence amongst Spiritual gifts. In his first Epistle also to the
Thessalonians he gives it in precept, That we quench not the Spirit, neither
despise prophecyings, but exhorts us to examine all things, and to hold fast
that which is good. Peter also does not deny, but that some things in the
Epistles of Paul are hard to be understood.

Thus it is evident, I wanted not reason to affirm, that some questions in the
Sacred Monuments of Christian Religion, are still complicated and involved:
neither is the Springhead of this holy Fountain so to be shut or dammed up,
that it may not be lawful for any to convey the streams to water this Celestial
Eden the Kingdom of Christ.

Some perhaps may fancy that this Question might have been stifled in the
birth, or overlaid by second thoughts, because it seems to graduate men in
dissoluteness; leading them from an awful reverence into security, from
security to contempt, and from contempt, to an unrestrained course of life.
Errors proceeding from a good intention are the more excusable; and that they
do e^re through a misunderstanding of the progress of piety, I shall now
demonstrate.

Fear never made good Tutour to duty, but love and a consideration of
beneficence. It Is the method of slavery to act under compulsion; but it is the
glory of obedience when affection extorteth a filial respect. Thus when Moses
in the sixth of Deuter. had set down all the laws, solicitous as is were of our
observing them, he brings in the law of Charity, commanding us to love God
above all things, and our neighbor as our selves. Our Lord Christ also brought
no other commandment but this of Love, making it the epitome of the Law and the
Prophets. From hence St. Paul also in the 13 to the Romans says, Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. St. John also that bosom-friend of his Lord and Master,
when he would describe unto us the perfection of it, by the nature of God,
tells us, God is Love, insinuating that he that abides in Love abides in
God, and God in him. Seeing therefore the Law, the Prophets, the Lord, and his
Apostles, do unanimously invite to love; considering also that love flows not
from fear (for fear and love are never consociated, love still expelling fear)
but from the love of someother toward us, which also is known by indulgence
and conferring of favors and benefits: it follows that the essence of piety
and sanctity is rooted in the assurance of the Divine love to us, and quickened
by the consideration, and estimation of Gods great benefits unto us: which
apprehensions inflame our souls to reaflect and obey him.

That our Lord Christ held this to be the path of true piety the Scriptures do
witness; and therefore David says unto the Lord, righteousness thou have
loved, but wick^dness thou have hated. For there is nothing more virtuous and
effectual to promove the mind to an exaltation of piety, and to keep it at that
pitch, than Love, and a continual remembrance of the Divine clemency and
goodness.

But this is undiscernable in the salvation of a few men, and the condemnation
of many. In this rather was the mercy of God manifested, that when in Justice
he might have damned all, he destinated some to punishment, but more to
salvation: for when the soul springs, and culminateth in the contemplation of
such a love, unless it be doomed to the left hand distribution, that man must
needs abhor vice, when he knows it is so displeasing to so loving a father.
And it will also forcibly allure him to the love of virtue, and piety, because
he remembers the indulgence of his God, does require it of, and expect it from
him. Lastly he will continually endeavor to be holy, innocent, and just,
because he knows his God, and his Savior is holy, pure, innocent, and just.
Nor does the objected security hinder at all the jou^ney of piety, but may
rather be accounted the life of good actions, and a happy being: but such a
condition of life cannot possibly be espoused to a perpetual fear of evil, and
torment. Neither do I understand and mean by security, that carnal habit,
which arises from a contempt of Gods laws, and an incogitancy of the day of
judgment: but a privation of anxiety, and a tranquillity of spirit,
germinating and budding from a confidence of the Divine goodness to mankind,
which our Lord and his Apostles have called Peace.

In this security and affiance, I say, felicity is placed, and I term it the
fountain of holiness, and good works. What good things can he imagine, what
laudable action can he meditate, or what great matters worthy of a Christian
resolution can he perform, that always doubts his own salvation? that thinks
God is angry with the greater part of mankind? and entertaineth such narrow
conceptions of the kingdom of Christ, as if it were open but to some few men, I
know not who in some angle and nook of the World? This is not to extol his
Majesty, but to obscure it; this is not to advance his glory, but to diminish
it; not to magnify his goodness, but to disparage it; not to admire his
wisdom, but to despise it; not to stand amazed at his omnipotence, but to mock
it: whereas they who think highly and Honorably (as it is meet they should) of
the Largeness of his Kingdom, their contemplations are devout, pious, and the
more congruous to the essence of God. Of which most blessed kingdom what my
conceptions are, I shall comprehend in two books, or Dialogues; in the last I
shall variously, and plainly demonstrate the largeness of this Kingdom, having
in the first cleared all those places of Scripture which seem to oppose the
magnitude of it.

For distinction sake I name the Prolocutours Caelius, and Maynardus, and every
attentive Reader may make himself a Moderatour.

Caelius. I come accompanied (my dear Maynardus) with early desires to renew
our last conference; and if it be no interruption to your studies, I should
desire satisfaction in a scruple, by some words of yours injected.


Maynardus. I account it (my Caelius) the noblest end of my studies, if by that
advantage I can in any matter benefit a friend.


C. You may remember, that after you had discoursed of the goodness and mercy
of God to mankind in Christ, you added that his kingdom, which was built upon,
and established in mercy, was set open to more men, than many men have hitherto
conjectured. I have ruminated upon these words, being doubtful whither they
might tend: and many things coming to my rememberance I remain unresolved.


M. Speak, I pray, your thoughts.


C. First I thought of O^igen, who (as it is said) was of Opinion that not
only the damned Souls of men, but also the Devils themselves at last should be
received unto mercy. I thought also upon their opinion who believed, that
although not all men, yet such as were matriculated into Christ by Baptism, and
did eat of his mystical bread, should obtain eternal life. Lastly I pondered
whether you might not insinuate that the number of the Elect was not inferior
to that of the Damned, but rather greater.


M. And which of these did you find most agreeable.


C. The last, but that the Scriptures teach us otherwise, seems the more
probable. But because nothing falls unadvisedly from you, I expect the reason
of your words: and whether you intended them in any of these senses which I
have delivered.


M. First I conceive that opinion to be falsely imposed upon Orig n, and that it
is an emulous invention of such men that would obscure his eminence, which
unworthy practice those times (so well as these) were very prone too. For my
part, I conceive that most learned man to have advanced the Kingdom of Christ,
and the mercy of God, by no reproveable or vulgar amplifications, which saying
being maliciously detorted through envy, and perversely understood by ignorance,
that devout Father was slandered to affirm that the devil should be translated
to glorious immortality: But this opinion, whether held by Origin or any other
man, is sufficiently refuted by Christ himself the Master of Truth.

The second opinion, which does invest all those with eternal happiness, which
are initiated by Baptism into, and have participated the Body and Blood of
Christ, is utterly to be rejected and dis-allowed; for that imputes salvation
to the efficacy of outward signs and elements: but this is so super-abundantly
overthrown by S. Paul, that it were waste of time to urge any thing in
confutation of it: for it would follow by unavoidable consequence, if that
Opinion should be granted, that Hymeneus and Philetus, and Alexander, of whom
Paul makes mention; that Ananias and Sapphira, and Simon Magus, that Julian the
Apostat^, nay that Sergius the Monk, who by some has been reputed Antichrist,
are now partakers of Beatitude.

But the third opinion, that the City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, the
Church Triumphant, should be larger than the execrable synagogue of the devil,
does not seem to my judgment to contain the least absurdity. Wherefore I shall
not conceal my preconceptions of it, unless you otherwise conceive of it.


C. I should (as I said before) embrace this persuasion, did not the word of
God restrain my consent.


M. Does neither the authority of the ancient Fathers, nor the consent of
former ages, nor the newness and greatness of a matter then prevail with you?


C. Not at all. For first, in disputation, not the authority of men, but the
power of reason should be of most importance. Secondly, the Fathers claim not
the least assent to their writings, further than they are confirmed by the
testimonies of the Scriptures. Then, for the consent of many ages and customs,
what is it, if it be not supported by reason, and the authentical authority of
Gods word, but a decrepit and a blind error? For there is no novelty in Truth,
than which nothing is more ancient, for she is the Daughter of the Most High.
But if there be a truth newly explorated, the greatness and the newness of it,
should rather allure, than affright me, or any other man.


M. You would then, did not the Scriptures overruled you, join your consent to
this Opinion?


C. I would.


M. Verily I applaud your judgment, as holy, and worthy of a Christian. But
what places are those which (as you say) contradict this Opinion?


C. The first is, because at the Deluge only eight persons were saved, and if
the salvation of the Elect were typified by this deliverance, doubtless the
number of the Elect is very small: but this seems confirmed by S. Peter in his
first Epistle, chap. 3. where speaking of the Ark, he says, In which very few,
that is eight Souls were delivered. The like Figure whereunto even Baptism does
now also save us.


M. These words of S. Peter rightly understood, do unfold the mystery of that
action. First he says, that the waters of the flood, were shadows or figures
of Baptism, and the destruction of sin; therefore Noah did typifie Christ the
Publisher and Preacher of Righteousness, and by the Ark is signified the faith
of the Kingdom of Christ: for as none were preserved from the waters, but those
who hearkening to Noah, took sanctuary in the Ark; so now also none enter at
the door of Salvation, but such as having heard the Gospel preached, believing,
repent: and following Christ Jesus the Pilot of his Heavenly Ark the Church,
are wasted by faith as in a ship through the raging waves and whirlpits of
death and hell. Whereas Peter subjoyns that very few were saved from the
deluge, those words may very aptly be referred to the paucity of believing Jews
at his first manifestation in the flesh. For James also writing to the Jews
scattered about all the coasts of Asi^, comfort them, that they be not
dejected through various tribulations, nor discouraged through the paucity of
believers: and shows them also that the sufferings of Christ, the
persecutions of the Godly, and the scarcity of those Jews that should free
themselves from that hallucination, and blindness of mind, was foretold by the
Prophets, and prefigured by types: and as that inundation destroyed not them
that took shelter in the Ark, neither can crosses, calamities, nor death it
self endamage those that trust in Christ, but be rather wholly converted to the
advantage of a believing soul.

Peter therefore, as I have showed, speaks not of the universality of the
Elect, but his words must be restrained to those contemporary Jews, to whom, as
he was an Apostle of the Circumcision, he directed that Epistle.


C. I confess with joy my Maynardus, thou have enlightened a very dark passage
in S. Peter; but what can you answer to this argument, that of that vast
multitude of Israelites which God brought out of Egypt, only two, Cal^b and
Josuah, were admitted into the Land of Promise?


M. The best and safest rule to unvail the mysteries of the Old Testament, is
to consult the Apostolical sense of those places. Paul handling that place in
the tenth chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, draws it into
example, thereby to warn and deter them from sinning by the sad president of
those Israelites that fell in the Wilderness: And in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, that he may discover the root of all iniquity, he says that they to
whom the Land of the Canaanites was promised, and they who fled out of Egypt
through unbelief should not possess that land, which God also there called his
Rest, because it does declare the peace and unity of the Kingdom and Church of
Christ, in which we shall live secure, trusting in the good will of God toward
us in Jesus Christ. Of which rest the Prophet Isaiah makes mention in the two
and thirtieth chapter, saying: And my people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. Behold here the
sense of the Apostle upon the words, where there is not a syllable of the
paucity of such as shall be saved, and doubtless it were an act of great
temerity to bow or wrest the Text further than the very matter does declare, or
wider than the Prophets and Apostles have conceived of it.


C. But can you show by some other passages of Scripture, (for without this
authority I know you attempt nothing) what must be understood by Josuah and
Caleb, and why only the little ones, the rest being excluded, should possess
the Land of Canaan?


M. There is no doubt but these two were preserved to be witnesses of those
wonderful deliverances, which God had vouchsafed to that unthankful people,
because they only had the courage amongst all the Spies, to undertake the
extirpation of the Canaanites; but if we raise the matter into a higher
consideration, seeing that those transactions pointed to the times of the
Messiah, it will be no impropriety to affirm, that Josuah and Caleb were Types
and adumbrations of the paucity of those, who upon the first coming of our
Savior, should believe in him, notwithstanding the majesty of God was
refulgent in him by the frequent attestation of miracles: which very thing,
those severe comminations against that stubborn and contumacious people do seem
to import: For, says God in the fourteenth of Numbers, all those men which
have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and in the
wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to
my voice: surely they shall not see the Land which I swore unto their fathers,
neither shall any of them that provoked me see it. And a little after, he
excepteth Josuah and Caleb, and all those under the age of twenty years. Of
which thing God complains in Isaiah (which place also S. Paul cites in the
tenth to the Romans) I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious
people. S. John also in the beginning of his Gospel says, He came unto his
own, but his own received him not.


C. I perceive by these two (for as it is written, In the mouth of two or three
witnesses every truth shall be established) the Apostles and Disciples of our
Lord are presignified, who as they did testify of his wonders and miracles, so
did they chiefly bear record of his Resurrection. For so our Lord himself says
to his Apostles, Ye shall bear witness of me through the utmost parts of the
earth. But now I expect to hear what you can say concerning the posterity of
them that sell in the wilderness, for certainly in this also is comprehended a
great mystery.


M. I should indeed have little to answer to this matter, had not S. Paul, that
great Revealer of hidden things, opened a way unto it. For the Apostle in the
eleventh to the Romans, does plainly prophecy that, Those branches which were
cut off through unbelief, shall through Faith be reingrafted. What else does
this signify but that the posterity of them that perished in the desert, shall
have access into the Land of Promise? was not all Judea after the death of our
Savior turned into a solitude? were not almost all them that had seen Christ,
destroyed by war, famine, or pestilence? yet their generations, as Paul
witnesses, shall be received into his Kingdom. In confirmation whereof, he does
accomodate the predictions of the Prophets, and thus unfoldeth them to the
preconsolation of the Gentiles. For I would not, Brethren, that ye should be
ignorant of this mystery (lest you should be wise in your own concei^^) that
blindeness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written: There shall come
out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. For this
is my co^enant with them when I shall take away their sins. Which words in the
original are somewhat different; but it seems the Apostle followed the
translation of the Septuagint, in which translation the words are not so much
considered as the sense. These things also Mos^s, Jeremiah, and Ezechiel, do
promise to the Israelites, that he will gather them out of all Nations, and
from the ends of the earth, that he will cleanse them with pure water and purge
them from all their iniquities, and give them a new heart, and a new spirit.


C. To the other things I readily assent, but I do not sufficiently understand
what is meant by the Deliverer.


M. I will show you my Caelius: This place is diversely expounded, but the words
of the Apostle are plain enough; for when he says, he shall come, it is liquid
he speaks of somewhat yet to come: and when he says, the Deliverer shall
come, whom can you suppose to be meant, but Jesus Christ the only Savior and
Redeemer of mankind? especially when he adds, out of Sion, that is, out of
the very Nation of the Jews, to whom this Prophecy does belong. But because
some Holy and great man was to be sent from God, for the instauration of a
collapsed Church, and the replantation of an extinguished Religion, this does
not at all seem different from the custom of God. For when things are even
despaired of, and grown desperate, he then uses (as the Prophet Malachie
speaks) to raise up some Elias before the coming of the great and dreadful day
of the Lord, and he shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the Children, and
the heart of the Children to their Fathers: that is, he will congregate and
convert the hearts of those Children to the Messiah, whose Fathers have
worshipped him in Spirit. And that this should be performed by Elias was the
opinion of Orig n, Theodoret, Chrysostom, and Austin also, which they confirm
by that saying of our Savior, When Elias comes he shall restore all things.
Howsoever in my judgment, Paul in that place means none other but Christ Jesus.


C. But was not Christ already come when Paul wrote? wherefore then does he
say, he shall come? What coming does he describe? his first appearing to suffer
death for us, or his last coming to judgment?


M. Paul in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, when he purposes to
describe unto us by whom Antichrist should be revealed, and by what weapons he
should be overcome, after that for a time, he had proudly advanced himself
against Christ under the name of Christ, he thus writes: Then shall that
wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. In which words four
things are declared unto us. That Antichrist shall be detected, by whom he
shall be brought to destruction, by what weapons, and lastly that the Lord
himself shall come in Person against this enemy, shall subdue him, and scatter
all his forces; and this shall be the means of that accomplishment. Whatsoever
is made manifest, was first hidden, and whatsoever is brought to light is made
manifest: Antichrist for a long time has lain hid like a wolf in sheeps
clothing: and still had been unmanifested, had not the appearance of Christ
begun to reveal him: by whose coming again also he shall be utterly overthrown.
But in the mean time, it behooves us to fight manfully under Christ our King and
leader, against this adversary and all his adherents: and least we should faint
or be discouraged, St. John assures us he shall be delivered into our hands,
And the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords and King of kings,
and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful. But with what
weapons? with those wherewith men go out to battle? No, but with the Spirit of
his mouth, and the brightness of his coming.


C. I apprehend you, with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
that is, with arguments taken out of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, which he
shall never be able to answer.


M. I deny not but the adversaries of Christ may be fought withal, and brought
to destruction by other weapons, but Paul tells us, that Antichrist shall be
put to flight by the Spirit of his mouth, to exaggerate the power of Christ,
who is able to vanquish his enemies by the breath of his nostrels. For his
Spirit, as the Prophet Isaiah says, is an over flowing stream, he is also a
consuming fire, and Christ Jesus is the brightness of this fire, at whose
appearance the enemies vanish, as the night and darkness is dispersed by the
approach of the sun.

Now if the tyranny of Antichrist, must be abolished by the Spirit of the mouth
of our Savior before his last coming to judgment, (which St. John
foretells, saying, And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and shall burn her with fire.) That the Gospel may be preached in all
the Kingdoms of the earth; another coming of Christ must yet be enquired after:
and this is that coming by which he has begun to restore the preaching of the
Gospel, to enlighten the understandings of them that sat in darkness, and to
confirm them by his Spirit. We know well under how much blindness and ignorance
the whole world, in former ages, has been kept, contiguous almost to the very
times of the Apostles. For as soon as their embassage was ended, the ravenous
wolves begun to enter into the fold of Christ (as Paul says) not sparing the
flock. Thus by degrees the true Christ was taken out of the world, and a
supposititious Christ laid in his room, in the holy place, the Temple of God
established in faith, not founded upon any material basis. In which temple he
sits, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and
signs and lying wonders, and with all de^eaveableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved. For they who shut their ears that they may not hear the truth,
it is no wonder that they delight in lies. And when salvation is promised to
them that believe the truth, they that delight in lies may justly fear
damnation.


C. If I understand you rightly, you intimate that as the absence of the Gospel
does signify the absence of Christ, (for where his word is preached, where his
voice is heard there is Christ) so by the return and restoring of the Gospel is
to be understood another coming of Christ.


M. Rightly taken; but I proceed to declare this middle coming* In the 18. of
Luke, Christ having propounded the similitude of the unjust Judge and the
importunate Widow, says of himself, When the Son of m^n comes, shall he find
says upon the earth? which cannot be understood of his last appearance, when
the Gospel being preached over all the earth, there will be an infinite
multitude of believers. But that I may no longer detain your expectation, he
then foretold this coming (if you heed the mystery) when by his denouncing of
judgment and destruction upon the Jews, he comforted and confirmed the minds
of those amongst them who did or should believe, saying, so reckon, that ye
shall see me no more henc^forth, until you shall say, blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord. Seeing therefore so much blindness is brought into the
world, so many shadows of falss Religion, and vails of false Doctrine: first
into the Church by the decretals of the Popes, then by the fabulous stories of
the Talmud, lastly into other Nations by the lies of Mahomet in the Alchoran;
it is altogether necessary, that Christ our King, by his most glorious coming,
should re-establish all things in unity, that the learned may be directed to
true wisdom, and the ignorant instructed in true Religion.


C. One thing remains, which seems to me yet improved, you said our Lord
Christ had respect to his second coming, when he told the Jews they should see
him no more, until with joyful acclamations they should receive him as their
Lord and King; which I conceive was then accomplished, when riding upon an Ass
toward Jerusalem, they entertained him with that great applause.


M. Two things are diligently to be considered: First, whether our Savior
spoke these words before those acclamations, or afterward: but let any man
confer the circumstances and he shall find they were afterward spoken.
Secondly, to whom these words were spoken. St. Luke attesteth that these words
were spoken to the Pharisees; but let any man consult the other Evangelists,
and he shall find, that he was afterward seen by the Pharisees; but he shall
not find that ever they said, blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord. Nay they were so far from approoving these jubilations, that it filled
them with murmuring and objurgations, for in that day when the multitude
followed him, St. John shows in the 12. Chap. of his Gospel, that the
Pharisees said within themselves, do you not see that we prevail nothing?
behold the whole world is gone after him. We must therefore seek after another
Advent, and it will be that which we mentioned from the prophetical saying in
St. Paul, which shall be then accomplished, when the straggling and vagabond
Jews shall infold themselves into the Church of Christ, and when those words of
the people shall be fulfilled in their signification, Hosanna to the son of
David, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
highest; for then according to the words of St. Paul, all Israel shall be saved.


C. I now plainly perceive that that place of St. Paul, is to be understood in
a Spiritual sense, and that upon the second coming of Christ the Jews shall be
restored; and that I may briefly declare my mind, I suppose that all those
destructions that have happened to that people, and that wonderful blindness in
which they have been captivated, did portend the universal calamity, which the
world was to suffer under Antichrist; and that this coming of our Savior shall
be as a resurrection from sin, a dereliction of our errors, and a conversion
to the true Faith of Jesus Christ, and having received delightful satisfaction
in these doubts, I shall now propound some places in the New Testament, which
make against this Opinion; and first these do occur the words of Christ
himself: Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there are which enter in, but
strait is the door that leads to eternal life, and narrow is the way, and few
there are that find it. Here Christ not obscurely does seem to signify, that
few shall be saved, but many shall be damned.


M. It is very excellently, and modestly spoken my Caelius, for indeed all
things are not as they seem, neither are all things proved which appear to be
so: some things are indeed such as they seem to be as gold and silver, but
other things though they appear true to the judgment of the sense, yet are
improperly so called, as tin and lytarge of gold mingled with gall and
quicksilver have a semblance of true gold. Hypocrites which we call
dissembler^ do not they appear true, devout, and Holy? yet they are so far
separated and distinguished from piety and true sanctity by our Savior
Himself, that he called them painted sepulchers, which are of beautiful
outsides, but full of filth, and stink and rottennes within. He says also by
their habit and behavior they seem to be sheep, but within they are ravening
wolves. So on the other side most men are accounted irreligious and profane,
wicked and reprobated; are pointed at, hissed at, scoffed at, plundered,
sequestered, murdered as enemies to God and goodness, and unworthy to enjoy
any share in Gods creatures, yet these persecuted men hold fast the true
Religion, and Faith in Christ. Our Savior therefore in the 7. of John
exhorts us, not to judge by appearance but to judge righteous judgment. And
in the 8. Chap. he reprehendeth the Pharisees that they judged after the manner
of men, all is not gold that glisters, the same thing may I say of this place
by you alleged; and perhaps they that extenuate the number of the blessed,
and lessen the Church Triumphant, do more oppose God, than they which amplify
and augment it. For if we search into some things with a holy curiosity, the
first appearances of them will vanish, from this very place this truth will be
sufficiently proved: For when a certain man asked our Savior, whether few or
many should be saved? Christ makes this answer, Strive to ent^r in at the
strait gate, for many I say unto you will strive to enter in, and shall not be
able. When once the Master of the house is risen up, and has shut the door,
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord,
open unto us, and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you
are; then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets: but he shall say, I tell you, I know you not
whence you are; depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob,
and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye your selves thrust out: and
they shall come from the East and from the West, and from the North, and from
the South, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God, and behold, there are
last, which shall be first, and first which shall be last. I suppose you doubt
not, but these words must be understood of the Jews, yet if you should scruple
it, these words would resolve you, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. As if this must advantage them, and entitle
them to the kingdom of heaven, because the Master of the house is of their own
nation, and chiefly sent to them: Which words some imagine to relate to the day
of judgment; but to me they seem to refer to the first coming of Christ: and
this will be manifest, to any man, that with diligence will examine the
particulars, spoken of by our Savior, wherefore Christ being asked about the
paucity of the elect, answers not to the question, but directs his discourse
another way, least he should breed a remisness, a negligence, a laziness in
them to seek after the kingdom of God; and therefore he exhorts them to
strive to enter in at the strait-gate, before the Master of the house be risen
up, and shut it against them.


C. What is this gate? and how to be shut?


M. You will plainly understand, what is meant by the gate, when I have showed
you, what it is to have the gate shut.


C. Proceed then to the handling of that.


M. When we read that the Master of the house does rise, and shut the gate, we
must understand thereby, the secret counsel of God upon the Jews, to blind them
and harden them for a time, that they should not confess him, and in a word,
the shutting of the gate, is the rejection of the Jews for a season, that the
Gentiles might be received into the Church of Christ. Which opinion is
confirmed by those words, by which he foretells, they shall come from all the
four c^rners of the earth, and sit down in the kingdom of God. And from the 14.
of the Acts also, where Paul and Barnabas when they were come, and had gathered
the Church together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he
had opened the door of Faith unto the Gentiles. Also by that which Luke said
before, that the door should be shut after that the Master of the house was
risen up; but he rose when Christ (who is that Master of the house, and Lord of
the house of God his Church) had delivered himself from the power of death,
from whence you see it follows that nothing else is understood by the straight
gate, but that short intervail of time from the coming of Christ to the
besieging, destruction, and desolation of Jerusalem, this also was foretold by
the Prophet Daniel in the 9. Chap. And he shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the
oblation to cease: and for the over-spreading of abominations he shall make it
d^solate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be powered upon
the desolate. Again, our Savior has explained these words of the Prophet,
saying, When you shall see Jerusalem compassed about on every side, then know
that her destruction is at hand: and a little after, This nation shall be
greatly oppressed, and shall perish by the edge of the sword, till the times of
the other nations be fulfilled.


C. But what are those times?


M. I shall tell you, though perhaps otherwise than most men conceive: for
Christ does here intimate that the Jews shall remain under that blindness and
calamity, tiil the other Nations of the world have believed and embraced the
Gospel; which limitation of time, is determined in the secret will of God: nor
is it any other than what the words of S. Paul import: That blindness in part
is happened to Israel, till the fullness of the Gentiles become in. Now weigh
the words, and observe whether this sense of them be strained, or detorted, or
rather be not proper and genuine.


C. They are indeed, only the Apostle handles them more at large.


M. Let us therefore revolve and perpend the answer of Christ to the question.
You demand of me, whether few shall be saved? but I admonish you not to trifle
away time in such questions, but let there be a striving, a holy contention
amongst you with all celerity, to enter in at this door of my Gospel: for the
time is very short, and when the hour of your rejection, the imminence of your
calamity approaches, your complaints will become unprofitable, and your
desires to enter, frustrate and repulsed: for the gate of Salvation shall be
barred up, and the faculties of faith cumbred and stifled. Seek not, O ye Jews,
with anxiety to know how few of you belong to the Church Triumphant, but with a
wise emulation run the race of Faith, that ye may belong to that Church, and it
behooves you also to set out early, if ye believe these words of mine, by which
I provoke and exhort you to newness of life, and publicly denounce and declare
unto you the approach of the Kingdom of God. Now if we believe the sense of
these words to be the same with those of S. Matthew, which you objected to me,
which cannot be denied, seeing in both places there is mention of the
narrowness of the gate, there that place in Matthew cannot reasonably be
understood of the number of the Elect, for if in that passage of Luke, nothing
be intended but a premonition of that short period of time, in which the Jews
had a capacity by Faith, to attain the Kingdom of Christ, although the number
of them was very small which then should believe, yet you must needs grant me,
that those things mentioned by our Savior in the other Gospel, must only be
referred to the Nation of the Jews: of which people few indeed did enter by the
True Gate Christ Jesus, and very many by the secret purpose of God being
excluded, remained without.


C. The force of your reasons does incline me to assent; and the rather,
because it has been observed of S. Luke, that it is his peculiarity to deliver
those things clearly and distinctly, which in the other Evangelists are related
more obscurely, and indeed this is the gift of an elegant, and the duty of a
perspicuous Writer. I will instance for brevity sake but in one example:
Matthew writes that the two thieves between whom our Lord was crucified, used
the same exprobations toward him, as did the Chief Priests, Scribes and
Elders; but Luke says only one of them used contumelious language against
him; And one of the malefactors which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If
thou be Christ, save thy self and us: but the other answering, rebuked him,
saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? and
we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man has
done nothing amiss. And although this be manifest, yet I would know if there be
not another explication of those words of the narrovv way, and the narrow
gate, if peradventure some man should remain unsatisfied with this?


M. There is indeed Caelius; for when a place of Scripture is assumed to the
proof of some false opinion, it may rather admit of any sense, than that
whereby it is applied to the confirmation of that error? will therefore redeem
this place from the countenancing of an erroneous opinion, and accomodate it to
the illustration and establishment of truth. First it is a matter acknowledged
and requires no proof, that by the contumacie and fall of Adam, we are all
conceived and born in original sin, that confession which David makes of
himself, is appliable to all the sons of Adam; Behold I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my mother conceive me. And it is no less evident, that if any
man be just, if any man be holy, he ought thankfully to confess that these
streams of sanctity, these divinations of righteousness, do slow from that
Fountain of Goodness Christ Jesus, by a new and divine regeneration: For of his
fullness have we received (that are members of his body) even grace for grace.
Our Savior in the words does propound unto us two doors and two ways, one
broad and wide, the other strait and narrow; that, as leading to destruction;
this unto eternal happiness. But what else can we imagine this way of
destruction to be, but the corrupt nature of mankind, and the proclivity of our
wills to all error and unrighteousness? and what can be meant by the narrow
way to Life, but the observation of the Commandments, and a sincere imitation
of our Lord Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life? for he says, If
ye will have life, keep my Commandments. Also in another place, If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross and follow
me.


C. It is a very religious interpretation which you have given of these two
ways, yet one thing does not a little move me, that Christ says, Many enter in
at the gate which ^adeth to destruction, but few find that way which leads to
Life: which argues, that a small number only shall be saved, and the greater
number shall incur everlasting condemnation.


M. Let me Caelius for a while interrogate thee, and do thou make answer, this
way perhaps may facilitate the issue of this Disputation.


C. With much willingness, for this has been a custom in disputation deduced
even from Socrates.


M. You have already granted that (unless I be mistaken) this broad way does
signify and imply, the depraved nature of lapsed man.


C. I do confess it.


M. And that by this narrow gate, this difficult passage is meant, the precepts
of God, the way of tribulation and calamity, which was the path our Lord Jesus
Christ did walk in.


C. To this also you have had my concession.


M. I desire you now to tell me, what can enter in at this broad gate, or
rather, what you suppose it is to enter in at this broad and wide gate, but as
I said before, to be made and born of the corrupt matter of the old Adam?


C. That truly is my Opinion.


M. Do you conceive that all men none excepted, or some men only are obnoxious
to this necessity of sinning?


C. All men, Christ Jesus the Author and Finisher of our salvation excepted,
who is therefore by S. Paul called the Second Adam, and the New man: For as by
the disobebedience of one man, sin was propagated unto all men, so by the
righteousness of one man, all they that believe shall be made perfect, Romans 5.
Our Savior also in S. John tells us, Whatsoever is born of the flesh, is
flesh. S. Paul also says, I know that nothing in me, that is, in my nature, is
good; for by nature we are all the sons of wrath. Which places, with
innumerable others, do perspicuously convince the impuritie of the nature of
man: that I may say nothing of all those inordinate affections, violent
concupiscences, facinorous actions, and heinous offenses which are produced as
the deadly poisonous fruit of this corrupt tree.


M. Your answer, Caelius, is very ingenious and opposite. What is it, think
you, to find out this way, and this gate that leads to Life?


C. Doubtless to find out Christ, who is the Way, and the Door, and the Life,
and despising all other transitory pleasures, and fugitive comforts, to fly
to him, and to honor him by right believing and well living.


M. But who enters at this gate having nature only for his guide, or how many
follow Christ only by the light of reason?


C. None alas, not one. For nature, as I have said, being the way to death,
whither can it lead us but to destruction?


M. Do all men therefore, following the conduct of nature, slide into death,
and tumble into condemnation?


C. This I have already granted without any hesitation.


M. Our Lord Christ, then, when he said many, understood all, and when he spoke
of a few, he meant none.


C. I cannot gainsay it, I have granted the antecedent, and the consequence is
irrefragable: but why did our Savior rather say many and few, than all and
none?


M. In this we may contemplate the wisdom and lenity of our ever blessed
Savior, who did so apportion and contemperate his sayings, that neither these
should sink into desperation, nor they be lifted and puffed up to arrogance and
ostentation: it pleased him therefore to say many, not all, that he might
qualify the rigor and severity of the matter, by the gentleness and mildness
of speech (for if he had said all, he had precipitated infirm and timorous
consciences into desperation) and with the same holy moderation he pronounced
few should find the narrow way: For had he said none, he would have seemed to
preclude and anticipate all hope of all Salvation: thus by a most wise
temperance and disposition of speech, he reflecteth to us our pravity and
misery, when he says many, and when he says few, he leaves us not altogether
destitute of hope, which is our heavenly viaticum.


C. Who then shall be saved?


M. When the Master himself had affirmed that it was more easy for a Camel to
pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom
of God, presently the Disciples felt within themselves a consternation of mind,
and being suddenly struck with an inward conflict of fear and wonder, they
enquired as you now do, who then shall be saved? to which question he returned
this consolatory answer: To man this is impossible, but to God nothing is
impossible: and thus he taught, that one and the same thing might be, and might
not be: by the Divine assistance it might be accomplished, by the powers of
nature it could not be effected. And this is it of which S. Paul so glorifieth,
through Christ, (of whom I receive my strength) I am able to do all things: and
in this sense also we must understand the yoke of Christ to be easy, and his
burden light: light and easy to grace, grievous and burthensom to nature.


C. You conjoyn and expound these things most aptly, and as I apprehend, our
Savior in these sayings made use of those figures which the Grecians do call
an Hypocorism, and an Hyperbole, the one speaking of a thing with divination
and extenuation; the other with incredible enlargement and amplification.


M. Rightly observed: for such extenuations are very much used in ordinary
conversation, and sometimes also in the Holy Scriptures: as for example, when
Paul writing to the Romans of the contumacy of the Jews: What (says he) if
some of them have not believed? he says some of them; when some of them only
had believed (a remnant selected out of the rest) and all the other, as Paul
witnesses, were blinded. The same figure he also uses in the fifth to the
Romans: For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. I doubt not but you perceive in
both these places, a manifest extenuation, when he says, some of them did not
believe, and many are dead; for he had said before, that all were dead in Adam.
These things being thus clearly proved, it is plain to all understanding, that
our Savior in this similitude of ways and gates, understood nothing of the
Multitude or Paucity of such as should be saved. And that you may more fully
perceive, that our Lord in that place of S. Matthew, spoke not of the life to
come simply and absolutely, or meant any thing of the last end of men, suppose
him to have said thus, many shall come to destruction, but few shall find life,
or many shall walk in that way which leads to everlasting death, but few shall
find the way to eternal life, here the way we see is not the end: And having
made mention of the way, he does admonish us of our humane imbecility, and
reduces to memory our present misery: that despairing of, and despising our
own weaknesses, we might have recourse to the refuge of his goodness and
clemency. For who that is grown to maturity of years (not to speak any thing of
our impure beginnings) unless afflictions compel him, grace regenerate him, and
the Spirit of God renew him, does turn into that troublesome and unpleasant way
of the cross? who has an affiance in, and who is so inflamed with the love of
God, as being secure of the life present and that to come, doubts of nothing,
is solicitous after nothing? who is careful of his neighbors good and goods,
as of his own, and who is equally sensible of his losses, crosses, and
afflictions, as of his own? who is so careful to honor God in the riches of
his Mercy, as he is industrious and plotting and toyling to enrich his own
family, and to enamil over a fugitive felicity? yet this the Law, this the
Prophets, this the Lord himself with strict severitie has commanded us: Thou
shall love God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self. What shall I
say then? Is the whole Mass of mankind created to destruction? and are we all
excluded Heaven through the infirmity of our nature? God forbid! for our
Heavenly Father to all our spiritual evils, languishings, and relapses, has
applied the medicine of his infinite Mercy, for he himself testifies of
himself, He sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him should be saved. From hence Paul also proclaims it, He sh^t
up all m^n under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. Let us therefore
(...) out with the same Apostle, Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? and let us subjoyn also our acknowledgement with
thanksgiving to him who does deliver us, saying, I give thanks unto God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. You see now my Caelius, the perverseness of their
conclusion who thus argue, Few ^nter in at the strait gate, therefore few sh ll
be saved. And now you apprehend the safety and sweetness of this conclusion,
Few find the way which leads to Eternal Life, therefore God does spread,
dilate, and diffuse his grace, otherwise mortal man must altogether inherit
corruption, as David says, If thou should be extreme to mark what is done
amiss, O Lord, who is able to stand before thee. Here now is the door opened
into that large field of the mercy of God, when through his benignity and their
faith, he conserveth the guilty. That is a true saying, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the Law, to do them;
But this is no less true, That Christ Jesus died for the ungodly, and was made
a curse for us, that we should be freed from the curse of the Law: so that we
are both accursed and blessed, execrable by nature, but sanctified by grace;
accursed in Adam, but holy and happy in Christ, to whom he honor and adoration
for evermore.


C. To the Lord Christ the Author and Life of our life be all praise and
glory, that by his wisdom has brought to pass, that thou have so clearly
illustrated this most difficult place, that there remains no doubt, no
scruple, no hesitation. Now I perceive how aptly one truth agrees with
another, and what a hollow and unsound reconcilement is made between truth and
falsehood.


M. If any other places of Scripture contain any appearing contrariety to this
assertion, name them Caelius, that before dinner I may give answer unto, and
vindicate them.


C. I shall perform it with great willingness, and with the best aid of my
memory, I shall choose such places as are most worthy of explication in this
matter. And first I will instance in that Parable of the Sower, whereby our
Lord does insinuate unto us that a remnant only shall be saved, for as it is
written in the thirteenth of Matthew, the fourth part only of the seed did
fructify, the rest perishing by diverse accidents. Wherefore I covet to hear
what you can produce in answer to this allegation.


M. It is the truest and the justest office of an Interpreter to expend, and
consider the end, purpose, and intent of the Speaker. This observation is
necessary in all emergencies, but then especially useful when we examine the
sayings, and Parables of our Savior, because not all can answer in every
respect to the purpose of the speaker. This some have attempted but with small
success. Let us therefore content our selves to enquire out the meaning and
scope of the place, for in that is contained all the doctrine and instruction
that can be expected from the speaker. For the similitude it self, and the
explication of it must be applied to the scope and intent, not the intent to
the similitude, for by such a preposterous accommodation, many absurdities would
follow. In this collation therefore our Lord Christ intending to show us all
those impediments, by which we are chiefly withdrawn from the worship of God,
(the principal part whereof is the hearing and the practicing of the Word
preached) borrows a similitude from the Sower, reckons up those things that
retard and hinder the growth of the seed, and does accomodate them to the
Heavenly seed, which is the word of God. Then he names three general
impediments; the devil, tribulations, and the cares of this life; and at least
with one of these is every man tormented and persecuted, yet does the word of
God take root, and bring forth fruit in a plentiful manner.


C. In what place?


M. In the good and fertile ground.


C. But which is that good ground, if three parts be scattered, one by the way,
another upon a rock, and a third part falls among thorns?


M. Even that ground by the way side, that rock, and that thorny place, when
that Spiritual Husbandman shall have driven away the fowls of the air, shall
have removed that rock, and burnt up those thorns. Did not Paul fall by the
way? did not Peter dash upon this rock? and was not Matthew choked with these
thorns? yet Paul became an elect Vessel, and the Apostle of the Gentiles; Peter
the chief Pastor to the Jews, a Feeder of Christ's sheep and lambs; and
Matthew both an Apostle and an Evangelist. Therefore the drift of that
similitude was only to teach the success and event of that Heavenly Doctrine*
not to imply any thing of the final condition of the Saints or reprobates:
although we may gather from this very similitude, and those things that follow
in the same chapter, that the number of the Elect shall be the greater, because
the Paucity has respect unto the Jews, of whom, as we showed before, were to
be gathered out from all parts of the world, and preserved as the seminary of
the Kingdom of Christ. This also may be gathered from that most plentiful
increase of the good ground (which was the Apostles and the other Disciples.)
Also from the grain of Mustard Seed, which although it be the least of all
seeds, when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree,
so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof: Also from
the leaven, which though it be little, yet being hid among many measures of
meal, it leaveneth the whole lump: all which collations and resemblances do
lively express the power and energie of the Word of God, and are as so many
Declarations and Manifestations of the greatness and largeness of the Church
Triumphant; but if any man should reply, that by this similitude sour sorts of
hearers are demonstrated unto us, yet were it inconsequent to infer from hence
a Paucity of Believers. Let us suppose an hundred Auditors, ten whereof by the
devil snatching away the seed, become unprofitable; Again ten others fall off
by a persecution, spring up against the Word; Lastly, ten more revolt through
love of riches, now the other seventy bring forth good fruit, some fifty, some
sixty, some an hundred fold, some six hundred fold, and by this reason do not
all things fitly correspond, and is not the comparison firm?


C. It will be firm indeed: but then the division of the hearers are not
distributed into equal parts.


M. Our Savior himself has not so divided them, nor commanded any such
division, but only said, thus and thus the seed fell. And what gross malignity
would it be in us, to wrest the words of a merciful Savior, to a rigid
interpretation? For if this does not happen amongst us in ordinary sowing and
husbandry, that the greater part of the seed does utterly perish, certainly we
must not imagine so of the Heavenly seed, sowed plentifully in our hearts by
the liberal hand of that Spiritual Husbandman.


C. Truly Maynardus, according to your premonition, I judge the Scriptures
should be interpreted according to the context, scope, and meaning of the
speaker: and what you have answered concerning the intent of our Lord in these
Parables, I approve as very proper and genuine. And with the opening of these
places, I am so affected, fitted, and enabled to understand others, that I will
only object one or two, and pretermit the rest, yet are they very few. I come
then to that place which makes most men of that malignant opinion, concerning
the salvation of mankind. I mean the place which is at the conclusion of the
two Parables; one of the Vineyard, the other of the Marriage of the Kings Son,
where it is in both places most clearly said, Many are called, but few are
chosen.


M. You say right, when you call it a malignant opinion, I will add an envious
and a dangerous opinion, driving men violently into desperation, and such
errors they might soon and easily avoid, if they would observe that Law of
interpretation which I mentioned before; for in the Gospel, if all the sayings
of our Lord Christ were thoroughly weighed, it would be confessed that the
greater part of them had reference to the Jews, for as he himself witnesses,
to them chiefly was he sent; I was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. St. Paul also in the 15. to the Romans says, Jesus Christ was a
Minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made
unto the Fathers. Therefore he was diligent with all care to perform his
ministry, in calling them, teaching them, exhorting them, warning them,
healing their sick, affecting them with benefits, convincing them with
miracles: for all which bowels of compassion toward them, they afflicted him,
reviled him, crucified him, killed him, all which things he would undergo:
first, that he might accomplish his embassage, then that the benefit of his
death and the glory of his resurrection might redound to all nations and
people that should receive with Faith these glad tidings of their Salvation.
For I do not deny but the Doctrine of the Son of God rightly and faithfully
received, to be the Doctrine of all times, ages, places, and persons; but this
I would, that those Texts and sayings which are accomodated to particular
persons, places, and times, should not be applied to the universality of men,
and time. For not all things belong to all men after one and the same manner,
as they are commanded, and spoken to some: If you desire an example, take that
of the young man, who desired leave to bury his Father, to whom Christ
answers, Follow thou me, and let the dead bury their dead. Therefore
hereafter let none take care to see their friends well buried; I will not care
for the dead when either the glory of God, or the necessity of the living
command my assistance. Our Savior bad them that were cured of the Leprosy to
show themselves to the Priests: Therefore must they now that are healed of the
itch or Leprosy, repair to the Priests?

I know some men from hence would authorize private Confession, or rather
confusion, for with such foolish, and impious Allegories they endeavor to
obscure the Doctrine of Christ, it was an argument of Divine power, and an
evident testimony of the obedience of Christ, who came not to destroy, but to
fulfill the Law, for it was expressly said in the Law, that the Priest should
judge of the leper. The Lord also commanded the rich Man to sell all his goods
and give them to the poor and to follow him; that saying very much troubled him
and made him sad, yet perhaps he afterwarwards put it in execution. And if he
did not, he ought to have done it, in obedience to the command of so good and
gracious a Master, it will be sufficient for us to have such a preparation of
mind, that if the welfare of our brethren, and the glory of the Lord require
it, to part with all things yea life it self, but this being a singular
injunction, and commanded only to one man, does not bind the generality of
men; so that they should neglect their estates, or impend all their wealth upon
the poor, any more than they are bound to sacrifice their sons because God
commanded Abraham to such an obedience, and therefore because our Lord said
unto the Jews, that many are called, but few are chosen, we must not generally
extend and stretch these words to all times and persons.


C. You mean (if I understand you right) that those sayings were meant of the
Jews of those times, and solely to be appropriated unto them, of whom many by
the Prophets, and afterward many were called by the Lord himself, but few were
chosen, namely Apostles, Disciples, and some Women, as the Holy Scriptures do
witness: these were the little flock to whom Christ did Minister that
consolation in Luke, saying, Fear not little flock, for it is the will of your
Father to give you a Kingdom, this is that remnant of which Paul in the 11, to
the Romans says, Even so then there is at this time a Remnant, according to the
election of grace; these are that seed of whom also Isaiah speaks, Except the
Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and been made like
unto Gomorrha. In all which places the paucity of the Jews of those times which
should be saved is not obscurely signified.


M. You take my meaning right, and you have very aptly connumerated those
places of Scripture. Those that do detort that saying of our Savior should
observe that all those parables in the 20, 21, and 22. Chapters in Matthew do
contain the rejection of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles. In
confirmation of this truth weigh those words in the first similitude in the 20
Chapter, they murmured against the good man of the house, saying, These last
have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us, which have
born the burden and the heat of the day. And it is manifest, that after the
resurrection of Christ, these Jews did make complaints: and when Paul and the
rest of the Apostles preached the Gospel to them that were without, they held
it an unjust thing, that the Gentiles should be made equal to them, the
ancient, and Holy people of God: this is plain to be seen both in the Acts of
the Apostles, and also in the Epistle to the Romans. In the same parable also
these words, Take what is thine, and go thy way, do clearly imply the rejection
of the Jews, and what is more manifest than that convertible Text? Those that
are last shall be first, and those that are first shall be last. Who (I pray)
are those last made first, but the Gentiles alienated from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and now preferred before the Jews? and who are those first made last,
but the Jews for a time rejected, till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in?
Then also those Israelites shall be saved, as we have showed before. Moreover,
the Parable of the 21 Chapter cannot admit of doubt; and that in the 22.
Chapter is so perspicuous, that if in the first there possibly were any doubt
to be raised, yet this would easily remove and dissolve it, especially when the
same sentence, Many are called, few are chosen, is found also in the conclusion
of that parable. Now that this similitude was by our Lord appropriated to the
Jews, who can make a question when he observes these words? The wedding is
ready but they which were bidden are not worthy: Go ye therefore into the high
ways, and as many as ye shall find bid to the marriage. This is the same which
our Lord commanded to his Disciples, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to all creatures. Mark the last Chapter. This Paul and Barnabas testify
in the Acts, It was necessary, that the word of God should first have been
spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unwo^thie
of everlasting life, See, we turn to the Gentiles; for so has the Lord
commanded us. Now compare this of Paul with that of our Savior, and you will
find that one egg is not more like another. Christ says, They that were
invited, were not worthi^; Paul says, You judge your selves unworthie; Christ
says, Go out into the high ways Paul says, We go out unto the Gentiles, for
thus has the Lord Commanded. But let us rise to dinner, there is an
importunate creditour must also have some satisfaction. That which remains
(which indeed is the most important matter) we will difer until the afternoon.


M. THe serenity of the air, my Caelius, and this pleasant face of heaven do
even invite us to forsake the house. With your allowance therefore we will
repair to yonder summer house, and spin out our discourse.


C. It is most agreeable Maynardus for I prefer the benefit of your
conversation before all sublunary contentments. It is now your part to proceed,
and as the gravitie of the matter does require, I shall lend you a very
attentive ear.


M. I will proceed, conditionally that you will interpose, when you doubt of
any thing spoken.


C. I shall most willingly.


M. Then First I will declare the first rise and beginning of that opinion
concerning the paucitie of the Elect. Secondly, I will prove by plain and solid
arguments, the amplitude and Largeness of the CHURCH TRIUMPHANT. In the
beginning, as by the subtle malice of the Devil, death got an entrance into
the World; so by his artifice and emulation, this envious and narrow Opinion
has been advanced and disseminated; for this father of lies, this enemy of
mankind, saw and collected by indubitable signs, that the Church of God was
established in mercy, as upon an unremoveable foundation: and that by degrees,
God would settle his heavenly Kingdom; which should consist of infinite
multitudes of Citizens: therefore has he endeavored, and does still contrive
by a thousand deceits, temptations, and trecheries to coarctate, straiten, and
preclude the passage into that kingdom. Thus by crafty enticement he beguiled
our first parents, and had not the wisdom and great goodness of God intervened,
all mankind had perished in their fall. But no violence, no power, no
fraudulencie of Hell can nullify the eternal decrees of God. His purpose
therefore has still taken effect, and in all ages his Church has been
enlarged according to the predetermination of his good pleasure: nor could the
seed of God be scattered and lost by all the oppositions of the Devil. That
Anti-God considers this, and applies his malice to new stratagems: amongst
others, spreads this opinion of the small number of the Elect, and the
ineffable multitude of the damned among those that are commonly called the
wiser sort of men. From hence came those verses, Omnibus in terris quae sunt a
Gadibus usque
Ad Gangen, pauci dignoscere possunt vera bona: --
Also, Rari quippe boni numero vix sunt totidem,
Quot Thebarum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili.


Another Author also says, The number of fools is infinite, these words are
commonly quoted as out of Solomon in his Ecclesiastes, yet let the Text be
rightly weighed, and Cicero must own the saying; Another says, All things are
full of folly. Which speeches: fall from such men who think none good, none
wise, none happy but themselves. Plato in his book to Phaedon the Philosopher,
is more moderate, for he says, Few men are extremely good or bad, but most men
are of a midling iniquity: so likewise the extremities of all things are few
and rare, as very little or very great, very white or very black, very swift or
very slow, but the indifferencies, are many and frequent. Now if you compare
the number of the best men with that of the tolerably good, this last number
will infinitely exceed the other.


C. It is even as you say. And verily this Philosopher has ever seemed to me
more Religious than the rest. But those others I take to be such men, as a
couple which were lately amongst us, when they met in the street, and had
saluted one another; quoth the one, I tell thee John, there are but two honest
men in all our City: and I assure thee replied the other, I think George thou
art one of them, and truly John (says he) thou art the other.


M. They knibbled one another like horses. But I return to that serpent, who by
little and little rigled himself, and insinuated into the judgment of wise
men, and by subtle extenuations, and malicious diminutions gave them to
understand, that the mercy of God, and the goodness of God to mankind, was not
so great as was imagined. That God was good and merciful, was undeniable truth;
but withal he was just, and a most severe revenger of offenses and
transgressions. Two ways he devised to instill this persuasion; one from
witnesses, another from signs and causes. His witnesses were those who wrested
the forementioned places of Scripture, which by the blessing of God we have so
far vindicated, that hereafter they will not be able to allege the least
matter of moment in opposition. His causes are the actions and bad deeds of
men, which that experienced deceiver does use to term so. And these nets he
spreads with such diligent and cunning artifice, that truly it is no hard
matter to fall into them, nay it is a most difficult thing to avoid them, for
thus he encroacheth upon the understanding; Will thou know, O man the truth of
thy salvation or damnation, and not only of thine but of all others?
Contemplate the inclinations, the studies, the meditations, the pursuits, the
actions of men, which are the causes of eternal happiness, or eternal misery;
if the actions be good, of salvation; if bad, of condemnation. Now look about
thee, judge the trees by their fruits, and thou will easily discern how few
they are that keep the commandments; and observe the multisarious parts of
righteousness: how small and contemptible number there is of good men, how vast
a multitude of wicked men and unjust. Wherefore dispelling all doubts and
hesitations thus conclude: If good works are the inerrable signs of Salvation,
and wicked actions the infallible causes of everlasting desolation, it follows
by unavoydable consequence, That small is the number of the Elect, infinite the
number of Reprobates.


C. O old Serpent, O hellish monster compacted of malice and deceit! I am
afraid, too many wise men of this world have been tutord and disciplined by
this Sophister, whom I have often heard to knit and interweave thus their
Fallacies and Sophismes.


M. Do you doubt it? there is nothing more sure than they are taught and
instructed by him, who separate themselves from the Communion and fellowship of
other Christians, as if they only were Religious and Holy, but all other men
execrable, profane, and reprobates. For this opinion had its first spring from
the Philosophers, afterward by degrees, it got a slide into the unwarie
persuasion of Christians.


C. I make no doubt of that. But I would now know how to be unintangled from
these fallacies?


M. First, I would grant all those things, that God is most just, that no man
perfectly works righteousness, or fulfilleth the Law in all its requisites:
and therefore that by nature, or the observation of the Commandments, no man is
justified. Eminent is that saying, There is none that does good, no not one.
Also John says, There is none good but God only. But I would remember also
that God the Father, has transferred all our iniquities, (which was his
goodness) and the universal punishment due to our sins upon the obedience of
Christ, as Isaiah teaches, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, and have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all. This also the Father himself testifies, saying, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased. The Son also attests it, I lay down my life for my
sheep. Then I would deny the antecedent of the connexed words.

I would answer, That good works are not the causes of Salvation, but the
purpose of God, and his everlasting mercy in Jesus Christ, comprehended by
faith. I would also answer, that wicked actions are not simply and absolutely
the causes of damnation, but diffidence, unbelief, and pertinacy. As the Lord
says in the 16. of John, The spirit must reprove the world of sin, because
they did not believe in him. As Paul also says, Through unbelief the branches
are broken off; also, That God has shut up all men under unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all, both Jews and Gentiles. And because I have faith in
God, and embrace his mercy, and am delighted in the Law of the Most High,
though the appetite and vicious nature of the outward man, resist and gainsay,
yet I would conclude, that neither sin, nor Law, nor the powers of Hell should
be able to condemn me. As Paul in many places witnesses: We believe, says he,
that man is justified by faith, not by the works of the Law. David likewise, in
this places man's beatitude, when God imputes righteousness to him without
works: Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven, and whose iniquities are
blotted out. Blessed is that man to whom God has not imputed sin. Lastly, I
would conclude, that from the appearance of works, no infallible criterium
could be grounded of our everlasting condition, because we are not ignorant
that those men that have been most dear to God, have collapsed and continued in
most presumptious and dangerous sins, who afterward upon repentance, have been
restored to eternal happiness. Therefore we ought not to judge rashly of the
final estate of others, but leave them to their master, either to stand or
fall, Romans 14.


C. I approve your answer brother Maynordus, for it most rationally confutes
the cavils of the adversaries, and their mistaken expositions, and solidly
confirms our opinion. And hereafter by the assistance of God, I will thus
repel the darts of the devil, and elude the subtle arguments of some men.


M. The Lord teach thy hands to war that bows of steel may be broken by thine
arms, Psalm. 18. I conceive I have now sufficiently showed the first hatching of
this barbarous opinion, and all its serpentine turnings and windings. It
remains now that we proceed to the confirmation of our most salutiferous
persuasion.


C. You judge rightly, otherwise you may incur the same censure with
Lactantius, who was said very soundly to confute the opinions of his
adversaries, but very weakly to maintain and prove his own assertions. But in
my judgment, these men seem ignorant of the duty of a prudent Orator, neither
do they fully understand the disposure u^ed by Lactantius in his Books of
Divine Institutions: For it is the part of a wise Orator (as Cicero teaches
us) to endeavor all he can, that that part of his Oration which consists in
the refutation of his Opponent, be more firm, compact and pithy, than that
which concerns his own Defense, to cast all our darts against him; but if our
own assertions be easier to be proved, and his harder to be overthrown, then it
is an excellent course to endeavor to entice and withdraw the minds of men
from the opposite defense, and to convert them to the favoring of our own.
Which things being true, I see no reason why it should be objected against him,
that he labored more in refutation, than in proof; for such is the cause of
Religion, that it must not be supported by the infirmity of humane arguments
and subministration of reason, but must flourish in the embraces of an active
Faith. Go ye into all the world (says our great Master) and preach the Gospel
to every creature: he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he
that believes not shall be damned. Paul also says, That a Bishop should be
able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsay rs, Tit. 1. For
there is no more required, but the sincere and pure word of God, which to them
that are ordained to eternal beatitude, is more sure, firm and infallible, than
principles and demonstrations are to Geometricians. And therefore if any man
has detected and confuted an erroneous opinion, he has well performed his
undertaking. I speak not this, as though Lactantius had not confirmed true
Religion, as it was to be proved against them who were ignorant of the
Scriptures, or despised them. For when, in the first three Books, he confuted
the superstitious errors of his adversaries, then he falls upon the proof of
Christian Religion: in the next three Books, and in the seventh, he sets down
the true end of our Religion, and sweetly invites men to pursue the reward of
immortality.


M. What you speak of that Father, is very true, that he was to contend against
such as denied the authority of the Scriptures, neither did they admit of
Proofs deduced from that authority. But we who have to deal with such men as
reverence the Sacred Monuments of Truth, must proceed in a different manner. I
will therefore demonstrate the Amplitude and Largeness of the Church
Triumphant, from four most firm and most clear topic places, and with as much
brevity, as the reason of the matter will allow. First, from the power of God:
Secondly, from his wisdom: Thirdly, from his mercy and goodness: and Lastly,
from Divine Testimonies. To begin therefore with the first, I say, Caelius,
that if we should grant the Church and Kingdom of God to be narrower, or less
peopled than that miserable Commonwealth of the devil, I fear, we should
derogate from the glory and majesty of our Creator and King. For the power and
greatness of a King, consists not so much in wealth and treasure, as in the
multitude of his people, the largeness of his territories, the extent of his
provinces, and the vast number of his Subjects who pay him tribute, and are
subject to his Dominion. How did the people of Rome swell to that greatness,
but by the multitude of Kingdoms and variety of Nations which they subdued, and
governed? from hence they were styled the powerful Romans, and Lords of the
world. From hence their Senate was called the Haven of Nations, the Refuge of
Kings. For what is greatness, but an abundance of power and majesty? and what
is power but a faculty of protecting others, defending themselves, and a
deliverance of the oppressed from the possession of an enemy? but if the enemy
of God and man be better provided of subjects, than the King of Heaven, he is
then more powerful, and his greatness more wonderful. But who was ever so
prodigiously wicked as to affirm the devil to be more powerful than God? the
work, than the workman? the basest servant, than the most wealthy Lord?
wherefore does the Lord of Heaven delight himself in these Titles, King of
kings, Lord of lords, the Mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, Strong in battle; and
the like?


C. Although the current of your discourse does very much affect me; nor do I
willingly hinder it; yet I cannot forbear for a while to stop it. Some man
might here say, this also is a great argument of the power of the King of
Heaven, in that he has destinated the major part of mankind (who were all his
enemies) to everlasting banishment.


M. This might be alleged of some Tyrant, who leaves no means unattempted,
either through justice or oppression, to enlarge his Empire; and such a Tyrant
is that old adversary the devil. But to affirm this of our Heavenly King, who
is our most lawful Sovereign, our common Father, who made us, and has taken an
everlasting care to preserve us, were most injurious, scandalous, and
blasphemous. Neither is that any right demonstration of power, that a Prince
destroys the greater part of his people, but on the contrary it is an
invincible evidence of power, when the greater number are by him preserved. For
the clearer understanding of this: Suppose two Princes, one whereof without all
Law or provocation, save that of his own exorbitant will, sought the ruin of
his people, and bent all his intentions to destroy them: the other used all
industry, care, and diligence (though they were ungrateful) to preserve them,
should not the greatest power be judged to be in him the Protector?


C. Yes indeed.


M. What if he preserved but a greater part, would you suppose him to be a more
powerful Prince than the other?


C. Why not? Truly both the more powerful, and also the more merciful; for if
he could have saved all, he would have saved all.


M. I do not think so, where then is his justice? for without it, there can be
no exercise of virtue, for the punishment of, and his severity unto a few, does
exalt and magnify his clemency to the rest.


C. I confess it, but we must be circumspect, least whilst we praise his
clemency, and augment his power, we diminish his justice. But if these
attributes be equal in God, then the number of the blessed, and the number also
of the damned are equal.


M. Such an equality is not to be required, where there is neither debt nor
merit, here only the true bounty, the free mercy of God are discerned: for God
owes to no man, and it is lawful for him to do what he pleases with his own
creature, the work of his own hands, and fashioned for his glory; unless that
the nature of all men, especially that of a Prince, should be more propense to
clemency and pardon, than addicted to punishment and revenge: as God himself
witnesses of himself, saying, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suff^ring, and abundant in goodness and truth. Now no motive is so
prevalent, as the promise of salvation, to win souls to God; nothing is so
magnificent, so princelike, so highly liberal, as to succor the afflicted, to
pardon the suppliant, and to deliver men from dangers: on the contrary, nothing
is more abject, vile, and deformed, than to make the highest cruelty to
cohabite with the greatest power.


C. If God loweth nothing to man, why is it said in the 20. of Matthew, that
the Master of the house bid his Steward call the laborers, and give to every
one their hire? Also our Lord Christ says to those that suffer reproach and
persecution for his Names sake, Rejoice and be exalted in joy, for I say unto
you, great is your reward in Heaven.


M. Our Lord out of his mere goodness and benignity, calls that a reward or
recompense, which is the effect of his own liberality, and this by the sequ^l
of that parable is manifest; The good man of the house went out to seek
laborers, not they to seek him, as he says in Isaiah, I am found of them that
did not seek me, I was made manifest to them that asked not after me. He
calls them, he hireth them, he sends them, he sends for them, and he
pays them. Some acknowledge the goodness of the Master, and murmr not;
others complain, using many objurgations, tax him of unjustice, and boast
their own works and day-labours, all these the Lord thus satisfies, Friend, I
do thee no wrong, did thou not agree with me for a penny? take what is thine,
and be gone, I will give unto this last even as unto thee, is it not lawful to
do what I will with mine own? a^t thou envious because I am good and lib^ral?
What I pray thee, do all these things import but the bounty of the Master of
the house? which is most plainly proved by those words, that it was lawful for
him to do with his own, as b^st pleased him. For he now calls those things
his, which before he called by the name of a hire, that we might understand his
wonderful goodness, for he adorneth his own gifts with the name of a reward,
that he might cherish and rowse up our sluggish natures to the lively
performance of our duties. For otherwise, has not the Lord stamped it as a Law,
saying, when you have kept all the Commandments, say of your selves, You are
but unprofitable servants, for you have p^rformed but your duty.


C. What is there intended by the word penny?


M. The penny signifies the Covenant which he has made with us, offering to
us life or death, honor or ignominy, felicity or misery. All these things,
Life, Honor, Felicity, are by his Fatherly indulgence promised to them that do
not attribute them to their own works or merit, but to the proud, and such as
boast of their own works (as did the Jews) or those that despair of the loving
kindness of God; nothing is due but reproach and confusion. For as Paul says,
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is everlasting life through
Jesus Christ our Lord.


C. Can life and death then be called a recompense or reward?


M. Yea, life in reference to the promise, death in respect of sin may be so
called. For reward bears an indifferent signification, and is appliable in
good and bad things, to good and bad men. Of bad men and vainboasters, the Lord
says, They have received their reward. And this is the same which the good man
of the house says, Take what is thine, and be gone. Peter also says, That the
wicked find the reward of their unrighteousness.


C. I now plainly perceive that the Doctrine which you raised from that Parable
in our morning discourse, is properly to be understood of the calling of the
Jews; if you please therefore pursue your purpose.


M. My purpose was to declare the infinite power of God, by which we might
conjecture of the largeness of his Church and Kingdom. For if the Majesty of a
King is best conspicuous in the abundance of riches, in the multitude of
people, and a great number of Kingdoms, Provinces and Nations, we must
necessarily conclude, That the Kingdom of God, who only can be truly said to
be powerful, great, and wonderful, is much bigger than that tyranny of the
devil. For I will never call that Prince great, who has a great multitude of
enemies, but I will term him powerful, to whom many pay subjection; and in this
I ^^^e Solomon on my side; In the multitude of the people (says he) is the
Kings honor, but in the scarcity of men is the destruction of a Prince.


C. This cannot be denied, when those things are abstracted from persons and
^lmes: but when I consider them more nearly, and look upon them in the lives
and customs of men, I confess I am puzzled what to think, for do you not see
that Satan does possess the greatest part of the world, which as John says, is
covered with evil: therefore not without cause is the devil called The Prince
of this world, and lord thereof.


M. What my CAELIUS? Know you not that John says, Judge not according to
appearance, but judge righteous judgment? do you forget what you confess in
the Symbol of your Belief, when you say, I believe the Holy Catholic Church,
which is the Communion of Saints; which had it been subjected to sense, had not
been put into our Confession, which consists simply and absolutely of the
objects of our Faith. Let it not therefore move thee that this Kingdom of
Christ, this Commonwealth of the Saints is not visible to the eye; for it is
better believed and comprehended in the mind, than discerned by the sense.


C. But seeing it consists of men, what is the reason it should be invisible?


M. Because God in the administration of his Kingdom, differs from the
conduct of humane reason, or the Methods of that old beguiler. And here now we
may contemplate the wonderful and admirable wisdom of God. The devil fills
all place^ with sin, death, and desolation: God disposes all things in
justice, life and healthfu^ salvation. Now observe with what inexpressible art
God does this to deceive tha^ Deceiver. Under sin he covers justice, under
death life, under condemnation salvation, under infirmity strength, under
folly wisdom. From hence it is said that all the World is overspread with evil:
from hence Satan is said to be the Prince of this world, because he seems to
govern all things according to his own sensuality as though there were no
providence, but it is not so, by no means so; the true and legitimate Prince is
he to whom the Father said, Ps. 2. Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
He is the true Lord who conquering death, and the Author of death says in the
28 of Matthew. All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth.


C. You have proved these things very fully, and the matter is strengthened by
the nature and definition of faith, for faith is defined by the Divines to be a
firm comprehending of those things in the understanding which are not seen.


M. I rejoice that you have so well profited by our discourse, that you can
assist the cause I maintain. But to make it yet more clear unto you I will
propound a similitude: We are in this life as in a City, which of right
belongs to some good Prince: but this City is usurped and oppressed by a
certain Tyrant with severe bondage: as for example Pharaoh oppressed the
Israelites in that memorable calamity: now if any man enter this City and
observe the Customs of it, he will say it differs very little from that of
Egypt, which with outward appearance and seeming willingness follows and
obeys the Tyrant, but inwardly consents with the true and lawful Lord: and
although they can contribute nothing else, yet they sigh and wish for him,
expect him, and bewail the burden of their servitude: and when he shall come
with power to chase and subdue the enemy, and to restore the City to freedom,
then the Tyrant shall feel of what force the Faith and Love of this people is
to their Lawful and merciful Prince, for in stead of many Subjects, he shall
then find many Enemies, for that old saying is a true one; He that has many
servants has many Enemies. What? are we not all Subject and mancipated to sin
even against our wills? Fitly therefore may we say with Paul, With the mind I
serve the Law of God, but with my body I am Subject to the dominion of sin. Add
also, that many men commit many errors through ignorance, and those will admit
excuse and pardon, for a difference must be put between sins of weakness, and
sins of malice and presumption. But where our King Christ Jesus accompanied
with might and Majesty shall come to sight the last battle with the Devil, then
that infinite multitude of the Elect, that innumerable company of celestial
Citizens shall appear. Now they are not discernable, because as (I have said)
either through force or ignorance they are compelled to wear the Tyrants
colors. In the mean time, till the expectation of that time be satisfied, our
prudent and abundantly wise Prince has some secret and clandestine conferences
with them, heartens them and comforts them, and bids them continue faithful to
him, and he will accept this their desire of him, this Faith for perfect
obedience. And although he can deliver us, he delayeth it, suffers us to
undergo the Discipline of afflictions, to kindle in us a greater desire of his
coming. These are the Divine stratagems, the royal arts, which do deceive both
the narrow judgment of men, and also elude the deceits and snares of the
Devil; for who would say that in so many sins there should be any
righteousness? in such a perturbation, such a trifluctuation of miseries any
quiet rest or peace? in so much folly any wisdom? in so much servitude any
liberty? or in so many dangers any safety? who would ever have thought the
thief (who was even buried alive in all wickedness, and brought to be crucified
for his notorious and flagitious offenses) had been one of the Sons of God, and
of the number of the Elect? On the other side, who would have imagined that
Judas Is^ariot chosen to the Honor of an Apostleship, and daily and hourly a
continual hearer of Divine truth, and heavenly wisdom, should not have been a
Citizen of Heaven: O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out? Here
is the new Art, here are new reasons of heavenly administration; this is the
mysterious way of God alone, who only is wise, powerful and good. Great is our
Lord and of great power his understanding is infinite. Psalm. 147.


C. By this way of judging according to the shallow judgment of man, I suppose
Elias was deceived, when he made his complaint that he only was left of all
those that did worship God: but what answered the oracle of God to him? I have
reserved to my self seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal.
Romans 11.


M. You gues right; and if in one place in one nation, there were so many
(althoug^ to a definite number be here put for an infinite multitude) and those
unknown to ^ greater Prophet, how many may we suppose then to have been, and
now to be, i^ the whole World?


C. Verily I think an innumerable company.


M. Let us then believe that this our heavenly King, is able and knows how to
purchase to himself a greater kingdom, than the Enemy who has neither wisdom
nor power.


C. But upon what reason do you refuse the ascription of wisdom and power to
the Enemy, when it seems repugnant to his name to deny him those attributes?
for you may call to mind they were termed Daemones or evil Spirits, from their
great power or wisdom by many of the Ancients, for Plato who followed Hesiod
and other Poets, does conceive them to be called Daemones quasi Daimones, which
signifies prudent or intelligent.

I am not ignorant, that some of the Graecians have derived the word from
(...), that is to terrify or make afraid, because strength armed with malice
is a terrible thing. But as concerning their power, their opinion who derive
the word from the Hebrew likes me best, for there are many Greek words deduced
from the Hebrew tongue. The Hebrews term both Gods and Devils Schadaim and the
more ancient Graecians leaving out the first consonant of the word, and reading
without prickt-vowels, made it Daim, then Daimones, for both the Graecians and
the Latins of elder times pronounced their dipthongues with distinct vowels
and not confusedly as we use to do, now this word signifies strength,
fortitude, and power. And albeit Schadaim be one of the names of our omnipotent
God, yet as Elohim the proper appellation of the mighty Lord, is communicated
to great Princes and Potentates, so the word Schadaim is promiscuously
attributed to Spirits good and bad, for although there be but one omnipotent
Lord God, yet Paul calls the Devils (...), that is the worldly Princes.


M. You have discoursed Caelius, very learnedly of the appellation of the word,
neither will I labor to urge any thing in contradiction of it; for it strongly
argues their power in that they are of a sensible and an indefatigable nature:
besides the use and experience of infinite business and occurrences, must needs
instruct them with an unspeakable knowledge; for Antiquity and length of days
joined with observation, must needs bring forth incredible effects, but as
there are two sorts of wisdom one Heavenly and Holy, another that descends
not from above, but is earthly, sensual, Devilish, James the 3. so likewise
there are two sorts of power. For as the last is not properly fortitude but
boldness, not power but impotence, and violence; so that is not strictly and
truly to be termed wisdom, but malice; that is a crafty and deceitful subtilety
to work mischief: for as upon an approach of danger, if the mind be egged on by
its own concupiscence and irregular desires, and not by consideration of the
public good, this attempt is rather a vicious audacity than a warrantable
valor: so knowledge without charity, and prudence without Justice, is malice
and subdolous fraudulencie (as Plato says) not wisdom. Therefore when the all
powerful wisdom of God does frustrate and evacuate the wiles of Satan, it is an
improprietie to say that the wisdom of God has overcome the wisdom of the
Devil; but rather that his malice is subdued by wisdom. Also when we speak of
the power of the Enemy, we should say, that audacitie is quelled by valor,
sury is vanquished by fortitude, and rashness disappointed by counsel.


C. Nothing can be more truly spoken.


M. Having therefore spoken of the power and wisdom of our omnipotent God, how
shall we speak of the goodness, mercy and clemency of our most indulgent and
long suffering Father? So incomprehensible i^ his mercy, that like an exuberant
river, nay a boundles Ocean, it diffuseth it self and refreshes all the
corners of the earth. Here I am struck dumb, and astonished at the wonderful
plenty of considerations that roll and flow in upon me; search the Scriptures
and we find him not so wealthy in any thing as in mercy; he chiefly delights
himself in the publication, the iteration, the exaltation of his mercy; he
discloseth himself, expresses himself, manifests himself, and communicates
himself in mercy. David says Psalm 33. The earth is full of the goodness of
the Lord, and in another place, the Lord is endued with plentiful mercy, and
under the shadow of his wings all people have safety. If I reckon up the
testimonies of the Apostles and Evangelists, I find not a word in them but
magnifieth the mercy of our God? Let Paul speak for the rest who himself found
so great mercy. Ephesians. 2. And you has he quickened who were dead in sins and
trespasses, wherein in time past ye walked according to the courss of this
world, according to the power of the Prince of the air, the Spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience: among whom we also had our
conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as
others: but God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with Christ (by grace
ye are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus: for
by grace are ye saved, through says and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God: not of works least any man should boast. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
orda^ned that we should walk in them. Here we may behold, with what
magnificence of expression the Apostle does divulge, and depredicate the
goodness and mercy of God, and how we must disclaim and abandon all our own
works and merits, by a steadfast adhesion unto, and a sure dependence upon the
eternal Love of God unto us in Christ Jesus. But how is God famous over all the
world for his mercy, and eminent for the riches of his goodness in the salvation
of a few, and the damnation of the rest?


C. Wonderful things I confess are revealed unto us of the mercy of God in the
Holy Scriptures: yet some men are not backward to say, that his mercy is as
conspicuous in the Salvation of one individual Soul, as in the preservation of
a thousand millions: because to that Soul which the infinite mercy of God has
delivered from death eternal, there was due an infinite punishment for infinite
transgressions.


M. These are the inventions and vain imaginations of men, which are too much
accustomed to measure things Divine by the rule of humane judgment. Suppose
there were in this City some man exceeding wealthy, and abounding with all
kind of outward blessings: suppose, I say, that he should share his munificence
to some few, nay bestow all his wealth upon them, leaving abundance of other
Citizens in an abject, wanting, and contemptible condition; would you think
this man as truly liberal, as if he had made an equal distribution of all his
estate among all the Citizens?


C. By no means, but extremely cruel, and a homicide, for Seneca said very
truly, He that sees a man in misery, is able to succor him, and refuses,
that man slays and murthereth him. But to say so of God were horrid impiety,
because it is Lawful for him to do what pleases him, for his will is the
perfect reason of his works.


M. But do you not remember the old saying, that good is of a communicable
nature, and that the more it is spread and diffused still the more good it is?


C. I have often heard it, and always took it for a rag of Philosophy.


M. Oh brother Caelius it is Divine; for good and true are convertible terms,
and of whomsoever predicated whether of Moses or Cicero, Paul or Plato, yet
they flow from God whose nature and essence is good and true, and because as
you said, whatsoever he wills is good and just: and that it pleases him to
be called rich in mercy, certainly this must appear in the glorious salvation
of many men: otherwise why does David sing out, the earth is full of the
mercies of God; and why is he called the Father of mercies and the God of all
consolation? O the blind envy of some men that would abridge, contract and
engross this goodness to some few persons! O the ingratitude of others that
endeavor to traduce and calumniate the benignity of God, as if he were some
Tyrant or merciless destroyer! Some perhaps are still diffident and require an
indubitable sign that may remove and banish all hesitation, behold the greatest
pledge, the firmest security, even Christ Jesus the son of God, upon whose
coming God set sorth a Declaration of his Love, for him has he sent into the
world, and upon him has he cast the burden of all our iniquities, Isaiah the
53. and again, behold the Lord shall give you a sign, a Virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son, and his name shall be called Emanuel. This is that sign which
we read of in the 12. of Matthew, An evil and an adulterous g^neration seeks
a sign, but no sign shall be given them, save only that of the Prophet Jonas,
to wit, the death of Christ, and his rising again the third day. What greater
significancy of love could the Lord exhibit to miserable mankind, than to send
his Son, his only Son, to be the reconciliation for our transgressions? or who
now can scruple the amplitude, the immensity of this goodness, this Love, this
mercy? how shall we be able with the Saints to know and comprehend the height,
the depth, the length, the breadth of this mercy? it is necessary that the
Love of Christ be the greatest of all other, not only in respect of the
magnitude, but also the multitude of sinners, otherwise we should disrobe and
denudate it of its proper dimensions, and who now will be so rashly bold to
say, that the benefit of so much love, and so great goodness, should be
confined to a paucity of men? for my part, I think no man can harbor such a
thought without a guilt of sacrilege: what? did he not deliver the greater
part of the world from their wickednesses, when he prayed unto his Father upon
the Cross to forgive those Jews and Aliens which were the complotters and
contrivers of his death? Father, says he, forgive them for they know not what
they do; and he said rightly they know not what they do; for had they known
says Paul they had never crucified the Lord of life. 1. Cor. 2. Now if
Princes, Magistrates, and many others, as Peter witnesses in the 3. of the
Acts, killed him through imprudence; what shall we think of all the world
beside? of them that had, and have at this day just causes of invincible
ignorance? Shall we exclude all these from the kingdom of God? We cannot
certainly if we diligently contemplate the nature and goodness of God* if we
think upon the clemency of our Lord Christ, and what he required of us: for he
prays for all them that sinned through imprudence and infirmity. Neither did
he pray in vain. Paul who at first was a persecutour and a contumelious sinner,
says, Notwithstanding that he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly, in
unbelief. And then he adds, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of which I
am Chief. Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that to me first Jesus
Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. And did not God demonstrate this
before to Jonas? Who was grieved that he would spare Niniveh, and destroy his
Gourd that did shed him from the violence of the heat: therefore God says unto
him, And have thou pity on the Gourd, for which thou have not labored,
neither made it grow, which sprang up in one night, and perished in one
night: and should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more than
sixscore thousand persons tha^ cannot discern between their right hand and
their left hand, and also much cattle? Here we plainly see the most benign and
merciful God does spare a multitude, and avert the present punishment of his
severity, because of their ignorance. And shall we imagine that he, who
remitteth a temporal judgment, because of unadvised actions, and involuntary
sins, will inflict an eternal mulct? or that he judges the death of the body,
to be greater than the destruction of the soul? Ignorance doubtless has some
excuse, especially if it be not tainted with fraud or malice.


C. This indeed is not denied, yet they say that Christ died indeed for all
meritoriously, but, for a few only effectually: because few only do expect
that advantage and benefit of Salvation by his death, and very few are found
worthy of that incomparable treasure of his satisfaction. Therefore he is not
blameworthy, who offered himself liberally for all men, but they are to be
condemned, who refused this propitiation.


M. Oh how many errors are contained in those few words! for as Ep^curus, that
he might not offend the Athenians, outwardly acknowledged a God, but in
judgment denied him; so these men in words confess the death of Christ, but
deny the power of it. For when the Epicureans durst not deny the Gods, yet they
denied a Providence which is inseparably conjoined to the nature of God, and so
by consequence they denied God, but more modestly and covertly: and are not
these men guilty of the same prevarication? They teach that Christ died for all
men, and affirm at the same time that the benefit of his death does concern
very few men: What is this but to deny the virtue of his passion, the glory of
his obedience? to say that men can abolish the energy, force, and effect of his
divine love? St. Paul says far otherwise, when with so much gravity and
mellifluous plenty, he does aver that no force is able to separate us from the
love of God, which he has manifested unto us in Christ Jesus. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies; who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Who shall
then separate us from the love in Christ? Romans 8. Me thinks they that are so
peremptory in the defense of that Opinion that Christ's blood was sprinkled only
upon a few, do much resemble that man who made a most magnificent feast, fit in
the preparation of it to entertain a whole City, but when the guests came to
sit down that were invited, there appeared only a very thin number, and might
not a man demand, wherefore all this preparation? mountains are delivered of a
mouse.


C. Who will deny this? for to what purpose should he prepare many things with
ostentation, which he did not intend to distribute?


M. But far otherwise does our Lord deal by us, for when some had refused to
come to his Supper, Luke 14. Go out, says he (to a servant) into the streets
and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the lame, the maimed,
the halt, and the blind, and when this was done, and yet room was remaining, Go
(says the Lord) into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in,
that my house may be full.


C. Oh the wonderful benignity of the Lord! to whom it seems not enough to
invite only, but to compel men to a fruition of his plenty. But how does he
compel men? for this phrase may sound harsh to some ears, especially seeing our
Lord seems to be of a different Opinion, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and is taken by violence.


M. First, we may call them violent, who deny themselves in the brideling of
their appetites, and moderating their sensualities, who oppose the activity of
Faith against the wit of reason, and prefer the Kingdom of God, before all the
fugitive pleasures of all the kingdoms of this world. He that will follow me,
says the King himself, let him deny himself, (this is that holy violence) Let
him take up his cross and follow me. For the Kingdom of God is not overcome by
any man, but by him who has first overcome himself. He that obtains this
conquest, as Plautus says, is Victor victorum, Conqueror of conquerours;
Again God is then said to compel, when of chips of Hell, he makes Cedars of
Paradise, Of sons of wrath, sons of God, and coheirs with Christ: when by a
kiss of love, and a spiritual embrace, he carries them up to Heaven, who by
nature were concenterd in hell. Thus when St. Paul did precipitate hlmself into
blasphemies, and did exagitate the world with persecutions, God suddenly wraps
him up into the third Heaven. This blessed compulsion also did they undergo,
that were of the Baptists Auditory, who as soon as the Sermon was at an end,
contended in a holy faith, who should first lay hold on Christ; for our Lord
meant nothing else in those words, but to express the vehemence of desire in
the multitude, to attain everlasting happiness. This he also showed in the
similitude of a conquered city, into which the Soldiers strive to enter. Of
which matter, if any man doubt, let him read the Testimony of St. Luke, in the
seventh chapter, who expounding those things which Christ said of John, and of
the Kingdom of God, says, All the people that heard him, and the Publicanes
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. Now God deals with
us, even as we use to do with tender infants, we hang up a piece of money, or
some other thing, and show it the child; pointing to it, as a reward of his
weak endeavors to reach it, we invite and allure him to take it, which when he
cannot perform, then by little and little we let down the money nearer the
child's hands, till he have caught it. Then we rejoice, the child triumphs
that he has got the gold, and we shout, and praise the child, as if he had
done some great matter. But tell me now, what did this little infant perform?
You placed the money, you provoked him to take it, you let it down that he
might reach it, only you did not put the money into his hands, and yet you
praised him and cockered him, as if he alone had done all. But God, besides all
these things, does more for us. He does not only set a felicity before us,
invite us, excite us, and raise us up, but also by the gracious instinct of his
Spirit, sweetly allure us, and compel us to like it, to will it, to choose it,
to embrace it, and to love it.


C. O blessed constraint, O delightful violence! let us therefore with them
congratulate this privilege, that he has adopted us to the participation of
the glorious inheritance of the Saints, that he has rescued us from the powers
of darkness, and translated us to the Kingdom of his dearest Son.


M. We ought indeed to return our thanks to him, but who can offer thanks
worthy of so great mercies? Our most liberal Prince will fill his house, will
people his Kingdom; but how large can we suppose this house, this Kingdom to
be, when it is as capacious as his love, as far extended as his goodness, and
as patulous as his mercy, in which there is sound neither measure nor
circumscription. And because this house is capable to entertain a multitude of
guests, and not a paucity only, therefore Christ says, In my Fath^rs house
are many mansions, John 14. Now compare the words of our Savior, with the
opinion of these men; they say, His house is a narrow house, a small house, and
that it shall also continue above half empty; the Lord witnesses his desire to
have it filled, and as Isaia^ says, It shall be even too na^row by reason of
the inhabitants, chap. 49. Now consider, who is most worthy of belief, God or
man, that is, truth or a lie?


C. Who will make any doubt of that, when God only is true, and all men are
liars?


M. What then has our King omitted, wherein has he been deficient in goodness
or wisdom, that his Kingdom should be dilated, amplified, and replenished?
Moses the Commander of the Isra lites, by the direction of God, appointed them
six Cities for Refuge, three on this side, and three on the further side of the
River of Jordan, that they who killed a man unawares through error, might flee
thither and escape. Romulus, the first Founder of Rome, set up a Sanctuary
also, unto which any malefactor might flee, and by that means avoid
punishment: This was the first beginning and foundation of that stupendous
Empire of the Romans; neither is it worth a wonder, for who is not moved with
the names of liberty, and freedom, and safety? who does not cheerfully run
thither to find it where it is promised? the same Moses consecrated every
fiftieth year to liberty and plenty, for in that year the slaves were
emancipated, and the bondmen made free: New tables were instituted, new
Ordinances devised, and possessions did revert to the owners, by their former
right to the inheritance: the Harvest and the Vintage of that year, was in
common; it was proclaimed by the sound of Rams-horns and Trumpets, and from
thence called the year of Jubilee. But has the wisdom and goodness of God been
less liberal to us? has he not sent Christ, or rather did not he himself in
Christ the Lord, come to constitute this Sanctuary, to reveal this Tower of
liberty, safety, and refuge? And with what reason, and upon what conditions he
did it, will easily be understood: for they that hastened to those Sanctuaries,
fled thither with body and goods, and were oftentimes taken or killed, before
they escaped thither; But to this Refuge of our Salvation, it is enough to run
with faith and unfeigned desires. Their Sanctuaries were limited to a certain
place, and a certain number of years; but to this there may at any time, be a
confluence of any people, from any part of the world. Their places of refuge
were not capable of all men, and were appointed almost but for one Nation: this
Heavenly Tower of Defense will receive an infinite multitude of people, and is
common to all men. The body only and the goods were there preserved, here man
is invested with glorious immortality, and enfeaffed with eternal liberty. Few
were there made better, but if they came thither wicked, wicked they there
continued: Here upon our first entrance, we are transsubstantiated into new
creatures, and thoroughly changed, as if we were new born again, for our
gracious King, who has opened unto us this Sanctuary of Salvation, does not
only remit unto us the punishment due to our transgressions, but does also
make us just, holy, and innocent. Lastly, they who fled to the places of
Succor, appointed by Moses and Romulus, changed their Lord, and were free from
all past dangers, but afterward they were severely punished, if they were
found guilty of new delinquency; nor after that relapse was there any Refuge
allowed them: But in our Sanctuary, as often as a man offends, so often is he
pardoned, provided that with true repentance he makes his appeal, and
prefers his petition to the King. And he that runs to this Holy Asylum,
this Heavenly Temple, is no longer a servant, but for ever free, being
manumitted by the son of God. For such is the goodness of our King, that he
will make us all the sons of God, and coheirs with his Son, Priests, Prophets,
and partakers of the Divine Nature, 2. Pet. 1.


C. But what and where is this Asylum, this City of Refuge, and year of
Salvation?


M. This Caelius, is the Church of the living, the City of the Saints, the
Pillar and Prop of truth: and this year of Jubilee is all that intervention of
time, from the Nativity of Christ, to the Day of Judgment: of which time the
Apostle says, Now the acceptable time approaches, the Day of Salvation
draws near. This is not more at this time, than at another, not more in this
year, than in another, not more in Europe, than in Asia or Africa, not more at
London, than at Rome; and therefore is the Church styled the Catholic Church.
For seeing this great City consists of such men as believe in, and reverence
the living God, wheresoever they are dispersed, there is the Church, and the
year of Jubilee, and that sempiternal place of Refuge.


C. What is your opinion of those that never heard of these things? or if they
have heard of them, it was only by a scattered report, but they had not the
insinuations of them, by the preaching of the Gospel, or any Divine
Institutions? For it is certain, that many Nations (as we have lately had
experience by the discoveries in America) have lived and died, who never heard
of Christ. But to think that all those men for so many ages, were predetermined
to damnation, is not consentaneous to the Divine goodness, and just government
of our Heavenly King. Although it may appear a difficult matter to conclude
either way of their final condition, yet I conceive no otherwise of them, then
those who lived before the coming of Christ, and the promulgation of the Law of
Moses, for if they did, or now do observe ^he law of nature, worship our God,
do nothing to others that they would not have done to themselves, or repent
them of such evil doings, my opinion is they may be saved, for they that feared
God, were always dear and acceptable to him, as Peter witnesses in the Acts of
the Apostles, such were Abimelech, Melchisedech, Jethro, Joh, and his four
friends: Hiram also the King of the Tyrians, the Queen of Sheba, Cyrus and
Darius Kings of Persia, and the Wise men at the Nativity of Christ, with
innumerable others (as it is highly probable) un-mentioned in the Book of God.
For this was the judgment of the most Ancient Fathers Origin and Clemens
Alexandrinus, as it is recorded in their writings, Qui verbum non accepit
auditione, (says Clemens) ei vema dandi propter ignorantiam. Who has not
heard the Word preached, his ignorance shall excuse him; for as the Apostle
says Romans 10. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? The
untaught shall not be condemned, but they who have heard the Ambassadors of
Christ, and despise the offers of his grace. This is the peremptory Sanction of
our Lord himself, Go (says he) preach the Gospel, and teach all Nations, he
that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be damned. This
is the Law and most just Decree of our King: that as he who hears the Gospel
and believes, shall be saved, so he that hears and believes not, shall be
damned. From whence it follows, that he is not condemned by the Gospel, who
has not heard the Gospel; but they are therefore separated to condemnation,
because they contemned the law of nature, and the testimony of conscience, by
which they shall be judged, as St. Paul witnesses in the second to the
Romans, this is the eternal purport of all Laws, that they to whom a law is
given, shall, if they transgress that law, be judged by it, but not those who
are not bound by that law. And if this be observed in all well-governed
Commonwealths, which are as images of that Heavenly Kingdom, much more may we
presume that it is observed by God himself, who is King of kings, and the
common Father of all mankind.


C. Indeed these things seem most worthy of our righteous God, and altogether
agreeable to his gentle nature: thus we see, he would not inflict punishments
upon the Ninivites without cause declared, for he first sent his Prophet to
them, that by his preaching they might understand the will of God. Yet that
saying of Peter in the Acts does seem to thwart this opinion, for he teaches,
That there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved, but the name of Jesus Christ. Acts. 4.


M. That is not otherwise to be understood, than (as we said before) to concern
them to whom that name has been preached: although whosoever is saved, has
salvation by God his Savior, as he proclaims of himself in Isaiah, I, even I
am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. But that is Jesus Christ, God
to be praised for ever; although explicitly and declaratively he has not been
revealed to them.


C. I confess I thought thus within my self, but I was willing to hear your
opinion, but when you said a little before, speaking of the Church, that it was
wheresoever men did believe, or should believe; wherefore made you that
addition, should believe?


M. Because at all times, and in all ages, many are elected to this kingdom,
which are not yet called, not compelled by faith to enter, as were Saul,
Cornelius the Centurion, and Sergius Paulus the Proconsul, and innumerable
others whose vocation and ingress was by the Lord, for some time deserred; who
because they were from all eternity appointed to this kingdom, are therefore
all Citizens and Members of this heavenly Commonwealth: this is manifest by
these and others, who the goodness of God being revealed, are afterward
received into this kingdom.


C. They say that Cornelius oponed a passage into this kingdom by his prayers
and Alms-deeds, and this they confirm by those words of the Angel to him, Thy
prayers and thy Alms are come up for a memorial before God.


M. The abettors of such fancies are contumelious to God, and ignorant of the
Scriptures; they reproach God, for they rob him of his Honor, and give the
glory to man; and they are ignorant of the Scriptures, not discerning an open
truth. Their error arises partly from a non-consideration of the words
preceding and subsequent, which if they had perpended, they had never dashed
against this Rock. What has St. Luke written in the beginning of this Chapter?
That Cornelius was a devour man, and one that feared God, with all his house,
which gave much Alms to the people, and prayed to God always. Afterward those
men that were sent by Cornelius give him this Character, that he was a just
man, feared God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews. Who now
does not plainly see that his piety to, and his fear of God are first
commended: then his Alms and good deeds are spoken of? he was a Religious and
a good man, and therefore gave many Alms to the poor, and prayed to God always,
which were the fruits and effects of his piety. Therefore it is said, he was of
good report among the Jews. But from whence came these good effects? Not from
his good deeds; for the tree must be good before the fruit can be good, as our
Lord says, Matthew. 7. For the cause cannot follow the effect any more than a
daughter can bring forth her Mother. But who made him Religious and just, and
fearing God? Who but he, that circumciseth the foreskins of our hearts? That
takes away our stony hearts, and gives us hearts of flesh, and new Spirits?
Ezech. 11. He, I say, made Cornelius both Religious and devout: and were not
these things declared unto Peter by the Divine oracle of God: for when he
supposed that all the rest of the Nations were alienated from the benefit of
the Gospel, the Angel tells him, Those things which God has purified, call
not thou unclean. Acts 10. Here God witnesses that he had purged, prepared,
and consecrated Cornelius to himself. And although it was spoken because of
Cornelius, yet the words concern all those that God has chosen and adorned
with the beautiful knowledge of the Gospel. And whereas it is said that his
prayers, and giving of Alms went up to God as a memorial, nothing more is
intended, but that God hears the prayers of the Godly, that their good works
are acceptable to him, and that he has them in remembrance, as flowing from
himself the Fountain of all good gifts. And where it is said, that he was
frequent in prayer, it is evident that this proceeded from a Divine
inspiration. For as Paul says, We know not what we should pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with unutterable
groans. Romans 8. Now if he was endued with the Spirit of God, as certainly he
was, and that his Almsdeeds and his prayers were accepted, it is as certain
that he had says, without which it is impossible to please God, as St. Paul
does most plainly teach. Romans 10. And if he had the illustrations of Faith,
then his heart was purified and cleansed, as Peter testifies of Cornelius and
other Gentiles in St. Luke, saying, That God had enlightened them by his Holy
Spirit, and purged their minds by Faith.


C. I perceive that by degrees you have come to the right explication of the
truth; but there is yet one thing to be enucleated, for Peter says, Of a truth
I now perceive, that God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation, he
that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted by him. Act. 10. Here
he shows that by good works a man is reconciled to God.


M. This speech of the Apostle, means nothing else, but what diverse other
holy sentences do teach, that God in his election of, and his Love to mankind,
has regard only to their goodness and glory, not to their original, their
pedigree, their country, their sex, their age, their merit, or any other
personal attributes. This truth is exemplified in the person of Cornelius, whom
God called being an alien, and dignified him with a place in his kingdom. The
signs of Election are an ingenuous and a reverential fear of God, like to that
of obedient children toward their parents, from whence there arises in them,
a confidence and a steadfast persuasion of the love of God to them, and from
thence again grows a delight in the Law of God, a complacency in the works of
righteousness, he that is accepted by God, he fears, he honors, loves,
and trusts in God: for it behooves that the person of that man be gracious
and acceptable, whose duties or offices of Love are accepted: for no
performances are acceptable from him, against whom we entertain a prejudice or
aversation, of this we have experience in the common civilities of life, but
with God there is no prejudice, for he is the searcher of the heart. And John
says, Whosoever does work righteousness, is born of God. Also, Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, he is born of God, that is, therefore some
men live justly, some man believes Jesus to be the Christ, because he is
justified by God, and endued with holiness and righteousness by him: for unless
he thus be born of God, he is unable to perform any thing justly and rightly,
or to believe that Jesus is the Christ. This the Lord himself confirms upon
Peter's confession, that he was the Son of the Immortal God. Verily (says our
Savior) flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father, which
is in Heaven. Now there is this difference between Divine and humane justice,
he that is not justified by God, may execute humane justice, for fear of
punishment, expectation of glory, or hope of other reward; but no man is
exercised in heavenly justice, who is not first justified, purged by Faith, and
assisted with grace. Therefore it is no wonder, that whosoever fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted of God; because the fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom, and a good understanding have all they that keep his
Commandments. With this fear, as with salt, the Lord does season their hearts,
and preserve from corruption (even whilst they are ignorant of him) those that
he purposes to call into his kingdom. This inchoation of their liberty, is
afterward perfected in the time of their vocation, by the preaching of the
Gospel and by Faith.


C. I have received full satisfaction, and I hope hereafter that both my self
and others, will give greater credit to the Oracles of God, then to the
perverse opinions and interpretations of men.


M. Now that we may conclude this digression, I say that wheresoever, or
whenever such are found, in that moment of time they have attained to this
Sanctuary, this propitious year of Jubilee. Only as it is written, Let us call
upon the name of the Lord, and we shall not be disappointed. Also, Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall escape. Joel. 2. Also, The name of
the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous flies unto it, and is safe. Prove.
18. To this tower, this sanctuary, the Lord himself beckneth the poor, the
miserable, the wretched, the desperate sinners, in this sweet invitation, Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will ease you. These are
the ways, the secrets of holy state, and the Divine Policies, which our King
uses for the Instanration of his kingdom. And if the kingdoms of the earth are
enlarged by such artifice, how much more shall we think the kingdom of Heaven
to be dilated, which is far more capacious, more firm, and more easy of access?


C. Truly I suppose it will infinitely exceed the kingdom, or rather the
dungeon of the Devil: even as much as there are more who wish and desire ease,
impunity, Honor and Salvation, then who are in love with labors, punishments,
servitude, ignominy, and death eternal, and certainly but few men will
precipitate themselves into these calamities, when they may with such facility
redeem themselves from the fear of them. And although a small industry only,
seems necessary to the prevention of these endless torments, yet we see but
few men that contend to get to this refuge, this most pleasant City; and what
should be the cause of this slackness, this dullness; this indiligence is to me
altogether unknown.


M. The cause is manifest; First that which I named before, to wit that the new
reason of state, which our King makes use of in the administration of his
affairs, deceaveth those that with the judgment of men, seek after this city
as gloriously visible and conspicuous. Secondly, the Church is congregated and
constituted out of this holy Sanctuary, by the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the Sacrament, and these being concealed from the greater
part of the World, by this means, this city for a long time was kept hid, and
so little taken notice of; that it was scarce discernable who were the true
Citizens. But as soon as the glad tidings of the Gospel have arrived, then we
see them flock to this city as in the time of Christ and his Apostles. For
when Christ himself had said that the kingdom of God was at hand, and after
that he had exhorted men to bring forth fruit worthy of repentance; he then
called them all unto him, with that joyful summons, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you ease.

Of this joyful invitation, this liberal year, the Prophet Isaiah foretold,
when speaking in the Person of Christ, he says, I am endued with the Spirit of
the Lord, Jehovah has Anointed me, and sent me to declare joyful tidings: to
heal them of broken Spirits, and to give liberty to them that are in bondage,
sight to the blind, to deliver the oppressed out of their streights, and to
preach the joyful year of the Lord. The Apostles also, those faithful
Ambassadors of Christ, did invite all mortal men to this great benefit, this
most blessed kingdom. Old things are past away, behold all things are become
new: and all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself in Christ
Jesus, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that God
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. Now
then, we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God: for he has made him who
knew no sin to be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.

But shortly after, false Apostles and counterfeit Ambassadors, brought in
humane traditions, and began to lay upon men's shoulders the burden and heavy
yoke of the Law, which things did deject, not erect men's minds, did terrify
them, not allure them, did wound them, not heal them: from whence (...) came to
pass that few made their approach to this kingdom, or if they drew near, they
soon returned and departed. For the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, is not
propagated and advanced by the sword, but by preaching, by the energie of the
Spirit, by good example, patience, charity, meekness, justice, temperance,
constancy, goodness, faith, lenity, long-suffering, and all those blessed and
peaceable fruits of the true Spirit of God. So our Lord himself; so his
Disciples propagated the truth, and sowed the Heavenly Doctrine of Christ in
men's hearts. For our Lord as Hilarie told Constantinus; Augustus did rather
teach than exact a knowledge and confession of himself; and giving Authority to
his precepts by the frequent attestation of miracles, he despised a will that
was any other way compelled to acknowledge him. And full of truth are these
words, for nothing so free as the judgment in Religion. For Religion
flourishes by sound reason and strong persuasion, not by fear and threatenings.
It is defended and preserved by dying, not by killing; by patience, not by
cruelty; by justice, not by butchery; by faith, not by fraud and rotten policy.
For he that will establish Religion by imperious ordinances and force, does not
seek to defend it, but to violate and pollute it. But because we see the night
approaching Caelius, unless you have ought to interpose, I shall descend to
such places of Scripture, as seem to favor this my opinion, of the amplitude
of the kingdom of God.


C. I have not the least doubt remaining, and I earnestly entreat you, before
the night prevent us, to hasten to those proofs as the chief end of our meeting.


M. In the first place therefore, weigh diligently that magnificent promise of
God made to Abraham, so often repeated and inculcated. God promises, and
confirms his promise with an oath; that he will make his seed as the dust of
the earth, so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall he
number the seed of Abraham, Genesis 17. And again in the 22. chapter, he
promises, In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply
thee in thy seed as the Stars of the Heaven, and as the sand which is upon the
Seashore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Here I would know of any man,
whether God in this inimitable (as to us) and inestimable promise, did intend
that the multitude of the Elect, (for that they were presignified by the seed
of Abraham is plainly showed in the 4. to the Romans) should be inferior to
the number of the Reprobate? Who will dare to say so, when he compares his
seed to those things which exceed all other things for number, yea indeed,
which are themselves numberless? For although Archimedes, that noble
Geometrician, supposed that he could number the sand, not only about Syracusa,
but of all the habitable and in-habitable parts of the world; and undertook to
write a Demonstration of this supposal to Gelo, then King of Sicilie: yet the
Prophet Isaiah teaches otherwise. What man (says he) has measured the waters
in the hollow of his hand? and meted out the Heavens with a span? or
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure? or weighed the mountains in
scales, and the hills in a balance?

Thus comparisons of this nature have been adhibited, to demonstrate such
things unto us, which in their kind admit of no comparison. From whence it
follows, that the progeny of Abraham is more numerous and copious, than all
others. Moreover, all the Faithful being comprehended in the seed of Abraham,
there is in the expressions of the Holy Ghost, a kind of tacit contention
against that Opinion of the Paucity of Believers, for as often, and as much as
he amplifies the Kingdom of God, so often, and so much he speaks in diminution
of the kingdom of darkness. Neither in this can I accord with S. Austin, who
says these words are uttered in an Hyperbole, yet when he labors to declare
the matter, any man may perceive he is mistaken. For in his Book Of the City of
God, he says, That the seed of Abraham is less in number than the multitude of
the wicked. Suppose the sand of the Seashore, or the dust of the earth do much
exceed the number of the whole generation of mankind, What then? we do not
confess that the number of the Elect, is greater than the number of the Sands:
but by the comparison this only is in question, Whether the Holy seed of
Abraham do not surmount the number of the wicked? but if it be not implied that
the number of the Elect is the greater, why should it be compared to a thing
that is infinite? If some man had come, and said, That this comparison (so high
that it exceeds belief) is more agreeable to the multitude of the wicked, which
is much above that of the faithful, would he not hereby secretly insinuate,
that here was no relish of Divine wisdom in this comparison? But if to think
any such thing, much more to say it, be impious and execrable, it is manifest,
and follows undeniably, that the multitude of such as belong to the Kingdom of
God, is much the greater. But to this ^ath not God added this also, That in the
seed of Abraham all Nations shall be blessed? Gal. 3. But how shall they all be
blessed, if the major part be excluded from eternal happiness? One of these two
things is necessary there to be allowed, either (which I abhor to think) that
God is a liar, or else that the number of the blessed is not equiparated by any
other number, and which of these two is to be chosen, I leave to the pious
Reader to judge.


C. You conclude solidly and truly; for as Fabius shows, an Hyperbole is then
to be known, when the matter expressed, exceeds all natural measure. Now
these promises are not vulgar, but so ample, stately and honorable, that the
narrow minds of mortal men, should be struck with admiration as often as they
contemplate the blessed multitude of the glorious Saints.


M. You speak the truth. But that wicked one who is wrapped up in a mantle of
piety, has been always busy and diligent to eclipse this truth. I will now
produce another place of Moses, because I know every new argument is a fresh
vexation to that fiend. In Exodus God does wonderfully set forth the goodness
of his own nature, for such is his clemency, that he promises mercy to a
thousand generations in pardoning sins and transgressions, but threatens
vengeance only to the third or fourth generation; Consider now what proportion
there is between one thousand and four, and know that there will be as great an
inequality between the glorious free men of Jesus Christ, and the few and
miserable bondslaves of the devil.


C. This is a proportion without proportion, and (to speak like a Geometrician)
a comparison between a body and the shortest line.


M. From Moses let us pass to that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, by whose
authority we shall learn that this most blessed Kingdom is perspicuously
exaggerated. He pours forth words of great consolation upon the Church, even
then Militant, Rejoice O barren, thou that did not bear, break forth into
singing and cry aloud, thou that did not travel with child. For more are the
children of the desolate, than the married wif^, says the Lord. Which words
are both cited and explained by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, Many
more, says he, are the children of the desolate, than of her that has an
Husband. Now they that are experienced in knowledge of Divine mysteries, are
not ignorant, that the Church of God is understood by that desolate and barren,
and the kingdom of Satan by the married wife, for in the same place the Apostle
distinguishes them one from the other, by most certain notes. Now we brethren,
says he, we the children of the Promise, as Isaac was: but as then, h^ that
was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even
so it is now. N^vertheless, cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the son of
the bondwoman shall not be Heir with the son of the freewoman. Therefore we
are not, my brethren, the children of the bondwoman, but of the free.


C. I have heard, and as I remember I have read, that that barren was the
Church collected out of all nations, and that the married wife was the
Commonwealth of Israel, the Synagogue of the Jews, which differ nothing but in
Nation and time.


M. I know it, and therefore I alleged this place of the Apostle, that it
might plainly appear, that they are not distinguished by reason of Nation and
time, but for inward qualifications, for manners, for conditions, and for the
end. For first he distributes all mankind into those that are born of the
flesh, and those that are born of the Spirit, besides these two, there is no
third. Then he says, Those that are worldly, do continually vex and persecute
those that are Spiritual and Heavenly, yet they are servants, these are free.
Therefore in reference to their final condition, he conferreth an everlasting
inheritance upon the sons of the freewoman, those of the bondwoman being
abdicated, forsaken, and rejected. These things being so learnedly and so
plainly disjoined by the Apostle, we ought not to conjoyn, or rather to
confound them. And if any man will by that married wife, or by that daughter of
the b^nd-woman, understand the Nation of the Jews: neither can he by that means
detract from the multitude of the Elect: for as he that treads the steps of the
faith of Abraham, is the son of Abraham, and belongs to the number of the
Saints; so he that follows the contumacy, and abides in the unbelief of the
Jews, is deservedly called a Hagaren, and an Ismaelite. Here is therefore no
place for tergiverlation; for he plainly affirms that the number of the
Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem, is much greater than that of the earthly
Jerusalem, and this is the reason of that great admiration of the celestial
Citizens, when they behold their own multitude, as you read at large in the
Prophecy of Isaiah.


C. It is so; but why is one called barren, and forsaken; and the other the
married wife?


M. First, because she is not so fruitful, pompous, and illustrious in the
ceremonies of the Law as the other: Secondly, because she appears little and
regardless in the eyes of the world. For she boasts not of good works and
merit: does not make ornament, magnificence, and splendor, to be inseparable
notes of her purity; and Lastly, is not celebrated for diversity of Sects, and
variety of rites and ceremonies. Therefore she is termed barren, without
children, solitary, little, despisable, and forsaken of God, by them that judge
according to the specicious outside of things. But on the contrary, the other
said to have a husband, because she surpasses in the pomp of outward worship,
for the Prophet has opposed the married woman to the barren, and her that is
forsaken: and speaks of both of them after the manner of men.


C. I will not here demand who is the husband of the Church, for I know it is
Christ the Lord: but who besides will they have to be her husband?


M. The very Synagogue it self boasts of Moses, but very falsely, as Christ
shows in the 5. of John, saying, Had ye believed Moses, ye had also believed
me, for he wrote of me: but if ye believe not his writings, how will you
believe my words? Also our Lord says in the 2. of the Apocalypse, that such
are not Jews, but blasphemers, and the Synagogue of Satan. Moreover they who
ordain and pretend Moses for their Lawgiver, if they seek salvation by any
other Law than that of Christ, whether it be of Moses, or Mahomet, or Pope, or
any Seperatist whatsoever, they may be said to have a master and a husband, and
they that are such, are all servants and bondmen, and as many as are begotten
of them, that is, perverted by them: and if they be servants, they shall not
abide in the house for ever, but the son abides ever. But Christ and his
Spouse, the Heavenly Jerusalem, have children, and those free from the Law, as
our Savior told the Jews, If the Son shall make you free, then you are free;
St. Paul also tells us, that where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, 1 Cor. 3. Therefore these are heirs, not by the observation of the
Law, but only as sons, sons of the freewoman, which is the Holy Catholic
Church, not the synagogue of the bondwoman, held under fear and servitude. For
he that is a son, does not imagine that he shall therefore become an heir,
because he serves the father and keeps his commandments, but because he is born
in true and lawful wedlock, or else called into the family by adoption.


C. These things are so plain, that he is wilfully blind that sees them not.
But can you produce any testimonies out of the New Testament?


M. I can; Behold St. Paul, comparing the calamity brought into the world by
the transgression of Adam, with the benefit of Christ's resurrection, that is,
those which were damned in Adam, with those that are justified, sanctified and
saved in Christ, says thus, But not as the offense, so is the free gift, for
if through the offense of one, many be dead: much more the grace of God, and
the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many,
Romans 5. Now the sense of the words is this, That the gift of one man Jesus
Christ, has abounded to many more, than the fall of Adam, and the offense by
that fall did extend. Here you see the Apostle says in terminis, that more are
saved by the advantage of Christ, than are damned by the sin of Adam.


C. I do see it, and I understand it; but how in the same place are those words
to be understood? For he says, As by the offense of one man, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one man, shall all men
be absolved. Here he says all men are damned, and yet all men are saved, and
seems to speak things repugnant. For if all be condemned, there is a necessity
none can be saved; and there is a necessity none can be damned, if all men be
saved.


M. You have propounded a question somewhat perplexed and knotty, but by Gods
assistance I shall untie it: I know there are some that say, all are condemned,
that is, all that are born under original sin, are obnoxious to condemnation:
that all are absolved and set free, that is, that Christ died for all men, and
that his death was effectual to expiation of the sins of the whole world, if
all men had applied unto themselves the benefit of his death by says; but this
opinion tottereth, in regard that all men are born in original sin; yet all men
are not justified, all men are not saved: and by this it would seem that the
efficacy of the passion of Christ was not so diffusive, as the transgression of
Adam was destructive, whereas if you consider the words only, the reason
should be the same in both. You have not forgotten the old Axioms, Paria
paribus, and contrariis omnibus contraria convenient. But this seems more plain
to me to affirm, that all which are condemned, are condemned for the offense of
one man; and so also all that are saved, have salvation by the benefit of one;
but it is true that all are condemned that came of the old Adam, and all which
are born of the second Adam, which is Christ, are saved; but they are few,
these are many, otherwise the righteousness of Christ, will be found less than
the disobedience of Adam. Thus we shall with the Apostle, harbor thoughts
correspondent to the Office and Divine virtue of Christ. And whereas it
follows, that by the disobedi^nce of one, many were made subject to the curse,
we have already showed that by many, the Apostle means all.


C. I remember it, and like very well of your interpretation; but go on,
because I see you are ready to make an end.


M. To the amplitude of this Divine Kingdom, those places also do concur in the
second Psalm, where the Father says to his Son, Ask of me, and I shall give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession. And in the 72. Psalm, He shall have dominion also from sea
to sea, and from the River unto the ends of the earth: also, All Kings shall
worship him, and all Nations shall do him service. These passages of Scripture
in the History, belong to Solomon, but in the mystery, to Christ our King, as
those that are conversant in the Scriptures, do well understand. Also that
place in Joel 2. I will pour forth of my Spirit upon all flesh. Again in the 2.
of the Acts, All men shall know me, even from the least to the greatest: Also
in the first of Malac. From the rising of the Sun, even until the going down of
the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense
shall be offered unto my Name, even a pure offering. Consult also the Prophet,
and observe in the seventh chapter, how honorable mention he makes of the
Kingdom of God. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom,
that all People, Nations and Languag^s, should serve him. Again in the 12. of
John, our Lord says of himself, And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men
unto me. Again, St. John speaking of Christ, says, That he does enlighten all
men, chap. 1. St. Paul also affirms, that God would have all men to be saved.
And in another place, He has shut up all men under unbelief, that he might
have mercy upon all men. In these and very many other places, by the word all,
is intimated the amplitude of the Kingdom of God. This is that seed, that
fruitful offspring, which Isaiah foreseeing, was forced with amazement to cry
out, Who can declare his generation? This is that multitude declared by St.
John in Apoc. 7. After this I beheld, and to a great multitude which no man
could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in
their hands: and cried out with a loud voice, Salvation unto God, which sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb. This multitude, this majesty and greatness of
the Kingdom of God, future generations will better comprehend than the ages
past; for they shall behold the most happy spreading of the Gospel, they shall
see the destruction of the Prince of the Ismaelites, and of that proud Vicar of
hell. Antichrist by little and little shall be overcome, and cast into utter
darkeness, from whence there is no redemption: and they also who have followed
his voice, and obeyed his imaginations, shall participate the same damnation.


C. Oh how happy has this day been unto me, wherein I have learned the
explanation of so many difficult places of Scripture, so great errors detected
and confuted, so many mysteries revealed, and so many knotty and involved
questions unintangled. The cloud of error being blown over, I now plainly see,
how rash and bold an enterprise it is, to judge of the Kingdom of Heaven by
appearances, which is not constituted by any thing subjected to our senses, but
prepared by the election of God, and distinguished from the synagogue of the
devil, by faith and the fruits of the Holy Spirit, not purchased by any
counsel, help, or merit of ours, but obtained merely by the gracious good
pleasure of our God. Wherefore from hence, forth I will forbear all such
temerity, and will leave the disposing of his Kingdom, and the reglement of his
affairs, to God himself, who enlarges it at several times, and in several
places, as best seems good unto him. I will know it to be my duty, to worship
God in Spirit, perpetually to exalt his mercy, to love and follow Christ, and
to help all men, even mine enemies, with my care, my counsel, and all my best
assistances.


Hic murus aheneus esto. FINIS.

