A Call to Archippus; OR, An humble and earnest MOTION TO SOME Ejected
Ministers, (by way of LETTER) To take heed to their MINISTRY, That they Fulfill
it.

Col. 4. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry, which thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

Acts 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over
which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood.

29. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the Flock.

1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an
Elder, etc. Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, etc.

Printed in the year, 1664.

A Call to ARCHIPPUS: or, an humble and earnest Motion to some Ejected
Ministers, etc.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
WE said Job 32. 7.
days should speak, and waited for the words of the Ancient; But an aged Paul
would not have others 1 Timothy 4. 12.
despise Timothy his youth, much less would he do it himself. Your long
silence has made us speak, to utter to you our own troubles, and the sighs and
groans of your helpless Flocks. We cannot inform you, but have only writ to 2
Pet. 3. 1.
stir you up by way of remembrance, and humbly to put you in mind, that you 2 Timothy 1. 6
stir up the gift of God that is in you, and suffer not your worthy Matt. 25.
25.
Talents to be buried in the Napkin, now the sinking Church and dying Religion
has such pressing need for their utmost improvement.

These Letters are to you in behalf of the poor Flocks, like the man of
Macedonia Acts 16. 9.
crying to you, Come and help us: or, a Call to Col. 4. 17.
Archippus, to take heed to the Ministry that he has received, that he fulfill
it.

Fathers and Brethren, we unfeignedly reverence you, we magnify the grace of
God in and unto you. Did not we reverence your Parts, Gifts and Graces, and
esteem them every way so useful to the Churches, we should contentedly see you
sit still, and never be at the pains to excite you. But our high value of you,
has made us humbly bold to expostulate the case a little with you, and
passionately to beseech you, to remember how great a work it is that lies upon
you, and to set your hands to it in this time of difficulty.

Some of yours were the holy hands by which we were called to our Office, when
you made us publicly promise (according to the obligation of our Office) that
we would never, for fear of any persecution, desist from preaching the Gospel;
and far be it from our Fathers to withdraw, as soon as persecution begins.
Suffer us with all modesty and submission, to reason with you. Has not God
said, Necessity is laid on you, and VVO unto you if you preach not the Gespel?
1 Cor. 9. 16.
Who shall free you from that Woe, or loose your bonds of that necesse, if yet
you sit still in silence?

Shall we mind you of Paul's example and charge? No bonds nor afflictions could
move him, nor make him shun Acts 20. 23, 24, 27.
to declare the whole counsel of God. And how strict is the command, That you
take heed to your selves, and all the Acts 20. 28.
Flock, over whom the holy Ghost has made you Bishops? And let it be noted,
how pertinent the motive is, Because grievous ver. 29.
Wolves are entered in, not sparing the Flock: And will you, at such a time,
give over your care for the Flock? Are we not most dreadfully charged, besore
God, and our Lord Jesus 1 Timothy 5. 21 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
Christ, and the elect Angels, to observe these things, and to preach the Word,
and be instant, and reprove, rebuke, exhort with all LONG SUFFERING? and shall
we flinch at the beginning of any Suffering? Are we not required to continue in
Doctrine, as ever we would save our selves, or them 1 Timothy 4. 16.
that hear us? Has not our Lord told us, That he that has set his hand to the
Plough, and looks back, is not fit for the Luke 9. 62.
Kingdom of God?

Let us call upon your Bowels. Pro. 29. 18
Where there is no Vision, the People perish: and can you see them perish, when
you have Luke 15. 17, 18.
bread enough, and to spare? Further, Are not you they, that Phil. 1. 17.
are set for the defense and confirmation of the Gospel? and will not you stand
to your work, against the Heb. 12. 3.
contradictions of men, that would Neh. 4. 11.
make the work of the Lord to cease? Besides, now is the time for you to 2 Cor.
6. 4, 5, 6, 7.
approve your selves to be Ministers of God, in much patience, affliction,
necessity, distress, imprisonment, labor, watchings, fastings; by
long-suffering, by kindness, by the holyGhost, by Love unfeigned, Word of
Truth, Power of God, Armor of Righteousness, on the right hand and on the
left. Is not this the Work of your Office and Calling, To watch in all things,
2 Timothy 4. 5. and 2. 3.
to suffer afflictions, and thereby to make full proof of your Ministry, and,
as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to endure hardness? Shall you with Jona, fly
to Tarshish, when the Lord sends Jona 1. 2, 3.
you about your work? will you not rather say, with resolution, as holy
Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I flee? Who Neh. 6. 11.
is there, that being as I am, would flee? etc. And as the Apostles, your
Leaders, when in your case; And now, Act. 4. 29.
Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy Servants, that with all
boldness they may speak thy Word.

Shall we humbly mind you of the relation wherein you stand, and the strong
obligations resulting thence? O how much is the glory of Christ, and good of
souls, bound up in you? Who will not presage a fatal change, when the Eccl. 12.
3, 5.
keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow themselves? Should not
the Gal. 2. 9.
Pillars of the Lord's House stand upright under their weight? shall the 1
King. 7. 21.
Jachin and Boaz of the Temple be as a man without strength? You are the
Champions of the Lord; and shall not you be Jer. 9. 3.
valiant for the Truth upon Earth? and confess your Lord in the face of danger,
though in Mar. 8. 38
midst of a wicked and adulterous generation?

Are not you the Shepherds of the Flocks? And shall the true Shepherds flee, as
Joh. 10. 12
soon as they see the Wolves, and leave the Sheep? When should they show their
care and diligence, their solicitude and watchfulness, if not when the beasts
of prey come to tear, and to destroy?

You are the Mat. 24. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.
Stewards and Dispensers of the Mysteries of God, that are to give to all the
Family their portion, every one in their season; and blessed is that servant
(only) whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing: And how will the
Master look on you at his return, if you suffer the Family to starve, when he
has left with you for their supply till he come? And has not God charged,
that you Matthew. 25. 1 Pet. 4. 10.
trade with your Talents? and as you have received the gift, so you minister
the same to others, without which you cannot be good Stewards of the manifold
Grace of God? and yet do you let your Talents lie unoccupied?

Are not you the Eze. 34. 4.
Physicians of the Churches? and when should they ply their Patients, unless
when in most danger to be infected with the mortal Plague, and common Leprosy
of the Times?

In a word, Are you 1 These. 2. 7
Nurses, and yet deny your Sucklings your breast? 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
Fathers and yet will not give Matthew. 7. 9, 10.
bread to your Sons that ask it? Watchmen of the Lord, and yet neglect your
fearful Charge; Who would not tremble at those dreadful Injunctions, Ezk. 3.
17. and 33. 7. whereby we are required to give men warning, or else, if they
should perish, their blood shall be required at our hands.

Finally, Has not the Lord ordained you to be his 1 Cor. 14. 29, 39.
Prophets? and shall not your souls be moved, neither at the thundering Charge
at the entrance, nor the sweet Promise in the close of those piercing and
powerful words, Jer. 1. 17, 18. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise and
speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at their fears, lest I
confound thee before them: For behold I have made thee this day, a defenced
City, and an iron Pillar, and brazen walls against, etc. And they shall fight
against thee, but shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, says the
Lord, to deliver thee. The passage seems like the stormy Wind, the amazing
Earthquake, and the Fire of God, in the Vision of the Prophet, ending in the 1
King. 19. 11, etc.
sweet, soft and still Voice. O let the Words of the living God work either
upon your Fear or upon your Hope.

Suffer us to stay you a while with a few serious Questions, which in all
humility we do request you, to let your grave considerations dwell for a time
upon. We beseech you, let not our importunity be grievous, nor our words seem
tedious, in so pondrous and important a case.

But to prevent misunderstandings in what we say, we must be forced more than
we would to lengthen, by premising a threefold Caution.

We would not be so understood in any thing, as if we Caut. 1.
did undervalue the Sufferings of our most deserving Brethren, or were
unthankful to God, or them, that they have so manfully stood for the TRUTH, and
resisted the strong Temptations to sinful compliance, even to the peril of
their Families, the loss of Goods and Livelihood, and their beloved Employment
amongst their dear People. We must, we do, and shall while we live, bless the
Lord for this their Courage and Constancy; that they have kept the Word of His
Patience, and have not denied His Name: And have born their public Testimony
against the Corruptions of the times; though we are forced (with submission) to
mind them, what pity it is, that they that did run so well, should not reach to
the end of their race.

We would not be understood, as if we did lay the Caut. 2.
blame of silence upon all our Fathers and Brethren, that have been thrust out
for Conscience toward God. We know there are of them, and that not a few,
(Glory be to God) that are harder at work than ever; laboring in season, and
out of season, by night and by day; whose Reward is with the Lord, yea, a great
Reward, and their praise throughout all the Churches.

We would not have what we speak of the present Ministry, Caut. 3.
to be understood de omni. We may not without grievous breach of Charity deny,
but some few (alas too few) are pious, sedulous, as well as singularly endowed
with learning and abilities; but we speak only of the generality; and would to
God their lives and labors would confute our too just complaints.

After these Cautions, we humbly subjoyn a few moving Questions.

Whether you think in your hearts, that the Ministry Quest. 1.
that now is, will ever keep up the Power of Godliness? O that we could but
charitably believe it! But who can deny his senses! Alas! how should Christ's
Kingdom and Interest, and the Power of Holiness be suported by these hands? If
Idleness will do it, if Ignorance will do it, if Looseness will do it, if Malice
will do it, then these men will bear up the Power of Godliness. Do you not know
that too many of them hate it, both name and thing? do not they plainly make
it, not the Prize they aim at, but the But they shoot at? These things are a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation. In this we know you are
sufficently convinced.

Whether you can see Religion sinking, falling, dying away, and you never put
your hands and Quest. 2.
shoulders to it, and yet be blameless? Fathers and Brethren, you are the Josh.
3. 14.
shoulders that must bear up the Ark of the Lord. Do not your 1 Samuel 4. 13.
hearts tremble for the Ark of GOD? Do you see it falling, and yet withdraw
your shoulders, and keep your hands in your bosoms? you would condemn that man
deservedly, as void of Christian Charity, yea, common humanity, that should not
take up his neighbor, and labor to chafe and rub, and recover him to life
when fallen down by you in a swooning Esth. 4. 14.
fit. Fathers, where then are your Bowels? where are your Compassions, and your
Zeal for the Interest of Christ and Holiness: If you see Religion it self in
this swooning fit, and have not with your utmost help, will the Lord hold you
guiltless, if you should altogether hold your peace at such a time as this?

Whether Pro. 11. 26.
there will a blessing follow him that keeps in his Corn in a time of Famine?
Behold Quest. 3.
England is crying unto you in her Famine, as Egypt to Joseph, for with you is
the store; for the Lord's sake Genesis 41. 56
open the storehouses. Now or never stir up your Gifts, we seem to hear the
fainting souls of the forsaken, starving Flocks, coming and crying to you, as
they to him, O give us Bread, for why should we dye in thy presence? We seem to
see the famishing cheeks approaching you, and calling for relief, expostulating
as they, Wherefore should we Genesis 47. 15.
dye before thine eyes? Give us Food that we may live and not dye, Genesis 47. 19.
For the Lord's sake bear with us to be a little plain with you; Are your souls
sensible of the Famine upon the Land, or are they not? if not (as we cannot, we
dare not, we do not think so of you Fathers; for we doubt not your Integrity
with God) you were, we will not say no Fathers, but not so much as true
Children or Members of the Church, having no Natural Affection, no Christian
Sympathy. If you are indeed sensible of the Famine, how can you keep in the
Corn? Surely the Voice of God to a withholding-Minister, seems like that, Lam.
2. 20. Arise, Cry out in the Night, in the beginning of the Watches; pour out
thine heart like water before the Lord; lift up thine hands toward him for the
life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the top of every street:
It grieves us to urge what yet we cannot keep in. Fathers, we reverence you
from our hearts, but cannot but set before you the gemitus and suspiria of
grieved souls, who seem to cry to you, as Lam. 4. 3. Even the Sea Monsters draw
out the Breasts, they give suck to their young ones; the Daughter of my People
is become cruel, like the Ostriches of the Wilderness.

Whether it will not impair the honor of our Quest. 4.
Glorious Profession, if the Followers should be of more courage and resolution
than their Leaders, and leave their Spiritual Commanders behind? To be plain,
the People are willing and forward to venture with you; and to run the resk of
it, and shall their Leaders be more backward than they? Were you like to be
alone it were more excusable; But they are ready to suffer with you, and run
all hazards that may come upon them for their duty in hearing: and shall we
only stand back? shall not a willing People, make a willing Ministry? O let the
Judge. 5. 9.
Governors of Israel offer themselves willingly amongst the People.

Whether a great part of your Flocks will not be Quest. 5.
in extreemest danger to run wild to Seducers, and despisers of Government, 2
Pet. 2. 10.
if you do not step in: evident it is that somewhere they must and will hear;
and for the formal Pharisees, or profane Hophnies, these they will never be
induced to sit down under. What then will be the consequence, but that they will
be under strongest temptations, to run to the Tents of Erroneous Teachers, and
(to their great peril) lend their ears to the instruction that causes to er
from Prove. 19. 27
the words of knowledge. Experience writes a sad Probatum est to what we say in
this; of which how mischievous the issue may be, we leave you to consider. Yea,
judge your own selves, we beseech you, whether false Teachers will not have a
fairer advantage than ever, to get in with our People, and glory over our
Ministry and Churches, if they be ready and forward in hazarding themselves
among their parties, when ours only shall decline their Flocks and Labors, as
soon as times grow periloas?

Whether you will not put a reproach into the Quest. 6.
mouths of our Adversaries, and give them occasion to speak evil of our Office,
when you shall be found to give over the Work, as soon as ever the Pay does
cease? Our hearts do honor you, but there be that reproach you as Hirelings,
which they now strengthen themselves in, and more confidently and colourably
than ever, persuade others off; (first) Because you give over the Work as soon
as ever the Maintenance do fail. (Secondly) Because (they say) you flee as soon
as the Woolf does approach, and will not bide by the Sheep, when your liberty
and outward comfort is thereby like to be in danger. Will you not care that the
Ministry be not blamed, and study to roll off so colorable an occasion of
reproach? shall 2 Cor. 6. 3.
we suffer the world to think that the spring of all our Motion, the oil to our
Wheels, the wind in our Sails was nothing but outward Advantage?

Whether you had your Commission, Office and Quest. 7.
Authority from the Magistrate, and your Power in, and relation to the Church,
be of a Civil Stamp? We know the Magistrate does not pretend to this: And if
none but Christ did, nor could Commissionate you, can any but He discharge you?
or can the Relation between the Church and you (if Divine and Spiritual) cease
upon the interposition of a Power merely Political, which is toto genere
distinct? If the Magistrate did not constitute and cause this Relation, how can
he make it to cease? or take away what (confessedly) he cannot give? were not
this to make it to be at the Magistrates pleasure whether Christ shall have any
Ministry or no? any Service or no? whether there shall be any Preaching or not?
and so indeed, whether God shall have any Church or no? And if the Magistrate
cannot make your Relation to the Church to cease, how can he make the Duty of
that Relation to cease? since the shadow does not more naturally and necessarily
follow the substance, than the Duty does the Relation. In a word; Will it be a
sufficient Answer, at God's Righteous Judgment, when the Lord shall ask us why
we did not preach the Gospel as he had bid us? to say, Lord, it was because the
Magistrate did forbid us. God is our Record in Heaven, that we are of those
that do unfeignedly fear the Lord, and honor the King; to whom we shall ever
yield obedience in licitis, deny submission in nullis. Only we are afraid, that
it will not be sufficient in that dreadful day, to produce the Magistrates
Warrant for our discharge, when directly contradicting the tremendous Charge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge both quick and dead at his appearing. We
verily fear, the Magistrates Dispensation will not be allowed before his
Tribunal; and then what a sorry case were we in, should we desist thereupon
from our work?

Whether God has forsaken those of his Ministers, that have set to their work,
since the day of Quest. 8.
that fatal stroke? or, whether he has not owned them by his Assistance,
Presence, Approbation, and the ample Testimonies of his Favor, and honored
his Name and Gospel by their Labors, Trials, Imprisonments, and Sufferings
whatever, that they have endured? Has the Gospel lost ground by them? It may
be enquired, Whether there be any place for Repentance in their prisons, (where
they have time enough to reflect upon their actions and correct what was amiss)
or whether they are not for ever settled, strengthened, and doubly confirmed in
their resolutions, by their Prisoncomforts and encouragments? and whom should
we believe in this, sooner then those that have tried the worst?

There is another Question, that we fear to put to Quest. 9.
you, But will rather let the Apostle himself ask you, 1 John 3. 16, 17, 18.
Whosoever has the worlds goods (and we add, much more, whosoever has the heavenly
Goods to dispense) and sees his Brother (much more his distressed Mother) has
need, and shuts up his Bowels of compassion from him, How dwells the Love
of God in him?

Whether you will be able comfortably to answer Quest. 10.
the Lord, when He shall put to any of you this Interrogatory, With whom have
thou left those few 1 Samuel 17. 28.
Sheep in the Wilderness? O that you would but consider with whom you have left
them! Is it not manifestly and mostly with [Blind-Guides] with Spiteful
Shepherds, or rather Wolves in Shepherds clothing? with [Cruel Fathers] that
Mat. 7. 9, 10.
that give stones instead of bread, and Scorpions for Fish? with [Violent
Watchmen] that when the distressed Spouse has come to seek her Beloved, have
woundded her, and smitten her, and took away her vail? Cant. 5. 6, 7.
Shall not our hearts melt, to think of leaving the steerage of our Vessels in
such unskilful hands, or with such selfish Pilots, as look no further then
their own Cabin? or sensual Shepherds, that feed themselves, and not the
Flocks? or Physicians, that have themselves the Plague sores running upon them?
May we not say unto our neighbor, Go Prove. 3. 28.
away and come again when we have it by us, and shall we deny our People our
care and oversight, when their cries, or at least their wants, do call so
loudly for it? Have we gained many to the profession of the Gospel, and
begotten many of them in truth unto Christ, and now shall we leave them to sink
or swim, when no man cares for their souls? Is this our tenderness to the Heb.
13.
Children that God has given us? Is this like Timothy Phil. 2. 20.
naturally to care sor their state? Is 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 11.
this to cherish them as a Nurse cherishes her Children? Is this, like Paul,
Phil. 2. 17.
to be ready to he offered up, upon the service of their Faith, and Acts 20. 24
not account our lives dear unto us so we may finish our course with joy; and
the Ministry we have recerved, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God?
Fathers and Brethren, it grieveth us, that you who are Worthies should be
compared to the unnatural among the Birds, Job 39. 14, 15, 16.
which leaves her Eggs in the earth, and forgeteth that the feet may crush
them, or that the Wild Beasts may break them, she is hardened against her young
ones, as though they were not hers. -- pudet haec opprobia nobis
Et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli.


Whether your Prayers and good wishes for Quest. 11.
your People, while you draw not forth your Isa. 58. 10.
souls to the hungry, be not like their cold Alms, Jam. 2. 15, 16, 17.
that if a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, do only say
unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding not
giving them those things, which are needful to the Body?

Whether you can, without highest Injustice, Quest. 12.
yea (we would tremble to speak it) without most dreadful Sacrilege, withhold
the Churches Goods when she is ready to perish for want? Fathers and Brethren,
who ever say their tongues are their own, yours are not: 1 Cor. 3. 22.
you are the Churches, a part of her legal Dowry, you are her most proper
Goods, her most rightful Claim, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
given her by Christ himself, yea given to her for ever, for her use. Your
Gifts, your Graces, all you Talents, they are unquestionably Church Goods, a
public Stock, for common use, in which all may claim a share. You are Romans 1.
14.
debtors to all. And have you forgotten the charge of the Lord, Prove. 3. 27.
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine
hand to do it.

Whether it be not better to Glorify God by a Quest. 13.
Prison (if that you fear should come upon you) than to be an Offense and
Stumbling Block by sitting still? Consider we beseech you, what are we for, but
our Maker's Ends? what are we good for, for what do we serve, but only for his
Pleasure? better we had no being, than not to be for Him. Better we were
without liberty, than that it should not serve Him. What a small thing is
Riches or Poverty; Sickness or Health; Liberty or Bonds, unless in order to his
Glory? Let us but live in the power of this acknowledged Principle, That it is
our business and our blessedness to glorify God, and all will be set at
rights. If that be true, then that is the best condition, wherein we may best
glorify God, and the happiness of every estate, is to be esteemed, according
to the order and reference that it has to this end. Now then, let God glorify
himself in us, and it cannot but be well. What should you then do but set to
the Work? For either God will preserve your Liberties, and then you will
wonderfully glorify him by your acting and venturing your selves for him; or
else he will send you to Prison, and then you will more glorify him by
suffering, lying there as the Public Hostages of the Churches, and Witnesses
of God's Truth; Besides that it may render you the more serviceable in your
Generation all your days after. But how little is God glorified by you either
way, while you sit still? Or, are you not rather an Offense, and a grief to the
spirits of the Godly, weakening the hands of your Active Brethren, and wounding
the spirits of your dear People? Who can see others at work, and partake of
strangers labors, when you their Shepherds give over your care for their souls?

Whether by this Recess you do not neglect the fairest opportunity that ever
you had, or may have, Quest. 14.
in all your lives, to honor the God that sent you, to save sinners, build up
Saints, and everlastingly to vindicate the Reputation of Christ's Ministry, and
further your own Peace and Comfort here, and Glory hereafter? Never had you so
clear and so loud a Call to hazard your selves for God, and thereby to prove
your integrity before him, and resolution for him, and to give public
Testimony of your Zeal, and the ardour of your Love to his Name, as now. Never
had you such an open and effectual door for the doing good to souls, whether
for Conversion or Edification. Now the hearts of the People cleave to you more
than ever, if you lose them not by your own neglect. Now they see the
difference between the Precious and the Vile; between the Hay and Stubble of
the present materials, and the Gold and Silver that you did build with; between
the burning and shining Lights, and the stinking and loathsome Snuffs. O how
erect are their ears! and their hearts long, and their mouths water (as we say)
and their souls wait for your words. We seem to see the thronging crowd, the
willing people, Pro. 8. 34.
watching at the gates of Wisdom, waiting at the posts of her doors, looking
when you will speak, that they might be refreshed; when your Job 29. 21, 22.
words will distill as the dew, and drop as the showers Deuteronomy. 32. 2
upon the mowen grass, or parched ground. We see them gathering about you, and
saying with them, Act. 10. 33
Behold, we are all here ready to hear all things that are commanded you of
God. Now may the Messenger of the Lord indeed say, They Job 29. 23.
waited for me as the rain, and they opened their mouths wide as for the latter
rain. How hungry are their souls? how do they hang upon your lips? how far will
they travel? how early will they rise? how hard will they venture (expertis
credit, glory be to God, we speak what we know) to get a wholesome meal, to
enjoy God in the pure and powerful Administration of his Ordinances. Verily the
Field is even white to the Harvest. O how great is the pity, that at such a
time you should have your hands out, and not thrust in your Sickle. The People
seem ready to catch at your words, as Benhadads servants, as soon as they
dropped from 1. Kings 20. 33.
the mouth of the King of Israel.

If you think it would not be so with you, we fear it is either, first, for
want of experience, because you have not tried; or, secondly, (if we may
presume to be so plain) through the neglect of too many, who are otherwise
Worthies, but have here through their own supineness, suffered the affections
of People to dye, and the coal of Religious Zeal to go out, for want of
blowing. But if they will but blow up this sacred Fire out of the Ashes, and
lay the Coals together, and give their People to taste of the pure Milk of the
Word, we miss our mark, if they want an encouraging Auditory, unless where
Religion, in the most professing times, has been a stranger. Awake then, for
now is the time for you to settle your selves for ever in the Affections of
your People. Now you may prove your love to them, as you never could before, by
hazarding your selves for their good. Now you may prove their love to your
Ministry, and to the Ways of God, as never you could till now.

Do you say, This is a carnal Argument?

We answer, It Is true, he is but an Hypocrite, that Quest. Answ.
looks no higher than the approbation of men, yea the best of men; But yet we
add, that the Affections of God's People, is a very choice and special Mercy.
He that has their hearts, shall have their prayers; and is that a little
thing? But these are little, to that we would especially answer, and that is;
He that has the Peoples Esteem and Affections, for the Lord's sake, has the
directest way in the world to their hearts, and the fairest advantage possible
to serve God's Interest upon them, and further his Work in them, which every
gracious Minister must needs value above all this worlds goods, as that upon
which the success of his Ministry, for winning and furthering souls, does
wonderfully depend.

Once again; Never had you such an opportunity in your lives, fore ver to put
to silence the slanderous tongues of Seducers, as now; they have vilified you
as Hirelings, Flesh-pleasers, that will go no further in Religion than will
stand with your own Advantage: O now or never confute them. What a loud
refutation of their callumnies would your engaging to purpose in the work of
God be at such a time as this? All sorts of men have been ready to take up
prejudices against us, as Self-seekers, and such as looked little further than
their Maintenance. Now pluck up these prejudices by the roots: now show you can
serve the Lord for naught. What lewd lies will all these imputations appear to
be, if the Lord stir you up to holy an activity? We can but touch upon your own
advantage, as indeed, we cannot dwell upon any thing, having so much to say in
a little. When had you such an advantage to get settled Assurance and Peace as
now? You can tell us better then our selves, (who yet blessed be God, speak
what we have seen and felt) that the most self-denying services are the best
evidences, and so bring in greatest comforts. When was there such a time to lay
up treasure in Heaven as now? You know the massyest Crown is for them that
endure the hardest service.

But we see there are many Lions in the way. The flesh is loath to labor (much
more to suffer) but cries, Master spare thy Self, and will find an hundred
Arguments to turn off a costly and hazardous duty. We despair the work will be
done without removing the prejudices, and therefore shall not dissemble the
difficulties and objections that be in the way.

Object. 1. It will be said, We are prohibited by the Magistrate.

Sol. 1. Was not this the Apostles case again and again? were not they
commanded, Act. 4. 18, 19.
yea strictly charged, not to preach any more? But did they give over? Why
should not we answer with them, Act. 5. 28, 29, 40, 42.
It is better to obey God than man? Does God charge us so deply, so dreadfully,
and shall we think our selves discharged if man contradict it? If the
Magistrate should be thought indeed to have such a power of Dispensations, will
not here be a fine easy way for idle Drones to shift the Yoke, and leave the
Plow? for 'twil but be to get an Order from above for not Preaching; and then
when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, to pluck out his Indulgence, and no more
can be said. But we fear God will not be so put off. Are not God's forbidden
Messengers, Act. 5. 20. Jer. 1. 17.
yet charged by Him to speak without fear, and that under a dreadful penalty,
and shall we fear man's wrath for preaching, more than God's WOE if we preach
not?

Repl. But it is said, Here is Preaching though we sit still: Whereas then the
Gospel was wholly forbidden to be preached, and so would have been extinct if
they had obeyed.

Ans. 1. It Is true here is preaching, but if not by us, how badly have we
answered, the formidable charge of Almighty God to us, or our sacred and solemn
vows to him? Will our Lord be put off by this, as a sufficient answer for our
loytering, that others were a laboring?

Ans. 2. There is indeed a Ministry, and Preaching (such as it is) but whether
such as is like to answer the ends of either, judge you. What are the next ends
of the Ministry in sum, but Act. 26. 18
Conversion and Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Edification? and are these like to convert souls, that have neither will nor
skill to deal with them about their Conversion, but persuade them they are all
regenerated and converted already? O how evidently do they Matthew. 23. 15.
harden them in their sins (for the most part) both by their Doctrine and
Lives, in stead of turning them from them! And are they like to edify in
holiness, who are apparently the venomous Enemies of Holiness? who for strict
and precise walking (without which no man shall see God) do openly, though
covertly, inveigh against it, as needless niceness, and the worst of folly. Now
if we have a Ministry, but such as does not answer the ends of a Ministry, how
few degrees are we the better for them than if we had none?

3. Your eyes will convince you, if you will but look abroad, that where there
is no better help, than of an Idle, Ignorant, Loose-living Ministry (under
which rank God knows, we speak it with grief of heart, too many, not to say the
most of those that are late come in, may be reckoned) or than the cold and
heartless way that is generally in use; the Coal of Religion does even go out,
and the Heat and Spirit of Christianity dye away: And is it not high time then,
for you to blow up the remaining sparks?

Sol. 2. Is it so indeed, our Reverend Fathers and Brethren, is it conscience
of the Magistrates prohibition that keeps you back (bear with us if we be a
little free with you) Why then do you neglect what you might do, without
crossing the Magistrate's command? if men did see you go so far as the
Magistrate gives you leave, they would be likely to believe, the conscience of
his Authority did keep you in; otherwise they will suspect this (too too
groundedly) for a pretext. If the Magistrate does forbid Sermons to your
People, he does not forbid Letters. Why do you not call upon and quicken them
frequently by these? If he forbid you the Pulpits, he does not forbid you your
neighbors houses. Why are they no more visited? may you not preach to a
private Family, or single person? See Christ and his Apostles preaching in
private houses (now called Conventicling) Mark 3. 19, 20. Acts 20. 7, 8. Acts
5. 42. Acts 2. 2, 14. (and this our Savior did even in a Church constituted,
the Priests and Elders questioning his Authority, Matthew. 21. 23.) Preaching to,
and praying with the multitude, (now called Rout, Riots, Seditious Asse^blies)
in the fields, by the Sea, etc. Acts 16. 13, 14. Mat. 5. 1. Mark 4. 1. and 6.
32, 34. and 10. 1. Luke 4, 42, Preaching to a private family or single person,
John 47, etc. Acts 8, 35. and 16, 31, 32.
And such was our Saviors, and the Apostles preaching, oft-times. You might be
the shorter and the oftener this way, and this would be a likely means of doing
no little good, if painfully followed. Though you are forbidden to set open the
Windows and keep Public Trading, yet what hinders but that you may have a
private Warehouse? Is it forbidden you to write out a Sermon once or twice a
week and send it amongst your People, and let it be read in their Families, and
Copies conveyed from hand to hand. This some have done, and this would be a
Testimony to your People of your constant care for their souls, and that you
are willing to do what you thought you lawfully might: whereas now they will
say, they see the contrary.

Object. 2. But Abiathar's quiet Secession is objected, who ('it is said) when
thrust out of the Office of the Priesthood, did not turbulently busy himself
in doing the work of that Office, but retired to a private life, and dwelt
quietly in his own house.

Sol. This is not an Objection for the friends of our Call and Office to make;
the case between him and us being so wonderfully disproportionate, as we might
many ways show. We shall instance but in four things.

1. Abiathar, as it seems, had no right to the Priesthood: for it did, by
right, belong to another Line. For 1 King. 2, 27. see Zadok his pedigree and
heirship, 1 Chronicles. 6. 3. etc. the Promise to Phinehas. Number. 25. 13. and consult
the English Annotations on 1 King. 1. 26, 27.
Abiathar was of the line of Eli, who it is not known how he came to the
Priesthood: Whereas Zadok (put in in his room) was the son of Phinehas, and
heir in a direct line to Aaron, and so seems to have the right of Priesthood
belonging to him, both by lineal descent, being the proper heir to it, and also
by God's special Promise.

2. Abiathar was put out by two Princes, who were 1 Chr. 29. 22 1 King. 2. 27
inspired by God, (and who knows but they may do it by extraordinary
direction?) by David, who anointed Zadok Priest in his room, while he was yet
living; and also by Solomon, ratifying his Fathers Act.

3. When Abiathar was thrust out, 1 Chro. 29. 22.
Zadok (not Hophni or Phinehas) was put in his room; a man Ezekiel. 44. 15.
owned and beloved of God, sufficiently, yea 2 Samuel 15. 27.
eminently fitted for the Work; so that he might recede, without fear of
miscarrying of the Work of the Lord, by the ignorance or wickedness of him that
it was entrusted with. Were this the case here, that your Work were put into
the hands of the best of men, and like to be better carried on by those, to
whom it is now committed, than before: Yea, if it were not like to sink and
fail, we should not think our selves so much concerned, to offer these
ungrateful lines unto you.

4. Above all, Abiathar had 1 King. 1.
forfeited his place by his Treason; so that the King might justly have cut off
his Person and Priesthood too: for, he was a man of death, 1 Kings 2. 26. and
the Sentence of death See the Dutch Divines, on 1 King. 2. 16.
Solomon is thought to have held him under, so that he should be only upon his
good-behaviour, and responsible for his crime upon any new provocation.

Object. 3. But it is further said, This will be a great occasion of Separation,
if Ministers set up in private, and draw away a great part of the People from
the Service of God in Public.

Sol. 1. The Separation be upon others, who when we were quietly settled in the
administration of Church-Ordinances, in a more pure and reformed sort, are come
in upon us, and have possessed our Places and Pulpits, and thrust us by the
places of public Convention. We continue still but in the same station, and
the same work, Luke 2. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
watching over our Flocks, and administering according to our Office, with no
other difference, but only that the place is altered; which being at the
Magistrates dispose, we quietly left it, according to our duty upon his command.

2. Yea, your not preaching will occasion Separation indeed: for whither will
the People run headlong, if not stayed and guided by the interposition of your
wisdom and prudence? Your moderation will be the likeliest means to keep them
from extremes: for you are they that have their hearts; by others they will not
be guided. For this, experience affords abundant instances, and too sad proof;
People every where joining themselves to the greatest of Separatists, rather
then they will rest satisfied with liveless Jejune, sapless Administrations,
offered withal by hands so unclean, and in vessels so impure, as somewhere they
are.

3. What is done in private, may be so prudently and inoffencively managed, as
to the season, as that (in case you and others are so satisfied) you, and they,
may orderly and timely attend, what is done in public, and show your readiness
to Unity and Peace, though you bear your Testimony against the Corruptions that
are on foot, evidencing your non-acquiescence in such impure and imperfect
modes of Administration and Ignorant and Ungodly Dispencers, as too generally
use them.

4. The most commendable endeavors after Christian Unity, must be conjunct
with a study of Gospel-Purity and the Power of Godliness, together with the
testifying of our vehement anhelation after it, and our vigorous endeavors (in
all lawful and peaceable means) for the obtaining of it. But how this should be
evidenced and effected (not to mention the hardening of others to think they are
in the right, and all is well) when men do fully jump in with all that is on
foot and acquiesce in it, looking for no farther help, we cannot well
understand.

Obj. 4. But it is added, That this will destroy God's Public Worship, and
alienate men from it.

Sol. 1. It is not the place, but the company conveened, that makes the Worship
to be public. The Meeting is public, and so the Worship public, though the
place may not be public: Else there was no Public Worship in the time of
great Persecution, when the Assemblies of Christians Act. 20. 8. Act. 12. 12.
Met by stealth in private houses.

2. It has been already showed, that there is a possibility of doing this,
without neglecting the Ordinances of God more publicly dispensed.

Obj. 5. But there is a secret and most forcible Objection yet behind, which we
fear lies with many at the bottom, though it come not so freely out; That this
is against our safety, and will certainly expose us to Persecution; and for a
man to adventure himself for an opportunity or two, to so great a hazard, as to
become a miserable Captive, and a prey to the Sons of violence, seems but folly.

Sol. 1. Why then do you neglect that of your work which would not expose to
Pesecution? cannot you dwell with your People, and keep the oversight of them,
and watch to see when danger approaches, and give them warning (though more
privately) whereby to prevent their Ruin? We humbly conceive, it is a part,
and no little part of a Ministers duty Act. 5. 42. Col. 1. 28. Act. 20. 20.
personally to instruct his People and to visit his Charge, and to preach from
house to house, and that distinct from public preaching: now this would not
expose you to any suffering, and yet how sadly is this neglected? There was a
time when this duty, being urged, the great objection against it was, because
Ministers had not time from their public Employments. Brethren, let us deal
plainly with God and with men; Why then is this great Duty now neglected? Now
when we have little else to do; especially since it is acknowledgly the great
duty of Ministers, and they may do it with safety, and be greatly instrumental
in it: And have now few other ways to edify their People; Is it for want of
time now that they do not do it? or from the multitude and weight of their
public Employments? But,

2. Is it true indeed, shall the fear of Persecution make us desist from the
work that God has committed to us with such a dreadful charge to fulfill it?
wherein we may fo wonderfully glorify him that sent us, and in the doing
whereof, the saving of our own and our Peoples souls is so much concerned: Will
not the People say that our own safty is dearer to us, either than their souls,
or our own, yea than God's Glory, if this should keep us back? as we verily
fear this will be found the greatest Remora. We do but desire that conscience
may plainly speak in the case, and tell men truly, whether if this were
removed, they would not fall forthwith to their Work. But has not God said
Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12.
Blessed are they that are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men persecute you and revile you, etc.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven: For so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you? Has not He assured us we
shall Mark 10. 29, 30.
come off no losers by him, but shall have an hundredfold even with
Persecution; yea, and that in this time, and in the World to come Life Eternal?
Is it not really Phil. 1. 29.
a Glorious Privilege to suffer for Christ, and a Act. 5. 41.
Badg of singular Honor? Have the former Saints thirsted for the Crown of
Martyrdom, and Gal. 6. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 5. 3.
gloried in the Cross of Christ? And is a Fine or a Prison enough to stop the
mouths of Gods Servants nowadays by the hundreds? Is it indeed Jam. 1. 12.
all joy to fall into diverse temptations, and are we afraid to venture? Where
does the 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Spirit of God and of Glory rest but upon suffering Saints? By ibid.
whom is God Glorified so much as by his suffering Witnesses? By what is the
Gospel Phil. 1. 12.
more furthered than by the Bonds and Tribulations of its Ministers? What
better way to ensure the Jam. 1. 12.
Crown of Life, and get the Mat. 5. 10.
double Portion in the Blessing, than by enduring Temptations and Persecutions
for the Gospel? What will so much Romans 5. 3, 4. Jam. 1. 3.
intend our Graces, further our experiences, help on Mortification, and 2 Cor.
4. 16, 17.
inhance our Eternal Glory, as our patient bearing for Christ?

Brethren, what will work upon us, if we will be quickened neither by the
consideration of God's Glory, nor our own? Has Christ suffered for us, both as
our 1 Pet. 2. 21 and 3. 18.
Surety, and Pattern? and have we such a Cloud of Martyrs, that have so stoutly
led the Van? and shall We shift off our Work for fear of Persecution? Let us
humbly request you but to view the encouraging Promises, that Christ has made
to Sufferers for his Name, which we can but hint, not handle, and let us
submissively reason with you; Are not these the very things which we have over
and over preached, and pressed on our People? and shall we make them believe,
by our flinching, that these things were not so? Bear with us, we beseech you;
Are these things true, or are they not? If not, why have we taught them? if
they be, why do we not live up to them? O that we did but act as if we our
selves had believed in what we have preached! Will it not be a real confutation
of what we have taught concerning the blessed Advantage and Glory of the Cross,
if we (when put to it) shall decline the Cross, notwithstanding all the
blessedness, we made People believe, we thought to be in it? God forbid that We
should tempt men to Atheism and Infidelity; and make them believe, there is no
more in Preaching, no more in Promises, than a flourishing talk.

The Conclusion.
But now it is time to think of closing. We fear we have been tedious and
troublesome; but suffer us yet to utter a few sighs more unto you. We should
not have thus pressed and presumed upon you, had not the necessity of the case
required it. Reverend and Beloved, if we cannot prevail with you; yea rather,
if God (that has the power of hearts) do not prevail with you, poor souls will
rue it, and Christ's Honor and Interest will suffer for it, his Gospel will be
a great loser by it. Pardon us therefore if we are loath to let you go: fain we
would that you should not be at the end of this Paper, before it has attained
its end; That you should not turn away your eyes from these Lines, till you
have resolved to set to your Work. O when will you be weary with forbearing.
Jer. 20. 9. I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his
Name; but his Word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and
I could not stay. Have you sat down in your discouragements, and said with him
in his infirmity, Yet now may your hearts wax hot within you, that you may
speak with your tongue. O that we could hear you saying with Elihu, Job 32. 18.
I am full of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me; I will speak that I
may be refreshed, I will open my lips and answer. What shall we say, Our 2 Cor.
6. 11
mouth is open to you, our heart is enlarged. O that we did but know what would
prevail with you! we Job 23. 4.
would fill our mouths with Arguments: We would not let you go, till you had
granted our humble Motion. Who shall choose our words for us? Alas, that we did
but know what would pierce! It grieves us to think we should have done, before
the Work be done; and that after all this, we should leave you as we found you.
We verily fear, lest the Argument of Self-preservation will at last prove more
forcible upon you, than all the moving Arguments that we can choose; and that
men are so in love with the way they have settled in, (from which they mostly
think it dishonorable to recede) that they will not be turned. Shall we go
from Words to Tears? O that we could command them! But we have not, (the Lord
pardon us) we have not the bowels and meltings, that we should have in
presenting you such a pitiful case. Shall we we fall from arguing to begging? O
that this would do it! Verily, we could creep on our knees unto you, For the
Lord's sake, let our words be accepted with you, do not despise our request;
Accept this Petition, as if it were written in the mingled tears, of us and
your People. Verily, these are the things, that they do sigh out before the
Lord in secret. Shall none of their miseries nor necessities move you? Was the
tongue of the dumb-born son of Croesus loosed, by the vehement commotion of
Nature in him, when he saw one about to murder his father? And shall not the
necessity of Souls loose yours? O think, by whom shall these be gathered? We
beseech you, by the Children (as it were) of your own Job 19. 17.
bodies, by the John 21. 15, 16, 17.
Love you bear to our precious Savior, (whose Interest it is, not our own,
that we have all this while pleaded with you;) We beseech you, by your high and
holy Calling, by all the Commands and Promises of the glorious Gospel, by all
your Vows to the most high God at your solemn Admission to your sacred
Function, Feed the Flock of God, which he Act. 20. 28.
has purchased with his own Blood. In a word, by the bowels of Fathers, by the
tears and cries of Children, by the necessities, distresses, groans, and
sorrows of our afflicted Mother, we beseech you do not turn a deaf ear to these
Requests. Fulfill you your Peoples joy: refresh their bowels in the Lord. We are
in deepest earnest with you, and do in some measure feel what we speak. We go
not to act a part. The case is very deplorable, that is before you. You see
what havoc is made, and what is like to become of poor souls. O if there be
any Phil. 2, 1.
consolation in Christ, any Comfort of Love, any fellowship of the Spirit, any
bowels and mercies, feed Christ's Lambs, feed his Sheep. We humbly and
tremblingly leave all at your feet; and fearing lest all our beggings to you
will not prevail, we turn our selves to beg of God for you, and the souls
committed to you and us.

O thou 1 Pet. 2. 25
Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, the Heb. 13. 20 Joh. 10. 11.
great and good Shepherd of the Sheep, that gave thy self for them, that
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
gave thy Ministry to them, for the perfecting of thy Saints, for the
edifying of thy Body; Quicken thy forgetful Stewards, to look to the pinching
wants of thy distressed Family. Awaken thine Under-Shepherds; call up thy
Watchmen to watch over thy Flock by night, that the beasts of prey may not
devour them. Sleep not thou, O Lord, in the sides of the Ship, when the Water
is come in, even to the soul, and we are all in jeopardy. Hear the moving cries
of thy Children and Disciples, about thee; Lord, save us, or else we perish.
Behold how thy Flock is scattered, and few search or seek after them, so that
they become a Ezekiel. 34. 5, 6.
prey to every beast of the field, because there is no Shepherd. O fulfill thy
Promise, and take the Work into thine own hands. Do Ezekiel. 34. 14.
thou feed thy Flock, and cause them to lie down. Thou have said, Ibid. v. 16.
I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away,
and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was
sick: but I will destroy the fat, and the strong, and will feed them with
Judgment. Remember thy Word unto thy Servants, in which thou have caused us to
hope. O Lord God, 2 Samuel 7. 28.
thou art that God, and thy Words are true, and thou have promised this
Goodness unto thy ibid. v. 29^
Servants. Thou, O Lord God, have spoken it; be it unto thy Servants according
to thy Word. O Mal. 4. 6.
turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and of the Children to the
Fathers. Where are the Isa. 63. 15.
soundings of thy Bowels? where are the movings of their Bowels? O let the
Distresses of thy Servants make their hearts to turn within them, and their
Repentings to kindle together, and give us once again, the men after thine own
heart, and set thou up Shepherds over us, that we Jer. 23. 4.
fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither be lacking, as thou have promised.
Psalm. 79. 13.
So we thy People, and Sheep of thy Pasture, will give thee thanks for ever,
and praise thy Name to all Generations. O Lord, thy People say, Amen. Let all
thy Ministers say, Amen, Lord Jesus, say thou, Amen.

FINIS.

