A LETTER from the Lord General Monck, And the OFFICERS here, to the several
and respective Regiments, and other Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland.
Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers,
YOU cannot be ignorant of the many Endeavors, and earnest Desires of many
good men in these Nations, to bring us to a Settlement; which it has pleased
God to dis-appoint unto this day, and leave us as a broken and divided People,
ready to run into Blood and Confusion: which that we might prevent so great
Calamities impending, after our earnest seeking God for his Direction and
Assistance, we find no Expedient so likely, for the satisfaction of the good
People, and the quiet and welfare of this Commonwealth, as the readmission of
the Secluded Members, in order to a Legal Dissolution of this Parliament by
their own free Consents; and to issue Writs for a future Full Representative of
the whole Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, under such
Qualifications as may secure our Cause, to convene on the twentieth of April
next at Westminster, for the establishing of this Commonwealth upon the
Foundations of Justice and true Freedom. And to take away all just Jealousies
from you, we do assure you, that we shall join with you in the maintenance of
those ends expressed in the enclosed; and do expect your cheerful concurrence
with us: and we desire to take God to witness, that we have no Intentions or
Purposes to return to our old Bondage; but since the Providence of God has
made us free at the Cost of so much Blood, we hope we shall never be found so
unfaithful to God and his People, as to lose so glorious a Cause: But we do
resolve with the Assistance of God, to adhere to you in the continuing of our
dear-purchased Liberties, both Spiritual and Civil. The Reason of our
Proceedings in this manner, may seem strange: but if you duly consider the
Necessities of our Affairs, and the present state of things, you will certainly
conclude nothing so safe to secure Public Interest, and to engage the Nations
peaceably to submit to a Free State; most of these Members having given us full
assurance, that their Session in Parliament shall not be longer than absolute
necessity will require, to the putting the Government into Successive
Parliaments; they not being free so to act by the old Writs, as when they shall
be called upon a Commonwealth-Account; and it is the Opinion of the truest
Friends to a Free State, That it cannot be consistent with the perpetual
sitting of these Members, being contrary to the Nature of such a Government.

And as we are confident the present Parliament now sitting, will not Repeal
any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this Parliament, for Sales, or
Public Disposition of Lands; so We shall in our Station observe, and cause to
be observed, all other Acts and Ordinances of this Parliament whatsoever; and
humbly interpose with the next succeeding Parliament, not only to pass a
farther Act of Confirmation of all such Sales and Dispositions of Lands, here
and in Scotland, but also of all the Distributions and Dispositions of Lands
and Houses in Ireland, to the Soldiery, Adventurers, or any other Persons,
made by or in pursuance of any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this
present Parliament, or any pretended Parliamentary Authority. And We entreat
You to send up an Officer, to give to the Lord General Monck an Account of Your
Acquiescence with Us herein. And if any disaffected persons shall hereby take
occasion to make disturbance of the Peace of the Commonwealth, either in favor
of Charles Stuart, or any other pretended Authority, we desire you to secure
them, till the pleasure of the Parliament or Council of State be known in that
behalf. You shall speedily receive Encouragement and Supplies of Moneys: and
indeed, it was not the least Motive to induce us to this way of Composure of
Affairs, That we might facilitate the raising of Moneys for the subsistence of
the Army and Navy; which would not otherwise have been done (if at all) but
with effusion of blood. We have nothing more at this time, but to assure you
that we shall ever remain,

Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers, Your very Affectionate Friends. GEORGE
MONCK. Cols
R. Knight John Clobery Tho. Read John Hubblethorne Leonard Litcot Tho. Sanders
William Air Rich. Moss William Farley Arthur Evelin John Streater.
John Butler. Quarter-Mr-Gen. Lieut. Cols.
Ethelhert Morgan James Mutlow James Emerson Joseph Witter Dennis Pepper.
Majs.
James Dennis Rich. Waggstaffe Tho. Johnson Fra. Nichols Jer. Smith Nath.
Barton Tho Higgs John Clark
Capts
W. Goodwin Hen. Ogle.


White Hall, Feb. 21. 1659.
LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1660.


