A SERMON Preached, at the Funeral of the Reverend and Learned MR. GEORG
RITSCHEL, Late Minister of Hexham in Northumberland:

By Mr. MAJOR ALGOOD, Rector of Symon-burn in the same County:

With an Elegy on his Death.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hall, Bookseller and Bookbinder on tyne Bridge
Newcastle upon Tyne, 1684.

Ecclesiastes 12: part of the 5 verse. Because man goes to his long home.
THe great matter necessary to be thought of in this life is, what shall become
of us after death, and whither we shall go when we go hence. For here we have
but a short time to stay, we are on our journey, and every moment brings us
nigher to the end thereof; but wherever we go to, after death, it is for ever
and ever. Solomon tells us in his distribution of time, that there is a season
to every purpose under heaven, and amongst the rest he reckons a time to be
borne, and a time to dye, but he tells us of no time to live, because our life
is uncertain, death follows in some soon after the birth, and their cradle
seems to stand on your graves, and those that live longest are but of few days
in respect of eternity. So that our life is to be reckoned rather a moment,
then time, and yet on this moment does depend our everlasting happiness in the
next life. This all is allowed us to make provision for our long home.

In the words we may consider.

1. The subject man.

2. His transitory estate and condition, expressed by way of travail, goes.

3. The end of his journey to his home.

4. The duration of that home, it is a long home.

To the first man. Man in general, that is every man, every woman, when our
glorious God had by his infinite wisdom made the world in a wonderful manner,
and furnished it with all variety and creatures for profit and pleasure; at
last after a most exquisite manner he consulted with himself for the shape of
Man, and finding no creature fit enough for a pattern, concluded with himself
to make mankind as a lively ressemblance (after some sort) of his own majesty,
that he might both in soul and body represent his creator. Adams soul did most
lively shadow out the divine essence, not only in the simplicity,
invisibleness, and immortality thereof, but also in that power which it enjoyed,
to know and to will.

1. For man's body it did likewise resemble God in several respects, but more
especially in that immortality, wherein it was at first created. The whole Man
then mixed of body and soul was in the creation in a glorious state of
immortality, bordering upon everlastingness, but it was not absolutely, but
conditionally. So it is true he had a power not to dye, if he had not sinned;
but there was a necessity he should dye when he had sinned, for so the
unalterable charge runs, Genesis 2:17.
in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye. Thus was the statute
enacted that all must dye, which is not to be repeated. It has bin put in
execution from the beginning of the world to this time, and so shall be to the
end of the world. We all come by the womb, and we must go by the grave; from
the arreast of death, there is no releasement, from its sentence, there is no
appeal. Balthazars embleame is now written upon every man's wall, thou art
weighed in the balance and art found wanting, and therefore thy life is divided,
and given to death. It is not the Majesty of a Prince, nor holiness of a
prophet, nor the gravity of a prelate that death respects. It is not strength
of body nor comeliness of person, not tender years, nor the wisdom of the aged,
not profound learning, nor an abiss of riches, can plead a privilege against
the grave. In other dangers there may be some way contrived by the will of man
to escape them, power, treasure, flight, counsel, and policy may serve the
turn; but there is no power in man to bannish death, no riches will buy it of,
nor can we fly from it, neither prevent it by counsel nor turn it back with
policy. The greatest and best of men, as well as the meanest and worst must
say with Job. Job. 17:14.
to corruption, thou art my Father: to the worm, thou art my Mother and my
Sister. Abel whose sacrifice was accepted, as well as Cain whose offerings were
rejected; Abraham the Father of the faithful, as well as the infidel Abimelech;
Jacob whom God loved, as well as Esau whom he hated, and David a man after
Gods own heart, as well as Saul from whom he took his holy Spirit, have bin all
alike subject to the empire of death, and to the decree of God so that then
death is the common road of all the world of Man in general without exception.

2. His transitory state and condition, goes.

We are here in this life performing a journey which we must one day finish.
One goes before, and another follows after; one body rotts in the grave, and
leaves room for another. Whether we go softly, or run swiftly, our time still
spends, and every moment brings us more forward toward our journeys end, and
nigher to our home, our bodies are but earthen cottagies, houses of dust, which
fall before we are aware; our life runs on apace, and death rides post after,
and often overtakes men, before ever they thought it was nigh them, and when
they least thought of 't.

Our life is like a candle in the body, in one the wind makes it sweale away,
in another it is blown out before it be half spent, and in other though it
burn out to the end, yett it continues not long, at last vanishes into smoke,
and exspires. Whether we sleep or wake, whether we stand, sit, or walk, still
the course of our life goes on, till it be finished; we never make a step
forward on the ground, but it is a slep nigher to death.

My days says Job. 7:6. are swifter then a weavers shuttle, and in the 9
chap. verse. 25.26. now my days are swifter then a post: they flee away, they
see no good; they are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hastes
to the prey. Where he reckons our life by days, and not by years, as if it
depended on moment, and not on time; but if on time it must be that which is
present, not that which is to come. But although in these places he allows men
days to live here, yett in another place as if he had bin so prodigal in his
account, he lakes up, and therefore he will have him to be a ereature but of
yesterday Job. 8.9. for we are but of yesterday, and know nothing; because our
days upon earth are a shadow. And in deed we may be very properly termed
creatures of yesterday, for a dying hour hastens on us so fast, that we
cannot, assure our selfs of the light of another day, and the time of our
journey end is so uncertain that we know not but this very evening, our life
may set with the sunn, nay shut up with the next moment.

The brevity of our life has bin noted by the most learned amongst the
heathens. The Egyptians compared it to an Inn, where a man lodges for a night,
and on the morning is gone; Aristotle to a certain beast which is never but
one day old, Sophocles to a shadow, and Homer to leaves which are blown away as
fast as they bud, and others to a dream which at our awakening is gone, so
transitory is the state of man he is still on his journey to death; he goes.

3. To his home. This world is like the wilderness to Israel, we must go
through it before we can come to the land of promise to the place of rest. We
must go through the red sea of temptations in this life, the Devil pharaoh
like following to destroy us, before we can come to our expected home.

This world is not our home but the way toward our home; it is but as our
inns, or lodgings, where we are not to stay any long time, but rest a night, or
so, take what is necessary for our repast, and refreshment, and then be going
on in our journey. We must leave the place to other comers. Our generation
passes and another comes. They that come hereafter shall tread upon our
graves as we do now upon the sepulchers of our fathers, they shall possess our
houses, goods, and lands, as we do theirs, who are gone before us.

Hence is it that the Apostle tells us Heb 13:14. for here we have no continuing
city, but we seek one to come. And he testifies of the Patriarch Abraham, that
he was no more but a sojourner in a strange land, he dwelt with Isaac, and Jacob
in tabernacles Hebr. 11:9. He built no houses, but such as are used in war;
such as are easily erected up, and soon taken down again. This he did, as also
your fathers generally of the first ages of the world, that they might testify
their religion, that they did not account this world as their home, but a place
from whence they must remove, they did not know how soon. Abram was in
expectation of going home. and therefore we are told ver. 10. he looked for a
city which had foundations, whose builder and maker is God, that is for heaven.

Besides the prophet David acknowledges, that he was no other then a travailer
in this life passing to another. Ps. 39:12. I am a stranger with thee, and a
sojourner as all my father were. Reason will in form us so much. For that is
not to be esteemed a man's home, where he came lately, and from whence he is
shortly to depart, but where he is to continue the most part of his life. Upon
this consideration St. Peter in his 1 Epist. 2. chap. ver. 11. becoms a
supplicant to Christians. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Prudent
travailers carry nothing with them which may be burdensome to them in their
journey, so this Apostle advises that we have a care, since we are as pilgrims
in this life, that we be not laden with sins, whose weight will hold us down,
and keep us from entering in at the strait gate.

4. The duration of our home, it is a long home.

We are here in this life but for a moment, it cannot properly be called time;
but wherever we go after death, it is for eternity. The longest day here has
its night, and the longest life ends in death; but the state in the next life
is unchangeable, without end. Whether we are to be placed amongst the sheep or
goats; whether we are to be crowned, or burned, it is for ever, the joy is an
everlasting joy, the punnishment, whether it be heaven or hell we go to it is
to be our long home.

The Ancients used to represent this by their hierogliphicks, of a round ring,
which has no end, of a Hydra's head which grows as fast as it is cut of, of
a running fountain which springs as quickly as it flows.

Arithmetic has her figures to cast up numbers, Astronomy its instruments to
take the height of the stars, mariners their plummets to sound the depth of
the sea, but no invention of man can fathom the depth, height, length and
breadth of eternity, which is boundless and unlimited.

It was the thoughts of this, which did so much amaze a serious man, that
sitting very melancholy, not speaking to any, nor reguarding those who spoke
to him, at last those words burst out, for ever, for ever, and for some time
spoke nothing else: he afterward told his friends about him, that it was this
for ever, which had wholly taken up his thoughts, and which he should never get
out of his mind.

And certainly when a man comes seriously to consider with himself that death
is an entrance to eterninity, opens a passage to a day that never shuts up, to
a continuation of time which has no end, and with all does ponder with
himself, that after a short and uncertain life here, he must lead an end less
life either with God, or the Devil, either in heaven or hell, either in
everlasting joys, or everlasting flames (I dare say for him) it is enough to
affright his soul, and to awaken his spirit from security as the mariners did
Jonah in the tempest 1 Jon. 1:6. what meanest thou oh sleeper, arise call upon
thy God, if so be, that God will think on us, that we perish not.

Consider then that man in general his state is transitory in this life, he is
a travailer on his journey homeward, his home is not in this world, when he
dies he goes home, and wherever he go to, it is a long home so reternitie.
Let us then use consideration.

Consideration is the key which opens the door to the closet of our hearts,
where all our books of account do lie. It is the very eye of our soul,
whereby she looks into her estate; let us now from what haith bin said make
a serious use often, and consider what a sad and dismal thing, it will be to
miscarrie for ever; what a wide door of mercy is offered to us in this moment
of our life, in this consists the opportunity to make our selfs happy for
ever or miserable without end. We are just now going on toward our home, it is
but one stroke of death, and we are gone in the twinkling of an eye, and God
knows whither, let us therefore be wise in this our day, before our dissolution
apeareth, that a speedy repentance may prevent our dwelling in darkness for
ever. God said of the church of Th^atira, I gave her time to repent of her
fornication, and she repented not, let not us give our good God occasion of
such a complaint against us. It is perniciously dangerous to put of our
consciences calling for repentance, and to say to them as Felix to S. Paul,
Act. 24. v. 25.
go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for
thee. All delay in this great concern is too hazardous, the present time is
still the fittest and only fit to Cast up the accounts of our souls.

In deed if we could arrest time, if we could strike of the nimble wheels of
its chariot, and could Joshuah like command the sun to stand still, and make
opportunity wait our leisure, then there were some thing of excuse for delay;
but since we can noe more command the future then we can call back the by past
time, it is but extreme madness to delay our hours. It is now in our power
under the influence of Gods grace, to prepare for death, to repent of our
sins, and make our peace with God before we go hence, and be no more seen;
but it is not in our power to live till to morrow, our days, may close up with
this day, our life set this very evening with the sunn, nay the next moment.
If we loose this opportunity which presents its self, it can never be
recovered, no not by most earnest wishes, nor fervent desire, nor a flood of
Tears. Remember the sad condition of profane Esau, for once despising the
blessing, he loosed it for ever, and found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears. To go on still in a sinful course of life,
with hopes that we may repent when we dye, is to venture all upon a very
uncertain after game, and just as if a mariner should be content to have his
ship cast away, upon bare hope, that he may escape on a planck, and get safe
to shore. How fondly do such dispose of that time which is not in their power,
but in Gods hand, whilst they vainly let go that which God has given them.

The stork, the brane, the swallow know their seasons, they know their
appointed time, and how much more should man a creature whom God has endowed
with reason, especially since it is so very uncertain how long we shall enjoy
this opportunity.

All creatures under the sunn do naturally intend their own preservation, and
desire that happiness which is agreeable to their nature, and shall man their
Lord be impiously careless of his eternal, and everlasting welfare? Death
stands ready to snatch us away, conscience persuades, Hell threatens, and
heaven invites to prepare, to lay up a good foundation for the next life, for a
long and happy home. Let us not then be secure, but set to work, whilst it is
called to day; for as the wise preacher Eccl. 9:10.
tells us, there is no work nor device nor knowledge in the grave, whither thou
go. What a sad and fatal thing is it for men to run head long to their long
home, like the rich glutton in the ghosple, who never was sensible of his
estate till he was in torment; he then found to his sorrow that out of the pit
there is no redemption.

He leads a life suetable to his Christian profession, who daily is in
expectation to leave it. The best guide of our life here is the often
consideration of our death, and what shall become of us when we go hence.

We need not wonder to see men so very industriously careful to avoid death,
it is naturally terrible; but this is it which all good men and even Angels may
admire at, to see Christians so generally careless, to lay up a good foundation
for a future life. For there is nothing certainly which makes death so terrible,
as the estate which follows after: if our long home be in heaven death is a
joyful birth day, and the day of it better then the day of our first birth; but
if it be in the Devils mansions, it is but the beginnig of endless misery.

Let us therefore be persuaded to make use of our time, and learn in this our
day the things which belong to our peace, before they be hid from our eyes,
before our feet be manacled in the dust, and our arms rott of from our
shoulders in the grave. Do that before death, which may do you good when you
are dead, but can never be done after. Live the life of the righteous, and dye
the death of the righteous, dye the death of the righteous, and live for ever
in a long and happy manner.

That I may press this further, behold there is before your eyes a spectacle of
mortality, the body of our deceased Brother, which we are met together to
bring to its own house as the prophet Esaias Esa. 14:18.
calls the grave, to lay it up in the dust, after all its great labor, long
journeys, and tedious travail on earth, his soul being gone before to take
possession of its long and happy home. I must therefore now leave the other, and
apply my self to this text. To say nothing were to be injurious to his worth,
and to hide those virtues which shined bright in him, and may serve for our
imitation. Whatever the envious may say, or think, it is no fault to commend
them at their death, who have bin commendable in their life. It was the ancient
custom of the church to celebrate the memory of holy men, that thereby others
might be moved to follow their examples.

As for his extraction I must be silent in it, he being a Bohemian borne, and
that particular unknown to us; yett (let me say) a man of mean observation by
his deportment might guess, it was of more than an ordinary rank; I shall
therefore only speak my knowledge of him, having had an intimacie with him for
a bove twenty years together.

As for his moral honesty it was very exemplar: I appeal to you all here
present, whether he has not left a good report behind him, and a good name,
which is better then precious ointment, not one of this parish, or elsewhere can
(I am confident) complain of any unjust dealing by him, nor can the poor this
day send cursses to his grave. I may justly in his behalf take up Samuels *
challenge whose ox has he taken? whose ass? or whom has he defrauded? whom has
he oppressed? or of whose hand has he received any bribe to blind his eyes
therewith, and I promise to restore it. So critical was he even to the minute
parts of honesty, that if thorough inadvertency he had done any thing, which
did but look like unjustness, though no person was prejudiced by the same, it
was an affliction to his mind. And as he did practice honesty himself, as if he
had known nothing else, so did he always love honest men, and set a just
value on such; but when he found any man to be otherwise, how would he condole
his condition; and heartily sigh for him, his look at the same time speaking
the thoughts of his heart, how sorry he was that any man should be a knave, how
seriously would he endeavoure to reclaim such?

In his conversation and friendship he was a Nathaniel one in whom there was no
guile, cordial and faithful without baseness and low dissimulation, and loved a
true friend as himself.

As for his learning it would require a more able encomist then my self, but,
in magnis voluisse sat est. His memory was great, his judgment greater, and
his pains in study all most infinite; so that I may truly say of him, had he
but had encouragement, conveniently and opportunities answerable to his great
parts, he might have bin a great light to this northern corner of the land,
made himself the envy of this age, and a shadow to obscure learned men about
him. Had he not bin more then ordinarily learned, when he came a young man into
England, the famous universitie of Oxford renowned thoroughout the civilized
part of the whole world had not taken so much notice of him, nor had some
learned men there (contracting an intimacy with him at his first comeing to
that place) continued a correspondencie with him, till a little before his
death. From Oxford he came to the deservedly renowned, and ancient corporation
of Newcastle upon Tine, where he was master of the free School for several
years, and how he behaved himself in that station, I appeal to those that
knew him there. Being wearied out with that toilsome employment, he removed to
this town of Hexam, famous in the time of the saxons, and yett in history, for
that it was then a Bishops seat and enjoyed ten Bishops successively, John of
Beverly, who as some historians note was the first master of Arts of the
Universitie of Oxford, being placed as the second Bishops here; now made famous
again by enjoying the Learned Ritschell as its vicar for above twenty years
together. He is now dead, yett he lives amongst learned societies, and will I
doubt not) to many generations in his imetaphysicks, prized so highly abroad
that Germany but of late desired the reprinting of them and they were so with
some addition. By his other books, concerning the rites and ceremonies of the
church of England published immediately after his majesty's happy return, he
showed what stamp he was of, that he was an enemy to all innovation in the
church. This seasonable defense of the church of England was very pleasing to
that famous (...) of the same Dr. John Cosins late Bishop of Durham, especially
being performed by a forreigner born, and he did ever after him a venerable
respect.

I hope for what I wish that God will stir up some of the reverend fathers of
this church to cast a favorable eye upon his two hopeful sons both educated in
Oxford, and reward them for the fathers pains.

But that which did crown all his other excellencies was his piety which was
singular. In his family he was a Joshuah, he and his house serveing the Lord
daily; what he was in the church. I need not inform you but call your
conscienses to wittness, hopeing that you will nevers forgett those good
instructions he sowed amongst you so plentifully.

I may as well as any give this testimony of him, he had not much of the form
nor outside of religion, but was very careful for the power thereof, and the
essential parts which might make him truly be rather then seem religious Such
was this wise, this worthy, this learned, and religious gentleman, who on
weddens day sevennight was sodainlye struck with a fatal palsy, which brought
him in a weeks time to the end of his journey, that he might go home and rest
from his labors. By what means I know not but it seems some way God did
conveigh it to his spirit, that his dissolution drew nigh, before ever death
made any show by any natural signification Whether he did it designedly or not
is more, then I can say, but I find that the last sermon he preached might very
well have passed for his own funeral sermon taking in a prophetic way for his
text 2 Timothy 1:12. For the which cause I also suffer these things; nevertheless
I am not asshamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that 'h
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him unto that day, nor was
this only his last text, but these words the very last that he spoke I know
whom I have believed etc. commending his soul now to God to whom he had before
committed it, and resting on Christ with a firm certaintye of salvation. Thus
did he shutt up his days, as he lived, so he dyed piously and religiously; and
this may be some ease to his sorrowful relations, some guide to our life and
death.

He is gone before we are following after God of his infinite mercy enable us
to travail thorough a life of cares, and misery, so that at last we may come
to a long, and ever happy home. To which God etc.

FINIS.
An Elegy upon the Worthy and Reverend Mr. Georg Ritschel. etc.
Vivitur ingenio.
LEt no fond tears bedew thy hearse
Bid the favorite Muse rejoice
And with triumphant verse
The music imitate of thy exalted voice
Bid her do something to comply
With the empyrean poetry.
2.
From noisy mirth tumultuous pleasures free
Let her ascend like thee
Above the bounds of this tempestuous air
Above the storms of grief, or clouds of care
There in smooth thoughts, and notions best refined
Enjoy the serene (...) of the mind.
3.
Alas our ^^llow wings in vain
Attempt that airy leight
And tired with too sublime a flight.
To their connatural earth return again
Thy mind was all of purest flame
And well could bear that place from whence it came
Thy strong devotion and thy lofty wit
This did to heaven-assend, that brought heaven down to it
4.
Tell how thy spacious soul could fathom all
Which we august and sacred call
And all the joy contain which from them spirings
And yet desend so low
As after this to know
The least affections of the meanest things.
5.
Evanid matter could not escape thy eye
Though in a thoms and shapes conceiled it lie
Prote^s of nature to thy sharper sight
Chaos it self was light
To the its in most secrets it betrayed
And showed a midst the gloomy shade
The imperfect Embryo of the world unmade.
6.
Thou sowest that hidden chain
With which we strive in vain
And in the midst of seeming liberty
When most we boast of being free
No more then prisoners at large remain
Thou know the laws of nature and of fate
Nay what is more of fancy too
And kept within thy view
What ever God or poets did create.
7.
Enjoy thy fruitful contemplations now
For they the same continue still
And thy enlarged understanding fill
Nor one poor grain for humane frailty allow
8.
Enjoy thy fate and if our low affairs
Can touch thee not disturb thy breast
Nor interrupt thy eternal rest
Look upon us whom empty cares
And frivolous doubts unquiet keep
Nor yield to better thought, or thoughtlesse sleep
So may our suns slide softly as thine away
And our (...) dies let in an everlasting day.
I. H.


