False Prophets and false Teachers described. 1652.
ALL the holy men of God they spoke forth freely, and when any spoke for Hire,
it was a filthy and a horrible thing, and the Lord did abhor it, and sent
forth his true Prophets to cry out against them. Isaiah 55.1, 2, 3. Isaiah
spoke freely, and he was sent to cry out against them that did not speak forth
freely without Hire, Isa. 56.10, 11, 12. His watchmen (says he) are blind and
cannot see, they are dumb dogs, yea greedy dogs that can never have enough,
every one looks for his gain from his quarter: They did so then, and do they
not so now? every one looks for his gain from his Quarter where he is, and for
great Means, (those that have eyes to see, may see) and the Lord abhorrs it.
Jeremiah he spoke freely, and was sent to cry out against them that did it for
Hire, Jerem 5. A horrible and a filthy thing is committed in the Land, the
Prophets prophecy false things, and the Priests bear rule by their Means, and
the people love to have it so. It was so then, but is it not so now? do not the
Priests bear rule by their Means over you, and do not you love to have it so? O
foolish people, that have eyes to see and cannot see, ears to hear and cannot
hear, hearts and cannot understand; but what will you do in the end, says the
Lord? All people see if you hold not up this filthy thing which God sent his
true Prophets to cry against. Ezechiel he spoke freely, and spoke against them
that spoke for the Fleece; see Chap. 34. see if your Shepherds do not teach for
the Fleece? But (says the Lord) I will take them out of their hands, they
shall no more be meat for them, neither shall they feed themselves any more of
the Flock, but (says the Lord) I will take them out of their Hands, and I will
feed them my self, and be their Teachers. Now the Lord is coming to teach all
his freely, and there is no Teacher like him, and they that are taught of the
Lord deny all teaching without; if you would be taught of the Lord, cease from
your Hirelings. Micah spoke freely, and was sent to cry against them that did
not; Chapter 3. says he, The Prophets divine for money, and the Priests preach
for Hire, and they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us?
They did so then, and do they not so now? But (says the Lord) they ran but I
did not send them, therefore they shall not profit this people at all. See
Jeremiah 23. the Lord will not have his gifts to be bought and sold; they are
worse then Simon Magus, for he would have bought the Spirit, but these Buy and
Sell the Letter for carnal ends, and acts (as in Stage Plays) for money; but
the Lord abhorrs it, therefore hold it not up. Hosea 6.9. he spoke freely, and
spoke against them then, and said, As a troop of Robbers wait for a man, so the
company of Priests they murder in the way by consent. Micah says in the 3.
Chapter, Put into their mouths and they cry peace, peace; but if you put not
into their mouths, they prepare war against you. Try your Priests, and let
the Scriptures be sulfilled, see if they will not go to Law with you? and if
they do, you shall see that they were never taught of Christ; for (he says)
if any man sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak
also, Now if they were sent of Christ, they would abide in his Doctrine, for he
that abides not in the doctrine of Christ, is a Devid, Matthew. 5.40. and Christ
when he sent forth his, he bad them take neither Bagg nor Scrip, but (says he)
freely ye have received, freely give; and if they were taught of him, they
would obey him and keep his sayings: but those that buy their Wares, they must
either set them forth at a greater rate, or else lose by them, and then they
would lose their Masterie which they have got by their Learning, and their
M^a^s. All the Teachers of the world they are Masters by their Learning and
their Benefits; those that were taught of Jesus Christ, they were not so; see
Mat. 23. but he taught them to deny it, and they abode in his Doctrine. You do
not read in all the Holy Scriptures, that any of the Holy men of God were
Cambridge or Oxford Scholars, or Universitie men, or called Masters; but (on
the contrary) they were plain men, and labored with their hands, and taught
freely, as they had received it freely from the Lord,: read the Scriptures, and
you may see what sort of men they were which taught the People; Abe^ he was a
Shepherd, Genesis 4.2. Jacob a Keeper of Sheep, Genesis 30.31. Moses a Shepherd,
Exodus 3.1. Elisha a Ploughman, 1 King. 19.19, 20. Amos a Herds-man, Amos 7.4.
Paul a Tentmaker, Acts 18.3. Simon and Andrew were Fishermen, Mark 1.16.
Matthew was taken from the receipt of Custom, Mark 2.14. they were not wise
and learned men, as the Scribes and Pharisees were, which Christ cried woe
against; (says he) Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, ye bind
heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them upon the poor, and your
selves will not touch them with one of your fingers. You may say, the Scribes
and Pharisees did so, who were the enemies of Jesus Christ; but do not the
Priests so now? is not the poor burdened by them, and oppressed by them, and
they are Rulers and Lords over them? Do they not sit in the same Seats that the
Scribes and Pharisees had? they had the chiefest places in Assemblies, have not
your Priests so now? they had the uppermost rooms at Feasts, have not your
Priests so now? they went in long Robes, do not your Priests so? they were
called of men Masters, are not your Priests so now, do not they hold the same
things that they did, and yet say they are sent of Christ? they are worse then
the Scribes and Pharisees, for they sat in Moses Seat, pretending to do
justice, but did not: for Moses was a just and faithful servant, set over the
people, a man fearing God, and hating covetousness; but they were covetous and
laid heavy burdens upon the people, and were Masters whereas Moses was but a
servant. And Jesus Christ himself said, VVo unto you Scribes and Pharisees, and
Hypocrites. They knew much, and said fair, but they did not act accordingly;
their words and works were not one, therefore it was Hypocrisy; and it is the
same now that it was then, with those that say one thing and do another: it is
not the hearers but the doers that shall be justified. Now Christ is come to
set free from these heavy burdens, and to ease the people of them; his
Ministry is free and not burdensome; those that are sent of him, are to be as
be was; but the Priests that profess to be sent of him are not so, they are
got into a Seat above the Scribes and Pharisees; they sit but in Moses Seat,
pretending to do justice, but they did not as they said; so the professed
Ministers are got up in the Seat of Christ, to take off oppression, but they
are Oppressors; for the Ministry of Christ is to feed the hungry, and to
cloth the naked, and let the oppressed go free, and to throw down those
abominations which the Lord has sent his true Prophets to cry out against, as
Pride and covetousness, and drunkenness, and lying, and swearing, and
oppression; but it is held up and contended for by them; for they are the Kings
of Pride in Towns where they are, and their Wives go in their Hoods, Vails, and
Rings, which are odious to the Lord, and poor people are burdened by them;
instead of setting free they keep in bondage. Where is the hungry fed by them?
Where is the naked clothed? Where is the oppressed set free? Christ says unto
his, Be not ye called Masters, but they do not obey him, that professes to be
sent of him; and Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Jesus
Christ said there should come salse Prophets in Sheeps clothing, but (says
he) inwardly they are ravening Wolves; making fair shows, and professing God
and Christ in words, but in w^rks deny him; having fine words, fair pretenses,
green and flourishing in profession, high in Notion, having a form of
godliness in words, but deny it in life and conversation; inwardly ^^ey are
r^vening Wolves, full of wrath, anger, and envy, and maliciousness, pride and
covetousness; but (says Jesus Christ) By their fruits ye shall know them: for
every Tree is known by its fruits: and (says he) They will say and do not. See
what Paul speaks in 2 Timoth. 3. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.5, 6. he seeing false
Teachers going forth, gave a description how they might be known; Of this sort
are they (says he) proud, covetous, self-lovers, boasters, heady, high-minded,
railers, false-accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those which are
good, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof; from such turn away. First look at the Trees,
and then at the fruits, and see if this sort of men be not such now, and have
been so a long time; but the Lord is risen in the hearts of the people, and
has opened their eyes that were blind, and causes them to see clearly, and
bids them let their light shine forth to others that sit in darkness. But he
is coming to take away the Vail that is spread over all Nations, and then
shall they see clearly; but those that have eyes may see, that this sort of men
preach now, and that for Hire, which is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ. Do
not proud men preach? Do not covetous men preach? Do not self-lovers preach? Do
not heady high-minded men preach? Do not railing men Preach? Do not
false-accusing men Preach? Do not men that are despisers of those that are good
Preach? Do not men that live in pleasures Preach? and all those sorts of men
Preach, and Hirelings too, oppressing and burthening the Creation? Those that
have eyes may plainly see, that these were never sent of God; the Ministers of
Christ were what they spoke, they walked answerable to their Ministry, that it
might not be blamed; and that the Ministry of Christ might not be burdensome,
they walked as Examples to others. Can a proud man lead off from pride? he may
speak against it, but if he speak against it and live in it, he is an
Hypocrite. Can a covetous man lead off from covetousness, or can a drunken man
lead off from Drunkenness? or can a malicious man lead off from
maliciousness? Can an Oppressor lead off from oppression? Can a man that
follows pleasures lead off from pleasures and wantonness? or a man that
follows the ways of unrighteousness, can he lead off from them, he may speak
against them, but if he speak against them, and live in them, or any of them,
he is an Hypocrite, and one that Jesus Christ's speaks of, that says and does
not, and so is an evil example, a pattern to follow the ways of ungodliness.
The Ministers of Jesus Christ were examples for others to walk by, see Titus 1.
They were blameless as they Stewards, of God, not self-willed, not soon angry,
not given to wine; no strikers, not given to fifthy lucre: where is your
example among all your professed Ministers? they were lovers of hospitality,
they were lovers of good men, they were holy, they were just, they were
temp^rate: where is your example? they were what they spoke. Paul labored
night and day that he might not make the Gospel of Christ burdensome, but (on
the contrary) that he might be an example to them that followed him: where is
your example? See what Paul says to the Thessalonians, says he in 2 Thessalonians.
3.7, 8. he was an example, and not he, but the rest also, and the people were
taught by their godly conversation to walk accordingly; for (says he) your
selves know ye ought to follow us, for we behaved not our selves disorderly
among you, neither did we eat any man's bread for naught, but wrought with
labor and travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any, but
to make our selves examples unto them that follow us: where is your example?
see 1 These. 2.5. for (says he) we use not flattering words, as ye know (he
called them to witness it) neither a cloak of covetousness, God is witness:
they were so free from covetousness, that they called God to witness it, who
searches the Hearts: Nor of men sought they glory, neither of them, the
Thessalonians, nor of others, when they might have been burdensome; but were
willing not only to impart the Gospel of Christ unto them, but their own
souls also, they were so dear unto them: Verse 9. The love of God is so where
it is made manifest in realitie. They labored night and day, because they
would not be chargeable to any of them, and preached the Gospel freely, as
they had received it from the Lord, Ye are witnesses, and God also (say they)
how holily, and justly, and unblamedly we behaved our selves among you. Where
is your example, for freeness, for holiness, for blamelesnesse? and they both
exhorted and comforted them, as a Father his Children. The Ministers of Christ
did so; but the Ministers of the world they are without among the false
Prophets, all Preaching for Hire, and making the Gospel of Christ burdensome,
which is contrary to Jesus Christ. He that says he is in Christ, ought to walk
as he walked; did ever he Preach for Money, or did he give forth command for
his to take Hire? how dare any of you Hirelings say you are sent of Christ? did
he say one thing and do another? was he not what he spoke in all things? were
not his Ministers examples for others to walk by, and exhorted others to mind
their conversation: says Paul, Be ye followers of ^e as dear Children, even as
I am a followor of Christ; and Christ says, Learn of me for I am meek and
lowly in heart. Now those that were his true Ministers they followed his
example, and they exhorted others to follow them; and he that is taught of
Christ now, abides in his Doctrine, but he that abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ, is a Devil; and he that says he is in Christ, ought to walk as he
walked, in all holy conversation. Then you that p^ofesse your selves to be his
Ministers, and to be sent forth from him, where did you receive a Commission of
him to be taskmast^rs? or to take Hire, or to be proud, or covetous, or to live
in p^easures, or to live in Hypocrisy, to say that you are not. They ^^t were
sent forth by him, were sent freely, and to undo the heavy bu^dens, and to be
examples for others to walk by. Where did you receive your Masterie? Christ
says, Let him that is greatest among yo^ be your servant, and Christ is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Where did Christ make use of outward
means to back him? but he denied it, and was persecuted by it? Where did he
envy, and have, and oppress any? Walk according to him if you be sent of h^^,
and do not persecute, and hate, and envy, and go to Law, for neither he nor
his did; and if you be sent of him, make proof of your Ministry, as they did
that he sent forth, and cause not the Gospel of Christ to be burdensome and
blamed by you. The true Ministers gave no occasion of offense in any thing,
that their Ministry should not be blamed, see 2 Cor. 6. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9.10. But in all things approved themselves as the Ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
prisons, in tumults, in labors, by watchings, by fastings, by purity, by
knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by the Holy G^ost, by love
unfeigned, by the Word of truth, by the Power of God, by the armor of
righteousness, on the left hand and on the right, by honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report, as deceivers, and yet true, as unknown, and yet
well known, as dying and behold we live, as chastened and not killed, as
sorrowful yet always rejoicing, as poor and yet making many rich, as having
nothing and yet possessing all things. See where such examples as these are to
be found now amongst your professed Ministry? His Ministers were persecuted
of the world, because they were to declare against the vanity of the world:
but the Ministers that the world sets up, live in the vanity of the world, and
are persecutors, vain, light and profane in their lives and conversations, and
so are patterns of ungodliness, walking on in Hypocrisy, and persecuting the
Saints of the most h^gh God, whom the Lord has redeemed from the vain
conversat^on of the world: His Ministers were never persecutors. VVo to he
Idol-Shepheards, woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Can, and have
runn greed^^ after the error of Balaam, for reward, (...) perished in the
gain^^ing; and so shall them, except they rep^^t.

Thomas Aldam Elisabeth Hooton William Pears Benjamin Nichalson Jane Holmes and
Mary Fisher.

Prisoners of the Lord at York Castle. 1652.
FINIS.

