Alidor and Calista. Being an excellent New Song, much in Request at Court, To
an Excellent New Playhouse Tune.
^SInce first my heart did feel the smart, of fair Calista's charming Tongue;
No ^joys it could to it impart, my flaming passion was so strong: But still my
grief, beg- ^ging relief, which moved her pity not in vain; For never was
known, by anyone, so ^charming and so sweet a Swain.

II.
Her fancy found some Charms abound,
in Alidor, which she often said;
Which often did his senses drowned,
but ah! they were too soon betrayed:
For as her passion still did move,
and urge her fancy to comply,
The Fates which often crosses Love,
divided my poor Swain and I.
III.
She still in brief, declared her grief,
but never durst with her love comply,
Which forced her tears to beg relief,
from Loves incessant Cruelty:
Yet with that Art, her yielding heart,
dessembled what her eyes discry'd,
And rather choose to Embrace the Dart,
then e're be any others Bride.
IV.
But ah! what comfort can this give
to my poor heart that is rent in twain,
Nay, it were better dye then live,
then live to see my self in pain:
Although she says she loves so strong,
that none can with her parallel,
Yet why should I my self thus wrong,
when I may in Embraces dwell?
V.
But hold, I think it were unjust,
to use such Acts of Tyranny,
I Will rather be confined to Dust,
than break my Faith and Constancy:
Never shall Calista have to say,
Alidor e're shall prove unkind,
I Will be a Martyr every day,
sooner then ever change my mind.
VI.
My pains are sore, and now therefore,
my love once more shall be revealed,
To she whose Beauty I adore,
who knows at length my love may yield:
It did appear his love did hear
those words which he in sorrows said,
Then willingly she did comply,
for Cupid now her heart betrayed.
VII.
Love here is my hand at thy command,
Calista I thy love will be,
Now let us not disputing stand.
I will forsake the world for thee:
They both unite in true delight,
and love in every vein does flow,
She felt the smart of Cupids Dart,
at length whether she would or no.
Printed for J. Deacan, at the sign of the Angel in Guiltspur-street: 1684.


