THE PARADISE OF THE SOUL: OR, A Little TREATISE OF VIRTUES.

Made by Albert the Great, Bishop of Ratisbon, who died in the Year 1280.

Translated out of Latin into English,

By N. N.

Printed for William Brooks, 1682.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Christian Reader.
TO excite thee to a perusal of this Incomparable Treatise of Albertus Magnus,
concerning the Nature of true Christian Virtues, I shall only say of it, it is
the Work of a Great Scholar, and a Great Saint; and although Small in Bulk, yet
extremely Big in its Intrinsic Worth and Value; in a word, it is its own best
Encomium, and needs not the Translator's Recommendation. The Scope and End of
the Author is declared in his Preface; and how solidly and proficuously, what
is designed is by Him performed, each Chapter is a speaking Demonstration; Read
then understandingly, meditate frequently, practice sedulously, and, allured
with the all-ravishing beauty of true Virtues, remember seriously, that since
it is impossible to be eternally happy without Them, (though not rigorously
requisite in that Heroic degree as here deciphered) it ought to be thy Grand
Concern to petition for them daily at the Throne of Grace, that thou may not
be deluded, as, alas! infinite inconsiderate Christians are, with false
Shadows, but really by Grace, be possessed of all those True Virtues, so fully,
and with such Masterly strokes, though in plain and humble Language described in
this Tract.

Farewell.
AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
OF the Love of God and our Neighbor. Chap. 1. p. 5. Of Humility. chapter 2. p.
14. Of Obedience. chapter 3. p. 19. Of Patience. chapter 4. p. 28. Of Poverty. chapter 5.
p. 34. Of Chastity. chapter 6. p. 39. Of Abstinence. chapter 7. p. 46. Of Prudence. chapter
8. p. 53. Of Fortitude. chapter 9. p. 59. Of Justice. chapter 10. p. 63. Of Temperance.
chapter 11. p. 68. Of Compassion. chapter 12. p. 74. Of Peace. chapter 13. p. 79. Of Mercy.
chapter 14. p. 84. Of Concord. chapter 15. p. 90. Of Constancy. chapter 16. p. 95. Of
Liberality. chapter 17. p. 100. Of Truth. chapter 18. p. 105. Of Meekness. chapter 19. p.
109. Of Faith. chapter 20. p. 112. Of Hope. chapter 21. p. 117. Of Fear. chapter 22. p.
122. Of Joy. chapter 23. p. 128. Of Sadness. chapter 24. p. 134. Of Gratitude. chapter 25.
p. 139. Of Zeal of Souls. chapter 26. p. 144. Of Liberty. chapter 27. p. 150. Of
Religion. chapter 28. p. 155. Of Maturity. chapter 29. p. 162. Of Simplicity. chapter 30.
p. 166. Of Silence. chapter 31. p. 171. Of Solitude. chapter 32. p. 177. Of
Contemplation. chapter 33. p. 182. Of Discretion. chapter 34. p. 192. Of
Congratulation. chapter 35. p. 199. Of Confidence. chapter 36. p.. 203. Of Contempt of
the World. chapter 37. p. 212. Of Mortification. chapter 38. p. 217. Of Contrition. chapter
39. p. 221. Of Confession. chapter 40. p. 227. Of Penance. chapter 41. p. 232. Of
Perseverance. chapter 42. p. 236. The Epilogue, containing the Confession of
Albert. p. 239.
THE PARADISE OF THE SOUL.
THE PROLOGVE.
THERE are certain Vices which frequently assume the semblance of Virtues, to
the end that they may be believed to be Virtues, when indeed they are Vices. So
Severity is reputed Justice: Soureness of mind is called Maturity: A jocular
Talkativeness passes for Affability: Dissoluteness is deemed Spiritual
cheerfulness of Heart: Slothfulness, or inordinate Sadness, is judged to be a
Moral Gravity: A torpid Tepidity is thought to be Discretion: Superfluous
Adorning goes for Neatness and Cleanliness: Excess in Diet and Retinue is
called Gentility: Prodigality is styled Liberality: Covetousness is Providence:
Obstinacy in Opinion is Constancy: Craftiness is Prudence: Hypocrisy is
Sanctity: a negligent unconcernedness is Meekness: The Curious man is reputed
circumspect: The Vainglorious, Noble-spirited: Presumption is called Hope:
Carnal Love is judged Charity: a malapert Accuser or Corrector, is said to be a
Zealot of Justice: the Dissembler is called Patient: the pusillanimous to
correct, is benign, meek, or peaceable: able: and so of the rest. But as
nothing of Value can be bought with false moneys, so neither is the Kingdom of
Heaven to be had for false Virtues.

There are also certain Natural Virtues, which Men have by Nature: as a Natural
Humility, Benignity, Modesty, Bounty, Mercy, Patience. But these also and such
like, do not deserve an Eternal Reward, or the Kingdom of God, but only such
Virtues as are free Gifts or Graces.

For there are certain gratuit Virtues, which Fools judge to be Vices. So
Justice is judged to be Severity: Maturity, amongst them, is reputed Soureness
of Disposition: Providence is called Covetousness: Constancy is called
Obstinacy: and so of all the rest abovementioned. In like manner, that which is
done out of Humility, is said to be done out of Vainglory: What is done out of
Sanctity, is said to be done out of Hypocrisy and Vanity: What is done out of
a Zeal of Justice, is said to be done out of a desire of Revenge: What is done
out of Charity, they say is done out of Malice and Hatred: What is done out of
Spiritual Love, they say is done out of Carnal Love: What is done with a pure
Intention, they say is done for Temporal Ends: and so of other Virtues.

Seeing then it is hard to discern betwixt Vice and Virtue; and seeing there
are certain degrees in all Virtues, which are first infused into the Soul by
the mere Bounty of God; and being infused, are more deeply radicated and
increased, and in time perfected; we shall nicely and thoroughly examine, which
are the true and perfect Virtues of the Soul, by which alone we are made
acceptable unto God. And we shall first speak of Love or Charity, which is the
Mother and Ornament of all Virtues.

CHAP. I. Of True Love of God, and our Neighbor.
OUR Love of God is true and perfect, when the Soul with all its Forces,
fervorously poures it self out upon God, seeking in him no Advantage, Temporal
or Eternal; but is affected toward him only for his innate Goodness, Sanctity,
Perfection and Beatitude; For the delicate Soul, does, as it were, abhor to
love God by way of Profit or Reward. Even as God with all his Force poures out
himself upon the Soul of man, never expecting any Profit from it, but desiring
to communicate to it his own natural Beatitude: But if I love God because he is
good to me, and upon this account especially, that he may communicate his
Happiness to me, I am convinced to have a Natural and an imperfect Love.

The inductive or motive to true Love is, a true acknowledgment of God to be
what he is; for in him is the matter of all Love: to wit, Excellency, Sanctity,
Power, Wisdom, Bounty, Beauty, Providence, etc. Moreover, Gods eternal,
immense, uninterrupted, and most faithful Love to us, is inductive of true
Charity.

Our Lord, in St. John, chapter 14 gives us an Argument or sign of true Charity,
saying, He who has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is who loves me.
Which St. Augustine testifies, saying, So much we love God, as we observe his
Precepts. The same is to be understood of voluntary Vows, which have an equal
Obligation with Precepts. St. Gregory also bears witness to our Lord, Return,
says he, my dear Brethren, inwardly to your selves: Ask your selves, if indeed
you love God. Yet let no body believe himself, whatsoever his mind shall answer
him, without the attestation of his Works. Let the Tongue, Mind, and Life be
asked concerning the Love of your Creator. The Love of God is never idle. For
if it be, it works great things: but if it refuse to work, it is not Love. But
this Execution of Works, and Observation of God's Commandments, must be
purified by the Intention, and must be done neither for fear of Punishment, nor
for love of Reward; as St. Augustine testifies. He loves God, not who therefore
keeps the Commandments, because he is compelled thereunto, either by the
greatness of Punishment, or by the greedy desire of Reward; but because that
which is commanded is honest, and the very best.

There are also two other signs of a sincere Love to God; to wit, when a man
congratulates with God in all things which please him, by whomsoever, at
whatsoever time, and in whatsoever place they are done. For a natural Love
deserves no praise from God, because it always reflects it self upon it self,
and seeks its own commodity: but the gratuitous, or free Love, only is
praiseworthy, which always is carried out of it self into another. A second
sign is, when a man condoles with God in all things which displease him, by
whomsoever, at whatsoever time, and in whatsoever place they are done.

Of true Love of our Neighbor.
True Love to ones Neighbor, is to love ones Neighbor as himself, Friend and
Enemy, as St. Augustine says. To love ones Neighbor as himself, is to love him
in God, to God, and for God. Thus every one ought to love his Neighbor as
himself: As he desires all good to himself and flies all Evil, so let him do to
his Neighbor. Or thus, As every one loves his own proper Good, in Body and
Soul, in Goods, and good Name; and as every one in these four, flies, and hates
his own proper Evil and Damage; so every one ought in these to love all the
good, and hate all the damage both of Friend and Enemy. Though no body is
bound by way of Precept to be moved so much, or so ardently, to his Neighbor
as to himself.

True Charity cannot be known by our Love of our Friends; For even the
Publicans love those who love them, Matt. 5. But true Charity is understood by
our love of our Enemies. To love him that loves us, is but Nature; but to love
one who does not love us, is the work of Grace. But true Charity to our
Neighbor is yet more excellently understood in the Gloss upon St. Matthew,
which says, To love one that loves us is Nature, but by Favors and Courtesies
to draw one to love, who loves us not, is Perfection. And although no body be
bound by Precept to love so much and so fervently his Enemy as his Friend; yet
happy were he, and highly Perfect, who could love as much, yea more, and do
works of Charity for his Enemy as for his Friend; for him that corrects and
reproves him, as for him that flatters him; for him that dispraises him, as for
him that praises him; because, as St. Chrysostom says, Nothing makes us so like
unto God, as to be courteous to those who malign and hurt us. And it is
certain, we might get greater Grace out of Persecution than out of Favor, if
we knew how to use it aright; as the Enemies of the Martyrs profited them more
to Eternal Glory than did their Friends.

Nature ought to move us to the love of our Neighbor, because every living
Creature loves his like: and so should every man his Neighbor, Eccles. 13.19.
And because the Image of God is in him, and it is commanded us so to do in the
Holy Scripture.

The signs of true Charity to our Neighbor, are, Truly to condole, as well
with Enemies as with Friends, in all their Adversities: Truly, and from the
heart to rejoice with them in every thing that happens prosperous unto them.

The signs of true Hatred to our Neighbor are, when we think of him with
Regret, when we see him with sadness of heart, when we speak with him, or of
him, or hear others speak of him with bitterness of mind; when we hinder, as
much as we can, all his Good, and that which is profitable unto him; when we
diminish and pervert the good which is in him. Our Lord Jesus did not so to his
Traitor Judas, who, in the very time of his Treason, fed him with his own Body
and Blood, together with his other beloved Apostles: and in the very place
where he betrayed him, refusing not to be kissed by him, most courteously
saluted him; grieving more for his Evil, than for his own incommodity, as says
St. Hierom. But it is wonderful that any one can flatter himself as if he loved
his Brother, when he has these signs of Hatred in his Heart. But to many it
seems sufficient, if they wish Eternal Happiness to their Neighbors, which
they can neither give them, nor take away from them, and which they ought to
wish even to Jews and Pagans. Nor will they remember, that seeing our Lord has
laid down his Life for his Enemies, we are obliged also, not only to love our
Christian Brethren, but also to part with our Goods and Lives for them in the
time of their necessity. But Superiors are chiefly obliged hereunto.

By two things Charity is cherished. Our Charity to God, by keeping his
Commandments, according to that, John 15. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall
remain in my Love, as I also have kept my Fathers Commandments, and remain in
his Love. Our Charity to our Neighbor, by Compassion, according to that of
Ecclesiasticus, c. 7. Fail not to comfort those that weep, and walk with those
that mourn: refuse not to visit the sick: for by these things thou shall be
strengthened in Charity.

CHAP. II. Of Humility.
OUR Humility is true and perfect, when we do not desire glory should be given
us, and contemn it when it is given us. The humble man always fears lest any
glory should be given him, and if any be given him, he trembles, and is heavily
sorry for it; knowing, that Honor and Glory are due only to God. The truly
humble never glories of any Grace or Glory, unless he intend hereby to raise
his Hearers to a Confidence in God: But if any Grace, or any thing that is
glorious, be reported of him, he hears it with grief of Heart, and dejection of
himself; knowing, that what is ascribed to him, is God's alone, To whom alone,
all Glory is to be given. 1 Timothy 1. The truly humble compares himself neither
to his Superior, nor to his Inferior, nor to his Equal; nay indeed, he deems no
Body inferior to himself: he contemns no Body; he heartily despises none but
himself; and earnestly desires to be despised by all; and greatly rejoices when
he is despised. Such an one never fears Reproaches, because he loves no Glory.
There is one who wickedly humbles himself, and his inward parts are full of
Deceit. Eccles 19. But the truly humble, says S. Bernard, desires to be reputed
vile, not humble. He who loves Humility, ought to plant the Root of Humility in
his Heart, that is, to acknowledge his own Frailty. He ought to acknowledge not
only how vile he is, but also, how vile he may be: Yea also, how vile he would
be this very day, unless God Almighty did violently restrain him from sinning,
and substract Temptations from him: There every one may know himself, and how
that of his own Frailty he is disposed to fall into the Abyss and Gulf of all
Vices: according to that, Thy Humiliation is in the middle of thy self. Mich. 6.

A frequent Exercise in humble Offices begets true Humility; the holy Scripture
testifying, that he shall never attain the Virtue of Humility who shuns humble
Works.

True Humility is cherished by this, that a man truly and indeed acknowledge,
that he cannot overcome any Temptation, carnal, or spiritual, of himself, and
that he is not able to do the least Good and acceptable Work to God, without
the special Assistance of Jesus Christ.

It is a sign of true Humility, when a man so far depresses himself, that he
judges himself unworthy of all Grace; nor dare he desire any, Grace: and if any
Grace, without his Desire, flow in upon him from God, he receives it with Fear;
nay he judges it more laudable to want the Grace of God, than to have it, which
he has so often diverse ways demerited and defiled, and which he never enjoyed
according to God's Appointment. Also, it is a Sign of true Humility, always to
seek the lowest Place, the meanest Companions, the humblest Office, and the
poorest Clothes.

The Pride of the mind may be discerned two ways; By an outward Argument,
according to that, The Clothing of a Man, and his Laughter, and his Gate, show
what he is. Eccl. 19. as a good or bad Tree is known by good or bad Fruit;
because all Works proceed from the Heart or Thought, as says S. Augustine: as a
sweet or stinking Breath exhales out of a sound or corrupted Stomach, as out of
good or bad Spices laid up in it: and as a wanton Eye is the Messenger of an
unchaste Heart, according to St. Augustine, so outward Signs betray men's
Intentions. Pride is discerned by an inward Argument; when one in his Heart
takes pleasure in himself, and prefers himself, and desires to be preferred
before others: and when in his Deeds he desires and affects to please men. Such
an one is very unlike our humble Master Jesus Christ, who neither pleased
himself, as St. Paul testifies, but expected the Reproach of Men, and Misery:
nor came to rule, but to be subject, as himself testifies, Matthew. 20. The Son
of Man came not to be served, but to serve. Therefore such a Master dissipates
the Bones of Scholars, who seek not to please God but Men; who, as the Psalmist
testifies, shall at length be confounded, because God has despised them. Psalm.
53.

CHAP. III. Of Obedience to God.
TRue and perfect Obedience to God is, when a Man diligently and often
considers, what in every Time and Place would best please God; and what the
wise God has especially ordered him to do: and this with all his Might he
always endeavors to fulfill.

Of Obedience to Superiors.
But, true Obedience to the Vicars of Jesus Christ, to wit, Superiors, is, when
the Subject faithfully and willingly performs what is most contrary to his
Inclination; never manifesting by any Sign, Word, or Deed, that he has an
Aversion from that he is commanded. But, there true Obedience cannot be seen,
where the Subject contrives the Precept; and himself suggests the Work, which
he would gladly do: St. Augustine testifying, He is thy best Servant, O Lord,
who does not desire to hear from thee what he would; but rather, would that
which he shall hear from thee. The truly obedient never expects an absolute
Command; but only knowing or believing the Will of his Superior, he
fervorously executes it as if it were a Precept; after the Examample of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom the Will and good Pleasure of his Father was the
highest Command.

The truly obedient never disposes of his own Actions, nor does he judge
according to his own Sense; nor does he declare his own Sense to any one
concerning his own Actions, seeing he has neither Will nor Nill; but simply and
securely, he commits to God and his Superior the entire Disposal of himself.

The truly obedient does not discern betwixt Good and Evil: As Abraham, when
God Almighty commanded him to kill his Son, did not discern whether it was good
or evil: nor does he discern betwixt good and better. For, he always judges
that to be best which is commanded, even when it is doubtful; unless the
Command should appear manifestly to be sinful: for then, according to S.
Gregory, We must know, that never any ill thing must be done for Obedience, but
sometimes a good thing we are a doing ought to be intermitted for Obedience.
The same S. Gregory says moreover, But, because sometimes the desirable things
of this World are commanded, and sometimes the contrary: It is greatly to be
remarked, That Obedience sometimes, if it have any thing of it is own, it is of
no value: and other times, unless it have something of it is own, it is little
worth; for, when the agreeable things of this World are commanded, a higher
place for example, He, who out of Obedience accepts of these things, he
evacuates in himself the Virtue of Obedience, if he also aspire after these
things by his own proper Desire; For, he does not guide himself by Obedience,
who, in accepting the grateful things of this Life, serves the Lust of his own
Ambition. Again, when the despicable things of this World, Disgraces and
Contumelies, are commanded, unless the Soul of it self desire these things, it
lessens to it self the merit of Obedience; because forced and unwilling, it
descends to those things which are despised in this Life. And a little after,
Obedience therefore in things that are displeasing, it ought to have something
of it self: and again, in those things that are pleasing, it ought not by any
means to have any thing of it self: To the end, that in things that are
displeasing, it may be so much more glorious, by how much it is joined to the
divine Disposition, even with Desire: And in things that are pleasing, it may
be so much more true, by how much it is more heartily separated, from the
present Glory which it partakes by the Divine Order.

The motive of true Obedience is the exact Obedience of Jesus Christ, who was
obedient in all things, not only to God his Father, saying, Notwithstanding not
my Will, but thine be done. Luke 22. but was subject also both to good Men and
bad, yea even to the very Devils.

Moreover, because all things, sensible and insensible, are obedient unto God,
and he has subjected them to Man, to the end, that he might understand that
himself ought to be subject unto God. The Sun and Moon were obedient unto
Joshua, Josh. 10. The Earth to Moses, when it swallowed up Cone, Dathan, and
Abiram, Numb. 16. The Sea to St. Peter, when he walked upon it, Matthew. 14. And
to Moses, when it drowned Pharaoh and his Army, Exodus 14. Serpents to the
Magicians in Egypt, Exodus 7. Wild Beasts to the Eremites and Holy Fathers in
Egypt, as we read in their Lives. The Air, Snow, and Hail to Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.
The Rain to Elias, 1 Kings, 17.18. And the Fire to him also, which burnt up two
Companies of fifty men a piece, 2 Kings 1. The Birds to the Holy Father S.
Francis: The Devils to the Apostles: and Diseases to Holy men, who delivered
the sick from them: and many other Creatures to Moses in Egypt, Exodus 7.8, 9,
10. And because all things are obedient to God, in Heaven, under Heaven, in
Purgatory, and in Hell; therefore, deservedly, man ought to obey God in all
things, fulfilling his Will and Commandments.

St. Bernard gives us the signs of true Obedience. The truly obedient knows no
delays, abhorrs putting off till to morrow, is ignorant of Slowness, prevents
the Command, puts in readiness the Eyes to see, the Ears to hear, he Tongue to
speak, the Hands to work, the Feet to go; he gathers up his whole self, that he
may fulfill the the Will of him that commands him. The same St. Bernard says
moreover, Every good obedient Man gives up his Will and his Nill (to wit, into
the hands of his Superior) that he may be able to say, My Heart is ready O
God, my Heart is ready; ready to do whatsoever thou shall command me; ready to
obey at thy Beck, yea, sooner than thy Beck; ready to attend to thee, to serve
may Neighbor, to watch over my self, and to rest in Contemplation of heavenly
things.

A sign of Disobedience is, when a Subject judges the Command of his Superior
to be unjust, and hence murmurs in his Heart; then he excuses himself, as
though he were neither able, nor ought to fulfill the Command: afterward he
subtly devises divert ways of evading the Precept. At last, he persuades some
or other, by Counsel or Entreaties, to hinder or retract the Command. Not so
Abraham, who went away in the Night, that he might forthwith fulfill what was
commanded him: leaving his Servants at the Foot of the Mountain, lest they
should hinder him from killing his most dear Son; and therefore deserved a
large Benediction for himself and his Seed.

CHAP. IV. Of Patience.
TRue and perfect Patience is, when one endures Injuries patiently, not only
when he is guilty, but also when he is innocent; after the Example of Job,
saying, I have not sinned, and my Eye dwells in Bitterness, Job 17. And
although an Injury be more intolerable to the Innocent than to the Culpable,
yet an Injury both may and ought to be borne much more contentedly, when no
Fault remorces the Conscience, than when one has deserved a Vexation for some
precedent Fault: according to St. Peter, who says, Let none of you suffer as a
Murderer, or a Thief, or a Reviler, or a Coveter of other men's Goods; but, if
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this
Account, 1 Pet. 4. For it is better that ye suffer (if so be the Will of God)
for well-doing, than for doing ill. 1 Pet. 3. For what Glory is it, if doing
ill and being buffetted ye bear it patiently? But if doing well, you suffer
with Patience, this is gracious before God. 1 Pet. 2.

That Patience is praiseworthy, which endures Injuries patiently, not only
from the bad, but also from those who seem to be good, and Friends; nor only
for bad Deeds, but even also for good. Then the Soul is the beloved of God
among the Daughters, as a Lilly among Thorns. Cant. 1. For a Lilly, though it
be pricked by Thorns, it retains, notwithstanding, it is Whiteness, and sends
forth a more fragrant Smell than if it were not pricked. So a Soul, the Spouse
of God, if it be afflicted by those who seem to be of the number and Society of
the Sons of God: yet it is not provoked to Impatience, but endeavors carefully
to preserve the Candor of a good Conscience, and the sweet Odor of a good
Name.

He is truly patient, that not only endures patiently Troubles that are brought
upon him, but also desires Troubles should be brought upon him: after the
Example of Jesus Christ, saying, My Heart has looked for Reproach and
Affliction. Psalm. 68.

The truly patient does not murmur amidst his Sufferings; after the Example of
Job, who amidst his Pressures, did not speak a foolish Word against God. Job 1.
but with a cheerful Mind he rejoices in the Grievances he suffers, and from the
bottom of his Heart gives Thanks for them.

The truly Patient never excuses himself for any Injury that is done him, even
though asked; but commits his Cause to the All-faithful God, who in his own time,
will not fail to manifest the Innocence of all who suffer wrongfully; as our
Lord Jesus, being interrogated by Pilate, when falsely accused, answered not a
Word.

The truly Patient complains to none of the Injuries he suffers; because by
Complaints and Excuses the Mind is sometimes alleviated, which Alleviation he
regards not: but alone with God, he bears his Trouble, until his pious and
faithful Lord repeal it by some inward Comfort.

There are three things which deservedly incite true Patience. The one is, to
understand, that for our Sins we have deserved the eternal and bitter Pains of
Hell; for Exchange whereof, we are afflicted with Corporal Inconveniences. The
other is, that our Lord Jesus Christ, by many, diverse, and great Injuries,
suffered by him for a long time, deserved for us, that we might return his Love
by being molested a little time. The third is, That the just God, according to
the Length, Greatness, and Sharpness of our Sufferings, will weigh the Length,
Continuance, Delight and Sweetness of our Joys; the Apostle St. Paul
testifying, That a momentary, light Tribulation for the present, works for us
on high, above Measure, an eternal weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4.

A sign of true Patience is, not to revenge our selves when it is in our Power,
and also to hinder others from revenging of us; after the Example of David, who
hindered Shimei from being killed, who cast Stones and Dirt at him, and called
him a Man of Blood, 2 Samuel 16. But the truly patient, rather devoutly prays for
those who injure him; as did our Lord Jesus effectually for his Crucifiers; and
blessed Stephen for those who stoned him. Yea, the truly patient even compells
Almighty God to have Mercy on those who injure him; as did Moses, saying,
Either forgive them this Fault, or if thou do not, blot me out of thy Book
which thou have written, Exodus 32. Such Prayers God willingly hears and grants;
whence those, David, Christ, and Stephen, were heard for their Enemies.

An Argument of Impatience is, when one, for some Trouble brought upon him, by
reason of some inward Disturbance, voluntarily omitts certain good Works, which
he might conveniently, and ought to have done; for then God suffers Injury done
him by Man: the same inward Motion can hardly hide it self, but it will break
out, either in the Countenance, Gesture, or Words. This is the most dangerous
kind of Impatience, whose Revenge breaks it self upon the innocent God.

CHAP. V. Of Poverty.
TRue and perfect Poverty is, voluntarily and freely to leave all things for
God; to possess nothing but bare Necessaries; and to think ones self unworthy
of them: yea, sometimes for God, and for the Love of Poverty, willingly to want
even Necessaries; for, where there is no need, there true Poverty cannot be
discerned. So our Lord Jesus Christ wanted necessary Food, when he could not
have Bread for himself and his Disciples, rubbing Ears of Corn; who in like
manner, wanted necessary Clothes, when (as says St. Bernard) he was stripped
stark naked before his Cross; who also being a thirst upon his Cross, could not
have a Draught of Water, nor a Stone, or Board whereon when he was a dying, he
might lean his crucified Head. Alas, how often is Superfluity there where true
Need is believed to be!

The truly Poor desires no transitory things, yea refuses them when they are
offered, after the Example of Elizeus, who refused the gifts of Naaman, 2 Kings
5. and after the Example of Daniel, who despised the gifts of King Balthazar.
He truly loves Poverty, who had rather deserve a little Glory in the Kingdom of
Heaven through Poverty, than a great one through Riches. And this, to be more
conformable to Jesus Christ.

Three things ought to move us to the love of true Poverty, according to St.
Bernard. Nothing, says he, is more dear to God, nothing more amiable to the
Angels, nothing more profitable to Men, than to end this Life in Poverty and
Obedience. That Poverty is pleasing to God, the same St. Bernard testifies; In
the left hand of God, says he, are Riches and Glory, in his right hand length
of Life. Of all these, there was an eternal Abundance in Heaven; but Poverty,
was not found there: but on Earth it did abound, and superabound, and Man knew
not it is Value; wherefore, the Son of God being enamoured with it, came down,
that he might make Choice of it for himself; and that he might also, by his
Esteem of it, make it precious to us.

Another motive to true Poverty is, the glory of sitting beside our Lord Jesus;
proceeding hence, that the ignoble Poor shall sit by him in Judgment, and judge
the Noble and Rich. And how laudable is it before God, purely to leave all
things for him, and of ones own Choice to be poor for the Love of God, to
confide in God above all things, because he is so powerful, once or twice a day
to afford all things necessary for the Body, which are the least things before
God: for he gives them more abundantly to his Enemies than to his Friends, as
he is powerful to minister to the Spirit Day and Night, and every Moment, an
abundance of spiritual gifts, which are the greatest things before God: nor
does he communicate them to his Enemies, but only to the good, who are his
Friends.

An Argument of true Poverty is, to have no Solicitude for transitory things;
but simply and securely to commit himself to God who plentifully administers
all Necessaries, even to Birds and Worms; and especially to the young ones of
Crows, which cry for Hunger in their Nest, whom the old black Crow leaves to
starve, because of their Whiteness, as if they were not her own Brood; who are
fed either by the Bounty of God, or by the Dew of the Air, until growing black,
their Damn succor them: or else they swallow down Gnats and Flies, which stick
to the Foam of their Bills, they crying uncessantly for Hunger.

An Argument of false Poverty or Covetousness is, willingly to beg Gifts
without necessity; or willingly and frequently to receive them. Such an one
sells his Liberty according to that of the Philosopher, Publius Mimus, to
receive Gifts is to sell ones Liberty yea, the Scripture says, Thou shall not
receive Gifts, because they blind the Eyes of the Wise, and change the Words of
the just. Deuteronomy. 16. For how is he a Lover of Poverty who will endure no Want,
and receives unnecessary Gifts willingly and frequently? Yea, who asks them,
and by certain subtle Devices extorts them, and without Necessity keeps them?

CHAP. VI. Of Chastity.
TRue and perfect Chastity is, when not only the Body is kept from carnal
Pollution; but even the Soul is preserved clean from carnal Concupiscence;
after the Example of Sarah, saying, Thou know, O Lord, that I have never
lusted after man, and have kept my Soul clean from all Concupiscence: yea, and
from those things which give occasions of Concupiscence. And this is that which
follows in the same place, I have never kept Company with those that sport,
neither have I familiarly conversed with those of light behavior. Tob. 3.

He truly loves Chastity, who (if it were possible) would choose rather less
Grace in this life, and less Glory in the other, by Virginal Chastity to be
more conformed to Jesus Christ, than by paying the Conjugal debt to merit
greater Grace and Glory.

The motives which ought to incite us to the love, of Chastity are; the Example
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Blessed Mother, and the holy Virgins, who
have despised Kingdoms, and voluntarily lost their Lives to preserve their
Chastity, as S. Agnes, S. Katherin, S. Agatha and inumerable others: and
especially the Chastity of Pagan Women and Virgins of whom S. Hierom writes,
That they chose Death that they might conserve their Chastity. The Cleanness
also and Freedom which follow Chastity ought to move and invite us to it: as
also, the glory which our Lord Jesus has promised to Chastity, He who shall
overcome (says he, Apoc. 3.) (to wit, the concupiscence of the Flesh) I will
give him to sit with me in my throne, as I also have overcome, and have sat
with my Father in his Throne; for incorruption makes one very near unto God.
Sap. 6.

These things are inductive of Chastity, and conserve it; a spare Diet, plain
Attire, corporal Incommodity, to avoid opportune time and place for Impurity;
which if Dina the Daughter of Jacob had done, she had not been taken, when she
went to a feast to see the women of the Country. Genesis 34. Moreover to shun the
Company of suspected persons. Now every man ought to be suspected by every
woman; for hence Thamar, the daughter of David, was corrupted by her own
Brother because she did not suspect him when she served him alone in his
counterfeit Sickness. 2 Samuel 13. In like manner, every Woman, though never so
virtuous, ought to be suspicious to every Man; according to the Counsel of St.
Hierom, saying, If thou will preserve thy Chastity, if thou happen to see a
Woman, although of good Conversation, love her with thy Mind but not with thy
corporal Presence.

But the chief Preservative of Chastity, is to be delighted in the Lord; for
then all other things become vile. Spiritual Delights being once tasted, all
carnal become insipid. St. Bernard. Whence St Gregory, He who is overcome by
the love of Earthly Things, is by no means delighted in God; for, the Soul can
never be without all Delight: For, it is either delighted with the lowest
things, or with the highest; and with how greater Industry it aspires to the
highest, with so much greater loathing it neglects the lowest. And with how
much more Heat it is inflamed toward the lowest, with so greater damnable
Tepidity it grows cold toward the highest; for both of them cannot equally and
together be loved.

An Argument of true Chastity is, a restraining of the five Senses from the
Allurements of the Flesh, and a Subtraction of the Heart from vain Thoughts and
Delights; for, from the Delectation of the Sight in seeing. of the Taste in
tasting, of the Smell in smelling, of the Feeling in touching, of the Feet in
walking, of the Mouth in laughing and talking, are wont to arise carnal
desires, which effeminate the Soul, and make it pliable and inclined to
Impurity.

An Argument or Inductive of Unchastity is, Intemperance in Meat and Drink: for
hence Noah was immodestly uncovered. Genesis 9. And Lot committed Incest with his
own Daughters. Genesis 19. And therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. commands, saying, Be
not drunk with Wine, in which is Luxury: to wit, occasionally.

Moreover, An unchaste Eye is the Messenger of an unchaste Heart, as St.
Augustine testifies. In like manner, unchaste Words, an unchaste Gate, and
holding Chat with Women, as Ecclesiasticus testifies, chapter 9. For the Beauty of
a Woman many have perished; and hereby Concupiscence is inflamed like a Fire.
In like manner, talking with Men inflames Women, and a curious eying of the
Gate and Beauty of another, provokes to Impurity; which Ecclesiasticus
dissuades, saying, Do not look upon a Virgin, least thou happen to be
scandalized in her Comeliness, Eccl. 9. The same Care a Woman ought to have
toward Men; let her not fix her Thoughts or Eyes upon a Man, nor a Man in like
manner upon a Woman. This wholesome Counsel Job followed, chap. 31. I have made a
Covenant with my Eyes, not so much as to think upon a Virgin; which is more
than simply to decline their Conversation.

CHAP. VII. Of Abstinence.
TRue and perfect Abstinence is, the use of only Necessaries, in Food and
Raiment, and an universal subtraction of Delicacies and Superfluities, and of
such things as are prepared with great Care, and bought with great Cost: after
the Example of S. John Baptist, who eat Locusts and the Leaves of milky Trees,
which had the Savor of Honey, and drank Water, and his Raiment was made of
Camels hair, Matthew. 3. Whence the Apostle, Having Food and Raiment, let us be
therewith content. 1 Timothy 6. Because the Servant of God ought not to have
Clothes for Ornament or Delight, but to cover his Nakedness. As says the
ordinary Gloss upon St. Matthew, concerning the Clothing of Saint John.

He observes and loves true Abstinence, who does not only willingly abstain
from those things which are delightful, which he has not, and which are
unlawful to him; but also freely and purely, for the love of God, forbears such
delightful Things as he has, and may have, and might use lawfully and
meritoriously; whether they be dear or vile. For if any one should take more
Delight in Roots than in Partridges, in Water than in Wine, Abstinence from
Water and Roots, would be more acceptable to God, than Abstinence from Wine and
Partridges. For S. Augustine says, no Delicacies whatsoever do hurt us, if they
be taken without desire. And course meats eaten with gust or greedily, hinder
the Virtue of perfect Abstinence: for, David poured out the Water upon the
Ground, which he had inordinately desired; which he dared not drink because he
had vehemently desired it, 2 Samuel 23. Elias did eat Flesh, not which he
desired, but which God sent him by a Crow. 1 Kings 17. Esau is a Witness of
this, who sold a Blessing never to be recovered, not for a Fowl, but for a Mess
of Broth. Nor must we only abstain from those things which please the Body, but
also from those which delight the Soul; to wit, from Vanities, from idle
Discourse, from temporal Joy, and from carnal Friendship. This Abstinence is
better and also more laudable than the first.

There are two Motives to true Abstinence. The one, that we never receive the
Gifts of God with due Gratitude; and never enjoy them for their right end, and
according to the divine Order; and hereby incurr God's severe Anger. The other
is, that we must give a strict Account of all the Gifts received by us, to wit,
for what end we have received them; either for our own Pleasure, or for just
Necessity, or for common Good. But he who wholly abstains from them has no
account at all to give of them.

A double Profit follows Abstinence; to wit, a Knowledge of the divine Secrets,
and the hearing of our Prayers; which are both manifest in Daniel, who, because
he refused the King's Meat and Drink, and would live upon Water and Pulse,
surpassed all the Magicians and Soothsayers in the knowledge of Visions and
Dreams. Secondly, because for his Prayers the seven Years which Nebuchodonozor
should have lived as a Beast, were changed into seven Months; when also he had
obtained of God to incline the Kings to give the People leave to return to
Jerusalem: he also obtained for the People, when they delayed, a Will to
return. In many Desires, and in the understanding of Mysteries, he was heard
for his Abstinence; which himself testifies, saying, Dan. 10. In those days, I
Daniel lamented and mourned, for three Weeks I eat no pleasant Bread, and Flesh
and Wine entered not into my Mouth; neither was I anointed with Ointment. And
therefore an Angel said unto him, From the first day on which thou did
resolve to afflict thy self in the Sight of thy God, thy Words were heard. A
third may be added, that Abstinence procures the Mercy of God; as appears in
the Ninevites, who at Jonas's preaching, through Abstinence obtained the Mercy
of God. Jon. 3.

We may admire, but not imitate, the Abstinence of the ancient Priests, of whom
St. Hierom writes, that they always abstained from Flesh and Wine, for a
weakness of Brain and Giddiness, which they suffered from their spare Diet; and
especially to prevent lustful Concupiscence, which is wont to arise from those
Meats, and from that Drink. They seldom eat Bread lest they should burden
their Stomach, and when they did eat any, they eat pounded Hysop with it, that
by the Heat of this Herb they might concoct that grosser Food; they used no
Oil, but with Herbs, and this very sparingly, to take away the Offensiveness
and Sharpness of their Taste. What shall I speak of Fowls? when they abstain
from Eggs and Milk as Flesh; one of which, they call liquid Flesh, the other
Blood, only with the Color changed.

An Argument of true Abstinence is, when one does not only in time of Health
reject costly and delicate Viands; but also when in Sickness and other
Necessity he makes use of them with Grief of Mind: also, when one does not only
abstain from delicate, costly, and superfluous Meats, but also, sometimes
subtracts from himself even Necessaries, that he may impart them to the Needy:
according to that of St. Hierom, What thou would eat if thou did not
fast, give to the Poor, that the Fast of thy Body may be the Feast of thy Soul,
but not the gain of thy Purse, etc.

An Argument of false Abstinence is, to forbear costly and delicate Meats, only
when thou have them not, or for vainglory to be praised; or for Parsimony to
prevent Poverty; or for Covetousness, to grow rich; or for Health-sake; or to
avoid Infamy and Detraction; or to procure some Dignity or transitory
Emolument; and not to obtain Grace in this Life, and glory in the other.

CHAP. VIII. Of Prudence.
TRue and perfect Prudence is, always to labor after the knowledge of the
divine Nature, and the depth of humane Misery; which Prudence, St. Augustine
aspired after, saying, O God, who art always the same, may I know my self, may
I know thee!

He has true Prudence who labors sollicitously to acknowledge what is the
best, and embraces it with all his Might; and what is the worst, and detests it
with all his Heart. He is truly prudent, who frequently ponders what shall be
the Lot of the good, and what of the bad; what Joy it shall be to the good to
be eternally united to the supreme Good, and what a grief it shall be to the
bad to be eternally separated from the same chiefest Good. He has true Prudence
who eyes, with his utmost Endeavor, every thing, which hinders, for a time,
from the Familiarity of God, to wit, Venial Sin, and which separates for ever
from the Fruition of God, to wit, Mortal Sin. In like manner, he uses true
Prudence who loves all things, which make to draw near to God, to wit, good
Works; and which eternally unite to God, to wit, Virtues, and the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost.

A Motive to true Prudence is, the Example of the Philosophers, who labored so
much for Knowledge, as St. Hierom writes, that they shunned Cities and much
Company, pleasant Gardens (where the ground is watered with delightful
Streams, the Birds sweetly sing, the Trees are peruqued with Leaves, or are
other Allurements of the Eyes) least by a luxuriant Abundance, the Fortitude of
the Mind should be effeminated, and its Prudence debauched. For, it is
unprofitable, often to see those things, by which some time or other thou may
be taken, and so commit thy self to the Temptation of such things, as thou
can not want, but with difficulty: In like manner, the Pythagoreans were wont
to dwell in desert places. And we read of some, who have put out their Eyes,
lest by their Sight they should be drawn from the Contemplation of Philosophy.
But if any one think he may enjoy all Abundance in Meats and Drinks, and yet be
able to attend to the study of Wisdom; that is, be in the midst of all
delights, and not be entangled and held by them, he deceives himself: for our
Mind, runs upon that which we see, hear, smell, taste, and touch: and our
appetite is drawn after that with whole pleasure it is taken. How much more we,
who ought to study Divine Wisdom? We ought also to be moved hereunto, by the
Damnation of many for their Imprudence; according to that of Esaias, Chap. 5.
Therefore thy people was led away Captive, because they had not knowledge. And
of Baruch, chap. 3. Because they had not Wisdom, they perished through their
folly.

The Office of Prudence is, to order the Thoughts of the heart, that they
wander not out of God; the Affections of the mind that they be not taken up
with creatures; our Wills, that they be not averted from God; our Intentions,
that they be not mixed, but pure; our Judgments and Suspicions, that they be
converted to God. In like manner it ought to order all our Words, Deeds and
Motions; that they be done for a due End, for the common Good, and Amendment of
all. For as Solomon testifies; The wisdom of a man appears in his
Countenance; that is, in his exterior Conversation. Eccles. 8. He who is so
ordered has an Argument of true Wisdom. Concerning this S. Bernard says: Every
day discuss and examine thy Life; Advert diligently, how much thou have
profited, how much thou have gone backward: what thou art in thy Manners, what
in thy Affections, how like and unlike unto God: study diligently to know thy
self: For thou art much better if thou know thy self, than if being ignorant
of thy self, thou know the Course of the Stars, and the Virtues of Herbs.

An argument of false prudence is to endeavor to know the course of the Stars,
the Virtues of Herbs, the value of Jewels, only for gain. For such knowledge
does not edify, but puff up with Vanity, 1 Cor. 8. To be crafty also in
secular affairs indicates false Prudence: yea it is Foolishness, as the Apostle
testifies, who says, 1 Cor. 3. The Wisdom of this World is folly in the sight
of God. And such alas, there are but too many: and therefore, our Lord Jesus
complains saying, Luke. 16. The Children of this World, are wiser than the
Children of Light in their Generation. There are also others who are subtle to
continue Wickednesses and new Inventions: but they are blind to consider the
Will of God: of such the Prophet Jeremy says; They are wise to do evil; but
they are ignorant how to do well; Such, as the Apostle says, saying (and
believing) themselves to be Wise, they are become Fools.

CHAP. VIII. Of Fortitude.
TRue and perfect Fortitude is to have Command over ones own Soul, when the
Mind is tempted by Pride, Envy, Anger, Luxury, Covetousness, vain Glory,
Complacence and carnal Delights; and rightly understanding Reason, does by no
means consent, but instantly suppresses such Motions: Whence that Pro. 16.
Better is he who commands his own Soul, than he who conquers Cities. This
Fortitude, the strongest of men, Sampson, had not, although he tore a Lion in
Pieces, and killed a thousand men with the Jaw Bone of an Ass: Because, for the
lust of a woman, he was deprived of all his strength, Judges 14.15, 16.

He has true Fortitude, who restraines his Body and senses from all unlawful
Things. This Fortitude David had not, who killed a Lion and a Bear, and slew
Goliath, but restrained not his Eyes from beholding unlawful Objects, 1 Samuel 17.
2 Samuel 11. O what Strength and Courage have some, to fast, to watch, to
chastize their Bodies with hair shirts and disciplines; and yet are not able to
restrain their Feet from ways of wickedness, their hands from unlawful Works
and Touches, their Ears from noxious hearing; nor especialy their Tongue from
hurtful Words; S. James saying, All Beasts, and Birds, and Serpents, and other
living Creatures are tamed, and have been tamed by men; but no man can tame the
Tongue: it is a restless Evil, full of deadly poison, James. 3. And yet he also
tells us, that without this restraining of the tongue, there is no true
Religion: if any one think himself to be Religious, and bridles not his tongue
deceiving his own heart, this man's Religion is vain, James. 1.

The Inductive of true Fortitude, is, a taste of Spiritual sweetness. For this
strengthens the mind to do good things, to endure Adversities, and to overcome
Vices, and all things that are hurtful. This was prefigured in Jonathan, who
having tasted a little Honey, was enlightened and animated to pursue his
Enemies, 1 Samuel 14. So Moses, having tasted a Spiritual Sweetness from the
Light and Conversation of God, was so strengthened, that for forty days he
needed no Corporeal Sustenance, Exodus 24.

The Office of Fortitude is, to confirm the Understanding in the Knowledge of
God, and the Will in the love of him and our Neighbor; to strengthen the Mind
in Adversity, that it be not terrified, and in Prosperity, that it be not
effeminated. Also, to animate the Mind, that it may be continually exercised in
good: to strengthen it, that it may never be overcome by Afflictions. The first
Fortitude St. Paul and St. Stephen had, 2 Cor. 11. and Act. 7. The second,
Mattathias and Eleazarus, 2 Mac. 6. Job and Daniel, Job 1. Dan. I. The third
Tobias, Tob. 1.2. Whosoever experiments this in himself, let him be secure that
he has true Fortitude.

An Argument of false, yea, of the worst Fortitude, is, to dare to do many and
great things against God. Of this St. Anselm: Power to sin is not liberty, nor
any part of liberty. To have power to sin, is rather not to have power, than to
have power: For whosoever has power to that which is not expedient for him, by
how much he has power to this, by so much Infirmity and Perversity has power
over him. Whence Esaias, chapter 5. Woe to them that are potent to drink wine, and
strong to drunkenness. This Fortitude had the Kings and Princes of old, the
Persecuters of the Church; and at this time have, and hereafter shall have,
Antichrist and his Associates.

CHAP. X. Of Justice.
TRUE and perfect Justice to God, is, a rendering of due praise to the Divine
Nature in all things; a rendering of due thanks for all goods and gifts
bestowed, and for all Evils suffered for us; a rendering of due Satisfaction for
all Commissions and Omissions, and of due hearty Grief for all Graces neglected.

He has true Justice to God, who is faithful to him, always, and every where,
in keeping all Precepts and Vows, who uses so great Diligence in every of his
Works, and at all times, as if his Salvation wholly depended on each of them;
and who does all his good Works purely for God, nor for any Favor or Profit of
this Life or of the other; and who receives every Gift with due Gratitude, and
enjoys it always and every where, according to the Order that God has appointed.

True Justice to our Neighbor lies in two things. Tob. 4. Never to do to our
Neighbor what we would not justly have to be done to our selves; that is,
never to hurt or offend him, by Word, or Deed, or Sign, or Counsel, in his
Goods, in his Body, or in his Honor; never to suspect ill of him; never to
detract from him; never to misinterpret or diminish his Good; never to hinder
his Good, for these things no Body, according to Justice, would have to be done
to himself. Also, to do good to his Neighbor, as he justly would have to be
done to himself; that is, to honor his Neighbor, to think well of him, to
interpret well all his Actions, even his bad ones; always to rejoice with him
in his Good, and to condole with him for his Misfortunes; always to excuse his
Innocence and to defend him being absent: for, every one, according to Justice,
would have these things done to himself. And it is said according to Justice,
because a Judge would not be hanged by a Thief, and yet he ought to hang a
Thief; because not to Will that, is according to Justice. And a Robber would
willingly be robbed so he might be permitted to rob, which notwithstanding, he
ought not to do, because to will that, is not according to Justice. Also, he
observes Justice to the Dead, who does not delay to perform their Will
according to their Appointment; and who, according to his Obligation,
alleviates and shortens their Pains, by Fasting, Prayers, and Alms. The Pains
of those which are in Purgatory, are shortened by Fasting, Prayers and Alms; as
testifies St. Bernard. He also observes Justice to the Angels, who acquiescing
in their good Admonitions, does not retard their Glory which is due to them
upon this Account; which they deserve for their good Offices done to us.

A Motive to true Justice is, that which David says, Psalm. 10. God is just, and
loves Justice. Also Hope and Joy is promised the Just in this present Life,
Psalm. 63. The just Man shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall hope in him. Also,
Exaltation and Praise is commanded the Just; according to that, Psalm. 32.
Exult, O ye Just, in the Lord, Praise becomes the Upright. Also, Security in
the day of Judgment is foretold the Just, Wisd. 5. The Just shall stand in
great Constancy. In fine, eternal Life is promised the Just, according to that,
Wisd. 5. The Just shall live for ever. And whatsoever Good is promised in the
Scripture, it is chiefly acquired by Justice.

The Office of true Justice is, to rectify our Thoughts and Affections, that
they be always set upon God; our Will, that it be conformed to the Divine Will;
our Intentions, that they always eye God, and that we refer all things to his
Praise. In like manner, to direct all our Words and Deeds, that they be always
done for some special and right end. And these things are an Argument of true
Justice.

But, an Argument of Injustice is, to usurp those things to ones self, which
properly belong to God; to wit, Love, Praise, Honor, Revenge; or which are our
Neighbors, and are due to our Neighbor. O my God, direct my Steps, that no
Injustice may rule over me, Psalm. 118.

CHAP. XI. Of Temperance.
TRue and perfect Temperance is, a just Moderation of our interior Motions and
exterior Works.

He has true Temperance, who does not only restrain his Heart from bad and
unprofitable thoughts, but also, observes a measure in good Thoughts, that they
do not longer or oftener take up his Mind, than a just time requires; because,
Thoughts of our necessary Affairs, although they be profitable, yet they are
not to be entertained in Time of the Divine Office; according to the Saying of
St. Bernard, The Holy Ghost, at that Hour, whatsoever thou offerest, besides
what thou ought, neglecting what thou ought, receives it not, whose Will
we may always do, according to his Will, he inspiring of us.

In like manner, the truly Temperate, moderates his Affections and Passions,
when he ought to hope or fear any thing or nothing, and how much and how long;
Concerning what he ought, somewhat or nothing to rejoice or grieve, and how
much and how long: concerning what he ought to have, or not to have: Love or
Hatred, or Shame, and how much, and how long.

In like manner, it moderates the understanding, that it do not employ it self
a longer time than is fitting about the understanding of any thing: it
moderates likewise the will, what and how great it ought to be; and the
intention, what and to what End, and how intent it ought to be. It poises also
our free Will, how much it ought to make choice of Good, and how much reject
Evil.

Moreover, true Temperance moderates the tongue, to wit, when we are to speak,
when to be silent, and how long; that is in convenient time: to whom we are to
speak, to wit, to persons of good, repute: when to speak, and where; to wit, in
time and place convenient: how to speak, and how much; to wit, maturely, with
Weight, Number and Measure: why we are to speak; to wit, for Necessity or
Profit: of what affairs; to wit, of Soul and Body. It moderates also the Works
and Manners and the Motion of all the parts of the Body; that, according to the
Apostle, All things be done by us decently, and according to Order. 1 Cor. 14.

We ought to be moved to Temperance, by the most wise order of God, who has
disposed all things in Measure, Number, and Weight, Wisdom 11. According to
this order, all our Actions, Manners, and Life, ought to be measured, numbered,
and weighed; that is, in the Virtue of the Father, to whom Measure; in the
Virtue of the Son to whom Number; in the Virtue of the Holy Ghost, to whom
Weight is ascribed. To the same also, the Example of the Apostle ought to move
us, saying, I Cor. 10. Give no offense, neither to Jews nor Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God, as I also in all things please all Men, not seeking what is
prositable to my self, but what is profitable to many, that they may be saved.
He was truly temperate who offended none, and studied to please all.

He has an Argument of true Temperance, who moderates himself in his Food,
Raiment, Sleep, and in every carnal Commodity and temporal Joy, admitting in
all these no Superfluity nor inordinate Delight, but pure Necessity.

The truly Temperate endeavors to keep a Mean in all things, except in the
Love and Praise of God, and giving of Thanks. For great is the Lord, and too
too praiseworthy: and therefore he is to be praised without Mean, Measure, or
End.

A sign of Intemperance is, when one having perverse Manners, disturbs and
disquiets all that dwell with him. He conforms himself to no Body in any thing,
but that which pleases himself, that he approves, and strives to have it done.
He is unsufferable to all others, and intolerable to himself: whence St.
Augustine, Thou have commanded, O Lord, and so it was done, that every
inordinate Mind should be a Punishment to it self: but how much more to others?
Such an one was Ismael, of whom it is written, Genesis 16. His hand was against
every one, and every ones hand against him.

CHAP. XII. Of Compassion.
TRue and perfect Compassion toward God, is without Intermission to be wounded
at Heart with Grief, for all the Injuries that have been done to him, or are
yet to be done to him, in himself, and in his Friends, Whom he who touches,
touches as it were the Apple of his Eye, Zach. 2. For all the Elements had
Compassion on Christ our Lord, dying upon the Cross.

A true Compassion to our Neighbor is, heartily to condole with him for his
Afflictions, as well spiritual as corporal; after the Example of the Apostle,
saying, 2 Cor. 11. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Where the Gloss. says, Who
is weak in Faith or other Virtue, and I am not weak? That is, I do not condole
with him as with my self? Who is scandalized for any Trouble, and I do not burn
with the Fire of Compassion?

True Compassion toward our Neighbors in Purgatory is, to be greatly
afflicted for the Grievousness of the Pains which they endure: and chiefly,
because they are separated in the mean time from the Vision and Fruition of
God; and God in the mean time is not fully praised by them. And in that
Affliction and Compassion, incessantly and earnestly to beseech God, that he
would vouchsafe to take them out of so sharp and severe Sufferings.

The superabundant Compassion of Christ our Lord to us, ought to induce us to
true Compassion: for, as St. Augustine testifies, He makes such haste to absolve
the Sinner from the Torment of his Conscience, as if his Compassion of the
miserable did more torment him, than the Passion of the miserable torments
himself: nor had he only Compassion on us, but he himself moreover, endured our
Diseases and bore our Griefs, Isa. 53. The Nature also of Members persuades the
same; as the Apostle testifies, 1 Cor. 12. If one Member suffer any thing, all
the Members suffer together with it. Moreover, there is a double Profit in
Compassion, which ought to allure us thereunto; to wit, a strengthening of
Charity, and a reigning together with Christ. Of the first it is said, in
Ecclesiasticus chap. 7. Fail not to comfort those that weep, and walk with
those that mourn; disdain not to visit the Sick; for by these things thou shall
be strengthened in Love. And of the second, the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. If we
suffer, we shall together reign with him. Rare is the Virtue of Compassion; our
Lord complaining, Psalm. 68. I expected one who should condole with me, but
there was none and who should comfort me, but I found none.

An Argument of true Compassion is, not only to condole with our Friends, but
also with our Enemies. So Joseph wept over every one of his Brethren, who had
sold him for thirty Pence, Genesis 45. and David greatly lamented the Death of
Saul, who had often designed to kill him; yea, he caused the Children of Israel
to be taught a Threne of Lamentation over his Death, 2 Samuel 1. So Absalon being
slain, who sought to take away his Kingdom from him, with his Head covered, he
lamented him, saying, My Son Absalon, Absalon my Son, who shall give me, that I
may dye for thee? Absalon my Son, my Son Absalon. 2 Samuel 18. And in like
manner, Job; I was wont, says he, to weep over him who was afflicted; and with
my Soul had Compassion on the Poor, Job. 30.

An Argument of false Compassion is, when one speaks Words of Compassion, and
shows a compassionating Countenance, and yet in his Heart rejoices at the
Affliction of his Neighbor; or being able, does not alleviate his Affliction,
or not restrain those who afflict him; but rather provokes and encourages
others to afflict him, by Signs, Words, or Deeds.

CHAP. XIII. Of Peace.
TRue Peace to God is, when our five Senses and the Use of all the parts of our
Body and all our inward and outward Works are disposed according to the
Guidance of Reason; and when all our Thoughts, Affections, Wills, Intentions,
and all our Exteriors, are done according to the Ordination of Reason; and that
Reason is wholly ordered according to the Will of God. But, as often as any
thing is done, without the Consent of Reason rightly disposed, immediately the
Peace of our Mind is disturbed.

He has true Peace with God, as says the Gloss. upon that, Romans 5. (Being
justified by Faith, let us have Peace with God.) who does not by a contrary
Will, strive against the Commandments of God; who follows the Commands of our
Lord, and bows his free Will to the Divine Precept: for, true Peace is to agree
with good Manners, and to contest with Vices.

He has true Peace with his Neighbor, who uses his utmost Diligence, not
designedly, upon what Occasion soever, to cause Desturbance to any one; For, he
who designedly disturbs another, can by no means beat any time without
Disturbance. For he that is disturbed, either revenges himself, if he be able;
or if he be not able, dissembles it. However, he who designedly has caused a
Perturbation, carries ever with him a Sting and Remorse of Conscience for it.

He seeks true Peace, who continually considers himself only; and leaving every
one to his own proper Judgment, lays aside all transitory and temporal Cares,
and rests only in the Contemplation of God; for there only true Peace is found,
as S. Augustine testifies; saying, Thou have made us, O Lord, for thy self; and
our Heart is unquiet, until it rest in thee.

There is a double profit of true Peace, which ought to induce us to the love
of it; to wit, a Sweetness and Quiet of Mind, which follows Peace; which
sweetness is as it were, a part and the beginning of Eternal Quiet and
Sweetness. And also this true Peace prepares an Eternal and continual
Habitation for God in the Soul; Who for his exceeding Mildness inhabits only
and rests in the quiet Heart; as himself testifies, Psalm. 4. In Peace, then
will I sleep and rest. And again the Psalmist; Psa. 75. His place is made in
peace. Which also the Apostle testifies, saying, 2 Cor. 13. Have Peace, and the
God of Peace and Love shall be with you.

He conserves true Peace, who follows what S. Hierom says. upon the Epistle to
the Ephesians; If we mutualy love one another Good and Prosperity; if we
tolerate until the last Harvest, those Sins, which without damage of the Good
Corn, or with hope of salvation of those who ought to be corected, cannot be
eradicated. If also, we determine not to do Works of Perfection, which ought,
and yet ought not to be done, lest the Weak should be scandalized

He has an Argumenr of true Peace, who avoids all Places, Persons and Actions,
whence probably may follow any disturbance. He also has a most certain Argument
of true Peace, who always, and every where, observes the Commandments of God
and his own Vows; as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm. 118. Much Peace to them who
love thy Law. An Argument of most true Peace is, when Reason is in all things
Subject to the Spirit.

He has an Argument of false Peace, who does not pluck up all the Roots of
Disquiet which are continually springing out. These are our own Will, a freedom
of mind, a singularity of manners, an inordinate desire of pleasing others; of
which, we have treated else where.

Also that is no true Peace, which proceeds not from our own Virtue, but from
the favor of others. For example; there are some who have a firm Peace, as
long as they feel no Contradiction; but what pleases them, that they find every
where: But, when some thing is done, which they did not think of, or some thing
happens which does not please them; instantly they lose their Peace of Heart:
so that the Virtue of Peace is not in them, but rather in others without them.
And therefore, those without them take away their Peace, when they please. But,
they who desire true Peace ought not to advert what others do or say, whether
they detract or flatter them; but should always think on such things as make
for Peace: and so the Virtue of Peace shall truly and lastingly remain in them.

CHAP. XIV. Of Mercy.
TRUE Mercy consists in three things, in Giving, in Pardoning, and in
Supererogating.

The truly Merciful, as long as he has any thing, administers necessaries to
those who are in Need; which if he should not do, he would not fulfill the
Office of true Mercy: according to St. Chrysostom, But, says he, Thou have
given once, this is not Mercy: For, unless thou relieve the Needy as long as
thou have any thing, thou shall not satisfy the Debt of Mercy: For, even the
foolish Virgins, having Lamps, had Oil also, but not enough. This Mercy Job
had, when he said, Job. 31. If I have denied to the Poor, what they desired,
and have made the Eyes of the Widow to expect; if I have eaten my Morsel
alone, and the Fatherless has not eaten of it; because Mercy has grown up with
me from my Youth, and came forth with me out of my Mothers Womb. And a little
after; The Stranger remained not without, my Door was open to Travelers.

But, he who gives his worldly Goods, and does not pardon Injuries, has no true
Mercy; as says St. Gregory. Therefore, the truly merciful, of his own Accord,
before he be asked, pardons from his Heart all Injuries; resolves never to
revenge them, neither by himself, nor by another. Yea, the truly merciful is
readier to give Pardon, than he who does the Injury is to ask it: for, the
truly Merciful is more grieved for the Sin of him who injures him than for his
own proper Affliction which he suffers from him: for so David, from his Heart,
pardoned Shimei without asking, when he cursed him and threw Stones at him; and
he prohibited others from killing of him, saying, Permit him to curse,
according to the Command of the Lord. If perhaps the Lord may look upon my
Affliction, and may render me good for this days cursing, 2 Samuel 16. So Joseph
forgave his Brethren before they asked him, weeping over every one of them,
Genesis 45.

Nor does even all this satisfy the truly Merciful, unless he do also obtain
of God, by his Prayers, Pardon for those who injure him. So Moses obtained
Pardon for the Jews, who went about to stone him; saying, Either pardon them
this Fault, or if thou do not, blot me out of thy Book, which thou have
written, Exodus 32. So St. Stephen for those who stoned him; and our Lord Jesus
for those who crucified him, obtained Grace and Pardon, Acts 7. Luke 23. Both
of them saying, Forgive them, for they know not what they do. Where the Doers
of Injury are greatly excused; as if they should say, they have no
Understanding, for they know not what they do; and therefore what they do, is
not deservedly to be imputed to them, but to be mercifully pardoned them.

It ought to induce us to the love of true Mercy, that God in his own Nature is
infinitely merciful, and in others loves Mercy beyond measure; as himself has
said, Go ye, and learn what that means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice,
Mat. 9.

Another motive to Mercy is, that the merciful God will in his Judgment condemn
without Mercy merciless Men; according to St. James, Judgment without Mercy, to
him who has not shown Mercy, Jam. 2. And the Merciful shall plentifully obtain
Mercy from God; For he lends upon Use to the Lord, who has Mercy on the Poor,
Prove. 19. that is, with great Usury and Gain he shall receive, whatsoever he
gives to the Poor.

The Office of Mercy is, to give every one a place with God according to his
Deserts. All Mercy shall make a place for every one, according to the merit of
his Works, says Ecclesiasticus, chap. 16.

An Argument of true Mercy is, when one subtracts from himself whatsoever he
can, saving his Life. And moreover, continually labors, even above his
Strength, that he may be able more abundantly to relieve the Indigent.

An Argument of false Mercy is, when one does not relieve the Necessities of
another, according to his Ability; but says to the Needy that of St. James,
chap. 2. Go in Peace, be Ye warmed, and be fed; but Ye give not to them such
things as are necessary for the Body; What shall it profit them? Whence St.
Chrysostom, It is needful also, that thou should not be so sparing of thine
own; but when thy Lord's Goods are committed to thee, why art thou so tenacious
of them?

Also, when he pardons those that injure him, when it is not in his Power to
revenge himself; or, when he pardons them, not purely for the Love of God, but
because he knows God will not pardon him, unless he first pardon them; or when
he prays for them only with his Mouth, but inwardly in his Heart rejoices at
their Confusion.

CHAP. XV. Of Concord.
TRUE Concord with God, is to be unitid to the Divine Will, in Prosperity and
Adversity; and, according to our Power, to be conformed to the Divine Manners
and examples of Jesus Christ. For S. John Chrysostom says, Nothing is more
worthy, than that a man be an Imitator of his Maker, and execute the Divine
Work, according to the measure of his proper Faculty. This Union our Lord
asked for us in the last Instant of his Life; saying As thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, so may they he one in us, John 17.

True Concord with our Neighbor is to Judge and think the same with all men,
in all things which belong to God. As in the Primitive Church, The multitude of
Believers had one Heart, and one soul, Act. 4.

Also, to be conformed to others in Meat, Drink, Sleep, Manners, and Works
which are not contrary to God, nor against our Profession, nor against
Perfection, that we may gain more: As the Apostle says of himself, 1 Cor. 9. To
the Infirm I became infirm that I might gain the Infirm. I was made all things
to all that I might save all.

It ought to move us to the Love of true Concord, that the Agreement of
Brethren is praiseworthy before God, and very pleasing unto him; As he has
said, by Solomon, Eccles. 25. In three things my Spirit is delighted, which are
approved before God and men: the Concord of Brethren, and the Love of
Neighours, and a Man and his Wife agreeing well together. For, miserable and
frail men observe that on Earth which Angels would not observe in Heaven.

We ought to be invited to the same, by the Diligence which our Lord Jesus used
to make Concord between Men and God; and betwixt his Apostles, when there was a
Contention amongst them, who should be the greatest, Mark 9. And when the other
Apostles had Indignation against the two Brethren James and John, because they
would sit at his right hand and his left: In all these things, he pacified and
agreed them.

An Argument of true Concord with God, is the Testimony of our Conscience, that
we are not involved in grievous Sins: Such a Testimony the Apostle had, saying,
I am conscious to my self of nothing, 1 Cor. 4. And Job, chap. 27. Neither does
my Heart reprehend me in my whole Life. Also, a fervent Desire of making
Progress our whole Life, in all good, according to the Ordination of God.

He has an Argument of true Concord with his Neighbor, who behaves himself so
holily toward all, that no Body complains of him; nor can any one speak an ill
Word of him. The Parents of St. John Baptist had both the Arguments; Luke 1.
They were both just before God, observing all the Commandments and
Justifications of the Lord, as to the first; and without blame, as to the
second. Judith also had them both; concerning whom it is written, Judith 8. She
was in all things much renowned, for she feared God greatly; nor was there any
one who did speak an ill Word of her.

An Argument of false Peace betwixt God and Man is, when one does not
solicitously examine his Conscience; and so through an erroneous Conscience, he
believes that he pleases God, when in all things he does indeed displease him.

Another Argument of Disagreement betwixt God and Man is, when the Divine
Disposition about his Creatures, is displeasing to Man, and the Divine Manners
and Examples, and most holy Works of Jesus Christ. Whence it is written, He
displeases God whom God displeases.

He has an Argument of false Concord with his Neighbor, to whom the good Works
and holy Manners of others are displeasing in his Heart, which notwithstanding,
sometimes with his Mouth he commends.

And he has an Argument of Discord, who prefers his own Judgment before others,
and always endeavors to draw the Sentiment of others to his own, but never to
conform his to others.

CHAP. XVI. Of Constancy.
COnstancy is true and perfect, when a Man can be drawn from Perfection,
neither by Prosperity nor Adversity: as Job, saying, Until I dye, I will not
depart from my Innocence, my Justification, which I have begun to maintain, I
will not forego. Nor can he be drawn to transgress the Divine Precepts or Vows
by Threats or Flatterys. So the seven Brethren in the Book of Machabees, who,
their Tongues being cut out, and the Skin of their Heads plucked off, and the
tops of their Hands and Feet cut off, were tormented alive in Brazen Pots, 2
Machab. 7. And Eleazarus would not dissemble to eat unlawful flesh; but said he
would rather go down to the grave, 2 Machab. 6.

He has true Constancy, who never ceases from the Divine Praises; According to
that, Psalm. 33. I will bless the Lord at all times, his Praise shall be ever in
my mouth, etc. Nor does he cease from a fervent Desire of profiting: For, S.
Leo Pope, testifies; None of us is so perfect and holy but he may be still
more perfect and more holy. And also, Then we begin to be in danger of growing
worse, when we cease to desire to grow better.

We ought to be incited to true Constancy, by the Constancy of Martyrs, and
especially of Virgins; who, in their frail Sex, by their Constancy, deserved
eternal Glory. But, we ought much more to be moved to Constancy, by the
Pertinacy of Jews, Heretics, and other perverse men in their Wickednesses;
who, for their Perfidiousness and Pertinacy in their Iniquities, are grievously
tormented in their Consciences here, and expect more grievous Torments, both in
Soul and Body hereafter.

An Argument of true Constancy is, when one, neither for loss of Life nor
Goods, ceases from those things which are pleasing to God: So Tobias ceased not
to bury the Dead; for which thing, King Sennacherib had taken away all his
Goods, and moreover, had commanded him to be killed, Tob. 1.2. So Daniel did
not cease to pray, Dan. 6. So the Apostles, after the Resurrection of Christ
our Lord, ceased not from the Manifestation of his Name, neither for whipping,
nor for the Fear of Death; Peter and John saying to their Adversaries, If it be
just in the sight of God, to hear You rather than God, judge Ye. Act. 4. Peter
also, and the Apostles said unto them, Act. 5. We must obey God rather than Man.

It is an Argument of Inconstancy, when any one departs from the way of
Justice, to obtain the Favor of Men, or some temporal Gain: as Balaam did,
who, for the Gifts and Friendship of Balack, would curse the People of Israel
against the Commandment of the Lord, Numb. 22. Or, for fear of parting with
temporal Goods, as that rich man, who went sad away from our Lord Jesus, when
he counseled him Perfection; for he had many Possessions and Riches which he
loved, Matthew. 19. Or, for fear of corporal Sufferings, as the Apostles all fled
away from their beloved Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 26.

But, Mattathias contemning the Honor which was shown him by the Messengers of
King Antiochus, and the Gifts that were promised him, forsaking all, fled into
the Mountains, that he might keep the Law of his Lord. Also, neither the Desire
of Favor, nor the fear of Temporal Losses, withdrew him from the way of
Justice, 1 Match. 2. In like manner, neither did the fear of corporal Sufferings
withdraw St. Stephen from the just way; but looking up to Heaven, amidst
Showers of Stones, he remained fixed in Christ, Acts 7. In like manner also,
Paul, who said, Acts 21. I am ready not only to be bound, but also to dye at
Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. XVII. Of Liberality.
TRUE and perfect Liberality is, when any one cheerfully administers temporal
Relief to all that are in Need, according to his Power; yea also, being
required, he willingly communicates spiritual Goods to all those who want them;
in confessing, and preaching, in giving Counsel and Instruction: nor is he
ready only to assist those who desire such things, but also, even to those who
do not desire, and care not for his Instruction and Preaching, according to the
Apostle, Opportunely and Importunely, 2 Timothy 4. Yea, to the unwilling, and to
those who know nothing of it, he communicates Prayers, Sighs, and Tears before
God. Nor is the truly Liberal satisfied with this, unless he moreover wholly
spend himself in Study, Meditation, and in other holy Works continually, for
the Salvation of his Neighbors.

To this Liberality we ought to be induced, by a desire of Conformity to God,
who does so continually impart his gifts temporal and spiritual, to all, even
to those who do not ask them; and above all these things, communicates the
Flesh and Blood of his most beloved Son Jesus Christ. Nor does it satisfy him,
simply to give his Gifts, unless also he give himself without Measure in every
Gift.

He commends his Liberality, that denies his Gift to none, though never so much
his Enemy: yea, very often, by Night and by Day, he imparts his Gifts to every
one, though he be never so much offended by any one.

In this he approves his Liberality, that whenever he finds any Opportunity
in a Receiver, he can by no means contain himself from permitting an immediate
Efflux of spiritual gifts from him: although by his infinite Wisdom he
foreknows, that he who receives those Gifts, will shortly lose them, or
immediately defile them, or fight against him with those very Gifts.

It ought to move us hereunto, that what we give is not our own, but another:
and the Proverb tells us, we may cut large Thongs out of another's Hide. Whence
S. Chrysostom, Thou ought not to be so sparing even of thine own; but when
thy Lord's Goods are committed to thee, why so tenacious, why so close fisted?

An Argument of true Liberality is, when any one cheerfully gives what he has
to those who are in Need, without any Desert of theirs, freely and without hope
of Recompense or Return: so our Lord Jesus gave both himself and all he had;
and this is the top of Perfection. Nor does it satisfy the truly Liberal to
give his Goods; in time of Necessity, he offers himself even unto Death, for
the Salvation of his Neighbors: as S. John teaches us, saying, 1 John 3. By
this we have known Gods Love, because he has laid down his Life for us, and we
ought to lay down our Lives for our Brethren. To this, Superiors are more
especially obliged. This Liberality the Apostle had, saying, 2 Cor. 12. I will
most willingly spend my self, and be spent for your Souls. The same says also,
1 Cor. 15. Brethren, I die daily for your Glory. That is, I suffer Dangers of
Death. The truly Liberal, without hopes of Recompense or Return, gives
whatsoever he is, whatsoever he has, and whatsoever he can do, to God, to the
eternal Increase of his Divine Praise; to all Angels and Saints, to their
perpetual Joy and Exultation; to all Sinners, to their Conversion; to all the
Just and Perfect, to the Conservation and Confirmation of their Perfection; to
all in Purgatory, to the Mitigation and Abbreviation of their Pains.

An Argument of false Liberality is, when any one gives that he may be praised
by others; or least he should be worse esteemed, others giving; or that he may
be freed from the Clamors of the Poor: and then he loses both his Gift and
Merit.

He also, is falsely liberal, Who gives by Compulsion, or for Favor; or for hope
of Grace in this Life and Glory in the other; or for fear of the Judge, who has
commanded to give, and who will not permit the Transgression of this his
Precept to pass unpunished.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Truth.
TRUTH is right and just, when the Mind, Tongue, and Works, truly agree: so
that what one thinks in his Heart, he utters with his Mouth, and performs by
his Deeds; after the Example of the Apostle inviting us, Phil. 3. Brethren, be
ye Imitators of me: and observe those (that is, imitate those) who walk so as
ye have our pattern. That is, says the Gloss. As I believe, teach and live.

He is true, who inviolably observes all his Vows to God, or men, and by Deed
fulfills all his words once spoken; unless he sometimes change them upon better
consideration: According to that of Isidore, In ill promises rescind thy faith;
and in an a sinful Vow change thy purpose: so God Almighty sometimes has changed
his Sentence, as is manifest in Ezechias, and the Ninevites. For he told
Ezechias by Esaias, that he should die; and yet after his tears he added fifteen
years to his life, Esai. 38. and he told the Ninevites, by the preaching of
Jonas, that within forty days their City should be destroyed, which
notwithstanding, upon the humiliation of King and People, he permitted to
stand, Jona. 3.

It ought to induce us to the love of the Truth, that Christ is the Truth, Joh.
14. And because Truth is ever amiable in it self. And although Truth be
sometimes grievous and intolerable to some, this is not from Truth, but from
their own perverse Will, which they would gladly fulfill, if the Truth were not
contrary unto them. To the chaste and humble Truth is amiable, which commends
Chastity and Humility, and detests Impurity and Pride, because she is very
contrary to the Impure and Proud, who have strengthened themselves in her
opposites. Also because Truth overcomes all things, 3 Esdras, 3. And because
Truth is immutable, as our Lord Jesus says, Luke 16. Heaven and Earth shall
sooner pass away, than one title fall from the Law. And in S. Math. Chapter 5.
Verily I say unto you, until Heaven and Earth pass away, one Iota or one title
shall not fall from the Law until all things be done.

An Argument of Truth is, when a man, neither for the Favor of any one, nor
for his own Advantage, nor for loss of Goods or Life, leaves the Truth; Nor
Dissembles, nor Conceals it in others: Nor ever on purpose says, or designs to
say any thing that is false: Nor goes from his word once spoken, unless for a
just Cause; After the example of Balaam, saying, Number. 22. If Balack would give
me a house full of Gold and Silver I cannot change the word of my Lord to speak
more or less. And also after the Example of Jeremy, Micheas, Daniel, and other
Prophets, who could by no means be overcome to deviate never so little from the
Truth by word or deed.

An Argument of Falsity is, to have one thing in the Mouth and another in the
Heart, and easily to go from his word without any profitable or necessary
reason. For not only he is a betrayer of the Truth, (as says St. Chrysostom)
who transgressing the Truth, manifestly speaks a Lie in place of Truth; but
also, he who does not freely speak the Truth, which he ought freely to speak,
or does not freely defend the Truth, which he ought freely to defend. For, as a
Priest is obliged freely to preach the Truth, which he has heard from God, so a
Layman is obliged faithfully to defend the Truth, which he has heard from the
Priests, and is proved in the Scriptures: which if he do not do, he is a
Betrayer of the Truth.

CHAP. XIX. Of Meekness.
TRUE Meekness or Gentleness is, when for Injuries and Affronts, the Mind is
not exasperated, nor is any bitterness of Heart manifested exteriourly; but he
who is injured is as a man not hearing, and not having Reproofs in his Mouth,
Psalm. 37. After the Example of Jesus Christ, concerning whom, Esaias, chap. 53.
And he shall not open his mouth; he shall be led as a Sheep to the Slaughter,
and as a Lamb before the Shearer, he shall be dumb, and not open his mouth.

Whence the Gloss. upon St. Matthew says, He is meek, whom Sowerness or
Bitterness of Mind does not affect, but the simplicity of Faith instructs to
endure all Injustice. He is meek, whom neither Rancor nor Anger affects, but he
suffers all contentedly. Of this great Virtue our Lord made himself, as it
were, the Master; which he would not have done, if it had not been of highest
Perfection. Learn (says he, Mat. 11.) of me, because I am meek and humble of
Heart. The meek does not provoke, nor is he provoked; he does not hurt, nor
does he contrive to hurt: he is meek who overrules bad manners. Hitherto the
Gloss.

The Beatitude promised by Christ our Lord ought to induce us to the Love of
Meekness, Mat. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the Earth. St.
Augustine, That Earth I believe, of which it is said, in Psalm. 141. Thou art my
Hope, my Portion in the Land of the Living. And a little after, Blessed are the
Meek, because they shall possess the Earth, out of which they cannot be driven.
Of this Earth, Psalm. 36. But the meek shall inherit the Earth, and shall be
delighted in much Peace. Also S. Peter, 1 Ep. 5. He will give Glory to the
Meek; to wit, God. Further, Let the Meek hear and be glad. Psalm. 33.

An Argument of true Meekness is, when the Mind does not murmur in Affliction,
nor does the reviled return biting Words, nor show any bitterness in his
Countenance, but always reserves his Mind quiet for the Inhabitation of God.

An Argument of false Meekness is, when a man utters soft and mild Words, and
shows a meek Countenance; and yet bears a grievous Bitterness in his Mind.

CHAP. XX. Of Faith.
TRUE Faith is, to believe the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, to be one true
God; and that in these three Persons there is one indivisible Deity, equal
Glory, coeternal Majesty. Every one of them is uncreated, immense eternal,
supremely Good, Wise, Omnipotent, God and Lord: nor are there three uncreated,
immense eternal, good, wise, omnipotent; or three Gods, or three Lords; but
there is one uncreated, immense eternal, good, wise, omnipotent, only God and
Lord. And amongst these three Persons none is before or after, because they are
coeternal; nor is any one lesser or greater, because they are, as to all
things and in all things, equal: yet they differ in their Properties, because
the Father is unbegotten, having his Origin from none; but the Son is begotten
by the Father, Light of Light, True God of True God; the Holy Ghost is neither
created nor begotten, but equally proceeding from both.

Also, true Faith commands us to believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ is true
God and true Man; eternally born of his Father, according to his Deity; but
temporally born of his Mother, according to his Humanity; and in all things
equal to his Father, according to his Divinity: who assumed a Soul out of
nothing, and Flesh of the most pure Blood of the B. Virgin Mary. Impassible and
immortal, according to his Divinity: passible and mortal, according to his
Humanity. Moreover, he who has true Faith believes all the Articles of Faith,
firmly and without doubting; seven belonging to the Divinity, and seven to the
Humanity of Jesus Christ.

The Faith of the ancient Faithful, to wit, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses
and such like, ought to induce us to true Faith. Also, of Infidels and
Gentiles, to wit, Job, Rahab the Harlot, and such like. By this all the
Ancients pleased God. And without Faith it is impossible to please God; as the
Apostle says, Heb. 11.

There is a double benefit of Faith, which also ought to induce us unto it: For
true Faith can do all things and obtaines all things; Witness our Lord Jesus
Christ, who says Mark. 9. All things are possible to him that believes. And
Chap. 11. All things whatsoever ye ask in Prayer, believe that ye shall receive
them, and they shall happen unto you. And in the same chapter, Verily, I say
unto you, That whosoever shall say to this Mountain, Be taken away, and be cast
into the Sea: and shall not doubt in his Heart that whatsoever he shall say,
may be done, it shall be done. As the Caspian mountains at the Prayer of
Alexander, were united, S. Antoninus.

An Argument of true Faith is, a frequent Exercise of good Works: For as the
Body is dead without the Spirit so Faith without Works is dead, As says S.
James, Chap. 2.

An Argument of false Faith is, not to believe the Scripture in all things; but
to think that all things happen by Destiny, or by the course of Nature, and not
from the Providence of God. Also S. Chrysostom says, He does not believe God to
be, who does those things secretly (God being present) which he is afraid to do
publicly (men being present.) Also S. Hierom, He is no true Christian who
dares not die in the state, in which he dares live. Alas, there were many
heretics of old, of which S. Hierom writes, We so confess free Will, as we say
that we always want the help of God: And that they do as well err who with
Manichaeus say, a man cannot avoid Sin; as those, who, with Jovinian, say a man
cannot Sin; because both take away the Liberty of the Soul. But we say, Man has
always both Power to sin, and also Power not to sin.

CHAP. XXI. Of Hope.
TRUE and perfect Hope is, a certain Expectation of future Beatitude,
proceeding from the Grace of God, and antecedent Merits: these two are
necessary to Hope. For, the Grace of God is not preserved but by Merits; and no
Body is saved by Merits without Grace. Hope therefore without Merits, is not
Hope, but Presumption.

He has true Hope, who though he often exercise himself in good Works, yet he
never confides in his own Merits, but only in the superabundant Goodness and
Bounty of God; knowing not whether his good Works please God, or no: seeing all
our Righteousness is as the Cloth of a menstruous Woman, Isa. 64.

He has true Hope who offers to God a just Sacrifice: according to that,
Sacrifice a Sacrifice of Justice, and hope in the Lord, Psalm. 4. A just
Sacrifice is our Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, who upon the
Altar of the Cross offered himself to God for the Sins of the whole World; a
more ample Satisfaction than the whole World did owe. For, as St. Ambrose says,
one drop of so precious Blood had sufficed to redeem all Mankind: but he poured
it out abundantly, that he might show the abundance of his Love. In this
Sacrifice is all our Hope and Health: according to that of St. Bernard, I have
sinned a great Sin; my Conscience is troubled, but not to despair, because I
remember the Wounds of my Lord: for he was wounded for our Iniquities. What is
so to Death, which may not be cured by the Death of Christ? If then so powerful
and so effectual a Medicine come into my Mind, I can no longer be terrified
with the malignity of my Disease. And therefore, it is manifest he mistook, who
said, my Iniquity is greater than that I may deserve Pardon, Genesis 4. And a
little after, I, what is wanting to me in my self, confidently usurp to me out
of the Bowels of my Lord; because they flow with Mercy, nor are Holes wanting,
through which they may flow forth. They have pierced his Hands and his Feet,
Psalm. 21. and opened his Side with a Lance; that through these Chincks I might
suck Honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of a hard Stone, Deuteronomy. 32. That is,
Might taste and see how sweet the Lord is, Psalm. 33. And a little after, The
piercing Nail is made to me an Opening Key, that I may see the Will of my Lord.
And why should I not see through the hole? The Nail cries, the Wound cries, that
God is, in Christ, reconciling the World to himself. Again, a little after, The
Secrets of his Heart is manifest through the Holes of his Body. The great
Sacrament of Piety is manifest. The Bowels of the Mercies of our Lord are
manifest, with which, from on high, he has visited us, Luke 1. For, why should
not Bowels be seen through Wounds? For in what O Lord could it be seen more
clearly, than in thy Wounds, that thou art sweet and mild, and of great Mercy?
For greater Mercy than this has none, than that one should lay down his Life
for those that are appointed and condemned to dye: Wherefore, my merit is the
Mercy of my Lord. Hitherto S. Bernard. The Mercy of our Lord manifestly
appeared in many things; for he Fasted, Watched, Prayed, Sweat, was Weary,
Wept, was Whipped, Suffered, was Crucified, that in him we might have a Supply of
all our Wants.

We ought to be induced to the Hope of Beatitude, by the exceeding great Love
of our Lord Jesus, which constrained him to purchase our Salvation with so
sharp Dolors: And that we might not miss of the Salvation he has merited for
us, he has given us his Angels for our Protection; his Scriptures for our
instruction; and his own and his Saints Examples to point out our way, and his
Body and Blood for our Comfort and Strength.

He has an Argument of true Hope, who valiantly resists Evils, and is
courageous in doing Good: who manfully attempts hard things, and stoutly
perseveres in them: according to that, Psalm. 30. Behave yourselves like men,
and let your Heart be strengthened, all ye that Hope in the Lord.

He has an Argument of false Hope who transgresses the Divine Precepts and his
Vows, neglecting to correct his Life according to the Scripture, and presuming
overmuch upon the Goodness of God without good Works. Such Hope is Vain, as it
is said in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 5. The Hope of the Wicked is as Down,
which is carried away by the wind, and as a thin Froth, which is scattered by
Storms, and as Smoke, which the Wind disperses; and as the memory of a Guest,
for a day in passing.

CHAP. XXII. Of Fear.
JUST Fear is a diligent keeping of the Divine Precepts, in Faith and Manners.
Also Just Fear is, an Anxiety of Heart, withdrawing a man from the unlawful use
of the Members of his Body and of his outward Senses, and inward Affections;
lest the Soul should be wholly separated from God, or somewhat estranged from
familiarity with him: Taking heed also, lest the Mind take delight, in Meat,
Drink, Sleep, or in any other the least Creature, and so decay in its fervor.
This Anxiety the Spouse had to her beloved; lest she should offend him in any
Motion, Gesture, Word or Deed, and thereby incur his disfavor. Also lest she
should be less grateful, through any the very least fault. Just fear makes to
abstain, not only from grievous Sins, but also from Venial. For by a custom,
even of Venials, Security of mind, and familiarity with God is lost, and many
Graces neglected.

The manifold profit of just Fear ought to induce us thereunto. For it is the
beginning of Wisdom, as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm. 110. And the beginning of
Justice, according to that, He who is without fear, cannot be justified,
Eccles. 1. It is also the Seal and Conclusion of all Virtues and Graces,
according to that, Eccles. 25. The fear of God puts it self above all things.
Where the fear of the Lord is not, all Grace is soon lost, and the Conscience
is perverted, according to that, Eccles. 27. If thou do not diligently keep
thy self in the fear of the Lord, thy House shall soon be overturned.

S. Bernard brings another Benefit of the Fear of God; I have truly learnt,
that nothing is so efficacious to obtain, to keep, and to recover Grace, as
always to be found before God, not to be high-minded, but to fear. Blessed is
the man who always fears, Prove. 28. Fear therefore when Grace smiles upon
thee; fear when it leaves thee; fear when it returns again; and this is to fear
always. And a little after, When it is present fear, lest thou should not
work worthily with it: And a little after, Fear when Grace shall be taken away
from thee, as one who art instantly about to fall. And again, Now if Grace is
propitiously returned, thou ought much more to fear, lest perchance thou
suffer a relapse, according to that in the Gospel, John 5. Behold thou art
cured; Go thy ways now, and sin no more, lest some worse thing befall thee.

To the same, the miserable Fall of the Angels ought to induce us, concerning
which, Job says, chapter 4. Behold, those who serve him are not stable, and he has
found wickedness in his Angels; How much more they who inhabit Houses of Dirt,
who have an Earthly Foundation, shall be consumed as it were with a Moth. Also
the Falls of Holy men from the beginning of the World, as of Adam, Sampson,
Solomon, and of all the Apostles. And alas, at this very day, very Holy men are
thrown down, according to that, Psalm. 90. Thousands shall fall on thy side
(that is, who ought to have sat by the side of the Judge in Judgment) and ten
thousands on thy right hand, (that is who ought to have been placed on the
right hand of Christ.) Whence the Gloss says, There are many who think they
shall judge others, and there are many more, who think they shall be placed on
the right hand amongst those that are saved; but they are deceived: For they
who presume of themselves, and have not their Root fixed on high, fail in their
imaginations.

We ought to be moved to the same by the Example of the Saints fearing God; as
Job says of himself, chapter 31. I have always feared God, as Waves swelling over
me, Upon that of Job, Chap. 17. All that I have shall go down into the deepest
Hell, and do you think at least there I shall be at rest? The Gloss says,
Consider, who of us can be secure of Rest when he is afraid whom the Judge
himself commends. S. Hierom, speaking of himself, says: as often as I think
upon the day of Judgment, my whole body trembles. What then shall such poor
wretches as we do, when so great men tremble?

He has an Argument of Just Fear who is so sollicitous in all things which
belong to God, that at no time nor place he neglects any thing that is possible
unto him: Yea, according to his power he does all things fervently; whence it
is said in Ecclesiastes, chap. 7. He who fears God, neglects nothing. And in
Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 15. He who fears God, will do good things.

He has an Argument of unjust Fear, who for the loss of Body or Goods, and not
for God, does do good and omit ill: or do ill and omit Good. This Fear our Lord
prohibits, saying, Math. 10. Do not fear those who kill the Body. And Esaias
Chap. 51. Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a mortal man? To such
the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 32. Where are their Gods, in which they put their
Confidence?

CHAP. XXIII. Of Joy.
TRUE Joy, or Gladness, is to be comforted in those things which belong to God.
For the matter of all Joy is in God; to wit Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
Liberality, Beauty, Beatitude, Mercy, Justice, Truth, Nobility, Sanctity,
Meekness, Faithfulness, Charity, Humility, and all such like Excellencies. And
all these things are immensly and eternally in God

He has true Joy, who has a sincere Conscience in all his Doings; Nor does ever
wittingly transgress the Divine Precepts and Vows; but always endeavors to
grow better, and to conform himself to the Example, and Divine Manners of Jesus
Christ. Of this Conscience, the Apostle rejoiced and gloryed saying, 2 Cor. 1.
This is our Glory, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity of Heart
and sincerity of God, and not in Carnal Wisdom, but in the Grace of God we have
had our Conversation in this World, but more abundantly to you wards.

It ought to move us to true Joy that the All-good God, amongst all Creatures,
has so far united Humane Nature alone to himself, that it may with Truth he
said, God is Man, and Man is God, And whatsoever God has by nature, Man has by
Grace; For he did not take the Nature of Angels but the Seed of Abraham, as the
Apostle says, Heb. 2. S. Chrysostom, Is it not a great and wonderful thing,
that our Flesh should sit above and be adored by Angels and Archangels?

Another motive is, that God has assured us of Eternal Beatitude, by the
Promises, of the Law and the Prophets, and also by Oath; according to that Luke
1. The Oath which he swore to Abraham our Father, that he would give us. By the
four Evangelists; by the testimony of the Apostles; by the Pledge of the Holy
Ghost in Baptism, which is a Pledge of our Inheritance; by an Earnest, that is a
fore-taste of the Sweetness of God in Devotion; by an Hostage, who is Christ
the only begotten Son of God. To this double Joy the Apostle exhorts us,
saying, Phil. 4. Rejoice ye in our Lord always (to wit for the Divine Union)
Again I say Rejoice (to wit, for the Certitude of Eternal Beatitude.)

He has ground and matter of true Joy who is by inward inspiration assured of
the remission of all his Sins, by which he grievously offended God, and every
Creature, and lost all the Grace he had received, and deserved never to have
any more bestowed on him. This assurance had S. Mary Magdalen, to whom our Lord
said, Luke. 7. Her many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much. And S.
Francis, of whom it is said, that it was revealed to him, that even the last
farthing of his Sins was remitted him.

Another Argument and Matter of Joy is, an Assurance of Mind, that one is the
Son of God, and Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven. This Assurance the Holy Ghost
gives, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. For the Spirit it self bears witness to
our Spirit that we are the Sons of God. But if Sons, also Heirs; Heirs indeed
of God, but Coheirs with Christ. This Assurance the Apostle had, when he said,
in the same Chap. I am sure that neither Death, nor Life, nor any Creature,
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God.

An Argument of false Joy is, to be delighted in transitory things; whether
they be temporal Riches, or carnal Friendships, or some corporal Commodity, or
temporal Joy: This Joy is the Trap of Sadness. For when these things pass away,
Joy passes and Sadness follows. And unless such Sadness depart out of the
Heart, true Joy shall never enter into it; because they cannot be together, no
more than Fire and Water, which mutually expel one another.

There is also sometimes a natural Joy, when a man thinks or speaks; or hears
another speak, or reads of the Perfection of God: there is also a natural Joy
in the desire of the Kingdom of Heaven. For all naturally desire Beatitude.
This Joy in like manner is Vain, and it is hard to discern, when it is a free
gift of Grace, and from God, and when natural. Happy were he, who could say
with Esaias, Chap. 61. Rejoicing, I will Rejoice in the Lord, (to wit, my
Creator) and my Soul shall Joy in my God (to wit, my Redeemer) Because he has
clothed me with the Garment of Salvation, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Sadness.
TRUE Sadness is a grief of Heart for all the Injuries which the patient God
has causelessly endured from his Creatures, from the beginning of the World, and
which he shall endure until the end of it, as well from Spiritual as from
Worldly men. This Grief ought to draw innumerable tears of Blood from the Eyes
of all that love God.

Another part of true Sadness is, that a man is oftentimes overcome in
Temptations, without making any resistance. For when he sees or hears any thing
in Birds or Beasts which belongs to Impurity, instantly the mind is defiled
with impure Thoughts, or Delights, or Affections. And when the Soul, by any of
the five Senses, perceives any thing which may move it to Vainglory, Envy,
Anger, Rancor, Detraction, Avarice, Levity, Carnal Friendship, or any Sin
whatsoever, forthwith, without fighting, it falls into some of the
forementioned faults, doubtful whether ever it shall rise again out of such a
Sin or no. And if, by the help of God, it do rise again, it is uncertain if it
ever recover the Grace which it had, and so great Grace as it had before. For
man can fall of himself, but he cannot of himself rise again. Because they are
Flesh, a Spirit going away and not returning, Psalm. 77.

Another part of true Sadness is, that manifold Graces flowing out of the
Fountain of the Divine goodness come to nothing, because they do not return to
the Principal from whence they flowed, with a manifold increase, according to
the Design of God. This all Creatures can never sufficiently bewail.

We ought to be induced to true Sadness, by the most holy Example of our Lord
Jesus, whose Soul was Sad from the very beginning of his Life to his very
Death. Who also acknowledged the Sad to be happy, saying, Mat. 5. Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Because Joys cannot be found but
by Sadness, as a certain Gloss says upon the Canonical Epistle of St. James.
The profit also which proceeds from Sadness, ought to induce us hereunto. For
true Sadness is more profitable than true Joy, according to that, Eccles. 7. It
is better to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting. For,
oftentimes, one is humbled by Sadness, but is lifted up by Joy. And, which is
more lamentable, sometimes a Spiritual man, after Joy and Devotion of Mind,
becomes more free that day, and less vigilant over his Actions, than he would
have been if he should have had no Joy. Another profit of Sadness is; Whereas
Prayers and other Good Works anoint and cherish God, Tears (which are an effect
of Sadness) compel or prick him; according to S. Bernard.

An Argument of true Sadness is, when the Mind is not depressed by Grief, but
elevated; Nor would it be freed from Sadness, but still desires more. But
Sadness, by which the mind is deprest and from which it desires instantly to be
freed, is not Good. Such is the Sadness of which it is written, Pro. 17.
Sadness of Heart dryes up the bones, to wit, of Virtues; and S. James. Chap. 1.
The Anger of man (which proceeds from Sadness) does not Work the Justice of God.

He has an Argument of true Sadness, who restrains his Senses from whatsoever
delicacies: He does not See, nor Hear, nor Taste, nor Smell, nor Touch any
thing, by which his grief may be mitigated: He flies also all Places, and all
Companies, by whose Conversation the grief of his Heart may be diminished. For
he is certain, the most Secure way is, to end his Life in true Sadness;
according to that, Eccles. 7. The Heart of the Wise is where there is Sadness:
The Heart of Fools where there is Joy.

He has an Argument of false Sadness, who, considering not the most wise
ordination of God, is tormented for the loss of temporal Goods, or for the
affliction or Death of Friends, or for the infirmity of his own Body: or for
his own Correction. Such a Sadness confers no Grace, but tears the mind in
pieces, according to that, Pro. 25. As a Moth in a garment, and a worm in wood,
so the Sadness of a man hurts his Heart: and Chap. 15. By the Sadness of the
Heart the Spirit is dejected

CHAP. XXV. Of Gratitude.
TRUE and Perfect Gratitude, is, to magnify the Exellency of the gifts of God
in the Soul, with annihilation of ones self, and a due reverence of Heart. So
David magnified the Gifts of the Commandments of God, saying, Psalm. 118. I have
loved thy commandments above Gold and Topaz Stones. And Solomon extolled the
gift of Wisdom, saying, Pro. 8. Wisdom is better than all the most precious
Riches; and every thing that is desirable cannot be compared unto it.

He has true Gratitude, who thinks himself unworthy of all the Gifts of God:
And by how much he reputes and judges himself more unworthy of the Favors of
God, by so much the more does the Gratitude of his mind increase. For all those
things which thou have given us, O Christ, thou requirest nothing of us, but
that we would be saved; and thou also giving this very thing, as it were
thankest the Receivers. S. Chrysostom.

The consideration of the Giver ought to move us to Gratitude who is
Omnipotent, the most Noble, the most Loving, the most Faithful, the Best, the
most Happy, and the most Perfect. Also the greatness of the Gifts. For there is
no gift so small, eirher corporal or spiritual, which comes from God, in which
the immense God is not included, with all his Divine Virtue: the affection also
of the giver is to be pondered: For, he does not give himself by halves or with
Indignation, that he may be freed of us; but out of all his Divine Desire, out
of all his Love and Goodness, the profit also of the Gifts is to be considered:
For he gives every one of them that we may know, love, and enjoy him, and to
make us happy. We ought to weigh also, what it is that compels him to give, not
the fear of any Evil, or hope of any Good, nor any Virtue of ours, but his own
immense and eternal Goodness. Our Unworthiness also ought to be reflected on,
who are not worthy even of our very Life; nor have we deserved to be even Worms
amongst his other Creatures.

The profit also of Gratitude ought to move us hereunto; for, it opens the
Fountain of Deity, and moves God to pour out himself upon us: as Ingratitude
dryes up the Founof the Divine Deity, the dew of Mercy, the streams of Grace.
The greater Gratitude there is in the Soul, the more apt it is to receive
Grace, and the more the All-bountiful God is compelled to give it.

He has an Argument of true Gratitude, who having maturely pondered all the
above mentioned motives to Gratitude, reverently receives the Divine Graces;
and with all his Heart gives thanks for them all, little and great: and having
received them from his most Loving Lord, with his utmost endeavor strives to
keep them undefiled. For how was the gift of the Friend grateful which was not
gratefully received, and which was so soon Voluntarily defiled and lost.

Nor do we need Gratitude only for those things which are to our Comfort, but
also for those which are to our Affliction; for God gives both out of the same
Goodness and Charity. Hence Tobias says, Chapter 11. I bless thee O Lord God of
Israel, because thou have chastized me, and thou have saved me. For in order to
equal Grace in this Life, and Glory in the other, God gives Devotion to men,
and permits Tribulation to happen to them: or for their gteater Profit: as he
permitted to Job, who said, Chap. 2. If we have received good things from the
hand of God, why should we not receive Evil? As if he should say, we ought
gratefully to receive both.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Zeal of Souls.
TRUE and perfect Zeal of Souls is, when one, by holy Meditations, by fervent
Desires, by Tears, Prayers, Watchings, Fastings, by Preachings, by Confessions,
by Counsel, by Instruction, and by other good Works, labors for the Salvation
of Souls. Now, how great this Grace is, Venerable Bede thus describes; What
Grace is more sublime, and what Conversation more grateful to God, than theirs
whose daily Business it is to convert Souls to the favor of their Maker, and
always to be increasing the Joy of the celestial Country, by their frequent
Acquisition of faithful Souls. Also, St. Gregory says, There is no such
Sacrifice to the omnipotent God, as is the Zeal of Souls. And this in regard of
the Image of the B. Trinity, imprinted upon Souls.

The Example of Jesus Christ ought to move us to the Zeal of Souls, who all his
Life long, with so great Fervor thirsted after the Conversion of Sinners, and
the Perfection of those that were good, that for the Recovery of lost Souls he
offered his particular Members to particular Torments, and at last his very
Life to a most shameful Death; as St. Bernard testifies: So great was his Zeal
for the Reconciliation of Man, that he did not attend his own Stipend, so he
might gain the lost Sheep. O! How great is the Dignity of Souls, and how great
is the Zeal of God for Souls, for whose Redemption the Son of God offered all
his precious blood to God his Father, when notwithstanding one drop of such
precious blood, would have sufficed for the Redemption of all mankind, as says
S. Ambrose; and especially, when hereby no happiness could accrue to him nor
decrease from him. This nobiliy of Souls the Wisdom of God knew, which is
unknown to us; which S. Bernard laments, saying, Alas! how title do we remark
the Nobleness of the Soul! which being present, the Body lives; whose absence
proves, what its presence gave: Which God so much esteemed, that he gave his
only begotten Son for it, which the Devil so much prized, that he offered the
whole world for it.

He has an Argument of true Fervor, who neither regards his own Life nor Body,
so he may gain Souls to Christ. This Zeal David had when he said, Who may give
me that I may die for thee, O Absalon my Son, my Son Absalon, 2 Samuel 18. And the
Apostle when he says, 2 Cor 12. I most willingly will spend my self and be
spent for your Souls, 1 Cor. 15. Brethren, I die daily for your Glory: that is,
I suffer the dangers of Death. And S. Dominick, when he would have sold himself
for a certain Captive, detained by the Saracens. And again for another, who
remained amongst Heretics for want of necessary sustenance. Whom
notwithstanding the wise God hindered from being sold, for the Salvation of many
Souls.

He has an Argument of false Fervor, who in his Spiritual Works, is more
solicitous for gifts than for Souls. Such is not the Devil, who was figured in
the King of the Sodomites, who said to Abraham, Genesis 14. Give me the Souls,
take the rest to thy self. And he who labors more for the Friendship or Favor
of Men, than for their Sanctity and Perfection; such an one cannot say with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. I seek not yours, but you. But it is to be noted, that
whenever two things move to any Work, to wit, God, and somewhat else, it is
hard to discern which moves most: For example, the Salvation of the Soul, and
the hope of Gain or Favor, or desire to Please, or Liberty, or some other
Delight, moves one to hear Confessions; or to some other Spiritual Work: here
it is hardly discerned, which of these most affects the Mind of him that
labors or Works: yet it is an evident sign, that some of the forementioned
Inducements do more move than God and the Salvation of Soul, when one hears
more willingly the Rich, Noble, Young, and Beautiful, than the Poor, Ignoble,
Old, and Deformed. And when one is Delighted to be oftener and longer with those
than with these, and perhaps with less Fruit: when notwithstanding they have as
Holy Consciences as those or more Holy, and are as obedient, or more, to
Counsels as they: and as much, or more, study perfection, as they: and as much
or more please God, as they. Witness S. James, Chap. 2. Has not God chosen the
Poor in this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which God has
promised to those who love him, but ye have dishonored the Poor. To wit, not
regarding him, in whom, notwithstanding, Christ is chiefly honored. As it is
said in an Homily upon that: Honor all men. It is evident that in their Works
many more seek themselves, than God. For those Works, which have Labor, and
also some Comfort, as are Preaching, Confessing, Governing and such like;
although there be great Danger in them, yet every one is ready to undertake
them: But those Works which have only Labor, and no Comfort in them; as
Fasting, Watching, Disciplines, and such like: although there be no danger in
them, yet every one avoids them, as much as he can.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Liberty.
TRUE Liberty is not to be tied with the Bonds of Sins, which do indeed bind
us; according to that, Pro. 5. The transgressions of the Wicked apprehend him,
and he shall be bound with the cords of his Sins. And indeed, make him a slave,
according to that, Jo. 8. Every one who commits Sin is a Slave of Sin. For to
sin is not Liberty, nor any part of Liberty, as says S. Anselm; but it is the
worst kind of Servitude. From this kind of Servitude no Body is freed, but by
the help of the only Son of God: as himself testifies; If the Son shall have
made you free, ye shall be free indeed: In the same Chapter.

He has true Liberty, who is not taken with the desire of Temporal Things, nor
with the Praise, nor with the Favor of men, nor with self-complacency, or
displeasure of others, nor with Carnal Friendship, or servile Fear, nor with
the delight of Transitory Joy.

The consideration of the Divine Order, which would have man to be Free, ought
to move us to the love of true Liberty; in sign whereof, he has given man free
Will, in this especially, making him like to himself, that he can be forced by
none, as neither can God be forced by any one. That free Will God bestowed upon
man, saying in Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 15. God made Man from the Beginning, and
left him in the hand of his own Counsel. And a little after, He has set before
thee Water and Fire, to which* thou will, stretch forth thy hand. Before man is
Life and Death, Good and Evil; What he pleases shall be given unto him.

He is undoubtedly in the way to true Liberty, who ties himself by the
inviolable observance of the Divine Precepts and counsels, and his own Vows:
who refrains his Mind and Senses from pleasure: who employs the members of his
Body in no unlawful things: who heartily loves the Yoke of Obedience: who
labors with all his Might how he may please God. The more any one applys
himself to these things, the sooner he obtains true Liberty and is more
strongly rooted in it. But who in this World freely does his own Will in all
things, as much as he can, he is entangled in diverse Snares of the Devil: and,
when he thinks himself most free, then is he most strongly and surely held in
the Slavery and Captivity of the Devil.

He has an Argument of true Liberty who desires none of those things which
alienate and estrange the Mind from the familiarity of God; such are,
Superiority, frequent Employment in exterior things, too great Solicitude for
the Commodities of the Flesh, dissolution of Mind, distraction in diversity of
Business; temerarious discussion of the Life and Conscience of others, excusing
or diminishing our own Defects, Manifestation or Aggravation of the Defects of
our Neighbors.

Another Argument of Liberty is, a secure Confidence of Mind concerning the
Remission of ones Sins, both as to the blame and pain of them, proceeding from
a fervor of Heart, which sometimes burns in the Heart as Fire in a Furnace;
which makes a Man who was before cold and languid, hot and inflamed in Prayer:
which Fervor, consumes all the stain and pain of Sin, as Fire burns out the
rust of Iron.

He has an Argument of Servitude and Captivity, who detests the Yoke of
Obedience, who abhors charitable and brotherly Correction, who daily contrives
Revenge of the Injuries he suffers, who is affected with Humane Praise and
Favor, who knowingly and pertinaciously employs himself in something which is
against God and his own Conscience, or against the Will of his Superiors, who
is delighted in the Reception or Collation of certain little Gifts or amicable
Letters; whence a Wise man says, To receive Gifts is to sell ones Liberty. And
Job, chap. 15. Fire shall consume their Tents who willingly receive Gifts. That
is, the Fire of false love, and consequently, a Band of Servitude follows that
Love. Concerning him who gives Gifts, Solomon says, Prove. 22. He shall get
Victory and Honor who gives Gifts; but he takes away the Soul of the Receiver.
All these things take away a Man's Liberty from him, and reduce him to a
miserable Servitude: for, he cannot in Freedom of Spirit attend to God, who is
taken up with such things.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Religion.
TRUE Religion, or Spiritual Life, as St. James says, chapter 1. is, To visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep ones self undefiled
from this World. He keeps himself undefiled from this World, who absolutely
renounces all secular manners, and avoids, as much as he can, both carnal and
spiritual Sins.

The Profit of a truly spiritual Life ought to move us thereunto; concerning
which, the Scripture says, Jo. 6. It Is the Spirit which gives Life, the Flesh
profits nothing. And that of the Apostle, Romans 8. They who are in the Flesh
cannot please God.

Moreover, he who would indeed become spiritual, ought to fly and hate carnal
Commodities; that is, detest carnal Desires which war against the Soul. as says
S. Peter 1 Ep. 2. and desire Asperities and carnal Incommodities; for, these
conserve Grace, as Thorns defend Herbs in a Garden: for, Grace flows out
through the Mouth, Eyes, and Ears. And, as Fire and Water cannot be together,
so neither can carnal and spiritual Pleasure; according to St. Bernard.

He must also know, that a Man can do no good of himself, as says the Apostle,
2 Cor. 3. Not that we are sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as of
our selves, but our Sufficiency is of God. This takes away Presumption: and
that he can do all things through Christ, more fully and perfectly, than by
himself, the Apostle being witness; I can do all things in him who strengthens
me. This takes away Despair; which two things, to wit, Presumption and Despair,
are very noxious to spiritual Persons, and often impugn them: also ever before
God to acknowledge, not only how vile he is, but also how vile he may be, and
might have been, if God had not prevented: and this takes away all swelling
Pride. And that God will exact an Acconut of all Evil committed, and all Good
omitted, and all Graces neglected both for himself and for the Community; this
gives just Fear. Also, to receive all Good, as from God giving it; and this
excludes false Love, and infers Gratitude. And to receive all Evil, as from
God, graciously permitting it for our Profit; and this infers Patience. The
more any one profits in these, the more he tends to a spiritual Life, and
grows, and is confirmed in it.

He has an Argument of true Spiritual Life, whose Spirit absolutely overrules
the Flesh, who is as sensible of any spiritual Damage as corporal, and as much
shuns the Place, Time, and Persons, where, and by whom he may be hurt in
Spirit, as where he may be hurt and incommodated in Body, and as speedily takes
care to cure his Spirit as his Flesh; yea, has so much more care of his Spirit,
as his Spirit is more worthy than his Body.

He also has an Argument of true spiritual Life, who is as much delighted in
spiritual Food as in corporal, and does as unwillingly neglect at any time his
spiritual Food as his corporal, and does as orderly take it as his corporal,
and does as much compel himself to it when he has no Appetite, as sick Persons
are compelled to corporal Food when they loath it.

Another Argument of spiritual Life is, if a man be as diligent about his
Spirit as about his Flesh; if he be as ready to obey in all things his
spiritual Physician, for the health of his Spirit and Soul, as the corporal
Physician for the Health of his Body; if he be as solicitous to get the Grace,
which he wants in Prosperity and Adversity, which he wants toward Friends and
toward Enemies, which he wants when he is praised and when he is dispraised,
which he wants alone before God, and which he wants amongst Men; as he is
sollicitous about Flesh and Fish, or about Summer and Winter Garments: if he
labor as much to get, multiply, conserve, and profitably to expend spiritual
gifts, as a secular Person does concerning temporal goods; and is so much more
diligent about his Spirit than his Body, by how much his Spirit is more worthy
than his Body. Concerning all these things, the Apostle says, Romans 8. They who
walk according to the Flesh, savor the things of the Flesh: But they who walk
according to the Spirit, savor the things of the Spirit.

An Argument of a carnal Life is, to live according to the Rule of the Flesh.
St. Augustine, He lives according to the Flesh who lives according to himself;
that is, goes whither he will; sleeps when he will, and as long as he will;
speaks what he will, and to whom he will, and when he will; eats and drinks
when he will, and as much as he will; laughs and takes filthy Pleasure, amongst
whom he will, and when he will. In fine, whatsoever is sweet to his Smell, he
seeks it; whatsoever is soft to his sense of touching, whatsoever is delightful
to his Eyes, whatsoever is pleasing to his Body, he exercises and follows it,
as he will, and when he will; because he carnally wills all things lawful and
unlawful. He is delighted in fine Clothes, Horses, and Arms, as he will and
when he will. And so he lives and is delighted, not according to God, but
carnally; and fulfills all the desires of the Flesh, as he will and when he
will.

Another Argument of a carnal Life is, Liberty of Tongue, whence follows a
Distraction of Heart; according to that, James 1. If any man think himself to
be religious, not bridling his Tongue, but seducing his own Heart, this man's
Religion is vain. Therefore it is written, Prove 21. He who keeps his Mouth and
his Tongue, keeps his Soul from Straits, chap. 18. Death and Life are in the
Power of the Tongue.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Maturity.
TRUE Maturity is, when all the Affections and Forces of the Soul are
unanimously gathered up into God. Hereby the Mind is restrained from Vanity,
and the five Senses from their Allurements: but, when the Soul recedes from
that blessed Union, forthwith it is entangled with diverse Vanities; for, all
things under Heaven are Vanity; as says Ecclesiastes, chapter 1.

The most holy Example of our Lord Jesus, ought to induce us to true Maturity;
concerning whose Seriousness, St. Augustine writes thus; We read that our Lord
Jesus was sad, wept, was weary from traveling, suffered Reproaches and
Injuries, Spittle, Whips, the Cross: but, we never read that he laughed, or
enjoyed the Prosperity of this Life. Hence all the Elect rejoice in themselves,
when they begin to be wearied with the Adversities of the World, and not to be
vainly deceived with any of it is Prosperities, knowing that there is another
Life to follow. Also, because the Holy Scripture much dispraises Dissolution
and Laughter; according to that, Eccles. 2. I looked upon Laughter as an Error;
and to Joy I said, why art thou in vain deceived? And Prove. 14. Laughter shall
be mingled with Grief, and Joy ends in mourning. And the Psalmist speaks thus
to the Lord, Psalm. 30. Thou have hated those who occupy themselves in deceitful
Vanities without Profit. And especially, the Commination of our Lord Jesus,
Luke 6. Woe unto you who now laugh, because ye shall lament and weep. Also,
because it much withdraws any one from the Familiarity of God, and obstructs
the Perception of Divine Graces.

He has an Argument of true Maturity, who neither by idle Words, nor by Deeds,
nor Signs, nor dissolute Gate, nor by any other Behavior, provokes others to
Levity; but always, in himself and others, from his Heart detests
Dissoluteness. He avoids all places where are occasions of Levity, and all
dissolute Company, that he may conserve Maturity; knowing, That he who will
touch Pitch shall be defiled thereby, Eccles. 13. And he who converses with
dissolute Persons, will not avoid Dissoluteness. Such an one was B. Job, who
was so mature and sober, that dissolute Persons avoided his Presence; as he
himself says, chap. 29. The Young men saw me, and hid themselves. And he had
such a custom of Maturity, that if the contrary were seen in him, no body would
believe it: whence he says in the same Chapter, If at any time I laughed at
them they did not believe me: and the light of my Countenance did not fall upon
the Ground.

He has an Argument of Levity, who is prone to laugh, who is jesting in his
Words, dissolute in his Manners, a frequenter of dissolute Places and Company,
and willingly dwells with such; who shuns grave and mature Persons, the sight
of them is offensive to him, and he believes the Infirmity of his Body proceeds
from Sobriety. Such an one is described in Ecclesiastes, chapter 11. Rejoice O
Young man in thy tender Age, and let thy Heart be joyful in the days of thy
Youth; and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thy Eyes; and
know, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment.

CHAP. XXX. Of Simplicity.
TRUE and perfect Simplicity is, to hurt no Body, and to do Good to every one;
as says the Gloss. upon the Parables. This is the first Virtue for which Job is
commended, chap. 1. There was a man in the Land of Hus, whose name was Job, and
he was a simple and an upright Man; as excelling in that above other Virtues.
This our Lord commanded, when he sent his Apostles into the whole World, to
gather Unbelievers to the Unity of the Catholic Faith; saying, Math. 10. Be ye
prudent as Serpents, and simple as Doves. Where Prudence is joined to
Simplicity: for Prudence without Simplicity is Craft; and Simplicity without
Prudence, is Folly. The Dove neither hurts with her Beak, nor with her Talons;
so the truly simple hurts neither with word nor Deed.

He truly loves Simplicity, who is not busied about many things; as Martha was,
Luke 10. For, where there are many things, there are Doubles or Folds. But only
seeks one thing; of which, our Lord; but one thing is necessary, for which Mary
Magdalen is commended: Who chose the best part which shall not be taken away
from her. This is that one Good, in which are all Goods eternal and immense.

The Profit coming from Simplicity ought to induce us thereunto. For it is
written Pro. 3. And with the Simple is his Converse; that is, the Lords. For
the Lord is familiar with the simple, to whom he does not disdain to reveal his
Secrets. Whence our Lord, Math. 10. said to his Apostles, prohibiting little
Children to come into his presence, Permit little Children, and do not hinder
them from coming to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. This is a Virtue
without which there is no Salvation: For our Lord Jesus says, Math. 18. Unless
ye be made like little Childeren, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. He does not say, unless ye be made little Children, but like little
Children; that is Simple and Innocent. Another Profit of Simplcity is, that
which is mentioned, Pro. 10. He who walks simply walks confidently. For the way
of Simplicity is the most secure way to the Kingdom of Heaven. For it is
written, He will protect those who walk simply, Pro. 2.

He has an Argument of true Simplicity, who perverts no bodies doings, but
presumes well of all; who neither depraves, nor diminishes any ones Good; who
desires the Salvation of all, and wishes ill to none: who does good things, and
does them well; And who has good thoughts of the Lord, and seeks him in the
simplicity of his heart, Wisdom. 1. Who submits himself to his will, and keeps
his Commandments.

He has an Argument of Duplicity, who has one thing in his Mouth, and another
in his Heart and works; As Joab holding Amaza by the Chin, said, Brother, God
save you; and in the mean time secretly drawing out a Sword, slew him, 2 Samuel
20. Against this our Lord Jesus says, Let your Speech be Yea, yea, Nay, Nay,
Math. 5. That is, what you have in your Heart, speak with your Mouth, and
exhibit with your Deeds. And S. James, Chap. 1. The double minded man is
inconstant in all his ways. And God curses double Dealers; to wit, who will
together serve him and the Devil; that is, exercise themselves in Sins, and in
good Works. For these our Lord says, Math. 6. No body can serve two, Masters;
to wit, that are contrary to one another. For Virtue and Vice, Good and Evil,
are wholly opposite. Against those who seek to please God and the World, S.
James says, Chap. 4. Whosoever will be a friend of this World is made an enemy
of God

He has an Argument of false Simplicity, who makes a show of Simplicity in his
outward Conversation, and yet carries Deceit in his Heart; Of such an one the
Prophet Jeremy says, Chap. 9. Let every one keep himself from his Neighbor,
and let him not have confidence in every Brother; because every Brother,
supplanting, will supplant, and every Friend will walk deceitfully.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Silence.
TRUE and perfect Silence is, not only to restrain the Tongue from unlawful
Words (as are Detractions, Lies, Perjuries, Unchaste, light, angry, hurtful,
reproachful Words, and such like; but also from profitable and lawful;
according to that, Psalm. 38. I held my Peace, and was humbled; I was silent
from good things: that is, from declaiming them. The Gloss. says, He does no
fall into unlawful things who warily rastrains himself from those that are
lawful. Spiritual Grace is poured out not only by unprofitable and hurtful
Words but by profitable Words, when a mean is not observed in speaking. This
moderation of the Tongue is a rare Virtue: Witness S. James Chap. 3. All
Beasts, and Fowls, and Serpents, and other living Creatures, are tamed, and
have been tamed by man; but the Tongue no man can tame; it is a restless Evil;
full of deadly Poison. The Gloss: the Tongue of wicked men, surpasses the
Beasts in Cruelty, the Birds in Levity, the Serpents in Virulency: For they are
Beasts who have sharpened their Tongues like a sword, Psalm. 63. They are Birds
who have put their mouth in Heaven, and whose Mouth has spoken Vanity, Psalm.
143. They are Serpents, of whom it is said; The Poison of Asps is under their
Lips, Psalm. 13.

The most holy example of our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to induce us to the love
of Silence; who, so recommended Silence, when he was asked concerning Crimes
falsely laid to his Charge, would not excuse himself nor by any Answer defer his
death. The example also of a certain Eremite, ought to move us hereunto;
concerning whom we read that he carried a Stone in his Mouth three years that
he might learn to keep Silence; for one may sooner learn to speak, than to be
Silent, according to that of a Wise man; He who knows how to speak, let him
learn also to hold his peace.

The Profit coming from it, ought to induce us to it. For Silence composes the
distracted Heart, induces quiet of Conscience: and makes the mind apt to
receive the Divine Grace. But where there is not Silence, there a man is easily
overcome by the Adversary: according to that Pro. 25. As an open City and
without Walls: so is the man who cannot restrain his Spirit in speaking: For
where there is not a moderation of the Tongue, there will never be Perfection;
according to that, James 3. If any one offend not in his Words he is a perfect
man. And no other, says the Gloss: Where there is a custody of the Tongue,
there is Happiness; according to that, Eccles. 14. Blessed is the man who has
not fallen by a word out of his Mouth. And Pro. 21. He who keeps his mouth and
his Tongue, keeps his Soul from straits.

He has an argument of true Silence, who when he may freely, and lawfully, and
without offense, speak, and whose words would be received with great desire,
and yet can by no means or very rarely be induced to speak, remembering that of
S. Gregory; If the holy Prophet Ezekiel was sent to speak, and yet sat silent
and weeping seven days, we ought to consider, how great a fault it is for him
not to be silent, whom no necessity compels to speak. And that Evangelical
word, Mat. 12. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment.

An Argument of false Silence or Loquacity is, to speak malapertly and
clamorously, that he may seem to be some body amongst others; Or in an
importune time, whereas seasonable Speech is the best. Against this is that,
Eccles. 20. A wise man will hold his peace until a fit time, but the wanton and
imprudent will not observe time. Or to speak when no body attends, or cares to
hear: Against that is, Eccles. 32. Where there is no hearing do not pour forth
Speech. Or when one answers before he hears, or be asked. Against this, Pro.
18. He who answers before he hears, shows himself to be a Fool, and worthy of
confusion. Or when he answers for another, not being asked: Against that is,
Eccles. 32. Young man, scarce speak in thy own Cause: if thou shall be asked
twice, let thy answer have a head.

An Argument of false Silence is, not to be silent out of Virtue, but lest he
should be confounded before the hearers. Or that he may be praised for his
Silence. Or when he is ashamed to speak, knowing not how to speak
understandingly, or profitably. Or that his folly may be covered by his
Silence, according to that, A Fool if he hold his peace, shall be acounted a
wise man.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Solitude.
TRUE Solitude is, to abstract the Mind from the Solicitude and inordinate
employ of exterior Actions, from all delight of Creatures and unanimuosly to
direct, as much as we can, all our Affections, Wills and Intentions unto God,
that we might be made one Spirit with him; to this the Prophet Esaias exhorts
us, Chap. 2. saying: Enter into the Rock, and hide thy self in the dug
earth. Enter into the Rock, that is, into the Divinity of Christ; hide thy self
in the dug Earth, that is, in the Wounds of Christ: he who is in this Rock
is alone; he who is out of this Rock is in a Crowd of People. In this Solitude
of Mind so great Grace and illumination of Mind is received, that the Receiver
is offensive to others to behold. As Moses remaining alone with God in the
Mountain, forty days and forty Nights, was so illuminated, that the Light broke
forth into his Face, and from the shining of his Countenance, proceeded, as it
were Rays of the Sun, which the Children of Israel were not able to behold,
until he covered his Face with a Veil, Exodus 34.

The most holy Example of our Lord Jesus Christ ought to move us to the love of
Solitude, who, though he could not by the Conversation of any be hindered from
his Spiritual Employ, yet notwithstanding, he often retired from Company for
the love of Solitude: and sometimes, when he could not go farther off, he
withdrew himself a Stones cast from his dearest Apostles, that he might attend
to Prayer; as St. Luke writes, chapter 22. Hereby insinuating unto us, that even
holy men, amidst the Multitude, cannot familiarly converse with God, or do get
little or no efficacious Grace amongst Men. Hence it is, that Zacheus could not
see our Lord Jesus in the Crowd; but afterward he saw him, and heard his
Voice, when alone he climbed up into a Tree, Luke 19.

The profit also of Solitude ought to induce us unto it; concerning which, our
Lord says of his Spouse, Hosea 2. I will lead her into the Wilderness, and
speak to her Heart. O how happy is he who even once once hears our Lord
speaking within him: The speaking of the Lord in the Heart, is to give
Assurance of Mind concerning heard Graces. It ought to move us to the same,
that holy Eremites of old ran into Deserts, Mountains, Dens, and Caves of the
Earth, that they might continually attend to God, and sometimes saw not a Man
for forty Years.

He has an Argument of true Solitude, who with pain is in the Company of Men;
and takes all occasions to withdraw himself from them. Behold I have fled a
great way off, and have remained in Solitude, Psalm. 54. As it was a Pain to S.
Mary Magdalen to see Men, after she could no longer see her Lord Jesus; yea it
was painful to her even to see Angels: whence, when the Angels went about to
comfort her concerning the Departure of our Lord out of his Sepulcher, she
says, I seek the Creator, and therefore it is grievous to me to see the
Creature. And therefore she fled into the Desert, for the love of our Lord
Jesus, thirty years, wanting all corporal Meat and Drink, whom the Angels
elevated into the Air at her set hours of Prayer; in which Prayer, she received
the Nutriment of Soul and Body.

He has an Argument of false Solitude, who though he be alone with God
corporally, yet his Soul is occupied in variety of Businesses, in diverse parts
of the World. These two things, Silence and Solitude, do efficaciously elevate
to Contemplation: Whence that of the Lamentations, chap. 3. He shall sit alone
and be silent, because he has elevated himself above himself.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Contemplation.
TRUE and perfect Contemplation is, a Collection of all the Affections and
Forces of the Soul, to know with delight and admiration of Mind, something of
the Divine Nature; to wit, of the Divine Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Charity,
Excellency, Liberality, etc. or to know the secret Judgments of God, or his
most holy Will, or some Perfection which tends unto him. This Contemplation had
the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles: for, God revealed his Secrets by
his holy Spirit to the Patriarchs and Prophets. To Noah he revealed the Flood,
Genesis 7. To Abraham the Destruction of the Sodomites, Genesis 18. To Jeremy the
Transmigration and Captivity of the Jews. To Joseph the Famine in Egypt, Genesis
47. To Daniel the Tree of Nebuchodonozor, Dan. 4. The like of other Patriarchs
and Prophets, to whom God revealed his Secrets; as diverse Visions to Ezekiel,
chap. 1. whence Amos, chapter 3. The Lord God will not do a Word, unless he reveal
his secret to his Servants. But he revealed all his Will and all Perfection to
his Apostles by his only begotten Son; as he says, Jo. 15. All things
whatsoever which I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. To the
end, that they might reveal the same to Posterity; which also they have
faithfully done. For their sound went out into all the Earth, and their Words
unto the ends of the World, Psalm. 18. But amongst the Apostles, he revealed and
declared his greatest Secrets to S. John the Evangelist, and to S. Paul.
Amongst other things, he revealed to them the eight Beatitudes; saying, Mat. 5.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, etc. Blessed are the Meek, etc. which
Beatitudes, contain in them great Perfection, and declare the perfect Will of
God.

There is a difference betwixt Contemplation, Meditation, and Cogitation: for,
in Cogitation the Mind wanders; in Meditation it finds out something; in
Contemplation it admires. Cogitation is without Labor and without Fruit;
Meditation is with Labor and with Fruit; Contemplation is without Labor, and
with Fruit.

We are brought to the Contemplation of God by three Degrees: concerning which,
St. Gregory, The first is, That the Soul recollect it self to it self. The
Second is, that it see it self, what it is, thus recollected. The Third is,
That it arise above it self, and submit it self, attending to the Contemplation
of it is invisible Maker. But it can by no means recollect it self to it self,
unless it have first learnt to restrain the Phantasms of terrestrial and
celestial Images from the Eye of the Mind; unless it have learnt to reject and
trample upon whatsoever shall occur to it is Thought from the corporeal Sight,
Hearing, Smelling, Tasting or Touching, that it may seek it self such within,
as it is without those: for, whilst it thinks upon those things it turns over
within it self as it were certain shadows of Bodies. Therefore all those things
are to be driven away from the Eyes of the Mind, by the hand of Discretion,
that the Soul may consider it self such, as it is created under God above the
Body; that being vivificated by the Superior, it may vivificated the Inferior,
which it administers.

We often will consider the invisible nature of Almighty God, but we are not
able; and the Soul wearied with those difficulties, returns to it self, and
makes to it self, of it self, degrees of Ascensions; that first of all if it be
able, it may consider it self, and then find out that Nature which is above it,
as far as it is able. But, if our Mind shall be dispersed in carnal Images, it
is by no means sufficient to consider it self, or the Nature of the Soul:
because by as many Thoughts as it is lead, it is as it were, blinded by so many
Obstacles. The first Degree therefore is, that the Soul, etc.

The Motives to Contemplation are, the ineffable Sweetness which is there
perceived; the admirable Perfection which is there learned; the principal of
all Beatitude which is there found: for the Fountain of all Beatitude, the most
High God, is there known; and what is known, that is loved; and what is truly
loved, is desired and labored for, that it may be obtained; and what is
industriously labored for, that is at length acquired; and when at length it
shall be acquired, it is possessed with endless Delight. Of this St. Bernard; A
Soul which has once learnt of our Lord, and has received of him to enter into
her self, and in her most inward recesses to pant after the presence of God,
and to seek his Face always; (for God is a Spirit, and they who seek him must
walk in the Spirit, and not in the Flesh, that they may live according to the
Flesh) Such a Soul, I say, I know not whether she would count it more horrible
and painful to experiment Hell it self for a time, than after having tasted the
Sweetness of this spiritual Study, to go out again to the Allurements, or
rather to the Troubles of the Flesh, and to return to the insatiable Curiosity
of the Senses; Ecclesiastes saying, chap. 2. The Eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the Ear with hearing. For, hear an experienced man what he says,
Thou art good, says he, O Lord, to those who hope in thee, to the Soul which
seeks thee. From this Good, if any one should have endeavored to have averted
that holy Soul, I believe he would hardly have taken it otherwise than if he
should have seen himself to have been cast out of Paradise, and from the very
Entrance of Glory. Hear yet another like unto this: My Heart, says he, has said
to thee, my Face has sought thee, thy Face, O Lord, will I seek. Whence he
said, But it is good for me to adhere to God. And also speaking to his Soul, he
says, Be converted, O my Soul, into thy Rest, because the Lord has done well
unto thee. I say therefore unto you, that there is nothing which one who has
received this Favor does so much fear, as lest being left by the Divine Grace,
it should be necessary for him to go out again to the Consolations, yea the
Desolations, of the Flesh, and again to suffer the Tumults of his carnal
Senses. In this Contemplation was St. Augustine, when he said, But it displeased
me, that I lived in the World, and it was a great burden to me, my sensual
Desires not now inflaming me as they were wont, with the hope of Honor and
Money, to endure that so grievous Servitude. For now those things did not
delight me, by reason of thy sweetness, and of the beauty of thy House, which I
loved.

He has an Argument of true Contemplation who is weary of living in this
miserable World; saying with B. Tobias, chap. 3. It is better for me to dye
than to live. And with H. Job, chap. 10. My Soul is weary of my Life. And with
St. Paul, Romans 7. Unhappy Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of
this Death? And he who thirsts after the Fountain of Life, saying with the
Psalmist, As the Heart thirsts after Fountains of Water, so thirsts my Soul
after thee, O God, Psalm. 41. Whence St. Gregory, A contemplative Life is, to
retain indeed in the heart the Love of God and our Neighbor; but to rest from
exterior Action, and to inhere only in the desire of the Creator, so that
nothing is now to be done: but all Cares being trampled under Foot, the Soul
burns with desire to see the Face of it is Creator: so that now it knows how to
bear with Grief the weight of the corruptible Flesh, and with all it is Forces
to desire to be present amidst the sweet-singing Quires of Angels, and to be
mixed with the caelestial Citizens, to rejoice before God for eternal
Incorruption.

He has an Argument of false Contemplation, who holds something concerning God,
or some Perfection of God, contrary to the Holy Scriptures, which
notwithstanding he temerariously defends by Reasons. And hence came Heresies of
old, to wit, that of Arrius, who denied the Son to be coeternal and
consubstantial with the Father: And that of Sabellius, who confounded the
Persons in the Trinity, putting only a nominal difference, whereas they truly
differ in their Properties. For the Father properly has Innascibility, the Son
properly Nascibility, the Holy Ghost Procession.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Discretion.
TRUE Discretion is, prudently to judge betwixt the Creator and the Creature:
what the Creator is, and what the Creature. Also to discern what is good, what
better, and what the best of all: what is bad, what worse, and what the worst
of all: How much God is to be desired, and how much Evil to be detested: Also
what Reverence one ought to have to his Superior, what Clemency and Compassion
to his Inferior, and what Society to his Equal: how he ought to behave himself
to the Dead, how to the Living: how to his Predecessors, and how to those that
are to succeed him: How to his Friends, that they be loved in God: and how to
his Enemies, that they be loved for God: How secretly before God, and how
openly before men: What refection is to be given to the Flesh, and what to the
Spirit: What Cloths he is to wear: When he is to eat, when to drink, when to
abstain, and how much, and from what meats: when to Watch, and when to sleep,
and how much and how long: When to pray, when to weep, and when to do any work:
How to behave himself to praise, and how to reprove: When to speak, and when to
be silent: how much, for what causes, with whom, in what place and at what
time: When to receive, when to retain, and when to give, and how much, and to
whom, and and at what time: To order, and prudently to discern. Concerning all
these things, is the work of true Discretion. This Virtue is the mistress of
all Virtues, appointing unto them all their Measure and Order. But where
discretion is not, there charity does not observe Order: What is to be loved in
the first place, and what in the last: nor measure what is to be loved less,
and what more.

S. Augustine testifies, where Humility is too much observed the Authority of him
that rules is broken; There obedience is blind and foolish where one believes
he is to obey, even in ill things. There Liberality is too profuse, when one
gives without Necessity to Stage Players. Where Discretion is not, there Fear
is dejected into Despair, and Hope is turned into Presumtion. There Justice
shows too great Severity. There Patience, Mercy, Meekness, Benignity, Goodness
dissemble unjust things. There Religion is dissolved into Licentiousnes, Truth
falsified, Chastity violated, Maturity made light, Constancy quite changed.

This Virtue increases by the failing of other Virtues: For, when a man often
falls from Humility into Pride, or Vainglory, from Charity into Envy, from
Patience into Anger, from Meekness into Rancor, from Fervor into Tepidity, from
Chastity into carnal Concupiscence, from love of Poverty into Covetousness,
from Peace into Disquiet, from Union into Discord, from Obedience into
Rebellion, from matutiry into Levity, from Religion into Dissolution, from
Silence into Talkativeness or Detraction, from spiritual Love into Carnal, from
Hope, into Presumption, from a just Fear into Humane and Servile, from Justice
into Severity, from Mercy into Softness, from Constancy into Mutableness, from
Truth into Falseness; then indeed one is made more cautious, and more
sollicitous and discreet in all things.

Helps to true Discretion are, diligent reading and meditation in the Holy
Scriptures, continual search into the Examples of Saints, frequent Counsel from
discreet Persons; according to that, Tob. 4. Always ask counsel of the wise.
Whence our Lord to Paul, Acts 9. Arise, and enter into the City, and it shall
be told thee what thou art to do. In like manner he sent the Lepers, Luke 17.
Go show your selves to the Priests. Not to one only, but to more; that if one
be less discreet, another more discreet may be sought.

He has an Argument of true Discretion, who does all his works with the counsel
of the Discreet; whom, if he cannot always have, he discusses all his Works and
Affairs in his own Conscience before God, with true Discretion and mature
Deliberation; according to that, Eccles. 32. Son, do nothing without counsel,
and thou shall not repent thee afterward. Yet let him not in this neither
always believe his own Conscience, unless he have the manifest testimony of the
Scripture. Neither let him by any means wrest the Scripture to his own sense,
but conform his sense to the Scripture.

He has an Argument of Indiscretion, who above his strength labors, in
Watchings, Fastings, Prayers, Disciplines, and Tears, destroying himself in a
short time: he is made unprofitable in the Service of God for many years. But
alas! there are few in our days guilty of this Excess.

He has an Argument of false Discretion, who, being careful not to destroy his
Body, neglects nothing which makes for its commodity, saying to the Lord, My
Strength I will keep for thee. Psalm. 58. And in the mean time, the Spirit
faints and pines away for want of spiritual Food, which by no means can be had
without Labor: whence St. Augustine, Whilst we fear the weakness of our Flesh,
we neglect the health of our Soul. Because the Flesh, if it be daintily fed,
kills the Spirit. As the Moth eats up the Wool, and the Fire consumes Wood,
Hey, and Straw, so the rebellious and dainty Flesh burns up, and consumes the
Soul. Such an one does not consider, that at length his Flesh shall be
destroyed, although it should enjoy all sorts of Commodities. As Secular
People, giving all pleasure to their Bodies, do not serve God the more, but are
more frequently sick. However, it is better that the Spirit should live,
replenished with Grace, in a languid Body, than that it should be languid or
dead in a sound Body.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Congratulation.
TRUE Congratulation which regards God, is to rejoice with God for all his
Beatitude and eternal, innate Perfection; to wit, for his Omnipotency, Wisdom,
Goodness, etc. and that he wants nothing, but is sufficient for himself and all
Creatures.

Also to rejoice with God for the orderly Disposition of Heaven and Earth, and
of all things that are in them; and for all his Works from the beginning of the
World to the end thereof: especially for the works of his Incarnation,
Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Mission of the Holy Ghost;
and for all his Judgments, manifest and secret, about Devils, about Souls in
Hell, Lymbus, and Purgatory, and about wicked men in the World. Also, to
rejoice with God for whatsoever Praise and Honor he has, from Angels and
Saints in Heaven, and from Men on Earth.

True Congratulation to our Neighbors is, to rejoice with all the Angels and
Saints, for their glory in Heaven: to rejoice with the B. Virgin Mary, with the
Patriarchs and Prophets, with the Apostles and all the Elect, with all holy men
in the Church and upon Earth, for all the gifts they have received, and shall
receive from God. Also, to rejoice with Sinners for their Conversion; with the
Just for their Confortation and Conservation in Grace, and with the Church for
the Sacraments and Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

The exceeding great profit of true Congratulation, ought to induce us
thereunto; for, whatsoever Perfection, Goodness, and Beatitude, the omnipotent
God has naturally in himself; whatsoever Glory the Angels and Saints have in
Heaven, and whatsoever Grace and Virtue there is in the Church, and the
faithful have in it, all this, by Congratulation, is made proper to every one.
It ought to induce us to the same also, that the Congratulation of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, is the Origin of all Creatures; and always was, and now
is, the Principle of all the Divine Works.

He has an Argument of true Congratulation, who is delighted in all things
which are in God; whom the Order of the Church, and all die Works and Judgments
of God, and the Divine Manners, and most holy Examples of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of all his Friends, do heartily please; and he commends them all
with his Words, and manifests them to others. Also, who has spiritual Joy in
all the natural, spiritual, and gratuit Gifts of the Angels and Saints in
Heaven, and of all men on Earth, and always, and every where according to his
Power, cooperates with them all.

He has an Argument of false Congratulation, who with his Mouth commends all
the Divine Ordination in Heaven and in Earth, and the Works of the Just and
their Virtues, and their holy Life, but dispraises them all in his Heart: such
our Lord upbraids in Esaias, chap. 29. This People draws near to me with their
Mouth, and honors me with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. Such are
cut off from the Body of the Church, who do not by Congratulation, participate
the Goods of the Body.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Confidence.
TRUE and perfect Confidence is a Security of Mind, that the omnipotent and
faithful God never leaves his Friends; according to that, Eccles. 2. No body
has hoped in God, and was confounded. for, who has remained in his Commandments
and was forsaken?

He has true Confidence who is assured, that the good God is always present
with his Servants in their Afflictions, and is always ready to deliver them out
of Temptations, and to glorify whom he has delivered: according to that, Psalm.
90. I am with him in Tribulation, I will deliver him, and will glorify him. As
he was with Daniel in the Lions Den, Dan. 14. With Noah in the Ark, Genesis 7.
With Joseph in the Cistern, Genesis 37. With the three Children in the fiery
Furnace, Dan. 3. And all these he most graciously delivered. Whence S. Peter, 2
Epist. 2. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation. And Sarah
says in Tobias, chapter 3. This every one who worships thee holds for certain, that
his Life if it shall have been proved, it shall be crowned; but, and if he
shall have been in Tribulation, he shall be delivered; and if he shall have
been in Correction, he may come to thy Mercy: For, thou art not delighted in
our Destruction; because after a Tempest thou make a Calm, and after Tears
and Weeping thou infusest Joy.

He has true Confidence who does not doubt, but that all his Prayers and all
his just Desires are heard. For, St. Chrysostom says, If thou shall approach to
God with this Zeal of Mind, and shall say, I will not depart, (to wit, unless I
receive) thou shall certainly receive; if thou ask such things as it behooves
him to give who is asked, and as are expedient for thee to receive who ask
them. This Virtue is very laudable, and of great merit before God; to which the
Apostle exhorts us, saying, Heb. 10. Do not lose your Confidence, which has a
great Reward.

It ought to induce us to true Confidence, that the most liberal God, without
our asking, oftentimes gives us greater things, of his mere incomprehensible
Bounty, than we should dare to ask: for, the Father has created us to the Image
of the Trinity, and his most holy Son has given us his Flesh for Food, and his
Blood for Drink, and his Soul to be the price of our Redemption. And who could
ever once have dared to think of such gifts as these?

The Posture of our Lord Jesus on his Cross ought to induce us to the same: for
of this St. Bernard says, Who would not be raised up to Hope, and to a
Confidence of obtaining, if he would consider the posture of the Body of Christ
on the Cross? Behold his Head bowed down to kiss thee; his Arms stretched out
to embrace thee; his Hands bored through to give thee Gifts; his Side opened to
love thee; his whole Body stretched forth to bestow his whole self upon thee.

He has an Argument of true Confidence, whose Conscience does not reprehend him
of mortal Sins: witness St. John, 1Epist. 3. If our Heart reprehend us not, we
have Confidence in God; and whatsoever we ask we shall receive from him. Whence
we read of Susanna, Dan. 13. Her Heart had confidence in God, because she knew
her self innocent of the crime objected against her. Another Argument of true
Confidence he has, who continually exercises himself in good Works, especially
in spiritual Alms, which is to remit Injuries; and moreover, to pray for those
who injure us: concerning which, it is said in Tobias, chap. 4. Almsgivings
delivers from all Sin and from Death, and will not suffer the Soul to go into
Darkness. Alms-deeds are great Confidence before the most high God, to all that
do them.

Another Argument of true Confidence of the pardon of his Sins, he has, who
does true Penance for them in his Youth and Health: witness St. Augustine; If
any man in his last Sickness desire to receive Penance, and does receive it,
and is reconciled at the same time, and dies immediately, I confess unto you,
that we do not indeed refuse him what he demands; but also we do not presume
that he dies well: I do not presume that, I will not deceive you, I do not
presume it. He who lives well after his Baptism, he who is baptized in the
Article of Death, he who during his Health does Penance, is reconciled, and
lives well afterward; all these dye with Assurance of their Salvation. But, as
for him who does not Penance, and who is not reconciled, but upon his
Deathbed; if you ask me if he dye with Assurance of Salvation, I will answer
you, that I am not assured of it. And a little after, Do I say then he shall be
damned? I do not say so. But do I say then he shall be saved? No. What do I say
then? I know not. I do not presume, I do not promise, I know not. Would thou
fee thy self of this Doubt? Would thou avoid this Uncertainty? Do Penance
whilst thou art in Health; for, if thou do true Penance whilst thou art in
Health, and thy last Day shall come, run to be reconciled: if thou do so
thou art secure. Why art thou secure? Because thou have done Penance at that
time when thou could also have sinned. But if thou will then do Penance when
thou can no longer sin, thy Sins have left thee, not thou them. But thou
say, how do I know, if perhaps God may not pardon thee? Thou say very
true. How do I know? I know not. That I know, this I know not. For therefore I
give thee Penance, because I know not. For, if I knew that it would profit thee
nothing, I would not give it thee. Also, if I knew that it would profit thee, I
would not admonish thee, I would not fright thee. There are two things; either
thou shall be pardoned, or thou shall not he pardoned; which of these two shall
be thy Lot, I know not: therefore lay hold on the certain, and let go the
uncertain.

They who desire to obtain true Confidence, it behooves them to convert their
Strength to spiritual Works; according to that of Esaias, chap. 40. They who
hope in the Lord shall change their Strength, they shall take Wings as an
Eagle: they shall run, and not labor, they shall walk and not faint. That they
who were before strong to corporeal Labors, may afterward be strong to
spiritual Labors.

He has an Argument of Diffidence, who not esteeming the grace of Redemption,
knowingly goes on in his Sins: whence in the Gospel, Jo. 9. We know, that God
does not hear Sinners; but if any one be a Worshipper of God, and do his Will,
him he hears. And Psalm 65. If I have regarded Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord
will not hear me. And Esaias 59. Your Iniquities have divided betwixt you and
your God; and your Sins have hid his Face from you, that he should not hear you.

He has an Argument of false Confidence, who thinks the most just God will be
so far overcome by Mercy and Pity, that in the day of Judgment he will save
all, both good and bad, because he has died for all: against this our Lord
says, Matthew. 25. These shall go into eternal Punishment, but the Just into
eternal Life. He also has an Argument of false Confidence, who thinks a Sinner
can deserve the first Grace when he pleases. Also, if any one believe that he
who abounds here in temporal Goods, shall abound hereafter in everlasting Joy;
against this it is said, The Just shall see (to wit, the wicked Man in Hell)
and shall fear, and shall laugh over him, and shall say, Behold the Man, who
made not God his Helper; but hoped in the Multitude of his Riches, and
prevailed in his Vanity.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Contempt of the World.
A True Contempt of the World is, to renounce the temporal things of this Life,
the Pomps of the World, all Dignities and Superiorities, Spiritual and Secular,
and to withdraw ones self from all his carnal Friends, and secular Manners, for
the hope of eternal Happiness. To this S. John exhorts us, 1. Epistle 2. Do not
love the World, nor those things that are in the World. This Contempt S.
Augustine had, when whatsoever was done in the World displeased him: And when he
discoursed with his Mother very sweetly, and amidst that Discourse, the World
with all its Delights was vile and disgustful unto him. In like manner St.
Agnes, St. Catharine, St. Cecily, and other Virgins, contemned the World, and
all its Glory, for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Worlds great unfaithfulness to it is Lovers at last ought to induce us to
the Contempt, and hatred of it: For this was done even to the Creator himself
by the wicked Worldlings; whom, upon Palm Sunday they gloriously received,
going out to meet him, and singing; Math. 21. Hosanna to the Son of David;
blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. But
afterward, on Good Friday, they went forth crying to Pilate, Crucify him,
Crucify him; if he had not been a Malefactor, we had not delivered him unto
thee, Jo. 18. And when he hung upon the Cross, they mocked him saying, save thy
self, if thou art the Son of God, Math. 27. And him whom they received with
Palms, Flowers, and green leaves, they crowned with pricking thorns, and beat
with Rods and Whips; and for him whom they strowed their own garments in the
way, him they stripped and spoiled of all his garments before the Cross; and
changed the Glory they gave him into Reproach.

The danger which comes from the love of the World ought to induce us to the
Contempt and Hatred of it; For St. James testifies, Chap. 4. Know ye not, that
the friendship of this World is Enmity with God; Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of this World, becomes an Enemy of God. And because the World hated our
Lord Jesus, and all his Friends, as he told his Apostles for their Comfort, Jo.
15. If the World hate you, know that it hated me before it hated you.

He has an Argument of Contempt of the World, who cares not for Nobility of
Parentage, nor seeks the Pleasures of the Flesh, nor desires Riches nor
Honors. Such was Moses, concerning whom the Apostle, Heb. 11. By Faith Moses
denied himself to be the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, (against Nobility) choosing
rather to be afflicted with the People of God, than to enjoy the delight of Sin
for a time, (against Pleasure) esteeming the Reproach of Christ, greater Riches
than all the Treasures of Egypt, (against Riches) for he had an Eye to the
Recompense of Reward. He has another Argument of true Contempt of the World who
is neither effeminared with the flatteries of the World, nor terrified with its
Threats; nor is moved either with the Praise or Dispraise of men. In this
Contempt of the World was the Apostle; when he said, Phil. 3. I have made all
things as loss, and I esteem them as Dung, that I may gain Christ.

He has an Argument of false Contempt of the World who then first abstains from
the love of it, and its Allurements, when by reason of old Age and Poverty, he
cannot enjoy it. For then he does not leave the World, but is left by the
World. As alas! how many are there, who then begin to leave off to sin, when
they can sin no longer.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Mortification.
TRUE Mortification of the Flesh is, when one voluntarily chastizes his Body
with Fastings, Watchings, Prayers, Hair-shirts, Disciplines, and Abstinence
from delightful Meat and Drink, that in all things the Flesh may be subject to
the Spirit. This the Apostle did, when he said, 1 Cor. 9. I chastize my Body,
and bring it into servitude, lest perhaps when I shall have preached to others,
I my self may be a Reprobate. And Judith, who was fair and young, a Widow and
rich, after she had dwelt with her husband three years and six Months, from her
Virginity she had a Hair-shirt upon her loins, and fasted every day, except the
Solemn Feasts, Jud. 8.

The great Profit which comes from the mortification of the Flesh ought to
induce us to it. For by the mortification of the Flesh the Spirit is
strengthened in Spiritual exercises. According to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
12. For when I am weak (in the Flesh,) then I am strong, (in Spirit.) And on
the contrary, by the cherishing of the Flesh, the rigor of the Spirit is damped
in Spiritual exercises; according to that of St. Augustine, The delicate Flesh
burns up and consumes the Soul as the Fire Stubble.

An Argument of true Mortification is, when no Pleasure, but only what is
necessary, is allowed to the Flesh: according to that of the Apostle, Romans 8.
We are Debtors, not to the Flesh, that we should live according to the Flesh.
For pleasure exacts many more things, and more delicate, than necessity
requires; but necessity is contented with a few things. And the Apostle
subjoyns the Evil which follows Pleasure, saying, If ye shall live according to
the Flesh, ye shall dye; but if by the Spirit ye shall mortify the Deeds of
the Flesh, ye shall live. But the Works of the Flesh are manifest; which are,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Immodesty, Luxury, Serving of Idols, Witchcrafts,
Enmities, Contentions, Emulations, Angers, Brawlings, Dissensions, Sects,
Envies, Murders, Drunkennesses, Junkettings, and such like: which I fore-tel
you, as I have foretold you, that they which do such things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.

Another Argument is, when any one, according to the Counsel of Jesus Christ,
hates his own Soul in this World; for our Lord himself says, Luke 14. If any
one come to me, and do not hate his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and Brothers, and Sisters, and moreover his own Soul, he cannot be my Disciple.
Which St. Gregory expounding, says, For then we well hate our own Soul, when we
do not yield to it is carnal Desires; when we break it is Appetites, resist it is
Pleasures: that therefore which by being contemned is led to something that is
better, is, as it were, loved through Hatred. But he who does not restrain his
Soul from it is Concupiscences, precipitates himself into the Snares of the
Devil; according to that of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 18. If thou yieldest to thy
Soul her Concupiscences, she will make thee a Joy to thine Enemies. As Dalila
delivered up the valiant Sampson to the Philistines, to be mocked, Jud. 16.

He has not an Argument of true Mortification, who only bridles his Belly and
Mouth from the Pleasure of Meat and Drink, but bridles not his Tongue from
unlawful Words, nor his Sight, Hearing, Tasting, Smell, and Touching, from
their Delight, nor his Heart from voluptuous Thoughts and Affections. For it is
a small matter, to restrain the Mouth and Belly from Meats, when the Heart and
the five Senses are sed with Delights. Whence St. Chrysostom, They who abstain
from Meats and do ill, they imitate the Devils, to whom not Meat but Wickedness
is always present.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Contrition.
TRUE Contrition is a grief for Sins voluntarily assumed, according to the
quantity and quality of the Crimes, with a purpose of confessing and making
Satisfaction, proceeding from the free grace of God: for, a natural Grief, or a
Grief without grace, profits, or is good for nothing. Jeremy expresses the
quantity of the Grief, when he says, Make to thy self the mourning for an only
Son. This the Lord commanded in Joel, saying, Cut your Hearts. To this cutting
are helpful the Thorns, Nails, Rods, Whips, Cross and Spear, which cut the body
of our Lord Jesus Christ. True Contrition is very rare, as testifies St.
Gregory. We must know, that there are some, who although leaving the World,
they offer indeed all they have, and yet have not Compunction in the good
things which they do: nor must we always believe there is true Compunction
where there are Sighs and Tears; for, such things are often wont to come from
the fear of Hell, or from the consideration of some Damage, or from natural
Grief, or from natural Compassion, when one remembers the Enormity of his
Crimes, or the most bitter Passion of Jesus Christ. To true Contrition is
required a grief for all the Sins we have committed, and for all the good we
have omitted, and for all the Graces neglected to our selves and others; and
also, for those which might, by occasion of us, be committed or neglected.

It will move us to true Contrition, if we seriously think what we have lost by
Sin, to wit, the Holy Ghost with his Gifts, and all gratuit Graces, the
Friendship of the B. Trinity, and the Society of the celestial Court. Also,
what we have got by Sin, to wit, eternal Death, the Malediction of God the
Father; as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm. 118. Cursed are they who decline from
thy Commandments. The Hatred of our Lord Jesus Christ who hates all those who
work Iniquity. The departure of the Holy Ghost, Who takes himself away even
from Thoughts, which are without Understanding; as he says in the book of
Wisdom, chap. 1. But much more from wicked Works; for these are worse, and more
horrible, than the very pains of Hell; as says St. Chrysostom.

The great Profit also proceeding from the same, ought to induce us thereunto;
for the least Contrition, effaces all the blots of the Soul, kills eternal
Death, confers the Benediction of God the Father, restores the Friendship of
God the Son, the Familiarity of the Holy Ghost, and the Society of the supernal
Citizens: And Contrition how little soever it be, more satisfies than the
greatest Alms we can give. All these things, often weighed in the balance of
the Heart, are inductive of true Compunction.

He has an Argument of true Contrition, who does so detest the filthiness of
Sin, that he would rather choose all the pains of Purgatory, than commit any Sin
against his most gracious God; and who would expose himself rather to the pains
of Hell (with Eleazarus) than, for the future, deliberately commit any Sin:
which also St. Augustine says, ought rather to be chosen. And who would most
willingly endure the torments of all the Martyrs, that he might hereby merit,
never more to commit any Sin; and who would offer himself to all the Sufferings
of the Sick and Poor, that he might duly satisfy God for his Offenses.

He has an Argument of false Contrition, who, although he weep bitterly for the
Sins he has committed, yet instantly after his Grief, he is not afraid to
commit the same, or other Sins. Against this, it is said in Ecclesiasticus, chapter
34. He who is washed from the Dead, and again touches the dead, what does his
washing profit him? In like manner, he who is sorry for his past Sins, and does
not resolve, for the future, to leave his Sins, to wit, his Pride, Envy, carnal
Friendship, fleshly Delights, or the unjust Possession of the Goods of others:
Concerning which S Augustine says, The Sin is not forgiven, unles that which was
taken away be restored. Against this it is said in Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 34.
One building, and another throwing down, what profit have they, but their
Labor? He throws down, who is sorry for his Sins: he builds who continues in a
will to Sin: concerning such a building St. Augustine says, Out of a perverse
will, is made lust or desire; And whilst lust is served, there is made a
custom; And whilst a custom is not resisted, there is made a necessity.

CHAP. XL. Of Confession.
TRUE Confession is a sincere and rightful manifestation of Sins, without
concealment, to a Priest. This our Lord commanded when he said to the Lepers,
Luke 17. Go show your selves to the Priest. And St. James, chap. 5. Confess
your Sins to one another.

To true Confession it is required, that it be entire, pure, discreet,
faithful, and perfect. According to that of Lamentations. 2. Pour out thy Heart
as Water, before the sight of the Lord. By pouring out is noted the Integrity;
for we must not industriously tell our Sins by drops, which we have never
confessed: but whatsoever we can together call to Mind, must altogether be
poured out before one Priest, (as Water.) Where it is noted, Confession ought
to be simple and pure, not made out of servile Fear, or by Compulsion; but
purely and simply for God. (Thy Heart.) where is noted Discretion. For not only
our Words and Deeds, Commissions and Omissions, are to be confessed, but also
our unclean Thoughts and morose Affections, inordinate Intentions, noxious
Wills; perverse Judgment, and rash Suspicions: for, Origin says, That in that
day, Thoughts shall accuse and defend Souls: not the Thoughts which then shall
be, but which are now in us, of which, certain Marks shall be left in the
Heart, as it were in Wax. Before the Sight of God. Where is noted the Fidelity
and Perfection of Confession; for all things are to be considered according to
the Acknowledgment of God: for, where we acknowledge one Sin, he, in his
Wisdom, sees a thousand.

The assured Remission of Sins, and the cleansing of the Soul, ought to induce
us to a true Confession: according to that, 1 Jo. 1. If we confess our Sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Iniquity. And because the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are obliged to Remission
and Pardon, according to that: Although God knows all things, yet he expects
the Voice of Confession. For Christ has cause to intercede for thee, and the
Father has cause to pardon thee, and whatsoever the Son wills, the Father also
wills, and the Holy Ghost.

He has an Argument of true Confession, who pours out all his Sins as Water, so
that there remain neither color, as in the pouring out of Milk; nor Fatness or
Savor, as in the pouring out of Oil or Blood; nor smell, as in the pouring out
of Wine or Vinegar. The color remains when the Sin is told, but the Occasion
Provocation to sin, is concealed; as it happens in Gluttony or Fornication, the
Fatness or Savor remains when the Sin is told, but quantity or long
continuance of the delight, in which Reason was wholly drowned, is concealed:
according to that, Psalm. 108. It has entered like Water into his Bowels, and
like Oil into his very Bones. The Smell remains when the Sin is told, but the
Infamy or bad Example, and Scandal of others, is concealed. But, he who rightly
confesses, manifests both the Sin, and what went before it, and what followed
after it.

It is an Argument of true Confession, when one confesses his Sins in Number,
Weight, and Measure. We must confess in Number, that is, how often we have
sinned, because a Wound often renewed, is more slowly cured. Also in Measure,
when one confesses the continuance of Sin; for he who is longer sick sooner
dies. In Weight, that is, the grievousness of our Sins: for Sin is aggravated
from a sacred Place, as a Church or Churchyard: from a sacred Time or Person;
as if it were a Clergyman who was hurt, if a religious or married Person with
whom one sinned.

An Argument of false Confession is, when one confesses lest he should be
reputed an Infidel, or that he may be accounted more holy, or lest the Holy
Communion should be denied him, to his Confusion: as Saul confessed, lest he
should have been confounded before fore the People by the Prophet Samuel.

CHAP. XLI. Of Penance.
TRUE external Penance is, an Abstinence from lawful things when pardon is
asked for unlawful; as says the Scripture. So Penitents and Religious Persons
abstain from Flesh, reject Fine Clothes, Fast, Watch, afflict themselves with
Disciplines, keep Silence, break their own Will, and refrain from many Delights
which would have been lawful to them, if they never had committed any thing
unlawful. This our Lord, and S. John Baptist commanded; saying, Do Penance, for
the Kingdom of God is at hand, Math. 4. and 3.

The Necessity of true Penance ought to induce us thereunto; for without it
there is no Salvation, our Lord saying, Luke 13. Unless ye have Penance, ye
shall all in like manner perish. And S. Augustine, Sins, be they little, be they
great, they cannot be unpunished. Whence the Lord enjoined David Penance for
his Sin in numbering his People, that he should either suffer seven years
Famine, or three years the Vengeance of his Enemies, or three days Pestilence:
and David chose for himself and his People the common scourge of Death. By this
is signified, that every one shall certainly be punished for his Sins, either
in Hell, signified by the seven years Famine, or in Purgatory, signified by the
Violence of Enemies for three Months; or with temporal Punishment, signified by
the Pestilence of three Years. So it is profitable to us to choose for our
selves the easiest Penance, and which soon passes away.

An Argument of true Penance is, a due commensuration of the Pain to the Fault:
that according to the quantity of the Fault, be the quantity and gravity of the
Pain: according to the delight of the Fault, the bitterness of the Pain:
according to the length of the Fault, the length of the Pain: and according to
the multiplicity of the Fault, the multiplicity of the Pain; as S. John
prescribes, Matthew. 3. Do worthy fruits of Penance. For as particular
Infirmities of the Body have necessarily particular Medicines, and no Medicine
is of such efficacy as that it can cure all Diseases; so also special kinds of
Sins have their special Penance: For Pride is not directly cured by
Almsgiving, nor Rancor and Envy by Prayer, nor Covetousness by Fasting, nor
Impurity by Watching, etc. But we directly satisfy for Pride by Humility, for
Avarice by giving of Alms, for Impurity, by the chastizement of the Flesh with
Hair-shirts and Disciplines, for Gluttony by Fasting, for Talkativeness by
Prayer, for Envy by Charity, and remission of Injuries, for Rapine and unjust
possessions, by Restitution, etc. But if any one, as St. Chrysostom says,
cannot fulfill the whole Order of Satisfaction, then our bountiful Lord accepts
of any other amends. Then for unjust things, Fasting suffices. If he cannot
fast, Prayer suffices; and if for weakness he cannot pray, God is satisfied
with a good will.

Innocent gives an Argument of false Repentance. It is a false Repentance, when
the Penitent leaves not an Office or Employment which he can by no means
exercise without Sin; or if he bear hatred in his Heart; or if he do not
satisfy every one whom he has offended; or if he do not pardon him who has
offended him; or if he bear Arms against Justice. It is also a false
Repentance, when one Sin is amended, and no care taken of another.

CHAP. XLII. Of Perseverance.
TRUE Perseverance is a frequent exercise of Good Works, a continual study of
Perfection, a diligent conservation of Spiritual Graces and Virtues unto Death.
To this our Lord invites us in the Apocalypse, 2. Be faithful unto Death, and I
will give thee a crown of Life. This Job had, when he said, Job 27. Until I
dye. I will not depart from my innocence. And Tobias, who hid the Bodies of the
dead in his house, and buried them in the night; although the King for this
commanded him to be spoiled of his Goods and killed. Tob. 1.

The exceeding great profit of Perseverance, ought to induce us thereunto. For
by this every good Work, and every Virtue shall be crowned, and our Salvation
wholly depends on it; according to that of our Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 10. He
who shall persevere to the end, shall be saved. Without this no Virtue or good
Work is remunerable: Without this, all Perfection comes to nothing. For what
did it profit the Apostle and Traitor Judas, that our Lord chose him out of the
World? what did profit him his long familiarity with Jesus Christ? what the
holy Sermons which he often heard from him? what the Examples, Virtues, and
Miracles which he saw done by him? what the Society of the Apostles? what the
Grace bestowed on him to preach and work Miracles? For to him, together with
the other Apostles, he said, Math. 10. Go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; Cure the sick, raise the dead, cure the leprous, cast out
Devils.

He has an Argument of true Perseverance, who, neither for the love of Life,
nor fear of Death; nor for threats, nor promises, departs from Virtue. As
Susanna, fearing not Death, said, Dan. 13. If I do this, (that is, sin) I must
dye. And Mattathias, 1 Macchab. 2. Although all the Nations obey King
Antiochus, and every one depart from the service of the Law of his Fathers, and
consent to his commands, I and my Sons and my brethren will obey the Law of our
Fathers. God be propitious un^^ us.

He has an argument of false Perseverance, who falsely presumes of his own
Sanctity, that he cannot fall. Hence arises a freedom of Mind; hence he has no
Watch over himself; and so it is impossible for any Man persevere in Sanctity.
Even the very Apostles, if they were in the world, and not a watch over (...)
selves, they might fall. (...) Example in David, (...) Murder and Adulte^^
(...) was negligent in (...) Eyes, 2 Samuel 1 (...)

(...) (...) shall one day have all these Virtues more perfectly, than Humane
Understanding can comprehend. I confess to thee, O Lord, that he is happy at
present, and shall be more happy hereafter, who has these Virtues, in that
perfection as they are here written; although perhaps less may suffice to
Salvation.

I beseech the also O Lord, with all the desire of thy Son, and Holy Spirit
(...) Creatures, that thou would (...) Discretion betwixt the Virtues (...)
of Nature, and Sem^^^^ (...) And whosoever shall (...) shall hear of it, or
(...) ^^mnipotent God, (...) one, true, and (...) ^ertain he who (...) has
(...) one, (...) de^^^ (...); (...) be


