General Monck's LAST LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetwood.

Declaring his resolution to send Col. Wilkes, Lieut. Col. Clobery, Major
Knight, by way of Treaty, in order to a happy Union between the two Armies of
England and Scotland.

With two other Letters from Persons of Honor, signifying great hopes of
Peace, and a prohibition of either Armies proceeding any further in their March.

Published by his Excellencies special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Elelphant and Castle near Temple-Barre, 1659.

General Moncks Last LETTER to His EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetwood.
My Lord,
AFter I had Answered the Letter, your Lordship did me the favor to send me by
Col. Talbot, I received another from your Lordship, of the 29th of October,
wherein your Lordship is pleased to express much of your Lordships Affection
and Friendship to me, for which I shall ever acknowledge my self engaged to
you; but truly I must assure your Lordship, no personal Discouragements
(although I have had my share of them) have induced me to the Justification I
make of the Parliaments Authority, but the tie of duty to which I am in my
Conscience obliged, and I shall be heartily sorry, if your Lordship makes any
other Interpretation of it, for your Lordship knows my Command has been offered
often up to those that had power to place it better: We are all I bless the
Lord, very unanimous here, and I am confident when the Gentlemen we send from
hence have given your Lordship a true understanding of our Actions, you will
not have so severe an opinion of them, as you seem to have in your late
Letters: The persons names are, Col. Wilkes, Lieut. Col. Clobery, and Major
Knight, all well known to your Lordship, to whom I beseech your Lordship to
give Credit, in what they shall propose from the Army here, and I beseech you
to believe, I am still with a sincere heart,

Edinb. Nov. 3. 1659. My Lord, Your Lordships very humble Servant. George Monck.

A SECOND LETTER TO THE Lord Fleetwood.
SIR,
WE think sit to acquaint you, that the Lord has so prosper'd our endeavors
here, that my Lord General Monck and the Officers have accepted of our
Overtures of mediation, and they have appointed Colonel Wilkes, Lieutenant
Colonel Clobery, and Major Knight, to repair to London Commissioners, to treat
with the like number of Officers there for a firm Peace and unity amongst the
Forces of both Nations, for which we doubt not but the Prayers of all good men
will be poured forth to the Throne of Grace.

We have prevailed with my Lord General, to dispatch Order this night to his
remotest Quarters, that they advance not further South-wards during this
Treaty, and we desire you will do the like, that none of yours may March more
Northward then they are; and truly for as much as we can perceive, none of
these Forces had so hastily marched out of Scotland, if yours had not gathered
this way. In a few days we shall see you, and in the mean time desire you to
believe we are,

Dalkeish this 4th. of November. 1659. SIR, Your affectionate: SERVANTS, Thomas
Clarges.
Thomas Talbot.

A THIRD LETTER TO THE Lord Fleetwood.
May it please your Excellency,
I Have for some days forborne writing, because what came to my hand, was
fully Communicated to you by Colonel Lilburn; your Excellencies, of the 27th
past, as also that of the first instant, came safe to hand, and what was
commanded, shall be faithfully obeyed according to my weak ability. Your Forces
in these parts are now, blessed be God, in good condition, and well resolved;
Colonel Lilburn, I know has acquainted you with General Monck's Letter, about
his sending up Wilkes, Clobery, and Knight, for an Accommodation:
Northumberland fails him, and his Soldiers (as all our intelligence faith)
fails him, and its no wonder if their hearts fail them, when they are carried
forth by no better principles, then the Justice of such a cause will afford, I
am persuaded your Excelency knows, what manner of person you have to deal with,
and I doubt not but the intercepted Letters sent you from Northallerton, will
direct your thought to look West, as well as North; If those Gentlemen that are
coming to you, insist upon the bringing in again of those Gentlemen to
Westmin^^^^, your friends hear both of the Army and Country; think it will be
little better then to insist upon the bringing in of -- -- but we cannot doubt
in the least, but that God will guide you only to such a condescension as may
secure the Cause and add somewhat to the comfortable being of your friends, who
have suffered for their adherence to you in this great day of Trial: I shall
continue hear until I see some probability of being more serviceable in another
place; That the Lord may direct your ways, and strengthen you for his work, is
the prayer of,

Newcastle, Nov. 5. 1659. Your Excellencies most Obedient and faithful Se^^^^^
John Pearson

FINIS.

