THREE LETTERS FROM The Lord General MONCK, Commander in Chief of the Forces in
Scotland, and one of the Commissioners by Act of Parliament for the Government
of the Army of this Commonwealth.VIZ. To Mr. SPEAKER, To the Lord FLEETWOOD, To
the Lord LAMBERT.


EDINBURGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, Anno Dom. 1659.

To the SPEAKER.
Right Honorable,
HAving received notice, that there was a Force put upon the Parliament on the
twelfth of this Instant, I have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to know
whether that force; does continue; for I am resolved by the Grace and
Assistance of GOD, as a true Englishman, to stand to and assert the Liberty
and Authority of PARLIAMENT; And the Army here (praised be God) is very
courageous and unanimous, and I doubt not but to give a good account of this
Action to You. I have, according to your Act of the 11th. instant, being
constituted a Commissioner for the Government of the Army, put out such persons
as would not act according to your Commission: I do call GOD to witness, That
the Asserting of a Commonwealth is the only intent of my heart, and I desire,
if posible, to avoid the shedding of Blood, and therefore entreat You, that
there may be a good understanding between Parliament and Army; But if they will
not obey Your Commands, I will not desert You, according to my Duty and
Promise. Which is all at present from

Your humble and faithful Servant, GEORGE MONCK.
Edinburgh, October. 20. 1659.
To the Lord FLEET WOOD.
Right Honorable,
I Have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to let you know that we have
received notice, that a part of the Army have put force upon the Parliament,
which they so lately called together, and owned with the greatest Testimonies
of Obedience and Repentance for their former Apostacy from them; I hope your
Lordship will not abet an Action of such a dangerous and destructive
Consequence; I know that you love the Liberty and Peace of England so well,
That you will use your best Care, that Attempts of this nature be suppressed. I
do therefore humbly entreat you that the Parliament may be speedily restored to
that Freedom, which they enjoyed on the eleventh of this Instant, Otherwise I
am resolved, by the Assistance of God, with this Army under my Command to
Declare for them, and to prosecute this just Cause to the last drop of my
blood; I bless the Lord, that the Officers here are very unanimous: and for
such, whose hearts fail them, or which will not act according to their
Commissions from the Parliament, I having Authority as one of the Seven
Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament, Do constitute such as cheerful
for this Good Old Cause, till the Parliaments pleasure be further known; And I
do plainly assure your Lordship, that I was never better satisfied in the
justice of any (...)gagement than in this: You cannot but (...) that God has
already showed (...) glorious in it, and determined the (...) this side,
against Arbitrary power of ^^^^ing Money without the Peoples consent first had,
and the management of the Militia by any other then the Parliament. I desire
your Lordship not to be deluded by the specious pretenses of any ambitions
persons whatsoever, and do not bring all the blood that will be shed upon your
own head; My Lord, Consider how you will answer to the dreadful God for the
ruin of three Nations, for to serve a lust, or to gratify a passion: For my
particular, I am ashamed of these Confusions and Changes that we have made,
that we are now become a scorn and a reproach to our very friends, and designed
to Ruin by all our Neighbors. I take God to witness, that I have no further
ends then the establishing of Parliamentary Authority, and those good Laws
that our Ancestors have purchased with so much blood, the settling the Nations
in a free Commonwealth, and the defense of Godliness and godly men, though of
different Judgment; And I take my self so far obliged, being in the
Parliaments Service, to stand, though alone, in this Quarrel, And doubt not
but your Lordship, having the fear of God in your heart, will carefully
consider of this matter: Which is all at present from

Your Excellencies humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.
Edinb. October. 20. 1659.
To the Lord Lambert.
Right Honorable,
HAving notice, that a part of the Army under the Parliaments Command, have,
contrary to their duty, put force upon them; I have therefore sent this
Messenger to your Lordship, to entreat you to be an Instrument of Peace and a
good understanding between Parliament and Army: for, if they shall continue
this Force, I am resolved, with the assistance of God, and that part of the
Army under my Command, to stand by them, and assert their lawful Authority.
For, Sir, the Nation of ENGLAND will not endure any Arbitrary Power, neither
will any true Englishman in the Army, so that such a Design will be ruinous
and destructive; Therefore I do earnestly entreat you, that we may not be a
scorn to all the world, and a Prey to our Enemies, that the Parliament may be
speedily restored to their Freedom which they enjoyed on the 11. of this
instant. Which is all at present from

Your Lordships humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.
Edinburgh, October. 20. 1659.

