A REPLY TO Two Discourses.

Lately Printed at OXFORD Concerning THE ADORATION OF Our BLESSED SAVIOR, IN
The Holy Eucharist.

Least Satan should get advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devises.

2 COR. II. v. 11.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.

Imprimatur. JO. VENN Vice-Can. Oxon.

May 19. 1687.

To the READER.
WHEN the two late Discourses concerning The Adoration of our Blessed Savior
in the Holy Eucharist, were first printed at Oxford, and the World expected
they should receive an Answer from the same place, from whence they had defied
the Church of England, I was vain enough to think it might fall to my lot to
Answer them. For I fancied so trivial a Pamphlet was below the regard of other
men, who do God and the Church better sevice in another station: and presumed
that while they offered Sacrifice, a mean man might serve to drive away the
Flies. Wherefore I committed to paper, what I thought I should say, supposing
that Province were assigned me, but having neither order nor inclination to
appear in Print, I proceeded as my leisure would allow me: and was not so
assiduous as I should have been to perform a task. Besides I indulged my
curiosity in a strict examen of the Quotations, which (some of the Books being
scarce, and most of them of a competent bulk) between procuring and reading
them cost me twice the time, that it did to write my Reply. This search I grant
was not absolutely necessary to my purpose, for a man that knows the Doctrine
of our Church, will not stick at any of the Quotations save only those out of
Mr. Thorndike: yet I do not regrett my pains: for I gained a more just and
lively Idea of the Discourser then I had before: and a fresh perusal of our
own excellent Authors, renewing those impressions I had formerly taken from 'em
was it self a very great reward.

So much work cut out for one that was in no great have: being neither very
fond of labor, nor lying under any obligation: must needs proceed as slowly as
ever any Church-work did: so that no man need wonder if a London Answer was
published when there yet remained near a third part of mine to finish.
Perusing that Reply I threw aside my own papers as superfluous, and resolved to
proceed no farther in so needless a design: the rather because it was reported
with great confidence, that another Answer was at that time ready, and
transcribing for the press. But some that impatiently expected this second
answer, finding after a fortnights expectation, there was no good ground for
that report: and being possessed with an opinion that there ought to be an
Oxford Answer; having likewise seen in what method I proceeded; and how far I
was advanced: importuned me first to finish my Reply though it were but for
their satisfaction: and at last extorted my consent to print it; upon condition
no other Answer should prevent them.

These are the reasons why it was made public, and why so late. If any man find
leisure to peruse it, I must beg him as he reads the Answer to read the
Discourses along with it, for that is a piece of justice due to every book
that is answered, and in confidence it would here take place, I have frequently
worded my Reply, so that it cannot be thoroughly understood, without comparing
my words with those in the Pamphlet they reply to.

CHAP. I. The Introduction.
IT is somewhat surprising that one, who has left the Church of England to go
over to that of Rome, should attempt to justify his desertion by pretending
both Churches are agreed; and if they are so, his conduct is the more amazing,
who quits the Principles of 'em both, and goes to settle the point he contends
for upon new Notions of his own: which by the way is so plain a confession,
that he thinks the Popish Principles cannot justify their Practice, that I
doubt the Gentlemen of that Communion will scarce thank him for his
undertaking. One would likewise have expected, that a man of the Editors
reputation, the famous Compiler of an Ars rationis Oxon. e Theatro 1673.
Art of Reason, should neither have writ nor published any thing, wherein the
Author did not reason like a man of art; or at leastwise talk as coherently as
ordinary men use to do by the pure strength of natural reason. Yet it pleases
the Author of the Pamphlet to display his great search and quickness, in such
illations as these; Disc I. chapter I.. 2. page 2.
Gloria in excelsis, is put in the Post communion, Ergo, The Church that put it
there disowns the Real Presence, Disc. I. ch III. 20. page 13.
Nihil magis incredibile: Ergo Not this more incredible that Idem corpus potest
esse in diversis locis simul. Ibid.
This thing is above our reason, Ergo It Is contrary to it: with other such deep
discoveries; to show us that his talent in Logic is as singular as his
judgment in Religion.

But I have no commission to question any man for making bold with himself; or
exposing his own understanding to what degree he thinks fit: and should
therefore have taken no notice of this Pamphlet, had it been any where printed
but at Oxford. I should not have thought my self obliged to censure the
extravagant singularities of a private fancy; such especially as are not likely
to do any mischief to the Public: and such I esteem the notions of this
Pamphlet; which is too perplexed for a common Readers understanding, and too
sophistical to impose upon the more intelligent. But considering the false and
scandalous reports, that are of late so industriously spread about the Nation:
as if Oxford Converts came in by whole shoals, and all the University were just
ready to declare: I have reason to believe this Pamphlet was designedly printed
at Oxford, to countenance those reports. For no doubt the Popish Presses were
at the Editors service; and to use them, instead of setting up a new one, hand
been less trouble and better husbandry. But the secret is, these Papers are to
pass with unwary people for a specimen of the Universities judgment: much such
a one indeed as the Tile was, which Hierocles's Scholar brought to market for a
sample of the House he had to sell. Now there are diverse agravations of this
foul play, which make it yet more insupportable. As why is this question now
revived which the members of our Church have of late so carefully declined out
of pure respect to those ears, which if it be possible they are not willing to
offend? Or why are we of the University attacqu'd in our own quarters? and so
defied to our teeth, that we can neither in honor nor honesty decline an
answer, tho, we are well aware with what design the scene of the Controversy
is laid in Oxford? Or how can we brook this usage from our companion? our own
familiar friend whom we trusted? with whom we have taken sweet council
together? and walked in the house of God as friends Ps. LV.14, 15.
? These are such cutting circumstances, as no armor of patience is sufficient
proof against.

For these Reasons, and not for any worth in the Book, I have ventured to
answer it; and complied with the severe task the Author sets me to make brick
and find straw too. For the Pamphlet duly considered will not furnish
sufficient matter for a Treatise. Strip it of its garniture, and it comes to no
more then this, That the Author supposes the Church of England to hold such a
Real Presence of Christ's natural body in the Eucharist, as he thinks a
sufficient ground to adore the Elements: To which we need only reply; That as
the Church ever held a real, so she ever denied a corporal i. e. a local
presence; and for that reason forbid the adoration of the Symbols. For, to say
no more at present, the same arguments that will justify our adoring them upon
the score of any, but a local presence of Christ's natural body, will excuse not
only the Popish, but even the grossest Heathen Idolatry.

This I take to be a full and sufficient answer to what our Author has spun
into two Discourses: However that I may leave no room for cavil, I shall take a
distinct view of the whole Pamphlet, and reply particularly to the Chapters and
Sections of each Discourse as they lie in order.

CHAP. II. A Reply to the first Chapter of the first Discourse.
THIS Chapter is taken up chiefly in recounting some little Alterations that
have been made at several times in our Rubricks and Articles: from which the
Pamphlet would infer that our Church has waver'd in her Doctrine.

Now to my apprehension, this Design let it be executed how it will, is very
impertinently undertaken. For admit that the Church had waver'd (as she has
not) what is that to his purpose of proving, that a Real though not Corporal
presence is ground enough to adore the Elements in the Eucharist? Again, admit
it were pertinent to prove, that the Church had waver'd in her Doctrine; how
impertinent is it to allege no proof, save out of the Rubricks and Articles,
which contain only terms of her Communion? omitting the Homilies and Catechisms
set forth by her Authority, as a solemn declaration of her Doctrine? We grant
that the Church having always held a Real Presence, so far as a Real
Participation imply's one; but always denied it if by Real we mean Corporal and
Local; has not always thought it requisite, to make the declaration and
subscription of this Doctrine, a term of her Communion: and if the Author has
any thing to object to her upon this score; it may possibly be to the purpose,
and then we are ready to answer it. Allways provided he forbear that shrewd way
of arguing, which he gives us a taste of in the second paragraph of his second
section: for to such kind of sequels as he makes there, we shall not think fit
to reply; but leave 'em to be seen through and despised by the Freshmen.

But a man, that is not moved by those arguments, may perhaps be put in mind by
the premises, to enquire why these Alterations were made? I answer that it is
easy to assign good reasons The reasons here assigned are (it may be) not the
true ones why the changes were made, but may serve to make a sober man
acquiesce in these alterations, nay prefer them now they are made: and the
Lawfulness not the Prudence of the Churches constitutions is the main point to
be considered by the members of her communion. It Is no matter what Politic
reasons might induce the Government to make these changes, as long as in making
them it did not deviate from the rule of Scripture. But the Reader that is so
disposed may gratify his curiosity as to this point too; by consulting Dr.
Burnets History of the Reformation vol. 2 page 170.190.392.394.405. Foxes and
Firebrands par. 2. page 10.11, 12, 13. Discourse of the holy Eucharist newly
printed at London page 72, 73. etc.
; but for want of the authentic Records we can but guess at the true. Perhaps
they might be as follows.

1. It has ever been the practice of all conformable Church of England-men to
handle both the Patin and the Chalice when they Consecrate. And indeed the very
nature of the action implies the use of that ceremony, so that there seems to
be no need of a Rubric to enjoin it. In K. Edward's first book there was a
marginal note to direct the more ignorant and unpractic'd In the present
Liturgy there are diverse such marginal notes; which are not injunctions to
perform, but directions when to perform some ceremonies which the Rubric
elsewhere enjoins, or the nature of the action supposes As for instance in the
office of Baptism Here (says the margin) the Priest shall make a Cross upon the
Child's forehead; the Rubric for this ceremony went before. And in the office
of the Eucharist, Here the Priest is to take the Patin into his hands etc. that
he should break the Bread and take the Cup into his hands is supposed in the
precedent Rubric (which only directs his standing that he may do it readily
and decently) for the very nature of the act of Consecration implies it. But
when this note of direction ( when to take the Patin etc.) was omitted, the
practice of taking it did not cease. For Rastall himself takes notice that
Jewel us^d to take the Bread into his hands; and we may better learn the mind
of our Church from his Practice then the Pamphlets surmises; if there were any
thousands as Rastall supposes (though I beg his pardon for some of his
thousands, and without a better reason then his supposal will not suppose one
thousand) omitted it; they were of those half-conformists, whom the Church has
always complain^d of as the most disingenuous and dangerous of all her enemies.
And for their sake in the review of sixty one it was necessary to restore these
directions, which were not so necessary when the mangling of the service was
less common.
when to use it; which was afterward omitted; when the usage was in all
appearance sufficiently secured by common practice. But when false brethren
took advantage from the omission to perform the ceremony awkwardly and lamely,
the directions were restored in the edition of sixty one.

2. The Gloria in excelsis is a hymn; and therefore most properly put in the
Postcommunion; because most conformably to our Savior's own practice, who when
supper was done Matt. XXVI.13. Mark. XIV 26.
sung a hymn with his Disciples.

3. The Trisagium as it now lies after Holy thrice repeated, in honor of the
three Persons of the Trinity, concludes very properly and pertinently with
Glory be to the O Lord acknowledging the Unity. This the Benedictus qui venit,
does not; but is rather liable to the same misconstruction for which the
Pandectae Canonum etc. published at Oxford by Dr. Beverege.
Council in Trullo ( Can. 81.) condemned the addition of (...) to that hymn.

4. The omission of these words [ in these holy mysteries] might be purely
accidental; and pass undiscovered, because as they signify no more then [ in
this celebration of the Eucharist] they have no material influence upon the
sense. But if we understand, as perhaps a perverse man may, that [ these
mysteries] signify the same with [ these elements] that is cause enough to
omit them: because they would assert an opinion which is contrary to sound
Doctrine, and the declared judgment of the Church.

Disc. I.. 3. n. 1. page 3.
What is farther observable in the two first Sections, is repeated and backed in
the third, and might be safely passed over, as containing nothing material but
what we again meet with there. For concerning the Form prescribed in delivering
the consecrated Elements he tell's us that in K. Edwards first book the Form
was The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ etc. in his second Take and eat this in
remembrance etc. in Qu. Elizabeth's both these put together as they still
continue in the English Liturgy. But withal he tells us, the first of these
Forms descends to us from Antiquity: and he finds no fault with the second,
which is entirely agreeable to the words and end of the Institution. So that we
are yet to seek, where the harm lies of using either Form single, or both of
them together? and yet farther to seek to what purpose this observation is
made? since it is manifest that neither Form single nor both of them together,
either owns a Corporal or denies a Real Presence.

He addds that the Scotch Rubric keeping the first Form requires the
Communicant to answer to it Amen: which without a Rubric ever was and is still
the Practice of the Church of England (for what more natural then to answer
Amen to a prayer?) and so were diverse other things (as for instance standing up
at the Gospel, and saying Glory be to thee O Lord,) which the Compilers of the
Scotch Liturgy having good reason to approve, thought fit to enjoin by a
Rubric; that the Puritans might have no pretense for Nonconformity.

But to return to the Communicants answering Amen. the Pamphlet truly observes
it to be according to custom of Antiquity: but I doubt the proofs it quotes
are not very judiciously chosen. The place in Eusebius belongs plainly to
another thing. The words are ( Hist. VII.9.) (...) (not (...)) (...), etc.
Which evidently shows that That Amen, was answered to the Doxology before the
distribution of the Elements, as not only Justin Martyr could have taught him,
but even Valesius himself in his Notes upon that passage of Eusebius. I leave
the examen of the other two Quotations to them that have leisure and the Books
by them, it is probable they may prove as pertinent as this. For I find it a
common practice in this man's other Works to quote those passages at length
which he thinks will bear the stress of an Argument, and barely refer to such
places, as contain only a hint which perhaps an unwary Reader may go near to
swallow.

This Amen was spoken says the Pamphlet as the Communicants confession that
what he received was Corpus Domini. But I shall rather learn the meaning of it
from Justin Martyr, Just. Mart. Edit. Steph Apol. 2. page 162. (...).
who observes that Amen in Hebrew signifies so be it, wherefore according to
His notion the Communicant answering Amen only joins with the Priest in praying
that the Body and Blood of Christ may preserve his Body and Soul to everlasting
life.

The Pamphlet farther observes that in K. Edwards first book there was this
passage in the prayer of Consecration. [And with thy holy Spirit and Word
vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these thy gifts and creatures of Bread and
Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ] which was afterward left out of the English Liturgy, and
restored in the Scotch. This omission by the way is something injudiciously
observed; because it shows us that the Clergy of Q. Elizabeth had no such
thoughts of the Real Presence as the Pamphlet would suggest they had. But I
refer him for answer to his own quotation out of Laudensium Autocatacrisis.
From these words (says he) all Papists use to draw the truth of their
Transubstantiation; wherefore the English Reformers scraped them out of their
Books] though his Gloss upon Restoring them in the Scocth Liturgy is a manifest
cavil; for no man of sense can interpret them as they lie there in favor of
Transubstantiation. see Archbishop Cranmers answer to Gardener. p. 70. p. 289.
The Archbishop the most competent Judge in this case thus interprets this
passage p 79. of his answer to Gardener. And therefore in the Book of the Holy
Communion, we do not pray absolutely that the Bread and Wine may be made the
Body and Blood of Christ, but that unto us in that holy mystery they may be so:
that is to say that we may so worthily receive the same, that we may be
partakers of Christ's Body and Blood, and that therewith in Spirit and Truth we
may be Spiritually nourished. And again p. 289. We do not pray etc: -- but that
they may be to us the Body and Blood of Christ; that is to say, that we may so
eat them and drink them, that we may be partakers of his Body Crucified and his
Blood shed for our redemption. Wherefore this was the sense of our Reformers
that compiled the Communion-office; and thus they understood it that restored
it in the Scotch Liturgy; and so must any man understand it that is not too
partially addicted to Popery.


I must beg the Readers pardon, if out of a desire to leave nothing unreply'd
to, I have particularly spoken to these inconsiderable observations, which the
Author himself does but skirmish with. But we are now come to the Rubric,
before which he intends to sit down: viz. that for explaining why we Kneel at
the Sacrament. This he tells us in K. Edward's book denied a Real and
Essential, but now denies only a Corporal Presence. To which I answer that K.
Edward's Rubric by Real and Essential means (as the Papists then used to do) a
Real and Bodily Presence: as is plain by the Articles set forth about the same
time, and quoted by the Pamphlet it self page 2.

He observes farther that both this Rubric and the explanatory Paragraph in
the 28th Article were expunged in the first of Q. Elizabeth. To which we have
already answered, that this at the utmost implies but a change in the terms of
our Communion: and if he think fit to challenge the Church upon that score we
are ready to give him satisfaction.

In the fourth Section he falls on in earnest upon the declaration about
adoration as he calls it, (...) I.. IV. page 4.
and from it as it now lies, draws three Observables, which are either very
dishonestly or else very ignorantly worded. They need no other answer then a
bare amendment of the expressions; which if they were intended to give the
sense of the Church of England, should have been to this effect.

1. Observable. That the Clergy do profess and teach, that the natural body and
blood of Christ, are not corporally i. e. locally present in the Eucharist.

2. Observable. That they have diverse reasons for this assertion: one
especially wherein Scripture, Philosophy, and common sense are agreed, viz.
that a true humane body cannot locally be in two places at once.

3. Observable. That in consequence hereof they declare, that the Presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, is indeed real but spiritual, and therefore
the Elements are not to be adored, because adoration ought not to be directed
to the natural body of Christ, but where it is locally present.

Had our Author had the ingenuity to express himself after this manner, he had
been no less kind to himself then just to the Church of England; for he might
have avoided diverse errors he commits in the three next Chapters, by avoiding
the grand impertinence of having written them at all.

CHAP. III. A Reply to the second chapter of the first Discourse.
Disc I.. VII. page 5.
THe design of the second Chapter is to prove by abundance of quotations, that
Learned Protestants heretofore have held, that the same body of Christ, which
was born of the Virgin Mary, crucified etc. is present as in Heaven so here in
the Holy Sacrament, either to the worthy receiver, or the Symbols.

By learned Protestants I presume he means those of the Church of England; for
so he should mean since he draws his Observables from a Rubric in their
Liturgy. Now he would have told us some news, had he mentioned but one of
these learned Protestants, who pretending to give the sense of the Church of
England does not hold, that the same numerical body which was born of the
Virgin Mary, crucified etc. is locally present in Heaven, and virtually present
in the Eucharist; not to the Symbols, but the Faith of the worthy receiver: or
if by those words, as in heaven so here he means locally in both; as indeed he
must mean, if his next Chapter be at all pertinent; he would have told us no
less news, had he brought but one quotation that could be honestly taken in
that sense. But if he have any third meaning it would have been a favor to
explain himself, for we pretend not to any talent in divination.

Now supposing he designs to combat the Church of England, I would gladly know
to what purpose he alleges Calvin and Beza? Disc. I.. VIII.IX.
for let their doctrine be what it will, to quote it to us who are not to be
concluded by their authority, is very trifling and impertinent. When the sense
of the Church of England was the question, one would have expected to hear
what the Church-Catechism says? What the Homilies? What Nowells Catechism?
Books allowed and published by the Churches authority, and authentic witnesses
of her judgment, or if private Doctors were the game, what Archbishop Cranmer's
book of the Sacraments? what Bradford, Philpot and the rest of Q. Mary's
Martyrs? what Bishop Jewel in his Apology and the Defense of it? what Bishop
Usher in his Sermon before the House of Commons? But instead of these we have
only the testimonies of some other eminent, but private men; all miserably
mangled and disjoynted; some of them Conciliators too, whose very design
obliges them to a looser kind of expression, then a true and adequate standard
of the Churches judgment will allow. Now should any of our private writers,
either in heat of disputation, or out of zeal to peace, or desire to explain a
great mystery; a little deviate in their expressions; we can easily forgive an
error, that proceeds from so allowable a cause; but still the Church is not
bound to justify that error.

But the quotations in the Pamphlet will not put us upon this Apology. Not an
author he quotes (except only Mr. Thorndike, of whom we shall say more by and
by) but speaks the sense of the Church; and industriously drives at a point
quite contrary to the Pamphlets design; which discovers a great flaw either in
the Authors judgment or honesty. I grant the authors as he has mangled 'em
look as unlike those worthy champions of our Church, as the shape that
appeared to Aenaeas did to the true and whole person of Hector. But I desire
the Reader neither to trust the Pamphlet nor me but his own eyes; to consult the
quotations as they lie entire in the authors themselves; and consider 'em with
their several contexts. For my own part having taken that pains, I profess to
find such dealing as I do not care to report, because I cannot expect to be
believed.

It Is somewhat unaccountable that a man of sense, having read the book of
Bishop Taylor's, which the Pamphlet quotes; should split upon the very Fallacy,
which that Bishop spends almost the whole first Chapter in detecting. He makes
it his business there to show, that Protestants in explaining the Real Presence
may lawfully use the same terms that Papists do. But they neither can nor do
use them in the Papists sense, and he that will urge the Protestants with those
words, must take the Protestants meaning along with him. This seems to be a
very equitable proposal. How far the Pamphlet complyes with it, I dare leave to
the meanest Reader, when he has perused this short and plain account of our
Churches doctrine in this point.

The natural body of our blessed Savior comes under a twofold consideration in
the Eucharist. 1. As a body dead; under which notion we are said to eat it in
the Sacrament, and to drink the blood as shed; as appears by the words of the
Institution, Take and eat, this is my body which is given or broken for you;
Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood which is shed for you: in which
words ( Acts and Monuments. page 1611.
as Mr. Bradford long ago observed) what God has joined we are not to put
asunder. 2. As a glorified body; in which condition it now sits at the right
hand of God, and shall there continue till the restitution of all things,
imparting Grace and Influence and all the benefits purchased by the Sacrifice
of the dead body, to those that (in the holy Eucharist most especially) are
through Faith and by the mavelous operation of the holy Ghost incorporated
into Christ; and so united to him that they dwell in Christ and Christ in them;
they are one with Christ and Christ with them; they are made members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones: and by partaking of the Spirit of him
their head, receive all the graces and benefits, purchased for them by his
bitter death and passion.

Wherefore it is evident that since the body broken and the blood shed neither
do nor can now really exist, they neither can be really present, nor literally
eaten, or drank, nor can we really receive them, but only the benefits
purchased by them. But the body which now exists whereof we partake, and to
which we are united, is the glorified body: which is therefore verily and
indeed received (as we shall see anon) and by consequence said to be Really
present notwithstanding its Local Absence; because a real participation and
union, must needs imply a Real presence, though they do not necessarily require
a Local one. For it is easy to conceive how a thing that is Locally Absent may
yet be Really Received, as he that receives a Disciple is said to receive
Christ; as the Disciples themselves received the Holy Ghost; as the King in the
Gospel received a Kingdom; or as we commonly say a man receives an Estate or
Inheritance when he receives the Deeds or Conveiances of it. In all which cases
the reception is confessedly real, though the thing it self is not locally or
circumscriptively present, or literally grasped in the arms of the receiver.

This by the way may serve to show the vanity as well as falsehood of
Transubstantiation, which was first devised to solve the literal eating of the
glorified body of our Savior: whereas though the body that is glorified, be
numerically the same that was broken; yet the body which is eaten as dead, and
the body which is present as glorified, are two as different things as can well
be imagined.

This may likewise serve to show, that there is no great disagreement among
those Protestants, whom the Papists too hastily charge with it. For they all
agree that we spiritually eat Christ's Body and drink his Blood: that we
neither eat nor drink nor receive the dead body nor the blood shed, but only
the benefits purchased by them: that these benefits are derived to us by virtue
of our Union and Communion with the glorified body: and that our partaking of
it, and union with it, is effected by the mysterious and ineffable operation of
the holy Spirit. The only difference is, that one part from the premises
infer, that Christ may be truly said to be Really Present in the Eucharist;
whereas the other scruple at the use of that expression (because the local
absence of his body is confessed on both sides) notwithstanding they agree in
all the points which the other party think requisite to defend it.

Now though it be easy as I said before to conceive how a natural substance may
be said to be Really Received though not Locally Present: it is not so easy to
conceive it Really Present when at the same time it is Locally Absent.
Therefore the Church of England has wisely forborne to use the term of Real
Presence in all the Books that are set forth by her authority. We neither find
it recommended in the Litugy, nor the Articles, nor the Homilyes, nor the
Churches, nor Nowell's Catechism. For although it be once in the Liturgy, and
once more in the Articles, it is mentioned in both places as a phrase of the
Papists and rejected for their abuse of it. So that if any Church of
England-man use it, he does more then the Church directs him, if any reject it
he has the Churches example to warrant him: and it would very much contribute
to the peace of Christendom if all men would write after so good a Copy.

Yet it must not be denied but the term may be safely used amongst Scholars;
and seems to be grounded upon the language of Scripture it self. For when our
Savior promises to be in the midst of them that call upon him; and to be with
his Church always to the end of the World, no doubt he promises to be really
present with them, though he does not mean that his Natural Body shall be
locally present amongst them. So St. Paul speaks of his own being absent in
Body but present in Spirit, 1. Cor. V.3. The Romans used to call their Gods
Praesentes Deos, not as locally present but always ready to assist them: and
whatever is in readiness when we want it, to answer our occasions may be
properly said (...), to be at hand, to be present. A man does truly
repraesentare pecuniam when he gives a good bill for it, though he does not pay
it down in specie. The Holy Ghost is said to abide and dwell in us; which words
imply a continual presence; no doubt Real, though not Physical and Local,
but only by his grace and influence. In short whatever we enjoy, use, and reap
the benefit of, as truly as if it were prae sensibus, is as Really present as
if it were Physically so: nay no doubt when virtue went out of our Savior's
body to heal the woman in the Gospel; though the Jews thronged him, and she did
but touch his garment, yet his body was more really present to her whom the
virtue of it healed then to them whom the substance of it touched.

So much for the use of the word: which when we of the Church of England use,
we mean thus. A thing may be said to be really received, which is so consigned
to us, that we can readily employ it to all those purposes, for which it is
useful in itself, and we have occasion to use it: And a thing thus really
received may be said to be really present two ways, viz. either Physically or
Morally, to which we reduce Sacramentally. A Physical presence (now we speak
of a natural Body) is local; antecedent to the reception and independent upon
it: the thing is first really present and then really received; and though it
were not received, would be still really present. A moral presence is only
virtuall consequent to the reception and dependent upon it: the thing is first
really received, and by consequence said to be really present; but it is not at
all present, to them that do not really receive it. Thus in the holy Eucharist,
the Sacrament is Physically, the res Sacramenti, Morally present: the elements
Antecedently and Locally, the very body Consequentially and Virtually but both
Really present.

From hence it is evident, that if we rightly understand the Presence, it is
not material with what adverbs we affirm it. We may say it is Really,
Essentially, nay Corporally present: that is, it is present in as much as it is
Really received to all intents and purposes, for which the Res ipsa the Essence
the Substance the very Body would be useful to us, if it were Physically and
Locally present. And the difference between us and the Papists is plain. They
(however they express themselves) understand a Local presence, which we deny
and therefore reject their expression. We (whatever term we use) mean only a
Spiritual and Virtual Presence, and explain the term we make use of to that
effect. Thus the Protestants in K. Henry the Eighth's time, that sufferd upon
the six Articles, denied the Real Presence (i. e. the Popish sense of it) but
meant the same thing with us, who think, we may lawfully use that term. On the
other side that excellent Person and glorious Martyr Mr. Bradford Acts and
Monuments p. 1608.
, I do believe (says he) that Christ is Corporally present, at and in the due
Administration of the Sacrament. But he adds this explication, By this word
Corporally I mean that Christ is present Corporally unto Faith.

It is likewise evident, that when we say Christ is Present, or Adorable in the
Sacrament, we do not mean in the Elements but in the Celebration. We affirm his
natural Body to be Locally in Heaven and not here; and that we, who are here
and not in Heaven, ought to Worship it as Locally present in Heaven while we
celebrate the Holy Sacrament upon Earth.

Lastly it is evident that this Doctrine is sufficiently removed from what the
Pamphlet calls Zuinglianism, how truly I will not now inquire. For we do not
hold that we barely receive the Effects and Benefits of Christ's Body: but we
hold it Really Present in as much as it is Really received, and we actually put
in possession of it though Locally absent from us. So that while we Spiritually
eat Christ's Flesh and drink his Blood, we through Faith, in a mysterious and
ineffable manner, dwell in Christ, and Christ in us; we are one with Christ,
and Christ with us: and by virtue of this Spiritual and Mystical yet Real
participation, we receive the Benefits consequent to it; even the remission of
our Sins and all other benefits of Christ's Passion.

This in short is our meaning; and to this effect all true
Church-of-England-men declare it. Whether we express our selves in proper and
accurate terms is another question, wherein if the Editor think fit to engage,
we are ready to answer him. In the mean time we desire him and the rest of his
Communion, not to catch up our words, and bait them in their own sense, which
is too like the dealing of the Old Romans with the Primitive Christians.

It remains that we say a word or two concerning Mr. Thorndike's Testimony, and
so dismiss this Chapter. The reader may please to take notice, that the whole
design of this Pamphlet is to furbish, and rig out a notion of Mr. Thorndike's
in his Epilogue to the Tragedy of the Church of England. The notion is neither
the Church of Englands, nor as I believe any other Churches: nor does he so
much as pretend that any other man, much less any Church ever taught it. He
only thinks it is * consistent with the analogy of Faith, not trenching (as he
says) upon any ground of Christianity, and seems to propose it as a peaceable
expedient, for complying outwardly with the Popish adoration of the Euch^^^^^ a
practice, which, when he wrote his (...) thought advisable if it could be
warranted, for he was then upon a project of Uniting all Christians in one
Communion: and wrote his Epilogue on purpose to serve that design: not
pretending to give the true sense of any party; but so to blanch the opinions
of them all, that the difference of their Judgment might not hinder their
Uniting. Wherefore he professes to expect Preface to the Epilogue p. 45 etc.
the Lot of Reconcilers, to be contradicted by all parties; and owns that he
says those things which he should have dissembled had the Church of England
continued. But it seems he thought as some others did, when the King was
Murdered, that the Church of England was utterly and irrecoverably dissolved:
and that it was necessary to hold Communion with some Church: and if it were
honestly practicable with the Church of Rome rather then another. It Is probable
the Editor was of the same mind, for I remember to have heard this very plea
made in his defense, by a friend of his about some Eighteen years since.

But whatever Mr. Thorndike's opinion was when he wrote his Epilogue, it is
certain when the King returned, he was a member of that Convocation that
revised the Liturgy; that he constantly attended there; and had a hand more
then ordinary in the Edition of sixty one. That he declared his unfeigned
assent and consent, to all things in the Liturgy as it was then altered: that
he conformed to it all the rest of his Life, and at last died in Communion with
the Church that imposed the use of it.

So then we have here quoted out of the Epilogue, a private opinion of a
private man, and what is that to the Church? especially since for ought then
appeared he was singular in it while he held it; and when occasion offered, he
forsook it: professing his unfeigned assent to that Rubric, which the Pamphlet
would confront with his Authority.

CHAP. IV. A Reply to the third Chapter of the first Discourse.
Disc. 1.. 19 p. 13.
The Author's purpose in the third Chapter, is to combat this assertion in the
Rubric, that it is against the truth of a natural body to be ( i. e. as he
explains it, that a natural body cannot truly be) in two places at once.

Here is a kind of inauspicious stumble at the very entrance. For it is one
thing to say as the Rubric does, that a true natural body cannot be; and
another as he does that a natural body cannot truly be in two places at once.
For should we suppose as he would have us, that God should make one of our
bodies be in two places at once; when God had done this, it would truly be in
those places; but before he did it he must change the nature of the body, and
make it cease to be a true natural body.

This is but a slip: but in the next Paragraph it is neck or nothing. Ibid. 20.
n. 1.
He finds there that Protestants confess Christ's presence in the Eucharist to
be an ineffable mystery (they own indeed our Union and Communion with him to be
so, but supposing that, the Real Presence is easily explained. But admit the
Real Presence be ineffable) what then? Ibid.
He conceives it is so because of something in it opposite and contradictory to
reason. Now any Protestant Child could have told him, though perhaps he will take
it more kindly from the Catholic Part 2. Cap. 6. page 41.
Representer: that the mysteryes of Faith, are above reason not contrary to it.
A little farther nihil magis incredibile says Calvin: therefore says the Author
not this more incredible that. Idem Corpus etc. Away you Wagg; what thrice in
one Paragraph?

. 20. n. 3. Dr. Disc. 1. 20. n. 3 p ^4.
Tailor is Quoted saying that if Transubstantiation were plainly revealed he
would burn all his arguments against it and believe it without more ado. And
so say I too: yet I would not believe that a contradiction could be verifyed;
but rather that they were deceived who thought that doctrine to imply a
contradiction: for if it were plainly revealed, it would be certainly true; and
if it were true it would not imply a contradiction. For a true proposition has
a true meaning: but a contradiction has no meaning at all: it is an empty sound
of words without any res substrata: whatever one part of it means, the other
unmeans again, and so the whole means nothing* Besides of two contradictories
one is always falls, so that to assert a contradiction is to affirm a falsehood
for a truth, and this we are sure God cannot do, because he has told us he
cannot lie. To conclude the Author himself seems to own that God cannot verify
a contradiction and he gives a very wise and perspicuous reason for it which I
leave to the Reader to consider.

Again Dr. Tailor is Quoted saying, Ibid.
that the doctrine of the Trinity does as much violence to Philosophy as
Transubstantiation. And so say I too: yet I profess I can easier conceive it
then I can Transubstantiation. For this supposes that a natural body being unum
numero, is at the same time fifteen hundred bodies all numerically distinct:
whereas the Doctrine of the Trinity says the three persons are one God, but it
does not say they are one person: so that here is no ad Idem as there is in the
other case, which implies a manifest contradiction, while the Doctrine of the
Trinity implies none at all. The Doctrine of the Trinity transcends natural
reason; Transubstantiation contradicts it in its own sphere: both of them do
equal i e. both of them do alike so far offer violence to natural reason, that
it cannot frame an adequate notion of either. Yet still it can conceive what
obstructs the credibility of both; and that more things do so in one case then
another: it can easily discern that what transcends it may for all that be
true; but what contradicts it in its own sphere must needs be false. And this
it can do without Scripture: but by Scripture it can further discover that the
Doctrine of the Trinity is true, and Transubstantiation utterly false. These
things are so plain and common, that it is nauseous to be forced by an
unthinking writer to inculcate them. Whoever knows any thing of the reason of
his Religion, knows all this and how to apply it to Dr. Taylor's words without
my telling him: and yet if I had trusted to that, these Quotations might
perhaps have gone for unanswerable.

In the next Section we come to a point. For since all contradictions are
equally possible and credible why (says he) may not this contradiction that
Idem corpus potest esse etc. Disc. 1.. 21. p. 14.
bid as fair for our belief as another? No doubt it may; and that for this
reason that all contradictions are equally, i. e. all of them absolutely,
impossible, and incredible; we may as well believe this as another, because we
can believe none at all. Why then (says he) I cannot apprehend how you believe
a real presence. If he cannot apprehend it, Ibid.. 22. p. 15.
we cannot help it; we do all that a reasonable man need desire to make him
apprehend it; we speak in plain and intelligible terms; We tell him that we
think it implies no contradiction to believe God can do things far above our
comprehension; and therefore when God tells us, that the bread which we break
is the Communication of Christ's body, though we cannot explain this mystery, we
can believe it without believing a contradiction; and granting this
communication, the Real Presence may be easily understood and explained: at
least it is no contradiction to say, that a body thus mystically communicated,
may be really present when it is locally absent as was showed before.

But the Author who has a peculiar way of thinking, Ibid. and. 23, 24.
can think but of two expedients to evade a contradiction, in affirming a real
and substantial, contra distinct to a Zuinglian Real presence: one of which is
by holding a Zuinglian Real Presence. ( compare. 22. with. 24. n. 1.) and so
let that pass. The other is by an incomprehensible continuation of Christ's
body. Bishop Usher would have told him a third; and other learned Protestants a
fourth; but the major part of them will So for instance Bp. Andrews quoted in
the Pamphlet page 7.. II. n. 1. De modo praesentiae nihil temere definimus; addo
nec anxie inquirimus etc. Inter mysteria ducimus, (and quidem mysterium est
Eucharistia ipsa) cujus quod reliquum est debet igne absumi; (i. e.) ut
eleganter imprimis Patres, fide adorari non ratione discuti.
tell him it is needless to enquire after any. For the Union of Christ's body to
the Soul of a worthy communicant being an inexplicable mystery, yet plainly
affirmed in Scripture; they with the fathers conclude, we have all the reason
in the world to believe it; but none to attemt explaining it: and we can
certainly believe it without believing a contradiction, though he that attemts to
explain it, may chance to run himself into an inconvenience.

Notwithstanding some Protestants hold that Christ's Body may be present by an
ineffable continuation; Disc. I. 23. p. 16.
and what has he to say to them? Why He thinks he may as probably suppose it
Present by an ineffable discontinuation. Perhaps not; for their Opinion may be
an Error, but his I doubt is a Bull: at least if I rightly understand that
abstruse notion of Presence by discontinuation; which looks so like a
cont^adiction in terms, that to me it is almost inconceivable, not for the
mystery of it but the nonsense.

Perhaps the example he gives may a little clear this difficulty. The Soul he
tells us is totally in the head and foot: and if a Spirit may be in two Ubies,
who can tell but a Body may be in two Places? Ibid.
That Is a Consequence which I leave to shift for it is self among the Freshmen:
But I would fain know what the Souls Ubiety makes here? for if it serve to any
purpose in this question it is to illustrate a Zuinglian Real Presence as he
calls it, for as the substance of the Soul not being coextended to the
dimensions of the Body, is lodged but in some one part; but the virtue informs
them all as effectually as if it is proper Vbi were in each of them; and in this
sense the Soul is said to be tota in toto and tota in qualibet part: so (to
make a just parallel) the natural Body of Christ which is Locally only in
Heaven, does as effectually impart its virtue to every worthy Communicant, as
if it were Locally present to each of them upon earth; and is therefore said to
be Really Present in the Eucharist. But to proceed. If this be a true account
of the Souls Ubiety, I see no occasion of conceiving it to manage the Body with
one foot in the water and the other out like a broken Oblicer, Ibid.
for the placing of the Body alters nothing in the Presence of the Soul. Oh but
what if the Legs be cut of? Ibid.
and the same Soul supposed still to inform them as before, per potentiam
divinam? why I think they might as well have staid on; for the Soul will be
Present as before; the Substance where it was before, and the Virtue in the
Legs as it was before. Well but let him suppose what he cannot explain, that God
by his Omnipotence may make a Soul be in too Vbies, what will he get by it? Not
that the Soul is or may be so, for a thing is never the truer or more possible
for his supposing it, but only that if a man suppose God can make a soul be in
two Vbies, then he must suppose that a soul may be in two Vbies; which is a
great truth, and no less a secret. Now dos he say any thing to induce a man to
this strange supposal? Not a Syllable that I can find to show the equity or
decency of it; not a Syllable to take of the impossibility. But here is the
Divine Omnipotence unaccountably summoned to vouch an impertinent Bull, which
if it be granted we are never the nearer. So perfect a tally is this Authors
understanding to his Judgment.

I have already spoke of what is most material in the next Section, if any
thing be farther observable, Ibid. 24. n. 1. p. 17.
it is this question, viz. If Dr. Tailors exposition of the real presence be
Orthodox, what becomes of -- praesentiam non minus quam illi veram quoted out
of Bishop Andrews. If a man would take advantage of this Quoter's blundering,
he might translate those words. We believe a real presence as well as they. But
we take the Bishop's words Bishop Andrews answ. to Bellarm. n. II.
praesentiam credimus; nec minus quam vos, veram; and his meaning, that the
Spiritual presence which we hold is as Real as the Corporal which the Papists
hold: and I hope we need not stay to prove a thing so manifest, and so
universally agreed on, Disc. 1.. 24. n. 2, 3, 4.
as that what is Spiritual is as Real as what is Corporal.

From this Passage to the twenty fifth Section, he reports the disagreement of
the Schoolmen, Ibid.. 25, 26.
in whose quarrels we are no way concerned. After this digression he spends two
Sections to show that the Real and Essential presence in the old Rubric, must
mean the same with the Corporal presence in the new. To which we have already
answered, that K. Edwards Reformers not only thought but said so. In the twenty
seventh Section he is at it again, Disc I. page 20.
that the absurdity of Idem Corpus, etc. presses us as much as the Papists: and
again in the twenty eighth that all he has been saying from the twenty second
is to show that to his apprehension, we must either hold this contradiction, or
another equivalent, or cease to hold a Real Presence contradistinct to that of
the Zuinglians. To this we have likewise answered, that if he will apprehend
things aukwardly, we cannot help it. We have told him very plainly how we hold
a Real Presence, and shown it to be far enough from what he calls a Zuinglian
presence: and all this without holding any contradiction; or so much as meddling
with that question whether two Contradictories may be both true? But the
Papists (and he if he were one of them) neither do nor can explain their
Presence without holding a contradiction; which is one of the very many
arguments, we urge against that prodigious doctrine.

Disc I.. 29 30.
The two next Sections are quotations out of Protestant "writers to this effect.
That we care not to dispute the Extent of God's Absolute Power; that it is not
pertinent to this question; that some men are too bold in setting bounds to the
Almighty; and others too forward in pronouncing what implies a contradiction;
and therefore the safest way is to wave these points, and stick to what is
revealed. All this is most undoubtedly true, and constantly maintained by our
best writers. We grant that no Judicious or Pious man would discourse of Gods
absolute power more then he has revealed; or press the Papists with Idem
Corpus, etc. were it only a Philosophical argument: much less would a Judicious
man speak to either of the points, when they were not pertinent to his purpose.
But when God has declared he cannot verify a contradiction; For example, we
read in Scripture that Christ was made in all things like unto us, Sin only
excepted; and that the Heaven of Heavens must contain him (i e his Natural
Body) till the restitution o^ all things; and that God who says both those
things cannot Lie, from whence it is evident that the Natural Body of Christ is
an Organical Body such a one as ours; which, as all men agree, can never be
said to be Locally Present in two places at once, without affirming such a
contradiction, as God declares he cannot verify. Wherefore when the Scripture
says that Christ's Natural Body is and must continue to be Locally in Heaven;
we have Gods own warrant to affirm, that even the Divine Omnipotence cannot
make it to be Locally Present at the same time upon Earth. This the Angel in
effect affirms when he says to the Women that sought Christ's Body, he is
risen, he is not here: for such an answer would but ill become the mouth of an
Angel, if it were possible for his Body to be risen, and yet be there at the
same time.
and the maxim of Idem Corpus, etc. is applied in Scripture to our Saviors
natural body; when we wave this where it is not necessary; to wit in explaining
our own doctrine; and employ it only against those that do, and must maintain
the contrary; we presume that neither the Judgment nor Piety of our Writers
will be questioned by any man that has but a grain of either. Though it would
not be altogether impertinent, even while we confine our selves to revelation,
if finding that Idem Corpus, etc. is a truth allowed in Scripture, we infer
that the contradiction of it must be false and therefore cannot be revealed.
And certainly did a man that considered what he said apply himself to answer
this argument, he would endeavor to take off the contradiction, and show it
was not real but apparent only; and not, as this unthinking Author does,
maintain that contradictions may be verified; which position were it once
granted, 'twere in vain to dispute or but assert any thing; and impossible to
give a firm assent to any conclusion either in Reason or Religion. Wherefore it
is ridiculous and impious in this man and Bellarmin and the rest of them to
invoke the Divine Omnipotence when they run their heads against a
contradiction. But they that pretend to make God when they please, may by the
same reason make him do what they please.

This I hope is a sufficient guard, against the untoward application of any
Protestant writings, wherewith the Pamphlet either does or can abuse the common
Reader in this matter. Disc. I. page 22. Ibid.. 19. p. 13.
In the end of the thirtieth Section, he palms upon us a passage out of S.
Austin, which is very surprising. He professes to forbear quoting the Fathers,
because the Protestants have done it for him; though we may take leave to
suppose another Reason; but here when he thought he could delude the Reader
with S. Austin's authority, he is willing to make his best of him. It seems
that excellent Father in his Tom. 6. p. 515. and Seqq. Edit. nov. Paris.
Cura pro mortuis having proved that Martyrs cannot interesse rebus viventium,
without a Miracle; immediately adds that Quemadmodum, the modus whereby this
Miracle is wrought is beyond his capacity, too sublime, too abstruse for him,
he had rather inquire of them that know, Vtrum ipsi per seipsos adsint uno
tempore tam diversis locis? or whether they relieved their votaries by the
Ministry of Angels? or whether it be both these ways? Which shows as the
Pamphlet tells us this Father believed no impossibility of a Martyrs being uno
tempore in diversis locis. Would not any man imagine now, who knows what point
the Author drives at, that he would have S. Austin say a a Martyr's Body might
be in two places at once? and would he not wonder that S. Austin should be
quoted for this purpose, who is Epist. 57. ad Dardanum -- carnis forma atque
substantia, cui profecto immortalitatem dedit* naturam non abstulit. Cavendum
enim est ne ita divinitatem astruamus hominis, ut veritatem corporis auferamus
Una enim p^rsona Deus and Homo est, and Utrumque est unus Christus Jesus;
Ubique per id quod Deus est; in Coelo autem per id quod Homo. Idem Tract. 31.
in Joan. Homo enim secundum corpus, in loco est and de loco migrat; and cum ad
alium locum venerit, in eo loco unde venit non erit. Et Tract 30 in Joan.
Corpus enim Domini in uno loco esse oportet (so Ivo, Gratiam, Lombard and
Aquinas quote it; not potest as it is Printed) veritas ubique diffusa est.
elsewhere so express and peremptory that the Natural Body of Christ himself
cannot be in two places at once? But the Author is wary; for he knew very well
that by ipsi per seipsos S. Austin meant, as he explains himself, ipsorum
animae in figura corporis sui. But did not S. Austin then believe that a Spirit
might be in two places at once? Perhaps not; but was therefore at a loss
because he knew not how to believe it; and this put him upon search of other
solutions. I will not now inquire whether a Spirit may be said to be in two
places at once? as the Souls of the Martyrs were by some perhaps supposed to
have been; though the affirmative may be explained without holding a
contradiction: but rather observe how S. Austin concludes this point, viz. If
the man whom he consulted should tell him out of Scripture, This thing is above
your reach and therefore forbear your enquiry; he would thankfully receive this
answer and and acquiesce. So upon the whole matter S. Austin delivers himself
like a true Church-of-England-man; Here Is a point started which is past my
understanding; the difficulties and ways of solution are these: I cannot
determine and therefore do not care to dispute; I submit to Scripture, and
content my self with the Certainty of the thing, without inquiring into the
modus. I wish other Writers would follow this example; and then perhaps we
might keep our Religion without parting with our common sense.

The thirty first Section containing only old matter has been spoken to before.
Disc. I. page 23.
I only add that if the Author allow Dr Heylin's reason, why does he give a
different one of his own? if not, why does he quote it?

In the thirty second Section he repeats the old blunder about Real and
Corporal; Ibid.
and adds two or three to keep it company. He cannot discern he says why it
should not be a contradiction for a Body to be Locally in one place and Really
Received in another? He should read Mr. Walker's Logic which will tell him that
two contradictories have the same Subject and Predicate. He says it is
insidious in the Rubric not to say that the Body Locally Absent is Really
Received, and may tempt a man to doubt whether the Church thinks it to be so.
Now I fancy not; because the Catechism is very express. He is troubled we
refuse other men's contradictions, and expect our own should pass currently. But
we have told him that we neither hold nor meddle, that we know of, with any
contradiction in explaining our own Doctrine, and he has not yet vouchsafed to
make it appear we do.

From hence to the end of the Chapter he is as busy as if he were playing with
Book of Education part. 1. chap. 11. page 145. printed 1677.
Thesauro's Bees. Five ways he has found out of explaining Really and
Essentially, and no man Living, that I know of, either says or means any one
of them as they are there delivered. Disc. I.. 33.
He says he does this to express his disquisition more fully

The three first explications are three such unaccountable Whimsyes, as need no
other disquisition, but whether the words are capable of a rational meaning.
For example. Ibid.
If by Really and Essentially be meant such a Presence of Christ's body to our
souls as the Papists hold there is to the Elements, i. e. by abolishing the
substance of the Soul and substituting Christ's body in the room of it etc. and
so for the two next. The fourth speaks imperfectly,. 36. page 25. Ibid.
but seems to say something of truth, viz. that the body becomes Really present
by reason of the same Spirit uniting us here on earth as members to it in
heaven. To this he objects that then Christ would be no more present in the
Eucharist then in any other Sacrament, wherein the Spirit is conferred. In which
I see no inconvenience; nor do I believe the Fathers did, when they said Christ
is present in the Eucharist as he is in Baptism. He objects farther "that such
presence is properly of the Spirit: Ibid.
which I hope for his credit is only a mistake of the Press; and that the
written copy had it by the Spirit. The fifth explication is likewise imperfect,
if he apply it to the Church of England; which does not hold a bare reception
of the benefits; but a Real participation of the body, and by consequence of
the effects and benefits. But the great and killing objection against all
explications, he dislikes, is their not advancing us beyond Zuinglianism.
Whether the opinion, which he brands by that name, be truly ascribed to
Zuinglius, and really so great a bugbear as this Author seems to apprehend, I
need not now stay to inquire; it is sufficient to my purpose that the Church of
England does advance beyond it. Yet the words of the Judicious and Venerable
Mr. Hooker are very well worth our observation. It seems (says he lib. 5.
Sect. 67. page 308.) much amiss that against them whom they term Sacramentaries
so many invective Discourses are made, all running upon two points, that the
Eucharist is not a bare Sign and Figure only, and that the efficacy of his Body
and Blood is not all we Receive in this Sacrament. For no man having read their
Books and Writings, which are thus traduced, can be ignorant that both these
Assertions they plainly confess to be most true, they do not so interpret the
words of Christ, as if the Name of his Body did import but the Figure of his
Body and to be were only to Signify his Blood. They grant that these Holy
mysteries Received in a due manner, do instrumentally both make us Partakers of
the Grace of that Body and Blood, which were given for the Life of the World,
and besides also impart unto us, even in True and Real though Mystical manner,
the very Person of our Lord himself whole perfect and entire as has been
showed. These words may receive farther light from Bishop Cosins's History of
Transubstantiation cap. 2. Sect. 13.17, 18. Now they that acknowledge thus
much, hold a Real Participation and Union; which is all that is requisite to
affirming a Real Presence. And if they deny a Real Presence they only reject a
Term which may well enough be used; but perhaps be better let alone. The truth
is what the Pamphlet attributes to Zuinglius, was as Bucer reports the tenent
of the Anabaptists; and as Mr Thorndike says of some Puritans in the beginning
of the late Rebellion. And by them it is most probable this notion was imparted
to a friend of ours, who at that time was observed to be their great associate
and favourer.

Disc. I.. 37 p. 25.
What the Remonstrants and Socinians say does no way concern us; much good may
they do the Author, they who set up for so great masters of reason will but ill
resent it that a man of his head should pretend to them. Ibid.. 38.
Who W.H. is, and who his Answerer I know not, having never seen either of
their Books, And being so well acquainted with this Author's sincerity, I
cannot depend upon his Credit, I meet with nothing quoted, but what it is easy
to give an account of; but to do it as it should be one ought to have the Books
by him: for I vehemently suspect this Answerer has fared no better then his
Brethren.

CHAP. V. A Reply to the Fourth Chapter of the first Discourse.
TO the third Observable laid down in the first Chapter which now comes to be
considered, the Author has three things to say.

1. That if Christ's Natural Body were Corporally Present in the Eucharist,
Disc. I p. 27.. 39.
it ought to be, then, adored; which we grant him and had he designed to
dispute for the Papists, he ought to have insisted that it is Corporally
Present.

2. Ibid. 40.
That if we reject a Corporal Presence yet if any other Presence be revealed,
which is as Real and Essential, as if it were Corporal; adoration will be no
less due to it thus, then so Present. That is, (if he mean to oppose us and not
barely fight with his own shadow) that since the Church of England holds the
natural body of Christ to be Corporally and Locally absent, yet as Truly and
Really Present, as if it were Locally Present; she is as much bound, to adore
the Elements for the sake of the Real Presence, which she owns, as she would be
if she likewise owned that Corporal and Local Presence which she deny's. I say
to adore the Elements: for otherwise there is no dispute whether Christ's body,
abstracting from the hypostatical Union, be more then a creature, which is not
adorable with Divine worship; For all understanding men are agreed it is not:
Or whether Christ's person i. e. his body hypostatically united to his Deity
wheresoever or howsoever present, is to be adored both in and out of the
Sacrament, viz. in the performance of all religious offices; still addressing
our adoration to him in heaven where his body is Locally Present; for this is
allowed by all true Christians whatsoever. This his second position we are to
debate when he speaks to it; in the mean time we deny it.

3 He undertakes to show that the Church of England (i. e. five writers of her
Communion, Disc. I. page 28.. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.
whereof one is Mr Thorndike as he delivers himself in his Epilogue) have
heretofore believed and affirmed such a Presence, to which they thought
adoration due. To adore a presence is an odd kind of expression; for it is to
adore an extrinsic denomination. To adore Christ present in the mysteries, is a
phrase we better understand; though that too be liable to misconstruction. If
the author dare to speak plain, the point that pinches, and the true thing to
be proved, is that Christ according to the quotations is so Really Present in
the Eucharist, that the Elements ought to be Divinely worshipped upon that
account. And if this be so, as I think I have plainly shown, I leave the Reader
to consider with what confidence the Author quotes either Bishop Andrews for
his purpose, who expressly in the very quotation declares himself against him,
saying Sacramentum tamen nulli adoramus; or Bishop Tailor saying likewise, We
give no divine honor to the Signs, or Bishop Forbes saying, Haec adoratio non
pani, non vino, non sumptioni, non comestioni debetur; or the Archbishop of
Spalato, since this passage in Bishop Forbes is a quotation out of the
Archbishop. I can only say that to me these passages seem to argue that the
Author is very Singular in something besides his Religion.

Disc. I. page 29.. 47.
Having given us this taste of his other good qualities, he concludes with a
spice of his Logic, and infers 1. That notwithstanding what he has said, the
Church in her Declaration seems clearly to deny Adoration due to Christ's body
as any way Present in the Eucharist; contrary to the forecited Doctrine, and K.
James's and Bishop Andrews's Religion. I will not take advantage of his
ambiguous expressions; but tell him that the King's, the Bishop's, and the
Churches meaning is very plain, viz. that since Christ's Natural Body is not to
be adored but where it is Corporally and Locally Present; and it is not so
Present in the Eucharist: that therefore in the Sacrament (i. e. in the
celebration) the worthy Communicant, to whose Soul that Body is really present,
is to adore the person of Christ in heaven where alone his Body is Locally
Present. This I doubt the Author very well knew, and saw it was no way contrary
to the Declaration. Wherefore he seems to lay no great stress upon this first
inference, but goes on Or at least 2 ly. And here he would have it be
infidious in the Church to deny that Adoration is due to a Corporal presence,
Ibid.
and not declare though she believes that there is another adorable presence.
Now I cannot imagine that even this Author has the confidence to say the Church
of England has not sufficiently taught that Christ in Heaven is adorable; or
the ignorance to think that any good Christian is not sufficiently assured of
that point. But as for adoring Christ's Body any otherwise then by directing
adoration to his person where his body is supposed to be Locally present,
neither the Church of England nor any other Church ever dreamt of it.

CHAP. VI. A Reply to the fifth Chapter of the first Discourse.
THe fifth is the kindest Chapter in all this Discourse: for the six first
Sections require no manner of answer, and the last seems at first sight to
show some little ingenuity; which with this Author is a thing so extraordinary,
that had he not retracted, I think we must have given him public thanks for it.

He tells us that perhaps some other passages may be collected out of the
Authors he has quoted, Disc. I. page 32.. 55.
that may seem to qualify those he has set down, and better suit with the
expressions of the Declaration. For it seems his Conscience flew in his Face,
because he very well knew, that if the Reader consulted the Authors themselves,
not only the passages he omitted, but those he mangled, would be found entirely
agreeable to the Declaration. The only way left to escape discovery, was to
prevent, if he could, the search as unnecessary. Wherefore he says tnat if the
unquoted passages come over to the quoted, we are then but where we were: and
the quoted accommodated to the unquoted will appear to abett but bare
Zuinglianism. To this I have answered as much as is necessary already and
therefore shall not repeat or add to it.

Disc. I. page 30, 31, 32.
The former part of the Chapter is spent in creating and annihilating such
objections as are worthy the Author's sagacity. Three such he has devised as no
man else could have thought on; and is pleased to answer them himself; for no
other man was worthy. I will not interrupt his triumph, or provoke him to renew
the combat, by telling him there yet seems to be life in those objections: but
rather advise him to consider, and spare himself, and not batter his own
notions in this cruel and hostile manner; he has another more gentle and easy
method; he knows how to contradict them by his way of proving them. But if he
be so bent upon Controversy, that he cannot be contented to live in Peace; I
would (rather then quarrel with himself) he would look down upon this Reply.
Not that I pretend in my own strength to cope with so puissant an Adversary;
but asserting the Doctrine of the Church of England, I may safely defy all
Opponents.

CHAP. VII. A Reply to the eight first Sections of the Second Discourse.
THE Title of this second Discourse does but ill agree with the design of it.
For all the world knows that Papists, who should be the Catholics this Author
means, by a Real and Substantial understand a Corporal Presence, and ground
their Adoration upon it. Whereas the scope of this Discourse is to show, that
the Papists in Adoring either do or may prescind from Transubstantiation; and
ground their Adoration precisely upon the Reality of the Presence: and by
consequence that Protestants especially of the Church of England, who hold
Christ Truly Present and Adorable in the Eucharist; ought upon their own
Principles to join in the Popish adoration; or at least absolve them that do so
from the guilt of Idolatry.

What the Writers of the Church of England mean when they hold a Real Presence,
and in what sense they teach us to Adore Christ's Body in the Sacrament; I hope
I have already explained so fully, that I need make no repetition: so that the
first six leaves of this Defense, will afford us little new matter, being
chiefly taken up in repeating some quotations in the first Discourse; and
aiming at no more then a specimen of Protestant concessions, which by what we
have said are sufficiently guarded against the Sophistry of his
interpretations. Wherefore waving for the present a distinct examen of all his
Protestant quotations, as a thing tedious, and no way necessary, serving
chiefly to divert and amuse the Reader, and thereby puzzle the cause, I shall
make it the business of this Chapter to speak briefly to those other passages
that are most observable in the eight first Sections of this Defense.

Disc II. page 1.. 1, 2, 3.
His two first Suppositions we grant him, being convinced of the truth of them
by much better reasons then he assigns. Nor should we have demurred to the
third, if we were not now acquainted with his insidious and shuf^ing way of
talking. But if we may explain our selves we grant him that Wherever the Body
of our Lord is Locally Present, it is supremely Adorable. We likewise grant him
that the Omnipresent God may be adored, before or in the Presence of any
Creature, (we on earth cannot worship him but in the presence of some Creature)
provided allways we direct our Adoration immediately and solely to him; not
considering the Creatures present, nor addressing the outward act, much less
the inward worship of the Heart, to any Creature upon the score of Gods
presence. For (taking Adoration for divine Worship) it is certainly Idolatry
not only to adore a Creature, but even to make it (as I may so say) the vehicle
of that adoration which we direct to God, and terminate upon him alone. It Is
true Christ's natural Body abstractedly considered is a creature: but then it is
for ever hypostatically united to the Deity; so that the whole person of Christ
is that very Lord our God, whom we must worship, and whom alone we must
serve. But no other creature is so united by virtue of God's presence to or in
or with that creature: and even that body is not so (i. e. hypostatically)
united, but as it exists like other human bodies within some determinate local
circumscription: wherefore no other creature may be adored; nor even Christ's
Body but as it exists and is united, and thereby becomes adorable, where it is
Locally present.

I pass by the place in the Corinthians which the Pamphlet most impertinently
refers to, Disc. II. page 2. 3.
having already taken notice of the Author's practice in such cases. Nor shall
I much insist upon that passage; that Christ's humanity abstractively
considered is adorable with a Worship not exceeding that due to a Creature:
Ibid.
for we are not now talking of Inferior Adoration, but supreme Divine Worship.
We know that adorare is by some taken for manum ori admovere; to kiss the hand
(or any thing else) in token of respect, which, as some Papists would persuade
us, is all they do to their Images. But it is certainly foppery if it be no
worse to do so to any thing but an intelligent being. Besides we know it was a
Lucian (...).
ceremony of the heathen Idolatry, and Job is of opinion, Ibid.
that if he had used it to the sun (in which our author newly instanced) it had
been an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for he should have denied the God
that is above. Job. XXXI.26.27.28.

In the fifth Section he tells us that Protestants, Disc. II. page 2. 5. n. 1.
of the Church of England especially, grant the body and blood of Christ to be
Really Present in the Eucharist not in Virtue only but in Substance: and that
this body and blood of our Lord which is not severed from his person is then to
be worshipped with Supreme Adoration. This we likewise grant him, as we have
already explained it according to the mind of those Protestants, and so pass
over the quotations which take up the two next sections, together with
abundance of advantage that an adversary might take: for we are now in pursuit
of an argument, that is in some danger to be lost in this mist of quotations.

These are all the Concessions wherein the Church of England is concerned: and
therefore we might pass over the two next; which I cannot imagine to what
purpose he mentions. Disc. II. page 10. 7.
For though the Lutherans grant (as some, not all of 'em do) that during the
action of the Eucharist, Christ's body is to be adored, as by Consubstantiation
present to the Consecrated Symbols: I see not what advantage this concession
gives to his cause, or how it is any way prejudicial to ours. For the
Lutherans hold a Local Presence; wherefore some of them think they may adore;
and if we could believe their Presence we should not contest their Adoration.

Ibid p. 11.
To as little purpose does he press us with Monsieur Daille's concessions. For,
if he grant more then the Church of England does, she is not bound to defend
him: though in this case I think he does not; and so we may safely join with him
in his concessions. For the reason why we cannot Communicate with the Church of
Rome, is not barely because she holds an Error, but because she proposes it
under an Anathema; and grounds an Idolatrous practice upon it; and requires our
consent to both these things as a term of Her Communion. This the Lutherans do
not: and therefore though their opinion be Erroneous, their Communion need not be
unlawful. Now to see with what judgment the Defender makes use of this
concession. He Is to prove that Protestants by their own rules ought to join in
the Popish adoration; and his argument is that Mons. Daille says we cannot
communicate with the Papists as long as they impose their adoration; though
otherwise we might if they only believed erroneously and kept their error to
themselves.

Ibid. p. 12.
Once more this Judicious Author appeals to M. Daille, who believing as the
Church of England does, that to Worship any Host is Idolatry, yet grants if the
case were otherwise, and if a Consecrated Host were truly adorable, it were
possible to adore one that is not Consecrated, without committing formal
Idolatry. Likewise He and Dr. Stillingfleet grant that when Christ was upon
Earth (where his person was confessedly adorable) a man that by inculpable
mistake had adored another person for him, might have likewise been absolved
from the guilt of formal Idolatry. And both these concessions are as certainly
true, as certanly alleged to no purpose. But perhaps the Author means the
reason only, not the instances, to be pertinent, and would infer no more but
that Papists by our own concessions may be no Idolaters though they Worship a
Creature; because they may do this by an inculpable mistake. This I grant may
be something (not to his but) to the Papists purpose, if he prove them
inculpably mistaken; but that We should suppose them so, I cannot see why he
should pretend. For he knows that we think Transubstantiation to be more then a
mistake; a flat and manifest defyance of Sense and Reason, Scripture and
Tradition; and in that respect more culpable then the grossest Heathen mistake:
for they (to mention no other disparity) wanted the Light of Scripture, which
the Papists have, and shut their eyes against; and this in our opinion makes a
vast difference between the Popish and Heathen Idolatry.

CHAP. VIII. A Reply to the six next Sections of the second Discourse beginning
at. 9.
SO much for the Protestant Concessions. The Defender in the six next Sections,
pretends to lay down Catholic Assertions; which I doubt will be no more allowed
by the Church of Rome, then his Protestant Concessions are by the Church of
England. First he tells us tha^ Catholics affirm there is in the Eucharist
after consecration, a Sign distinct and having a diverse existence from the
thing signified. Disc. II. page 13.. 9.
Whence he concludes that Dr. Stillingfleet does them wrong, when he says they
grant the Signs to be hypostatically united to the Thing signified. A Sign
there must be, says his own quotation out of Bellarmin, or there can be no
Sacrament. Wherefore we presume they hold a Sign. But then the Sign as they
explain it, is neither the Sign instituted by Christ, (which doubless a
Sacramental sign ought to be) nor indeed any other Sign, but a Sign that
signifies nothing. Then for the separate Existence of it, some Papists do not
hold that neither; as the Author could not but see in that very place of Dr
Tailor, which he refers to in this Section: which makes it somewhat strange,
that so liberal a quoter should here be so unseasonably sparing, as not to
afford us one testimony that expressly owns this separate Existence. But all
Papists that will talk consistently must deny it: not only because an accident
cannot exist without inherence; but because they hold the Species united to the
Body to make one entire object of Adoration; which cannot be without a
Hypostatical Union. Wherefore Bellarmin and Valentia though they do not use the
term [ Hypostatically] yet find themselves obliged to say the thing; and
explain the Union of the Species to the Body in the same manner as they do the
Hypostatical Union. Valentia indeed is so much a Jesuit as having said the
thing, to deny the word: but Bellarmin is more considering. And this is all,
that excellent Person says, whom the Author therefore traduces for slandering
the Catholics: to which I can only say, that he certainly slanders Dr
Stillingfleet; and I know not how to count him a Papist who will not allow
Bellarmin to be one of his Catholics

See Dr. Stillingfleet, of the Idolatry of the Ch of Rome, cap. 2. 4. page ^25.
He adds that his Catholics affirm this Sign, we are speaking of, to be all
that of the Bread and Wine which is perceptible by any sense: and therefore
when they tell us that the Substance is done away, Disc. II. page 14.. 10.
they take Substance in such a sense as is nonsense; For so he says though in
more and other words: but it is good to be as brief as may be when we talk
unintelligibly. And nonsense is a sort of sense very proper for this subject
being the remaining species and accidents of sense when the substance of it is
done away. Wherefore our Author proceeds in the same strain, and tells us that
his Catholics allow Local positions to be predicated of Christ's Body,
indivisibly present; but to taste, to be digested to nourish* to be pressed
with the Teeth, to be burnt, or gnawed by brutes, these belong only to the
Species, and not to Christ's Body which is impassible. All this is to be
understood in the Sense last mentioned; wherefore he wisely forbears to give a
reason; and only quotes Bellarmin, who is now become one of his Catholics. But
Bellarmin at best was but a fallible Cardinal, and infallible Pope See the
Preface to Determinatio. Jo. Parisiensis, lately Printed at London p 5, 6.
Nicholas II. with his Cardinals made Berengarius tell another tale. And though
Hildebrand differed from Nicholas, and Innocent III. from them both; yet we
must not inquire how all these Popes were Infallible, and their several
Adherents Orthodox, and yet our Authors Doctrine good Catholic Doctrine still.
For the Book of Education tells us, that Part. I. cap. 9. p 92.
Acuteness and Sagacity are apt to dispose men to Heresy: and it is certain that
no man can become a Thorough Convert of this Authors, till his Brains be
Case-hardned to be proof against all manner of contradictions.

In the eleventh Section he says that the word Sacrament is not allways taken
in the same sense. Disc 2. page 14.. 11.
We allow him to take it in any sense provided it be sense that he takes it in.
Wherefore we except not to his taking Sacramentum for Res Sacramenti when he
explains how his Catholics adore the Sacrament. It seems that they to the
Sacramentum give an inferior cult; but Divine adoration (which I wonder why he
would not call latry) to the Res Sacramenti only, Ibid
viz. only to our Lord's Body and Blood and so to our Lord himself as present
in the Sacrament (for so he says) and to him precisely as Really present,
abstracting both from Transubstantiation and the belief of a Corporal presense;
for so he explains himself afterward. Now if there be no Popery Lurking under
that sly word cult, I am afraid this Catholic Defender will go for as rank a
Heretic as any Calvinist that now rows in the Galleys. For to give the Papists
sense in the words of Theol. quaest. 79. disp.
Suarez. Non solum Christus sed totum visibile Sacramentum, unico cultu,
adoratur. It Is not an inferior cult to the Species that will serve the turn;
nor Duly nor Hyperduly neither, but Moral. l. 8 cap. 32.
Henriquez says it must be Latry; speciebus Eucharistiae datur Latria propter
Christum quem continent. In short Disc concerning the Adoration of the Host,
lately reprinted at London.
the remaining Species of Bread and Wine together with the Natural Body and
Blood of Christ invisibly yet carnally present under them, make one entire
object of the Papists adoration which they call Sacramentum. And this they tell
us the Council of Trent means, when it requires Sess. 13. cap. 5.
Omnes Christi fideles Latriae cultum huic Sanctissimo Sacramento adhibere. Dr.
Stillingfleet Idolatry of the Church of Rome cap. 2 page 116.
Nor is this Denied that I know of by any that understand either the Doctrine
or the Practice of the Church of Rome. So says the Great and Learned Dr
Stillingfleet in the place here quoted by our Author: who should have confuted
this passage instead of nibling at an unanswerable argument: else the meaning
of the Council will allways be judged, by the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church; and the most artificial disguise the Defender has in his Wardrobe will
never make his Catholics pass currently for true Papists.

I am not sollicitous what the words of the Council of Trent are, nor I think
ever shall be, till I forget the two famous controversies that See F. Paul's
History, lib 2. page 216.228.
Soto had with Vega and Catharinus. Disc 2. page 15. 12.
For if they who were members of the Council, and so eminently concerned in
wording the Decrees, were for all this ignorant of the true sense of those
Decrees; it is now I doubt too late for a Protestant to give 'em a determinate
meaning; nor need any man regard 'em any more then those other Oracles that
were dictated with the like ambiguity. But to guide us in this Labyrinth, the
Defender gives us a Judicious Observation, as he calls it, out of Sancta Clara
which is this. Disc. 2.. 13. p. 17.
The substance of the Catholic Faith is declared both in the Chapters and
Canons; but yet the Canons we must stick to, where the form is exceeding exact,
though the manner of expression sometimes different from that in the Chapters.
How Judicious this remark is, and how much for the Council's honor, may perhaps
be questioned: but how well it is applied to the present case, where the Canon
is more ambiguous and therefore less exact then the Chapter; is a thing will
admit of no dispute: nor will any man contest this Author's title to so
Judicious an application.

After a leafe's insignificant pother, he comes to this final Resolution. Disc.
2.. 14. p. 18.
That to adore the Sacrament is at most but an improper expression. And says as
magisterially as ever Soave did, that dutiful Children ought to learn of their
Mother how to speak; Disc. 2. p. 17.
provided always (say I) that their Mother do not teach them to abuse their
Father; and if they cannot come at their Mother, or cannot understand her
language, I hope it is no offense to ask her meaning of their Brethren that know
her mind. But after all it is not the expression but the practice that we
complain of; it is not talking improperly, but committing Idolatry that we fear;
it is not his inferior cult, but Suarez's unico cultu that we cannot digest. And
if the Defender would not urge us by pardoning an expression to allow a great
Sin, we would not only suffer, but advise him to talk improperly and
singularly, that so his language might the better correspond with his notions.

CHAP. IX. A Reply to the nine next Sections of the second Discourse beginning
at. 15.
HItherto the Author has been ranging; in the fifteenth Section he seems to
make a set. Disc. 2. page 19.
He deny's that the Protestants give a true state of the question and his
instance is in Dr. Stillingfleet, whom his evil Genius ever prompts him to
attacque; notwithstanding his briskest attempts so constantly and scandalously
miscarry. To him he joins Bishop Andrews and Bishop Tailor; whose words if they
be pertinently applied here, are so disingenuously quoted in other parts of
this Pamphlet, that I doubt the Author's dealing will amount to a very improper
expression.

But if Protestants state the question wrong; let us hear how this Author
himself states it. He reduces the whole controversy to these two questions 1.
Ibid. p. 20.
Whither the Body and Blood of Christ ( prescinding from whatever symbol is or
may be there) is adorable, as being present in the Sacrament with the symbols?
2 ly Whither the adoration of Christ's Body (and so of Christ) as present, if
it should not be so, will amount to Idolatry? allways supposing as he adds in
the 17 th Section, that we continue to adore the self same object as the
Papists now do, in the self same place, page 21.
with all the same circumstances wherewith their adoration is now performed.

To this I answer, that I cannot take it upon this Author's word, that Popes
and Councils with the most and best of the Romish writers, have so abandoned
all common sense and ingenuity, as to say and practice what they have done, if
they really meant no more then he pretends. For this were an improper
expression with a witness; an insincerity that an honest Heathen would tremble
at. Nor if one or two Schoolmen were really of his mind, should he that in the
Guide is so great a stickler for majorities, here propose the opinion of a few
forlorn members, for the standing Judgment of the whole Church. The true sons
of the Church of Rome are more ingenuous; and own that they believe, the
species together with the Body, to make one entire object, to which they pay
one entire act of adoration. For the truth of this together with a full state
and decision of this question I refer the Reader to a Printed at London 1685.
for Brab. Ailmer and lately reprinted.
late excellent Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host. For it is not
my present business to dispute with Honest minded Papists, whose errors I
heartily lament, and beseech God to open their eyes; but with this shuffling
writer, who being indeed of no Church, would fain pin himself now upon the
Church of Rome. This (says he) is affirmed by Catholics; more then this need
not be so, and again, Disc 2. page 20. l. 7. Ibid l. 2 Disc 2. page 16.
The Roman Church owns or imposes no more. So likewise. 13. The definition of
this Council in the sixth canon, ( more then which is not required to be
professed by any Son of the Roman Church) is this Si quis dixerit etc. That is
(as is declared more at large in the fifth discourse of the Guide) the stress
of all lies upon si quis dixerit and si quis negaverit.. 186. p. 133.
So that if a man be but a little complaisant in his practice and keep a good
tongue in his head, let him be what he will in his heart, he may still be one
of this Author's Catholics, though I doubt none of the Church of Rome's. For
though the greatest sins are with him but improper expressions, yet all honest
men of the Roman or any other communion, will call his dealing by a proper
expression which I do not now care to name.

Wherefore the Controversy between us and this Author (for the Church of Rome
is no way concerned in his dreams) is briefly this. Whether prescinding from
Transubstantiation and a Corporal Presence, and allowing only a Real Presence
as the writers of the Church of England do, it is Idolatry to pay the self same
adoration, with the self same ceremonies to the self same object in the self
same place and manner, that the Papists now pay it to the Consecrated Elements?
To this I answer Affirmatively; and hope I have already Chap. 7. par. 2. of
this Reply.
given a good and sufficient reason why I do so. It remains that I examine what
the Author has to say for the Negative.

First he says those Protestants who absolve the Lutherans from Idolatry,
Disc. 2.. 19.
may, as he has stated the matter, as well absolve his Catholics. To which I am
not concerned to answer, though it is false and easily confutable, because his own
state excludes the consideration both of a Popish and Lutheran Presence as far
as either of them differ from the Church of England's Real Presence.

Come we therefore 2 ly to the twenty first section, where he supposes both
Papists and Lutherans in an error; both mistaking Christ the true object of
supreme Adoration to be in a place where he is not. Ibid. p. 25.
He should add, and the Papists upon that mistake adoring an object that is not
at all Adorable. Now this he says cannot be termed any such Idolatry, as is the
Worship of an object not at all Adorable. Such or not such is not properly the
question, but whether it be Idolatry? Wherefore I pass by his impertinent
trifling with his Angel and his Serpent; for the argument he should answer is
this. The Israelites and Manichees, who directed the outward act of adoration
to a Creature, were accounted Idolaters by God and the Primitive Church;
notwithstanding their own supposing, or the Author's supposing for them: and we
by the same reason say that whoever pays the adoration aforesaid to the
Consecrated Elements, let him suppose what he will, will for all his
supposition commit an improper expression which God and the Church will account
Idolatry.

His third assertion must be taken in pieces. Disc. 2. page 26.. 22.
He says Whatever Fault or Idolatry it may be in a Manichee to Worship the Sun,
or an Israelite the Calf, yet etc. where I wonder he talks so mincingly,
whatever fault, and may be, when St. Paul 1 Cor. X.7. is peremtory that the
Worshipers of the Calf were Idolaters. Ibid.
He says his Catholics freely grant, that a good intention grounded upon
culpable ignorance can excuse none from Idolatry. We accept this Concession and
desire to know if Popish ignorance be not Culpable how it is possible any
Ignorance should? 3. He says that Mons. Ibid.
Daille (and he supposes other Protestants with him) allow that a Ground or
Motive of adoration which is Reasonable though not absolutely certain, but
actually mistaken, is sufficient for avoiding the just imputation of Idolatry.
Whence he infers that if Catholics can produce a rational ground of their
apprehending Christ present in the Eucharist, though possibly mistaken in it,
they are to be excused from Idolatry: at least by those Protestants who excuse
the Lutherans: and so he proceeds to show his Rational Grounds.

I think it an easy undertaking to show a vast disparity between the Papists
and Lutherans in this point; but not very pertinent at this time. For neither
of those parties is concerned in the question as it is now stated by our Author.
It Is with him and with his Catholics we have to do; with them that prescind
from Transubstantiation and a Corporal Presence; and not with the Lutherans or
Papists who both stick to a Corporal Presence, and are not so ill advised as to
quit their hold to run the hazard of this man's idle suppositions^ But here is
the juggle I expected, here is the Main Point lost in a mist. We that have been
drilled on through one whole Discourse, and twenty and six long pages of
another, and all in hopes to have seen it proved, that supposing no Corporal,
but precisely a Real Presence, to adore the Elements is no Idolatry; are now to
be put of with five stale grounds for belief of Transubstantiation. I say of
Transubstantiation though he only names a Corporal presence: For he calls
himself the Catholic Defender, and the grounds he alleges are the Popish
arguments for Transubstantiation; and he disclaims being a Lutheran; and we
know of no party besides these two that now holds a Corporal Presence.

CHAP. X. A Reply to the six next Grounds of the second Discourse* beginning at
sect;. 24.
SInce my present undertaking obliges me no farther, then to answer the
Defender's arguments upon the question as he has stated it; I might very well
pass over his grounds for belief of Transubstantiation: which were before
offered in the Guide; and in other Authors before that Guide could go alone;
and may be easily traced from Author to Author up to Archbishop Cranmer, who
has reported and answered every one of them in his Book of the Eucharist.

Our Author delivers in his list of them like a bill that begins with Item.
Disc. 2. page 27. sect;. 24.
For he says his first ground for a Corporal presence (after a possibility
thereof granted also by sober Protestants) is Divine Revelation, viz. the words
hoc est corpus meum, so often iterated in the Gospel; and again by S. Paul
without any variation, change, or explication: as also the discourse of our
blessed Savior in the sixth Chapter of S. John's Gospel.

Now to this second and foremost argument, the I choose to refer here to the
Archbishop's book, that the Reader may the better see these Arguments are
stale, and have been baffled above a hundred years since.
Archbishop has punctually replied: viz. to the words of the institution p.
8.23.253 and elsewhere, and the answers are now so well known that they need
not be repeated, and whereas the Pamphlet insists upon S. Paul's repeating them
without any variation or explication; the Archbishop plainly shows p. 254.
Page 254. S. Paul is not afraid for our better understanding of Christ's words,
somewhat to alter the same, least we might stand stiffly in Letters and
Syllables, and err in mistaking the sense and meaning. For whereas our Savior
Christ broke the Bread, and said This is my Body, S. Paul say'th that the Bread
which we break is the Communion of Christ's Body. Christ said his Body, and S.
Paul said the Communion of his Body: meaning nevertheless both one thing, that
they which eat the Bread Worthily do eat Spiritually Christ's very Body.
that S. Paul both varies and explains them as will be evident to any man that
consults 1 Cor. X.16. so likewise to the Popish explication of our Saviors
discourse Joh. 6. the Archbishop answers in diverse places Page 20. The Spiritual
eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood by Faith, by digesting his Death
in our minds, as our only price, ransom, and redemtion, from eternal
Damnation, is the cause wherefore Christ said, that if we eat not his Flesh
and drink not his Blood, we have not Life in us, and if we eat his Flesh and
drink his Blood we have everlasting Life. And if Christ had never ordained the
Sacrament, yet should we have eaten his Flesh and drunken his Blood, and have
had thereby everlasting Life, as all the Faithful did before the Sacrament was
ordained, and daily do when they receive not the Sacrament. See more Ibid and
again p. 112. These words ( what if you see etc. Joh. VI.62.63.) our Savior
Christ spoke* to lift up their minds from Earth to Heaven, and from Carnal to
Spiritual eating, that they should not Fantasy that they should with their
teeth eat him present here on earth: for his Flesh so eaten (says he) should
profit them nothing, and yet so they should not eat him, for he would take his
Body away from them and ascend with it into Heaven: and there by Faith and not
with Teeth they should Spiritually eat him, sitting at the right hand of his
Father, and therefore (says he the words, which I do speak, be Spirit and
Life: that is to say, are not to be understood that we shall eat Christ with
our teeth grossly and carnally, but that we shall Spiritually and Ghostly with
our Faith, eat him being carnally absent from us in Heaven.
p. 18.31.37.111.217.329. in all things speaking consonant to the sense of the
primitive Fathers: according to whose notions the true and plain meaning of
that Chapter has been so fully expressed in a late Paraphrase that no more need
be said of that matter. And whereas this Author farther says that no argument
from our senses is valid against plain revelation; (though the case was
something otherwise in the fourteenth page of the first Discourse,) to this
likewise the Archbishop answers p. 263. Page 263. Let us now consider how the
same (Transubstantiation) is against natural reason and natural operation;
which although they prevail not against God's word, yet when they be joined
with God's word, they be of great moment to confirm any truth -- not that they
add any authority to God's word but that they help our infirmity p. 266. where
giving diverse instances out of Scripture of Faith confirmed by sense, he
concludes. Which sensible proofs were so far from derogation of Faith, that
they were a sure establishment thereof. Again p. 270 concerning arguments drawn
from the Schoolmen. I make (says he) no foundation at all upon them, but my
very foundation is only upon God's word -- and mine arguments in this place, I
bring in only to this end, to show how far your imagined Transubstantiation is,
not only from Gods word, but also from the order of nature.
in the very same manner that we do to this day; and have already answered in
the fourth Chapter of this Reply.

Disc. 2. page 23 ^ 25.
The next Ground is the definition of several Councils which he calls the
Declaration of the most Supreme and Universal Church Authority, not
considering how harsh these expressions will ^ound at Rome: and he tells us that
seven or eight of these Councils, if we take in the second Nicene are reckoned
up in the first Discourse of the Guide and all of 'em before that of Trent.

I must confess the Archbishop replies to but one of these; for men were more
wise and modest in those days then to challenge the other seven. He says indeed
en passant of the Roman one under Pope Nicholas, that the Papists themselves
were then ashamed of Berengarius's first recantation; a very good reason one
would think, to wave an appeal to that Synod: and in truth the Lateran under
Innocent III. was the only Council that intelligent Papists could at that time
pretend to. Now to this the Archbishop excepts p. 251. as a Synod packed and
overaw'd by that exorbitant Pope, which neither had nor alleged any Scripture
to vouch their definitions: A truth, of which the whole world is by this time
very well satisfied. But to speak distinctly of these eight Supreme Universal
Church-Authorities; See Bp. Cosins History of Transubstantiation c. 7.. 7, 8,
9, 10.
two of 'em, those at Rome and Vercelli under Leo IX were Italian Conventicles,
managed by Humbert and Hildebrand, whereof the first condemned Berengarius
without hearing, the second without understanding him. Wherefore the Gallican
Churches defied 'em both, and Victor was fain to send Hildebrand into France;
where he picked up another little Synod at Tours, and once more condemned
Berengarius. The express Judgment of these three small Universal meetings is
not certainly known: But if we may guess by the decision of the next Roman
Synod under Nicholas II they believed according to the form, which Humbert and
Hildebrand then contrived for Berengarius to recant in. About 18 years after,
when Hildebrand himself was Pope, and his infallibility began to blome, he
convened another Roman Synod, and proposed a more correct form; which he forced
Berengarius to subscribe to; Labbe. Council. Tom. 10. col. 378.
not without some feud, which arose in that little assembly like a tempest in a
basin, and continued three days till at last the Pope outbluster'd it. After
all this, Hildebrand himself, See Pref. to Determine. Jo. Paris. lately printed
at Land. p. 7*
as appears by his own work in manuscript, was not fully satisfied what was fit
to resolve upon the question. So that five of these eight Supreme Universal
Church-authorities, were governed by one man, who scarce knew his own mind: and
one whose character; as many of the Papists give it; would have made Sr. Thomas
More say of him too, that he would not for the world hear him say the Creed.
Now for the second Nicene Council, our Author seems to make but a faint and
doubtful appeal to it; whether it be that the places, he refers to, are fairly
capable of another meaning then he aims at; or whether he had a Just notion of
the reverence due to such a Council. See Bp. Andrews upon the 2 d. Command. c.
3. p. 203.
A Council convened by an Empress that had lived a Heathen till her marriage;
and was then but a kind of a Si quis dixerit-Convert to Christianity. A Council
managed by Tarasius an old courtier of the Queens; and one John of the East,
whom his own Patriarch, that sent him, affirmed to have some devotion but
little Learning. A Council that defined Angels to be Corporeal, and Stocks and
Stones to be worshipped: in short a Council that should have defined
Transubstantiation, though it did not: for the world never saw an assembly
better fitted, to define a condradiction to Scripture Sense and Reason. See Bp.
Cosin's History of Transubstantiation cap. 7.. 30.
Yet even this Council came not up to our Author's terms, any more then the
Council of Florence, which he quotes to as little purpose. For it is certain
that Council did neither decree nor treat of Transubstantiation; the Instructio
ad Armenos, being foysted into the Decrees, three months after the Council was
dissolved, and so much with the Armenians approbation, that to this day they
believe the Consecrated elements to retain their nature in the Eucharist. And
will not our Author's private and truly humble Christian be finely holp up now
with the Supreme Universal Authority of eight Councils in Buckram, which at
last amount to but one Lateran under Innocent III? and that too infamous for
establishing the Deposing Doctrine? See F. Walsh's Letter to the Bp. of Linc..
22.
so that all honest and loyal Papists reject the Lateran Canons; affirming they
were only proposed but never ratified by the Council, but shuffled into the
Decretals by Pope Innocent's Nephew when he came to be Gregory IX. But perhaps
the Council of Trent may salve all and help to settle a wavering man. Truly no;
as this Author expounds it; See c. 9. par. 3. of his Reply.
for it only defined Si quis dixerit: i. e. the Council it self says nothing
but only what you shall not say: do but hold your tongue and believe your
pleasure, you may still be as good a disciple as Nicodemus was. Now to muster
up the forces of these nine General Councils; here are seven of 'em nothing to
the purpose; the Eighth of very doubtful, if not very scandalous Authority;
the Ninth leaves our Faith at liberty, and would only bridle our Tongues;
proposing no grounds of believing, but a swinging curse for talking.

Our Author himself seems a little diffident of this ground, Disc. 2. page 29..
26.
for a better reason too then a man would expect from him. He says these
Councils are not so ancient as some may expect; and truly Novelty in Religion
is allowed by all sober men too be a great persumtion of Falsehood. Wherefore he
endeavors to goad up his pretensions some two or three hundred years higher;
though all in vain as long as he is destitute of truly primitive Antiquity. The
Authors, he remits us to, are every one of 'em explained and vindicated by the
Archbishop; except those mystagogicall Catecheses, which I think were not
printed, (perhaps not made) till after the Archbishop's death. But these Of
whom I do not speak more particularly, because the Discourser himself but
names them, without laying claim to any particular passages or expressions in
them, waving also (with his accustomed prudence) all pretense of proving them
authentic; though whether they are so be a disputable point; or rather it is
indisputably certain that several of them are spurious.
Authors and abundance more are effectually considered in that Just and
admirable work of Monsieur Aubertine de Eucharistia: which if the Defender's
humble Christian " when he goes into the public library, Ibid.
will be but so humble as to make the companion of his studies, he will find that
no art can make Transubstantiation look so old, but that the persent Roman
Doctrine will appear too young by above twelve hundred years.

Disc. 2. page 29.. 27.
Instead of securing his next deceitful ground, and giving us something we may
rest our foot upon; He sends his humble Christian to a Discourse and a
Digression in the Guide, to Mons. Blondell's Eclaircissement; and the endless
Controversy between Claud and Arnaud: which when he has consulted he will find
he has been upon an April errand. But to save him that labor if we can; let
us first see what will become of us if we grant this ground; viz. the Universal
Doctrine and Practice of the later both Eastern and Western Churches till
Luther's time. Now to this ground likewise the Archbishop has effectually
replied in diverse places. p. 11. p. 380. and especially from p. 405. to the end
of the Book. The sum is that the true Church and Doctrine are to be judged by
their agreement to Scripture and Antiquity; not always to be measured by the
majority of visible Professors. For that may be often overrun with dangerous
error; (as de facto it was among the Jews even by our Authors own confession,
in his book of the benefits of our Savior cap. 9.) Wherefore the general
Example is not always a rational ground of Practice; and a reasonable man will
consider the reason of the practice, he complies with; and bring a Doctrine Isa
VIII.20.
to the Law and to the Testimnyo, before he yields up his assent to it. This we
presume Romans XI.4. 1 King. XIX.18.
the seven thousand did which were the true though secret Church of God, when
all the rest of the visible Jewish Church, had bowed the knee to Baal and
kissed him. Thus the rest of that Luke. XII.32.
little flock which God has ever had and will have to the end of the world;
not swimming with our Author's stream though never so impetuous, Disc. 2.. 27.
p. 31.
but weighing all things in the balance of the Sanctuary. For if prevalence
and prescription were a rational and sufficient ground of practice, and the
visible majority of the Church should fall into a Damnable error, (which thing
certainly may be, because it has been) the Church might lawfully persist in
that Damnable error, nor would it be obliged to eject the most scandalous
corruption that had once got peaceable possession. This we think a sufficient,
and give it as the shortest, answer to this ground considered with the utmost
advantage whereof it is capable; viz. supposing ( See Dr. Feild's Appendix to
his third Book of the Church, wherein he proves that the Latin Church was and
continued a true Orthodox and Protestant Church and that the maintainers of
Romish Errors were only a Faction in the same at the time of Luther's appearing.
what is falsely challenged) the universal doctrine and practice of the later
Church till Luther. But otherwise we could both tell him, and prove beyond all
possibility of a fair Reply, that the controversy lasted above three hundred
years before Transubstantiation could be licked into any shape; and that at
last it was settled in an age, of which the Papists themselves give so
scandalous a Character, that no History can tell us of a majority more unlikely
to sway a knowing or a virtuous man. We could show him that the Universality,
he talks of, must exclude the Abissines, the Armenians, the Maronites, and
abundance of other Christians; nay the much more valueable part of the Latin
Church it self. For though the Pope, when he was strong enough to exercise the
Plenitude of his Power, made his Enemies and their Writeings as invisible as
fire and smoke could; yet still there remain the undoubted Monuments of a long
visible Succession all declaring against Transubstantiation; for a collection
of whose Testimonies the world has lately been obliged to a member of the Roman
Communion.

His last ground is the same with the foremost of his firsts; viz. the
Concessions of Protestants. Disc. 2. 28. p. 31.
For he is at it once more that the Genuine Sons of the Church of England hold
our Savior to be Really Present and Adorable in the Sacrament. Which has been
so often said, and, I hope, so fully answered before, that I shall take no
farther notice of it now. I shall only tell him as the Archbishop often tells
Gardener upon the like occasion, that he seems to be in great distress, when he
flies for refuge to those Authors, whom at other times he abhors as Heretics;
but his application to them is in vain; for they are far from meaning any such
thing as he pretends.

Ibid. p. 32.
In the close of this Paragraph he looks back upon all these Pleas of
Catholics, and invites us to see if they will not make up at least a reasonable
Ground or motive of their Adoration. Now I must profess that I see nothing like
it, as he has ordered the matter. For though I believe a man of art out of
these five grounds, might have made a plausible though not a rational plea; to
my apprehension this Author has left the Papists in a much worse case, then he
found them. For 1. he offers nothing to excuse them from Idolatry, but the
Concessions of one or two Protestants, which it is evident come not home to his
purpose; because they whom the Protestants excuse are supposed inculpably
mistaken; and not at all mistaken in the object of their Adoration. 2. He
ingages the Papists upon a very difficult, or rather an impossible precision,
both because it is contrary to what they have been taught; and because they are
all bound under a severe Anathema to believe Transubstantiation; so that a
Papist can never explain this term [ Real Presence] to himself, but by this
other of [ Corporal Presence effected by Transubstantiation] 3. Having invited
the Papists to wave that Corporal Presence, for which they think they have a
great many arguments; he proposes Adoration founded on another notion; for
which he has not offered them so much as one argument. So that in short he
proposes what no body is like to practice, upon the sole strength of a Doctrine
for which he has nothing to say.

In the next place he complains that these five Rational grounds are not
strictly examined by the Protestants. Disc. 2.. 29 p. 32.
But we think otherwise; and must leave the indifferent Reader to Judge between
us. We think they were effectually answered by the Archbishop above an hundred
years ago; and by diverse other writers since; especially the Author of a late
Incomparable Discourse against Transubstantiation: which all the Posse of the
Church of Rome will never be able to answer any otherwise then they did the
Archbishop.

Wherefore the Defender must allow us to retain our old opinion of those
Protestants, whom he censures so freely in the remaining part of this
paragraph. Ibid. p. 33.
We shall still think that Mons. Daille had reason; and made a true resolution
of Popery into Passion and Interest; that Bishop Tailor has proved as well as
said, that the Papists pretenses to the Fathers are but few and trifling; that
what the Defender quotes out of Liberty of prophesying, is a very good argument
against the literal sense; and that the Bishop while he pleaded for the
Papists did prudently to omit Catholic tradition; which he knew was not on
their side. We shall still profess with Dr. Stillingfleet, that the grossest
Idolatry in the world has as fair a plea as the Popish; and conclude that this
Trifler finding fault with him, has not ex- but inexcuseably mistaken the
Doctor's argument; as will appear by comparing his words with what the Dr. says
Rom: Idolatry cap. 2.. 7. page 132.133. Lastly we agree that if
Transubstantiation were warranted by Catholic tradition, Adoration were
sufficiently grounded; and cannot but smile, as Crassus did upon a like
occasion, to see how gingerly the Defender nibbles at this concession. He seems
to say that Tradition is for Transubstantiation, Ibid.
yet he waves that, and pleads only for a Corporal Presence; which for any
thing he says here may be taken in a Lutheran sense; though (to talk with him
in his own language) if Trans -- be true Consubstantiation must needs be falls.
And what is all this to his purpose, who pretends to abstract from both? and
ground his Adoration precisely upon a Real Presence?

And now it is my turn to address to the indifferent Reader; and if he have
either read Mr. Thorndike's Epilogue, or but carefully considered this Author's
quotations out of it, to ask his opinion about these two or three questions. 1.
Whether this Author has in all this whole Pamphlet expressly owned himself a
Roman-Catholic? or rather skulk'd under the general name of Catholic taken in
the same latitude, Mr. Thorndike takes it in his Epilogue? 2 Whether all his
shuffling be not only to advance Mr Thorndike's new and singular notion of a
presence of Christ's body in, or with, or under the Elements (. 28. p. 32.)
distinct from the Church of Englands Real, and the Papists and Lutherans
Corporal Presence? In short, not a Virtual, nor Spiritual, but a Corporal
Presence, effected neither by con -- nor Transubstantiation, but after some
other unknown manner distinct from both? (. 17. p. 21.) 3 Whether a new and
upstart doctrine which was probably never thought of before Mr Thorndike's
time, ought to pass for a doctrine of the Primitive Church? 4 Whether the man
that plays these tricks be an honest Papist? And whether the humble Christian
that swallows them must not have a very humble understanding?

CHAP. XI. A Reply to the five last Sections of the second Discourse.
Disc. 2. page 33.
OUr Author. 30. imputes it to the strength of his Grounds not to excess of
Charity, or the singular fancies of some few learned men, that of late the
Protestants do either not at all, or but very faintly charge the Papists with
Idolatry.

This confident assertion he very well knows is false, as the Reader will find
it by and by; and if it were true, it will not serve him to shelter his
peculiar notions under the Patronage of the Church of England. Wherefore I must
return him a quotation out of Dr. Stillingfleet's Preface to Roman Idolatry
last paragraph.
the same Preface, which himself quotes, viz. That our Church is not now to be
formed according to the singular fancies of some few though learned men: much
less to be modeled by the Copricio's of superstitious Fanatics; who prefer
some odd opinions and ways of their own, before the received Doctrine of the
Church they live in. Such as these, we rather pity their weakness then regard
their censures: and are sorry when our Adversaries make such properties of them
as by their means to beget in some a disaffection to our Church.

But to come to those Protestants, Disc. 2.. 30. p. 33, 34.
who (our Author tells us) neither out of singularity, nor charity, but pure
conviction are of late so kind to Popery. The first he quotes is Mr. Thorndike
in his Epil. wherein he is not only a Conciliator, and so obliged by his very
design, to strain his charity; but his terms of Reconciliation are, by his own
confession, peculiar notions of his own; which he seems to have proposed, as
not thinking that other Reconcilers had sufficiently cleared the Papists from
Idolatry. For it must be confessed that this Pious and Learned Man was zealous
to his last hour to acquit the Church of Rome from Idolatry: partly out of the
natural sweetness of his temper, which made him unwilling to lay so grievous a
sin to the charge of any Church; but chiefly upon a mistaken principle, that
all Idolatry unchurches. So that the charge of it would in his opinion light
heavy upon the Papists; and at the rebound equally hurt the Church of England,
which derives her Succession and Ordination from the Church of Rome. This
mistaken opinion the Defender greedily lays hold on; and ask's with great
briskness What Church or Sect of religion can be apostate at all, Ibid. p. 34.
if not a Church committing and commanding Idolatry? I must desire him to
reconcile this pert question with another as pert, in the book of the Benefits
of our Savior chap. 9.. 14. And now (says he) what can hinder God's goodness,
or decay the Church, since it is plain that sin cannot? even the sin of Idolatry
as is proved at large in the two foregoing Sections. For when he does this, he
will return the common answer to that objection wherein he now sides with Mr
Thorndike.

Ibid.
The next is Bishop Forbes in his Considerationes modestae and pacificae; whose
design and character is so well known, and so obvious to any man that has but
ever looked upon his book, that I think the Reader will need no farther
information how excessive his charity was in this matter.

Ibid. p. 35.
Thirdly Archbishop Bramhall concludes that very Section, which our author
quotes, with these words. Though the Church of Rome do give divine worship to a
Creature (or at least a party among them) yet I am so charitable as to hope
they intend it to the Creator. It may be the Defender will reply now that he
does not say excessively charitable.

Ibid.
Fourthly it is notorious that Bishop Tailor wrote his Liberty of prophesying to
serve the interest of the Church of England; which at that time was to obtain a
general toleration. Wherefore it concerned him in that book to be more then a
Conciliator, and represent Popery with the utmost favor it would bear. Yet he
could not even in that book so dissemble his Zeal against Popery, but that in
the very Paragraph, our Author quotes, he accuses the Papists confidence, and
Fancifull Opinion, which makes them do violence to all Philosophy, and the
Reason of man, and undo and cancel the Principles of two or three Sciences.
And these words, which, one would think, are not so very favorable and
absolving, lie just between the two sentences the Defender has transcribed. In
the next paragraph he calls Idolatry the crime which Papists formally hate, and
we materially avoid. And again, in the next to that, says If they who do as the
Papists do, are not formally guilty of Idolatry there is no danger their
disciples should be so. So that he plainly owns them guilty of material, and
dares not venture to acquit them even of formal Idolatry.

Notwithstanding the Defender goes on at all adventures, Disc. 2. page 31.. 35.
and will have it a fault in Dr. Tailor to say in one book, that if Papists are
deceived in Transubstantiation, it is certain they commit an act of Idolatry;
whereas he says in another that it is evident the Object etc. is the only true
and Eternal God etc. which seems to be a very course Complement to his Reader;
for it either supposes him so Lazy as not to look back, what words those and
cetera's stood for, or (if he did) so dull as not to see, that Dr. Tailor in
both these quotations only charges the Papists with material Idolatry. Ibid.
He will likewise have M. Daille to be faulty, for opposing the Papists with
such a form of argument, as would prove the Lutherans to worship a mite. But
instead of his miserable that-which solution, let him interpret the word [
joyned] in the major of his own Syllogism, by [ Consubstantiate] (as he must
do, if he mean to oppose the Lutherans) and he will find that it has four terms.
In the third place, faulty with him is Dr. Stillingfleet for two or three
reasons, which as they have been urged, so they have been answered before. But
he tell's us in good time, that Catholics grant as much as the Dr. that the
Presence of the Divine Nature in any thing is no good ground to pay Divine
Worship to that thing. For he hoped we had forgot his abstracting from a
Corporal, and grounding his adoration precisely upon a Real Presence, we desire
he will stick to this grant and that supposal, and then show what trick he has
left to evade Idolatry. Disc. 2. page 36, 37. 31.
"He concludes, All these are faulty I say. Why so Positive good Sir? why
because they charge the Papists with worshipping a Creature instead of Christ,
from which other Protestants clear them. But what if the Chargers give better
reasons then the Clearers? Or what if the Chargers are the far greater number?
is a majority the Guide's beloved argument, grown out of Favor? Or what if the
Chargers and the Clearers both agree in the matter of fact? as indeed they do:
for the one part only says that the Papists worship Bread; and the other that
it is true they do so, but it is more then they mean to do. To conclude, the
Papists direct the act of adoration to the species, supposing Christ to be
Locally present under them: but if Christ be not so, but the substance of Bread
instead of him (as the Protestants affirm and prove) then the Papists who
intentionally worship Christ, do actually pay their Worship to Bread instead of
him; which is all the Protestants accuse them of: For that act is as certainly
a species of Idolatry, as the object has the species of Bread.

Disc. 2. page 37.. 35.
The fifth and last Protestant Author, that is quoted, is the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Hammond; who according to the Defender seems to Charge the Papists
rather with a material then Formal Idolatry: and this material Idolatry, we are
told, like material Adultery may in many cases be committed without Sin. This
latter Doctrine I believe is none of Dr. Hammond's, for it is contrary to plain
Scripture. For when Abimelech (Gen, XX.) had like to have committed material
Adultery with Sarah and being reproved in a Dream, pleaded the innocence of his
intention; God acknowledges this innocence, and says, For I also withheld thee
from sinning against me therefore I suffered thee not to touch her v. 6. so
that it seems the act had been a sin against God, v 5.
notwithstanding Abimelech's doing it in the integrity of his heart and the
innocence of his hands. But to return to Dr. Hammond; it is plain he has
heartily endeavored to strain his charity, and yet for all that censures the
Papists as severely as any sober Protestant ever did. And the Reader will be
fully satisfied of this truth; if he please to consult (for it would be too
much to transcribe) the 63. He delivers himself to this effect. To Worship the
Bread in the Sacrament must certainly be Idolatry, in the literal notion of the
Word, and they that do this upon any the subtilest ground, that by any error or
mistake (be it never so piously taken up) believe it not to be Bread, but very
Christ incarnate, and thereupon Worship it: these, I say, in case they be
mistaken, though they are not guilty of Idolatry in all the aggravations that
belonged to it among the Heathen; yet I cannot free them from the Charge of
Worshipping an Idol, etc.
nine Sections which the Dr has writ upon this Subject; beginning. 63. of his
discourse of Idolatry, I assure my self the mildest censure, that can be passed
upon the Defender, will be, that he never read that Discourse. But he thinks he
has launc'd us to the quick: Disc. 2. page 37. 32.
when he puts us in mind of our Forefathers, who for many centuryes were such
Idolaters, as we make the present Papists. Poor man! where has he been sleeping
these fifty years? that he knows not this stale objection has been so often
urged and answered, that all understanding Papists are now ashamed to make use
of it.

Yet for all this we are likely to part good friends for he tells us his
Catholics grant it is unlawful to worship the bread, if we do not believe it to
be God; Ibid.. 33.
or direct the outward act to our Lord as [Corporally] present in the
Sacrament, if we do not believe him so present. Thus instead of defending his
Catholics for adoring, he graciously absolves the Protestants for not adoring.
As for what he adds of submitting our Judgment to the Church; that is nothing
to the present purpose: For he knows that we insist upon it that Popery in this
point, does directly and manifestly overthrow all the principles of Sense, of
Reason, and Religion, and we are not so singular in this opinion, but that
Papists themselves own, they cannot in this question pretend to Scripture
without first defying Sense and Reason.

In the last Section the Defender proposes two Questions, which he thinks the
most material in this dispute. 1. Disc. 2. page 38. 34.
Whether the Popish grounds of believing Christ's Corporal Presence [viz: as
effected by Transubstantiation] be Solid and true? to which we answer
Negatively. 2. Whether the Church of Rome, as a term of communion in this
point, exact any more then the acknowledgment of a Real Presense? to which we
answer, that to our apprehension she does. For she requires us under an
Anathema to believe Transubstantiation: which whoever does, must define a Real
Presence to be a Corporal Presence effected by Transubstantiation. So that the
prescinding expedient this Author offers, would have us prescind from the
definition of the object, i. e. to consider a thing, prescinding from the thing
that we consider; which the Papists have more wit then to propose to us. 2 that
if she did not, Disc. 2.. 17. p. 21.
it would not serve the turn. For she requires us even by this Author's
confession, to bow down before the Elements; which, if Christ's Body be not
Locally Present in the Eucharist, we have proved to be Idolatry, be the bow
never so prescinding. For to worship the true God by an Host, is in effect all
one as to worship him by an image; which is as truly, though not so gross,
Idolatry as to worship an image instead of him.

And now (as the Defender says) Hitherto of this Controversy: wherein if I have
chiefly considered my Adversarye's management, it is because a Scholar should be
answered; but a Jugler need only be detected.

CHAP. XII. The Close.
Having taken so distinct a view of both the Discourses, I know not whether I
must beg the Reader's pardon for considering so much of 'em; or demand the
Author's thanks for sparing what I have passed over. The Controversy it self
would have lain in a little room; but the Author's handling it gives an
adversary so large a field of matter, as would easily furnish a very voluminous
Reply. My aim in this was to make it as short as was possible, without omitting
any thing material; and I Am confident I have not, I Am sure I have not
willingly, omitted or dissembled the force of any one line, that seemed to make
against the Church of England.

The Quotations in the Pamphlet are many and generally tedious; none of 'em
sincere, and most of 'em twice or thrice repetaed. To have-publish'd 'em
entire, would have taken up more paper then this answer does: nor would a
recital have sufficed, without some reflection* and after all the Reader is no
more bound to trust me then him; but for full satisfaction must recurr to the
Authors themselves. Wherefore I concluded it the shorter and better way, to
give the sense of our Church and those Authors in plain and easy terms; so that
the common Reader might be his own interpreter; and without any farther
assistance make a right construction of what the Pamphlet would pervert.

Some perhaps may fancy my Reflections are sometimes too severe, upon so little
seeming provocation; and at other times too light for so serious a subject as I
treat of. I confess I could not always dissemble my just abhorrence of the
Author's insincerity; which I take to be the Sin in the world that an honest
man can least pardon. Had the Author been a true sincere Papist, as well my
inclination as my duty would have made me treat him with respect, for simple
error is an object of compassion to be dealt with in the spirit of meekness:
but Hypocrisy is the common aversion of God and Man; and ought to be abhorred
and stigmatized. As for lighter Answers, I think I have never given them, but
when they were requisite in reply to Comical objections; for nothing can be
more ridiculous then a solemn confutation of a Jest. The Author indeed seems to
talk with great gravity all the way; but his matter for the most part is of a
quite contrary Character: and in such a case the Grimace does but add to the
Comedy and make it the more necessary to return an answer in kind.

What I have said has been the shorter, because my Adversary has been twice
answered already: both professedly by the Author of the late Reply printed at
London; and occasionally by those other worthy men that have considered the
several parts of the Guide in Controversy. For there is not an argument, nor a
quotation, nor scarce a sentence in either of these Discourses, but is almost
verbatim in that Guide aforesaid; which contains the whole stock of the
Fraternity; the sum and substance of all they have to say, if they write as
many books as Tostatus. 'Twas but the other day that a great part of these
Discourses was again printed in the Book of Church-Govenment; and for ought I
find we must expect the same stuff word for word, in every book they are to
publish. But at this rate instead of being answered they deserve to be indicted
for extortion. For the buyer of their book pays unconscionable use upon use,
besides the nauseousness of the tautology. Wherefore for my own part I now take
my final leave of them; and resolve, not so much as to inquire what other books
the Editor's press is big with. And perhaps when other Readers are aware of his
proceedings, the edition of his books will not need to be stinted to twenty
thousand of a sort in a year.

FINIS.

