A COLLECTION Of Several LETTERS AND DECLARATIONS, SENT BY General Monck Unto
the Lord Lambert, the Lord Fleetwood, and the rest of the General Council of
Officers in the ARMY. AS ALSO, Unto That part of the Parliament, called the
Rump. The Committee of Safety, so called. The Lord Mayor and Common Council of
the City of London. The Congregated Churches in and about London.


LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

A LETTER FROM General Monck TO KING CHARLES.
May it pl^ease your Majesty.
SEeing it has pleased God out of his gracious will and pleasure, to cause me
to cast my Eye upon this Commonwealth of England, my native Country, (and your
three Kingdoms;) and viewing there, to behold the sad and lamentable
condition, that now, and for many years past, it has been entangled in; which
as Reason and Conscience together persuades me, is occasioned chiefly for want
of its ancient and ever customed way of Government, (to wir) a King and
Parliament, which has been unsettled altogether amongst us, ever since the
unhappy death of your Majesty's late father our King; by reason whereof, our
ancient and accustomed wholesome Laws both of Church and State, are most
strangely torn and massacred; and all through the self-seeking ends of some
certain persons, which at present I judge not fit herein to be communicated,
who having gotten the power of the sword in their hands, thought for ever to
rule and reign over their opposers; (I think in spite of God or man:) But of
late some of those (I hope I may truly bless the name of the Lord for it,) who
were the chief Rulers of those unhappy Differences between our King, and his
three poor distracted Kingdoms, are taken out of this World; insomuch, that
the Power of those remaining, is much weakened; But yet they will (I perceive)
seek to tread in the felf same steps of them that have gone before them, as
seeking only to set up their own Interest, although to the utter ruin of the
Nation. Studying how of littleness to become great, hating the name of a King,
but would joyfully embrace the power thereof, (yea, I may say, they seek far
more Power, than ever our late King did take upon him,) and all this done under
the zealous pretense of Saintship and Religion; the form or manner whereof* is
plainly manifested by their tollerating and setting up of strange Sects of
Religion, as Anabaptists, Quakers, and such like, seeking utterly to destroy
and pull down, our ancient Orthodox Divines, unless timely prevented. I
question not but your Majesty is very well knowing of the Power, which for some
few years past, I have had in governing the English Army here in Scotland;
which Power, when I had once obtained, I did resolve, as much as in me lay, to
keep, until a fit time and opportunity should offer it self, that I might
employ it for the glory of God, and the good of your Majesty, whose faithful
Subject I humbly acknowledge my self to be. Now so it is, may it please your
Majesty* I plainly seeing, and with a sad heart beholding the threatening hand
of the Lords severe Judgments stretched forth against these three Kingdoms,
which forthwith must, and will inevitably fall heavy upon us, (for ought as can
be imagined, to the utter ruin both of King and Subjects) unless suddenly
prevented by our humble submission to the Lord, and an unfeigned Repentance of
our former miscarriages. May it also please your Majesty to give me leave to
acquaint you, that I humbly conceive, I had never a better opportunity of doing
my Country service, (in freeing them from their Egyptian bondage, as I may term
it,) and in restoring the Crown to the right owner thereof; which if possible
to be done, shall be done with as much care, safety, and diligence, as God
shall enable me, and that with as little wrong as may be either to King or
Subjects; which work when it is perfected, I hope will tend to the settlement
of our ancient Protestant Religion: In tender consideration of all which
Premises, I most humbly beg that high favor of your Majesty, that you will be
graciously pleased, to permit me to make these Proposals following. First,
whether your Majesty will be pleased, to accept of the real endeavors of me
your unworthy Subject and Servant to be employed in being a means in helping
your Majesty to a quiet and safe possession of three Kingdoms; which have (with
violence) been so long time withheld from you? If yea, Then, Will your Majesty
be pleased, to consent to a Treaty to be had between your Majesty, and a free
Parliament, which shall be lawfully Elected and Chosen by the Country, whose
care I hope will be for the choosing of such honest, godly, and religious men,
as had no hand in the death of our late King, or since his death, have (by any
unlawful means whatsoever*) enjoyed any of his Lands, Tenements, or Rents, or
the Lands, Tenements, and Rents, of the late Deans and Chapters, or any of your
late sequestered Subjects, or which since his death have appeared violent in
their acting against Kingship, and consequently against your Majesty, our
lawful King: Not in the least that I have any malice or evil will against such
persons, but for that my Conscience tells me, that so long, as self-interessed
persons are suffered to sit in Parliament, there is little good to be expected,
either for King or Kingdom; for it is a hard thing for men to act against
their own selves, to the loss of their Lands and Livings; which they suppose
they have so honestly gained. If your Majesty will be pleased to consent to
such a Treaty, and that thereupon it may be agreed upon, that your Majesty
shall be restored to your three Kingdoms; which I question not, but will be the
event of such a Treaty: Then I humbly beg, that your Maj. would be pleased to
think fit to declare what mercy and pity, you are pleased shall be shown to
all those that have been the chief of your enemies, (whose blood in severity of
justice, might deservedly be spilt,) upon their humble submission to your
Majesty, and their promise of future obedience; for I hope you will judge, that
the only way to join the hearts of the People of your three Kingdoms, to pray
for your happy success in all things; and not only so, but it will undoubtedly
encourage them all to venture their Lives against all your opposers, if any
shall contest: and also that your Majesty would be pleased, to declare out of
your gracious goodness, what satisfaction shall be made to the poor Common
Soldiery throughout your three Kingdoms, who have been forced to take up
Arms, although against your Majesty, for mere necessity to keep them and their
Families from starving, who indeed are much behind in their pay; which will be
utterly lost and undone, unless your Majesty take compassion upon them; which
if you are pleased so to do, I question not but you will find as much humility
and submission from them, as can be expected; and for the future it will engage
them to be as ready to serve your Majesty, as they were to serve your enemies
for the time past: And moreover, I conceive it will be a great incouragment to
them, to join with me in this design. I shall trouble your Majesty with little
more at present; But to let you know, that my hopes are, that you would be
pleased, to have that confidence in me, as not to credit any rumors or
reports, that may seemingly contradict what I have herein proposed; for as for
that, I would have your Majesty to be confident, that I shall not value neither
the ill will, or yet look upon the favor of any, who shall yet appear in
opposition to a thing that I have so really purposed, so long as God and my
Conscience persuades me, that in so doing I shall accomplish a good Work both
for his glory, and my Countries good: and yet I think fit to carry as fair a
correspondency as I can, with those that have taken upon them the Authority in
England: To that end, I have thoughts of going to London very suddenly, that I
may see their actings, and order things there somewhat for my advantage; I
humbly beg your Majesty's speedy Answer touching these Proposals: So with all
submissiveness, I crave your Majesty's favor, in giving me leave to subscribe
my self,

Your Majesty's for ever faithful and Loyal Subject, GEORGE MONCK.
Edenborough December. 30. 1659.
SEVERAL LETTERS From the Lord General Monck, Commander in Chief of the forces
in Scotland, and one of the Commissioners by Act of Parliament for the
Government of this Commonwealth, VIZ. To Mr. SPEAKER, To the Lord FLEETWOOD.
To the Lord LAMBERT.

Printed, Anno 1660.

TO THE SPEAKER.
Right honorable,
HAving received notice, that there was a force put upon the Parliament on the
twelfth of this instant, I have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to know
whether that force does continue; for I am resolved by the Grace and Assistance
of GOD, as a true Englishman, to stand to and assert the Liberty and Authority
of PARLIAMENT; And the Army here, (praised be God) is very courageous and
unanimous, and I doubt not but to give a good account of this action to You. I
have, according to your Act of the 11 th instant, being constituted a
Commissioner for the government of the Army, put out such persons as would not
act according to your Commission: I do call GOD to witness, That the Asserting
of a Commonwealth is the only intent of my heart, and I desire, if possibl e,
to avoid the shedding of blood, and therefore entreat you, that there may be a
good understanding between Parliament and Army; But if they will not obey Your
Commands, I will not desert You, according to my Duty and Promise. Which is all
at present from

Your humble and faithful Servant; GEORGE MONCK.
Edinburgh October. 20. 1659.
To the Lord FLEETVVOOD.
Right honorable,
I Have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to let you know that we have
received notice, that a part of the Army have put force upon the Parliament,
which they so lately called together, and owned with the greatest I estimonies
of Obedience and Repentance for their former Apostasy from them; I hope your
Lordship will not abet an Action of such a dangerous and destructive
Consequence; I know that you love the Liberty and Peace of England so well,
That you will use your best Care, That Attempts of this nature be suppressed. I
do therefore humbly entreat you, that the Parliament may be speedily restored
to that Freedom, which they enjoyed on the 11th of this instant, Otherwise I am
resolved, by the Assistance of God, with th^s Army under my Command, to declare
for them, and to prosecute this just Cause to the last drop of my Blood; I
bless the Lord, that the Officers here are very unanimons: and for such, whose
hearts fail them, orwhich will not act according to their Commissions from the
Parliament, I having Authority as one of the Seven Commissioners appointed by
Act of Parliament, do constitute such as are cheerful for this Good Old Cause*
till the Parliaments pleasure be further known; And I do plainly assure your
Lordship, that I was never better satisfied in the sustict* of any Engagement
than in this: You cannot but remember that God has alrea^y showed Himself
glorious in it, and determined the quarrel on this side, against Arbitrary
power of raising Money without the Peoples consent first had, and the manage
ent of the Militia by any other then the Parliament. I desire your Lordship not
to be deluded by the specious pretenses of a^y ambitious person what^oever* and
do not bring all the blood that will be shed upon your own head; My Lord
consi^er how you will answer to the dreadful God for the ruin of three
Nations, for to serve a lust or to gratify a passion: For my particular, I am
ashamed of these confusions and Changes that we have ma^e that we are now
become a scorn an^ a reproach to our very friends, and designed to ruin by
all*our Neighbors. I take God to witness, that I have no further ends then
the establishing of Parliamentary Authority, and those good Laws that our
Ancestors have purchased with so much blood, the settling the Nations in a free
Commonwealth, and the defense of godliness and godly men, though of different
Judgment; And I take my self so far obliged, being in the Parliaments Service,
to stand, though alone, in this Quarrel, And I doubt not but your Lordship,
having the fear of God in your heart will carefully consider of this matter:
which is all at present from

Your Excellencies humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.
Edinb. October. 20. 1659.
To the Lord LAMBERT.
Right honorable,
HAving notice, that a part of the Army under the Parliaments Command, have,
contrary to their duty, put force upon them; I have therefore sent this
Messenger to your Lordship, to entreat you to be an instrument of Peace and
good understanding between Parliament and Army: for, if they shall continue
this Force, I am resolved with the assistance of God, and that part of the Army
under my Command, to stand by them, and assert their lawful Authority. For Sir,
the Nation of England will not endure any Arbitrary Power neither will any true
Englishman in the Army, so that such a design will be ruinous and destructive;
Therefore I do earnestly entreat you, that we may not be a scorn to all the
world, and a Pre^ to our enemies, that the Parliament may be speedily restored
to their Freedom which they enjoyed on the 11 th of this instant. which is all
at present from

Your Lordships humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.

A LETTER OF THE OFFICERS of the ARMY in SCOTLAND, under the Commander in Chief
there, To the OFFICERS of the Army in ENGLAND.
Dear Brethren and Friends,
THis is, of all the days of Trouble God has brought upon us, the saddest
that ever our Eyes saw in these poor Nations; We have had to do often with the
Common Enemy, but never before engaged against our Friends, the very thoughts
of which is a wound* deeper in our Spirits than the sword can make in our
Bowels.

Above all things therefore it is our earnest Prayer, and shall be our
endeavor, to Reconcile the differences in that which to our Consciences seems
the most equitable and just Medium for us ^o agree in, namely, To entreat you
(as we have interposed with the superior Officers of the Army) to labor a due
understanding between your selves and the Parliament, the necessity and equity
of which request we cannot but believe you must subscribe to, if you seriously
consider a few Proposals.

1. Whether the asserting of a free Parliament, duly qualified, of faithful
men to GOD, and his people in these Nations, to be the Supreme Legislative
Authority of these Nations, was not the Good Old Cause we fought for, as that
only which vindicated in Spirituals our Consciences from Imposition upon them,
contrary to the Liberty of the Subjects of JESUS CHRIST, and our Persons, and
Estates, and Posterity in Civils, from the Usurpations of the late King upon
the Liberties and ancient Rights of the Freeborn People of England.

2. Whether it be not the only vindication of your late laying aside the Son
and Successor of our old General, because you did verily believe, as you have
protested to the world, That the Government of any single person might in time,
ruin the aforementioned Libertyes, purchased by our Blood, and the vast
Treasures of this Commonwealth; Monarchy, however bounded, necessarily
requiring Uniformity as to Religion, and Prerogative as to Civil, both which
must needs be oppressive and destructive to our Consciences and Rights.

3. Whether, when you set up again this Famous Old Parliament, you did not
believe in your Conscinces that it was a Return to the Good Old Cause, from
which you had Apostatized, and the best Expedient to heal the sad breaches of
this poor Commonwealth* which the Lusts of men have made; witness your
Declaration presented by the Lord Lambert, and the rest (the sixth of May) to
the Speaker, as the Representee of the House.

4. Whether, this Parliament has ever yet endangered or disowned you, or the
Nation in these Great Ends (which can only acquit all the bloodshed from
Murder) your Liberties as Englishmen and your Privileges as Christians, but
rather have given security for both, in such Votes as they had time to pass, by
such promises as they are too honest to forget, and by a Progress large enough,
considering the Confusions and Difficultyes they found the Government in, by
our setting up the things, of which we are now ashamed.

5. Whether, if your Consciences be better informed, it can satisfy ours, or
any Christian Consciences in the Nation, to act according to your particular
apprehensions, when we see them cross so much the plain Rule of the Word;
which, as it requires obedience to all Authority, so, much more to that which
is asserted and settled upon the surest Foundation of the Peoples Rights, and to
which you are so solemnly engaged by Protestations, as in the presence of God,
who will not hold them guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

6. Whether, if upon this occasion of our Dissentings, the Common Enemy should
arise with a stronger party, and make use of our Divisions to yoke us in
bondage worse than ever: That their little finger should be heavier than the
Loins of those preceded them, the people of these Nations would not have sad
Cause to leave at your doors the blood of those Innocents they must sacrifice
to their Cruelty, Conside ing especially that the Redemption of these old
Usurpations, must be by the Heads of Gods People, and bring worse upon us, the
blood of Saints, whose death is precious in the sight of the Lord. We beg you
therefore, to lay to heart the Premi^^es, and believe we are n en of such
Consciences, as cannot close with this Action and Acquiesce in it, But would
cordially desire, that God may humble us for the evil of our ways, That in
making Peace with Him, we may Unite in love to each other: And we shall also
assure you, that though the present Emergency has made our Commander in chief,
to put some of the Officers from their Commands, whose actings have not been
such as might promise they can cordially join in this business, yet he has
continued to them their Sallaries out of the Contingencies of the Army, till
the Parliaments pleasure be further known: And we shall also assure you, That
whatever endeavors may be for the settling of this Parliament again in a free
capacity to Act for us in these Nations, we shall be as ready as you to bear a
Testimony against them suitable to our station, if they should violate the so
often promised and engaged for Liberties of these Nations, whether Spiritual or
Civil, There being a witness against them in their late Votes, that the
Representative of the people, is entrusted not for the Ruin, but the safety of
the Commonwealth.

Linlithgow, October. 22. 1659. Signed in the Name, and by the appointment of the
Officers of the Army in Scotland. WILLIAM CLARKE, SECRETARY.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Fleetwood, to be Communicated to the Officers
of the Army in and about London.
A SECOND LETTER TO THE Lord Fleetvvood.
SIR,
WE think fit to acquaint you, that the Lord has so prosper'd our endeavors
here, that my Lord General Monck and the Officers have accepted of our
Overtures of mediation, and they have appointed Col. Wilkes, Lieutenant Col.
Clobery, and Major Knight, to repair to London Commissioners, to treat with the
like number of Officers there for a firm peace and unity amongst the Forces of
both Nations; for which we doubt not but the prayers of all good men will be
poured forth to the Throne of Grace. We have prevailed with my Lord General to
dispatch Order this night to his remotest Quarters, that they advance not
further Southwards during this Treaty, and we desire you will do the like, that
none of yours may march more Northward then they are; And truly for as much as
we can perceive, none of these Forces had so hastily marched out of Scotland,
if yours had not gathered this way. In a few days we shall see you, and in the
mean time desire you to believe we are,

Sir, Your affectionate Servants, Thomas Clarges, Thomas Talbot.

Dalkieth this 4th of November. 1659.
GENERAL MONCKS LAST LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetwood.
My Lord,
AFter I had answered the Letter your Lordship did me the favor to send me by
Col. Talbot, I received another from your Lordship, of the 29 th of October,
wherein your Lordship is pleased to express much of your Lordships Affection
and Friendship to me, for which I shall ever acknowledge my self engaged to
you; but truly I must assure your Lordship, no personal Discouragements
(although I have had my share of them) have induced me to the Justification I
make of the Parliaments Authority, but the tie of duty to which I am in my
Conscience obliged, and I shall be heartily sorry, if your Lordship makes any
other Interpretation of it, for your Lordship knows my Command has been offered
often up to those that had power to place it better: We are all I bless the
Lord, very unanimous here, and I am confident when the Gentlemen we send from
hence have given your Lordship a true understanding of our actions, you will
not have so severe an opinion of them, as you seem to have in your late
Letters: The persons names are, Col. Wilkes, Lieut. Col. Clobery, and Major
Knight, all well known to your Lordship, to whom I beseech your Lordship to
give credit, in what they shall propose from the Army here, and I beseech you
to believe, I am still with a sincere heart,

My Lord, Your Lordships very humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.

A Letter sent by General MONCK to Vice Admiral GOODSON, to be communicated to
the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, in answer to a Letter with some
Proposals lately sent to him from Them.
Dear Countrymen and Commanders,
I Am glad thot you have not forgotten your old friend, and that by this
occasion, I have such advantage to hear of your hearty affections to me, and
kind remembrance of me, and that you have such a deep sense of the divisions
amongst us, and the miserable consequence thereof; but I am very much sadded
that you have entertained such mistakes and misapprehensions of our
proceedings. These enclosed Papers will fully satisfy you, that we have just
grounds of dissatisfaction, and that we cannot comply with such violent and
unwarrantable undertakings, both against our reason as men, and against our
Consciences as Christians, that you and we should take our Commissions and pay
from the Parliament, and yet to violate their Authority, after such solemn
assurances of obedience and faithfulness, contrary to the expressed word of
God, and our own late Addresses. I hope I am so well known to some of you, that
I am none of those that seek great things to my self, or delight in the
shedding the blood of English men, much less of Christian Brethren, but to
preserve the name of God from Blasphemy and Reproach, which our actings (I wish
I could not call them treache^ousness and perfidiousness have occasioned;
whereby Jesus Christ and his truth have been evil spoken of, which makes our
very lives bitter to us, and to assert the integrity and honor of this Army,
which is very dear to me, I have been forced with the Parliaments Army under my
command, (though with much grief of heart) to beat our Testimony against the
late violence of the Army; and the reasons thereof you will find in our printed
papers, and our endeavors to persuade them in England to remove that force
which they have put upon the Parliament. As to your Proposals, I beseech you
seriously to consider and lay to heart these following Answers.

1. To the first, you are pleased to intimate the joy of the Cavaliers that
they see us stand to our Declaration, but I believe, that this violent
interruption of the Parliament was the greatest courtesy to gratefie that
Family and Interest that could be imagined in the World, (and I could wish it
were not designed). I should be very sad to strengthen the hands of the Wicked,
but let me assure you, this arises from the slanders and calumnies which men
cast upon us in England, as if we that assert the Authority of those that
brought the late King to the Block, are for introducing that Family, which I
take God to witness, we in our very thoughts abhor, and shall spend our blood
in opposition to any Single person whatsoe ver.

2. You are pleased to compare our present differences to that of the
Israelites, with the two Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half the Tribe of
Manasses) and I earnestly pray that there may be the same issue, for if they
will restore these persons to their lawful Authority, which have been
established by many successes, and for the difference of which they so lately
hazarded to blood we shall quietly sit down and wait upon the Providence of
God in our places and Stations, and to this end we have sent Commissioners into
England men faithful and approved. What you are pleased to instance concerning
my satisfaction in the year 1653. When this Parliament was interrupted
formerly, I shall answer you to that, it was never in my Conscience to go out
of Gods way under the pretense of doing Gods work, and you know the variety of
times does much vary the nature of affairs, and what might then patiently be
submitted unto, we being engaged with a foreign Enemy in a bloody War, cannot
be drawn into a president at this time; after our Repentance and assurance of
Loyalty and Constancy; you may be pleased to remember that the consequence of
the former Interruptions was the Introduction of a single person, and a
manifest breach of all our promises and engagements, so that if God blessed me
with success, then I do much more through mercy expect it now, when I put all
to hazard for the Glory of God and the good of his people.

3. I do acknowledge that the Army has been in the hand of God and instruments
of good to these Nations, yet if they shall apostate from the Cause of God and
his people in exposing them to Arbitrary Power, and the wills of men, in taking
upon them to Abollish Laws, raise money without consent of the people, destroy
Ministry and property, and force Parliaments, I cannot but witness against
such proceedings as unwarrantable not suited to any rule either from God or man.

4. I have taken care by Garrisons in this Country, and assurance from the
whole body of the Nation, that they will not own the interest of Charles
Stewart., and that they will preserve the peace of the Commonwealth in
obedience to the parliament; So that if that part of the Army in England will
set up a distinct interest in the Nation, in deserting that Cause that has
been so precious to us, and cost so much blood and treasure for to establish
their own Interest and greatness. I do declare in the presence of the Great God
I cannot own you, nor Ioyn with them; Now having opened my heart to you and as
you know my plainness and sincerity, that I am none of those that dare assert
any thing against my Conscience, from that experience ye have had of me, I
heartily beg your belief and credit, that I shall keep in the way of duty, and
endeavor to do the Lords work in my Generation, and shall not own any corrupt
interest whatsoever, and do desire of God his blessing according to my
Integrity in this undertaking, having this good Testimony in my own Spirit,
that I have nothing but public and Righteous ends upon my heart, and by all
these respects and kindnesses that I have received from you, I desire you will
join with us in your desires that this Parliament may be restored to the
excution of their duties and trust, with freedom and honor; I have no more
but my hearty Love and service to you all, desiring God to bless you all, and
make you happy instruments for the good these Nations in your several places
which shall be always the Prayer of dear Friends.

Your humble Servant and fellow Soldier, G. M.
Edinburgh, November. 29. 1659.
To the Right Honorable Vice Admiral Goodson, to be Communicated to the rest
of the Officers of the Fleet, in Answer to the Letter that was sent to me from
them.
A LETTER Of General George Moncks, Dated at Leicester 23 January, and directed
unto Mr. Roll to be communicated unto the rest of the Gentry of Devon:
occasioned by a late Letter from the Gentry of Devon dated at Exceter 14
January, and sent by Mr. Bampfield to the Speaker; to be communicated unto the
Parliament. Read in Parliament Jan. 26.
Most honored and dear Friends,
MEeting with a Paper dated at Exon the 13 instant, directed to William Lenthal
Esquire Speaker of the Parliament, and subscribed by diverse of my friends and
relations, purporting the recalling the Members secluded 1648. as the best
expedient for establishing these Nations upon a foundation of lasting peace. I
have taken the boldness from my relation to some of you as allied, and my
affectionate respects to all of you as dear Friends and Contrymen, to
represent to your consideration my present apprehensions of the state of
Affairs here, in order to all our better satisfactions; wherein I humbly crave
your leave of freedom without prejudice.

Before these unhappy Wars the Government of these Nations was Monarchical in
Church and State: these wars have given birth and growth to several Interests
both in Church and State heretofore not known; though now upon many accounts
very considerable, as the Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist and Sectaries
of all sorts as to Ecclesiastics; and the Purchasers of the Kings, Queens,
Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and all other forfeited Estates; and all
those engaged in these Wars against the King as to civils. These Interests
again are so interwoven by Purchases and intermarriages, and thereby forfeited;
as I think upon rational grounds it may be taken for granted; That no
Government can be either good, peaceful or lasting to these Nations, that does
not rationally include and comprehend the security and preservrtion of all the
foresaid Interests both Civil and Spiritual; I mean so far as by the Word of
God they are warranted to be protected and preserved. If this be so, Then that
Government under which we formerly were both in State and Church, viz. Monarchy
cannot possibly be admitted for the future in these Nations, because its
support is taken away, and because its exclusive of all the former Interests
both Civil and Spiritual, all of them being incompatible with Monarchical
Uniformity in Church and State thus expired. That Government then that is most
able to comprehend and protect all Interests as aforesaid must needs be
Republique.

Wherefore to me it is no small doubt, if upon the Premises to admit of the
Members secluded 1648. were not to obstruct our peace and continue our War,
rather than establish the one, and end the other; in that very many of those
Members assert the Monarchical Interest, together with the abolition of all
Laws made since their seclusion; Which I fear upon account of self-preservation
both of Life and Estate as well as Spiritual Liberty, will immediately involve
all these Nations in most horrid and bloody War afresh; the very apprehensions
whereof, I confess, I do infinitely dread, and submit the dangerous consequence
thereof to your prudent considerations, and the rather, seeing the Army also
will never endure it.

Having thus briefly laid before you the present condition of Affairs, let me
now entreat you to consider whither it were not better to desist from that
Paper, and submit to the proceedings of this Parliament, who have resolved to
fill up their House, determine their sitting, and prepare a way for future
successions of Parliament; by which means being full, and thereby comprehending
the whole Interest of these Nations, they may through God's Mercy, and all our
patiences, establish such a Government in the way of a Commonwealth, as may be
comprehensive of all interests both Spiritual and Civil, to the glory of God,
and the weal and peace of the whole. But if by your impatiencies they be
obstructed, our peace will be so much the longer a stranger to us; and we
thereby a prey to our selves, and all foreign Enemies. Wherefore humbly
pressing these upon your serious considerations with all the friendly and
affectionate respects and service to you all, I remain

Dearest Friends, Your very humble and affectionate Servant, GEORGE MONCK.
Leicester, 21. Jan. 1659.
For the honored Robert Rolls Esquire to be communicated to the Gentlemen of
Devonshire, who signed the late Letter to the Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
A LETTER FROM THE Officers at Whitehal To the OFFICERS under General Monck In
SCOTLAND.
Dear Brethen and Fellow Soldiers,
WE most heartily wish Grace and Truth to be multiplied unto you, through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; And also we desire the God and Father
of all Grace, to add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to
Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity.

Dear Brethren, We cannot but be deeply affected and afflicted in our own
spirits, to consider of your dissatisfaction with us upon mistaken grounds. You
have known us this many years to be your faithful Brethren, that durst do
nothing that is sinful; And we may affirm with plainness, honesty and
simplicity of heart, we have done nothing in the late Revolution, but that
which the Providence of the most wise God prepared to our hands, and led us
unto, without so much as one half hours time to design or resolve to take that
course we were necessitated unto; Since which most of such persons that were
not clear in the present and sudden Action, have made their acknowledment of
their full satisfaction, and we are mutually reconciled, and they are received
and tendered by us as affectionate Brethren: And for a more full Narrative of
the providential Grounds, and gradual Steps that led us to that Work, yet (with
aching hearts) and as an Answer to your Queries, signed in your name by William
Clerk, Secretary, bearing date the 22. instant, We refer you to a Book,
Entitled, The Armies Plea, and also, The Armies Declaration, relation
thereunto being had, we hope will give you satisfaction.

Loving Brethren, What have we done that you are offended? we are not conscious
that any thing is acted by us upon the public Theater, but that which we judge
is acceptable to God* And what we have done has proceeded from uprightness of
heart, and for the glory of God, the good of his Intrest, Cause, and People in
these Nations: Nothing less than these worthy ends could have caused us to
adventure our All, that is dear to us for your and their sakes; And after such
a hazard, our Brethren to look shy upon us, yea such, with whom we have lived,
and conversed together, prayed, fought, and jeoparded our lives together, and
witnesses together of the glory of the most high God. in the high places of the
field; Yea, we that are of one Society, of one Family and Household, that none
hitherto (through the grace of God could dis-unite us) now to be at a distance
with us, is the greatest wound to us, which is unexpressable: If it had been
from our Enemies, we could have born it; Oh but, they are the wounds of the
house of our Friends. And all this arising without dealing brotherly with us,
and without so much as sending to know the providential Grounds that led us to
these Undertakings; And likewise your and our unhappiness has been possibly by
mis-informations received by those who have corresponded with the principal
occasioners of this Breach; However we are censured by you, we shall, we hope,
carry Christianly and Brotherly toward you, and exercise our selves in the
Doctrine of our Savior, If any be overtaken in a fault, restore such a one in
the spirit of meekness, knowing also, we are subject to like temptations: And
we ought to pity and pray for one another, and forgive one another, even as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven us; We hope the fear of God will guide you,
so that you may do nothing to grieve Him and his little Flock, and rejoice the
common Enemy abroad and at home, nor give them advantages to make a prey of
these poor Nations: What can you propound to your selves? If you are for good
things, so are we; if for a Free State and Commonwealth, so are we; if against
a Single Person, so are we; if for Reformation, so are we; if for Godliness,
and the Nations to be exalted in Righteousness, so are we; Why do we differ in
the form and way to it? Oh, dear friends if you should precipitately engage
i^to a War, and should Conquer your Brethren, would not (...) (...) be a
Conquest over your selves, and all the (...) People of the Land? And if they
are gone, certainly (if you retain your old Principles) you would not desire to
live long (...).

(...) Brethren, We commend unto you that place of (...), Josh. 1. 14, 15. We
shall with our bended knees implore the God of Heaven, and King of Saints, to
guide you, and persuade you* as holy Noah said in another case, Genesis 9. 27. God
shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shim. Finally, Brethren farewell,
Be of good comfort, Let us be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love
and peace shall be with you and us: We remain,

Your most affectionate Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers.
Dear Friends, We hope to hear in your Answer to this, that all our dear
Friends now in Bonds, are at Liberty, and that the Lord has satisfied your
hearts to acquiesce in his present Dispensations, so as we may not expose each
other to further Inconveniency


.
A RETURN OF THE General and Officers IN SCOTLAND, To the aforesaid LETTER of
the OFFICERS at Whitehall.
Dear Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers in the Lord,
IN the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, We return you our most hearty wishes and
prayers, That Grace, and Truth, and Peace also might be multiplied unto you:
And that to your Faith, and your Virtue, and your Knowledge, and your
Temperance, and your Godliness, and your brotherly Kindness, and your Charity,
might be added, Patience, and Meekness, and Humility, and Self-denial. Great
are the thoughts of our hearts, for the divisions in Reuben, and we are (as you
express it) deeply affected and afflicted in our own spirits, when we consider
what cause we have to be dissatisfied with you, our dear Brethren; you, with
whom we have lived and conversed together; with whom we have prayed and fought
and jeoparded our lives together; with whom we have taken sweet Counsel, and
walked together in the House of God as Friends: But we cannot conceal from you
that our Affection and Affliction of spirit is much increased by the Letter you
sent us by Captain Deane, and by the Books you referred us to in that Letter.
We had before some small (indeed our only) hopes that there might be some
mistake between us; but alas! We cannot but now think (since we find you have
no more to say for your selves) that Our fears were but too true and the Causes
of our Dissatisfaction at your present actings but too just: We shall deal with
you with that plainness and freedom, and sincerity that becomes Brethren, for
so we think it becomes us, To fulfill all Righteousness: And so we think it
expedient both for you and us, that We may the sooner come to a right
understanding one of another.

We could not be satisfied that there was any such need of more General
Officers (the first occasion of this unhappy difference) as that the Parliament
should be pressed to it so unseasonably, and so just a jealousy created in
them that there was a Design to set up a Single Person (of which they had but
so late, and so sad experience) and we could not but think it sufficient for
the security of the good Interest, that the Army was united under one head, the
Parliament.

We were less satisfied, that after you declared your Satisfaction and
Acquiescence in the Votes of the House, you should endeavor by a new way to
wrest the Power out of their own hands, and to prosecute the same Design; This
making the Army a Corporation in a manner Independent from the Civil Power, and
creating to it an Interest, distinct from that of the Peoples, by whom they
hitherto have, and still must live, and for whom they are by their Engagements
and Duties bound to dye: and that after you knew the Parliament had in effect
disapproved your Petition, you should still endeavor to get more hands to it,
which neither the Parliament, not we our selves could look upon any otherwise,
then as a design to force the Parliament to grant what they had already in
effect disapproved, if not to do that which you say was done, at less then half
an hours warning.

But then that after the sad experience of so many confusions and tossings,
which these poor Nations had already felt by such actings as these, after the
unhappy (and since acknowledged unlawful) former interruption of that (by your
selves called) famous long Parliament, after the Confusions and Distractions of
that little one of your own, and not of the Peoples choosing; after the
occasion by them given to some of setting up, and the necessity imposed on us
of accepting a Single Person, contrary to our former Engagements, and to our
Interests; after our late renewed Engagement, and our solemn and serious
expressions of Repentance, That you should so soon return to your former sin,
and for the apparent interest of nine or ten Persons (who how precious soever,
yet cannot be worth the blood that may be shed in this quarrel) to put a new
force upon the Parliament, and to destroy all Lawful Authority in the three
Nations, and to put them out of hopes of ever having any for the future, but
what shall be at your disposals; and to do these things in the Name of the
whole Army, thereby usurping a Power over your Brethren, to which you have no
right, and involving us in the same guilt with yours in the same actings,
against which we are bound to protest before God and man: This is that which
lies the sorest upon our Spirits; This is that which wounds us deepest.

This is that which must of necessity make the three Nations slaves to the Army
the Armies of Scotland and Ireland, slaves to that of England, and that of
England to nine or ten Persons, and perhaps in short time those nine or ten, to
one single One. The best effect it can have must be that which you so much
complain of in the Armies Plea, page 25.

That all the pious and good People of this Nation shall not enjoy a peaceable
and quiet life in all Godliness and Hodesty, but only some part of them.

We cannot but in the Name of the Lord tell you, that these Actings make us
stink in the nostrils of the good People, and cause the Name of God to be evil
spoken of, and his Enemies to rejoice.

And yet you say, Behold, what we have done? and tell us in many, but very
general terms, what good things you are for: We likewise are for good things as
well as you; We are for a Free State and Commonwealth as well as you; We are
against a single Person as well as you; We are for Reformation as well as yon:
We are as well as you for Godliness and the Nations to be exalted in
Righteousness; if so be that you be indeed for these things which you pretend*
and that we differ not in the end as well as in the way to it!

But how can you be for good things, as long as you do that which is Evil? How
can you be for a Free State and Commonwealth, if for the Interest of nine or
ten Persons you dissolve Parliaments? To what purpose is it to be against a
single Person, if you be for nine or ten; or for Reformation, if you return so
soon to former sins? Or, how can Godliness or Righteousness be exalted, by
violent and unwarrantable means?

Brethren, Our daily prayer to God is, That we may not be necessitated to War
with you; but if we be, we must tell you that we do not precipitate our selves,
or run rashly or inconsiderately into it; We have had time, sadly and seriously
to consider the whole Matter, and we must deal plainly with you, and tell you,
that what you pretend, you had not half an hours time to deliberate about, We
have expected from you some weeks; We could not but take notice that the
occasion both of Calling and interrupting this Parliament, was, the making of
General Officers.

How little desire we have of making a conquest over you, He knows who knows
how little joy we should take in it; If there were not something in the Quarrel
that is dearer to us than our lives, we should never undertake it.

And now Brethren, as yet dear and precious in our eyes, we beseech you for the
mercies of Jesus Christ to lay these things to heart, and as we have done with,
Josh. 1. 14. 15. so to reflect seriously upon Josh. 7. Verse 19. and once more
to take the shame to your selves, and to repent with a repentance not to be
repented of. Consider whose blood is to be shedd on both sides, what cause it
is that lies at stake, who they are that are like to reap the benefit of our
Contentions: Suffer not Self or Interest, nor desire of the things of this
world, to entangle you again in the same snare, out of which you have so lately
escaped* Lay not up your treasure in this world* But seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven; Do not evil, because you think good may come of it.

Finally Brethren, stand fast in that Liberty wherein Christ has made you
free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.

EDINBURGH, Your most affectionate and afflicted Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers.

POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Brethren,
WE entreat you not put so hard a Name upon the necessary and short restraint
of our Brethren, as Bonds; We still own them and use them as Brethren; their
Pay is still continued to them, and the Restraint put upon them, for their and
your, and our Security, and the Security of all Gods People, we hope will be
very short, shorter than either you or we can expect: And take it not ill, we
acted any thing without first sending to you, We acted nothing but what was
necessary to our present safety, and we immediately sent our Letters to you,
which if they came not to your hand, it is not our faults: We have lately sent
Commissioners, Men faithful and approved, whom we hope you will treat as
Brethren.

For the Right Honorable the Lord Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers of
that part of the Army at London.
THE LETTER Of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the CITY of
LONDON; To his Excellency, The Lord General MONCK.
Right Honorable,
WE dare not enter upon the answer to the merits of your Excellencies Letter
of the 12th of November, which came to our hands the 23d of the same (which was
the first and only that came to us) without Prefacing our hearty, and thankful
admiring and acknowledging the transcendent Mercy of God, in putting into your
Heart those Pious and Noble Resolutions, to appear at such an Exigent to be the
glorious Instrument in his hand, both to Assert and Vindicate the greatest
Interest, both Civil and Religious of these Nations. And next, That your
singular Humility of Spirit, and Affection to this City, in Communicating to us
so early, those your just Resolves, and inviting us to share in the Honor of
Assisting, to the obtaining of those great and glorious Ends, in which the
happiness of these Nations in general, and of the City, as a Corporation,
consists.

In all which our Spirits were both enlightened and warmed by a spark from your
zeal, and actuated by God to a present activity in our sphere and capacity, in
compliance with your Excellencies advice, as we trust the whole world that has
seen our Actings since the receipt of your Letter, can bear us witness, and
that we hope may be our sufficient Plea for Pardon for our not returning a more
timely answer to your Excellencies said Letter. But we desire your Excellency
to believe, that was principally retarded by suspicion cast on the
Authentiqueness of it, by those who had the confidence on that score to
imprison the Deliverers, and by the Interposition of the Forces here, and led
out against your Excellency, who lay in the passage to You.

But now (may it please Your Excellency) seeing it has pleased God in some
measure to remove those Obstructions, We presume by this to Assert in VVriting,
what We hope all Our Actings, since the Receipt of Your Excellencies Advice,
have evidenced.

That We have cordially concurred with your Excellency, in disowing the
Author of that Force who interrupted the Parliament, and ravished the
Birthright of these Nations, by daring to null and make void Acts of
Parliament: and We think, have contributed somewhat by Gods blessing on Our
Counsels, and Actings, to the preventing of the sad Consequences of that
exorbitant presumption. How fully and entirely We comply with Your Excellency,
in asserting the Authority and Freedom of Parliaments, and the just Rights and
Liberties of the People, a National Ministry, for the enlightening of the
Ignorant, and suppressing of Atheism, We humbly Refer Your Excellency to Our
enclosed Declaration, and do seriously assure Your Excellency, That We shall
(by Gods assistance) persist faithfully and vigorously in this Good Cause: And
praying God to preserve your Excellency, and those Noble Commanders with You,
in these Your Just, Honorable, and Christian Undertakings, shall Remain,

Your Excellencies Most Affectionate and Faithful Friends and Servants, The
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Council Assembled.
In Their Names, and by Their Order, SADLER.
Guildhall, London, December, 29. 1659.
This Letter is Conveyed by the Sword Bearer of London, by the several
Directions of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Court of Common Council.
THE LETTER Of His EXCELLENCY, the Lord Genesis Monck, In ANSWER to the former
LETTER.
My Lord,
I Received a Letter from your Lordship, and the rest of the Common Council, of
the 29 th of December, and do humbly thank you for that great esteem which you
are pleased to put upon our poor Endeaours of the Parliaments Army under my
Command, far trancending our Merits and Services. As to those Ends which we
then declared for, I bless the Lord I acted Conscience, and I hope we were
found in the way of duty, and are resolved by the grace of God to adhere to
them, having found such wonderful blessings following us in these our just and
honest Undertakings.

As your prudent Counsels and courageous Actings, were the great means under
God of restoring this Parliament to its just and lawful Authority, so of the
safety and welfare of the Nations, for which I do for my Self and the rest of
the Officers here, return my very hearty thanks, and we shall have ever cause
to bless the Lord for this great mercy, in putting into your hearts such
righteous and honorable Resolutions, to appear at such a time, when our
Liberties and Properties, and all that is dear unto us, even the Ordinances of
our blessed Savior, were in such hazard.

Indeed, it was much in our hopes, that such a glorious City, that had redeemed
themselves from slavery at the price of so much blood and treasure, and had
been the great Instruments in the hand of God, for the carrying on the Work of
Reformation, and bringing three Nations out of the Captivity of Tyranny and
Arbitrary Government, could ever consent to such illegal and unjust
proceedings. As we do acknowledge your great activity in promoting those great
Ends which we lately represented to you, so we do heartily thank you for the
honor and encouragement, which you have been pleased in this your Letter to
give to the Parliaments Army here; for our selves, we having nothing to seek
(we bless the Lord) in all this Affair, but to endeavor the safety and
Settlement of these Nations in general, and of the famous City in particular.

We received your enclosed Declaration, and do cheerfully join with you
therein. And I do promise you for the Army under my Command, that they are
resolved (by the assistance of God) to stand by and maintain this present
Parliament, as it sat on October 11. from whom we received our Commissions;
and do hope, that you that have been so eminently Instrumental in their
restoring, will heartily concur with us therein; and shall to the utmost of our
power defend the freedom of successive Parliaments, and the Liberties Spiritual
and Civil of the People in these Nations, and shall encourage in our Stations,
the Godly and Learned Ministers, and shall continue faithful in this Good
Cause, that the Nations may be stablished in a Free Commonwealth, and the Army
kept in due obedience to the Civil Authority.

And as we have experienced the great affection of your City in such a day of
Darkness and great Trial, so we shall ever study to the utmost, to express our
services for you, and shall not think our lives too precious to hazard for your
welfare. I think to wait upon you shortly, and shall reserve those further
acknowledgments to that opportunity, and remain,

Your Lordships very humble Servant, George Monck.
New Castle Jan. 6. 1659.
A LETTER SENT FROM General Monck; SUPERSCRIBED, To the Right Honorable
William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the Right Honorable the Parliament of
ENGLAND.
To be communicated to the rest of the Members of Parliament at London.
Right Honorable,
I Received yours of the 22 d. instant, and desire to return to our good God
hearty thanks, that he has been pleased to own and appear for his People in
such glorious instances of Mercy and Deliverance. I bless the Lord, I never
doubted of his presence and success in this undertaking, being so righteous a
Cause; and had long since put it to Gods determination, but upon advertisements
from Friends in England, That if I could continue here without engaging till
the first of January, the work would be done without blood. I cannot but admire
upon what Intelligence you should be persuaded of a second Treaty: Indeed I was
enforced to make use of such an Overture, to remove the Commissioners from
London, whom I cannot but blame for receding from their Instructions; but I
hope they will give you a satisfactory account of their proceedings. Yet I
acknowledge that I could not but resent their carriage, having secured one of
them for betraying the private instructions; of which I doubt not but you have
been fully informed.

My last Answer to the Lord Lambert, who sent several Messengers to invite me
to a second Treaty, was, That I could not treat without authority from the
Commissioners for the Government of the Army, and to that end desired a Pass
for the same Messengers to go to Portsmouth to receive their Commands and
Instructions; who was returned back with this Answer from Lambert and the
Council of Officers, That they could not consent thereunto: and since that, I
have not heard from them.

I have your Army (I bless God) upon the River Tweed, within three hours ready
to be drawn together, and they are very cheerful and unanimous, willing to
endure any hardship for your Service.

The last night Capt. Campbelt came express from Ireland, giving a full account
of their affection to the Parliament, and of the late Transactions there; That
they had seized Dublin Castle, and secured Jones and others, with a Declaration
to stand by and own your Authority: for which (on this instant) we kept a day
of Thansgiving. They writ also to the Irish Brigade in England, which I
dispatched to them. Six Hardress Waller gives me an Account, that all the
Forces and Garrisons in Ireland had Declared for you.

This is such a mercy, that I hope the Lord will make us sensible of, and
careful to improve. They required my opinion as to managing of the Affairs of
the Army, which in such an urgent necessity I presumed to give. I have disposed
of most of the vacant Commands in Scotland to very honest men, who are ready to
dye for your Service, or to disband at your Command. And before your Letter
came to hand, I had disposed of Col. Saunders and Major Bartons Commands the
Lord Lamberts Forces pressing upon me. I could not leave my vacant Places
unsupplied; but I know that (this Work prospering) you will have opportunity
enough to gratify them: Capt. Izods place is reserved for him according to
your pleasure. I humbly thank the Members of the Council for that Great Honor
that they were pleased to conferr upon me, and hope you never shall find but
such an absolute obedience from me to your Commands, that I shall be more ready
to return that Commission then to receive it. I believe that you never doubted
of my persevering in those good Principles I declared for, and that I should
comfortably (if the Lord had pleased to frown upon us) have suffered in this
most Righteous undertaking. I have made ready to March, but am unwilling to
hazard your Justice and Authority upon a Fight, when it may be done with more
security. I shall attend your further Command, and desire the Lord to bless
your Forces and Counsels, and to restore you in your just Authority; which is
both the Prayer and endeavor of

Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant GEORGE MONCK.
Caldstream, 29. December, 1659. POSTSCRIPT.
I thought fit to acquaint you, That my Lord Warreston has endeavored to stir
up the People of this Nation as much as he could against your Interest. Col.
Lyscot having been very faithful and active for the Parliament in this
Undertaking, I entreat your Lordships to be mindful of him for a Regiment of
Horse. I have given him the Command of a Foot-Regiment, but he was always of
Horse, and is a very honest and stout Gentleman, and fit to Command a Regiment
of Horse. I have sent your Lordships the Copies of my last Letters, and of the
Officers here, to my Lord Lambert, and the Officers of Nen castle; and also to
the Commissioners of Parliament at Portsmouth, that you may be acquainted with
our Transactions. Major Knight has Col. Saunders Regiment, and Capt. Prime is
Major.

I entreat you to Communicate this to the rest of the worthy Members of
Parliament with you.

GEORGE MONCK.



A LETTER Sent by His EXCELLENCY The LORD General Monck, To the CONGREGATED
CHURCHES In and about LONDON.
Honored and dear Friends,
I Received Yours; and am very sensible of your Kindness; which you have
expressed to the Army in Scotland, in sending down such Honorable and Reverend
Persons, so long and tedious a Journey, whom we have received with thankfulness
and great joy, as your Messengers of the Churches, and Ministers of Christ; and
have taken notice of this Office of L ve, and of your care of these three
Nations. I do promise for my Trust, and the rest of the Officers here, That
your Intrest, Liberty, and Encouragement, shall be very dear to us; and we
shall cake this as a renewed Obligation; to Assert to the uttermost, what we
have already Declared for the Churches of Jesus Christ. I doubt not, but you
have received Satisfaction of our Inclination to a peace^b^e Accommodation, and
do hope that some Difficulties being united, we shall obtain a fair Composure.

I do assure you, that the great things which have been upon my heart to secure
and provide for, are our Liberties and Freedoms, as we ^re the Subjects and
Servants of Jesus Christ, which are Conveyed to us in the Covenant of Grace,
assured in the Promises, purchased for us by the Blood of our Savior, and
given as his great Legacy to his Churches and People; in comparison of what, we
esteem all other things as Dung and Dross, but as they have relation to, and
dependence upon this most noble end: The other are our Laws and Rights as Men,
which must have their esteem in the second place, and for which many Members of
the Churches has been eminent Instruments, to labor in sweat and Blood for
these Eighteen Years last past, and our Ancestors many hundred Years before;
the substance of which may be reduced to Parliamentary Government; and the
People consenting to the Laws by which they are to be Governed, that this
privilege of your Nations, may be so bounded, That the Churches may have both
Security and Encouragement, is my great desire, and of those with me.

So that I hope you will own these just things, and give us that Assistance,
which becomes the Churches of Christ, in pursuance of this Work; And we do
assure you, that we shall comply as far as possible, with respect had to your
Security, and Safety of these Nations, and the preservation of our Ancient
Birthrights, and Liberties; and we shall pray that we may be kept from going
out of Gods way, under pretense of doing Gods Work.

I do in the Name of the whole Army, and for my self, give you all our
affectionate thanks for this your Work of Love, and though we are not able to
make such Returns, as are in our hearts and desires to do; yet we shall
endeavor by all means and ways, to express our Care and Love to the Churches;
and shall leave the Reward to him, who is the God of Peace and Truth, in
special assured a Blessing to the Peacemakers: And conclude with the words of
David, 1 Samuel 25. 32. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and blessed be your
Advice, and blessed be you all. Now the Lord be a Wall of Fire ronnd about you,
and let his presence be in his Churches, and they filled with his Glory.

I have no more, but to entreat your Prayers for an happy Issue to these
unhappy Differences; Which is the Prayer of him, who is,

Reverend Sirs, and dear Friends, Your very Affectionate Friend and Servant,
GEORGE MONCK.
Edinburgh, Nov. 23. 1659.
For my Reverend Friends, Dr. Owen, Mr. Hook, Mr. Greenhil; to be Communicated
to the Churches in and about London.
THE Lord General Monck HIS SPEECH Delivered by him in the PARLIAMENT On
Monday, Feb. 6. 1659.
Mr. Speaker;
AMongst the many mercies of God to these poor Nations, your peaceable
Restoration is not the least: it is his work alone, and to him belongs the
glory of it: and I esteem it as a great effect of his goodness to me, that he
was pleased to make me amongst many worthier in your service, some way
instrumental in it. I did nothing but my duty, and do not deserve to receive so
great honor and respect as you are pleased to give me at this time, and place;
which I shall ever acknowledge as an high mark of your favor to me. Sir, I
shall not now trouble you with large Narratives, only give me leave to
acquaint you, that as I marched from Scotland hither, I observed the people in
most Counties in great and earnest Expectations of Settlement; and they made
several Applications to me, with numerous subscriptions: the chiefest Heads of
their desires, were, for a free and full Parliament, and that you would
determine your sitting; A Gospel Ministry, Encouragement of Learning and
Universities, And for admittance of the Members secluded before 1648. without
any previous Oath or Engagement.

To which I commonly answered, That you are now in a free Parliament; and if
there be any force remaining upon you, I would endeavor to remove it; and that
you had voted to fill up your House, and then you would be a full Parliament
also; and that you had already determined your sitting: and for the Ministry,
their Maintenance, the Laws and Universities, you had largely declared in your
last Declaration; and I was confident you would adhere to it: but as for those
Gentlemen secluded in the year 1648.

I told them you had given Judgment in it; and all people ought to acquiesce in
that Judgment: but to admit any Members to sit in Parliament without a previous
Oath or Engagement to secure the Government in being, it was never yet done in
England.

And although I said it not then, I must say with pardon to you, That the less
Oaths and Engagements are imposed, (with respect had to the security of the
Common Cause) your Settlement will be the sooner attained to.

I am the more particular in these matters, to let you see how grateful your
present Consultations about these things, will be to the people.

I know all the sober Gentry will heartily close with you, if they may be
tenderly and gently used; and I am sure you will so use them, as knowing it to
be our common Concern, to expatiate, and not narrow our interest; and to be
careful neither the Cavalier nor Phanatique party have yet a share in your
Civil or Military Power; of the last of whose impatience to Government, you
have had so severe experience.

I should say something of Ireland and Scoland: Indeed Ireland is in an ill
condition, and made worse by your sudden Interruption, which pretended the
passing an Act for the settlement of the Estates of Adventures and Soldiers
there, which I heard you intended to have done in a few days; and I presume it
will be quickly done, being so necessary at this time; when the wants of the
Commonwealth call for supplies, and people will unwillingly pay Taxes for
those Estates of which they have no legal assurance.

I need not tell you how much your favor was abused in the Nomination of your
Officers of your Army there; their Malice has been sufficiently manifested: I
dare affirm that those now that have declared for you, will continue faithful,
and thereby evince that as well there, as here, it is the sober interest that
must establish your Dominion.

As for Scotland, I must say the people of that Nation deserve much to be
cherished; and I believe your late Declaration will much glad their spirits;
for nothing was more dreadful to them, then a fear to be overrun with
Phanatique Notions.

I humbly recommend them to your Affection and Esteem, and desire the intended
Act of Union may be prosecuted, and their Takes made proportionable to those in
England, for which I am engaged by promise to be an humble Suitor to you.

And truly, Sir, I must ask leave to entreat you to make a speedy provision for
their Civil Government, of which they have been destitute near a year, to the
ruin of many Families: and except Commissioners for management of the
Government, and Judges to sit in Courts of Judicature, be spedily appointed,
that Coutry will be very miserable.

I directed Mr. Gumble lately to present to you some Names, both of
Commissioners and Judges: but by reason of your great Affairs, he was not
required to deliver them in writing to you; but I now humbly present them to
your Consideration.

A LETTER OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Genesis Monck, TO The Speaker of the
Parliament from Guild Hall, London.
Right Honorable,
IN obedience to the Commands received from the Council last night, I marched
with your Forces into the City this morning, and have secured all the persons
except two, ordered to be secured, which two were not to be found: The Posts
and Chains I have given order to be taken away, but have hitherto forborne the
taking down of the Gates and Portcullises, because it will in all likelihood
exasperate the City; and I have good ground of hopes from them that they will
levy the Assess; They desiring only first to meet in Common Council, which
they intend to do to morrow morning. It seems probable to me, that they will
yield obedience to your Commands, and be brought to a friendly compliance with
You; for which reason I have suspended the execution of Your commands touching
the Gates and Portcullises, till I know Your further pleasure therein, which I
desire I may by this Bearer: I shall only desire that (so Your commands may be
answered with due obedience) such tenderness may be used toward them, as may
gain their affections: They desired the Restoration of those Members of their
Common Council that are secured; which desires of theirs I shall only commend
to Your grave consideration, to do therein as You shall think most expedient;
and, in attendance upon Your further commands, Remain

Your most humble and obedient Servant. GEORGE MONCK.
Guild Hall, Feb. 9. 1659. To the Right Honorable William Lenthal, Speaker to
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England at Westminster.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Shall become an humble Suitor to You, That You will be pleased to hasten
Your Qualifications, that the Writs may be sent out; I can assure You it will
tend much to the Peace of the Country, and satisfy many honest Men.

Thursday Afternoon, Feb. 9.
THis Letter from General George Monck from Guild Hall, London, of the 9th of
February, 1659. was read.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,

That the Answer to this Letter be, to send General Monck the Resolve of the
Parliament, That the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullises thereof
be forthwith destroyed; And that he be Ordered to put the said Vote in
Execution accordingly, and that Mr. Scot and Mr. Pury do go to General Monck
and acquaint Him with these Votes.

Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk to the Parliament.

Thursday, February 9. 1659.
Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,

THat the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullises thereof be
forthwith destroyed; and that the Commissioners for the Army do take Order that
the same be done accordingly.

Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk to the Parliament.

A LETTER FROM His Excellency THE LORD General Monck, AND The Officers under
His Command, to the Parliament; In the Name of themselves, and the Soldiers
under them: Dated the 11. of February, 1659. With the Parliaments ANSWER
thereunto.
Mr. Speaker,
WE cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge the wonderful goodness of God to
You, in Your return to the discharge of Your remaining Trust; and Your Forces
under our commands (after some difficulties) in bringing of Us by a tedious
March in such safety to this place, to wait upon You in asserting the Freedoms
of our Native Country: and being here (as we have to our utmost Hazard and
Power been instrumental in your return) so we shall be still ready to pursue
your Commands so far as possibly we may.

To evidence which, we have observed and executed your late Orders in relation
to the Chains, Posts, and Gates of the City: which was some hing grievous to
us, and to the Officers and Soldiers under out Commands; and that because we
do not remember any such thing that was acted upon this City in all these Wars;
and we fear that many sober people are much grieved at it and apprehend farther
force to be offered to them, while they seem principally to desire the speedy
filling up of the House, which you have declared for, as well as we have
expressed our just desires of: and are apt to doubt, left what we have done may
be so far from answering the expected end, as that it may increase the
discomposure of men's spirits in the Nation.

Upon this occasion, it comes fresh into our minds, that when by the treachery
of some Officers of the Army you were interrupted: we declared to the world,
That the ground of our undertaking was not only your return to your Trust, but
also the Vindication of the Liberties of the People, and the preservation of
the Right of our Country, the protection and encouragement of the godly and
faithful therein, as the establishment of the Peace of these Nations. Which
declarations ma^e before the Lord, Angels, and men, in the day of our
extremity, we (as we expect the blessing of the Lord upon our future
undertakings) cannot but still own, and stand by.

We find that the asserting of the just Liberties of the people, is that which
the generality of the Nation is much in expectation of; and that many sober
people (together with our selves) are under fears, left this great price that
God has put into your and our hands, (as your Servants) should not be
improved, but that we shall run in confusion again.

Therefore we humbly crave leave to present before you some grounds of our
fears: we are afraid that the late wonderful and unparalleled deliverance,
is not so publicly and solemnly acknowledged as it might be, that the Lord
(who wrought so stupendiously) may have the glory of all: we are troubled that
some as yet do sit in the House, who are impeached of Treason: we cannot but
observe that diverse Members of your House, (who contrary to their trust, acted
in that Illegal and Tirannical Committee of Safety) are not actually disabled
from sitting there: Notwithstanding Colonel Lambert has only the Vote of
Indemnity to secure him from as high Crimes as have been Committed in this
Nation, and is not obedient to your Orders, yet he seems to be winked at.

We understand that Sir. Henry Vane upon bare pretense is permitted to stay
about the City, to the great dissatisfaction of your best Friends; that there
are dangerous Consultations, and that of those who had a chief hand in your
late Interruption, and the hazzarding of the whole Nations, contrary to our
expectation.

We find continued in the Army some persons of dangerous Principles, and such
who were active enough in the late Defection.

Though we are far from wishing the ruin of any, yet we could desire that your
signal Indulgence to late Notorious Offenders, did meet with that Candid
Reception from them, as to be so much the more ingenuous in their professed.
Repentance: but we observe that many of them do seek to justify themselves,
and are not without their Agents in print to palliate their foul Enormities;
which makes us yet to suspect that we are in some danger of returning into the
late distempers that you and the Nation are but newly delivered from.

We are not ignorant, that there are those who lately struck at the Root of
English Parliaments in practice and Design, thereby have inflamed the Nation,
and given great advantage to the Common Enemy, yet they are not without a
strange confidence to precipitate men into a belief, that they are not only
Persons against the one, and for the other.

With grief of heart we do remember and would lament over the too palpable
breach of Engagements in this Nation; Therefore we should think it a duty
rather to mourn over the same, then to promote any new Oath to be taken at this
time: Yet we perceive that there is a design to provoke the Parliament to
enforce an Oath upon the Nation, and to take notice, that amongst others there
are some who are most forward to promote the said design, who have made the
least (if any) conscience in keeping Engagements already taken.

Here we must not silence our deep resentment of a bold Petition, and of
dangerous consequence, which was lately presented to you, the consequence
whereof (if you should answer their desires) would be to exclude many of the
most conscientious and sober sort of men from serving under you in Civil and
Military employments, who have and would prove themselves most faithful, and a
door would be opened in design to retrive the Interest of those who have (by
the just hand of our gracious God) made themselves so apparently obnoxious.

Moreover (which is not the least part of the venom of that Petition) we
clearly see the same spirit which of late would have pulled away the
by-you-declared-just maintenance from Ministers, would now provoke you by an
Oath to endanger the forcing away of many of the most godly from their
maintenance.

In urging our fears from the premises that concerns some of different
principles from us, we would not be thought to (as we do not) design any thing
that may incur the censure of unjust rigidity.

We freely profess our desires* that tenderness of conscience may have its full
just liberty, but we cannot in judgment account* that tenderness of conscience
which will not scruple at treachery it self, or any unrighteousness to carrey
on corrupt designs.

Having presented you with our fears, we shall add our Resolutions, that by
the help of God we shall stand by you in the pursuance of what we have declared
for; And therefore do make this humble request to you: we could desire, that
whilst you sit, your utmost endeavors may be to manifest your affectionate
desires for the public good of these Nations; Our further desire is, that
those Regiments underyour consideration (whose Officers are not) may be spedily
passed.

And in regard we find that the grand cause of the present heats and
dissatisfactions in the Nation is, because they are not fully represented in
Parliament, and seeing no other probable Expedient whereby to keep the Nation
in peace, then by filling up your Number; we must therefore make this our main
desire, upon which we cannot but insist, that you would proceed to issue forth
Writts in order to Elections: for the better effecting whereof we entreat, that
you would conclude upon due and full Qualifications, that not only those who
have been actually in Arms against the Parliament may be excluded, but also
such who in the late Wars betwixt King and Parliament, have declared their
dis-affection to the Parliament: And because the distracted condition of this
Nation is at this hour so evident and pressing, we are constrained for the just
maintenance of your Authority, and the satisfaction of all true English men,
earnestly to desire, that all the Writs may be issued forth by Friday next,
returnable at the usual and legal time; For we think it convenient to
acquaint you, that to pacific the minds of this great City, in the prosecution
of your late Command, the chief of us did give an assurance thereof.

And we must not forget to remember you, that the time hastens wherein you have
declared your intended Dissolution; which the people and our selves desire you
would be punctual in.

Hereby the Suspicion of your Perpetuation will be taken away, and the people
will have assurance that they shall have a Succession of Parliaments of their
own Election; which is the undoubted Right of the English Nation.

You have promised and declared no less: both the people and your Armies do
live in the hope and expectation of it.

That we may the better wait for your full and free Concurrence to these just
desires on the Nations behalf: upon Mature deliberation we have thought it our
duty as to continue the usual Guards for the safety of your fitting, so for the
present to draw the rest of the Forces under Command into the City, that we may
have the better opportunity to compofe spirits and beget a good understanding
in that great City, formerly renowned for their resolute adhering to
Parliamentary Authority, and we hope that the same spirit will be found still
to breath amongst the best, most considerable and interessed persons there.

This Action of ours, as we hope it will receive your favorable
interpretation, so we do believe it will (through the blessing of God) be of
good use for the present peace, and future settlement of these Nations.

These are our thoughts which we communicate to you, in the Names of our
selves, and the Officers and Soldiers under our Commands, we are

Your Honors most Humble Servants, GEORGE MONCK Colonels.
Tho. Randers. Leon. Litcot. Io. Clobery. Io. Hublethorne. Tho. Read. Ra.
Knight, Dan. Redman.
Ethelbert Morgan, Lieut. Col. Nathaniel Barton, Major. Majors.
Tho. Johnson. Ier. Smith. Tho. Pryme. Fra. Nichols. Pet. Banister.


White Hall Feb. 11. 1659. Saturday, Feb. 11.
UPon the reading of the Letter the House Resolved, That the thanks of this
House be given unto General Monck for his faithful service in securing the
City, and that as to filling up of the House, the Parliament were upon the
Qualifications before the receipt of the said Letter: and the same will be
dispatched in due time.



THE SPEECH AND DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK,
Delivered at Whitehall upon Tuesday the 21 February, 1659.
Ordered by his Excellency the Lord General, that this Speech and Declaration
be forthwith printed and published.

William Clarck, Secretary.

GENTLEMEN,
YOu are not I hope, ignorant, what Care and Endeavors have been used, and
Means essayed, for healing the broaches of our Divisions amongst our selves,
and that in order thereunto diverse Conferences have been procured between you,
though to small effect; yet having at length received fuller satisfaction from
these worthy Gentlemen that were secluded then formerly; I was bold to put you
all to the trouble of this meeting, that I might open my self to you all even
with more freedom then formerly: but least I might be mis-apprehended or
mistaken, as of late it besell me, I have committed to writing the Heads of
what I intended to discourse to you, and desire it may be read openly to you
all.

THE DECLARATION OF His Excellency THE LORD General Monck.
Delivered at White Hall upon Tuesday the 21 of Feb. 1659.
GENTLEMEN,
IT appears unto me, by what I have heard from you and the whole Nation, that
the Peace and happy Settlement of these bleeding Nations, next under God, lies
in your hands.

And when I consider that Wisdom, Piety, and Self denial, which I have reason
to be confident, lodges in you, and how great a share of the Nations
sufferings will fall upon you, in case the Lord deny us now a Settlement, I am
in very good hopes there will be found in you all, such melting bowels toward
these poor Nations, and toward one another, that yon will become healers and
makers up of all its woeful breaches. And that such an opportunity may clearly
appear to be in your hands, I thought good to assure you, and that in the
presence of God, that I have nothing before my eyes but Gods glory, and the
settlement of these Nations, upon Commonwealth Foundations. In pursuit whereof
I shall think nothing to dear; And for my own particular I shall throw my self
down at your feet, to be any thing or nothing in order to these great Ends. As
to the way of future Settlement, far be it from me to impose any thing, I
desire you may be in perfect Freedom; Only give me leave to mind you, That the
old Foundations are by Gods Providence so broken, that in the eye of Reason,
they cannot be restored, but upon the ruins of the People of these Nations,
that have engaged for their Rights in defense of the Parliament, and the great
and main ends of the Covenant for uaiting and making the Lords name One in the
three Nations: And also the Liberty of the Peoples Representatives in
Parliament will be certainly lost, For if the People find, that after so long
and bloody a war, against the King for break ng in upon their L^berties, yet at
last he must be taken in again, it will be out of question, and is most man
fest, he may for the future govern by his will, dispose of Parliaments, and
Parliament Men as he pleases, and yet the people will never more rise for
their assistance.

And as to the interests of this famous City (which has been in all ages the
Bulwork of Parliaments, and unto whom I am for their great affection so deeply
engaged) Certainly it must lie in a Commonwealth; That Government only, being
capable to make them (through the Lords blessing) the Metropolis and Bank of
Trade for all Christendom, whereunto God and Nature has fitted them above all
others.

And as to a Government in the Church, the want whereof has been no small
cause of these Nations distractions; It is most manifest, that if it be
Monarchical in the State, the Church must follow, and Prelacy must be brought
in, which these Nations I know cannot bear, and against which they have so
solemnly Sworn.

And indeed moderate not rigid Presbyterian Government, with a sufficient
Liberty for Consciences truly tender, appears at present to be the most
indifferent and acceptable way to the Churches Settlement.

The main thing that seems to lie in the way, is the interest of the Lords,
even of those Lords who have showed themselves noble indeed, by joining with
the people; and in defense of those just rights, have adventured their dearest
blood and large Estates. To that I shall only say, that though the state of
these Nations be such, as cannot bear their sitting in a distinct House, yet
certainly, the wisdom of Parliament will find out such Hereditary marks of
honor for them, as may make them more noble in after ages.

Gentlemen, upon the whole matter the best result that I can make at present
for the peace of these Nations will be in my opinion, that you forthwith sit
together in Parliament: In order,

1. To the settling the conduct of Armies of the three Nations in that manner,
as they may be serviceable to the peace and safty of them, and not to its own
and the Nations ruin, by Faction and Division.

2. To the providing sufficient Maintenance for them; That is for the Forces by
Land, and for the Navy by Sea, and all their Arrears of both, and other
contingencies of the Government.

3. To the appointing a Council of State with Authority to settle the Civil
Government and Judicatories in Scotland and Ireland, and to take care for the
issuing forth Writs, for the summoning of a Parliament of these three Nations
united, to meet at Westminster the 20. day of April next, with such
qualifications as may secure the Public Cause we are all engaged in, and
according to such Distributions as were used in the year, 1654. Which
Parliament, so called, may meet and act in freedom, for the more full
establishing of this Commonwealth, without a King, single Person, or House of
Lords.

4. To a Legal Dissolution of this Parliament to make way for succession of
Parliaments,

And in order to these good ends, the Guards will not only willingly admit
you, but faithfully both my self, and every the Officers under my command, and
(I believe) the O ficers and Soldiers of the three Nations will spend their
blood for you and successive Parliaments.

If your Conjunction be directed to this end, you may part honorably, having
made a fair step to the settlement of these Nations, by making a way for
successive Parliaments.

But I must needs say, that if any different Councels should be taken (which I
have no reason to fear:) these Nations would presently be thrown back into
force and violence, and all hopes of this much desired establishment buried in
disorder which the Lord in his great mercy I hope will prevent. And so God
speed you well together, and unite your hearts for the preservation of Peace
and settlement of these Nations to his own Glory and yours, and all our
Comforts.

A LETTER From His Excellency the Lord General MONCK, And the Officers under
his Command; to the Parliament, in the name of themselves and the Soldiers
under them.
Mr. Speaker,
WE cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge the wonderful Goodness of God to
you in your return to the Discharge of your remaining Trust; to our selves, and
your Forces under our Commands, (after some difficulties) in bringing of us, by
a tedious March, in such safty to this place, to wait upon you in asserting the
freedoms of our native Country: and being here (as we have to our utmost
hazard and power been instrumental in your Return, so) we shall be (...) ready
to pursue your Commands so far as possibly we may. To evidence which, we have
observed and executed your late Orders in relation to the Chains, Posts, and
Gates of the City, which was something grievous to Us, and to the Officers and
Soldiers under our Commands; and that because we do not remember any such
thing was acted upon this City in all these wars; and we fear that many sober
people are much grieved at it, and apprehend further force to be offered to
them, while they seem principally to desire the speedy filling up of the House,
which you have declared for, as well as we have expressed our just desires of, and
are apt to doubt, lest, what we have done may be so far from answering the
expected end, as that it may increase the discomposure of men's spirits in the
Nation. Upon this occasion, it comes fresh into our minds, that when by the
treachery of some Officers of the Army you were interrupted, we declared to the
world That the ground of our undertaking was not only your return to your
Trust, but also, the Vindication of the Liberties of the people, and the
Preservation of the Rights of our Country, and protection and encouragement of
the godly and faithful therein, as the establishment of the peace of these
Nations. Which Declarations made before the Lord, Angels and Men, in the day of
our extremity, we (as we expect the blessing of the Lord upon our future
undertakings*) cannot but still own, and stand by.

We find that the asserting of the just Liberties of the People, is that which
the generality of the Nation is much in expectation of; and that many sober
people (together with our selves) are under fears lest this great price that
God has put into your and our hands, (as your Servants) should not be
improved, but that we shall run in Confusion again. Therefore we humbly crave
leave to present before you some grounds of our fears: We are afraid that the
late wonderful and unparalleled Deliverance, is not so publicly and solemnly
acknowledged as it might be, that the Lord (who wrought so stupendiously) may
have the Glory of all: We are troubled that some as yet do sit in the House,
who are impeached of Treason: We cannot but observe that diverse Members of your
House, (who contrary to their Trust, acted in that illegal and Tyrannical
Committee of Safety) are not actually disabled from sitting there:
notwithstanding Colonel Lambert has only the Vote of Indemnity to secure him
from as high Crimes as have been committed in this Nation, and is not obedient
to your Orders, yet he seems to be winked at. We understand that Sir Henry
Vane upon bare pretense is permitted to stay about the City, to the great
dissatisfaction of your best Friends; That there are dangerous Consultations,
and that of those who had a chief hand in your late Interruption, and the
hazarding of the whole Nations, contrary to our expectation. We find continued
in the Army some Persons of dangerous Principles, and such who were active
enough in the late Defection. Though we are far from wishing the ruin of any,
yet we could desire that your signal indulgence to late notorious Offenders,
did meet with that candid reception from them, as to be so much the more
ingenuous in their professed repentance: But we observe that many of them do
seek to justify themselves, and are not without their Agents in print to
palliate their soul Enormities; which makes us yet to suspect that we are in
some danger of returning to the late distempers that You and the Nation are but
newly delivered from.

We are not ignorant, that there are those who lately struck at the Root of
English Parliaments in Practice and Design, thereby have inflamed the Nation,
and given great advantage to the Common Enemy, yet they are not without a
strange confidence to precipitate men into a belief, that they are the only
Persons against the one, and for the other. With grief of heart we do remember
and would lament over the too palpable Breach of Engagements in this Nation;
Therefore we should think it a duty rather to mourn over the same, then to
promote any new Oath to be taken at this time. Yet we perceive that there is a
design to provoke the Parliament to enforce an Oath upon the Nation, and do
take notice, that amongst others* there are some who are most forward to
promote the said defigne, who have made the least (if any) Conscience in
keeping Engagements already taken. Here we must not silence our first
resentment of a bold Petition, and of dangerous consequence, which was lately
presented to you, the consequence whereof (if you should answer their desires)
would be to exclude many of the most conscientious and sober sort of men from
serving under you in Civil and Military Employments, who have and will prove
themselves most faithful; and a Door would be opened in design to retrive the
Inter^st of those who have (by the just Hand of our Gracious God) made
themselves to apparently obnoxious. Moreover (which is not the least part of
the venom of that Petition) we clearly see the same spirit, which of late
would have pulled away the by you declared just Maintenance from Ministers,
would now provoke you by an Oath to endanger the forcing away of many of the
most Godly from their Maintenance. In urging our fears from the premises that
concerns some of different Principles from us, we would not be thought to (as
we do not) design any thing that may incur the censure of unjust rigidity. We
freely profess our desires, that tendern^sse of Conscience may have its full
just liberty, but we cannot in judgment count that tenderness of Conscience
which will not scruple at treachery it self, or any unrighteousness to carry
on corrupt designs.

Having presented You with our fears, we shall add our Resolution, That by the
help of God we shall stand by you in the pursuance of what we have declared
for: And therefore do make this humble request to You. We could desire, That
whilst you sit, your utmost endeavors may be to manifest your affectionate
desires for the Public Good of these Nations; Our further desires is, That
those Regiments under your consideration (whose Officers who are not) may be
speedily passed. And in regard we find that the Grand Cause of the present
Heats and Dis-satisfactions in the Nation is, because they are not fully
Represented in Parliament, and seeing no other probable expedient whereby to
keep the Nation in peace, then by filling up your number; We must therefore
make this our main desire, upon which we cannot but insi^t, that you would
proceed to Issue forth Writs in Order to Erections: For the better effecting
whereof we entreat, That you would conclude upon due and full Qualifications,
that not only those who have been actually in Arms against the Parliament may
be excluded* but also such who in the late Wars betwixt King and Parliament
have Declared their Disaffection to the Parliament: And because the distracted
condition of this N^tion is at this hour so evident and pressing, we are
constrained for the just maintenance of your Authority and the satisfaction of
all true Englishmen, earnestly to desire, That all the Writs may be issued
forth by Friday next, returnable at the usual and legal time, For we think it
convenient to acquaint you, that to pacific the minds of this great City, in
the prosecution of your late Commands, the Chief of Us did give an assurance
thereof.

And we must not forget to rememeber you, that the time hastens wherein you
have Declared your intended Dissolution, which the people and our selves desire
you would be punctual in. Hereby the Suspicion of your perpetuation will be
taken away, and the People will have assurance that they shall have a
Succession of Parliaments of their own Election; which is the undoubted Right
of the English Nation: you have promised and Declared no less: Both the People
and your Armies do live in the hope and expectation of it. That we may the
better wait for your full and free concurrence to these just Desires on the
Nations behalf, upon Mature Deliberation, we have thought it our duty as to
continue the usual Guards for the safety of your sitting, so for the present to
draw the rest of the Forces under our Command into the City, that we may have
the better opportunity to compose Spirits, and beget a good understanding in
that great City, formerly renowned for their resolute adhering to the
Parliamentary Authority, and we hope that the same Spirit will be found still
to breath amongst the best, most considerable and and interessed Persons there.
This Action of ours, as we hope it will receive your favorable interpretation,
so we do believe it will (through the blessing of God) be of good use for the
present Peace, acd future settlement of these Nations. These are our thoughts
which we communicate to you, in the Names of our selves, and the Officers and
Soulders under our Commands, We are,

Your Honors most Humble Servants GEORGE MONCK. Colonels.
Tho. Sanders. Leon Litcot. Jo. Clobery. Jo. Hubblethorne. Tho. Read. Ra.
Knight. Dan. Redman
Ethelbert Morgan, Lieut. Col. Nathaniel Barton, Major. Majors.
Tho Johnson. Jer. Smith. Phil. Pryme. Fra. Nichols. Peter Banister


White Hall, Feb. 11. 1659.
A LETTER From the Lord General MONCK, And the Officers here, to the several
and respective Regiments, and other Forces in England Scotland and Ireland.
Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers,
YOU cannot be ignorant of the many endeavors, and earnest Desires of many
good men in these Nations, to bring us to a Settlement; which it has pleased
God to dis-appoint unto this day, and leave us as a broken and divided people,
ready to run into Blood and confusion: which that we might prevent so great
Calamities impending, after our earnest seeking God for his Direction and
Assistance, we find no Expedient so likely, for the satisfaction of the good
People, and the quiet and welfare of this Common-W^^l^h, as the readmission of
the Secluded Members, in order to a Legal Dissolution of this Parliament by
their own free consents; and to issue Writs for a future Full Representative of
the whole Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, under such
Qualifications, as may secure our Cause, ^o convene on the twentieth of April
next at Westminster, for the establishing this Common Wealth upon the
foundations of Justice and true Freedom. And to take away all just Jealousies
from you, we do assure you, that we shall join with you in the maintenance That
was his Speech at the re-admitting the secluded Members.
of those ends, expressed in the enclosed (...) and do expect your cheerful
concurrence with us. And we desire to take God to witness, that we have no
inten ions or Purposes to return to our old Bondage: but since the Providence
of God has made us free at the cost of so much blood, we hope we shall never
be found so unfaithful to God and his People, as to lose so glorious a Cause.
But we do resolve with the Assistance of God, to adhere to you in the
continuing of our dear purchased Liberties both Spiritual and Civil. The reason
of o^r Proceedings in this manner may seem strange: but if you duly consider
the necessities of our Affairs, and the present state of things, you will
certainly conclude nothing so safe to secure Public Interest, and to engage
the Nations Peaceably to submit to a Free State; most of these Members having
given us full assurance, that their Session in Parliament shall not be longer
than absolute necessity will require, to the putting the Government into
Successive Parliaments; they not being free so to Act by the old Writs, as when
they shall be called upon a Commonwealth Account; and its the Opinion of the
truest Friends to a Free State, That it cannot be consistent with the perpetual
sitting of these Members, being contrary to the Nature of such a Government.

And as we are confident the present Parliament now sitting, will not Repeal
any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this Parliament, for Sales of Public
Disposition of Lands; so we shall in our Station observe, and cause to be
observed, all other Acts and Ordinances of this Parliament whatsoever; and
humbly interpose with the next succeeding Parliament, not only to pass a
further Act of Confirmation of all such Sales and Dispositions of Lands, here
and in Scotland but also of all the Distributions and Dispositions of Lands and
Houses in Ireland, to the Soldiery, Adventurers, or any other Persons, made by
or in pursuance of any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this present
Parliament, or any pretended Parliamentary Authority. And we entreat You to
send up an Officer, to give to the Lord General Monck an Account of Your
Acquiescence with Us herein. And if any disaffected Persons shall hereby take
occasion to make disturbance of the Peace of the Common Wealth either in favor
of CHARLES STUART, or any other pretended Authority, We desire you to secure
them, till the pleasure of the Parliament or Council of State be known in that
behalf: you shall speedly receive Encouragement and supplies of Moneys: and
indeed, it was not the least Motive to induce us to this way of Composure of
Affairs, that we might facilitate the raising of Moneys for the subsistence of
the Army and Navy; which would not otherwise have been done (if at all) but
with effusion of Blood. We have nothing more at this time, but to assure you
that we shall ever remain,

Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers, Your very Affectionte Friends, GEORGE
MONCK. Cols
R. Knight John Clobery Tho. Read Jo. Hubblethorne Leonard Litcot Tho. Sanders
William Air Rich. Moss William Farley Arthur Evelin John Streater
Jo. Butler. Quart. Ma. Genesis L. Cols
Ethelbert Morgan James Mutlow James Emerson Joseph Witter Dennis Pepper.
Majs.
James Dennis Rich Wagstaff Th. Johnson Fra. Nichols Jer. Smith Nath. Barton
Tho. Higgs John Clark
Capts.
W. Goodwin Hen. Ogle


White Hall Feb. 21. 1659.

