OBSERVATIONS UPON Military and Political AFFAIRS.

Written by the MOST HONORABLE GEORGE Duke of Albemarle, etc.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for Henry Mortlocke, at the White-Hart in
Westminster Hall, and James Collins, at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street, 1671.

TO THE MOST SACRED MAJESTY OF Charles the II. By the Grace of God King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
THIS Book humbly addresseth it self unto Your Royal Patronage, upon Account
both of the Work, and the Author. Mines of Gold and Silver bear a Value, which
appropriates them to the Crown, wheresoever they be found. Here is a Treatise
of Warfare and State Policy, brought Ex umbra in Solemn; and bearing a special
reference to your Sovereign Majesty, from whom both the Sword, and the Gown
derive their lawful Power and Authority.

The great Instrument of Your Majesty's MOST MEMORABLE RESTORATION fitly
appears Author of this (...). Wherein he has left his Important
Observations, for preparing others after him to serve Your Majesty Domi
Militiaeque.

Singular Success following long Exercise in Martial Offices Advanced this
Person: That it may reasonably be doubted of him, Fortiorne an felicior esset.
Valor and Sufferance he is pleased to call the two Chief Parts of a Soldier.
Both these signally concurring in himself, were wrought up at length to that
just Composition, Imperator bonus, idemque robustus miles. Neither may I omit,
that in fighting he came nearest the way of the Ancient Romans, Presso gradu,
ac stabili pugna cominus rem gerere.

And when he had leisure from Arms, his Pen was busied in Compiling this
Platform of Military Conduct, being a Collection of his Reading and Experience
together. It was written five and twenty years since, and sent from the Author
then Prisoner in the Tower, unto the Lord Viscount Lisle. So that it will admit
almost the same Epilogue, that Ammianus Marcellinus makes to his History, Haec
ut miles quondam -- Pro virium explicavi mensura, etc.

After the Duke of Albemarle's Decease, I had the Honor to be Publisher of his
Manuscript, conferred upon me by the Favor of my Lord Lisle. In whose hands it
has been faithfully preserved, as a true Picture of the Author drawn by
himself: whereof let me only say, Ex pede Herculem. And so I leave him Inter
Ingentes Bellorum Animas.

God Almighty multiply his Manifold Blessings upon Your Majesty's Royal Person,
Family, and Government, unto the attaining of all Happiness; which is the
fervent Prayer of

Your Sacred Majesty's Most Humble, Loyal, and Obedient Subject, JOHN HEATH.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. Line 15. dele the, p. 28. l. 2. for sl. r. slit, p. 33. l. 4. r. set
down, p. 48. l. 5. r. Carthrages, p. 69. l. ^. dele Knight. Knight. ^. 114. l. 3. for
possessed r. passed, p. 116. and 117. for Circumvolation r. Circumvallation,
toties quoties. p. 127. l. 27. after with them, make a period.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Military and Political AFFAIRS.
CHAP. I. Some Observations concerning a Soldiers Profession and his Duty.
THE Profession of a Soldier is allowed to be lawful by the Word of God; and
so Famous and Honorable amongst Men, that Emperors and Kings do account it a
great honor to be of the Profession, and to have experience in it; and next
under God, the Profession of a Soldier does rule or over rule the greatest
part of the World. He that chooses the Profession of a Soldier, ought to know
withal, Honor must be his greatest wages, and his Enemy his surest Paymaster.

There are two things that cause men to be desirous of this Profession; the
first is, Emulation of Honor; the next is, the hopes they have by License to
do Evil. As the aims of the first are Virtuous, so will they do good service:
the other by strict Discipline, may be brought to do good Service, and to be
obedient Soldiers; but if that Discipline be neglected, then they prove the
ruin of an Army.

Let a Soldiers Resolution be never so great, and his Courage invincible in
the day of Battle, yet if he faint under the burden of such tediousness as
usually attends upon warlike designments, he is no way fit for enterprise:
because the two chief parts of a Soldier are Valor and Sufferance; and there
is as much Honor gained by suffering Wants patiently in the War, as by
fighting Valiantly; and as great Achievements effected by the one, as by the
other. It is no virtue, but a weakness of the mind, not to be able to endure
want a little while: and yet it is an easier matter to find men that will offer
themselves willingly to Death, than such as will endure Labor with patience.

The greatest virtue which is required in a Soldier is Obedience, as a thing
wherein the force of all Discipline consists.

A Soldier must be always ready to confront extremity of Danger, with
extremity of Valor, and overtop fury with an higher resolution.

A Soldier should always respect courses of Honor, and the Public good,
above his own safety: and ought to fear nothing but God and Dishonor. Let
every Soldier arm his mind with hopes, and put on Courage: whatsoever disaster
falls, let not his heart sink. The passage of Providence lies through many
crooked ways. A despairing heart, is the true Prophet of approaching evil.

CHAP. II. Some Observations upon War, which is the Profession of a Soldier.
PEace, Fullness, Pride, and War, are the four Fellies, which being let into one
another; make the Wheel, that the Times turn on; and after a long Scene of
Peace, War ever enters the Stage.

The causes of all Wars may be reduced to six heads; Ambition, Avarice,
Religion, Revenge, Providence, and Desence.

War, the Profession of a Soldier, is that of all others, which as it
conferreth most Honor upon a man who therein acquitteth himself well; so it
draws the greatest infamy upon him who demeaneth himself ill. For one fault
committed can never be repaired, and one hour causes the loss of that
reputation, which has been thirty years acquiring.

In matter of War, there is such a medly, and interlacing of material
circumstances with the body of the action, that commonly one business begets
another. No Science, or Faculty whatsoever in multitude of parts may any way be
comparable to the Art Military; wherein every small, and unrespected
circumstance quite alters the nature of the Action, and amongst the variable
events of War, many unexpected occasions arise, which give present Victory to
him that is ready to take it: and many strange chances so alter the course of
things, that no foresight can discern what may happen.

War begins when one party lists, but it ends when the adverse party
pleases.

War is in the same nature with Offenses, Necesse est ut veniant, they must be,
but they are mightily in fault that cause them.

Yet in those Wars whose ends are to defend your own Possessions, or to recover
them being lost, or where Necessity strikes up her hard Alarms, or wronged
Religion beats her zealous Marches, go on and prosper.

CHAP. III. Some Observations of an Offensive War, and Conquering of Countries.
AN Offensive War will keep you from Civil War at home, and make you feared of
your Enemies, and beloved of your Friends, and keeps your Gentry, and Commons
from laziness, and all sorts of Luxury. But here you must note, to entertain a
Foreign War, is not good to be observed, but by such Kingdoms and States that
are able to go thorough with their Designs they undertake. Because as a Foreign
War is necessary for Rich and Potent Kingdoms and States; so it is hurtful to
Petty Kingdoms and States: for being too weak to gain by it, they will in the
end, but lose their design, their Honors, and Moneys, and impoverish
themselves, and increase their Enemies. It is not for Kings and States to
undertake a troublesome and dangerous War upon an humor, or any other slender
motion: but diligently weighing the circumstances thereof, and measuring the
peril and hazard with the good consequents, to inform their Judgments of the
Action, and so try whether the Benefit would answer their Labor. They ought
likewise to be well informed of the greatness and riches of the Country, the
quality and strength of the People, their use of War, and the opportunity of
their Havens. And he that makes an Offensive War, must so proceed therewith,
that he be sure to keep what he gets, and to enrich, not impoverish his own
Country. For he that does increase his Dominions, and yet grows not in
Strength, must needs go to wrack. Now those grow not strong who grow poor in
the Wars, although they prove Victorious: because their Conquests do cost them
more than they get by them. This error many run into by not knowing how to
limit their hopes; and so grounded on their own vast conceits, without weighing
their strength, they are utterly ruined. For Conquests, not having Power
answerable to their Greatness, invite new Conquerours to the ruin of the old.

That Prince who puts himself upon an Offensive War, ought to be Master of
his Enemy in Shiping, Purse, and Men; or at least in Shipping and Purse: or
else he must see some Garboils in the State which he assaileth. And he ought to
be called thither by a party; otherwise it would be a rash Enterprise.

If you make any attempt upon any Foreign Country, the first thing you ought to
do, is to take some Sea. Town that has a convenient Harbor, and that lies
nearest the greatest City in that Country, in which you make your War. This
Town you ought to secure and harbor very well with good works: and take care
that it be very well Victualled, before you advance further into the Country
with your Army. So this Town will serve to keep your Provisions for your
Magazines: and being well provided of Victual, will serve upon occasion to make
good your retreat. For having once gotten possession of a Sea. Town, and having
well Fortified and Victualled the same, you have one foot on Land, and the
other on Sea.

Having fortified a place for your Magazine, and your Retreat, advance with
your Army unto the chief City in the Country. By which means you will soon
force your Enemy to Battle; and if you win the Battle, and follow your Victory
close, you may gain the chief City of the Country, either by Composition, or
Assault, if it be not Fortified; or before your Enemy be able to relieve it,
you may be able to starve it. But in case you do not prevail to be Master of
the chief City, either by Composition, or Assault; then ought you strongly to
entrench two thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse in a Quarter: and so
Fortifying one Quarter after another with your Army, until you have entrenched
so many several Quarters, as you think may be sufficient to keep the City from
Provisions. And then, if you think fit, you may run Lines from one Quarter to
another. And having strongly Entrenched that part of your Army that is
quartered about the City, draw the rest of your Army into a Body, and entrench
them in some place near the Town, where you think it most convenient to meet
with any Enemy, that may come to the relief of it. You ought likewise to use
the best means you can for intelligence, and continually to send out Parties of
Horse several ways, that when any Enemy approaches near you, you may be in a
readiness to fight with him. If you come to be Master of the Chief City of a
Kingdom, or Country, I account that Kingdom, or Country more then half won.

The surest way to keep that Country you Conquer in Obedience to you, will be
to oppress them as little as may be (especially at first) either in their
Purses, Consciences, or Laws. He that obtains a Kingdom with the Rupture of
his Faith, has gained the Glory of a Conquest, but lost the Honor of a
Conqueror. But you ought to disarm them, and take Pledges of them for their
Obedience, the which must be kept in your own Country. You ought also to employ
in your Garrisons all the Gun-Smiths, and all the Salt-petre-men that you find
in the Country you have Conquered; and to take into your hands all the Powder
and Brimstone you find; and destroy all the Powder-Mills that are out of your
own Garrisons.

When it shall happen that you are to Conquer a Country that does afford
Covert, and Protection to an Enemy, who is more malicious than valorous, and
through the fastness of the place refuses to show himself, unless it be upon
advantages; the War doubtless is likely to prove tedious, and the Victory less
Honorable. In such cases there is no other way, than so to harrass and waste
the Country, that the Enemy may be famished out of his Holds, and brought to
subjection by scarcity, and necessity: which is a means so powerful as well to
supplant the greatest strengths, as to meet with Subterfuges and Delays, that
of it self it subdueth all opposition, and needs no other help for atchieving
of Victory.

It is much better for a Prince to invade an Enemy in his own Country, than to
attend him at home in his own Kingdom; if so be that he has competent Forces
to give him hopes of doing good upon his Enemy. For the seat of War is always
miserable.

CHAP. IV. Some Observations upon a Defensive War.
THE best way to prevent any attempts of any Foreign Enemy, is to be able and
ready to resist their Designs; and the best way to do that, is to have a good
Rich Public Treasure beforehand, and your people continually well trained up
in Martial Discipline.

When you foresee that an Enemy is resolved to set upon your Country to conquer
it, and if your Enemy be so much Master of you at Sea, that you fear the
shutting up of your Havens by his Shipping, then ought you to provide your
Magazines extraordinarily well with Ammunition, Arms, and Salt, and great store
of Brimstone, Saltpeter, and Salt-petremen, and to have Powder-Mills in all
your Chief Towns

In the beginning of a Defensive War, if you meet with a powerful Enemy, and
foresee that the War is likely to last long, then it will be wisdom in you to
entertain some Foreign Nation: But you must be careful to entertain none of
those Nations who serve in your Enemies Army, unless they be such as are of a
contrary Religion to your Enemy; to the end that you may spare your own Nation
as much as may be: Provided always you have money to pay them punctually;
otherwise they may prove dangerous to you. And I would wish you by no means to
keep them longer than you have money to pay them: for if you do, you will find
they will prove more your Enemies than your Friends. Likewise you must be
careful to entertain no more Strangers, than you are well able to Master; and
that you Garrison them not in any of your Sea-Towns, or Forts, or where your
Chief Magazines are. And in what Towns you do Garrison your Strangers in the
Winter, where you place one Company of Strangers in a Garrison, you ought to
place two of your own Nation. It is a very dangerous thing to entertain a
Foreign Friend to gain your own Country: but there is no danger in entertaining
a Foreign Friend to help to keep your Country, so long as you have money to pay
them.

You may with good Fortresses, and a good Army so tie up your Enemy in hindering
him from Victuals, and by intrenching always so near him, that you may now and
then fall upon some of his Quarters, and so hinder him from making any Siege of
importance. And when a Conqueror advances not forward, he recoileth. But here
you must note, that such places as you fortify are to be well fortified, well
manned, and well provided of all necessaries, and that you do not fortify any
place, which will require many men for the Defense of it in a Siege.

If you be assailed by a Power altogether disproportionable to your Forces, and
are in this case forced to leave some part of your Country to the Enemy, then
you ought to burn all the Victual which you cannot contain wiehin your
Fortresses, and also all the Towns and Villages which you cannot guard. For it
is better to preserve your self in a ruined Country, than to keep it for your
Enemy. It is a Maxim, That no public good can be without some prejudice to
some particular men: So a Prince cannot dis-entangle himself from a perilous
Enterprise, if he will please every man: and the greatest and most usual faults
which we commit in matters of State, and War, proceed from suffering our selves
to be carried away with this complacency, whereof we repent when there is no
remedy left.

A Kingdom or State, though they have received many overthrows, should never
cowardly yield themselves up to be Slaves to their Enemies, but endeavor to
look Fortune again in the face, and to be ready to overcome or lose more
gloriously, or get honorable terms of Agreement. Because by yielding they can
hope for nothing but the saving of their lives, and it will be in their Enemies
hands to deprive them of that at their pleasures: and Peace is more grievous to
men in subjection, than the War is to them that enjoy their liberties; and they
are hopeful in their Arms, who have no other hope but in their Arms. A just
Cause is good defense against a strong Enemy.

CHAP. V. Some Observations for those that undertake a War.
A Sovereign Prince is more capable to make great and ready Conquests than a
Commonwealth, and especially if he goes in person into the Field. For never
any Prince has founded a great Empire, but by making War in person: nor has
lost any, but when he made War by his Lieutenants.

Those that undertake a War, ought to make their Levies according to the War
which they undertake; carefully foreseeing that they undertake no Offensive
War, but such as they be able to go through with their Purses and their
Honors: And if their Purses will bear it, to make their Wars great and short.
It is an excellent property of a good and wise Prince to use War, as he does
Physic, carefully, unwillingly, and seasonably; either to prevent approaching
dangers, or to correct a present mischief, or to recover a former loss. He that
declineth Physic till he is accosted with the danger, or weakened with the
Disease, is bold too long, and wise too late. That Peace is too precise, that
limiteth the justness of a War to a Sword drawn, or a Blow given.

The next thing they who undertake a War ought to observe, is Secrecy and
Expedition in their designs: It is a perilous weakness in a State to be slow of
resolution in the time of War: such Affairs attend not time. Let the wise
Statesman therefore abhor delays, and resolve rather what to do than what to
say. Slow deliberations are symptoms either of faint Spirits, or weak Forces,
or false Hearts.

In War more than any other profession the command ought to be single. For
though you have many Armies in the Field, yet ought you to appoint one General
to have the absolute command over the rest of your Generals.

And there ought to be a special care in making choice of an able General. For
an able General will make choice of good Officers, and such as are fit for
War: but a General that is not experienced in the Wars, if he meet with good
Commanders, it is by hazard. This advantage also you will find by having an
experienced and well reputed man to your General, that the Officers and
Soldiers of your Army will fight with much the more resolution, and confidence
of Victory; and your Enemy will fight with the less resolution and hopes of
Victory. For good Officers will make good Soldiers, and good Soldiers are as
necessary to a War as good store of Gold. And therefore those that undertake a
War, must not always measure their Power by their Treasure, but they must put
the goodness of their Soldiers in the balance with their Treasure.

Before you undertake a War, cast an impartial eye upon the Cause. If it be
just, prepare your Army, and let them all know they fight for God. This adds
fire to the Spirit of a Soldier, to be assured that he shall either prosper in
a fair War, or perish in a just Cause.

You must be most vigilant and careful to have all your Magazines doubly
provided, that if any disaster befall your Armies, you may soon supply them
again. He that would be in War victorious, must be in Peace laborious. You
must likewise be very punctual in sending supplies of Money, Men, and all other
necessaries to your Army. For the want of any one supply many times coming too
late proves the loss of the whole design; and in no profession the loss of
time proves so dangerous as in Martial Affairs.

You must not be apt to judge of your Generals Actions according to the Event,
but according to Reason; and not to lay the fault of your Armies ill success
upon your General, when it lies in your selves, either for want of
necessaries, or timely supplies, or by bridling the Authority of your General
too much. Besides, if a General be never so wise, and diligent, he cannot
foresee every thing that may break, and cross all that which he had purposed.
For it is a Piece of Divine Power to direct a path free from the crookedness
which might lead the straight way to happy ends: and it were as great a madness
to believe that a man were able to give directions to meet with all chances, as
to think no foresight can prevent any casualty.

If you intend to have a well-commanded Army, you must pay them punctually, and
then your General can with Justice punish them severely.

You must foresee that your Frontier Towns be well Fortified, well Manned, and
well Victualled before your Army takes the Field.

You ought not to neglect rewarding those, that do you eminent Service; for by
it you bind them to be faithful to you, and you encourage them to do the like
Service upon another occasion, and encourage others to be ambitious of the same
honor. You must likewise be careful that the honor of such as have done brave
Actions and great Services be not diminished nor blemished. Because the most
generous Spirits (which will easily excuse all want of other recompense for
their Services) will never endure this, to be robbed of the honor due to their
brave actions, and will sooner stomach such a want of due honor, than any
other thing whatsoever; whereupon very often great mischiefs have followed.

You must not be too confident in the Arm of Flesh, and in your Victories; give
not too much honor to your Armies, and too little praise to God. Use all the
lawful means you can for the executing of your designs, and by your Prayers
recommend he success to God, and the good conduct of your General The Senate of
the Romans reserved nothing else to themselves, but a power to make new Wars,
and to confirm Peace: every thing else they referred to the arbitrament, and
power of the Consul. Notwithstanding that there were in the Senate men
exceedingly well experienced in the Wars; yet forasmuch as they were not upon
the place, and therefore ignorant of very many particulars, which were needful
for them to know that will advise well, and by interposing their Counsels they
would have committed many errors: For this cause they suffered the Consul to do
all of himself, and that the Glory thereof should be entirely his; the love of
which they thought would provoke and encourage him to do well.

It is a great vanity and indiscretion in a Prince, or State in matter of War
to undertake many enterprises at once.

It is better for two weak Kingdoms rather to compound with an Enemy to some
loss, than seek for satisfaction by the Sword; lest while they two weaken
themselves by mutual blows, a third decide the Controversy to both their
ruins. When the Frog and the Mouse could not take up the Quarrel, the Kite was
Umpire.

You ought to be careful you have no Officer in chief that is covetous, or
given to pillaging. For such men are good to no body, but themselves and the
Enemy; and are most commonly easily corrupted with money. Such men ought by no
means to be made Governors of Towns.

No Prince or State ought to doubt but that they may be able to make good
Soldiers, when they want not men. For if they have many men, and want
Soldiers, they should rather complain of their own Sloth, and small Wisdom,
than of the peoples Cowardice.

CHAP. VI. Some Observations, and Considerations to be observed, and thought on
by a General, that takes upon him the Command of an Army.
HE that undertaketh the Command of an Army ought seriously to consider the
hazards of this Charge, and the difficulties, and examine his own abilities
well before he adventureth on it: Because if he grows rich, he is traduced;
if he fail, or prove unfortunate, he is calumniated, scandalized: And if the
whole success answers not their opinions who employ him, they will repine,
although the fault most often is caused by their own neglect, or wilfulness, or
by curbing the Authority of their chief Commander too much. And people are
always apt to judge of their Generals Actions rather by the event than reason.
So that it is a very hard thing for a man to take the Command of an Army upon
him, and to keep his reputation unto the end. Therefore no General ought to
undertake any design timorously, or rashly; but such Actions as he foreseeth by
his wisdom, and experience, that his Master, or Masters purse, or purses, and
his own abilities be sufficient to go through with Victory and Honor.

The first thing that a General ought to do, is to desire God to assist him in
all his Councils and Actions, and to beseech him to give him and his Soldiers
Courage in the day of Battle: For it is he who makes our Enemies flee before
us. It is he sets up Kings, and Kingdoms, and pulls them down at his
pleasure.

A General of an Army must make it his principal aim to begin well: and then
not to omit any thing for the preserving of what he has gotten. He ought to be
provident in taking care for Money, Men, Arms, Victuals, Ammunition, a good
train of Artillery, with all things necessary belonging to it; Clothes, Shoes,
Stockings, and Shirts: He must foresee and provide that none of all these
things fail him in the execution of his Designs. And he must be careful to make
choice of knowing, and valiant Officers for his Army. For you may observe in
all the Roman Wars, that they conquered more Nations by their expert knowledge
in Martial Affairs, than they did either by their Number or Valor. It has
been the manner of all famous Generals to bring their Soldiers to perfection
by exercise.

A General ought carefully to observe these three things in his Martial
Discipline, to recompense commendable Actions, to punish the bad, and
constantly to use the exact exercise of Military Discipline. He must never
suffer his Soldiers in any place to be idle, especially when the Army is
brought together in a Body: for if he employ them not in that which is good,
they will busy themselves in that which is naught.

It is the height of a provident Commander not only to keep his own designs
undiscoverable to his Enemy, but likewise to be studious in discovering his. He
that can best do the one, and nearest guess at the other, (...) the next step
to a Conqueror: but he that failed in both, must either ascribe his Overthrow
to his own folly, or his Victory to the hand of Fortune. He that is a Chief
Commander ought to know that if he will be secure in War, he must be watchful
and valiant: and that expedition and secrecy crowns all warlike exploits
with Success and Glory: and that the opportunity of time is the Mother of all
worthy Exploits.

In the course of War a General shall meet with some occasions, wherein he is
not only to contend with Men, but with Chances and Things, which are to be
overcome with less difficulty, than an Enemy, and are more dangerous, as
Hunger, Discontents, and Labor. Things well and happily achieved do get the
Commander great goodwill from the Soldier, and things ill carried as much
hatred. Wherefore a General should always prefer courses of security before
those of hazard, and trust Fortune no farther, than necessity constrains
him. Caesar thought it not best to tempt the waywardness of Fortune, when by
other means he might obtain his desires: and a wise General should always
rather follow Reason than Fortune.

War is not capable of a second Error; one fault being enough to ruin an Army:
And therefore a General ought to be careful even of possibilities, accounting
always that which may happen, to be as certain as any thing which he does most
expect. A Generals Counsels should not pass approbation through his own
judgment alone, neither should they be communicated to more than is needful,
neither are they to be hastened forwards with passion, but ought often to be
maturated with staid deliberation. Likewise he is to take special care that no
humorous respect do hinder that resolution which true judgment approves. For
oftentimes it falls out that either particular profit, delightful pleasures,
desire of revenge, or some other unseasonable affection does so entangle them
in their proceedings, as they never attain to the main drift of the action: and
this is called Stumbling by the way.

A General must be careful not to measure the humor of his poor, needy, and
undisciplined Soldiers by the garb of his own ambitious thoughts; and so lay
such projects of difficulty as were very unsuitable in the particularity of
occurrences, to that which his Soldiers were fit to execute: Neither should he
be so prodigal of his Soldiers Blood, as though men were made only to fill
Ditches, and to be the woeful executioners of his rashness. Of all Victories a
General should think that best, which is least stained with Blood.

It is requisite in a General to mingle love with the severity of his
Discipline. They that cannot be induced to serve for love, will never be forced
to love for fear: Because love opens the heart, fear shuts it; that
encourages, this compels: And Victory meets encouragement, but flies
compulsion. If thou art called to the Dignity of a Commander, dignifie thy
place by thy Commands: and that thou may be the more perfect in Commanding
others, practice upon thy self. A Chief Commander ought to know that that
Command is best, and most sure, when the Soldier rejoices in his Obedience.

What Soldiers earn with the hazard of their lives, if not enjoyed,
prophesies an overthrow to the next Battle.

A General shall rule much, if Reason rule him.

A General ought to use his best endeavors, to buy good success with
extraordinary labor. For Industry commands Fortune, says Caesar. And there
is no doubt but diligence, and laboursome industry by circumspect and heedful
carriage seldom fail, either by hap or cunning, to make good that part, wherein
the main point of the matter depends. And where the Lions skin will not serve
his turn, there let him take part of the Foxes to piece it out.

It is a dangerous thing for a General to make himself chief in persuading a
Prince, or State to any weighty and important resolution, so that the counsel
thereof be wholly imputed to him, which belongs to many. For inasmuch as men
judge of things by their events, of all the evils that rise thereupon, the
blame will be wholly laid upon him as Author: and if good come of it, he is
commended for it; but the reward comes much short of the loss which is
hazarded. The Sultan Selimus, termed the great Turk, having made preparation
(as some report) for the Conquest of Syria, and Egypt, was encouraged by one of
his Bashaws, who was then upon the Confines of Persia, to undertake rather an
Expedition against the Sophy: By whose counsel the Sultan was persuaded, and
went to that enterprise with an exceeding great Army. But coming into a very
vast Country, where a great part of it is desert, and very few Rivers, and
finding there those difficulties which long since had ruined many Roman Armies,
was so distressed, that he lost most of his Army by Famine and Plague.
Wherefore (however in the War he was vanquisher) he caused the Bashaw, Author
of that counsel, to be put to death.

CHAP. VII. Some Observations what is the fittest strength for Armies to be of;
and what proportion of Horse and Foot, Dragooners, and Pioners, there ought to
be in an Army. And likewise showing the proportion of Pikemen, and Musketeers,
according to the Service that they shall be most employed upon.
AN Army of thirty or forty thousand men Trained, well Disciplined, carefully
Conducted, and still recruited upon all occasions, may destroy an Army four
times as great. Because great Armies for want of Victuals oftentimes destroy
themselves. And an Army of thirty or forty thousand may fight with an Army
three or four times as big, and beat them; provided that by the advantage of
their ground they avoid being surrounded: and the disorder and confusion that
commonly is in a great Army, will likewise be apt to break them.

Where your Service lies in Campagnia, the proportion of your Army ought to be
two Footmen to one Horseman, besides your Dragooners. But where the Service of
your Army shall be most in Sieges, there you ought to have three Footmen unto
one Horseman; and sometimes four Footmen to one Horseman, besides your
Dragoons; provided your Enemy be not able to over-master you in Horse. But for
your Body of Foot, when your Service shall chiefly consist in the Campagnia,
then you ought to have as many Pikemen as Musketeers amongst your Foot,
besides your Dragooners. But where your Service lies most in Sieges, there you
ought to have in your Body of Foot besides your Dragoons two Musketeers to one
Pikeman: and to every eight hundred Horse you ought to have an hundred and
fifty Dragooners. And always to an Army of twenty thousand, or thirty thousand
men, you ought to have a thousand Pioners; whereof an hundred ought to have
horses, as a necessary part of the Army upon a March, a retreat, drawing off
Cannon in a Battle, and at Sieges. I do not mean that these Pioners shall be
entertained to make the Soldiers lazy: For each Soldier ought to know what
belongs to his labor for his ordinary pay, that is, to pass upon his Duty
punctually, and willingly, namely to March, Watch, Fight, and entrench himself,
and to be ready to endure with Obedience and Patience, Labor, Hunger, Cold,
and Heat.

CHAP. VIII. Some Observations concerning the Arming of an Army, and how each
Soldier ought to be Armed.
ONE of the greatest advantages that I know which can be taken in War by a
Chief Commander, is to endeavor to have his Army better armed than his Enemies
Army, both with Offensive Arms, and Defensive Arms. Arms are the security of
your own Soldiers, the terror of the Enemy, and the assured ordinary means of
Victory. And this is certain, that the most warlike Nations, and most
Victorious, have always sought to get advantage of their Enemies by advantage
of Arms. The end of Arms is either to assault, or defend; and hence are Arms
divided into two kinds, Offensive and Defensive. Offensive Arms are to do
execution upon your Enemy; and Defensive Arms raise the Spirits, stir up
desire to fight, make the Soldier bold, and cheerful to perils. And whereas
the Defensive Arms of Horsemen and Pike-men are much slighted by some in these
times, I would have such to know, that Soldiers ought to go into the Field to
Conquer, and not to be killed. And I would have our young Gallants to take
notice, that men wear not Arms because they are afraid of danger, but because
they would not fear it. And I am confident, that one Army well armed with
Defensive Arms, may very well expect without any great difficulty to win twenty
Battles one after another of Armies equal in strength, equally conducted, and
fighting upon equal advantage of ground, but not armed with Defensive Arms. So
much advantage do I suppose to be between Armies that are armed, and Armies
that are not armed with Defensive Arms.

I will now show you how Horsemen, Footmen, and Dragooners ought to be armed
with Offensive and Defensive Arms.

An Horsemans Offensive Arms are these.
A Carbine, or a Musquet-barrel of the length of a Carbine-barrel, well stockt
with a Snapance: the which I hold to be much better then a Carbine for Service.
Also a case of Pistols, and a good stiff long Tuck, and a Belt.

An Horsemans Defensive Arms are,
An Headpiece with three small iron Bars to defend the Face, Back, and Breast;
all three Pistol-proof: a Gauntlet for his left hand, or a good long Buff
Glove. A Girdle of double Buff about eight inches broad, which is to be worn
under the skirts of his Doublet, and to be hooked unto his Doublet, and made so
that it may be fastened together before. If you find Buff to be scarce and dear,
you may make those Girdles of Buff before spoken of with Bull Hides, or good
Oxes Hides, dressed like Buff.

The Furniture that belongs to an Horsemans Horse is as follows.
He ought to have a very good Horse, and a good Pad-Saddle made, so that it may
very well carry a Case of Pistols, three good Girts, a pair of good Stirrups,
and Stirrup-leathers; with a Crupper, and a Fore-Pattern: also a good Bitt,
Rains, and Head-stall, with a good leathern Halter.

I have omitted here to speak any thing of the Armor of a good Cuirassier,
because there are not many Countries that do afford Horses fit for the Service
of Cuirassiers: But where Horses are to be had fit for that Service, there a
General ought to have two thousand of them in his Army.

The Offensive Arms of a Musqueteer are these.
A Musket and Rest, and a good stiff Tuck not very long, a Belt, a pair of
Bandaliers; but you must be careful that the Charges be not made too big, which
is a great and common fault now adays. Also every Musqueteer ought to have a
Scourer to make clean his Musket: For he must be very careful in keeping his
Musket clean, or else it will be very apt to break upon Service, by means of
which neglect I have known many Soldiers spoiled.

The Defensive Arms of a Musqueteer is a good Courage.
But in case you have more Musketeers than you have Pikes, so many Musketeers
as you have more than Pikemen in your Army ought to have Swine-feathers with
heads of rests fastened to them. My reason for it is this, your Pikemen will be
able with ease to shelter from the violence of the Horse so many Musketeers as
they are in number: and these Musketeers which have the Swine-Feathers being
employed by themselves, will be able likewise to defend themselves from the
Horse, with the help of their Swine-Feathers.

The Offensive Arms of a Pike-man are these.
A good long Pike of eighteen foot in length with a small Steel head, and a
good stiff Tuck not very long, with a Belt: for if you arm your men with
Swords, half the Swords you have in your Army amongst your common men, will
upon the first March you make be broken with cutting of Boughs.

The Defensive Arms of a Pike-man are these.
An Headpiece with Back and Breast; a Buff Girdle of double Buff eight inches
broad, the which is to be worn under the Skirts of his Doublet instead of
Taces. The same Buff Girdle is to be hooked up to his Doublet, and to be
fastened before. A good long Buff Glove for the left Hand. I am well assured
that a Girdle of Buff will be much safer, and much more serviceable, and easier
for a Pike-man to wear than Taces.

The Offensive Arms of a Dragoon are these.
A Musket, or a good Snapance to a Musket Barrel; the which I hold much
better for Dragoon-Service, being upon occasion they may be able to make use of
their Snapances on Horseback, and upon any Service in the night they may go
undiscovered. He must have also a Belt to hang his Musket in, with a pair of
Bandaliers, and a good long Tuck, with a Belt. And all your Dragoons ought to
have Swine-feathers.

Of a Dragoon Horse and Furniture.
He ought to have a good ordinary Horse, sl. Saddle, Snaffle, Rains, Stirrups,
and Stirrup-Leathers, an Halter, and two Girts.

There are some other necessaries that Soldiers ought to be furnished withal;
the which I do think fit to be spoken of in this place, and they are these.

Each two Foot-Souldiers ought to have a little Hatchet between them for the
cutting of Wood for Firing, and Wood for Hutting: Also each two Dragoons ought
to have an Hatchet between them for the aforesaid purpose. Each Soldier ought
to have a Knap-sack, each Company of Foot, and Dragoons to have a Powder-Bag.

CHAP. IX. A List of the Chief Officers that belong to an Army, and what
Strength each Regiment ought to have of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons.
A General, a Marshal of the Field, a Lieutenant General of the Horse, a
General of the Ordnance, or Master of the Ordnance; a Serjeant-Major-General of
the Horse; a Serjeant-Major-General of the Foot: Colonels of Brigades both of
Horse and Foot: the Treasurer of the Army; Colonels of Regiments both of Horse
and Foot; a Lieutenant General of the Ordnance; Sergeant Majors of Brigades
both of Horse and Foot; a Commissary General of the Victuals;
Lieutenant-Colonels of Regiments of Foot; Serjeant-Majors of Regiments both of
Horse and Foot; a Quartermaster General of the Foot; a Quartermaster General
of the Horse; an Engineer General; a Scout-Master General; a
Waggon-Master-General; Captains both of Horse and Foot; and Corporals of the
Field.

The Marshal of the Field receives Orders from the General; the Major General
of the Horse, and the Major General of the Foot receive their Orders from the
Marshal of the Field; the Serjeant-Majors of the Brigades from their
Serjeant-Major-General; the Serjeant-Majors of Regiments from the
Serjeant-Major of their Brigade; the Quarter Masters of Horse-Troops, and the
Sergeants of Foot Companies receive their Orders from the Serjeant-Majors of
their Regiments; the Quarter Masters of Horse-Troops, and Sergeants of Foot
Companies give the word, and such Orders as they do receive from the
Serjeant-Majors of their Regiment to all the Officers of their Companies: the
Quartermaster of the Artillery, and the Quartermaster of the Victuals receive
their Orders from the Marshal of the Field, the Marshal of the Field speaking
with the Serjeant-Major-General of the Horse, and the Serjeant-Major General of
the Foot, the Quartermaster of the Artillery, and the Quartermaster of the
Victuals, so gives Orders to all the Army.

All Orders and Commands ought to be given in Writing, if there be time for the
same.

Thus much more I do think fit to add in this place, That my opinion is, each
Troop of Horse ought to be an hundred in strength, besides Officers, and each
Troop ought to have two Quarter Masters.

Each Foot Company in my opinion should be an hundred and fifty strong, besides
Officers, and each Company ought to have six Sergeants.

Each Regiment of Horse in my opinion ought to be eight hundred in strength,
besides Officers; and so many Regiments of Horse as there is in an Army, so
many Troops of Dragooners there ought to be of an hundred and fifty in
strength, besides Officers, and each Troop of Dragooners ought to have six
Sergeants.

Each Regiment of Foot ought to be a thousand five hundred in strength, besides
Officers.

Each Regiment of Dragooners must be in strength according unto the number of
the Regiments of Horse that there is in an Army.

CHAP. X. Some Observations showing how necessary it is to have Soldiers well
Disciplined, and well Exercised before they are brought to Fight.
IT cannot be denied but Warlike Discipline, and good Fortune were the raisers
of the Roman Empire. And it is not length of life, or number of years that
teaches the Art of War, but continual Discipline, and Meditation of Arms, till
a man has with care and diligence employed his study and labor therein. For
upon the Foundation of Practice is grounded the Frame of sound and perfect
skill. Plutarch speaks this of the Victory which the Thebans had against the
Lacedaemonians; the Thebans till that day had no reputation for Valor, but
afterward by exercise, and use of Arms under Epaminondas and Pelopidas became
the bravest Soldiers in Greece: Not unlike was the saying of Pyrrhus to his
Muster-Master, Choose you, said he, good Bodies, and I will make them good
Soldiers. This shows how necessary Discipline, and Exercise is for the
making of good Soldiers.

CHAP. XI. Some Observations concerning a Train of Artillery, and him that
Commands it.
THE General of the Ordnance ought to be a man generally experienced in all
parts of Martial Discipline, especially in all parts of the Mathematics, and
in Gunnery. It is a place of great Honor, and much Trouble, and requires much
experience, and a great deal of care, and foresight for executing the place
well. The General of the Ordnance ought to choose an able man to be a
Lieutenant of the Ordnance, and to take care that the chief Engineer be an able
man, and also the inferior Engineers. The Master Gunner ought to be a very
able man, and the inferior Gunners very good. The General of the Ordnance must
likewise foresee that there be a skilful Fire-work-Master; and that he be not
only skilful, but valiant, and able to put his skill in execution. Likewise
there ought to be provided good Battery-Masters, and works Basis's. To setd own
every particular thing, and the Officers that belong to a Train of Artillery,
would require the labor of writing a Book by it self. Wherefore I will but
touch on some particular things, and places, and leave the rest to the care of
the General of the Ordnance, to make choice of such Officers as a Train of
Artillery requires, and he will have need of; and to provide for every thing
in particular, according unto the designs that he shall take in hand.

The General of the Ordnance ought to give special Order to his Master-Gunner,
that such Guns as he makes choice of for his Train, be diligently tried by
him, whether they be true boared, or whether they have their full Metal: and
that all the Fieldpieces that are made choice of for the Train be ten or
twelve Foot long. The which you will find to be of great advantage in fighting
a Battle with your Enemy, whose Fieldpieces are not so long. All your Pieces
of Battery ought to have Block-Carriages, besides their other Carriages; and to
each Piece of Battery two thick planks three inches thick, and sixteen or
eighteen inches broad, and fourteen foot in length. The which planks may be
easily carried upon your spare Carriages: and these planks will be always ready
at hand, and save planking of your Batteries. You ought to have the powder for
your Cannon to be made up into Carthrages for all your Cannon; and this way you
will find less dangerous, and much quicker for service, than the charging of
them with Ladles. The Wagons that carry your Powder, ought to be planked with
thin planks on the sides, and over at top. Then you may have Locks set on them,
and keep them locked; by which means a Rogue will not be able easily to fire
your Powder upon a March.

It were very fit the Lieutenant of the Ordnance, the Commissary of the
Victuals, and the Master of the Fireworks should have Companies of Firelocks,
or Snapances of an hundred and fifty apiece; the which Companies will serve to
guard the Train upon a March, and at night in their Quarters, and free the Army
from that Duty, and be very serviceable upon diverse other occasions. Cannon is
a great clog to an Army upon a March, but an Army which has none, can do no
great Service: and therefore in these times the Artillery is an essential part
of an Army.

It is very fit a General of the Ordnance should have belonging to his Train
some certain number of Boats, or Punts with Carriages to carry them on, for to
make a Bridge over unpassable Rivers.

CHAP. XII. Some Observations, and Preparations to be observed by a General in
Field-Service: also concerning Intelligences and Spies.
AS soon as a General can get Provisions for his Horse, it will be most
advantageous for him to have all things in a readiness to take the Field. For
if he take the Field before his Enemy, he preventeth the Enemy of his Designs.
A General ought to be careful before he takes the Field with his Army, that he
provide for the punctual supplying of his Army with Money, Ammunition, Victuals,
Arms, Men, Shoes, Stockings, Shirts: And seeing it is impossible for an Army
upon a March to carry with them sufficient of all these necessaries; therefore
a General ought carefully to foresee, as he advances any way with his Army,
that his Magazines for his Army be always so near him, and so well stored with
such things as he shall have occasion to use, that his designs fail not for
want of any of the aforesaid things. And he must be careful that his Enemy be
never able to cut off his Provisions at any time, or his Retreat.

A General or Chief Commander ought to see that he does not ruin his Army upon
disadvantages, either by engaging them unadvisedly in Battles, or by assaulting
Towns, and Breaches rashly, or by long Sieges, or long Winter Services, without
good probability, and assurance in the judgment of men to prevail. And he must
take care always to join Judgment with Valor in all his Actions.

A General ought carefully to lay hold on such occasions as offer themselves to
defeat his Enemy; and judiciously observe to know when to fight, and when not.

A good Commander ought wholly to avoid doing any thing, which being but of
small moment may only produce evil effects in his Army. For to begin a
Skirmish, or a Combat, wherein the whole Forces are not employed, and yet the
whole fortune is there laid to stake, is a thing savouring too much of
rashness: And yet I hold it fit that wise and experienced Commanders when they
meet with a new Enemy that is of Reputation, before they come to join* Battle,
should cause their Soldiers to make trial of them by some light Skirmishes; to
the end, that beginning to know them, and to have to deal with them, they may
be rid of that Terror which the Report and Reputation of these men have put
them in. And this part in a General is of exceeding great importance; for these
small experiences made by the Soldiers will cause them to cast off that
terror, which by means of the Enemies Reputation had possessed them. Thus Livy
says, that Valerius Corvinus was sent by the Romans to make some small
Skirmishes with the Samnites, that a new War, and a new Enemy might not
affright them: But a good Commander must be very careful that nothing arise,
which upon any accident may take away the Courage, and Hearts of his Soldiers.
Now that which may be of force to take away their Courage, is to begin with
loss. And therefore a Commander should be very careful how he engages any of
his Troops in small Skirmishes; and that he send no parties out of his Army
upon any occasion, without taking care that they be commanded by good
Commanders: and that the Officers that Command such Parties have Order not to
engage themselves with the Enemy, unless they have some certain hopes of
Victory. Nor ought he to undertake to guard any passages, where he cannot bring
his whole Army together. Nor should he keep any Towns, unless it be those, upon
loss whereof his utter ruin follows. And those that he guardeth, he should
take such care both for their Defenses, and also with his Army, that whenever
the Enemy has any design to assail them, he may make use of all his Forces to
the rescue of them.

If you have any certain hopes of starving your Enemy, or putting him to a
retreat for want of Provisions, your securest way then will be not to fight
with him, especially if your Enemy be of equal strength with you, or stronger
than you are.

If a Commander in Chief discovers his Enemies Foot to be lodged in their
night Quarters in a Campagnia with their Carriages, it were good then to charge
them in the night with so many Horse, as you shall think fit in several places;
and leave part of your Horse and Dragoons to make good their retreat upon
occasion. If it falls so out that your Horse cannot totally rout your Enemies
Foot, let them have Order to fire their Ammunition, and so retreat.

It is very fit a General should often command his Horse and Dragoons to fall
upon his Enemies outermost Horse-Quarters. The which is one of the readiest,
easiest, and securest ways that I know of to break an Enemies Army.

A General is not so much blamed for making trial of an ill-digested project,
as he will be for the obstinate continuing in the same. Therefore the speediest
leaving of any such enterprise does excuse the rashness, which might be imputed
to the beginning.

Difficulties of extremity are never better cleared, than by adventurous and
desperate undertaking. And hence grows the difference between true Valor,
and foolhardy Rashness, being but one and the same thing, if they were not
distinguished by the subject, wherein they are showed. For to run headlong into
strange adventures upon no just occasion, were to show more levity, than
discretion: and again, to use the like boldness in cases of extremity,
deserves the opinion of virtuous endeavors.

A General should always be careful so soon as he comes out of the Field to
visit his Frontier Towns, and take with him some of his best Commanders, and
some of his choice Engineers, and to see what Fortifications his Frontier Towns
want, and to give order for the repairing of such wants: and likewise to take
care that the Magazines be furnished with a years provision, and that he give
especial Command to the Governors of his Frontier Towns to be careful by their
vigilance and good itnelligence to prevent sudden surprises, and valiantly to
defend their Towns, and providently to dispose of their provisions in case they
should be besieged.

Concerning Spies you must be always suspicious of them; because as it is a
dangerous task for him that undertaketh, so it is also for him that imployeth
them: And that Spies may not agree to give false advice, they should be
examined severally, that by the agreement or disagreement of their advices, you
may judge whether they be good: and by the verification of those which speak
true or false, you shall know who betrayeth you, or does you true Service. But
this is not all, to beware of your own Spies; you must also take heed of those
of the Enemy, which you must pre-suppose you have in your Camp For this reason,
besides the secrecy which must be used in all enterprises, it is good to give
a charge by publishing (in a still way) that you have a quite contrary design
to that which you purpose to put in execution; that so these Spies may report
it to the Enemy. But the most effectual means to be well served by these kind
of men, is to be very liberal to them; for they are faithful to those who give
them most. A General must take care that he have continually Spies in the
Enemies Army, to know when his Enemy moves, and what condition his Enemies
Army is in; and he ought to have in every Frontier Town of his Enemy some
correspondence with some Towndweller, or Soldier of the Garrison, that by them
he may understand from time to time what condition his Enemies Garrisons are
in. And if the Enemy draws any Forces to an head at any of his Frontier
Towns, let the aforesaid people give the Governor of your next Garrisons
notice of it. You ought to know that Intelligence is the most powerful means to
undertake brave Designs, and to avoid great Ruins: and it is the chiefest
Foundation upon which all Generals do ground their Actions.

A General that Commands an Army, and sees that for want of Money he cannot
keep them long together, is unwise if he ventureth not his Fortune before his
Army falls asunder: For by delaying he certainly loses; whereas hazarding he
might overcome. Another thing there is yet much to be accounted of, which is,
that a man ought (even in his losing) seek to gain Glory by being overcome by
force, than by any other inconvenience.

The principal Heads of War for Field-Service, are the Art of Marching,
Incamping, Imbatteling, and to know the ways how to procure good Intelligence,
and providently and skilfully to get Provisions fit for his Army, and his
Designs, and not to ground his foundations upon vain imagination.

In matter of War the motions ought to be quick, where the least moment of time
often carries the whole business.

It is necessary in War oftentimes to change Counsels according to the variety
of the accidents.

In execution of Designs of War, good judgment ought to ground them, and
diligent expedition put them into Act on For the least fault or stay that a man
commiteth may give leisure, and occasion for the Enemy to provide, that all the
plots, and counsels how good soever shall serve to no purpose.

CHAP. XIII. What strength Divisions of Horse ought to be from four thousand to
ten thousand, when they are to March in an Army, and when they are to Fight a
Battle; or if Foot be to Fight on the Flanks of each Division of Horse, or when
they come to be Embattelled to Fight on the Flanks of an Army. That small
Divisions both of Horse and Foot are much better than great Divisions for
Service either in Campagnia, or within Enclosures; because they are not so apt
to fall into Disorder, and are much more ready to be commanded upon all
occasions.
AN Army which is imbattelled in small Divisions of Horse and Foot, is not so
easily routed as that Army which is imbattelled in great Divisions. And small
Divisions are much more ready than great Divisions: for besides seconding one
another, and wheeling upon all occasions, they will likewise out-front an Army
which is imbattelled in great Divisions: The which is one of the greatest
advantages that can be taken in the imbattelling of an Army. Also small
Divisions of Horse and Foot are much readier for Service, where you cannot
imbattel them according to the rules of Art, by the nature of the place, or
within enclosures, or where the brevity of the time will not give you leave. To
conclude, an Army that is imbattelled in small Divisions is much more
troublesome for an Enemy to deal withal, than an Army that is imbattelled in
great Divisions.

It is most convenient, and ready to have your Divisions of Horse and Foot, to
March at the same strength, or some ten or twelve men more in a Division, than
you intend to fight them in a Battle: by this means your Army will be much
readier, and sooner imbattelled upon all occasions. If you fight your Horse in
a day of Battle on the Flanks of your Body of Foot (which is the usual way of
placing the Horse:) and if you intend to Skirmish in the day of Battle with a
small Division of Foot on each flank of each Division of Horse (which I hold to
be the best and strongest way of imbattelling your wings of Horse) provide
always that your Musketeers in each Division of Foot, that are to Skirmish on
the flanks of each Division of Horse in a Day of Battle, be so ordered that
they may be sheltred by Pikes from the Force of the Enemies Horse. And in what
order the two Divisions of Foot shall fight in a Day of Battle on the flanks of
each Division of Horse, so as to have the Musketeers sheltered by the Pikes
from the force of the Enemies Horse, shall be demonstrated unto you in the
following figures.

If your strength of Horse be four thousand, and if they be to fight on the
flanks of a Body of Foot, and each division of Horse to have a division of Foot
fighting on each flank, then each Division of Horse ought to be forty in front,
and three deep; and so the strength of each Division of Horse will be an
hundred and twenty. If your strength of Horse be five thousand, then each
Division of Horse ought to be an hundred and fifty strong, fifty in front, and
three deep. If your strength of Horse be six thousand, or ten thousand, then
ought you to have an hundred and eighty in a Division, sixty in front, and
three deep. And of this strength (as is aforesaid) ought your Divisions of
Horse to be. If you intend to fight Foot on the flanks of each Division of
Horse in a Battle, the Divisions of Foot that shall fight on each flank of each
Division of Horse, shall be in strength twelve files of Pikes, and twelve files
of Musketeers, which in all make a Body, or a Division of an hundred forty
four men. And on the flanks of each Division of Horse, when you come to
imbattel them to fight, you must place a Division of Foot of an hundred forty
four men, half Pikes and half Musketeers. The order how the Divisions of Horse
and Foot shall march together when they come near an Enemy, and how they shall
imbattel, and skirmish, shall be demonstrated in the following Figures. The
Divisions of Foot before spoken of, will serve to fight on the flanks of any
Division of Horse of what strength you please to have them.

In the first place, for your better understanding of this new way of
Discipline (the which I am well assured you will find very serviceable and
advantageous against an Enemy, if you make use of it) I will demonstrate unto
you in the following Figure, in what order a Division of Horse, and two
Divisions of Foot shall stand ready to march, to be imbattelled when occasion
shall serve. The which order must be observed by all the rest of the Divisions.
By this means you may understand how all the rest of the Divisions of Horse and
Foot that are to fight on the flanks of an Army in a day of Battle may be
ordered for a march, and to be in readiness to be imbattelled, when an Army
comes near the Enemy.

These Figures following lettered with A B C D E F G, show you the order of the
Divisions of Horse and Foot (I mean those Divisions of Horse and Foot that are
to be imbattelled together in a day of Battle on the flanks of the Body of
Foot) to be ready to march when occasion shall serve, or to be imbattelled. And
this order which shall be here set down for this one Division of Horse figured
with the Letter A in the following Figure, and the two Divisions of Foot
figured with the Letters B C D E F G, the same order ought to be observed after
the same manner for a march when you come near an Enemy. By this means your
Army will be much the sooner imbattelled upon any occasion, and always in a
readiness to receive your Enemy: if so be your Divisions of Horse and Foot,
when they march, be of the same strength as you desire to have them when they
are imbattelled to fight, and that you march your Divisions of Horse and Foot
by Brigades as you do intend to fight them.



The Figure before, figured with the letter A, stands for a Division of
Horse; the order that they are in, in rank and file, is their order. The
figures figured with B C D E F G, are small Divisions of Foot, the which shall
be at large demonstrated in this following observation: the order that they
stand at in rank and file, is their order, viz. three foot in file, and six in
rank. The distance of ground between the Divisions of Musqueeteers D F and the
Division of Horse A, is thirty paces, three feet to the pace. And this distance
of ground of thirty paces between the two Divisions of Musqueeters D F, and the
Division of Horse marked with the letter A ought to be when the Divisions of
Horse and Foot are imbattelled to fight. The distance of ground between the
Division of Musketeers, and the Divisions of Pikes is twelve Footmen. Which
are Pikes, and which are Musketeers this following demonstration will declare
unto you. The figure before, figured with the letter A, is a Division of Horse
of threescore in front, and three deep; and in the strength of the Division is
an hundred and eighty Horse. The figure with six files, and six ranks of small
pricks figured with the letter C, is a Division of Musketeers, in strength six
and thirty, each small prick standing for a Musqueteer. The figure figured with
the Letter B with cross strokes, is a Division of Pikes of twelve files and six
deep. The strength of the Division is seventy two Pikemen, and each stroke
standing in way of a rank stands for a rank of Pikes being twelve in rank;
and each stroke standing in way of a file is to be accounted for a File six
deep. The figure figured with the letter D is a Division of* Musketeers of the
same strength that the figure C is. The figures figured with the Letters E F G,
are the same that B C D, and the little small strokes in the Front, Rear, and
Flanks of the Divisions of Horse and Foot stand for Officers. When these two
Divisions of Foot, and one of Horse are to march away by small sub-divisions,
as the way will give leave; then the righthand division of Foot figured with B
C D is first to march away: next, the Division of Horse signified by the Letter
A, then the left hand Division of Foot figured with the Letters E F G is to
follow the Division of Horse figured with the Letter A. You are to appoint to
every Division of Horse two Divisions of Foot, like as you see in this former
figure of A B C D E F G, if your Foot will hold out to do it. If you have not
so many as to do it, you ought not to fail to flank each Division of Horse in
the Vanguard of your Army with two Divisions of Foot, as is set down in the
former figure. And each Musqueteer of those Divisions of Foot which are to be
imbattelled on the flanks of each Division of Horse ought to have, when they
come to encounter with the Enemy, two pair of Bandaliers, or a pair of
Bandaliers, and a dozen of Charrages in each Musketeers Pocket. Likewise each
Musqueteer ought to have twelve spare Botlets besides his Bandaliers furnished
with Powder and Bullet: and each two Divisions of Foot ought to have a
Powder-Bag full of Powder carried along with them. All the Divisions of Horse
and Foot that are to be imbattelled together on the flanks of your Army in a
day of Battle, for the Wings of your Battle being divided into Brigades, are to
march after this order as is here set down for the marching of this one
Division of Horse, and two of Foot when you are near an Enemy and marching
toward him. This way of fighting Foot amongst Horse is much the stronger way
of Imbattelling an Army in my judgment then any other that I have either seen
or read of: and hereafter in a fit place I shall show sufficient reason for to
prove it so to be.

The following figure marked with the Letters HIKLMNO, shall show you in what
manner the Musketeers in the two Divisions of Foot that are imbattelled on the
flanks of each Division of Horse, as you see them in the foregoing figure
marked with the letters ABCDEFG, how, I say, the aforesaid Musketeers shall be
drawn into a fit Order to give fire on the Enemies Horse or Foot upon any
occasion.

The words of Command that you are to give to the Musketeers to bring them
into the Order of the following Figures KLNO, from the Order of the foregoing
figures CDFG, are these words of Command which follow. Command the two first
Ranks of the two Divisions of Musketeers marked with the Letters C and D to
march forwards till the two last ranks of the aforesaid two ranks of both the
Divisions be twelve foot beyond the front of the Pikes, then command them to
stand; then command the two ranks of Musketeers that belong to the Division of
Musketeers marked with the letter C, to turn to their left hands, and the two
ranks of Musketeers marked with the letter D, to turn to their right hands:
then command these four ranks of Musketeers, the which are now files, to march
forwards till they meet. Then command those Musketeers which before did turn
to their right hands, to turn to their left hands, and those Musketeers which
did turn to their left hands, to turn to their right hands, and file even with
the Pikes. Then command the two last ranks of Musketeers of the two Divisions
of Musketeers marked with the letters CD, to turn to their right hands about,
and march forward, till the two rear ranks of both the Divisions be twelve feet
beyond the rear rank of Pikes in the Division of Pikes marked with the letter
B. Then command the four ranks of Musketeers to stand, commanding the two
ranks of Musketeers that belong to the Division of Musketeers marked with the
letter C, to turn to their right hands, and the two ranks of Musketeers marked
with the letter D, to turn to their left hands. Then command the four ranks of
Musketeers, which are now files, to march forwards, and meet in the rear of
the Pikes. Then command those Musketeers which did before turn to their right
hands, to turn to their right hands again, and those Musketeers which did turn
to their left hands, to turn to their left hands again, and file even with the
Pikes. Then command the two middlemost ranks of Musketeers, which are left of
both the Divisions of Musketeers marked with the letters C and D to march
forward, and front even with the Musketeers in the front of the Pikes. Then
command the Division of Horse marked with the letter H to close their ranks and
files to their close Order: and the Division of Pikes marked with the letter B,
and the two ranks of Musketeers, which are now in the rear of the Pikes, to
close their ranks and files to their close order.

The same words of Command and Order must be observed by the two Divisions of
Musketeers marked with the letters GF, as is here set down, and observed by
the two Divisions of Musketeers C and D. And these words of Command which are
here set down, will bring the former figure marked with the letters ABCDEFG,
into the form and order of this following figure marked with the letters
HIKLMNOPQRS.



By the words of Command which are before set down, the Musketeers in the
former figure marked with the letters ABCDEFG are brought into this order and
form, as you see them in the figure marked with the letters HIKLMNOPQRS. Now
what order this figure marked with the foregoing letters is in, I will here
declare unto you.

The Division of Horse marked with the letter H is threescore in front, and
three deep, who are now at their close order in rank and file, the which is a
foot and half in file, and six in rank. Likewise the two Divisions of Pikes
marked with the letters I and O on the flanks, and the four ranks of
Musketeers in the rear of the Pikes marked with the letters L and Q are at
their close order in rank and file, the which is one foot and an half in file,
and three in rank. Also the three ranks of Musketeers marked with the letters
MKNRPS are at their order in rank and file; the which is three foot in file,
and six in rank. These twelve ranks of Musketeers, which are in the front
stand ready to advance with the rest of the Horse and Foot against an Enemy,
and to be commanded to make ready, and give fire on the Enemies Horse or Foot,
as occasion shall serve, as you see them in the figures marked with the letters
M K N R P S.

When these twelve ranks of Musketeers which are in the front, are commanded
to give fire upon the Enemy, you must command them to do it in this manner:
Command the twelve ranks of Musketeers marked with the letters M K N R P S to
make ready: being ready, command them to present, the which you must command
them to do after this manner. Let the first six ranks of Musketeers before
spoken of present, kneeling upon their right knees; then let the six last ranks
of the former twelve ranks of Musketeers move up close to the first six ranks
of Musketeers which are presenting and kneeling on their right knees. Then
command all the Musketeers in the six last ranks to step forward with their
right legs within the inside of their Leaders right legs, and step forward
with their left legs close up to their Leaders left legs without-side of their
Leaders left legs, presenting their Musket over their Leaders heads in the
first ranks. The twelve ranks of Musketeers marked with the Letters M K N R P
S being thus presented as is here set down, command them to give fire together;
and when they have given fire, command them to advance easily with the rest of
the Foot and Horse, and make ready again, and give fire after the same manner
again, as is before spoken of, and so often as you please. The four ranks of
Musketeers, which are in the rear of the two Divisions of Pikes marked with
the letters L and Q will serve, if any of your Musketeers in the front shall
be hurt or slain.

Now I have showed you how the Musketeers in the Divisions of Foot, which are
to fight on the flanks of each Division of Horse in a day of Battle, are to
give fire on the Enemies Horse. I will now show you in the next figure marked
with the figures of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12, how the Musketeers shall be
sheltered by the Pikes from the Enemies Horse, when they shall charge the
Divisions of Foot, which are on the flanks of each Division of Horse. But first
I will set down the way how you shall bring the Musketeers in the former
figure marked with the letters M N R S to the order as you shall see them in
this following figure marked with the figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. You
must command the two ranks of Musketeers, six in front, and two deep on the
right hand Division of Foot marked with the letter M, to turn to their left
hands, and command an Officer to lead them down on the right hand flank of the
Division of Pikes marked with the letter I, keeping one foot and an half
distance from the right hand file of the aforesaid Division of Pikes, until he
bring the two men that were the left hand men of the two ranks of Musketeers
marked with the letter M, even with the bringers up of the right hand file of
the Division of Pikes marked with the Letter I. Then command them to turn to
their right hands about, and close their ranks and files to their close order.
After that, command the two ranks of Musketeers six in front, and two deep on
the left hand of the aforesaid Division of Pikes marked with the letter N,
command, I say, those two ranks of Musketeers to turn to their right hands,
and command an Officer to lead them down on the left hand, on the left hand
flank of the Division of Pikes marked with the letter I, keeping one foot and
an half distance from the left hand file of the Division of Pikes marked with
the letter I, until he brings the two men that were the right hand men of the
two ranks of Musketeers marked with the letter N even with the bringers up of
the left hand file of the Division of Pikes marked with the letter I. Then
command the two files of Musketeers (the which were before ranks) which you
have drawn down on the left hand flank of the Division of Pikes marked with the
letter I, to turn to their right hands about: then command them to close their
ranks and files to their close order. The same order must be observed with the
four ranks of Musketeers, six in front and two deep, marked with the letters R
and S on the right and left hand of the left hand Division of Pikes marked with
the letter O, as is here before set down for the four ranks of Musketeers
marked with the letters M and N. Then command the four ranks of Musketeers
marked with the letters K and P to close their ranks and files to their close
order. And these words of Command before set down will bring the former figure
marked with the letters I K L M N O P Q R S to the order of this figure marked
with the figures of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12.



By these words of Command before set down, you see the Musketeers marked with
the letters M N R S P K in the figure before this former figure, are now
brought into this order, as you see them in this figure before marked with the
figures of 5 6 11 12 9 3 under shelter of the Pikes: The Musketeers and Pikes
being at their close order standing in a readiness to receive a charge from
Horse, and the Pikes to shelter the Musketeers every way upon occasion from
the force of the Horse. The figure marked with the figure 1, is a Division of
Horse, threescore in front and three deep, being at their close order. The way
how the Musketeers shall be sheltred by the Pikes from Horse, I will here
declare unto you: Command the two right hand files, and the two left hand files
of the Division of Pikes marked with the figure 2 (the which Division of Pikes
is twelve files of Pikes, and six deep) to charge to their right, and left
hands: the two right hand files to the right hand, and the two left hand files
of Pikes to the left hand over the shoulders of the Musketeers on the right
and left hand marked with the figures 5 and 6: commanding these four files of
Musketeers marked with the aforesaid two figures to turn to their right and
left hands. When the two right hand files, and the two left hand files of Pikes
of the figure marked with the figure 2, are commanded to charge to the right
and left hands, then command the other eight files of Pikes of the figure 2,
which have not as yet charged their Pikes, I say, command the three first ranks
of those eight files to charge their Pikes to the front over the shoulders of
the Musketeers marked with the figure 3. Then command the three last ranks of
Pikes of the eight files of Pikes to charge to the rear over the shoulders of
the two ranks of Musketeers marked with the figure 4. And these two ranks of
Musketeers in the rear marked with the figure 4 must observe to turn to their
right hands about, when the Pikes are commanded to charge to the rear.

The same Order and words of Command, the which are here set down for the right
hand Division of Foot, marked with the figures 2 3 4 5 6 7 must be observed by
the Officers of the left hand Division of Foot, marked with the figures 7 8 9
10 11 12. The Musketeers which are placed without-side of the Pikes marked
with the figures 3 4 5 6 9 10 11 12 must stand ready with their Matches, Cocks,
and Pans guarded, and ready to give fire either by one rank at a time, or two
ranks, as the Officers shall see occasion to command them, which must be done
after this manner: If you command only the outermost ranks to give fire, then
must you command them to present kneeling on their right knees, and command
them to level so low, that they shoot at the Horse legs, and by that means they
will shoot clear under the tops of your Pikes being charged. If you please to
command two ranks of Musketeers to give fire at one time, the Musketeers
being ready to present command your Pikemen to port their Pikes: then command
all your Musketeers to present, the first rank of Musketeers kneeling on
their right knees, the second rank of Musketeers must move up close to the
first rank of Musketeers, every Musqueteer in the second rank stepping forward
with his right leg within the inside of their Leaders right legs, and step
forwards with their left legs close up by their Leaders left legs without-side
of their Leaders left legs, and so present their Muskets over their Leaders
heads. After the Musketeers in the first rank have thus presented, command
them to give fire; then may you, if occasion serve, command your Pikemen to
charge their Pikes again, and your Musketeers to make ready again.

But here some may object, that if any one of these two Divisions of Foot
marked with the figures 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 should be charged by Horse
several ways at once, then the four corners of the Division of Foot will be ill
defended, by reason that the two outermost files of Pikes to the right and left
hand are charging to their right and left hands; so by this means they conceive
the four corners of the Division of Foot will be left naked for want of Pikes
to defend them. To prevent this objection, the Captains, Lieutenants, and
Sergeants ought to be placed on the four corners of a Division of Foot with the
Musketeers, as you see them in this foregoing figure, marked with the figure
7. For you must understand, that each little long stroke at the corners of the
Division of Foot stands for an Officer. Now all the Captains that command the
Foot on the flanks of each Division of Horse in a day of Battle ought to have
Pikes, and the Lieutenants and Sergeants ought to have Partisans and Halberts
of eleven foot in length.

In this Service against the Horse, are two chief things that the Commanders of
the Foot who command any Foot amongst the Horse in a day of Battle ought to
give their Soldiers a strict charge to observe: the first is, that the
Musketeers when they are to give fire should always take aim at the Horses
legs. The second observation is, that your Pikemen charge their Pikes against
the Horses, and not against the Horsemen, when the Foot are charged by Horse,
and that your Pikemen charge not their Pikes, until the Enemies Horses are come
within forty paces of your Foot.

If you fight Foot among your Horse on the flank of your Army, as you see them
placed in these two figures before marked with the letters HIKLMNOPQRS, and the
figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. Then you must observe when your Enemies
Horse come to charge your Horse, or the Foot on the flanks of your Division of
Horse, that your Divisions of Horse move not from the two Divisions of Foot on
their flanks (unless your Enemies Horse be put to the retreat) but to keep an
even front, with the two Divisions of Foot on their flanks, and receive their
Enemies Charge, keeping the aforesaid order. But in case your Enemies Horse
rout any one of the Divisions of Foot on the flanks of any one Division of
Horse, then the Commander of the Division of Horse, that is to march between
two Divisions of Foot, must be in a readiness to Charge the Enemies Horse that
has routed his Foot, either with part of his Division of Horse, or the whole,
as he sees occasion, or as he may with convenience.

That your intention of fighting Foot amongst the Horse may not be discovered
by your Enemy, who has not been used to the like Discipline; or at least that
he may not know the way and order that you intend to fight your Foot in, let
your Divisions of Foot, which are to fight on the flanks of your Horse in a day
of Battle, as you see them in the two former figures: let, I say, the two
Divisions of Foot which belong to each Division of Horse, march in the rear of
the Divisions of Horse, as you see them in the foregoing figure, till they come
within Musket Shot of their Enemies Horse: then draw up the two Divisions of
Foot, the one on the one flank of a Division of Horse, and the other on the
other flank of the same Division of Horse in the same order as you see them in
this foregoing figure.

CHAP. XIV. What Strength each Division of Horse ought to be from three
thousand to ten thousand, to fight on the flanks of a Body of Foot in a day of
Battle, if you will have no Foot to fight amongst the Horse.
IF your strength of Horse be three thousand, and if they be to fight on the
flanks of a Body of Foot in a day of Battle without Foot to fight amongst them,
then each Division of Horse ought to be thirty in front, three deep, and ninety
in a Division. If your strength of Horse be four thousand, then the strength of
each Division of Horse ought to be an hundred and twenty, forty in front, and
three deep. If your strength of Horse be five thousand, then each Division of
Horse ought to be an hundred and fifty strong, fifty in front, and three deep.
If your strength of Horse be six thousand, or seven thousand, then they ought
to be an hundred and eighty in a Division, sixty in front, and three deep. If
your strength of Horse be eight thousand, nine thousand, or ten thousand, then
ought each Division of Horse to be an hundred in front, and three deep, and
three hundred in a Division.

Your Divisions of Horse from ninety to an hundred and eighty (if you have no
Foot to fight amongst your Horse) ought to charge their Enemies Horse after
this manner. Each Division of Horse from ninety to an hundred and eighty in
strength ought to be sub-divided into three subdivisions, as is here set down,
and shall be declared unto you by this following figure, marked with the
letters A B C.



The three sub-divisions of Horse marked with the letters A B C are a Division
of Horse of ninety, sub-divided into three equal sub-divisions, being thirty in
a Division, ten in front, and three deep. The distance of ground between the
subdivision marked with the letter A, and the subdivision marked with the
letter B, is twenty paces, three feet to the pace. The like distance of ground
is between the sub-divisions of Horse marked with the letters B and C: the
little strokes that stand in the fronts, flanks, and rear of the three
sub-divisions, stand for Officers.

Now when the Vanguard of your Horse comes within fifty paces of the Enemies
Horse, let the two sub divisions of Horse marked with the letters A and C
advance toward their Enemies Division of Horse upon an easy trot: and the
Officers of the two Divisions of Horse must be careful that they Charge all
together the Division of the Enemies Horse which they meet with. And when the
two sub-divisions on the right and left hand marked with the letters A and C do
advance toward their Enemy to charge them, then let the middle sub-division of
Horse marked with the letter B follow after easily upon a walking pace. And
when the Officer in chief that commands the middle sub-division of Horse
marked with the Letter D, sees the other two sub-divisions of Horses marked
with the letters A and C to be mingled with the Enemy; then let him command his
sub-division of Horse to advance upon a round trot, and charge his Enemy. The
same order must be observed by all the Divisions of Horses that are but ninety
in strength, when they come to charge an Enemy. And the Divisions of Horse from
ninety to an hundred and eighty in strength must observe the same order in
charging their Enemy, as is here set down in this Division of Horse of ninety,
marked with the letters A B C, if no Divisions of Foot be to fight amongst the
Horse.

If you be eight thousand, nine thousand, or ten thousand strong in Horse, then
each Division of Horse, when you come to fight in Battle, ought to be three
hundred in strength: and each Division of Horse ought to be sub-divided into
five equal sub-divisions, as you see them in this following figure marked with
the letters D E F G H.



In these five sub-divisions of Horse marked with the letters D E F G H, there
are sixty Horses in each sub-division, twenty in front, and three deep. So that
the five sub-divisions marked with the letters D E F G H are a Division of
Horse of three hundred in strength, sub-divided into five equal parts, and
being at their close order in rank and file: And the little small strokes that
you see in the flank, rear, and front, stand for Officers. The distance of
ground that is left between the sub-divisions marked with the letters D and E
is twenty paces, three feet to the pace. And the distance of ground between the
sub-divisions of Horse marked with the letters E and F is twenty paces. The
same distance of ground is between the sub-divisions of Horse marked with the
letters F and G, and G and H.

If you intend to have your Divisions of Horse to be three hundred in strength,
my opinion is, that each Division of Horse ought to be sub-divided into five
equal parts, as you see them in this figure marked with the letters D E F G H.
For these reasons a Division of Horse for three hundred in strength being
divided into five equal parts, as you see them in this foregoing figure, will
take up much more ground in front, than a Division of Horse that is but three
hundred in strength, and not sub-divided. Now it is one of the chiefest
advantages that can be taken in a day of Battle, by your Divisions of Horse to
outfront your Enemies Divisions of Horse.

Besides, a Division of Horse of three hundred in strength being sub-divided,
as is before set down, will be better commanded, and not so subject to fall
into a disorder upon any occasion, as a Division of Horse of three hundred in
strength, all in a body.

Moreover, you may charge an Enemy three several ways with a Division of Horse
of three hundred in strength, being sub-divided as you see them in this
foregoing figure; whereas you can charge an Enemy but one way with a Division
of Horse of three hundred in strength, being all in one body.

The first of the three ways to charge your Enemy with a Division of Horse of
three hundred in strength, and sub-divided, is in this manner; when a Division
of Horse thus sub-divided into five equal parts comes within forty paces of
your Enemies Division of Horse which they are to charge; then let the two
sub-divisions of Horse marked with the letters D and H advance, and charge
their Enemies Division of Horse on the flanks; and then let the other three
sub-divisions of Horse marked with the letters E F G advance, and charge their
Enemy in the front of their Division at the same time.

The second way is this, when you come within forty paces of your Enemies
Division of Horse, then command the three sub-divisions of Horse marked with
the letters D ^ H, to advance upon a trot, and charge their Enemy: then command
the other two sub-divisions marked with the letters E and G to follow upon an
easy pace, until they see that the three sub-divisions marked with the letters
D F H be mingled with their Enemy. Then let the two sub-divisions marked with
the letters E and G have order to advance upon a good round trot, and charge
their Enemy.

The third way of charging your Enemy, is, to command the five sub-divisions of
Horse marked the letters D E F G H to charge the Enemy together in an even
front. And I account either of these three ways better to charge a Division of
the Enemies Horse to rout them, than to charge a Division of the Enemies Horse
with a Division of three hundred Horse in one Body together, without being
sub-divided.

CHAP. XV. By the following Figures are declared what Strength each Division of
Foot ought to be to Fight a Battle, and Encounter with Foot: and the order that
must be observed for doing the same; and how they shall easily, and readily be
in order to defend themselves against the charge of any Horse.
FOR Field-Service you must observe to have as many Pikes as Musketeers
amongst your Foot; and each Division of Foot ought to be two hundred eighty
eight in strength, half Pikemen, and half Musketeers; and you must rank your
men but six deep: so that in the Division of two hundred eighty eight men,
there will be four and twenty files of Pikes, and four and twenty files of
Musketeers, six deep. The order that they must be drawn into, to be in
readiness to fight with Foot, and to defend themselves against Horse, shall be
declared unto you by the following figures.

But in the first place I will show you the order that these four and twenty
files of Pikes, and four and twenty files of Musketeers must be drawn into*
The first order that the aforesaid two hundred eighty eight men must be drawn
into, is, as you shall see them in this following figure, marked with the
figures 1 2 3; and the distance that they are at in rank and file is their
Order.



The figure marked with the figure 1 is a Division of Pikes of four and twenty
files, six deep. The six ranks of small pricks marked with the figure 2 are a
Division of Musketeers consisting of twelve files, six deep: And the like are
six ranks of pricks on the left hand of the Division of Pikes figured with the
figure 3.

Now the way that you must observe to bring these four and twenty files of
Pikes, and four and twenty files of Musketeers into the order, as you see them
in the following figure marked with the letters A B C, is by these words of
Command. Command the three first ranks of Musketeers of the two Divisions of
Musketeers marked with the figures 2 and 3 to march forward, till the last
ranks of Musketeers of both the Divisions of Musketeers have marched twelve
feet beyond the first ranks of Pikes. Then command them to stand, and cause the
three ranks of Musketeers at the left hand to turn to their right hands, and
the three ranks of Musketeers on the right hand to turn to their left hands.
Then command them to march forward, and join together before the Division
marked with the letter A. Then command the Musketeers, which before you
commanded to turn to their left hands, now to turn to their right hands; and
those Musketeers that you commanded before to turn to their right hands,
command them to turn to their left hands. Then file the Musketeers that you
have brought before the front of the Pikes, even with the files of Pikes. Then
command the other six ranks of Musketeers on the right and left hand of the
Division of Pikes to advance forwards, and front with the Musketeers, which
are in the front of the Pikes, leaving eighteen foot distance between the
Divisions of Musketeers, marked with the letters C and B, and B and D, as you
see them in this following figure, marked with the letters A B C D; and the
distance that they are at in rank and file is their Order.



The figure marked with the letter A is a Division of Pikes consisting of four
and twenty files, six deep. The three ranks of small pricks marked with the
letter B are four and twenty files of Musketeers, three deep. The three ranks
of small pricks marked with the letter C, are twelve files of Musketeers,
three deep: the like are the three ranks of Musketeers marked with the letter
D. And the Musketeers standing in this order as you see them in this foregoing
figure, marked with the letters B C D are now in a readiness to give fire on an
Enemy. Now the way that the Musketeers must observe in firing on their Enemy
is thus: Command both your Pikemen and Musketeers to shoulder their Arms, and
march together in the same order as you see them in the foregoing figure,
marked with the letters A B C D, commanding the three Divisions of Musketeers,
marked with the letters B C D to make ready; and when the Musketeers are all
ready, command the two first ranks of Musketeers in the aforesaid three
Divisions of Musketeers to present. The three first ranks of the three
Divisions of Musketeers marked with the letters C B D must present kneeling
upon their right knees. The second ranks of the aforesaid Divisions of
Musketeers must march up close to the three first ranks of Musketeers which
are presenting on their right knees; every Musqueteer in the second rank
stepping forwards with their right legs within the in side of their Leaders
right legs, and then step forwards with their left legs close up to their
Leaders left legs, without-side of their legs, and present their Muskets over
their Leaders heads in their first ranks. And after the two first ranks of
Musketeers of the three Divisions of Musketeers marked with the letters C B D
have thus presented, command them to give fire together And when these
Musketeers before spoken of have fired, let the three first ranks of the three
Divisions of Musketeers marked with the letters C B D remain kneeling on their
right knees. Then command the second ranks of the three Divisions of
Musketeers to kneel upon their right knees, as close to their Leaders right
knees as they can. Then command the last ranks of the three Divisions of
Musketeers marked with the letters C B D to march up to their Leaders,
stepping with their right legs within side of their Leaders right knees, and
step forwards with their left legs without side their Leaders left legs, and
present their Muskets over their Leaders heads, and then command them to give
fire. After the last rank of the three Divisions of Musketeers marked with the
letters C B D have fired, command the two first ranks of Musketeers of the
aforesaid three Divisions of Musketeers which are kneeling, to stand up;
commanding your Division of Musketeers marked with the letter A, and the three
Divisions of Musketeers marked with the letters C B D to march on easily, and
make ready again, and when they are ready, let them give fire in the same order
as they did before. This order of marching and giving fire must be observed by
all the other Divisions of Foot, that are to fight in the Body of an Army.

Or if you approve not of the way of Musketeers firing, as is here set down,
you may subdivide them after the old manner, and so command them to give fire.

The order that this Division of foot marked with the letters A B C D must
observe to defend themselves, against Horse is after this manner, as you shall
see them placed in the next figure, marked with the figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7* And
the way to bring the three Divisions of Musketeers, and one of Pikes marked
with the letters A B C D to the order of the figure following, marked with the
figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 is done after this manner.

You must command the last rank of Musketeers, of the Division of Musketeers
marked with the letter B, to turn to their right hands; then command an Officer
to draw them away on one side of the right hand file of the Pikes, and draw
them in between the third and fourth ranks of Pikes marked with the letter A.
Then command your Pikemen to advance their Pikes, and close their files, and
ranks to their close order. Then command the Division of Pikes to advance
forward, till they come within three feet of the last rank of Musketeers which
are in the front of the Pikes. Then command the two last ranks of the Division
of Musketeers marked with the letter C, to turn to their left hands. Then
command the two last ranks of the Divisions of Musketeers marked with the
letter D to turn to their right hands. Then command two Officers to lead these
four files of Musketeers (which were before four ranks) into the rear of the
Pikes marked with the letter A; the which four files are there to meet and join
together in the rear of the Pikes. Then command those Musketeers which did
before turn to their left hands, to turn to their right hands; and those
Musketeers which before turned to their right hands, to turn to their left
hands. Then command the first rank of Musketeers, which is only left of the
Division of Musketeers marked with the letter C, to turn to their left hands.
Then command an Officer to lead them down close on the outside of the right
hand file of the Pikes; and when the Officer has brought the Leader of the
file of Musketeers right against the bringer up of the right hand file of
Pikes, command the file of Musketeers to stand. Then command the half file of
that file of Musketeers to double his front to the left hand. Then command
those two files of Musketeers to turn to their right hands about. Then command
the first rank which is left of the Division of Musketeers marked with the
letter D, to turn to their right hands, commanding an Officer to lead them down
close on the outside of the left hand file of the Pikes: and when the Officer
has brought the Leader of the file of Musketeers right against the bringer up
of the left hand file of the Pikes, command the file of Musketeers to stand.
Then command the half file of that file of Musketeers to double his front to
the right hand. Then command those two files of Musketeers to turn to their
right hands about. Then command the Musketeers which have not as yet closed
their ranks and files, to close their ranks and files to their close order, and
file and rank even with the Pikes.

This which is here set down is the readiest, and easiest way to bring the
former figure marked with the letters A B C D unto the order of this figure
following, marked with the figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7. And this Division of Foot is
now in a readiness to withstand the charge of any Horse.



The figure marked with the figure 1, is a Division of Pikes, consisting of
four and twenty files, and three deep. The figure marked with the figure 2, is
a Division of Pikes of the like number that the figure 1 is. The two ranks of
small pricks in the front of the Pikes, figured with the figure 3, are two
ranks of Musketeers, having four and twenty in a rank. The two ranks of small
pricks in the rear of the Pikes marked with the figure 4, are two ranks of
Musketeers, having four and twenty in a rank. The two files of pricks on the
right hand of the Division of Pikes, marked with the figure 5, are two files of
Musketeers, six deep: and the like are the two files of pricks on the left
hand of the Division of Pikes, marked with the figure 6. The little strokes at
the corner of the Division of Foot, marked with the figure 7, stand for
Officers. And the rank of small pricks between the two Divisions of Pikes
marked with the figures 1 and 2, are one rank of Musketeers consisting of four
and twenty Musketeers in number.

You see in this figure marked with the figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7, the Musketeers
standing under the shelter of the Pikes, the Pikes and the Musketeers being
all at their close order, and in a readiness to receive a charge from Horse;
and the Pikes sheltering the Musketeers every way upon occasion from the force
of the Horse.

Now the way how these Musketeers and Pikemen shall defend themselves against
Horse, I will here declare unto you. If you perceive your Enemies Horse to
divide themselves into four parts to charge any one Division of Foot which is
placed in this manner as you see them in this foregoing figure: then command
the two right hand files of Pikes, and the two left hand files of Pikes of the
six ranks of Pikes marked with the figures 1 and 2, to charge to their right
and left hands over the shoulders of the Musketeers on the right and left
hand, marked with the figures 5 and 6. Command also the four files of
Musketeers, marked with the aforesaid two figures, to turn to their right and
left hands. When the two right hand files of Pikes are commanded to charge to
their right and left hands, then command the other twenty files of Pikes in the
first three ranks of Pikes, marked with the figure 1, to Charge to the front
over the shoulders of the Musketeers, marked with the figure 3. Then command
the twenty files of Pikes marked with the figure 2 to Charge to the rear over
the shoulders of the two ranks of Musketeers in the rear marked with the
figure 4. And the aforesaid Musketeers must observe to turn to their right
hands about, when the Pikes are commanded to charge to the rear.

The Musketeers which are placed without-side of the Pikes, marked with the
figures 3 4 5 and 6, must stand ready with their Matches, Cock, and Pans
guarded, and to be ready to give fire either by one rank at a time, or two
ranks, as the Officers shall see occasion to command them; the which must be
done after this manner. If you command only the outermost ranks of Musketeers
to give fire, then must you command them to present kneeling on their right
knees, and command them to level so low with their Muskets, that they may
shoot at the horses legs; by that means they will shoot clear under the tops of
your Pikes being charged. If you please to command two ranks of Musketeers to
give fire at one time, then as soon as the Musketeers are ready to present,
command your Pikemen to port their Pikes: then command all the Musketeers
without-side of the Pikes to present, where the first ranks of Musketeers are
to kneel on their right knees; then the second tanks of Musketeers must move
up close to the first ranks of Musketeers, every Musqueteer in the second
ranks stepping forwards with their right legs within the inside of their
Leaders right legs; then they must step forwards with their left legs close up
by their Leaders left legs, without-side of their Leaders legs, and present
their Muskets over their Leaders heads in the first rank. When the Musketeers
have thus presented, command them to give fire. And if Horse charge a Division
of Foot which stand in the same order that this Division of Horse does, marked
with the figures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7, You must command your Pikemen to charge again,
and be careful to place the Captains, Lieutenants, and Sergeants of the
Division on the four corners of the Division, as you see them in the foregoing
figure marked with the figure 7.

CHAP. XVI. Some Observations concerning the Marching of an Army.
You must be careful before you march with your Army into the Field, to see
your Soldiers well Clothed, well Armed, and well Disciplined; and that you be
stored with Shoes and Stockings for the March, and also with Ammunition,
Bread, and Money. If you be not careful of this, you will soon bring your Army
to ruin. You must also have a great care of those Soldiers which fall sick,
or are hurt, upon a March; for this alone will not only encourage Soldiers to
undergo any danger, or labor, but by it you will win their affections so, that
they will never forsake you.

You ought to know the nature of the Country, the quality of the ways, the
compendiousness of turning, the nature of Hills, and the course of Rivers,
through which you are to march. And the best way to know these things is by
good Guides, and good Maps: For he that leads an Army by an unknown and
undiscovered way, and marching blindfold upon uncertain adventures, is subject
to many casualties, and disadvantages: Let every Commander therefore persuade
himself that good Discoverers are as the eye of an Army, and serve for lights
in the darkness of ignorance, to direct the resolutions of good providence, and
to make the path of safety so manifest, that he need not stumble upon
casualties: For that which a General should chiefly observe upon a March, is
first Safety, and next Convenience. If you March into a Country which is hard
to enter, and which has but few passages, whereby to enter into it, you must
force one; and before you go farther, you must there fortify, as well to
assure your way for your necessaries, as for your retreat. For a General must
be careful never to March into any such place, where his Enemy may be able to
cut off his Provisions, or his Retreat.

It is most convenient and ready to have your Divisions of Horse and Foot to
march at the same strength, or some ten or twelve men more in a Division, than
you intend to fight them; by which means your Army will be much more ready upon
any occasion to be imbattelled: And your Officers and Soldiers being used to
march with their Divisions in the same strength and order as you intend to
fight them, will not be so apt to be in a disorder, as that Army that does not
use to march with their Divisions of Horse and Foot at the same strength as
they intend to fight them.

Your Regiments of Horse and Foot ought to be divided into Brigades, your Foot
into three Brigades, and your Horse into six Brigades, if you be twelve
Regiments of Horse strong, or above. It is most necessary to use your Brigades,
and your Divisions of Horse and Foot to march in Battalia when time and ground
will give leave; for otherwise you will not be able to march three hundred
paces in the view of an Enemy with your Brigades imbattelled, but your
Divisions of Horse and Foot will be apt to lose their distances, and by
consequence will be most apt to fall into a confusion.

You must be careful to be furnished at the least at every quarter with three
Guides: If you be to march in the night, you ought to have six.

Before you set forwards, your Guides must be agreed upon the way which they
will take: There must also be a Captain of the Guides, a man of spirit, and
vigilance, and one that may take care to get Guides from place to place. You
must be careful to carry with you the Maps of the Country, through which you
are to march.

The best way to keep your men from straggling upon a march, when they pretend
to go out of their ranks and files to drink, or to ease themselves, is this;
let them have command to leave their Pikes or Muskets with their Camerades;
and the Lieutenant and Sergeant ought to see this order observed.

You ought upon a march to send out some parties of Horse or Foot, according as
the situation of the Country, and the strength of the Enemy requires, in the
Vanguard and flanks of your Army, to discover and search for Ambushments, and
parties of the Enemy, which will be always apt to attend upon an Army for
booties.

When you come to march with your Army through any Woody Country, then you
ought to have loose Wings of Musketeers to march on the flanks of your Army,
some Musket Shot off from the Body of your Foot, to keep small, or great
parties from firing on your main Body. And in such places you ought to have a
special care that your Baggage be well guarded on the flanks; and that your
Scout-Master and Spies do bring you intelligence daily.

It is most necessary when you march, to make an halt once in a day for the
ease of your Soldiers, and relief and ease of your Carriage-Horses, in some
convenient place where is both Horse-meat and water.

It is very fit you give orders to your Pioners to make you three ways on each
side of your Carriage way, that is, six ways besides your Carriageway, or as
many as conveniently the ground and places through which you are to march with
your Army will give way. So by this means the one half of your Army may march
on one side of your Carriages, and the other half on the other side of your
Carriages. By marching in this order your train will be the shorter, and a less
guard will serve to guard the rear of your Wagons, by reason the main body of
your Army will be so near the rear of your Wagons. And also your Army will
march much the nearer together, whereby you will the sooner draw them into
order to fight upon any occasion. Likewise you will be able to march safer and
farther in a day, than you can when your Army marches but in one or two ways.

If it fall out so that you must be constrained to march with your Army and
Baggage in one Highway, or over one Bridge, the Conductor that has the
Conducting of the Vanguard of your Train, ought to know upon such an occasion
what Regiment his Train of Artillery is to follow; and that he have a special
care not to march into any narrow passage before those Troops he is to follow.

If you have any occasion to send out any parties to provide Provisions for
your Army against night, you ought to give order unto those Officers to keep
their Soldiers from straggling; for such oversights do many times bring great
inconvenncies to an Army. Therefore Officers ought not at any time to suffer
their Soldiers to straggle, nor slacken the severity of Military Discipline,
though they believe themselves far from an Enemy, and in great security. For
Soldiers are commonly least secure when they think themselves most secure.
Security is commonly the forerunner of misery.

In marching with an Army to fight with your Enemy, you ought to carry with you
as much Bread, Cheese, or Cattle and Salt as you may conveniently; for it is
impossible that Soldiers should find Bread to be bought every where: And if it
be possible to be done with safety, lie with your Army between your Enemy and
his Provisions, being better furnished with Provisions than your Enemy: For
lying near your Enemy with safety, and without fighting, will in the end surely
discourage your Enemies Soldiers by their necessities, or force them to fight
upon disadvantages, or at last put them to a retreat: And then the Victory is
more then half won, if any of these things happen unto your Enemy.

An Army may be divided into four parts, namely, the Cavalry, the Infantry, the
Artillery, and the Victuals.

If you March with Cannon, and suffer an Enemy to approach too near you without
intrenching, it is impossible for you to avoid fighting or losing your Cannon.
Therefore a General ought to know how to make use of it at his advantage, and
avoid the inconveniences of it by his foresight, either by intrenching, or
retreating in time, if he has no mind to hazard a Battle.

There is nothing that brings so much disorder to an Army upon the March as
the Baggage: And therefore it is highly necessary to reduce it to the smallest
proportion that may be: and the Waggon-Master-General ought to make a review of
it every morning when the Army marches, for otherwise it will daily increase.

Your Marshal-General ought not to suffer many Women, or Boys to March with an
Army, whereby Sickness and Famine get into the Army.

If your Army be of any great strength, then may you march with it in two
parts, each part about two or three miles distant from the other* if you have
no Enemy near you that is able to affront you. And if you can march in this
order with safety, you will march much the farther in a day, and your Soldiers
will be much better provided for at night.

If you are to march with an Army into a Country where you think the
Inhabitants will fly before you, then ought you to carry Hand-mills, and
Baking-pans along with you, that each Company upon occasion may be able to
grind their own Corn, and provide themselves Bread.

It is very fit and necessary, if you have any occasion to pass over any Rivers
that are not fordable, in your march, to carry with you Boats or Punts to make
a Bridge of.

It is most necessary likewise to carry with you Caltrops into the Field, the
which are very convenient at times to be thrown in places, as either into Fords
or narrow passages, where Horses are to pass to spoil them: and they are of
especial use in a night upon a Retreat, to be thrown into narrow passages, or
by day into dirty or watery passages. Those Caltrops that are made for Fords,
must be made somewhat more weighty than those that are made for other passages,
that the water may not be able to carry them away.

CHAP. XVII. Some Observations for the Quartering of an Army at Night upon a
March, and for the setting out of their Guards to secure their Quarters.
YOU ought to give a strict charge to the Quarter-Master-General of the Foot,
to have a special care (if it be possible) to Quarter your Infantry upon a
march, and your Train of Artillery in places that are naturally, or casually
well fortified, as with enclosures, or in places compassed with Rivers, or
Moors; and where there may be Provisions for your Carriage-Horses, or where
Provisions may conveniently be brought in by the Country People for them. This
way of Quartering your Army must be carefully observed, if any Enemy of
strength be near you that may be able to do you any affront upon any of your
Quarters. If any Enemy of strength be near you, you ought to Quarter your Army
as near together as possibly you can; but by all means if it be possible, avoid
Quartering your Infantry in the Campagnia.

The time of lodging an Army is a dangerous time to be assaulted in, because
the Army is then tired, and every man (desirous to be lodged) hastneth to the
quarter in disorder, which is a thing hard to avoid: And therefore the General
and the Officers ought to have a special care to avoid this danger. The which I
conceive to be done best this way. Those Horse and Dragoons that you send
before for a Guard with the Quarter-Master-General, and his attendants for the
providing of Quarters, as soon as those Troops shall come to the place where
the Army shall quarter, they ought to send out small Parties, and Scouts
several ways to discover, and to search for ambushments; and the remainder of
the Horse and Dragoons ought to keep guards in some convenient places about the
Quarters till night: And such Foot Soldiers as you send before to preserve the
Foot Quarters from being pillaged, ought to be two out of every Company, a
Pikeman, and a Musqueteer; and a Sergeant out of each Regiment to command them:
and two Lieutenants and a Captain out of the three Brigades of Foot, to Command
all the men that are appointed to preserve the Foot Quarters from being
pillaged by their Camerades. These Soldiers and Officers ought to have their
Orders over night for the same, that they may be in a readiness in the morning
to march with the Pioners as a guard for them: for the aforesaid Soldiers may
most conveniently do these two services under one.

The Carriages that belong to the Horse Officers (especially the Carriages for
such Officers as shall be lodged in Out-Quarters with the Foot Carriages) the
Marshal of the Field, the General of the Artillery, the Treasurer of the Army,
the Commissary of the Victuals, the Quarter-Master-General, the Secretary of
the Council of War, the Provost-General; all these ought to be lodged within
the General Quarter.

The Marshal of the Field, the Major-Generals of the Horse and Foot, and the
Majors of the Brigades both of Horse and Foot, ought to go before to the
Quarters to view the most convenient places for Guards for the security of
their Quarters. The Sergeant Major of the Regiments both of Horse and Foot that
are assured to have Outwatches at night, ought to go somewhat before their
Regiments to know of the Major of the Brigade where the places are that the
Companies of their Regiments should guard that night, with their Orders for the
same. Then the Serjeant-Majors of these Regiments, that are to have the
Outwatches for the night, knowing what Guards the Companies of the Regiments
should have that night, and having received all their Orders for the same,
ought to meet their Regiments before they come to the Quarters, that they may
conduct the Companies of their Regiments that are to watch at night, the
nearest way to their Guards; seeing it is a great trouble for Companies that
are tired, to remove from their Regiments to their Guards, having laid down
their Arms, and settled themselves for rest.

After the Marshal of the Field, or the Major General of the Foot, or both,
have had a special care of securing the Quarters of the Infantry from all
danger of any sudden surprises, by placing good Guards in convenient places;
then if the Infantry be quartered all together, the General or the Marshal of
the Field, or the Serjeant-Major-General of the Infantry, one of them ought to
go every night one round or two: besides, there ought to be appointed a Colonel
to go the Grand Round every night, and he ought not to fail to go two Rounds.
And in my opinion it is fitter for all Grand Rounds, or any other Rounds, to
give the Word, than to receive it.

But if it falls out so, that you Quarter your Brigades of Foot one from
another, then the Major General of the Foot must trust to the care and judgment
of the Colonels and Majors of the Brigades for the setting out of their Guards,
and going the Rounds, unless it be that Brigade with which he lodges himself.
The Major General ought always in such a case to give order to the Colonels of
the Brigades, that they appoint an Officer of the Field for the Grand Round,
and that he fail not to go two Rounds at the least: There must be likewise
appointed a Captain of the watch to every Regiment that lies within the
Quarters, to see that the Corporals and Sentries at each Colors keep good
Watch; and that the Soldiers of each Company of his Regiment within the
quarter keep good order, and that the Soldiers within his Quarters make no
fires in any places, where they may endanger the firing of the Quarters.

I will now say something concerning the Quartering of the Horse, which you
ought always to Quarter without-side of the Foot. The Horse-Quarters ought to
be as near together as conveniently you may lay them, that upon all occasions
they may be able to assist one the other upon any sudden falling on their
Quarters in the night. And that you may Quarter your Horse the nearer together,
you may by sending out parties of Horse before, cause the Country people to
bring in Provisions both for your Horsemen, and their Horses into the chief
Villages or Towns where you are to Quarter your Horse; the which the Country
people will most willingly do, rather than to be troubled with the Quartering
of any Horsemen; and by this means your Troops will lodge much the safer.

It is one of the hardest things that I do know that belongs to Horse-Service,
for a Commander of Horse judiciously to order his Horse Guards for the securing
of his Quarters at night. And the best way for doing the same, as I conceive,
is this, you ought to lodge in your outermost Quarters of Horse which lie next
your Enemy. And before you draw your Horse into their Quarters, you ought to
set out your Guards, and send out of your Guards some small parties several
ways; and when those that you have sent out are returned, you ought to send out
more, to discover any parties of your Enemies, and to search for ambushments.
Your Dragooners that are Quartered in your out-Quarters of Horse, ought to
guard the Highways that come into your Quarters. And against such guards of
the Dragoons as you keep upon the Highways, you ought to Barricado your
Highways up with something or other that may not easily be removed; and let
the Pioners make you another way for the relief of your Guards from your
quarters. And therefore I hold it most convenient to have an hundred Pioners to
be horsed, which always should be lodged in the outermost Horse-quarters next
the Enemy, for the stopping up of some passages, and for the making of others
that may be unknown to the Enemy: Likewise upon the ways which are made by the
Pioners you ought to have a Guard of Dragooners: and all your Dragooners ought
to have Swinefeathers, the which the Dragooners ought to stick up without side
of the Avenues; and in the Avenues that the Pioners have made for the relief of
the Out guards of Horse.

One Guard is not sufficient to give the Alarm at that distance, whereby you
may have leisure to put your self in order to fight: wherefore you ought always
to have half your Horsemen to watch on horseback one half of the night, and
the other the other half of the night: and when the one half of your Horsemen
watches, the other half of your Horsemen must be saddled, and the Officers and
Horsemen be in their clothes. Your innermost Horse-quarters (which lie safer
than your outermost Horse-quarters) when the one half of your Horsemen
watches, the other half may be unsaddled; but your Officers and Horsemen must
not lie out of their Clothes. And the Officers in each quarter ought to have
order upon any alarm, that as soon as they are drawn in Arms they should make
all the haste they can to assist their Camerades that are assaulted in their
quarters; and that an Officer in Chief in each quarter go two or three Rounds
in a night. And this order of watching ought to be observed in your
Horse-quarters, if you lie within twenty miles of any Garrison of your Enemy
that is able to affront any of your quarters.

The General of an Army ought always upon a March to give out two words at
night, the one for a Watchword, and the other for a Field-word. The Officers
ought to receive both, but the Soldiers only the Field-word; the which ought
not to be given to the Soldiers, unless there be an Alarm.

Towns and Villages that lie in a Champaign Country are most fit for
Horse-quarters: the Towns and Villages that lie in an enclosed Country are most
fit for Foot-quarters.

CHAP. XVIII. Some certain Observations to be kept in the fighting of Battles,
and some Directions for the Imbattelling of an Army.
WE may observe two especial ends which the great Commanders of the World have
ever striven to atchieve, Victory, and Over mastering their Enemies. The latter
by cunning, and wisely carrying of a matter before it come to trial by blows:
the former by forceable means, and fighting a Battle: the one proceeding from
Wisdom, and the better faculties of the soul; the other depending upon the
strength and abilities of the body. The latter end is principally to be
embraced, as the safest course in these uncertain and casual events. For that
which rests upon corporal strength, and makes execution the way to a
conclusion, is full of hazard, and little certainty. And yet of all the actions
of War, the most glorious and most important is to know how to give Battle: For
the art of imbattelling an Army has always been esteemed the chiefest point of
skill in a General (for skill and practice do more toward the Victory than
multitude) seeing the gaining of one or two Battles acquireth, or subverteth
whole Empires, Kingdoms, or Countries: And therefore a General of an Army ought
to know all the advantages which may be taken in a day of Battle; and how to
prepare against disadvantages which may happen. Concerning both which I will
here give you my opinion.

Advantages bring hope of Victory, and hope conceives such spirits as usually
follow when the thing which is hoped for is effected; whereby the courage
becomes hardy, and resolute in Victory; and where the Soldiers fear no
overthrow, they are more than half Conquerours. So on the other side,
disadvantages and danger breed fear, and fear so checketh valor, and
controuleth the spirits, that Virtue and Honor give place to distrust, and
yield up their interest to such directors as can afford nothing but diffidence
and irresolutions.

It is most necessary for a General in the first place to approve his Cause,
and settle an opinion of right in the minds of his Officers and Soldiers: the
which can be no way better done, than by the Chaplains of an Army. Also a
General ought to speak to the Colonels of his Army to encourage their Officers
with a desire to fight with the Enemy; and all the Officers to do the like to
their Soldiers. And the better to raise the common Soldiers spirits, let
their Officers tell them that their General does promise them, if they will
fight courageously with their Enemy, and do get the day, that they shall have,
besides the Pillage of the Field, twelve-pence apiece to drink, to refresh
their spirits when the business is done. The which I am confident will make the
common men fight better, than the best Oration in the world.

It is very fit a General should use his best endeavor to understand the
strength of his Enemies Horse and Foot, and how they are armed both with
Offensive and Defensive Arms, and what proportion of Pikes they have to their
Musketeers. Also he must endeavor to know by name and place the Chief
Officers of his Enemies Army, and their abilities in Martial Affairs; by the
which means he may guess where the Chief Commanders do command in a day of
Battle: So he may easily know how to place his Army best for his own advantage.
This if carefully observed will be of very great use.

You ought to know that novelties, and unexpected adventures are very
successful in Battles, and in all Martial designs.

A General must be careful never to hazard a Battle with his Enemy, when he
finds him imbattelled in a ground of advantage, although he do out-number him
much with men: The safest way then will be to fight with him by Famine: For
although a Generals Fortune should be generally subject to his will, yet by his
wisdom he should rather follow Reason than Fortune in such cases.

A General ought to be careful when an Enemy approaches near him, to send out
some two or three knowing Officers with a good strong party of Horse and
Dragooners to make good the Horsemens retreat upon occasion) whereby to
discover the Enemies strength, and order of his March: and that they take
notice of what advantages may be taken of the ground which lies between them.
And the party that is sent ought to have order, if it be possible to take some
stragglers, that the General may the better understand the strength, and
condition of his Enemies Army.

If you intend to give Battle, you must have regard to these principal things
that follow: You must never suffer your self to be forced to fight against your
will; and never to fight your Soldiers when their spirits are either dismayed,
or cast down. If you resolve to fight with your Enemy, then you ought to choose
a place for the Battle fit for the quality, and number of your Soldiers. For
if you fear to be enclosed by a great number, you ought to shelter your flanks,
or at least one of them, by the nature of the place, as by a River, Wood, or
some other thing equivalent: If you be weak in your Cavalry, you must avoid the
Plains, or fight with Foot amongst your Horse, as is showed in the three next
Battles: If you be strong in Horse, you must avoid strait passages, or enclosed
places.

You ought to know that directions are the life of Action, and the sinews and
strength of Martial Discipline; and therefore you must give punctual orders to
your Marshal of the Field, and your Major-Generals, and Colonels of the
Brigades both of Horse and Foot before they begin to fight: And your Orders
ought to be written, if you have time: for after the Battle is once begun, is
is impossible for a General to give Orders, more than in that part where he is
present at the same time.

That you may know how to place your Divisions of Horse and Foot at their true
distances, you ought to allow unto every Horseman in the Front of the Divisions
of the Vanguard, and Battle six foot of ground in breadth; and to every Foot
Soldier in the Divisions in the Vanguard, and Battle you ought to allow five
Foot. Also you must observe, that between every two Divisions of Horse and Foot
in the Vanguard of your Army to allow an hundred paces of ground in breadth,
three feet to the pace: besides what you allow for the Division in the Battle,
which is for the reserve. You ought likewise to allow between the Vanguard of
your Horse-Troops an hundred paces; and between the Vanguard of your Foot an
hundred and fifty paces, three feet to the pace. This order must be observed
both in placing the Divisions of Horse and Foot, and the Van-guards, Battle,
and Reer-guard of your Army; that the foremost Troops being put to recoil, may
not fall upon those which should come up to relieve them, nor the Battle upon
the Rear.

You must always be careful to place the best Regiments either of Horse or Foot
on the Wings of your Army.

The Officers that lead the Divisions in the Vanguard of a Battle ought to have
special care to see that the Divisions both of Horse and Foot keep their
distances; but especially the Officers that lead the Divisions in the Vanguard
of your Army on the flanks of your Horse or Foot, they must be extraordinarily
careful that they close not with their Divisions in upon the main Body. I know
no one thing that Officers care is more required about, in fighting a Battle,
than to see that such Divisions as they Command keep their Distances: For let a
man consider how hard a thing it is for an Army that is imbattelled in a
Campagnia to march a mile together without losing their Order. And questionless
it is much harder for an Army to march a mile together in the face of an Enemy,
and the Vanguard of the Army continually skirmishing to keep their distances:
And unless the Officers of an Army are punctual in observing their Orders of
keeping their distances in marching, it is impossible but some part of your
Army, if not the whole, will be in a confusion before the Battle be half fought.

It is seldom or never seen that two Armies that are of any equal strength, and
that use one kind of Discipline, being imbattelled one against the other, but
the one Army out-fronteth the other upon one of the Wings, and the other Army
outfronteth the other upon the contrary Wing, when both Armies come to
encounter. Therefore you ought to give punctual Orders, before the Battle
begins, to those Chief Commanders that Command on the outermost flanks of
the Vanguards of the Horse, that in case either of the Wings of Horse does
out-front his Enemies Wing of Horse, they should advance easily, keeping their
order with that Wing of Horse which they Command (as soon as their Cannon begin
to play, and not before) and charge that Wing of Horse which they do out-front.
Command also those Divisions of Horse that out-flank your Enemies Horse on the
flanks, when they come within a near distance of your Enemies Troops, to wheel
with their Divisions so, that they may be able to charge the Wing of their
Enemies Horse on the flank, at the same time when the rest of the Horse
charge them in the Front. And in case you do out-front your Enemies Army on
both flanks, either by the advantage of the number of your men, or by the
well-ordering of them, then both your Wings of Horse must observe the aforesaid
order.

Here you must note, that if you fight Foot among your Horse, your Foot must
advance with your Horse, and your Horse by no means to advance before your
Foot, until your Enemies Horse be put to flight.

But if it falls out so (as most commonly it does) that the one Army be
out-flanked upon one Wing, and the same Army does out flank the other Army on
the other Wing: if it fortune so, that you be out-flanked in one of your Wings
of Horse, then ought the General to give an especial order to the Officers,
that that Wing of Horse which is out-flanked do not advance from the main Body
of the Foot, but keep an even front with the Foot, until their Enemies Horse
come up close to them to charge them. And in the mean time so soon as the
Officers of either of your Wings of Horse discover that they shall be
out-flanked, they ought to have order to draw up on the outermost flank of that
wing of Horse that is out-flanked, the Reer-Guard of Horse of the same wing of
Horse with all the expedition that may be. For I am confident it is far less
dangerous to want a Reerguard in a wing of Horse, than to be out-flanked by his
Enemies Horse. Likewise those Officers that do perceive they shall be
out-flanked by the Enemies Horse, ought to have order that if any of their
Divisions of Horse (which does most often fall out, when they are out-flanked
by the Enemies wing of Horse) do front against the Enemies Foot, and not
against their Horse, that then they shall draw all those Divisions of Horse on
the outermost flanks of the same wing of Horse.

But in the imbattelling of two Armies, if it prove so that your Armies are
equally fronted (the which seldom or never does happen) then if you have one
wing of Horse that are more confident in their Valor and Resolution, than you
are of the other, let that wing of Horse charge first (for as many hands make
light work, so the best hands make surest work:) and the other wing of Horse
keep in even front with the main body of Foot, until the Enemies Horse come up
to charge them.

You ought to use your best judgment, and skill to charge your Enemy first in
that place where you are surest to overcome him: for so favorable are men's
judgments to that which is already happened, that the sequel of every action
depends for the most part upon the beginning.

If it fortune so, that either of your wings of Horse do put to flight either
of your Enemies wings of Horse, then ought the Chief Commander of that wing of
Horse to have order upon the flight of his Enemies wing of Horse, to send but
three Divisions of Horse after them; the which three Divisions of Horse ought
to have their Orders beforehand for the same, and their Directions what to do.
One of the three Divisions of Horse that is appointed to follow the routed wing
of the Enemies Horse, should be commanded to be sub-divided into small
sub-divisions when they are to follow the execution, about fifteen Horsemen in
a Division; and the other two Divisions of Horse ought to follow after in
order; and keeping their men together without being sub-divided, that they may
make good the Retreat of the other Division of Horse, which is upon the
execution of those Horse of the Enemy which are fled: And all the three
Divisions of Horse ought to have order not to follow the Enemy above a mile,
and then to return to the Army again, with all the expedition that they may.
And all your other Horse that have put the Enemies wing of Horse to flight,
ought to charge the Enemies Foot with as much speed as they can.

Having spoken of some advantages that may be taken by the Horse on the flanks
of an Army in a day of Battle (the which are the chiefest advantages in winning
of a Battle) and how they are to prepare against disadvantages that may happen:
I will now speak something concerning some advantages, and some disadvantages
that may happen in Foot Service in a day of Battle.

And first of the advantages that may be taken by Foot in a day of Battle; the
greatest advantage that can be made use of, is by ordering the Musketeers so,
that they may be able readily to skirmish with Foot, and to be suddenly put in
order upon any occasion to be sheltered by the Pikes from the Enemies Horse.
Each Division of Foot that fight in the Body of your Army (if you intend to use
this kind of Discipline which is set down in this Book) ought to be in strength
two hundred eighty eight men, half Pikes, and half Musketeers. And each
Division of Foot that is to fight amongst your Horse, ought to be an hundred
forty four men in strength, half Pikes and half Musketeers. The way how to
order these Divisions of Foot in a day of Battle is shown you in these three
following Battles. By this way of ordering your Foot, the success of a Battle
will not wholly rely upon the success of the Horse, as it does now adays, as we
do order our Infantry.

Your Foot being ordered this way as is before spoken of, the success of a
Battle will lie more upon the success of the Foot, then upon the Horse. And I
account them (being thus ordered as is here set down, and as you shall see them
in these three following Battles) a more firm body to trust to for Victory,
than the Horse. The Horse likewise by fighting of Foot among them become a
firmer Body, than by fighting Horse alone. And such as shall make trial of this
way of imbattelling their Troops, shall find it very advantageous unto them in
fighting a Battle, and no hinderance at all, but a great furtherance to the
Horse-Service.

If your Fieldpieces be of ten or twelve foot in length, and having their full
metal, and if you meet with an Enemy whose Fieldpieces are not so long, you
will find that you have by it a great advantage of your Enemy. The advantage is
this, when you come with your Army and Artillery within shot of your Enemies
Body of Foot, your Artillery being placed in the Vanguard of your Army,
command your Army to stand, and your Cannoneers to play with your Artillery
upon the Enemy. If your Enemies Fieldpieces be no longer than are usually
carried into the Field, you will be able to shoot upon your Enemies Body of
Foot, a quarter of a mile before your Enemies Artillery will be able to shoot
at your Body of Foot with any certainty. The which will prove a great advantage
to those that shall make use of it, to be able to out-shoot your Enemy a
quarter of a mile with your Artillery; and your Enemy to recover that
disadvantage must be constrained to march a quarter of a mile in Battalia with
his Army before he can bring his Artillery to shoot to any purpose at your
Army; the which will prove (if you have good Cannoneers) a great
dis-heartening, if not a total overthrow to your Enemy.

All the Musketeers that march in the Vanguard of an Army in a day of Battle
ought to have two pair of Bandaliers furnished with Powder and Bullet; and in
case you have no Bandaliers, let there be provided for each Musqueteer in the
Vanguard of the Army twelve Carthrages, which they ought to carry in their
right hand pockets, and twelve Bullets apiece in their pockets besides: and
each company to carry with them, for the re-furnishing their Musketeers upon
occasion, a Powder-bag full of Powder. Thus ought the Musketeers in the
Vanguard of an Army to be furnished: All the rest of the Musketeers ought to
have their Bandaliers furnished with Powder, and Bullet; and each Musqueteer
ought to have twelve Bullets apiece in their Pockets; and each company must
carry with them a Powder-bag full of Powder.

It is very fit likewise that you have in each Company six good Fouling-pieces,
of such a length as a Soldier may well be able to take aim, and to shoot off
at ease; twelve of them being placed in a day of Battle, when you bring a
Division of Foot to skirmish with an Enemy on the flanks of a Division of Foot;
six Fowling-pieces on the one flank of a Division of Foot, and six on the other
flank, as you shall see them placed in these three Battles following. Those
Soldiers that carry the Fowling-pieces, ought to have command when they come
within distance of Shot of that Division of the Enemy that they are to
encounter with, that they shoot not at any, but at the Officers of that
Division.

Likewise you ought to have on the flanks of each Division of Pikes, a Soldier
with Hand-Granadoes, that if you bring your men to push of Pike, they are to
fire the Grenades, and to throw them in amongst the Enemies Pikemen; which
will prove a great advantage, if they be boldly and well thrown.

Unto every Division of Foot in the Battle of your Army you ought to have two
Divisions of Horse, of forty in a Division, ten in front, and four deep on each
flank of each Division of Foot in the Battle of your Army, as you shall see
them in these three following Battles. These Divisions of Horse will be always
in a readiness to charge the Enemies Foot at all times when the General shall
think fit.

If you out-flank your Enemies Foot with your Foot, either on the one flank, or
both the flanks, let so many of your Divisions of Foot as do outflank your
Enemies Foot, be drawn up on the Enemies flank, and give fire on them: And the
Officers in Chief that Command on the flanks of the Vanguard of the Foot,
ought to have particular Orders for the same, in case any such thing should
happen: and likewise they are to have a special Order for the keeping of their
true distances in their advance toward an Enemy.

If you perceive you have more Pikemen in your Army than your Enemy, or if your
Pikemen be better armed with Defensive Arms, or with longer Pikes, and that you
have no advantage of him in your Artillery, nor the Enemy in the ground upon
which you are to advance; then make what orderly have you can, (continually
skirmishing with your Enemy with the Vanguard of your Foot) to bring your men
to push of Pike with your Enemy. When you have done that, you must give order
to the Officers in Chief that Command the Battle of your Army, that they be
careful to advance so with the Battle to front with the Vanguard of the Enemy,
some little while before your men come to push of Pike, that at that time you
may bring as many men to fight as you can.

The disadvantages that may happen to the Foot in a day of Battle are these.
The greatest is to be beaten by the Horse, either on the one flank, or both
flanks: and therefore the Foot Officers ought to imbattel their Foot so, that
they may be able to shelter their Musketeers by their Pikes from the charge of
any Horse. The way how it may be done is showed plainly in the three next
Battles. Another disadvantage is to be out-flanked by your Enemies Foot; to
prevent which, your Chief Officers that command on the flanks of the Foot ought
to have Order, that as soon as they perceive they are or shall be out-flanked
upon one, or both the flanks, they should draw up the Reerguard of their Foot
unto one, or both flanks of the Vanguard of their Foot, as they shall see
cause. Another disadvantage that the Foot may have is to be out-shot by the
Enemies Artillery: In case it falls out so, then, when you once come within
shot of your Enemies Artillery, your Horse ought to have order to advance as
orderly, and speedily as they may, until they come to encounter with the
Enemies Horse. If you fight with Foot amongst your Horse, your Horse and your
Foot must advance together. Likewise you must advance with your Foot and
Artillery as orderly and speedily as may be, until you come within shot of your
Enemy with your Artillery, without shooting either with your Cannon or Muskets.

If you understand that your Enemy has more Pikemen in his Army than you have,
or his Pikemen better armed with Defensive Arms, or their Pikes to be longer
than yours; then ought you to avoid, as much as you can, the bringing of your
Soldiers to push of Pike.

In case the Musketeers in the Van guard of your Foot do come to want Powder,
or your Divisions of Foot in the Vanguard of your Army have lost so many men,
that they need relief from their reserves in the Battle; then let the Officers
in the Vanguard of the Foot have special command not to retreat with the
Vanguard of Foot by no means, but to advance skirmishing easily toward the
Enemy, until their reserves be marched by them. Then let their Officers Command
them to stand, and see that their Bandaliers be furnished with Powder, and
Bullet, and set them in order with as much expedition as may be; and then let
them march up within an hundred and fifty paces of the Reer-guard of Foot, and
to be in a readiness to second them upon any occasion.

A General ought to give particular Orders to all the Officers in Chief of his
Army before the Battle begins, in writing, if he have time, that the Officers
in Chief may know how to Command their Soldiers to make use of all the
advantages, that he conceives may happen unto them in a day of Battle: that
upon any neglect of his Officers for not making use of any such opportunities,
the excuse of not having Order for the same may be taken away. Likewise it
should be written in their Orders how they ought to prevent any disadvantages
that a General conceives may befall them. The which will not only prevent
excuses, but according to the old saying, He that is forewarned is fore-armed.

Set upon your Enemy when he is affrighted and distracted; for there is nothing
then to be expected of your Enemy but despair and confusion.

A General must be careful to give a very strict Order to his Officers, and
Soldiers, that not a man of them offer to Pillage before the Field be clear of
the Enemy; and that such Officers as do suffer their Soldiers to Pillage
before the Field be clear of the Enemy, shall suffer for the same as the
Soldiers for Pillaging.

Before the Battle begins, you ought to give out a Field-word both to your
Officers and Soldiers; and besides your word, that your Soldiers and Officers
may the better be able to know one the other, being mixed with the Enemy: they
ought to wear something or other about them to be known from the Enemy.

After the winning of a Battle, a General should follow his Victory with all
the expedition that he may, either by keeping his Enemy from gathering an head
again, or presently falling upon some Countries or Towns, where he thinks he
may do his Enemy the most hurt: For the yieldings after a Victory, if well
prosecuted, are better than the Victory it self: because when people are in
suspense, and great fear, and confusion, as it happens in sudden things, it
is a singular time to obtain Victories, or some honorable composition. The
fruit of Victory consists in the well using of it, which whosoever does not,
incurreth an infamy so much the greater, than not to know how to overcome, by
how much it is a greater fault to be deceived by the things that are in a man's
power, than by those that depend upon fortune.

Likewise a General is to take care for recruiting of his Army upon all
occasions, but especially after a Battle.

Although those things which are here before set down seem easy to understand,
and very easy to practice; yet are they so often neglected by Commanders in
Chief, either in neglecting to make use of advantages, or not giving out
punctual Orders before a Battle for the aforesaid things, or through the
neglect of such as should put their directions in execution, that one or more
of the aforesaid neglects are always the loss of Battles. And the loss of two
or three Battles proves the loss of Countries and Kingdoms.

He that desires either that a City defend it self obstinately, or that an
Army in the Field fight it out resolutely, must try his Wits to make an
impression in the breasts of them that are to fight, that such a necessity
lies upon them. And it much helps an Army toward the winning of a Battle,
to make them confident that in any case they cannot doubt of Victory. The
things that give them this confidence, are, that they be well armed, and well
ordered. For when Valor is accompanied with good Order, and good Discipline,
it makes good use of the fury in such manner, and at such times, that no
difficulty abateth it, nor ever quaileth the courage: Because those good orders
reinforce the Spirit, and the Fury, both being still maintained by the hope of
overcoming, which never fails while good Orders and good Discipline hold firm.

You ought not to despise, and think too meanly of your Enemy; for that will
not only beget negligence in your own Army, but care and diligence in your
Enemies Army. And it is most sure, the valor of a few may surmount the number
of many: and if you be broken by your Enemy that you despise, you double your
own disgrace by your rash and indiscreet arrogance.

But to speak of chances, and to touch some particularities, thereby to show
evidently the weakness of man's wit, and power, and the casualty of warlike
attempts: let a man consider by how many accidents the mightiest Armies are
many times dispersed, and dissipated, and the greatest Enterprises overthrown.
As sometimes by the death of one man; sometimes by the dissension of Officers,
or Soldiers; sometimes by tempests, or unseasonable weather: sometimes again
by Plagues, or Diseases in the Camp: otherwhiles by sudden Fears that fall upon
the Soldiers without cause; sometimes (as Guicciardine notes) by a
Commandment either not well understood, or ill executed, by a little temerity
of disorder, by some vain word or speech of the meanest Soldier: and lastly
(says he) by infinite changes which happen at unawares, unpossible to be
foreseen and prevented by the wit or counsel of any man. Which shows that no
humane wit is able of it self sufficiently to govern an Army, and that God
reserveth to himself the success of Battles, and disposes of Victories at his
pleasure.

CHAP. XIX. Some certain Observations concerning the Retreat of an Army.
TO know how to make an honorable Retreat, is one of the principal points of
Military Art, and worthiest the knowledge of a General, to be able upon
occasion to make a safe and sure Retreat: For those that can do nothing else
can easily put themselves into a War, but to return home again in safety is
that which concerns the honor of a Leader.

When a General intends to retreat with his Army, he must be careful that (if
it be possible) his Retreat be not through any places, but such as his Pioners
may be able to make him, where three or four may march in breast, besides the
way for the Carriages: For there is no greater danger of receiving a Defeat
than when a Retreat is made at a narrow passage. But if you be forced to make a
Retreat through a narrow passage, there is no better way to prevent danger,
than to raise some Works near this passage in the most advantageous places you
can find. If you retreat in the night with your Army, and have passed any
narrow passage with your Troops, it were very good for you to give command that
some Caltraps be thrown into those narrow passages to spoil your Enemies Horse,
if they follow your Troops; and if you retreat in the daytime with your Army,
the aforesaid Caltraps will be very useful to be thrown into dirty and watery
passages.

A Retreat in view of the Enemy is the most dangerous action that can be
undertaken by any Commander. And therefore it is held in the opinion of most
Commanders better to retreat in the night, than in the day: because it is very
dangerous to pursue an Army in the night; and if he that retreateth be careful
to lay his ambushes well, he may sooner do a mischief to his Enemy than his
Enemy to him.

Likewise it is better to retreat with part of an Army, than with the whole;
and it is best to march as far at first as possibly you may, to the end you
might have some advantage of space before the Enemy that follows you: for so
the Enemy durst not follow you with small Troops, and with great Forces they
will never be able to reach you; besides the scarcity and want of Victuals that
they will find by following you, will much discourage them

Some Commanders now adays, whose skill reaches not so far as to know the ABC
in the Art Military, that is to say, the use of their Arms, they think it a
blemish to their Honors to make a private Retreat in the night. But this is
that that I will say of such Gallants, Presumption and Ignorance are two bad
Counselors in War.

CHAP. XX. Some Observations concerning the stopping of an Army upon Passages
either over Rivers, or difficult and mountainous places.
IN the first place I will speak something of stopping the passage of an Army
upon a River, if your Army be to pass a River that is not passable, but upon
two or three places, without making a Bridge: I conceive this to be the best
way. Upon the chiefest passage over the River there you ought to attend your
Enemy with all your Forces, if you may find there sufficient provisions for
your Army to subsist. And upon the other two Fords, or passable places, if they
may be commanded each of them by one Sconce, I think it convenient then for you
to give order for the raising of two Sconces, and to see them well furnished
with Cannon, Men, Ammunition, and Victuals. But here you must note, if your
Enemy do bring with him Punts, or Boats for to make a Bridge, or if he be able
to procure Boats out of the Country for the aforesaid purpose, then I conceive
the raising of the Sconces is a needless labor: Therefore then the best way
will be to march with your whole Army on the one side of the River, as your
Enemy marches on the other (if the Country in your March be able to afford you
Provisions for your Army) and so to fight with your Enemy as he passes the
River; or after your Enemy has possessed the River, if you think you have
Forces sufficient to encounter him.

I hold it a most dangerous, and un-Souldierlike action for any Commander to
divide his Forces for the keeping of passages against an Army, whether it be
upon a River, or any other strait and difficult passages: for you ought not to
put all your Fortune in danger, and not all your Forces: To do so is a manifest
folly. He is never thought a good Gamester that would hazard his whole rest
upon less than the strength of his whole Game. My reasons for it are these: If
your Enemy forces one of those passages that you endeavor to keep, or find
out some other passage that is not guarded, you will find much trouble and
pains before you can draw your Forces together. And very likely the Enemy may
prevent you from doing it, either by forcing you to fight before your Forces
are come to you, or by keeping you from joining your Forces together again. And
when it comes to pass that your Forces must leave the passage which they are
to guard, or lose it by some occasion, there is a fear and terror stricken into
the hearts of the people and Soldiers which trusted in that place; that being
unable to make experience of their valor, you lose, or are in danger to lose
your Enterprise. Thus it came to pass at the coming of the French into Italy in
the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, in the time of Francis the
First, King of France, where it manifestly appeared to what pass it came to
hold difficult places ill to be kept, and to stop passages, as you may see in
Guicciard. lib. 12. For the reasons aforesaid the Romans never held nor guarded
the passages against Hannibal, but rather would that their Armies should fight
in open places where they might overcome him than to send them to the Mountains
to be consumed with cold, or other discommodities of those places.

CHAP. XXI. Some certain Observations touching the profitableness of
Intrenching, and some Directions for the same.
THE Intrenchment incloseth your Army as a walled City, from whence you may
march privately with such designs, leaving your Baggage in safety. The
Intrenchment hinders the Enemy from constraining you to fight, unless when
you please. The Intrenchment causes you to take strong Cities in the face of a
more puissant Army than your own. Briefly, the Intrenchment is less subject to
Infection, than the Villages are. In effect, an Army Entrenched and hutted,
will rather subsist three months in Health in a Camp (in the Summertime) than
a fortnight in the best Villages. One of the most necessary parts of War is to
know how well to incamp, and entrench.

When you come to besiege a Town before which you intend to entrench your Army,
you ought to place your line of Circumvolation so near the Town, that you may
be able to quarter your Army within it safely from your Enemies Shot; allowing
an hundred and fifty foot for an Alarmplace between the Breast work and the
front of the Quarters. The Trench without your Breast-work must be twelve foot
in breadth, and six foot in depth, and three foot in breadth at the bottom. And
the Earth that comes out of the Trench will raise you a Breast-work, or
Rampire of twelve foot in breadth at the bottom, six foot in height, and three
foot in breadth at the top, with one foot bank. Upon your line of
Circumvolation at the distance of every two hundred paces, you ought to have a
Spur upon your line to flank it. And before the Quarters of every Regiment upon
your line of Circumvolation you must leave a small Avenue, that one single man
and no more may be able to pass through at a time. You must likewise have in
your line of Circumvolation four great Avenues for Carriages to pass through:
and upon the great Avenues you must set up Turn-pikes, and without every
Turn-pike there must be an Half Moon. Here note, your Army must be divided into
as many Quarters as you intend to have approaches against the Town. And you
must raise some Batteries close within the line of Circumvolation, there where
you think the most advantageous places may be for the same, for the annoying of
any Enemy that may come to trouble you.

If you suppose your Enemy may come so strong as to attempt the forcing of your
Quarters, then ought the Trench of your line of Circumvolation to be in breadth
sixteen foot, and in depth eight, and in breadth at bottom six foot. You ought
likewise to have some Outworks, both Half-Moons, and Horn-works, within
Musket Shot of your Rampire or Breast-work. And if there be any Hills somewhat
above Musket Shot off from your line of Circumvolation, that may be
advantageous to your Enemy for the planting of his Ordnance to play upon your
Breast-work, or any part of your Quarters, you ought upon such an Hill to raise
a Sconce. Thus you ought to observe and do, if you intend to fortify your
Leaguer strongly for to prevent a powerful Army from forcing your Quarters.

If you have a desire upon any occasion to Entrench your Army in the Field for
their better safety, your best way then will be to draw your Army into as
little a compass of ground as you may with convenience. For the less compass
your Rampire is, the easier it will be to defend: And if you have any occasion
to send out any part, or parts of your Army upon any design, those which are
left, the less compass of ground they have to desend, the better they will be
able to do it.

The Sod or Turf which you are to face your Intrenchment withal, if you are
likely to have any Winter-Siege, or any long Siege, must be four or five inches
long, or thereabouts, and in length fourteen or fifteen inches diminished
inwards.

CHAP. XXII. Some certain Observations about the taking of Towns and strong
Places.
THere are seven ways to win Castles, strong Holds, and fortified Towns. First,
by Treachery. Secondly, by Surprise, as by Petarring the Ports, and by
Assaults. Thirdly, by Approaches, Batteries, and Assaults. Fourthly, by
Approaches, Mining, Batteries, and Assaults. Fifthly, by Intrenching,
Approaches, Mining, Battery, and Assaults. Sixthly, by Composition. Seventhly,
by Starving.

Philip of Macedon esteemed no place strong, where his Ass laden with Gold
might enter. For the attempting, or taking of Towns by Surprise is very
commendable in Officers, and sometimes very successful where the Officers have
good Intelligence, and carry their business secretly, carefully, orderly, and
valiantly. And there is no adventure for surprising a place more safe in War,
than that which is farthest from suspicion of being undertaken: and by such
sudden designs one may gain that in one hour, the which may not be gotten any
other way under a years service of an Army, or two.

In the besieging of all Towns a Commander must be careful that his Enemy be
not able to cut off his Victual, or his Retreat; and that he besiege no Town
but such as he is able to cut off all relief from the Besieged. A Commander in
Chief ought likewise to be careful how he adventureth upon Winter-Sieges, and
long Winter-Services, or long Sieges at any time, unless the consequence of the
place requires it, and that he be sure to take it in the end. Long Sieges
ruin Armies, empty the Purse, and most commonly it falls out so, that it
hinders Armies from better employments; and after a long Siege, though things
fall out according to a Commanders desire, he will have little reason to brag
of his Victory, when he vieweth his Expenses, his Time, and his Army. The
malice of a great Army is broken, and the force of it spent in a great Siege.
Hannibal entering into Italy with his Army to make War upon the Romans, would
not be drawn to besiege any of their Towns: all his War was to weaken them in
Force and Reputation, knowing that when he was absolute Master of the Field, it
would not be long e're the walled Cities would open their Gates, without
expecting any Engineer or Battery.

If a General besieges any Town in which his intelligence, or his opinion has
deceived him so much, that he has little hope of taking it, the speedy leaving
off any such Enterprise does excuse the rashness which might be imputed to the
beginning: and a Chief Commander is not so much blamed for making trial of an
ill-digested project, as he is for the obstinate continuing in the same: and if
he refuses to be led by reason in such a case, as being the best means to
guide him to convenient ends, he is commonly constrained by the commanding
warrant of necessity to undergo the same thing upon harder conditions.

It is most difficult to accomplish the design of a Siege, especially of any In
land Town, so long as you have a good Army encamped near you, or likely to
attend you speedily, the which Army will be able to cut off your Victuals, or
constrain you to fight, unless you have two Bodies of Armies, that so with the
one you may hold your Enemy in play, and with the other you may actuate without
impeachment: or, unless you be Master at Sea of your Enemy, and then you may
besiege any Sea Town of your Enemy with one Army, without any hazard at all, if
you can have time to entrench your self strongly, before your Enemy be able to
enforce you to fight.

The surest, safest, and speediest way of taking any Town, if it requires
above three weeks Siege, and if your Enemy be able to bring any force to put
relief into it, or to force you to fight, is, by intrenching your self before
them. And when you are entrenched before a Town, where your Enemies hopes in
making you to quit it do consist in nothing else, but in cutting off your
Victuals, you ought to have that foresight to bring with you, or cause to be
brought into your Leaguer out of the Country so much Victuals as you judge to
be necessary to serve your turn for the taking of the Town. This way you may
take a Town with one Army, though your Enemy speedily attends you with
another Army.

If you make a Siege with a small Army, with an intent to starve a strong
Garrison, you must fortify your Quarters one after another with the whole body
of your Army; and then if you think fit you may run lines from one quarter to
another.

Every Commander knows that man's flesh is the best Fortification that belongs
to a Town; and where a Town is well manned, the best way of taking it is by
Starving; and when a Town is weakly manned, the best way of taking it is by
Battery and Assaults, or by Approaches, Mining, Battery, and Assaults.

One thing more I could advise a Commander in Chief to be careful of, and that
is, not to assault any Town, or Place without great probability of obtaining
that which he desires; and never to assault a Town, but when he may assault it
at diverse places at once. There is nothing so suddenly ruineth Armies as
Assaults when they miscarry. For a General is certain to have his best men
killed and spoiled upon such designs, and the rest so much discouraged, that it
would prove very dangerous unto an Army if they should suddenly after it fight.

Mines, where you may come to make them, are much better than Batteries for the
taking of Towns or Castles: because they always prove much more dangerous, and
terrible to an Enemy by means of their sudden, and unexpected operations: and
all sudden and unexpected actions are very successful in all Martial Affairs. A
Commander cannot take any place of strength with any certainty or safety,
without the use both of Batteries and Mines.

A Chief Commander when he marches to besiege a Town, ought to carry with him
as much Money, Ammunition, Victuals, and all other necessaries, as is possible
to be carried for the Siege: and those necessaries that he cannot carry with
him, he must be careful to furnish himself withal with as much expedition as
may be, for fear his Enemy may find out some way that he does not think of to
prevent him of his necessaries, or at least cause them to be brought to him
with much danger and trouble.

The first thing you are to do when you are marching toward a Town to besiege
it, is to send the most of your Horse and Dragooners, and with them likewise
near as many Musketeers as you send Horse, about three or four days before the
body of your Army; that you may thereby keep all supplies from coming to the
Town: and command your Horsemen to take up the Musketeers now and then behind
them upon the March, that they may be able to make the more expedition. You
ought also to send along with the Horse your Quartermaster General, and some
two or three of your chief Engineers, that they may, by that time your Army
comes up, have pricked out the line of Circumvolation, and the Quarters for
your Army; and to view how many approaches you may conveniently make toward
the Town: For so many approaches as you make, so many quarters ought you to
divide your Army into. After your Engineers, and Quarter Master-General have
pricked out the line of Circumvolation, and the quarters, then so soon as your
Army comes to the quarters, draw them into their Quarters, and command them to
Hut with all the expedition they can. Likewise the line of Circumvolation ought
to be divided into as many parts as there are quarters, according to the
strength of the Regiments in each quarter. Then the Quarter Masters of the
Regiments of Foot ought to divide the ground equally amongst their Regiments;
and each Quartermaster of a Regiment is to measure out to each Company of his
Regiment their ground: and the Officers are presently to set the Soldiers
their work, for the raising of the line of Circumvolation. And the Soldiers
ought to know when occasion requires them to entrench themselves, that it does
as properly belong to their Duty to entrench themselves, as to stand Centry, or
to carry their Arms.

As soon as the earth is out of the Ditch for the raising of your Rampire, then
may you begin your approaches. And you must always be careful to break ground
at the first, as near the Town as possibly you may with convenience: And that
you may break ground the nearer, and your men be the more bold, set your
Pioners and some others to work as you come to your Quarters, for the making of
great store of Cannon-Baskets, which may serve you in good stead for this use:
At the beginning of every night set them up before those which are to break
ground; and on each hand of those Cannon-Baskets which you set up before the
Soldiers that are to break ground, you ought to set some Cannon-Baskets for
the safeguard of the Guards. Your approaches ought always to be well flanked
with Redoubts and Batteries.

If a General come before a Town, where is but a weak Garrison, and many
Outworks to the Town more than the Garrison is well able to defend, it will be
good then for a General to attempt taking of some of the Outworks; and if he
take any, he ought to begin his approaches from thence.

The best time to assault the Outworks will be in the night.

Through all dry Motes you are to approach the Rampire of a Town by Galleries
under ground, under the dry Mote of the Town. And through all wet Motes you are
to approach to the Rampire of a Town by Galleries above ground. But in running
your Gallery under a dry Mote you must have a care that it be not discovered to
the Enemy by carrying the earth out of your Gallery. The next thing you must
have a care of, is, that you do inform your self rightly, before you begin your
Gallery, of what depth the Mote is, that you may begin to make your Gallery so
far back, as to be sure to run your Gallery under the bottom of your Enemies
Mote. For if your Enemy once discovers against what part of the Wall you are
running your Gallery, it is ten to one but your Enemy may prevent you, either
by hindering you from advancing your Gallery to the Rampire, or by rubbing your
Mines.

When you have advanced your Galleries to the Rampire, let those that are
appointed to assault the Breaches, and the Ports, have Soldiers appointed to
throw Hand-granadoes, and to fall on with them: and give order to those that
are appointed to assault the Breaches, and scale the Walls, that as soon as
they are gotten within the Wall, or Rampire of the Town with a reasonable
number of men, they march unto that Port that is next them, and open it to let
in the Foot, and Horse that do there attend. And for this purpose there ought
to be some Soldiers appointed to carry fit Instruments for the breaking open
the Gates of a Town.

When a Port is opened, let the Officers have order presently to repair to the
Market place with their Soldiers for clearing of the Enemy from that place.
And you ought to command the Officers and Soldiers that no man offer to
pillage upon pain of death, until all the Enemy within the Town that carry Arms
be either killed or disarmed. Besides the word you give to your Soldiers, to
know one the other by, you should command them to wear something about them
that they may know one the other from the Enemy.

If your Officers when they assault a Town do find the Town to be cut off by
the Enemy by raising any works within the Rampire, or Wall of the Town, then a
Chief Commander should give Orders to the Officers appointed for the Assault,
that in case they find any such thing, then they should do their best to plant
themselves with their Soldiers on the top of the Rampire only; which must be
done by help of the Engineers Work-basis, and Pioners, who must be appointed to
be in a readiness with Saccots in their hands, when they shall be called upon
to fortify any place that the Soldiers may possess themselves of, if occasion
require. The like order must be observed in assaulting of Outworks, as is here
set down in this last observation concerning the assaulting of a Town.

You ought likewise to have in a readiness Ovens to heat Cannon-Bullets red-hot
upon all such Batteries whereby you can conveniently come to shoot them into
the Town. Likewise your Mortar-pieces must be so conveniently placed, that you
may shoot Mortar-granadoes into the Town, and wait a little to see the effect
of your Fire-Bullets, and Grenades.

Here note, that you must not shoot any Fire-Bullets, nor Mortar-Granadoes into
the Town, until one, half hour before you begin to assault: For if you do use
the Fire-Bullets, and Mortar-Granadoes before the aforesaid time, you will
teach your Enemy to find out a way to prevent you for doing any mischief with
them at your Assault: And likewise your Enemy being used to them, the fear of
the danger of them will by use be taken away, (...) upon your Assault.

(...) and your men drawn out, and (...) for the Assault of the Breaches, and
your Ordnance playing with Fire-Bullets, and your Mortar-pieces with their
Grenades, then spring your Mines, and give a general Assault.

One thing more I think fit to add to this Discourse. There are two ways for
blocking up of an Haven, or a River. The first is, You must make of Iron a
thing in form of a Frisrutter; the beams through which the cross-bars go must
be twelve foot in length, and the cross-bars that go through the beam must be
of that length, that when one of these iron Frisrutters is set down into an
Haven, or River, the cross-bars of the iron Frisrutter must be of that length
as to reach upon an High Water within six foot of the top of the water. This is
one of the best inventions that I know for the blocking up of an Haven, or
River. There is no way that I know to remove these Frisrutters out of an Haven
or River, which is blockt up with them, and having so many of these Frisrutters
made in a readiness beforehand as will block up an Haven or River upon which
you have a design, and having all other necessaries in a readiness for the
letting of those Frisrutters down into the Haven, or River, you may block up an
Haven or River in four and twenty hours time.

There is another way of blocking up an Haven or River, by throwing great
Stones into them, and leaving small passages for the water to pass through. By
this Invention the King of France won Rochel.

CHAP. XXIII. Some Directions for the Removing of an Army that is Entrenched
before a Town.
IF an Enemy be entrenched before a Town, it most often proves hard to remove
him, if he has men enough to defend his line of Circumvolation, and keep his
Approaches. The most usual ways to remove an Enemy which is entrenched before a
Town, are these four. The first is, to attempt the cutting off your Enemies
Provisions from him. The second is, if your Enemy has by oversight left some
Hills near the Town without his line of Circumvolation unfortified: and if the
Hills be so, that Ordnance being planted upon them, they will command the
ground between them and the Town; then you may by possessing your self of these
Hills force your way to the Town either by a forceable Assault under the
shelter of your Cannon, or by Approaches: Or if any Hills lie so that you may
command the ground close within your Enemies line of Circumvolation, planting
Ordnance on them, that your men may under succor of your Ordnance be able to
force your Enemies line of Circumvolation; then you may beat him off his line
of Circumvolation, and so force his Quarter. The third way is to march into
some of your Enemies Countries. The fourth and last way is to besiege some of
his Chief Towns, that you have certain intelligence do want either Men,
Victual, or Ammunition.

(...)such Horses as he intends to keep in his Garrison in a Siege.

If a Garrison lies so, that it cannot easily be relieved with Ammunition,
then the Governor ought to have a Powder-mill in his Town; and in his Magazine
good store of Brimstone, and one that is skilful in making of Powder, and
another that has skill in making Match: and he must be careful to sow at a fit
time of the year a competent quantity of Hemp Seed for the making of Match. If
the Corn-Mills about a Town lie so, that the Enemy may be able to spoil, and
destroy them, then the Governor ought to see his Town furnished with
Hand-mills. He must also have a special care that his Walls be out of danger of
scaling; the Gates of his Town not subject to be petarred. Now the best way to
prevent petarring the Ports, is to have Draw-bridges, and Half-moons, without
the Ports, and Port-cullices at the Ports, and Turn-pikes upon the Highways
right against your Half-moons. The ways for the Rounds ought to be easy, and
convenient; the Sentinels well set: the Guards very exact; and the Companies
that are to watch should always draw Lots for their Guards.

And if you suspect any Officers, or Soldiers for betraying your Town (as in
Civil Wars Soldiers are apt to do, or when they are ill paid) then must you
order your Guards after this manner. Let your Companies that watch draw Lots,
for their Guards upon the Parrado place every night: when they have drawn Lots
for their Guards, let those Companies whose Lot falls to watch at the Ports
be ordered after this manner. That Company whose Lot falls to watch at a
Port, let the one half of that Company watch at the Port that is appointed them
by Lot, and the other half at one of the Half-moons at one of the other Ports
next adjoining. And all the Companies that are to watch at the Ports are to be
ordered in the like manner.

Now here you must note, that if a Governor will have his Town secured from
sudden Surprises, he must have always without the Ports of his Town Half-moons,
and Turn-pikes upon the Highways right against the Half-moons, and
Port-cullices at his Ports. The Gentlemen that are to watch at each Port-cullis
ought to be four, which must be drawn, and relieved from the Main-guard. These
Gentlemen ought to be locked up in the place where the Port-cullices stand,
until they be relieved: and the Captain of the Main-guard ought always to keep
the Key. All the other Companies appointed for the Watch, are to watch
according unto their Lots.

All means must be used to hinder Intelligences, and Treacheries; the Guards
doubled always upon Market-days, and Fair-days: and upon any Alarm those
Soldiers that have not the Guard ought to repair with their Arms speedily to
their Colors; and from thence the Companies are to make all the haste possible
to attain to the place that is appointed them to defend upon any Alarm. Thus
much every Company that has not the Watch ought to know, and have order for
the same beforehand.

If you mistrust the fidelity of the Townsmen, you ought to keep a good
Main-guard upon the Marketplace, and small Guards at all the crossstreets, and
then make it death for any Townsman to come out of his house upon any Alarm.
And if the Townsmen have any meeting together at any time without the
Governors consent, they ought to be imprisoned. The like must be observed if
they are found out of their Houses after nine of the Clock at night. Likewise
if you mistrust the fidelity of the Townsmen, it is very necessary that there
be a Work raised against the Rampire of the Town, the which must face the Town,
and command part of it, and one of the Ports. In this work you ought to build
places for to keep your Magazine in. And at the entrance of this Work without
the Port of the aforesaid Work, there ought to be a Drawbridge and a Port
cullis; and the Drawbridge ought never to be down, or let down but at relief
time. The Ports of your Town ought to be shut at Sunsetting, and to be opened
a little after Sunrising. Before you open your Ports in a morning, you ought
to send out small Parties to search all the suspicious places about the Town
for Ambushes. After these parties are returned, finding no danger, you may open
your Ports, and set out your Day-Guards for the security of your Cattle: and
then the Townsmen may drive forth their Cattle. You ought likewise to have a
Trumpeter to watch continually on the highest Steeple in your Town, to give you
notice of the approach of any Enemy by day, or of any Alarm, or Fire by night.

A Governor of a Town should be careful always to have parties abroad, that he
may the better secure his own Quarters, and trouble the Enemy. And especial
care must be taken for getting constant intelligence from the next Frontier
Towns of his Enemy.

A Governor of a Town ought to see that he have as many Outworks raised about
his Town as is necessary, and not more; and that all his Outworks be commanded
by the Rampire of the Town.

If the consequence of the Town requires it, and if a Governor may by raising
a Sconce or two secure his Town, and the relief of it the better, it were very
fit to do it. But he must have a care that the Sconces which he raises for the
security of the Town be raised in such convenient places, that an Enemy when he
comes to Besiege the Town, may not be able to plant himself between the
Sconces and the Town.

In the fortifying of a Town if the Governor lay many Elms, or Oak-Trees, in
the Bulwarks which he raises about the Town, he will find it a good prevention
to hinder the Enemy from mining his Bulwarks: and likewise it does strengthen
his Bulwarks very much against Batteries.

If a Governor of a Town has certain intelligence that he shall be besieged,
and finds that he has not Horse meat sufficient for the Horse that are in
the Garrison answerable to the rest of his Provisions in the Town; and in case
he has not time to provide more, then the Governor ought to send away so many
of his Horse as he has not meat sufficient for to hold out with the rest of
his Provisions, or such as he supposes he shall not have occasion to use, unto
one of the next Towns that belong to his Party.

Likewise if a Governor of a Town find that he has more Outworks than his
Soldiers are well able to defend, it will be safest for him then to slight
those Outworks that he thinks he shall have less occasion to use.

A Governor must be careful of using his best endeavors and skill valiantly
to defend his Outworks. For next man's flesh, Outworks are the best strength
that belongs to a Town. And upon all occasions he must be careful to cut off
the Outworks of the Town; and the Town, as often as the Enemy shall enforce
him to it.

The greatest part of the Cannon of the Town ought to be planted against the
Enemies approaches; and the Governor ought to give command that they play upon
his Enemies approaches as often as his Ammunition will give leave.

A Governor should be careful to sally no oftener with strong parties than
necessity requires, or the advantages that the Enemy by his carelessness, or
boldness shall give him occasion.

At the beginning of every night you ought to make sallies with small parties
upon the Enemies Workmen that do then approach, and break ground, and now and
then to sally with a strong Party.

At the beginning of the night you ought to make some fires so near the Enemies
approaches as you can conveniently, that you may be able to see by the light of
the fire where your Enemies break ground, that so you may the better hinder
them by shooting at them with the more certainty.

For which occasion your Town ought to be the better provided of Wood, and
Pitch-Barrels. And there must be care taken to lay some Soldiers with
Fowling-pieces or Firelocks, behind little small Breast works not far from the
fires, to spoil those that may come to put out the fires.

If a Governor of a Town be sure he has more Powder than is answerable to the
rest of his Provisions (the which he ought always to have) then may a Governor
undermine his Enemies Corpse de Guards, when they are advanced very near unto
his Outworks. And always when he springs a Mine, he ought to sally strong on
his Enemies Trenches, and to command those Officers, if it be possible, to nail
the Enemies Ordnances; and for that purpose some Soldiers ought to be
appointed to carry fit instruments with them. And whenever you sally strong
on your Enemy, you must likewise have in a readiness some Spademen to slight
such of the Enemies works as your Soldiers shall possess themselves of Also
you must have a care to appoint many Soldiers for the throwing in of
Hand-Granadoes into your Enemies Corpse de Guards; the which will be a special
means to help your Soldiers for the beating your Enemy out of their Corpse de
Guards.

If your Town be fortified with a dry Mote, and if your Town be well manned, it
is much stronger then a wet Mote: And as soon as you see upon what parts of the
Town your Enemy does make his approaches, then dig a Trench in the bottom of
your dry Mote, so far as you see your Enemies approaches are in breadth against
your Town, about eight or ten foot in breadth, and so deep, until you come
either to Water or Rock. But if you are fain to dig deep before you find
either, then make a Gallery under ground under the bottom of your dry Mote, so
far as your Enemies approaches go. For which purpose your Town ought to be
furnished with good store of Timber. And if you observe the aforesaid
directions, it will be impossible for your Enemy to run his Galleries to the
Rampire of the Town without being discovered: and then you may easily prevent
him from doing you any hurt, either by his Galleries, or his Mines.

If your Town be fortified with a wet Mote, then the best and strongest
Fortifications that belong to a wet Mote is a false bray of some twenty foot in
breadth; and when you perceive where your Enemy will make over his Gallery to
your Rampire, then must you plant two of the best pieces of Cannon that you
have in your false Bray just against the mouth of your Enemies Galleries; the
which two pieces must be sunk so deep, that they may play almost level with the
water: By this means you will be able to do your Enemy the more mischief, and
secure your Ordnance the better from your Enemy. For the more security of your
Ordnance and Cannoneers from your Enemies Batteries, you ought to raise the
Traverses close to your Cannons cross your false Bray.

In desending the Outworks of a Town that is fortified with a wet Mote, there
must be a special care, and resolution showed: For the Out works being once
lost, you can Sally no more on your Enemy.

I will conclude with this advice to all Governors that are to defend a
besieged Town, that they have a special care of these three things. The first
is, that from the beginning to the end of a Siege, their care be such, that
their Garrisons spend no more Victuals daily, than necessity requires. The
second thing is, that they do not vainly waste their Men, Ammunition, and
firing, but that they do so order the expense of these things, that they may be
able to hold out with their Victuals: For many Governors do either cowardly,
or ignorantly make a waste of the aforesaid things, that they may give over
Towns the sooner to their Enemy, and that, as they conceive with honor enough;
whereas their own cowardliness has brought them to want necessaries for the
defense of their Towns, more than the pressing Service of their Enemies. But if
such Governors had their deserts, they ought to die for such carelessness and
cowardliness.

The third and last thing is, that they carefully defend their Outworks, and
their Town with all the Skill, Judgment, and Valor that they and their
Garrisons can afford; and that they so order their Sallies, and the cutting off
their Outworks and Towns, that their Garrisons and Towns may be able to hold
out so long as the Provisions of the Town shall last.

One thing more I think fit to add in this place, a way to break a Bome, or a
Bridge that shall be made over a River for hindering Provisions from coming to
the Town that is besieged. Take a great Ship, and let it be made with
Mason-work within in the manner of a Vaulted Cave, and upon the Hatches lay
Millstones, and other Stones of great weight, and within lay many Barrels of
Powder in the Vault. By means of the danger you will hardly get any man to
conduct it; therefore you must tie a great Beam at the end of the Ship to make
it keep a straight course in the midst of the Stream; and when you have a fair
wind, lay your Train and set it going.

If the Corn you keep in store for your Garrison be now and then dusted, it
will keep good in a Garner seven years; but if your Corn by chance grow musty,
then make Biscuit of it; for then it will make as good Biscuit as the best Corn
in the world.

CHAP. XXV. Some Observations concerning Fortifications.
TOuching the Art it self in respect of the matter, and the manner, it is a
member of Architecture; but the end is Military: For to fortify is nothing
else but to raise Works answerable to necessity, and the occurrences of War.
Neither is it the end of Fortification to make a place impregnable, or
impossible to be taken; for so it were ars artium. But to reduce it to a strong
defense: concerning which Art, seeing there are so many Books written, I will
here set down only thus much in brief of it, that in Fortifications you must
observe five principal things, namely, that the Line of Defense be within
Musket Shot; that the flanked Angle do not exceed ninety degrees, nor be less
than sixty: that the gorge of the Bulwark be not too narrow: that the flank be
as great as may be: that all Outworks (if it be possible) must be commanded by
the body of the Fortifications.

CHAP. XXVI. Some Observations of Mines.
COncerning Mines thus much I may say without prejudice to that Art, that the
chiefest things to be respected are these; first the true distance to a
designed place; which is best gotten by Instruments, and help of Geometry,
where other marks of certainty are wanting. Secondly, the direction of the
Mine, that you may not err in your course, which the Compass affords.
Thirdly, the strengthening of the Mine with Timber-work, if need requires; and
stopping of your Mine well, and laying your Train well. Lastly, the
counter-mining, and cross meeting: All which parts have very many
circumstances, and require a larger Discourse than may be thought pertinent for
this place: And being at large discoursed of by many several men, I will omit
to speak any further of it here: only thus much more, that I hold Mines much
better than Batteries, where you may come to make use of them with any
expedition, because of their sudden and unexpected operations.

CHAP. XXVII. Some Observations for the keeping of Conquered Countries.
A Conqueror ought to know that an imperfect Victory is the seed of a new War.
If thou have made a Conquest with thy Sword, think not to maintain it with thy
Scepter; neither conceive that new Favors can cancel old injuries. No
Conqueror sits secure upon his new-gotten Throne, so long as they subsist
in power that were dispossessed of their Possessions by his Conquest.

If thou have Conquered a Land, whose Laws and Language differ not from thine,
change not their Laws and Taxes; and so the two Kingdoms will in a short time
incorporate, and make one Body. But if the Laws and Language differ, it is
difficult to maintain thy Conquest; which that thou may the more easily do,
observe three things: First, to live there in person (or rather send Colonies)
Secondly, to assist the weak Inhabitants, and weaken the mighty. Thirdly, to
admit no powerful Foreigner to reside there. Remember Lewis the XIII. of
France, how suddenly he took Millan, and how soon he lost it.

Here you must note, if you Conquer a Free People, to assure your Conquest you
must do these two things; First, to take away the desire of Revolting from
those whom you have Conquered. To do this, you must not take away (at least
during the life of those who have lived so) their hopes of recovering their
Liberties by their good Obedience, either to them or their Children: And
therefore you must always begin by a fair way, and establish a condition for
them whom you have conquered, which may be sure both for their Life, their
Wives, and their Goods.

There is another means, whereof the Ancients made a profitable use, and is now
wholly left, the which I have spoken of before, and do marvellously approve of,
which is to establish Colonies, and to transport the people from one Country to
another. The conquered people will have much the better of it by their change;
for they shall enjoy such liberties as the people do amongst whom they live;
whereas in their own Country they will be kept so much under, that they can
hope for nothing but their lives. And the Conqueror by this means will be much
the more assured of keeping the people in Obedience.

CHAP. XXVIII. Some Directions for the Preventing of Civil Wars.
A Kingdom, or State, in preventing Civil War ought to observe these four
principal things. The first is, that a Kingdom or State ought to have
Fortresses, but good ones, and few in number, and none within the heart of the
Country. And you ought not to perpetuate any Government, neither to Families,
nor yet for life.

The second thing is (if it be possible to be done without the endangering of a
Kingdom or State) that there be but one Religion in a Kingdom or State.

The third is; that Kingdom or State that will live secure from Civil Wars must
be provident to compass a rich public Treasure; that when a Kingdom or State
come to be over-populous, they may be able to employ their people in
Plantations, or in a Foreign War. But the principal and able remedy against
Civil War is to entertain a Foreign War. This chaseth away idleness, sets
all on work; and particularly this gives satisfaction to ambitious and
stirring spirits; it banisheth Luxury, makes your people Warlike, and
maintains you in such reputation amongst your Neighbors, that you are the
Arbitrator of all their Differences. But this Maxim is not good to be observed
except by such Kingdoms, and States that are able to go through with the
designs they undertake. For as I find it necessary to Rich and Potent Kingdoms
and States; so I find it hurtful to petty Kingdoms and States; because being
too weak to gain by it, they will in the end but lose their Honors, and
Moneys, and impoverish themselves, and increase their Enemies.

The fourth and last thing is, whereas the poorer and meaner people, that have
no interest in the Commonweal, but the use of breath, these are always
dangerous to the peace of a Kingdom, and having nothing to lose, willingly
embrace all means of Innovation, in hope of gaining something by other men's
ruin: there are these three means left for a State to ease it self of this
sort of people, either to employ them abroad in Plantations, or in a War, or to
interess them in the quiet of the Commonweal by learning them such Trades and
Occupations as may give them a taste of the sweetness of peace, and the benefit
of a Civil life.

CHAP. XXIX. Some Observations showing how necessary it is for England, or any
other State, or Kingdom, providently to prepare a Rich Public Treasure
beforehand, either for the Defense of themselves, or offending their Enemies.
And how necessary it is to Train up their people to Martial Affairs.
LET us first consider what danger a Country, Prince, or State is in, that is
not so provident to provide a Rich Public Treasure beforehand, either for a
Defensive War, or an Offensive War: For in the Wars you must upon all
occasions, have your hands in your Purses: and having not a Rich Public
Treasure beforehand, no Kingdom, or State, is able to make an Offensive War, to
gain Countries, or Honor, unless they be drawn into a Country by a Party. Nor
is such a Kingdom or State well able to defend it self in a Defensive War. For
if an Enemy landeth in a Country, the obedience which at other times is
willingly given to Princes, or States, is greatly weakened at such times, and
all necessary means to maintain a War, is hardly drawn from the Subject; and
the common people will be easily drawn to change Masters, when their oppression
shall be more frequent from their Friends, than their Enemies: and such great
oppressions at such a time upon the Commons (which of necessity there must be,
when a Rich Treasure is not providently provided beforehand) will prove very
dangerous to any Kingdom or State in a Defensive War. Therefore that Kingdom or
State that will live securely from an Enemy, must have a special care to
provide a Rich Public Treasure beforehand against unusual, and extraordinary
casualties, which are not to be removed but by speedy and effectual Remedies.
And no expedition can be made to avoid the dangers and ruin of a Kingdom or
State, either in an Offensive, or a Defensive War, without a Rich Public
Treasure provided beforehand. And it is an easy thing for Governors of a
Kingdom or State to raise a Rich Public Treasure out of the extravagant
Expenses of the people, without giving any discontent at all; as having an
Excise upon all the Beer, Ale, and Wine that is sold in all Alehouses, and
Taverns in a Kingdom or State, and likewise upon all the Tobacco that is
brought into a Kingdom or State, and upon all kinds of Laces, Cards, and Dice.

Now to conclude, and speak something how necessary it is for a Kingdom, or
State to train up their people to the use of Arms. Such Kingdoms where the men
are trained up in Academies of virtuous actuality, do always keep their Honors
at an high price, affording at all times men of absolute and complete carriage,
both for designment and performance. I account a Rich Public Treasure
providently provided before hand, and a people well trained in Martial Affairs,
to be two of the only Pillars (next under God) that will preserve a Kingdom or
State from ruin and danger.

CHAP. XXX. That Reading, and Discourse are requisite to make a Soldier
perfect in the Art Military, how great soever his knowledge may be, which long
Experience and much practice of Arms has gained.
MEN have two ways to come by Wisdom, either by their own harms, or other men's
miscasualties: And wise men are wont to say (not by chance, nor without reason)
that he who will see what shall be, let him consider what has been: For all
things in the world at all times have their very counterpane with the times of
old.

But here I would have a prudent Soldier note, that it is a matter very
dangerous to follow wholly the examples of another, if a man in general or in
particular have not the same Reason, the same Wit, and the same Fortune. For
albeit humane actions seem to be so joined and coupled together, that that
which now is present and has been, ought to be again: yet notwithstanding the
accidents which are so different, and diverse, that no man whosoever he be
(except very prudent) can always govern himself in matters present by the
example of that which is past.

I take the Office of a Chief Commander to be a subject capable of the greatest
wisdom that may be apprehended by natural means, being to manage a multitude of
disagreeing minds, as a fit instrument to execute a design of much consequence,
and great expectation, and to qualify both their apprehensions and affections
according to the accidents which rise in the course of his directions; besides
the true judgment which he ought to have of such circumstances as are most
important to a fortunate end; wherein our providence can not have enough either
from learning or experience, to prevent disadvantages, or to take hold of
opportunities. And therefore that Soldier that is only trained up in the
School of Practice, and taught his Rudiments under a few years experience,
which serves to interpret no other Author but it self, nor can prove his
Maxims but by his own Authority; my opinion is, his mere practical knowledge
cannot make him a perfect Soldier, nor fit to be a General.

Experience joined with Reading and Discourse, do feast the mind with much
variety, and choice of matter, or entertain it with novelties incident to
expeditions, and use of Arms. And therefore it is not only Experience, and
Practice which makes a Soldier worthy of his name; but the knowledge of the
manifold accidents which rise from the variety of humane actions is best, and
most speedily learned by reading History: For upon the variety of chances that
you shall meet withal in History, you meditate on the effects of other men's
adventures, that their harms may be your warnings, and their happy proceedings
your fortunate directions in the Art Military. These examples which are taken
from History, are but a plain kind of principles, on which the mind works to
her best advantage, and uses reason with such dexterity, that of inequalities
she concludes an equality, and of dissimilitudes most sweet resemblances; and
so she works her own perfection by Discourse, and in time grows so absolute
in knowledge, that her sufficiency needs no further directions.

It is most requisite likewise for a Commander to look into the diversity of
orders for imbattelling, and to weigh the nature thereof, that he may with
knowledge apply them to the quality of any occasion.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. SOme Observations concerning a Soldiers Profession and his Duty.
Page 1 CHAP. II. Some Observations upon War, which is the Profession of a
Soldier. 3 CHAP. III. Some Observations of an Offensive War, and Conquering of
Countries. 4 CHAP. IV. Some Observations upon a Defensive War. 8 CHAP. V. Some
Observations for those that undertake a War. 11 CHAP. VI. Some Observations,
and Considerations to be observed, and thought on by a General, that takes
upon him the Command of an Army. 15 CHAP. VII. Some Observations, what is the
fittest strength for Armies to be of, and what proportion of Horse and Foot,
Dragooners, and Pioners there ought to be in an Army. And likewise showing the
proportion of Pikemen, and Musketeers, according to the Service that they
shall be most employed upon. 21 CHAP. VIII. Some Observations concerning the
Arming of an Army, and how each Soldier ought to be Armed. 23 An Horsemans
Offensive Arms. 24 An Horsemans Defensive Arms. ibid. The Furniture that
belongs to an Horsemans Horse. 25 The Offensive Arms of a Musqueteer. ib. The
Defensive Arms of a Musqueteer is a good Courage. 26 The Offensive Arms of a
Pikeman. ib. The Defensive Arms of a Pikeman. 27 The Offensive Arms of a
Dragoon. ib. A Dragoon Horse and Furniture. 28
CHAP. IX. A List of the Chief Officers that belong to an Army, and what
strength each Regiment ought to have of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons. 29 CHAP. X.
Some Observations showing how necessary it is to have Soldiers well
Disciplined, and well Exercised before they are brought to Fight. 31 CHAP. XI.
Some Observations concerning a Train of Artillery, and him that commands it.
32 CHAP. XII. Some Observations and Preparations to be observed by a General in
Field-Service: also concerning Intelligences and Spies. 35 CHAP. XIII. What
strength Divisions of Horse ought to be from four thousand to ten thousand,
when they are to March in an Army, and when they are to Fight a Battle; or if
Foot be to Fight on the Flanks of each Division of Horse, or when they come to
be Embattelled to Fight on the Flanks of an Army. That small Divisions both of
Horse and Foot are much better than great Divisions for Service either in
Campagnia, or within Enclosures; because they are not so apt to fall into
Disorder, and are much more ready to be commanded upon all occasions. 42 CHAP.
XIV. What Strength each Division of Horse ought to be from three thousand to
ten thousand, to fight on the flanks of a Body of Foot in a day of Battle, if
you will have no Foot to fight amongst the Horse. 60 CHAP. XV. By the following
Figures are declared what Strength each Division of Foot ought to be to Fight a
Battle, and Encounter with Foot: and the order that must be observed for doing
the same; and how they shall easily, and readily be in order to defend
themselves against the charge of any Horse. 66 CHAP. XVI. Some Observations
concerning the Marching of an Army. 77 CHAP. XVII. Some Observations for the
Quartering of an Army at Night upon a March, and for the setting out of their
Guards to secure their Quarters. 85 CHAP. XVIII. Some certain Observations to
be kept in the fighting of Battles, and some Directions for the Imbattelling of
an Army. 92 CHAP. XIX. Some certain Observations concerning the Retreat of an
Army. 111 CHAP. XX. Some Observations concerning the stopping of an Army upon
Passages either over Rivers, or difficult and mountainous places. 113 CHAP.
XXI. Some certain Observations touching the profitableness of Intrenching, and
some Directions for the same. 115 CHAP. XXII. Some certain Observations about
the taking of Towns and strong Places. 118 CHAP. XXIII. Some Directions for the
Removing of an Army that is Entrenched before a Town. 128 CHAP. XXIV. Some
Directions and Observations to be observed and followed by a Governor of a
Frontier Town, for the furnishing of it with necessary Provisions against a
Siege, and for the defense of it in a Siege. 130 CHAP. XXV. Some Observations
concerning Fortifications. 141 CHAP. XXVI. Some Observations of Mines. 142
CHAP. XXVII. Some Observations for the keeping of Conquered Countries. 143
CHAP. XXVIII. Some Directions for the Preventing of Civil Wars. 145 CHAP. XXIX.
Some Observations showing how necessary it is for England, or any other State,
or Kingdom, providently to prepare a Rich Public Treasure beforehand, either
for the Defense of themselves, or offending their Enemies. And how necessary it
is to Train up their people to Martial Affairs. 147 CHAP. XXX. That Reading,
and Discourse are requisite to make a Soldier perfect in the Art Military, how
great soever his knowledge may be, which long Experience and much practice of
Arms has gained. 149
FINIS.

