A SOBER LETTER OF GENERAL MONCK'S UNTO THE Commander in Chief, and Officers
in Ireland: with another Letter from an Officer of the Army there; wherein the
Genrall does declare his own, and Armies resolution, to adhere to their first
Declaration; notwithstanding the agreement of his Commissioners at London, it
being contrary to the Instructions given them to Act by.

Printed at London 1659

General Monck's Letter unto the Commander in Chief in Ireland, to be
communicated to the Officers there.
SIR,
HAving recieved yours, of the 4 of this instant signed by your self and some
others, you are pleased to signify your apprehensions of our undertakings, and
your hopes that we have received from our Brethren in England, such
satisfaction as we may acquiesce in their late actings: I have sent to you by
this Gentleman these enclosed Papers, wherein you will be fully informed of our
endeavors and pains to keep a right understanding with our friends and
Fellow Soldiers, but we sincerely profess to you that we cannot be convinced
of any such necessity or sense of duty that could engage them in Actions so
violent, and unwarrantable, contrary to such late and solemn engagements,
indeed it makes our hearts mourn in secret to consider what the issue of this
dangerous and rash change of the Government may be, but we hope we shall be
found in the way of duty, and shall walk according to Gods word, in that we
have born our testimony according to our consciences, against that which is
evil, and we humbly desire you to lay to heart the great dishonor that will
lie upon the holy name of God, by our inconstancy, and (I wish I could not say)
Treachery: are we not an Army that have the highest engagements upon us, never
such a professing Generation for God, yet to make no conscience of obedience to
those that God set's over us, nay such whose authority has been witnessed too
by Almighty God in many successes, and for restoring of which, we were but the
other day rejoicing and praising God. And for the asserting whose just
authority our Brethren in England so lately hazarded to blood, and from whom
we have all received Commissions and Encouragement, and this to be don without
half an hours deliberation; we tremble to consider of it, and that a few
persons and of them some unknown to us to be entrusted with the power of
abolishing Laws, Raising moneys, choosing general Officers, creating new
Modells of Government, making Peace and War, and this derived from the Officers
of a few Regiments quartered in England, and our consent to all this
authoritatively required, we cannot but witness against such proceedings as
must needs make us a Scorn to our Enemies, a shame to our friends, and odious
to all the People of God in the World: is this the good old Cause, the defense
of the Parliaments privileges to dissolve them with the greatest Contempt? are
Peoples Rights now secured, when their consciences, Estates and persons are
abandoned to the wills and pleasure of nine or ten persons? are the Churches of
Jesus Christ like to be protected when the encouragement of the Ministry of the
Churches is to be removed; Now we beseech you in the bowels of the Lord Jesus
to lay to heart these things, and consider whether our jealousies and fears be
not real, and we desire to deal with plainness and singlnesse of heart as in
the presence of God with you, that our Brethren in England are very dear to us
in the Lord, that it wounds us deeper to consider these actings, then the
wounds we have received from our enemies, for them we could have born. We
bless the Lord that you are so sensible of the hazard and blood that may
follow: so we beg of you to remember what blood has been shed, and who will
answer for it, if we be worse then those God cast out before us. We bless God
we need no umbrage for our actions, but testify before God and man that we
will not admit any single person whatsoever, nor House of Lords, that we desire
successive Parliaments and Councils of State established by authourity of
Parliament for the Government of these Nations, and that there may be a Legal
foundation and succession. We desire our Brethren in Ireland to join with us in
our desires to the Army in England, that this Parliament may be restored, and
put a period to their sitting, and settle such expedients as may be for the
securing of these Nations against the common enemy, and we shall take this as a
renewed engagement of your Brotherly love and kindness to us, and having no
further to trouble you, but to let you know that I am

Edinburgh, 27 Nov. 1659. Honored Sir, Your humble Servant GEORGE MONCK,
This Messenger after some time, being in this City, carried himself very
indiscreetly, so that I thought fit to confine him to his Chamber, which I hope
you will not take ill.



A Letter from an Officer of the Parliaments Army in Scotland, to an eminent
friend in London.
Sir,
THe Lord General and Officers there, are resolved to stand to their
Declarations and Resolutions for the Parliament; what their Commissioners have
done being besides their Instructions in the Third, Fourth and Sixth Articles
of their late agreement.

Edinburgh 29 Nov. 1659. Your Servant J E

For Mr. I P.

