Algernoon Sidneys FAREWELL.
WElcome, kind Death, my long tired Spirit bear,
From hated Monarchies detested Air:
And Waft me safe to the happier Stygian Land,
Where my dear Friends with flaming Chaplets stand:
And Seat me high at Shaftsburys Right Hand.
There Worshipping, my Prostrate Soul shall fall:
Oh! for a Temple, Statues, Altars, all.
Volumes, and Leaves of Brass; whole Books of Fame!
For all are due to that immortal Name.
For my Reception then, great Shades, make room,
For SIDNEY does with Loads of Honor come.
No braver Champion, nor a bolder Son
Of Thunder, ever graced your burning Throne.
Survey me, mighty Prince of Darkness, round:
View my Hacked Limbs, each honorable Wound.
The Pride and Glory of my numerous Scars
In Hell's best Cause the old republic Wars.
Behold the rich Gray Heirs your SIDNEY brings,
Made Silver all in the Pursuit of Kings,
Think of the Royal Martyr, and behold
This bold Right Hand, This Cyclops Arm of Old,
That labored long, stood Blood and Wars rough shock
To Forge the Ax, and Hew the fatal Block.
Nor stopped we here; our dear Revenge still kept,
A Spark that in the Fathers Ashes slept,
To break as fiercely in a second Flame,
Against the Son, the Heir, the Race, the Name.
Revenge is God-like, of that deathless Mold,
From Generation does to Generation hold.
Let dull Religion and Sophistick Rules
Of Christian Ignorants, Conscientious Fools,
With false Alarms of Heavens forbidding Laws,
Blast the Renown of our Illustrious Cause:
A Cause, (what e're dull Preaching Dotards prate)
Whose only Fault was being unfortunate.
Oh the blessed Structure! Oh the charming Toil!
Had not Heavens Envy crushed the rising Pile,
To what Prodigious Heights had we built on!
So Babells Tower had Solomon's Church out-shone.
True! my unhappy Blood's untimely spilt;
And some soft Fools may tremble at the Guilt.
As if the poor Vicegerent of a God
Were that big Name that our Ambition awd.
A poor Crowned Head, and Heavens Anointed! No!
We stop at naught that Souls resolved dare do.
And only curse the Weak and Failing Blow.
Whilst like the Roman Scaevola we stand,
And Burn the Missing not the Acting Hand.
Nay the great Work of Ruin to fulfill
All Arts, all Means, all Hands are Sacred still.
No Play too foul to win the Glorious Game:
Witness the great Immortal Teckleys Fame.
In holy Wars it is all True Protestant
Kings to dethrone, and Empires to supplant.
Nay and the Antichristian THRONE to shake,
Cursed Monarchy, it is Famous even to make
The Alcoran the Bibles Cause assume:
And Mahomet the Prop of Christendom.
Such Aid such Helps sublime Rebellion wants,
Rebellion the great Shibboleth of Saints;
Which current stamp to Reformation brings.
For all is [GOD with US] that strikes at Kings.
Now Charon, Land me on the Elysian Coast,
With all the Rites of a Descending Ghost.
A Stouter, Hardier Murmurer never fell
Since the old Days of Stiff-neckt Israel:
Since the cleft Earth in her expanded Womb
Oped a Broad Gulf for Mighty Corahs Tomb.
Methinks I saw him, saw the yawning Deep.
Oh! 'twas a Bold Descent, a wondrous Leap!
More swift the pointed Lightning never fell.
One plunge at once to his Death, his Grave, his Hell.
London, Printed for W. Davis in Amen-Corner.


