ABout the 7th of March 1655. Master Whiting and Master Spelman came to Richard
Hodgkinsonne to treat about the printing of Judge Crookes [or Sir George
Crookes] Reports; desiring the said Hodg. to tell him truly and
conscienciously, what he would print it for by the sheet and find Paper? The
sum the said Hodgkinsonne then pitched unto them was a farthing a sheet, the
number printed being two thousand upon each sheet, and the Paper to be worth
five shillings a Reame ( viz. five shillings and six pence perfect) so for that
time they parted: But shortly after Master Whiting came to the said Hodg. with
one Master Bacon, and desired the said Hod. to make some Proves, which he
accordingly did.

About the 12 of September 1656. M. Jo. Whiting, and M. Clem. Spelman went to
the Warden of the Stationers; where M. Whiting desired to have Sir G. Crookes
Reports entered to the said Hodgkinsonne, declaring unto the said Warden that he
had agreed with the said Hodg. for printing them, and therefore willed him to
take a care that none else should meddle with the printing of them.

The 15 day M Whiting, M. Spelman and Hodg. went to the Clerk, where M. Whiting
declared the same words he had done before to the Warden, but the Clerk
refused Entrance to the said Hodg. upon pretense of a former entry to one
Warren.

The 16 day M. Whiting, and M. Spelman went to Stationers' Hall, and there at a
public Court M. Whiting disclamed the Entrance of Warren, as surreptitious,
and declared his agreement with Hodg. as formerly he had done to the Warden and
the Clerk, but no Entry was made as desired.

The 16 day of October M. Spelman M. Richison, M. (...) went with Hodg. to the
Hall, where he presented the Copy, and required Entrance, but was put off.

The 5 of January M. Spelman and M. Whiting went with Hodg. again to a public
Court, where he presented the Copy requiring Entrance, but was put off again,
etc.

This caused M. Whiting to complain to the Lord chiefe-Justice of the
upper-Bench, who (accompanied with 3 or 4 other of the Judges) after hearing
all that could be said by the Company, for neglecting to enter to Hodg. as also
what Warren could say for his pretended claim; una voce Ordered, That the
former pretended Entry to Warren, so surreptitiously obtein'd, should be
obliterate, and the said Copy be Entered de novo to the said Hodgkinson.

The 20 of October 1657. the 17 years of King Charles began to be printed,
during the printing whereof, M. Whiting has diverse times declared to the
several Workmen, and to sundry other Persons (before them in the Workhouse)
which he has brought thither to see that work, and Printing; That he had
agreed with M. Hodgkins. for printing of Sir Georg Crooks Reports, and that the
book, then in hand, of King Charles his 17 years; was not a third part of it:
for there was beside 22 years of King James his time, and 11 years of Queen
Elizabeth's time; Before the said Workmen, the said M. Whiting has often been
angry with the said Hodg. for finishing what work he had before, and forbad him
to entertain any other work; assuring him that he would find him work for 7
years, with the books aforesaid; And he has driven Customers from his the
said Hodg. house that have come to him about work.

The 23 of March, two Booksellers came into the Workhouse of the said Hodg.
and in the presence of the Workmen, did much importune the said Hodg. to take
and print for them what number of sheets he pleased of the Lord Hubbards
Reports; but Hodg. told them he could not entertain their work until he had
acquainted M. Whiting, and obtein'd his consent.

The 26 day, M. Whiting being in the Workhouse, the said Hodg. moved him for
his consent; but he refused, saying, That there were Reports of one Bulstrode
Whitlocks printing, which he would not for 100 l. should come out before his 11
years of King James; and therefore willed the said Hodg. not to think of
entertaining any other work, but to finish the 17 years of King Charles with
all speed, and to print for him the 11 years of king James by Michaelmas.

Shortly after Hodg. told M. Whiting that King Charles was near done, and
desired to know if the Copy for King James his time were ready or not; if it
were not, and that the press, for want-thereof, should stand still, it would
be very chargeable: Whereupon within a day or two after M. Whiting brought the
said Copy into the said Workhouse, where Hodg. cast it off, and concluded that
the last 11 years of King James should make a second Volume.

About the 30 of May King Charles was finished, and Hod. asking M. Whiting for
the Copy of King James his time, to go in hand with all; M Whiting told him it
was in Just. Hales hand for perusal, but promised faithfully to bring it to
him in a fortnight: The said Master Whiting came again within 2 or 3 days and
desired Hodg. to provide work for a Month, if he could; for (being tired) he
had a mind to go into the Country; and then promised without fail to bring
the said Copy to him, within a month; but failed then as before.


