Baston's Case VINDICATED: OR, A Brief Account of some Evil Practices Of the
Present Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, etc. As they were Proved:

1. Before the Admiralty. 2. Before the Council; And 3. Before the
Commissioners for Stating the Public Accounts.
London, Printed in the Year, 1695.

TO THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament Assembled.
May it please your Lordships.
IF the delaying and perverting of Justice, Supporting the Guilty, and
Persecuting the Innocent, and that in Matters which concern the Public
Welfare, be fit for the Cognizance of Parliaments: Then, I humbly conceive, the
following Matters may not be improper for this Most August Assembly, which the
Duty I owe to my King and Country, and the Impositions and hard usage I have
received, has obliged me to lay before this Most Honorable House; humbly
praying, all due Protection and Encouragement, against my many powerful
Adversaries, so far as I have been, or shall be found in the right; and more
especially, because it will appear, I did my Duty for the Good of the Public,
Repugnant to my own private Interest. I am,

With all profound Respect, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, Samuel Baston.

Baston's Case, etc.
I Was a Clerk to the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, and Exchanging
Prisoners at War, about 4 Years; toward the end of which time I came to
understand the following Miscarriages; particularly that of the Prisoners at
War, which I happened to know after this manner: I being part Owner of a Vessel
employed in Transporting Prisoners at War, between Dover and Callais, the Capt.
of the said Vessel was obstructed in getting his money for the Freight of the
French Prisoners, which by the general Or Agreement between the Two Courts for
a General Exchange of Prisoners.
Cartel was to be paid by the Commissary of that Port in France where they
should be landed. But at length the Capt. peremptorily demanding the said money
of the Commissary at Callais, according to the Cartel; the Commissary told him
to this effect, That he owned the Authority of the Cartel, but had never paid
any money on that account since the War; and that he could not do it without
Orders from Paris: for that A French Popish Merchant, that formerly lived in
London, but fled to France at the Revolution, there being Warrants out against
him.
Monsieur Joseph Dulivier, was the Man concerned in that Affair, and had a part
in all the Exchange Vessels; after which the said Capt. going to France, did
write to Paris to Joseph Dulivier, demanding by what power he received, or
stopped his money, contrary to the general Cartel; in answer to which the said
Joseph Dulivier, and Also a Popish Merchant, who being obnoxious to the
Government, was then newly banished by Order of the Queen and Council; but had
a part in all the Transport Vessels.
Peter Dulivier, his Cousin, wrote the said Capt. several Letters. But soon
after this the Capt. was turned out, for a pretended Crime; and afterward the
Ship was also shuffled out of the Service. But the Capt. giving me these
Letters he received from Mr. Dalivier, and after I had got those translated
that were written in French; and seeing they contained matters of dangerous
consequence, to my great surprise, I forthwith acquainted the Commissioners
therewith; and on the 27th of October, 1693. I laid all the said Dulivier's
Letters before them, at a full Board; as also a Paper of Queries relating to
the Miscarriages of the Transport Ships, which I recommended to them to enquire
into; Upon reading of which, together with the French Letters, some of them
(especially Mr. Addison) From the Teeth outward.
commended my Care and Zeal for the public good, giving it their Opinion, That
there was an unlawful Correspondence held with the French; Otherwise, Dr.
Welwood said, Dulivier must be Lunatic when he writ them Letters; and Mr.
Kirkby said, That if Dulivier had a part in the Transport Ships, Mr. Churchil,
whom they had entrusted in that Affair, was a great Villain; whereupon the
Commissioners did send for Mr. Churchil, and one Mr. Masters, whom Dulivier had
said in one of his Letters, was Partner with him; which said Masters had been
turned out by the Queens Order, signified to the Commissioners by the Secretary
of State, for Actions against the Government, and had afterward gone several
Voyages to France, incognito, in contempt of her Majesty's Order; and when Mr.
Churchil and Mr. Masters attended the Board, and had been in with the
Commissioners a little time, I was also called in; and Dr. Wellwood taking up
the Queries which related to Mr. Churchil, asked him to this Effect, Whether he
was the Note, When any miscarriage happened to be committed in the Transport
Ships, Mr. Churchill used to pretend to be Owner, that by a pretended Check
from the Commissioners, he might remove all Clamor from them, for
corresponding with Dulivier; and at other times I have heard him say, He had
not a Stick in any of the Ships, but was paid for soliciting.
True Owner of the Ships he solicited for, or whether he solicited for a
gratuity? To which Mr. Churchil answered, He had as good ask him, Whether he
had lain with another man's Wife? Upon which Mr. Addison took the Queries out
of the Doctor's hand, and said, They were not fair questions. And Mr. Kirkby
said, 'Twas no matter who were Owners, so the King's business was done; bidding
me keep a Copy of what I had laid before them, hinting, that I might be fued at
Law for Scandal. Some of the Commissioners also moved, that I might leave my
French Letters in the Custody of Doubtless to be burned.
Mr. Garrard, their Secretary; which I Refused to do; answering, That if they
trusted me to keep the King's Papers, I thought they might easily trust me to
keep my own. Then they proceeded to examine Mr. Masters, (who was present
asking him, How he durst go privately several Voyages to France, after he had
been turned out by the Queens Order, for Actions against the Government? who
did not only own the Fact, but very confidently answered, That he did the
Nation no wrong, but good service by it: And Mr. Churchill (who was seated at
the Board with the Commissioners) looking over the back of his Chair, told Mr.
Masters, Thar he went to France What Mr. Churchill denies here, he confessed at
the Admiralty; and to extenuate the Crime, pretended he sent Mr. Masters to
France upon secret Service, which was known to Mr. Secretary Trenchard: But
when the Examination came before the Council, Secretary Trenchard stood up, and
declared to this Effect, That he did not know Mr. Masters, nor of his going;
but found his Name had been made use of very unhandsomly and scandalously
without his knowledge, and that if he was punished for it, he could not help
it; and the Commissioners said, they would lay his Crime before the Council
(though I believe 'twas the least of their Thoughts:) And Mr. Addison turning
about, as if he was Angry, and asking Mr. Garrard, their present Secretary, how
these matters came to pass; Mr. Garrard Answered in a passion, that they must
not lay the fault upon him, for some of them knew of Masters's going as well as
he: This unexpected Answer drove the Commissioners to a full point, for they
looked one upon another, and made no Reply. But now the Tables are turned upon
me, and I (it seems) am the chief offender; for Mr. Masters takes up the
Diseourse, and tells the Commissioners, That the Cause of his being turned out
was by a malicious Information, That I had carried to my Lord Nottingham's
Office; and Mr. Churchill backed him, and said, He had Witness that would swear
it, and mentioned one Mr. Armstrong in my Lord Nottingham's Office (a Gentleman
that I know not) upon which, some of the Commissioners were angry, and Mr.
Addison said, They would keep no Clerks that were Informers; I confess I was
surprised at this shamming Accusation, and offered the Commissioners to make
Oath, That neither directly, or indirectly, I never carried any such
Information, or knew any thing of the doing thereof, challenging Mr. Churchill
to prove it, if he was able; but this silenced all the other matters concerning
the Correspondence with Mr. Dulivier; for most of the Commissioners rose from
the Board in a great passion; and Mr. Churchill being come out of the Office,
into Scotland-Yard, threatened me, That if I would not desist, he would make me
run my Country; and Mr. Masters thought fit to challenge me to meet him out of
the Verge of the Court, and the Secretary Mr. Garrard bid me have a care what I
did, for Mr. Churchill was a Man of great Interest at Court: and I happening,
upon this, to meet Mr. Addison coming down stairs from the Office; I acquainted
him of the ill Treatment I had had from Mr. Churchill and Masters, who, walking
away in have, very scornfully Answered, That he could not help me, if I would
not rule my Tongue; So I finding much discouragement, and seeing the said
miscarriages, and those that acted in them, encouraged by the Commissioners, I
resolved to lay down my Employment, and make a discovery thereof; and
accordingly, about the beginning of Feb. 1693/4, I acquainted the
Commissioners, at a full Board, That I designed to leave my Employment, and
desired their Discharge, at which they seemed extremely startled, and contrary
to their former method of Threats, fell now to good words, useing all manner of
persuasions and Arguments with me to stay, telling me, I was only in a Passion,
and desired me to consider of it till the next morning, when I would be in a
better humor, which was all the Answer I could then get of them. But coming
again the next day to the Boatd, and persisting in my Resolution to leave their
Office, they all fell to make Declarations each Man for himself, That he had
not Cheated the King, and asked me, if I believed ever a Man at that Board had
Cheated the King? I told them it was an insnaring question for me to answer
while I was their Clerk; but if they would give me my Discharge, I would answer
that, or any other question they should ask me; at which Mr. Elder, one of the
Commissioners, lifted up his hands, as it were, in a frighted posture, and
said, O, Gentlemen, I was ever against that The same Mr. Masters, before spoken
of; and these words of Mr. Elder's, confirm the Truth of what their Secretary
spoke, that some of the Commissioners know of Masters's going as well as he.
Masters's going* to which words none of the Commissioners made any Answer. But
I still pressed for my discharge, and the Commissioners continued to offer more
Arguments for me to stay; one of them declaring he would go an hundred Miles to
serve me, saying, That if I would stay till my Father in Law came to Town, they
would prevail with him to lay out a considerable Sum of Money, and purchase me a
Place, which I might hold by a Deputy, and yet continue in their Office. Mr.
Addison also said, Mr. Baston, suppose we comply with all your demands, what
then? To which I Answered, That I could not continue in their Office; the
Commissioners also asked me how I designed to dispose of my self? and that if I
would seek any Employment, and let them know what it was, they would go in a
Body and Recommend me; telling me also, That they would never consent to my
leaving the Office, without the Approbation of my Father in Law, because if it
should prove my Ruin, they believed my Father would blame them as accessory to
it: But perceiving they would not give me my discharge, I acquainted them from
that day forward, I was no more their Clerk; to which they answered, That since
no persuasions would preval with me to stay, they could not help it; and that
they hoped I was not going to bring any Complaint against them, as Mr. Gibson
had formerly done: These and several other Arguments of like nature the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded did make use of publicly at their Board to
prevail with me to stay in their Office; and I have been a little more large in
reciting these Discourses, because these Gentlemen were so shameless as to
insert in their Answer to my Complaint, which they gave in Writing under four
of their Hands, to the Council Board, That they turned me out of their Office
for Misdemeanour, hoping by the help of that monstrous untruth to have
blackened my Reputation, and extenuated their own miscarriages.

But to proceed, finding they would not give me my discharge, I left their
Office in Feb. 1693/4, with a considerable sum of Money due to me, for
Traveling Charges and Sallary, which I am not paid to this day; and about the
beginning of March following, did lay the miscarriages of these Commissioners
in Writing before the Secretary of State, which met with sudden dispatch,
being within three days after sent to the Lords of the Admiralty with the
King's Order thereupon, to examine into it, and make their Report to his
Majesty; whereupon their Lordships forthwith summoned the Commissioners for
Sick and Wounded, with my self, and several others concerned, to attend their
Honorable Board; and after the Examination was perfected, their Lordships made
a Report to His Majesty, a Copy of which I obtained about April, 1694. by an
Order of their Lordships, (the better to enable me to prove the Complaint a
second time before the Council) which Copy I have inserted as follows.

By the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England
and Ireland, etc.
Admiralty Office 14 th. April, 94.
IN Obedience to your Majesty's Pleasure, signified to this Board by Letter
from my Lord Shrewsbury, of the 8th of March last, for our examining into a
Complaint made against the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded Seamen, and
Exchange of Prisoners at War; of the Mismanagement of the Business under their
Care: We having examined into it, do humbly make the following Report.

The First Article Charges the Commissioners,
That they were informed, that Monsieur Peter and Jos. Dulivier, in France,
were concern^d in the Transport Ships employed in the Exchanging Prisoners
between England and France, and that instead of their taking any Care to
redress it, they discouraged those that gave them the Information.

Upon the First Article.
It appeared to this Board, That Dr. Welwood, one of the Commissioners for Sick
and Wounded Seamen and Exchange of Prisoners, Informed the rest of the Board,
That Mr. Baston told him that he could make it appear, That the Duliviers were
concerned in the Transport-Ships, employed in Exchange of Prisoners of War, and
the grounds of the Suspicions were from a Letter from Joseph Dulivier, to Capt.
Bayley, one of the Masters of the Vessels, dated at Paris the 24th of February,
1692, wherein Dulivier says, He has received his Letter from Bulloign,
adviseing of his coming there with Prisoners, and desires to know who employed
him; for that he expects to be half concerned in the Passage of Prisoners
brought by him, as he is with Masters and others. And Peter Dulivier, by his
Letter from Paris the 25th July, 1693. to the said Capt. Bayley, tells him,
That he and his Cousin Jos. Dulivier, have been at great Charges in settling the
Which was a very ill manner, being private Exchanges of Man for Man, and
Quality for Quality, which proved very tedious and prejudicial to the poor
Captives; when at the same time the Dutch had an Agreement for setting open the
Prison-doors on both sides; and so preserved the Lives of their Men by their
speedy Releasement; whereas many English Prisoners, by their long Imprisonment,
and barbarous usage, perished, and others went into the French Service.
manner of Exchanging of Prisoners, and expects to have the Advantage he has
already demanded, or to be at half of the Charges, and half of the Profit or
Loss of the said Passages: And by another Letter from Jos. Dulivier to Mr.
Majet and Exquemelin, dated at Paris the 9th September, 1693. he tells them,
That he has made the Agreement about the Exchange of Prisoners on both sides,
with Monsieur Delagnii, by the Order of the Commissioners of England; and from
the beginning of this War has received the payment of all them that are
returned; and informs them, that till this time he has a share in the Transport
Vessels, which was given him by the Undertakers of the Trades, in consideration
of his pains in settling that Affair; and that he was allowed by them about 30
Sous for each Prisoner brought into France. And by Jos. Dulivier's Letter of
the 26th September. 1693. from Paris to Capt. Bayley, (all which Letters were
laid before the Commissioners by Mr. Baston) he seems to be surpised that he
and his Owners should deny him his small profit, and expects that they should
allow him Which is about 5 s. in the pound.
30 Sous for every Prisoners both French and English that they Transport; and
says, he has been paid for all their passages (except the last put on shore at
Bulloign): And that if they don't think fit to comply with his Propositions,
they may complain to the Commissioners. And by a Letter from Mr. Churchil
(which was produced at this Board by Dr. Welwood) and Mr. Alston to Capt.
Rutter, Master of the Ann Pink, an Exchange Vessel, dated at London 10th Feb.
1692/3. They desire, and order him to follow the Orders of their Worthy Friend
Mr. Jos. Dulivier, in which he will well satisfy them. And Joseph Dulivier, in
his Letter from Paris of the 21st March 1693. to Rutter, desires him according
to the Order of Mr. Churchill and Alston, to go to Nantz, and there follow the
Orders of Monsieur Drake: But, says, he must not load any Goods but Currants,
which Port was not in the Cartell, nor were the Currants (for which leave was
given by an order of Council) to be brought from any place, but St. Malo's. Mr.
Kirkby, one of the Commissioners, did own to this Board, That upon Baston's
producing Dulivier's Letters, he did Reprimand him, but said, It was for not
producing them sooner, which Baston said, he could not, because he had them not
before. Baston said, That at the second time the Query's which he laid before
the Commissioners about Mr. Churchill, Duliviers and Masters, were heard, and
Churchill and Masters present. Dr. Welwood took up the Queries, and Asked
Churchill whether he was concerned in any of the Ships he Solicited for, or
sold his Interest for a Gratuity, which Churchil refused to Answer; upon which
Mr. Addison taking the Queries out of the Doctor's Hand, said they were not
fair Questions; and Mr. Kirby said, 'Twas no matter who were Owners, so the
King's business was done; That Dr. Welwood told Mr. Kirby, That 'twas not fit
Baston should be discouraged; upon which the Dr. says, He was ill Treated by
the Board; and upon the whole matter it appears, That upon what was laid before
the Commissioners, there was reason to dismiss these Ships, where there were
such grounds to believe the Duliviers were concerned, giving this Board no
other reason, Than that they had a good Opinion of Mr. Churchil; and it
likewise appeared that they discouraged those that gave them the Information.

The second Article complains,
That Robert Masters, Commander of one of the Transport Vessels, went every
Voyage to France in her, after he had been turned out by order of Her Majesty,
for Actions against the Government, whereby there was opportunity of giving
Intelligence to the Enemy.

To which Article we refer to our Report therein, dated the 24th of March last,
which is as follows, viz.
My Lord Nottingham writes to the Commissioners, the 18th of November, 1692.
that he was informed, That Masters, the Commander of one of the Vessels
Employed by them in Exchanging Prisoners, had brought over a Lady from France,
without the King's Pass, and directed them to Enquire into the matter, and to
remove him, unless he could give very good reasons for what he had done; and
the Commissioners, after an Examination taken, removed him from his Command:
Sometime after Dr. Welwood acquainted the Board, That Mr. Baston Informed him,
That Masters had been two Voyages to France in the Ship, since he wat turned
out, and the pretended Master of that Vessel was only his Servant, upon which
he was again discharged; after this Mr. Churchill acquainting Dr. Wellwood,
That he designed to Employ Masters again, the Dr. moved the Board, that he
might be no more Employed, and after some debate 'twas so resolved at a full
Board; but the same afternoon three of the Commissioners met, and signed an
Order for bringing over Currants, which was left blank for such Master as Mr.
Churchill should appoint, which said blank was filled up with Masters's Name,
and a Pass was likewise drawn to to be sent to the Secretary of State, and
Masters's Name inserted therein by one of their Clerks, by the direction of Mr.
Garrard Secretary to the Commissioners; two or three days after Dr. Welwood
acquainted the Board, That Masters was Commander of the Vessel bound for France
in their Service; but the Board did not revoke their Order, and he went
Commander that Voyage.

It further appeared, That when Dr. Welwood complained to the Board, that
Masters had been two Voyages in the Ship to France, notwithstanding he was
discharged by their Order, and asked the Secretary, Mr. Garrard, how it came to
pass. Garrard answered in a passion, That some of the Commissioners knew of it
as well as he.

As to this last point Dr. Welwood and Mr. Baston Affirm it, but the rest of
the Commissioners, and the Secretary say, that they do not remember it.

And since this, Dr. Welwood has acquainted this Board by Letter, That Mr.
Masters was Examined by him, in presence of the rest of the Commissioners, and
voluntarily confessed, That about October 1691. he came up the River of Thames,
near the Bridge, with a Lading of Wine in a Transport Ship, having Landed his
Prisoners at Dover by the way, that the said Ship and Lading was seized upon by
the Custom-house Officers; and as he was told afterward, were both made
Prizes, or the Wine stav'd: That immediately after the seizing the Ship,
Masters was sent Master of another Transport Ship to France, in which he has
hitherto continued: and because there was not a New Pass in the Office, the Old
Pass for the former Ship was made use of, by changing the Name of the last Ship
into that of the first: That Dulivier, before he went away, carried him to Mr.
Churchill, and after they had been together a while alone, he was called in and
employed by Churchil ever afterward.

The Third Article complains,
That several Prisoners have made their Escape from Plymouth, by bribing Clerk
to Mr George Dickinson, the Commissioner's Agent at Plymouth.
Nicholas Sharrack and Wannel the Jailer: Aad that Mr. Dickinson, Agent to the
Commissioners, abused the Prisoners, and cheated them of their allowance of
Victuals.

Upon the Third Article,
It does appear to this Board, That several Irish Prisoners did make their
Escape from Plymouth, and particularly Who was not a Prisoner at War to be
Exchanged, but a Pyrate to be tried for his Life.
Fitz Geraldine, an Irish Captain of a Privateer, under the late King's
Commission: And that the French Prisoners were ill used by Wannel and Sharrack,
Servants to Mr. Dickinson; and Wannel was turned out by Mr. Dickinson, wichout
any Order for it; but Sharrack is still continued; and that when Dr. Welwood
was at Plymouth, and weighed the provisions appointed for the Prisoners,
instead of 4 l. weight, which was allowed them, there was not full half that
weight. The Commissioners did write to Mr. Greenhil, Commissioner of the Navy
at Plymouth, to examine the Masters that came from France, touching their
Information of the Prisoners being ill used in France, who gave them an
Account, that having examined several of the Masters, they confirmed the Truth
of their This Information was sent to the Commissioners, about the 6th or 7th
of July, 1693. attested under the hands of one Ben. Cook, and about 20 other
Masters of Ships, who had been Prisoners in France, and then newly, returned
from St. Malo to Plymouth, setting forth, that several Irish Prisoners, etc.
escaped from Plymouth, in the Transport Ships, under the Notion of French
Prisoners at War, by Bribing Nicho. Sharrack, and the Jailer, and that they had
spoke with several Irish Captains at St. Malo, whose Names they mention, who
assured them, That they escaped out of Plymouth Prison by Bribery, and that any
one who had money, might with ease do the like. These Masters in their
information also affirm, That before the Transport Ship, (that brought them
over to Plymouth) Arrived at St. Malo, they were well used, and had Liberty to
walk the Town upon Bayl; but the French Prisoners. who came over in that
Transport Ship, complaining to the Governor how Barbarously they were used at
Plymouth; that they had half their Allowance kept from them, and were
frequently beaten by VVannell the Jailer, and several of their Heads were broke
by him, which they showed the Governor; this with other Complaints, ^o
incensed him, that he forthwith confined all the English Prisoners to close
Prison, useing them with much Barbarity.

There are other things worthy of Note, contained in this Information, for
which Reason (after this Report) I often moved at several hearings to have it
produced, but could never obtain the same.


Information with their Oaths: But nothing was done in it by the Commissioners,
and Dickinson was continued in his Employment.

The Fourth Article Complains,
That the Commissioners stifled the Complaints against Mr. Dickinson for
abusing the Men in their Provisions; and that they passed his Accounts without
being sworn to.

Upon the Fourth Article,
It appears, That when Dr. Welwood and Mr. Elder, came into the Commission,
they found many Complaints against Dickinson; Upon which Mr. Elder was sent to
Plymouth to examine into it: And that when he returned from thence, and made his
Report, Dr. Welwood moved the Board, that Dickinson might be turned out. But
the Commissioners refused to do it, alleging, that they could find no body
else to serve in his room; and after that, Dr. Welwood being at Plymouth,
enquired into several complaints against Dickinson; and finding that he had
taken money of a Prisoner, who was half an Englishman, to give him leave to go
into the Country: and that he had given the Prisoners short weight of
provisions, he proposed to the Board, upon his Return to London, that Dickinson
might be turned out: but they refused it. It likewise appeared, that the said
Dickinson's Accounts stand open, and that none of them have been sworn to, as
is the constant custom in other Ports, where the Agent, Physician and Surgeon,
swear to the Accounts, to the best of their knowledge, before they receive
their money: As also that the Commissioners make Dickinson Debtor for the money
they pay him, and Creditor on his Accounts which he does not swear to, and are
not duly Examined: And that upon Baston's finding fault with his Accounts, they
were taken out of his hands to be inspected by others; tho he says 'twas his
business to examine all Accounts in that Office.

And Mr. Richard Gibson certifies, by a writing under his hand to this Board,
That during the time he served as Clerk to the Commissioners for Sick and
Wounded, there were Instructions sent to their Agents at the several Ports,
signed by the Commissioners, at least by Three of them, and sealed with the
Seal of their Office; in which, to the best of his Remembrance and Belief, they
were to And this Article about Swearing was, to my knowledge, in Mr. Dickinsons
Instructions, tho the Commissioners always dispensed with the performance
thereof:
swear to the Truth of their Respective Accounts.

The Fifth Article complains,
That they keep their Accounts in a clandestine manner, and thereby give
themselves Opportunity to cheat their Majesty's.

Which Article the Complainants If this Article was not fully proved before the
Admiralty; yet it may easily be made appear, not only by the Commissioners
keeping their Books, but their shameful partiality in passing and paying Mr.
Dickinsons Accounts of Plymouth, without being Sworn to, to the great wrong of
King and Subject; and I remember when I left the Office I saw a Quarters
Account of Mr. Dickinsons, for a great sum of Money, then about two years old,
Endors'd upon the back by Mr. Garrard the Commissioners Secretary, in these
words, This Account is yet to be Examined, when it had been Posted in the
Leidger, and paid long before. And in like manner, while I was in the Office,
all Accounts that came, were posted in the Leidger by Mr. Garrard before
Examination, and afterward, as he thought fit, he gave them out to be examined
with constant instructions not to alter the Total, but to return the Objections
in Writing to him; but whether he made the just abatements, is best known to
his own Conscience; it appears by Mr. Dickinson's Accounts, he did not: also in
the 6th Article of this Report it is proved, That Mr. Garrard having the
disposal of the King's Money, passes his own Accounts, without any other Check;
all which I think are demonstrations of keeping their Accounts in a Clandestine
manner, so as to give themselves opportunity to cheat the King.
could not make out, unless it were in the 50 l. Bill to their Secretary, which
is mentioned in the 7th Article.

The Sixth Article complains,
That they give Additional Allowances to their Secretary and their Cashier: And
that their Secretary had not accounted for any of the money imprested to him.

Upon the Sixth Article.
It appears that they do allow an Addition of Salary to their Cashier for a
Clerk and Office, which the Commissioners say they think he deserves; and it
likewise appears that their Secretary has not regularly accounted for any money
imprested to him, but passes his own Accounts without any other check.

The Seventh Article complains,
That when they went down to Pay the Quarters at Plymouth, they deducted 6 d.
per Pound out of the Allowance for Advance-mony, and that they took away the
power of the disposal of their Tallies from their Cashier, and gave it to their
Secretary.

Upon the Seventh Article,
It appears, The Commissioners in 1691. acquainted the Treasury, that the
Tallies could not be disposed of, without allowing 6 d. in the Pound Advance;
That 'twas true the Commissioners did deduct more than was abated for the
selling the first Tallies; but by selling other Tallies, they were out of
Pocket; so that when they had any Tallies to dispose of, they ordered their
Cashier to beat down the Price, without giving him a power to agree; so that
they are generally disposed of by their Secretary, who had 50 l. in one Bill
allowed him for Brokage, for procuring money upon the Talleys; which their
Cashier says, they denied to him: and that he knew nothing of it: For 'twas
mentioned in ihe Bill to him for advance.

That when their Cashier disposed of 10000 l. Talleys, without loss, Mr.
Johnson, one of the Commissioners Clerks told him, he lost 50 l. by it: And the
Commissioners threatened to complain of their Cashier to the Treasury, for
disposing of them.

In Addition to the Second Article of the Complainers, it is set forth,
That the Commissioners refused VVhite's Proposals, tho he offered to Transport
the Prisoners cheaper than others.

That the Commission is in Effect managed by Mr. Addison, Mr. Kirkby and their
Secretary, who oftentimes Sign for the Commissioners.

That they put the King to too much charge for the sick men near London, by not
sending them to the London Hospitals.

That after the last Battle they carried down more Chyrurgeons to Portsmouth,
to look after the sick and wounded men than was necessary, thereby putting
their Majesty's to an extravagant charge.

It did appear that they refused VVhite's Proposals, and told him, he went to
take the Bread from others. That they sent him to Dulivier, who acquainted him,
he could have had 20 s. per Head, but for him. That they made a Bargain for 15
s. per Head, tho White made a Proposal in Writing, to do it for 10 s.

That there was a Certificate laid before us, signed by Three of the
Commissioners, which did not appear to be their Hands, tho they said, they
believed they were: But Garrard says, he thinks that he signed for Mr. Kirkby:
and Johnson, one of the Clerks, for Mr. Addison: Collins, another of the
Clerks, says, That he often times set the Commissioners Hands to Papers, by Mr.
Garrard's Order: And Johnson says, he put Mr. Kirkby's Hand to a Ticket, by
Order of Mr. Addison and Mr. Shephard, which Mr. Kirkby afterward approved.
Dr. VVelwood being asked, whether he knew if this was a practice amongst them?
said, he had been told it, but did not believe it: But that looking over the
Copy-book, he found his Letters to several Papers, which he don't remember to
have signed. He further says, that Mr. Kirkby proposed to sign for Mr. Addison,
and took the Pen in his Hand to do it: upon which the Dr. went from the Board.
This was owned by Mr. Kirkby. And Mr. Addison being asked the same Question,
said, He had oftentimes seen the Commissioners Hands set to Tickets, in matters
of Seamens Clothes: Mr. Shephard says, he believes it has been done: Mr. Kirkby
says, he believes it has been done for about these two Years past; and Mr.
Elder believes it has been done once or twice.

It appeared, that by the method for taking care of sick men near London, it
was in the power of Mr. Case, the Surgeon, to send them to the Hospital the
next day after he had received them; by which he was entitled to 6s. 8d. for
their cure At Deptford the King paid 12 d. a day for each man's Quarters, and 6
s. 8 d. for his Cure; whereas the whole charge to the King, of the London
Hospitals, is but 2 d. a day, and the men better taken care of; by which it
appears. that in every 100 l. the King paid at Deptford, his Majesty-paid above
80 l. thereof in his own wrong.
.

That there was a great Number of Surgeons sent down after the Battle, which
the Commissioners say was for the better taking care of the men.

All which is humbly submitted to Your Majesty. F. J. L. H. P. R. R.


The aforesaid Report being thus made and signed by Four of the Lords of the
Admiralty, was carried by their Lordships, on a Sunday Night to Kensington, to
be read before the King in the Cabinet-Council; but according to what the
Commissioners before threatened, that if they were cast before the Admiralty,
they could stop any Report from coming to the King, by removing the matter to
the To purchase delays.
Council. So indeed it proved; for that Night Four of the Commissioners for
Sick and Wounded, had lodged a Petition to the King, in the Nature of an Appeal
from the Justice of the Admiralty: praying to be heard before His Majesty in
Council, touching the Crimes whereof they were accused: And His Majesty was
graciously pleased to Order, That the Matter should be Examined by a Committee
of the Council on the Wednesday following: So that the Admiralty's Report (as I
was informed) was not read to the King.

Then were the Commissioners and my self, with others concerned, soon after
summoned before the Council: But at the first and second attending, nothing
material was done, and so continued till the King was gone for Flanders; and
then, after several days Examination before the Council, their Lordships made a
Report to her late Majesty of blessed Memory; a Copy of which I have seen: And
in the said Report, among other things, is contained, That the Commissioners
are guilty of

PARTIALITY, Great Mismanagement, AND Breach of Trust.

But after this Report was made, I found that the Sick and Wounded Office still
stood as firm as ever: For I perceived, tho Judgment was passed against them,
that they had obtained a Celsit Executio, for an unlimited time; By reason of
which, Execution soon went out against me: For the Commissioners, and their
Emissaries employed for that purpose, proclaimed in all public places, that
they were acquitted like worthy honest Gentlemen; and that I appeared to be a
False Accuser; adding the opprobious Names of Villain, Informer, etc. This soon
obliged me to look to my self: and in order to put a stop to this horrible
scandal, I resolved to get a Copy of the Council's Report, and accordingly I
petitioned the Queen and Council for the same, in the words following:

To the QUEEN'S Most Excellent Majesty, in Council.
The humble Petition of Samuel Baston.
Shows, THat your Petitioner having been formerly a Clerk to the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded Seamen, etc. And seeing diverse Miscarriages
in their Office, which your Petitioner believed to be very prejudicial to Your
Majesty, did advertise the said Commissioners thereof; but finding no redress,
your Petitioner did, out of pure Zeal to your Majesty's Service, lay down his
said Employment; and soon after, viz, about the beginning of March last, did
lay the said Miscarriages, in Writing, before his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury;
which said Miscarriages were, by His Majesty's Command, Examined, first before
the Lords of the Admiralty, and after, before the Lords of Your Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council; at both which places, your Petitioner humbly
conceives, he charged the said Commissioners with nothing but what he made
appear. Yet, notwithstanding, the said Commissioners give out, That what they
were Accused of, has proved to be malicious and false, and accordingly they are
acquitted thereof; by which Report your Petitioner is rendered as one of the
worst of Men. Those who are rightly affected to your Majesty, not knowing the
true matter of Fact, believe your Petitioner to be a malicious and ill
principled man; and those disaffected to your Majesty, do look upon this as a
Victory they have obtained, and do eagerly lay hold on all opportunities to
defame and ruin your Petitioner, that all men by his Example may be discouraged
from serving your Majesty in this Kind for the future: So that your Petitioner
has not only the misfortune to lose all he had to depend upon in the world for
a maintenance, but is like to be ruined in his Reputation also, which is more
dear to him than Life. For preventing of which,

Your Petitioner does most humbly and earnestly pray Your Sacred Majesty
graciously to order him a Copy of the Report that the Lords of the Council made
to your Majesty about the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, etc. that thereby
your Petitioner may be enabled to take off the Scandal that has and will be
cast upon him by the said Commissioners, or any disaffected persons: Also to
enable your Petitioner to defend himself against any vexatious Suit of Law,
which the said Commissioners may bring against your Petitioner for Scandal, and
which they have not scrupled to threaten: By this means your Petitioner will he
able to support his Reputation with all good men; otherwise (without your
Majesty's gracious Protection) his Ruin will soon be accomplished for being so
ready and zealous to serve your Majesty:

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

And waiting on the Clerk of the Council to know the Answer to my Petition, he
told me it was read, and then laid down, and nothing ordered upon it, whether
it was granted or rejected; so that I could never get a Copy of the Council's
Report, to justify my self in the discharge of my duty. This put me much out
of heart, being a confirmation of all the Scandals cast upon me; and thus was I
left to God and the wide world, being afraid to walk the streets for a
considerable time, lest I should be baited to death by the disaffected Party,
etc.

But now I shall relate the Examination these Miscarriages met with before the
Commissioners for stating the Public Accounts.

When I first exhibited this Complaint to the Secretary of State in the
beginning of March 1693. I then also presented a Copy thereof to the
Commissioners of Accounts, where it slept quietly about five months sworn to,
till the Lords of the Admiralty and Council had gone through with it, as is
before related; and there being one Mr. The King's Surgeon at Plymouth, that
took care of the sick and wounded Seamen, etc. and was an Eyewitness to all
the miscarriages of Mr. Dickinson.
John Leckie, who had Signed the Complaint, being the Principal Evidence
concerning the miscarriages of Mr. Dickinson at Plymouth, in barbarously using
the French Prisoners and Seamen in the Hospital, by cheating them of the King's
Allowance, with many other miscarriages supported by the Commissioners, the
said Mr. Leckie having been before the Admiralty and Council, and having stayed
in London a considerable time after all was over, he and I did despair of ever
being called by the Commissioners of Accounts. And Mr. Leckie meeting with an
opportunity, went on board the Mocho Frigate to the East Indies, on his own
Affairs, about the beginning of July, 1694. Not long after, viz. the first of
August following, I received an Order from the Commissioners of Accounts,
requiring my attendance on them the third Instant, and I was also ordered to
acquaint Mr. Leckie that he should likewise attend at the same time. According
to this Order I did attend the Commissioners of Accounts at their Office in
York-Buildings, where, after I had acquainted them that Mr. Leckie was gone to
Sea, they told me the Board had come to a Resolution to examine my Complaint,
and that if I was willing to justify it, they would appoint a day for the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, and I to attend: They also told me, that
the Complaint consisting of Seven Articles, the first Three Articles, which
chiefly related to a Correspondence with the French, did not properly lie
before them; so that they resolved to begin at the Fourth Article: To which I
answered, That the Fourth Article consisted chiefly of the Miscarriages of
Plymouth: to the Truth of which Mr. Leckie had made Oath before them when the
Complaint was first exhibited, and that his Name was written in the Margin, as
the principle Witness thereto; and that I could say little to it, having never
been at Plymouth in my Life. And I further acquainted them, That the
Correspondence with the French was the chief Reason I laid down my Employment
in order to detect it, which I looked upon as my duty to do; and that I
conceived, as their Honors were Members of Parliament, it might not be
improper for their cognizance to lay before the House of Commons at their next
meeting; a Correspondence with the Enemy being a matter that so much concerned
the Safety of their Country: I also acquainted them that the Fourth Article had
been twice sufficiently proved already by Mr. Leckie, before the Admiralty and
Council, as would appear by each of their Reports, which I thought their
Honors might receive as Evidence of the truth thereof, and that seeing they
thought fit to reject the most material part of the Complaint, and the
principal Evidence to the rest being absent; I prayed to be excused any further
Attendance in regard there could be no full hearing, and that I had been much
fatigued already, and prayed now to have a little rest, designing to lay all
these matters before the King, at his Majesty's arrival from Flanders.

But notwithstanding this, and what else I urged (being twice before them) the
Commissioners rejected the first three Articles of my Complaint that I was a
Witness to, which related to a Correspondence with France, and barbarously
using the French Prisoners, etc. And on the contrary, would oblige me to stand
to that which Mr. Leckie, had sworn to about five Months before, and
accordingly they Issued their Precept for me to attend them at their Board, and
being come, I found the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded had brought one Late
Clerk to Mr. Dikinson at Plymouth, and now in the same Employment under the new
Agent.
Mr. Sharrack to be a Witness for them, and his Master Dickinson; and when the
Commissioners of Accounts had sent for us up, the fourth article of the
Complaint was read, which related to Mr. Dickinson, which Mr. Sharrack
redicul'd, saying, Not one word of it was true; and then one of the
Commissioners of Accounts, who was Chairman, in the name of the Board, told me,
That the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded had brought Mr. Sharrack to be an
Evidence in the behalf of Mr. Dickinson, and that the Board was resolved to
hear what he could say to that matter; at which being surprised, I answered,
that I thought he was not a proper Evidence, and laid down several reasons for
it, to the Effect following,

First, That Mr. Sharrack himself stands accused as a Criminal in discharge of
his Duty, while he was Mr. Dickinson's Clerk, and his Name is mentioned as such
in the third Article of this Complaint; and it appears he is a Criminal, and
has abused the French Prisoners by the third Article of the Lords of the
Admiraltie's A Copy of which I delivered at the Board.
Report; therefore to admit him a Witness upon Oath, against that Complaint in
which he not only stands charged as a Criminal, but has been proved so, is to
swear him in his own behalf, which I told their Honors I thought was contrary
to Law.

Secondly, That if their Honors should believe what Mr. Sharrack was about to
swear, they must of Consequence make Mr. Leckie Perjured, which I thought would
appear to be very hard dealings with a Man that is absent at Sea, who staid so
long in London waiting their Honors Commands, and who so fairly proved these
very matters twice before at the Admiralty and Council, where this Mr. Saarrack
durst not appear to confront him.

Thirdly, That Mr. Dickinson being accused (I conceived) ought to come up and
answer for himself; for seeing I was forced against my Will by their Honors
Precept, to attend a matter I knew little of, I thought it was too much Favor
for Mr. Dickinson, who had been before proved a Criminal, to spare him the
trouble, and suffer him thus to answer by Proxy to matters of such moment.

To which the Chairman made answer to this Effect, That all these matters in
the End should be duly considered by the Board. But because Mr. Sharrack had
taken so long a Journey on purpose, they were Having from my unwillingness good
grounds to believe I was not able to contradict him.
resolved to hear what he could say. To which I replied, that I protested
against their Proceedings, believing it illegal, and that, if they thought fit,
I would submit my self therein to the Opinion of the Attorney General. At which
they were angry, saying, I arraigned the Justice of their Board, and stood in
Contempt of the Authority of their Board, etc. I answered, That their Honors
could not reasonably blame me, if they considered what I had gone through
already, and how much my Reputation lay at stake, for that the Commissioners
for Sick and Wounded, and I, could not be all in the right, but Punishment must
of necessity be due to one side or the other. But notwithstanding the
Commissioners of Accounts would proceed to examine Mr. Sharrack; and first he
produced an Affidavit, sworn by himself, which was read at the Board, the
purport of which was to testify how long he had served under Mr. Dickinson,
and that he had managed all affairs for his Master, both relating to the Sick
Wounded Seamen, and Prisoners at War; and that he believed nothing was acted by
his Master, but he was privy to it, etc. which Affidavit I suppose was produced
to make whatever he should swear, carry the greater face of truth, in reference
to his knowledge of matters and things, and as a foundation whereon Mr.
Sharrack was to build the following deposition, the sum and substance of which
I shall relate as short as I can.

The Commissioners of Accounts having given Mr. Sharrack his Oath, they read
the fourth Article of the Complaint; the first Particular of which contained
these words, viz.

That the Commissioners For sick and Wounded.
for their own private Interest, connive at, and permit those employed under
them to wrong their Majesty's, appears by their passing by and stifling all
Complaints made against Mr. Dickinson, their Agent at Plymouth; all which have
been laid before them several times: First, his hard usage to the French
Prisoners, in allowing them only Two Pence per diem a man, for the space of
Fourteen Months, with a Loaf of Bread, which he gave them for a Penny, and had
himself sixteen of said Penny Loaves for a Shilling; and upon Complaint made he
afterward allowed an Half Penny per Day more: That he abated an Half Penny per
diem from each Prisoners Allowance, under pretense of finding them Water; which
they are supplied with gratis at all other ports; neither did it cost him any
thing here, he obliging one Pike a Victualler to supply them with Water for the
liberty of selling them Ale. Yet the poor men had not a Pint of water a day per
man; and those that went not upon the water's first coming to the Prison, had
none at all, there being several Prisoners who perished for want of water The
Seat of War being most to the Westward, caused great Numbers of French
Prisoners to be brought into Plymouth more than other Ports, whose barbarous
usage was from time to time represented to the Commissioners, not only by the
poor Prisoners themselves, but also by Monsieur Delagnii, Intendant General of
the Marine at Paris, in several Letters, setting forth the inhumane usage the
French Prisoners had from Mr. Dickinson and his Servants, in defrauding them of
their Allowance, etc. by reason whereof many of them died, with repeated
Threats to use the English Prisoners with the like Cruelty, if it was not
redressed; which never being done by the Commissioners, but rather encouraged,
was certainly the true Cause of all the misery that the English Prisoners
suffered in France, in which Hundreds perished: And these Letters of Monsieur
Delagnii's, I moved several times to have produced, but could never obtain the
same.
.

Thus it appears Mr. Leckie swore there was about three Farthings per diem
deducted from the French Prisoners, whose whole allowance was but Four Pence
each man a day, except Commissioned Officers, whose Number was very
inconsiderable; but where any such were taken (that could not handsomely be
suffered to Run, or else Exchanged for common Seamen) they were not kept to
this miserable Pittance; but on the contrary, permitted to Ride up and down the
Country, under pretense of Recovery of their Health, etc.

But now comes Mr. Sharrack to counter-swear what was before sworn by Mr.
Leckie; and in order thereunto positively depones to this Effect, That he was
the person that constantly paid the French Prisoners their allowance, and that
Mr. Dickinson never deducted above a Farthing a day from the Prisoners, which
was for supplying them with Water and Straw.

And the Chairman demanding of me, what I had to object against Mr. Sharrack's
Oath, I answered, That tho I knew little of the Affairs of Plymouth, yet I was
much surpised at what he had sworn; and therefore I prayed their Honors to
send for the Commissioners Letter-book, wherein I would show them the Entry of
a Letter that the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded writ to Mr. Dickinson
concerning a Complaint they received against him about abusing the French
Prisoners. And that the Commissioners in that Letter writ to Mr. Dickinson
thus: We hear you deduct Three Farthings a day from the Prisoners: pray let us
know how it comes to be. We know you deducted according to former Direction. By
which, and Mr. Dickinson's Answer, I told their Honors they would surely find
that Mr. Sharrack had not sworn right. But the Chairman said, 'twould put them
out of their method; and that they would send for the Book to morrow. I
answered, That I conceived it would not hurt their method, to detect a man in a
false Oath; the End of all methods in these Cases, being to find out the Truth;
and therefore I insisted several times, and prayed, That in Justice to Mr.
Leckie, who was absent, the Book might be sent for, and produced while the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, and Mr. Sharrack, were present, to prevent
all Tricks in altering the Book, etc. that otherwise might be done before the
morrow: At which one of the Commissioners of Accounts was pleased to say, That
if I insisted to have the Book sent for, 'twas his Opinion they ought to do it;
notwithstanding which I could not Tho Mr. Sharrack was to be discharged any
further attendance that Night; and it would not have taken up above a quarter
of an hour to have sent for the Book, being no further than from York-Buildings
to Scotland-Yard.
prevail.

But before I proceed to the next part of Mr. Sharrack's Deposition, I shall
pass to the following day when the Book was sent for, and so relate what became
of this part of his Oath.

On the morrow the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, and my self, being again
before the Commissioners of Accounts, according to Order, they produced their
Letter-Book; (But here it is to be noted Mr. Sharrack was not present, being
discharged any further attendance the Night before) And the Letter that I
mentioned being read, they found in it the words beforementioned, viz. We hear
you deduct a day from the Prisoners: pray let us know how it comes to be; we
know you deducted according to former direction. But Mr. Addison, one of the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, standing up, told the Chairman, he was
under a little mistake in reading that part of the Letter: for them Figures
which he read for Three Farthings and an Half Penny, were not so, but Three
Fourths of a Farthing and half a Farthing: At which it was demanded, how they
made up their Accounts with such odd Money. Very easily, May it please your
honor, replied Mr. Addison. Then to trace the matter further, I moved that Mr.
Dickinson's original Letter might be produced, which he writ in answer to the
Commissioner's Letter, which being read, Mr. Dickinson said in it in his own
defense, That he never deducted but a Farthing a day from the Prisoners, and
desiring to see the Letter, I found the word Farthing was interlined, and the
word under it blotted out; and urging to the Chairman that the Letter had been
altered; he answered it could not be, seeing Mr. Dickinson, that wrote the
Letter, had not been in Town for several Months; to which I replied, that Mr.
Sharrack his Clerk wrote the Body of the Letter, and was last night in Town to
alter it; but that he was either infatuated, or in haste when he did it, for he
had not done it right, so as to bear any coherence with the Commissioner's
Letter: With that Mr. Addison alleged, That Mr. Dickinson's saying he deducted
but a farthing a day from the Prisoners was according to what Mr. Sharrack had
sworn; but one of the Commissioners of Accounts was pleased to speak to the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded in this manner, Gentlemen, here is no
agreement between your Letter and Dickinson's answer; for you write to Mr.
Dickinson to know why he deducted three fourths of a Farthing from the
Prisoners, and he writes you word in his answer, that he never deducted but a
Farthing, which is four Fourths; so that this will not hang together at all, to
which Mr. Addison answered; may it please your Honor, we writ to Mr. Dickinson
to know why he deducted three farthings a day from the Prisoners, and he writes
us word again in this Letter, that he never deducted but a Farthing, which is
according to what Mr. Sharrack has sworn. The same Gentlemen replied, But Sir,
you said just now it was three fourths of a Farthing. May it please your
Honor, replied Mr. Addison, I could not say so, there is no such Money goes in
England, I beg your Honor not to mistake me, I Am sure it is all very right, God
forbid we should do an ill thing, may it please your Honor, etc. Nay Sir, says
he, either you or I are in a false Story, I Will refer it to the whole Board;
I Will be judged by your own Brethren if you did not say just now, it was three
fourths of a Farthing. Yes, says Mr. One of the Commissioners for Sick and
wounded
Shepherd, Mr. Addison, you did say 'twas three fourths of a Farthing, I would
not contradict you though I did think you were mistaken. Well, says the
Chairman, which is it three fourths of a Farthing, or three Farthings? It is
three Farthings, may it please your Honor, says Mr. Addison. Why then, says
the same Gentleman again, If you take it that way, there is still no agreement
between your Letter and Dickinson's answer, for you write to Mr. Dickinson to
know why he deducted three Farthings a Day from the Prisoners, and further you
say, you know he deducted a halfpenny according to former direction; and he
writes you word in his Answer, that he never deducted but a Farthing. Now no
Man in his Wits can suppose that Dickinson deducted less than you all allowed
him to deduct. May it please your Honor, says Mr. Addison, we never allowed
him to deduct any thing; nay, says he, your own Letter-Book is a Witness to the
contrary, wherein you do not only approve of his deducting a halfpenny a day,
but quote your former Order for it, or else what do you mean by them words; we
know you deducted a halfpenny a day, according to former Direction? at which
Mr. Addison was quite gravelled. And then I moved the Board to give the
Commissioner's Secretary his Oath, to show more plainly that the three fourths
of a Farthing was only a prevaricating Evasion of Mr. Addison's to cover the
Crime; but they were pleased to answer there was no need of it; for the matter
was plain enough, and they were very well satisfied how it stood. So they
ordered their Clerks to take a Copy of the Commissioner's, and Dickinson's
Letter, and now I shall humbly submit it to better Judgment, Whether Mr.
Dickinson's Letter was not altered in reference to the Words Farthing, a Day,
and also how true Mr. Sharrack's Oath has been in this part: But here follows
more of the same stamp.

And now I shall go back to the day before, and proceed upon Mr. Sharrack's
deposition. The Commissioners of Accounts having refused to send for the
Letter-Book, as is before-mention^d, they proceeded to read the next Branch of
the fourth Article, in the Complaint, which was in these Words, viz. Secondly.
That Mr. Dickinson withheld the Seamens Allowance of meat from them, in the
Hospital at Plymouth, for that in presence of one of the Commissioners four
Men's Allowance of meat weighed only one Pound, six Ounces, whereas it should
have weighed four Pounds. This Mr. Leckie had also sworn to.

In opposition to to which, Mr. Sharrack, upon his Oath, positively affirmed to
the Effect following: A Very unchristian Act to encourage Mr. Sharrack to
proceed upon his Oath, when what he had sworn be fore sinel^ so strong of
Perjury.
That he was the Person that always took Care of the Provisions for the
Hospital, and that the men, such as could eat Flesh, had always full weight of
Provisions, according to whole Allowance, except what small matter might
reasonably be supposed to waste in the Boiling; and to show that there was
often such Complaints made upon no grounds he continues upon his Oath to give
the following Instances. Sir Cloudsly Shovell (says he) coming a Shore one
morning, the Seamen in the Hospital made complaint to him, that they had not
full allowance, and that their Provisions was not good, upon which Sir
Cloudsley came to the Hospital, and ordered me to take some pieces of the Beef
out of the Copper, which were found to be full Weight; with that Sir Cloudsley
called for some Bread, etc. saying he would taste this Beef, of which there was
such Complaints, which he liked so well, that he eat the best part of two
pieces, and blamed the men for complaining, telling them they were well used,
and that the Beef was as good as any he had at his own Table. And Mr. Sharrack
going to proceed, I interrupted, asking him, were they four Pound pieces that
you swear Sir Cloudsley Shovell tasted of? He answered, yes; but the Chairman
told me, I must not interrupt him and that he swore cautiously. Yes Gentlemen,
replied I, he swears very cautiously, he swears Sir Cloudsley Shovell eat above
four pound of Beef by way of a taste; and after Mr. Sharrack had made several
Speeches, that perhaps he might be mistaken in the quantity of Beef, and he was
sure there was all imaginable Care taken, and that 'twas malice against his
Naster, etc. The Chairman asked me, what had I to object?

I answered, That when this Particular was Examined before the Admiralty,
Doctor Welwood acknowledged that he was the Commissioner that Mr. Leckie
mentions in the Complaint before whom the meat was weighed in Plymouth
Hospital, that proved so much short of Weight, and that seeing Doctor Welwood
did not now attend with the rest of the Commissioners, I prayed he might be
sent for Face to Face, with Mr. Sharrack, to be asked some questions about this
matter, the Chairman answered, that he was ordered to attend with the rest of
the Commissioners, but that he pretended some earnest Business, and prayed
their excuse, so they would send for him to morrow. But I continued to pray
their Honors to send for him Face to Faee with Mr. Sharrack, because he was to
be discharged any further Attendance that Night, otherwise their Honors could
not so easily discover the Truth, but I could not prevail, for the Chairman
answered, that the next day would do as well, and that they would consider of
all these matters in the End. So now I must pass to the next day (when Doctor
VVelwood was present, and Mr. Sharrack gone) and give an account what became of
this part of Mr. Sharrack's Deposition.

The next day giving my Attendance, and the Dr. being ask^d several Questions
upon Oath, did answer to this Effect, That when he was at Plymouth there was
Complaint made to him, that the Seamen in the Hospital had short Weight of
Provisions; upon which he said he went to the Hospital, and causing several
Pieces of the meat to be taken out of the Copper, that should have been Four
Pound Pieces, he found upon weighing them, that none of them was These
Proceedings were so notorious, that Nicholas Sharrack was generally known in
the Fleet to be the Man that cheated the Seamen of their Allowance in Plymouth
Hospital; and when he was in London, has confessed he durst not go to the
Navy-Office by daylight for fear of being beaten, or killed by the Seamen: And
I have seen a Letter to the Commissioners, under his own hand, wherein he gives
them an Account of a Mutiny at Plymouth by the Seamen, and how they threatened
to burn the Hospital; and that they assaulted his house, threatening to kill
him; so that he was forced to withdraw into the Country; and all because of
these Cheats, which were never redressed by the Commissioners, but his Master
Dickinson and he still protected by them.
half that weight: Upon which he said, he Reprimanded Mr. Dickinson and
Sharrack; and that he hoped it was afterward mended. Upon which I moved, that
the Doctor might be asked, upon his Oath, who it was that took the Beef out of
the Copper, and weighed it before him? He answered, it was Mr. Sharrack, who
managed the Hospital under Mr. Dickinson: And then I referred it to their
Honors to consider what an Oath Mr. Sharrack had yesterday made, who swore,
That the men had always full Weight of Provisions in the Hospital; against whom
there is first Mr. Leckies Oath, who was Surgeon upon the place, and an Eye
witness; and now also Dr. Welwood swears, that Sharrack himself weighed those
very Provisions that were short of Weight, as aforesaid.

But now I must be forced again to go back to the preceding Day, to proceed
upon the last part of Mr. Sharrack's Deposition: and I am obliged to take this
broken method in relating it, because the Examination was not so compact as it
might have been, Sharrack being suffered to swear behind Mr. Leckies back; and
the Evidence against Sharrack being sworn behind his back, when they might as
well have all been Face to Face. And the Commissioners of Accounts, as I have
before related, not thinking fit to send for Dr. Welwood, they proceeded upon
the next particular of the Fourth Article in the Complaint, which being read,
contained these Words, viz. Thirdly, That Mr. Dickenson Paid the People that
Quarter the Seamen, at Five Shillings Six Pence per Week, the King's Allowance
being Seven Shillings. To this also Mr. Leckie had Sworn.

In opposition to which, Mr. Sharrack positively Swears, That he was the Person
that made up his Master's Accounts, gave out the Tickets for the Sick and
Wounded, and paid the Money to the People that Quartered them; and that there
was never deducted above Six Pence in the Pound, which was for Returns of Money
from London. And the Chairman demanding of me what I had to object, I answered
to this Effect:

When this Article was Examined before the Admiralty, Mr. Dickenson was there
to justify himself, and He being the Tool to do all the Executive Part of
these Cheats, durst not then appear Face to Face with Mr. Leckie, but Mr.
Dickenson was thought fitter to come up, that whatever Crimes were proved, he
might pretend Ignorance, and shift them off to his Clerk. But so soon as Mr.
Leckie was gone to Sea, up comes Sharrack, and courageously Swears a direct
Negative to all that Mr. Leckie had sworn believing none was able to contradict
him.
Mr. Sharrack was left at Plymouth; and one of the Lords of the Admiralty, in
my hearing, did Examine Mr. Dickenson, speaking to him in this manner.

Mr. Dickenson, we will not Examine you upon Oath, because it is against your
self; but declare upon your Honor, as you are a Gentleman, what was the most
that ever you deducted from the People that Quartered the Seamen. To which Mr.
Dickenson answered, I never deducted above Twelve Pence in the Pound, which was
for Returns of Money. Upon which his Honor turning to my Lord Faulkland* (who
was Chairman) said, my Lord, This Matter looks with a very ill Face; for I
remember some time ago, when one Ben. Berry, now Surgeon at Plymouth, brought a
complaint against Mr. Dickenson, he also accused him of the same Crime that Mr.
Leckie now does, of making unreasonable Deductions from the People; and then we
would have had Mr. Dickenson come up to answer for himself; but he pretending
much of the King's Business, we excused him, and he sent up his Man, one
Nicholas Sharrack, to justify his Proceedings: And I remember Sharrack, in his
Master's Justification, Swore before us, That his Master never deducted above
Eighteen Pence in the Pound; and now Mr. Dickenson declares upon his Honor, he
never deducted but Twelve Pence. Therefore (added I) I pray your Honors to
send to the Admiralty for the Minuits of Mr. Sharrack's Deposition before their
Lordships; for you will find that in Mr. Berry's complaint (which was about
February, 1691/2) Mr. Sharrack then Swore, That Mr. Dickenson never deducted
above Eighteen Pence in the Pound. And afterward, before the Admiralty, Mr.
Dickenson himself, about April 1694. says, he never deducted but Twelve Pence.
And now Mr. Sharrack Swears again positively, before your Honors, he never
deducted but Six Pence. To which the Commissioners answered, That there must be
Perjury either on one side or the other; and the Chairman said, they would take
care to send for the Minuits of the Admiralty that I had desired, and consider
of all these matters in the end: And accordingly I lest in Writing, how they
should describe the said Minuits in their Letter or Precept to the Lords of the
Admiralty; but whether they have got it, or not, I don't know. Thus in the
beginning of August, 1694. in one Day, Mr. Sharrack finished his Deposition,
which he came from Plymouth to make, and was the same Night discharged any
further Attendance, and hurried out of Town again down to his Post, as an
honest Man fit to serve the King.

About this time I had notice that one Capt. White was come for England, who is
the Person mentioned in the Lords of the Admiralty's Report, that in the
beginning of the War made a Proposal in Writing, to the Commissioners for Sick
and Wounded, to Transport the Prisoners at War, for Ten Shillings per Head, and
afterward made a verbal Proposal to do it for Eight Shillings a Head; but he
being at Sea when this Complaint was Examined before the Admiralty, the verbal
Proposal of Eight Shillings a Head could not be fully proved: But now, hearing
he was come for England, I acquainted the Commissioners of Accounts, who at my
instance were pleased to send for him: And the said Capt. White proved before
their Honors, That the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, refused to employ
him for Eight Shillings a Head, Mr Addison telling him at the Board, he could
not undertake it at so low a rate; and that he did it to prejudice other Men;
raising many other Difficulties and Objections, etc. and bid him go and talk
with Mr. Peter Dulivier, and Mr. Holder; and that going to them, each of them
told him the said Capt. White, he had Note, Mr. Holder had then made a
Proposal, in Writing, to the Commissioners, for Thirty Shillings a Head;
therefore the Sharers therein, had reason to be angry with Capt. White, for
proposing to do the same thing for Eight.

I have Mr. Holder's Original Proposal of 30 s. ready to produce.


spoiled the Market, and that they could have had Twenty, if not Thirty
Shillings for each English Passenger, had it not been for him.

And the Commissioners having quite discouraged Captain White's, proposal of
Eight Shillings a head, they presented to the Admiralty a Representation, a
Copy whereof I shall insert, as follows.

To the Right honorable the Lords Commissioners for executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral of England.
The Commissioners for exchanging Prisoners at War, Represent,
THat in pursuance of an Order of his Majesty in Council, dated the 21st. of
this Instant November, a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, We have received
proposals from several Persons for a Ship to carry French Prisoners at War for
France, and to bring back the English Prisoners from thence, and find the
Proposals of Richard Holder Partner with Mr. Peter Dulivier.
of London, Merchant, to be the fairest, untruth, for eight Shillings a head is
fairer than Twenty.
which are, either to have twenty Shillings a Head for each English Prisoner he
shall bring from France, or if he may have Liberty to carry to France such a
quantity of English Goods as are not contraband, bringing back only Money for
them, for which he will give such Security as shall be required, that then he
will bring all the English Prisoners home for nothing.

The Ship is called the Elizabeth of London, Burden Eighty Tuns, ten Men, and
six great Guns, now lying in the River Thames, and ready to Launch.

We pray your Lordship's speedy Directions, which of these Proposals we shall
agree upon.

Tho. Addison. Antho. Shepherd.
29th Nov. 1689. There are two Commissioners more that signed this
Representation, whose Names I shall omit because they are dead.




And the Commissioners giving this Representation to the Admiralty, their
Lordships refused to give them direction to agree for twenty Shillings a Head,
accounting it an extravagant price, so the Commissioners were forced to sink
the price to fifteen Shillings a head, and then they employed the same Captain
White, with the same Ship, and Covenanted for fifteen Shillings a Head, for the
same Service he had before offered for Eight Shillings, out of which Captain
White allowed gratuities to Mr. Holder, and Dulivier, at the rate of Half a
Crown a Head for each Prisoner, and at the making up of one account between him
and Mr. Holder, there was about ninety odd Pounds of such Half-Crowns deducted
from the said White, out of his Freight, which was done by virtue of a
Collusive Agreement, or Charter-Party made privately between him and the said
Mr. Holder, which the said White was obliged to enter into, before he could be
admitted into the Service.

Captain White did also upon Oath in my hearing relate some other things of
Moment before the Commissioners of accounts. But at present I shall only
mention one of them, the substance of which was, That Mr. Addison One of the
Commissioners for sick and Wounded.
told him not long after the beginning of the War, as a great Secret, that he
knew that Monsieur Dulivier paid all the French King's Pensions to his Spies
here in England.

This Captain White has the Reputation of a Person of known Integrity, and
affection to the Government, and performed his Duty during the time he was
employed in Transporting the Prisoners with great Zeal, in reference to
discovering the designs of the French; but met with such unexpected
disappointments and Obstructions, that he was sometimes in danger of being
murdered by the French, who it seems had an account of his Actions, instances
of which he has given to the Commissioners of Accounts.

But however in Justice to the said Captain White, who is now absent at Sea, I
shall here insert the Copy of a Memorial, presented by me in his behalf to the
Commissioners for Accounts, in order to stop the Mouths of the Commissioners
for Sick and Wounded, or any of their Party, from blackening him in his
Reputation, as they have done by me and all others who have opposed their Evil
Practices.

To the Honorable, the Commissioners appointed to take, state, and examine the
public Accounts, etc.
The Memorial of Samuel Baston, Shows,
THat Captain John White who was lately before your Honors, has acquainted me,
That whereas he is suddenly going a long Voyage to Sea, and not knowing if he
shall ever return; and forasmuch as what he has hitherto said and sworn at your
Honorable Board against the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, and Prisoners
at War, has been when the said Commissioners have not been present, and that
nothing for the future may be alleged by the said Commissioners against him
the said Captain White to prejudice his Reputation, when he shall be absent at
Sea, and not present to justify himself, he the said Capt. White, has
therefore desired me, in his behalf, to pray your Honors Precept for him to
appear Face to Face, with the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, before your
Honorable Board, as soon as your Honors think fit, not only to justify and
confirm what he has already said and sworn, but to hear and answer all
Objections, that the said Commissioners can bring against him, and also, to
declare some other Matters of Consequence to the King's Service, which as yet
he has not discovered.

Thus far relating to Capt. White.

London, 15. Nov. 1694. Signed, Samuel Baston.


According to the Request in this Memorial, the Commissioners for Sick and
Wounded, with Capt. White, and my Self, were sent for by the Commissioners of
Accounts, and being all present, the Memorial was read, and one of the
Commissioners of Accounts, who was Chairman, told the Commissioners for Sick
and Wounded to this effect, That this was the business they had sent for them
upon, and that the Request was so reasonable, they could not deny it; and
therefore desired them, if they had any thing to object against Capt. White,
either to what he had said against them, or to his Reputation in general, that
they would now declare it. To which Mr. Addison answered, We did not come to
accuse Capt. White, but thought he had come to accuse us. But the Chairman
replied, That is not the matter, Gentlemen, you have heard the Memorial read,
Capt. White is going to Sea, and desires that you would now speak what you have
to object against him, before he goes, and he is here ready to make answer to
it, to prevent all Scandals that may be cast upon him in his absence. To which
Mr. Addison answered to this effect; We have nothing to say against Capt.
White; we always believed him to be an honest Man; and if he has been hardly
used, we could not help it; for what we did in turning him out, was by Order.
Then the Chairman was pleased to say, Captain, you hear that the Commissioners
have nothing to say against you; and as for us, I do assure you, there is not
the least Imputation upon you at this Board, but we believe you to be a very
honest Man, and that you have been greatly abused.

Now this Business being ended before the Commissioners of Accounts, it slept
all the time of the Parliament, in the Year 1694. till the beginning of March,
1694/5. The Parliament being then sitting, one Mr. Crosfield came to me, and
told me, he designed to bring a Petition into the House of Peers, against
several Corruptions in the Government, and among the rest, he designed to
insert the Business of the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded; asking me, if I
was willing to appear before the Parliament. I told him I was very willing: and
thereupon I drew up a short Account of the Matter, and he placed it the first
Article in his Petition, which was Presented to the House of Peers, the Ninth
of March, 1694/5. And being called in before the House, among other things, I
prayed, That the Proceedings before the Commissioners of Accounts, might be
laid before the House; which their Lordships were pleased to order accordingly.
Then was I in great Expectation to end this troublesome Business, that had lain
so long and so heavy upon my Shoulders, while the Commissioners were supported.
For I, and several others, fully concluded, That the aforementioned
Depositions of Mr. Sharrack, and many other miscarriages of Forgery, etc. with
all Capt. White's Depositions, would have come open and barefaced before the
House: but we were all mistaken. For about eleven Days after the Order, viz.
the 20 th. of March, the Commissioners of Accounts had gotten the Examination
referred to them, alleging to the House (as I was informed) That it was still
depending before them and not finished; and produced a great bundle of Papers,
saying, That was not half the Examination, etc. And accordingly it was
re-committed to them by an Order of the House; and for the better discerning
how their Lordships Order was observed, I shall insert it, as follows,

Die Mercurii 20. Martii 1694.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled,
That the Papers this Day delivered in, from the Commissioners appointed to
Examine, Take, and State the Public Accounts of this Kingdom, in pursuance of
an Order of the 9th. Instant; as also all other Papers and Informations now
before this House, relating to Mr. Crosfield's Complaint, mentioned in, or
annexed to his Petition; and which concern the Commissioners for the Sick and
Wounded; be sent to the said Commissioners of Accounts, in order to their
Proceeding in the further Examination of that Matter now before them: And after
such Examination perfected, they transmit the Informations, and report their
Observations thereupon, to this House.

Math. Johnson, Cler. Parliamentor.


'Twas surprising to me when I heard the Commissioners of Accounts had
Represented, that the Complaint was still depending before them, and not
perfected: When (as I have before related) it had from time to time lain so
long dormant in their Office, both before and after Examination; which was all
gone through long before in the manner aforementioned, except the first Three
Articles, which their Honors totally rejected; saying, them Articles did not
lie before their Board, they being only concerned for the King's Revenue.

The getting it thus Recommitted toward the End of a Session of Parliament,
procured about Eight Months further delay, to the great Encouragement of those
accused, who well know that Old Crimes are seldom punished.

However; I hoped for the best; and Mr. Crosfield and I, soon after this Order,
waited upon one of the Commissioners of Accounts, at his House, praying him to
speed the Examination, that a Report might be made to the House of Peers before
the breaking up of the Parliament; desiring him also to think of Mr. Sharrack's
Deposition, etc. that was past. To which he answered, (speaking to me) Say you
nothing, but keep your Tongue within your Teeth; there is a great difference
now; we have an Order of the House of Lords; we know where the Shoe pinches
better than you; don't trouble your self; for we'll lay our fingers upon the
right place, etc.

Thus I went away with great satisfaction, thinking all things went well; and
having on the 22 d of March waited on the Commissioners of Accounts, we
received their Order to atend them the 29 th following, with the Commissioners
for Sick and Wounded; but nothing material was done that day, or the 30 th,
till the 2 d of April.

April 2 d had another Hearing, when the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded had
brought their Answer in Writing to the first Article, about the Correspondence;
which I prayed to hear read; but the Commissioners of Accounts would not grant
it.

I also prayed to have the Letter of Mr. William Churchil and Mr. Samuel
Alston, produced and read, which is mentioned in the first Article of the
Admiralty's Report; and which I offered, as an Evidence of the Correspondence;
but I received Answer, that it could not be found.

Then the Commissioners of Accounts received an Accusation against me from Mr.
William Churchil, who affirmed, that I had carried an The Old Accusation spoken
of in page 4. revived.
Information to my Lord Nottingham's Office, by which Robert Masters (mentioned
in the 2 d Article of the Admiralty's Report) was turned out; and produced a
Letter under my Hand, as a Testimony thereof; which being Read, the
Commissioners of Accounts Examined me upon it. I answered. That the Crime was
not great, if true: But if their Honors would receive Accusations against me
that was foreign to the matter before them, I prayed that Mr. Churchil might
make Oath to the Truth of his Accusation (it being the custom of their Board to
receive nothing but upon Oath), but it was not granted me: Yet the next day a
discourse of this matter arising, the Commissioners administered an Oath to me
to swear a Negative, wherein the Affirmative was not sworn, and all about a
matter that whoever did it, ought certainly to be commended, and not condemned.

But now they came closer upon me, for they made an offer at my Life by an
Accusation, wherein Mr. Addison pretended to make out, That I was the Criminal,
and had held the Criminal Correspondence with Dulivier, and produced a Paper,
which the Commissioners of Accounts took and read, obliging me to answer for my
self. I told their Honors, I conceived it was not Legal to suffer the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, to interfere with such pretended
Accusations against me, before they had answered to what was Exhibited against
them, and when they had done that, then I would answer to any thing they had to
allege against me; for that proceeding in this method, tended only to stifle
the Truth, and discourage all such as appeared for the same. But all I could
say, availed nothing, though one of the Commissioners of Accounts said, they
ought to receive no such Accusations. But another was of a contrary mind,
saying, 'Twas a Criminal Correspondence, and that they ought to take notice of
it. So then the Tables were turned upon me, and I was obliged to clear my self,
lest they should Minuit against me pro Confesso.

April 3. Had another Hearing, when Robert Masters charged as a Criminal in the
Complaint, and adjudg'd so by the Admiralty, as per Second Article of their
Lordships Report, was admitted a Witness upon Oath, in his own behalf, relating
to the Correspondence with Dulivier, in which he himself was concerned.

Now I shall give an Account of a foul Piece of Fraud, acted in a parcel of
Rhubarb, and how it was this Day Sworn off before the Commissioners of Accounts.

It was Sworn at the Bar of the House of Lords by two Drug Merchants, who were
Summoned, That in January, 1693/4. they Sold to Mr. Jonathan Leigh, Apothecary,
at public Sale, about one Hundred and a half of Rhubarb, at which is about
nine Pence 3 Farthings per Pound.
Four Pounds Eleven Shillings per Hundred; and that the said Rhubarb was
damaged, and none of it good, or fit for Medicine.

An Apothecary also being Summoned, Deposed, That he was Mr. Leigh's
Apprentice, at the time the said Rhubarb was bought; and that a considerable
quantity of it, by Order of the said Mr. Leigh, was beaten into Powder, and
delivered into the Mr. Leigh, and Three Apothecaries more, are appointed to
prepare the Medicines for the Army, and sick and wounded Seamen; and they keep
their Elaboratory in the Savoy, London; from whence all such Medicines issue.
Elaboratory in the Savoy, for Their Majesty's use. And being asked, He also
declared upon Oath, That his Conscience would not give him leave to dispense
such Rhubarb into Medicine: That the said Rhubarb cost but after the Rate of
about Nine Pence Three Farthings per Pound; and that good Rhubarb, fit for
Apothecaries use, was at that time worth at least, Three or Four and Twenty
Shillings per Pound Concerning this Rhubarb, it was the Opinion of the
President, and several of the College of Physicians (whom I waited upon about
this matter), that whoever took it for any Distemper where Rhubarb was the
proper Medicine, must needs die for want thereof, it having no more Virtue than
so much Powder of Rotten Post. Neither is this the only miscarriage of this
nature that has come to light. And if such gross Errors as these could pass the
inspection of all those Physicians, Apothecaries, etc. that the Commissioners
for sick and wounded pretend do constantly view all their Medicines, then God
and the Consciences of those concerned, only knows what other bad medicines
have been issued in like manner, for the lucre of Gain, and how many poor men
have perished thereby.
. This is the Substance of what was Sworn at the Bar of the House of Lords,
which was transmitted in Writing, Signed by each Person, to the Commissioners
of Accounts, pursuant to their Lordships Order of Reference; and this Day, viz.
the Third of April, the Apothecary and Drug-Merchants, being Summoned to attend
the Commissioners of Accounts, and being sent for up, the Four Apothecaries
were also called up; and after the former had again declared upon Oath,
according to what has been before related, then the Commissioners of Accounts
admitted the Four Apothecaries upon Oath, to Swear a Negative in their own
behalf; neither were they examined separate, but all suffered to be in the Room
at a time, and when one was upon his Oath, the others stood by, and did
sometimes direct and help his Memory, as they saw occasion. Thus they Swore off
the Matter, only one of them made a small Trip, which was this.

One of the Apothecaries (among other things) upon his Oath declared, That not
one Grain of the Rhubarb sent in Powder to the Savoy, went for the use of the
sick and wounded Seamen.

Then I prayed liberty to ask him some Questions, which were these.

Sir, If that damaged Rhubarb sent into the Savoy was not employed for the use
of the sick and wounded Seamen, where then did it go? was it dispersed among
the Army? But here I was interrupted, and told, I had nothing to do with the
Army: 'twas sufficient he had Sworn, that none of it went to the use of the
sick and wounded Seamen.

Then I proceeded to ask him,

Sir, Upon your Oath, Do you keep the Medicines for the Army, and sick and
wounded Seamen together? Or, do you distinguish which is for the Army, and
which for the Sick and Wounded?

He answered no; there is no need of it, we keep them all together.

Then I demanded:

Sir, Upon your Oath, Are you constantly at the Elaboratory in the Savoy, when
the Invoices of Medicines sent from the sick and wounded Office, are made up to
be sent to the Seaports? or, who is it that attends that Service?

He answered, It Is Mr. Anderson's Business to look after that, for I am never
there.

Then, replied I, How can you so positively Swear, That not one Grain of this
Rhubarb went for the use of the sick and wounded Seamen, when the Medicines are
kept together without distinction, and you are never there at the making up of
the Invoices?

Thus the dark miscarriage of the Rhubarb was Sworn off by the Criminals
themselves, and looked upon as a slight and trivial matter.

This Part being over, I moved to have produced the Information of one Ben.
Cook, and about 20 other Masters of Ships; and also a Letter of Mounsieur
Delagny's, which were both Inserted in the List of Witnesses given in by me the
27 th. of March, but I could not obtain the same.

I moved also, that the Minuits of the Admiralty might be produced, concerning
what Nich. Sharrack Swore against Ben. Berry's Complaint, which I had prayed
might be sent for in the List of Witnesses, of the 27 th. of March, but could
not obtain it, though it was to show the falsity of Vid. the last part of his
Deposition.
Mr. Sharrack's Deposition aforementioned.

Saturday, April 6 th had another hearing, and Mr. Richard Gibson attending
according to Order, to be a Witness about the Proposal of Capt. White, the
Commissioners of Accounts received an Information upon Oath, against him and me
(which was foreign to the matter before them) by Three clamorous Women,
brought up on purpose from Deptford. Neither were they examined separate, but
called up all together, and being upon Oath, one was suffered to tell her
Story, and the rest only asked, if what she said was true? And Mr. Gibson going
to justify himself, the Commissioners were not willing to hear him: To which
one of the Commissioners of Accounts said, That since they had suffered Dirt to
be thrown in his Face, they ought in Honor to give him liberty to wipe it off
again: So at last the Board was prevailed with to consent to hear Mr. Gibson's
Defense the Thursday following The whole business which occasioned all this
dispute, was an Accusation for receiving two shillings (a Fee allowed by the
Commissioners) about the latter end of the year 1689. when Mr. Gibson was their
Secretary; which now they were not only so shameless to deny the allowing, but
also to bring up these Women to arraign Mr. Gibson for receiving it; and One of
the Commissioners of Accounts was so very eager as to give it the Term of
Levying money upon the Subject; which shows how ready some persons are to lay
hold on all little Opportunities to defame and blacken the Reputations of those
that endeavor to detect public Frauds.
.

April 11 th, Thursday, had another Hearing, when the Commissioners for Sick
and Wounded brought one of their Clerks, their Messenger, and their
Doorkeeper, to be Witnesses for them. I moved that they might be asked,
Whether any one had offered to tamper with them? Which was Refused.

I moved, that Mr. Gibson, or my self, might be permitted to ask the
Commissioners for Sick and Wounded some Questions, in Order to clear Mr. Gibson
of the Information so unjustly charged upon him; but it was refused.

Thus Mr. Gibson being Summoned as an Evidence for the King, met with very
scurvy Treatment; against which the same Commissioner of Accounts, last spoken
of, did several times object, declaring they ought not to have received any
such Information.

Then I moved, That that part of the Complaint might be Examined which sets
forth, That the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, keep their Accounts in a
Clandestine Manner, contrary to the Practice of the Navy, whereby they give
themselves Opportunity to Cheat the Vide the Note to the 5th Article of the
Admiralties Report.
King -- Received Answer from the Chairman, That they nor I had nothing to do,
how the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded keep their Accounts.

And thus I have done with the last Examination before the Commissioners of
Accounts.

But here it may not be improper to observe, That Sir Samuel Bernadiston left
the Commissioners of Accounts, and Sir Peter Colliton died before this
Complaint came under Examination: Neither do I remember that the Honorable
Paul Foley was at any of the aforementioned Debates, the greatest part of which
happened in the Sitting of the Parliament.

And this Treatment being added to all the hard usage I had before undergone,
and seeing my Enemies multiply upon me, I was very desirous that a final end
might be put to this Tedious Business, and that the Commissioners of Accounts
might Represent me to the House of Lords either for a Knave or an Honest Man,
as they in their Consciences thought I deserved; and to move their Honors
thereto, I wrote them the following Letter.

Honored Gentlemen,
HOping you will suddenly give in a Report to the House of Lords concerning my
Complaint against the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, pursuant to their
Lordships Order of Reference, of the 20th of March last; but before the said
Report be given in, I shall humbly beg leave to offer to your Consideration the
following Particulars:

1. That I laid down my Employment to bring this Complaint, out of a love to
Justice, and Zeal for the King's Service (tho directly contrary to my own
private Interest at that time:) And tho there has been a Report made to the
King by the Lords of the Admiralty, and also a Report by the Lords of the
Council to the late Queen, of blessed Memory; both which Reports do (I
conceive) set forth, That the Matter of Fact in my Complaint, is true; all
which are public Evidences, that what I did, was the Duty of a good Subject:
Yet, notwithstanding, my Adversaries have been supported, and I, as though I
were a Criminal, have been to this Day, not only kept out of Employment, but
also left openly exposed, as a Sacrifice, to the Malice of the numerous Train
of the Corrupt and Difaffected Party, to the hazard of my Life, and damage some
hundreds of Pounds; so that my Case is become a public Example to deter and
affright all faithful Subjects from ever daring to do their Duty, in
discovering any Crimes against the King or Kingdom for the future; and of what
evil Consequence such public Proceedings may be, to the discouraginging Virtue
and Fidelity, and Supporting, und Establishing Vice and Treachery, I shall
humbly leave your Honors to Judge; because your Power, Wisdom, and Duty, to
promote the Honor and Interest of your King and Country, is so far Superior
to mine.

2ly. That the Complaint Exhibited by me against the Commissioners for Sick and
Wounded, does, I conceive, contain matters of great Consequence to the Public
Good, which Complaint must of necessity be either true or false; and
consequently I do deserve either to be Encouraged, or severely Punished.

Therefore my humble Request to your Honors is, That you will insert your
Opinions of me in your Report to the House of Lords; and if you believe my
Complaint is true, and that I had a design to promote the Interest of my King
and Country therein, that then you will recommend me to their Lordships for
Encouragement. But because I will be wholly Impartial to my self, I also pray,
That if your Honors can find any just grounds to believe that my Complaint is
false, That then you will not spare me, but in Justice to the Commissioners
accused, Represent me in your Report, as an Impostor, that deserves Corporal
Punishment, in such manner, as to the Wisdom of your Board, shall seem
agreeable to the Rules of Justice. For, I humbly suppose, any Man that brings a
false and malicious Complaint, ought to be severely punished for the same,
otherwise no Gentleman is safe in his Reputation, or in any Office, or Grant he
shall receive from the Crown.

And now, Honored Gentleman, I most humbly pray you to speed your Report, and
to Consider of, and Answer, these my Just Requests; In doing which, I assure my
self, that you will thoroughly consult the Merits of the Cause, for the good of
your Country, according to the Rules of downright Justice (without regard to
Persons or Factions) so as not to spill innocent Blood on either side. For, I
conceive, it is morally impossible, That the Commissioners Accused, and I their
Accuser, can all be Honest Men. I am

Your Honors most Humble And Obedient Servant, Samuel Bastno.
London, April 19. 1695.

FINIS.

