The TROUBLES of ENGLAND. by Dr. BATES. Princip: Phys: to K.C.I.
Summoning Hull.



Edghill Fight:



ECCLESIA

I Sturt sculp


Printed for Abel Swall at the Unicorn at the West end of St. Paul's. 1685

Elenchus Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia: OR, A short Historical ACCOUNT OF The
RISE and PROGRESS OF THE Late Troubles in England.

In TWO PARTS.

Written in Latin by Dr. GEORGE BATES, Principal Physician to K. Charles the I.
and K. Charles the II.

MOTUS COMPOSITI: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Composing the Affairs of England By
the Restoration of K. Charles the Second, And the Punishment of the Regicides:
And other Principal Occurrents to the Year 1669.

Written in Latin by THO. SKINNER, M.D.

Made ENGLISH.

To which is added a Preface by a Person of Quality, and in the body of the
Work several choice Original Papers, an account of which is given in the end of
the Preface.

London: Printed for Abel Swalle, at the Unicorn at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, Added by a Person of Quality, who had the care of
Revisiing the Translation.
IN the beginning of the World the Life of Man being very long, and the
Transactions that happened neither great, various, nor many, there was little
need of History. The Father living many hundred years with his Children and
Grandchildren, had leisure and time sufficient to imprint in their memories the
story of the few Occurrents that were past; and no man coming then to govern
any considerable number of men, till he had lived the space of three or four of
our longest lives put together, was by that time abundantly furnished from his
own Experience; and what had happened in his own days, with so much prudence,
as might qualify him for Government.

But when after the Deluge the Life of Man was brought by degrees to about
threescore and ten, or fourscore years, and much of the latter part of that
small period became unfit for business by sickness and other calamities of old
age, and the affairs of the World grew numerous, whether considered as past, or
present; then it became necessary that Memorials should be kept for the relief
of humane infirmity, the perpetuation of the memory of Actions, and that
mankind, who had but a short time to live upon the Earth, might in that time be
quickly and easily furnished with an artificial Experience, derived from an
artificial Memory; by which Governors might be qualified for government, and
Subjects disposed to a dutiful submission to the Prudence and Conduct of their
Superiors: that so this short and transitory Life of Man might be rendered as
wise and happy as it was possible, and that Piety too might be nourished in the
minds of men by a serious reflection on the Works of Gods Providence,
manifested in the several effects of his wise Conduct in the government of the
World, whereby he has in every Age demonstrated his Justice and Mercy in
dealing to every man a Reward according to his Actions.

These were the Causes of the invention of Letters, and of writing Histories or
Memoires of past Events for the use of Posterity, by those that had seen them,
or were otherwise well informed concerning them. And those into whose hands
these first Monuments fell, were mighty fond of them, and by often reading and
deeply considering them, in a short time much improved themselves in Wisdom,
Virtue, and Piety. For the first and most ancient Stories were written without
any vain pomp of affected Words or Rhetorical Expressions: the Historian not
courting the Applause, but laboring hard for the Improvement of the Reader:
And he again repairing to those venerable Repositories, not to seek a vanishing
Light, unprofitable Pleasure and Devertisement, but a solid and durable
Improvement, and the Rules of living well and wisely. So there is a threefold
use of History: Political, Moral, and Divine. Of all which, briefly in their
order.

The Political use of History is twofold: first, as it relates to Governors;
and then, as it relates to Subjects or Inferiors.

The advantages Princes and Great men, who are to govern others, do or may reap
from the reading of Histories well and wisely written, are innumerable; but
then they are to such so well known, that I need not spend any time to remark
them here; my design not being to instruct my Betters, but to improve (if I
may) my Equals.

And as to Subjects, the use of History is not much less; by which, if they
would seriously reflect upon what is past, they might learn many things that
would be of great use to them, and render theirs and their Governors lives
more easy and happy.

1. For first, they might observe with what difficulties all humane Governments
are beset, how often God (for causes known sometimes only to himself) defeats
the wisest contrivances and designs of men: How neighboring Princes
interpose, and cross or frustrate their undertakings, out of interest, fear,
hope, envy, and the like: How often want of due instruments, provisions, men,
moneys, changes in the seasons; and a thousand other accidents intervene and
prevent their purposes.

Now this consideration would certainly (if men were modest and just) procure
from them a due regard for their Superiors, even then when they are
unfortunate, and not make every unprosperous accident that happened, the effect
of sloth, negligence, carelessness, and supine stupidity. And being thus
disposed, they might sometimes, at least, find the reason of public Calamities
in themselves; at others, in the justice of God punishing the sins of men; or
in the neighbor Princes, or any other cause, rather than traduce and defame
their Governors, and suspect their fidelity to their own Interests and Honor,
which must be infinitely dear to any man of sense.

2. History will teach men, that Religion and Liberty are very ill secured for
the most part by Civil War and Rebellion: for as to the first, the right hand
of God planted it in the World by Miracles and the effect of a mighty
Providence, without Force, Wealth, Eloquence, or Policy, by the Blood and
Patience, the Meekness and simplicity, the Holiness and Resignation of Saints,
Martyrs, and Holy men: And as it was planted, so it must be defended, so it
must be preserved.

But then there is nothing in the world more contrary to this method, than for
Subjects to raise Tumults, encourage Insurrections, list Armies, and attempt
the ruin and destruction of their Princes and Fellow Subjects, to defend this
Faith; which was planted by Meekness, and watered with the bloods and tears of
the Martyrs: and this, if Religion be never so apparently persecuted and
endeavored to be destroyed. But who can delineate the madness of perpetrating
all these horrid Villainies out of mere fear and jealousy Religion should be
designed upon, before there is one drop of Blood spilt, or one man ruined or
attempted to be ruined?

And as to Civil Liberty and Property, they were won from kind and good-natured
Princes, by the dutiful Carriage and Civility of their Subjects. And therefore
there is scarce a footstep of them to be found amongst those Nations that were
never Civilized; and many of them have never enjoyed those rare Blessings, but
in a low degree, and some scarce at all, as the ancient Egyptians.

Now as there is nothing more ungrateful, than for men to turn the Favors of
their Princes, or indeed of any man, into occasions of Quarrels and Resistance,
even when there is a real cause to be concerned for the loss of these precious
and inestimable Jewels; so is there nothing more foolish, than for men to put
these Darlings of theirs to nurse in Fields and Camps, reeking with the Blood
of their Fellow Subjects, surrounded with Fire and Smoke amidst the roaring of
Cannon, the rattling of Drums, the shrikes and groans of dying men, and all that
is dreadful to flesh and blood; and after all to fall into the hands of an
enraged Prince, if he prevails; and into the less-merciful clutches of their
own Soldiers, if they happen to overcome their Prince. Certainly there cannot
be a more impolitick Error committed by Subjects, than to resist and rebel,
when their Privileges are really invaded: but then to do all this by way of
prevention to be wheadled and cajoled into such miseries as those with the mere
fears and jealousies of contingent and possible designs, this is a degree of
Rage beyond all other human madnesses, and can be inspired by nothing but
Furies and incroaching Devils, who take possession of the very souls of such
men, as they are said to have done heretofore of some men's bodies. And there is
not a more powerful Amulet against these Miseries, than a due observation of
the Tragedies these Devils have heretofore raised in the world. The truth is,
almost all the Nation are satisfied that next the Mercies of God, nothing did
more contribute to our late Preservation, than the remembrance of our former
Miseries: And the History of them may have very near the same effect upon our
Posterity.

3. The third and last Political use of History, is to acquaint the World with
the nature and temper of men. There is scarce any thing more difficult than for
a man to know himself well; and if he did not sometimes see himself in others,
he would hardly perhaps ever do it: But then who but God can pretend to know
all the various, changeable, and inconstant humors, designs, and ends of the
Mass of Mankind in the space of those few years we are to live? and yet if it
were possible, how infinite is the danger of being mistaken and purchasing our
experience at the price of our ruin?

But History, like a kind Mistress, leads us by the hand into her delightful
Gardens, and there reads Lectures upon every Flower, Plant, and Weed, and truly
acquaints us how this and the other sped well or ill; and then assures us our
Fortune will be the same, if we be not so wise as to take her word, but will be
trying over again the same Experiments upon our selves or others. But above
all, if we take Demagoues, People-drivers, the Flatterers and Adorers of the
Many, for good men, or good friends, or in short, any man for a good
Commonwealths-man or Patriot, who is not a good loyal hearty Subject.

If men would thus a while consult in History the honest policy of preserving
themselves and their Countries from Ruin and Confusion, they could not but
observe, that Immorality was in every Age the greatest Enemy of Mankind. That
Ambition, Pride, Avarice, Revenge, Lust, and Luxury, and the rest of those
horrid deformities of Mortality, were the real weights which set these Machines
in motion, which have torn down Empires, and ruined the most flourishing
Kingdoms; and particularly have in the memory of man twice, bid fair for the
ruin of ours, under two Princes of so exact a Justice, and so God-like a
Clemency and Goodness, that their Subjects having no real Calamities to
complain of (which is a Felicity rarely given by Heaven to the best Ages) our
wanton Countrymen, sick of Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, rifled the Cabinet of
God Almighty, and the innocent bosoms of two excellent Princes, and pretended
they discovered their designs of introducing Popery and Arbitrary Government.
And by these Chimerical fears intoxicated and bewiched the poor Populace, and
putting them at last in fearful Commotions, these quick-sighted Privado's of
Heaven, the Censors of Princes, the Darlings of the Rabble, mounted the Saddle,
and drove the People as the Devils did the heard of Swine down the steep Rocks
of Rebellion, Schism, and Treason, while they who put them into this miserable
condition, reaped the Wealth, and divided the Honors and Employments of the
Nation amongst them, and under the mask of a pompous Piety, were religiously
proud, covetous, ambitious, revengeful, insolent, treacherous, perjurous, and
in a word, a parcel of the most sanctified Rogues and Traitors that ever the
Sun shined upon.

When God Almighty reduced us out of our Hell of Misery, and Chaos of
Confusion, there was no Apology more frequent in the mouths of men than this:
Who could have thought that men of such seeming Piety, of so exalted and
eminent a zeal for the Glory of God, the Protestant Religion, and the Liberty
and Property of the Subject, that such men, I say, as these should hatch in
their minds such horrid Villainies, Treasons, Rapines, Murders, Perjuries, and
ambitious Projects, as we have since with astonishment seen them practice?
Well, if they had wisely considered the Histories of other Countries, or of
former Ages, they might easily have foreseen and prevented all this Misery: for
whenever men are more sollicitous for the faults of their Superiors, than
careful to amend their own; when they seek to win the entire love and esteem of
Subjects from their Princes and Governors; let the outside be what it will,
there is Pride, Ambition, Avarice, and Discontent within: and therefore such
men, of all others, are never to be trusted.

This Thought well pursued, will lead a man home too, and give him an occasion
to search his own heart, and try diligently whether he is a good and useful
Member of the Civil Society in which he lives: If he is under the dominion of
any of these Vices, let him never call himself a loyal Subject, or a good
Patriot; for whatever his present intentions are, he will be neither, when his
Interest shall lie cross to his Duty. And because it is much harder to believe
ill of ones self, than of another, let History acquaint him how many men have
been drawn in by their own secret, and in all probability to themselves
undiscovered Vices, till beyond their first intentions or thoughts, they have
been swallowed up in an Abyss of horrible Crimes and Disorders; and what have
betided them, may be our lot too, if we do not purge out, or at least watch the
motions of these Disturbers of the World in us.

The Doctrines of Morality are sometimes unpleasant and uneasy to corrupted
minds, and do not easily insinuate and obtain admission; and when they are
received, do often make such slight impressions, that they vanish in oblivion
and forgetfulness: but examples convey them to us with pleasure and delight,
and the variety and wonderful accidents that are to be met with in all
Histories, which are nothing but the imagery and various colors of Virtues and
Vices embodied and made visible to us, make vived and lasting impressions on
the minds of men, and stamp and engrave the Ideas of them on the fancy and
memory, so that nothing but death can destroy or obliterate those impressions.
And this was one reason why the Ancients clothed their moral Observations in
Apologues, Fables, and Parables; but History having the reality of persons,
names, times, and places, do infinitely exceed these fictitious
representations: and therefore as History grew up in the World, these
fictitious Images of it were laid by and antiquated.

Examples fit all Capacities, at least some or others of them, in a vast
variety; whereas Precepts can hardly be so clothed, but some will despise the
meanness of the language, or others not understand the goodness of it: whereas
Examples fit themselves to all Capacities, and teach men before they are aware
of it, the loveliness of Virtue, the turpitude and baseness of Vice, and the
different events which for the most part in every Age have attended them.

This brings me to the third particular I proposed, the divine use of History.
As the World was not the Product of blind Fate or Chance, but the Work of a
Great, Wise, and Holy God, who raised and built it out of Nothing by his
infinite Power, and by his Wisdom brought it into this beautiful order in which
we behold and admire it: So neither did he desert it when he had formed and
adorned it, but has ever since governed it with one unsearchable and
irresistible Providence and Wisdom. And this not only the inanimate and
irrational part of it, but above all, his eyes are upon the children of men;
and in the government, protection, preservation, rewarding and punishing,
exalting and abasing them, he exercises so steady, just, and reasonable a
Providence, but withal, so abstruse, hidden, and reserved, that it exceeds the
Wisdom of the greatest and wisest of men to penetrate into the reasons of it,
or to foresee the events before they discover themselves in time.

Now in the History of the Actions and Events of mankind, there is an
undesigned History of this Providence of God, which like some Rivers, sometimes
run above ground plain and delightful, or terrible and instructive at the first
glance; but at others, buries it self under Mountains and Hills: and though in
those secret recesses it still (like those Rivers) maintains an uninterrupted
course, yet can no mortal eyes pursue its streams, and observe its windings and
turnings, or when and where it will break out and again discover it self, till
he himself is pleased to bring it into the light again.

Now History has brought down an uninterrupted thread of the methods of
Providence from the creation of the World to this day; by which, as in a Glass,
we may see a representation of the Justice and Mercy of God in his dealings
with the sons of men, and admire that wonderful Wisdom and Power, which,
without offering violence to the freedom of men's wills, has yet been able to
dispose them to effect his own most holy purposes, when they least designed it;
without any violence has protected Virtue against the utmost rage of Men and
Devils, and preserved it through all the Ages of an ill World; and punished
Vice by it self, in ways so abstruse and secret, that the Workers of Iniquity
have been stunned and amazed to see not only their ill designs overruled, but
made the Instruments of their own deserved ruin.

There is no one thing that has in every Age so much staggered the belief of a
divine Providence governing the World and the Affairs of Mankind, as the
prosperity of wicked and lewd men, and the misery and oppression of good and
virtuous men. But this Mist will vanish like smoke, when men are pleased to
take a view of past Ages, and observe the Catastrophies of the several Periods
and Ages: for that which may seem at one time to be all Mystery and Riddle,
will by degrees open and unfold it self, till at last there will be nothing
more apparent, than that God had all this while his eyes upon both the one and
the other, and kept the invisible Reins in his own hands, and by ways,
unperceived both by the good and bad, at last, tho not suddenly, brought them
to their deserved ends, and recompensed both according to their different
deserts; and this will give us an assurance, that as it has been in past Ages,
so it will be in ours; the same God is still at the Helm, and he will, as
heretofore he has, conduct us also to that end we have deserved, be it good or
bad, without respect of persons, which will preserve us in Peace and Virtue,
dispel all melancholy thoughts, and free us both from speculative and
practical temptations.

It is not hard to apply all I have said to the History of our Late Revolutions
in England; but as I design a Preface to a very short History of them, and so
must not be long: so the Reader will be much more instructed and better pleased
to reflect upon that History, and to compare it with this Preface, and then
determine with himself whether these thoughts of mine upon this occasion are
pertinent, and whether there be any thing in the following Story that will
prove and illustrate the truth of what I have here said; and therefore to him I
shall leave it.

But because these Pieces never appeared before in English, may I have the
Readers leave to give him a short account of the designs of them.

The Author of the first two Parts was Dr. Geo. Bates, a learned and an eminent
Physician of London in the last Age, who was afterward Physician to Oliver
Cromwell, and so must of necessity be intimately acquainted with many things
which were not known to others, and had means to look through all the disguises
of that cunning Impostor, as his Station and Employment also afforded him an
easy access to most of the Grandees that had then a large share in promoting
the Miseries of England. The first part was published in the time of Oliver
Cromwell, and yet is written in an Air and Style which shows the Author durst
speak truth, when if discovered, his life would have paid the price of his
Veracity; and yet that time too may yield us a good assurance he did not
venture his life for falsehoods and slanders; it was not then a time to belly
prosperous, insolent, and enraged Villains.

He gives us this account of the Work himself by an Epilogue added in a latter
impression, at the end of the First Part.

Whilst the Original of this small History was in Writing, it was several times
seen by the Reverend George Lord Bishop of Winchester, the Worthy Nicholas
Oudart Secretary and Counselor to the Prince of Orange; by Sir John Wederburn
Knight; by Dr. Richard Owen Professor of Divinity, and Rector of St. Swithins
in London; by Dr. George Ent, heretofore Physician to Charles the First, and
now to the present King; and also by Fabian Philips an Attorney, who was my
Assistant in searching the Rolls, Offices, and Monuments of the Law, (that I
may not mention Dugard who printed it) men above all exceptions: although there
is an insolent Defamer, who pretends I have fathered another man's Work, whose
Calumnies I neither value nor fear.

This Passage is inserted by him only to prove he was the Author of it, but is
at the same time a strong proof of his integrity: for it is very well known,
these Persons were not all of one side in our late Distractions.

The first Part of this Piece was first printed about the year 1651, without
his name, for the information of Strangers, and therefore he premiseth a short
account of the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Privileges of Parliament,
and Liberties of the Subject, here; which had been so abominably misrepresented
to Foreigners, that they stood generally in great doubt on which side the
right lay, and considering the time when it came out first, nothing could be of
greater use and benefit to the then-oppressed interest of our late Sovereign.

Nor was it only useful abroad, but at home also: for the People of England
were then so distracted by the Contradictions betwixt the Royal and the Rebel
Party, that they, at least many of them, did as little know on which side to
give their Verdict, as the Neighbor Nations. Hence the Learned and Ingenuous
Mr. Henry Foulis, in his Preface to his History of the wicked Plots of our
pretended Saints, gives us this Account of himself: As for the Author (says
he) whilst a Schoolboy, he was too much swayed to Presbytery; and delighting
in the Stories of our Times, had none to peruse, but May, Vicars, Ricraft, and
suchlike partial Relators: by which means believing, with the ignorant, all
things in print to be true, he was persuaded to incline to the wrong side. But
a little before his going to the University, lighting by chance upon Dr. Bates
's judicious Book Elenchus Motuum, he found the Laws and true Government to be
opposite to his former Readings, and therein the Knavery and Juggling of their
Opposers, strange things which he had never heard of before. Which, with some
other assistance, so far prevailed with him, that in a short time he threw off
Father Schism, and ever since, like little Loyal John in the Epitaph, For the
King, and Church, and Bloud-Royal,
He went as true as any Sun-Dial.


There are some others who have acknowledged to the World in print, the benefit
they and the Government received from this first Part.

The Second Part was added by Dr. Bates, after his late Majesty's Restitution,
to inform the World of the manner of his Majesty's Escape from Worcester, and
how things were carried till the deposition of Richard Cromwell, wherein is an
excellent account of the bloody War in Ireland, and the just Judgment of God
upon the Scotch Covenanters for joining with our English Parliamentarians, upon
pretense of setting up Presbytery here, but indeed to enrich themselves the
second time with the Spoils of England; the effect of which was, that
Presbytery was ruined even in Scotland by O. C. and his victorious Independent
Army, and they lost at the same time all their Civil Privileges, and were
treated, till the Kings return, as a conquered People by their fellow-Rebels.

The Third Part was written by one Dr. Tho. Skynner, another Learned Physician,
to continue and bring down the Story, and show the Joy of our Nation at the
Restitution of his late Majesty. It is in the Original written in a florid
style, and full of curious and ingenuous Reflections.

The Translations of all these have been managed with great care, to make them
both true to the Originals, and delightful to the Reader; only the Translator
thought fit to supply some Papers which are but hinted at, or wholly omitted in
the Author; as the Treaty of the Isle of Wight, in the First Part; the
Coronation Oath, in the Third; and others. And also when there are any Papers
or Expressions mentioned, to publish the original Papers and words, when he
could find them; but when not, he has humoured the Translation as near the
Latin as the sense of the Author and idiome of the two Languages would permit.

There is great hope that this short account of our late horrible Confusions
here in England, which is so acceptable in the Original to all Foreigners and
Learned Englishmen, may now translated be no less acceptable to all those who
either cannot read the Latin, or care not to give themselves so much trouble;
and that it may contribute something to the interest of the Government, by
forewarning men how they betake themselves to those courses again which
produced such dreadful Effects heretofore.

A TABLE To the First Part.
A.
ACcusations against the Lord Keeper and Judges page 24 Army fall off from the
Parliament, and seize the King out of their possession, 82. Seem to comply with
the King, ibid. but relapse, 87. The Assembly set up Presbytery, 57
B.
Beginning of the Troubles, 17 Bishops accused, 24. Their Lands sold, 59
C.
Covenant and Solemn League, 60. Its fruits, 62 Courts, several abrogated, 28
Cromwell Oliver, 77
E.
Episcopacy abrogated, 56
F.
Fairfax, Sir Thomas, 77 Fasts, the noted forerunners of some mischief, 134
H.
High Court of Justice (falsely so called) its beginning and proceedings, 139.
and inf. Hotham, Sir John, 38
I.
Independents, 61, 71. and inf. work the Presbyterians out of power, 76, 79
Intercessions for the King, 142 Ireton's Remonstrance, 133 Irish Rebellion, its
beginning, 45 The Junto or Rump of the House of Commons 138
K.
King Charles the First goes into Scotland, 31. Goes to the House of Commons,
34. Withdraws to Windsor, and thence toward York, 35. Goes to the Scots Army,
65. Designed to be murdered, 88. Escapes to the Isle of Wight, 91. He is
murdered, 158. His excellent Character, 161. Keepers of the Liberties, or
Council of Forty, 166
L.
Laud, Archbishop, 23 Lords House in Parliament abolished, 163
M.
Militia, 33, 36, 41 Monarchy of England, and the Rights thereof, 1. Abolished
by the Rebels, 163.
O.
Oxford-Parliament, 63
P.
Parliaments what, their Power and Customs, 5. and inf. Parliament-Factions,
22. To sit as long as they please, 30. Their scandalous Declaration, 32. Their
unreasonable Demands, 39. Modelled by the Army, 137. Peter's, Hugh, 133, 143
Prerogative abated, 29 The Presbyterian Model, 57 Prynn, William, 137
Q.
Queen goes into Holland, 35
R.
Religion, the pretense of the Rebellion, 43
S.
Scots Rebellion, 20. They come into England, 62. The King puts himself into
their hands, 65. They sell him, 67. Take up Arms for the Kings deliverance,
100. Are defeated, 101. Sects and Sectaries, 67, and infra. Strafford Earl, 21,
23. His Trial, 24.
T.
Trial of his Sacred Majesty K. Charles I. 144 Tumults and Riots, 25 Tunnage
and Poundage, 18
V.
Vote of Non-Addresses, 95. Is rescinded, 102.
W.
War, its beginning, 42 Wight Isle, the Treaty there, 102. and inf. The Kings
Concessions there voted satisfactory, 136. Writs of Summons to Parliament, the
form, 7
ERRATA'S.
To the First Part.
PAge 1. line 8. for to read of, p. 66. l. 3. r. honor, p. 67. l. 33. for
showing r. show, p. 74. l. 9. add from, p. 82. l. 2. r. muttering, p. 102. l.
10. r. levitie, p. 137. l. 23. add who, p. 159. l. 9. r. reported, ibid. l.
11. r. harmonious, p. 162. l. 2. r. bounds, ibid. l. 11. r. Rectitude, p. 163.
l. 3. r. Charge.

To the Second Part.
PAge 22. line 7. read Rathmeenes, p. 27. l. 3. r. Arts, p. 30. l. 21. r.
Butler, p. 48. l. 15. r. envied, p. 58. l. 7. add most, p. 66. l. 31. add
for, p. 67. l. 12. r. Execute, p. 74. l. 26. r. Nor, p. 87. l. penult. dele
are, p. 96. l. 14. r. make, p. 104. l. 35. r. hand, p. 108. l. 28. r. Dirlton,
p. 121. l. 35. r. Massey, p. 124. l. 1. r. Coming presently to blows at the
Town of Wigan, p. 125. l. 23. r. Keith, p. 204. l. 35. r. obey.

To the Third Part.
PAge 15. line 2. read retained, p. 41. l. 1. r. farce, p. 44 l. 14. r.
Leicester Vicount Hereford, p. 53. l. 29. r. Sollicitor-General, p. 63. l. 23.
r. Sir Richard Baker's, p. 66. l. 16. r. Mounson, p. 82. l. 29. r. Falmouth, p.
86. l. 20. dele was, p. 90. l. 2. r. fight.

A short HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE Rise and Progress OF THE Late Troubles in
England.
ENgland, The Right of Kings in England,
as all the Records of our Antiquity tell us, never was governed but by the
authority of a King; and though it has been divided into several Kingdoms, or
rather Camps, yet it never had rest from intestine Commotions, nor foreign
Invasions, till it came under the Obedience and Protection to one sole Monarch.

Since that, In the person of a Monarch, for above a thousand years,
it is now above a thousand years that Kings in a continued succession have
reigned with supreme Authority in England. And so great all along has been the
Love and Reverence that the People have had toward a Prince, that he was
always judged the fittest and most worthy of the Government, who was next in
Blood to the King; And he hereditary,
so that no factious Election, but lawful Birthright, could ever warrant a
Title to the Crown. The Royal Heir of the last King, though an Infant, is
immediately carried to the Throne, even in the Cradle: And in this kind of
immortality in reigning, the Laws glory, And never dying.

To him all swear Allegiance


That the King of England never dies.

Nay, and by the ancient common Law, all Subjects above twelve years of age,
are bound by Oath to bear a peculiar Faith (by the Laws called Allegiance) to
the lawful Prince, to him alone, and for ever, even before he be crowned; and
that their Obedience may be confirmed upon a double account, a religious Oath,
and Supremacy.
that of Supremacy, is likewise to be taken to the King.

I must here beg the Readers pardon, if in the very beginning I speak of the
Kings Prerogative, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the People;
which to our Countrymen who have studied the point, perhaps may be tedious,
though to the Work we now undertake it be absolutely necessary; seeing thereby
it will appear who have been the Violators, and who the Observers of the Laws.

The Prerogatives of the K. or chief marks of Majesty, and the Regalia, belong
only to the King.
In the first place, what great power the King has over the lives and fortunes
of his Subjects, is hereby made manifest, that mediately or immediately they
all hold their Estates of the King; that is to say, that whatever Lands and
Possessions they enjoy in fee or feudal rights, they owe them more to the
bounty of the King than to Fortune.

So that all Estates and Possessions are derived from him, and to him return at
last. He has the care of Pupils and Lunaticks.
And therefore all Estates failing of lawful Heirs, or when the Owners forfeit
them by Felony or Treason, flow back to the Kings Exchequer, as to the Ocean
from whence they have been derived.

The King, as Father of the Country, has the care of the persons of Pupils and
Lunaticks, and enjoys their Rents and Revenues. Nay, by the ancient Laws, it is
not lawful for them to contract Marriage without his consent; and if they do,
they are to be severely censured.

The power of coining Money.
And that what is to be given to Caesar, may be known by the public Money, the
matter, form, manner, and value of Coin, is varied according to the will and
pleasure of the King.

All Honors, Titles, and Privileges, He confers all Honors and Offices;
all public Corporations and Societies, flow from and are constituted by the
Crown; the Admiral, Chancellor, Treasurer, Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
are only made by the King; Which are to be administered in his name alone.
in whose name alone their Writs, Warrants, and Sentences pass: nor does any of
them enter into Office before he has taken an Oath of Fidelity to the King,
and of faithful administration.

None but the King has power of Peace and War, His power in matters of War.
who orders Military Discipline according to his will and pleasure, and not by
the forms or prescripts of Laws; and as he himself thinks fit, disposes of the
Forces both by Sea and Land; it being necessary that he who watches for the
safety of the Commonwealth, should be invested with sufficient Power to repress
intestine Seditions, and repel foreign Invasions. Upon that account, it belongs
only to him to appoint Musters and Levies of Soldiers, secure the Castles and
Garrisons (with which maritim Fortifications England, even in the profoundest
time of Peace, is no less secured than by the Seas); as often as there is need
also to fit out a Fleet, and to set Governors and Commanders over both.

Nor is the Sword neither to be weilded by any other hand but that which sways
the Scepter: so that if any one (without the Kings command) take up Arms for
the defense of the Kings Person and Rights, he is by so doing guilty of
High Treason, and liable to the punishment of a Traitor, without a special
Pardon from the King.

Nor is his Power more limited in Ecclesiastical than Civil affairs: Also in
Ecclesiastical affairs.
for since the authority of the Pope being shaken off, the Church was made part
of the Kingdom, and the Clergy after long reluctance began to be contented with
the common privileges of Subjects; the King became at length Custos utriusque
tabulae, and (as he ever was in right before, so was he then) acknowledged and
confirmed by Law to be supreme Head and Governor in spiritual as well as
temporal affairs, and owned to be in a manner the Bishop of the Kingdom;
wherein, in the promotion of Bishops, conferring of Dignities, appointing
Fasts, enjoining Rites and Ceremonies in the Church, he has (with the advice
of the Fathers and Rulers of the Church) always exercised a supreme and sacred
Power and Authority.

He moderates the rigor of Laws.
He has also so great power over the Laws themselves (though he obliges himself
to govern according to Law) that sometimes he moderates the rigor of the Law
according to Equity, pardons Malefactors; And judges in undecided cases.
and in cases that are not decided by any Law, interposes his Imperial
Sentence. Lastly, that I may assert nothing rashly, but all upon the credit of
Lawyers, the life, force, and authority of every thing that is acted in
England, is to be found in the King alone.

But because the King of England has not, like Briareus, an hundred hands, nor
can he, like the Sun, view all things at one glance; he has been accustomed to
create from amongst the Nobility, Bishops, Judges, He chooses his own
Counselors.
and Commons of the Kingdom, without the envy and emulation of any, such and so
many Counselors as he pleases, to assist and ease him in the weighty care of
the Government.

He that mounts the Throne is never to be brought to the Bar, since the Law
says he cannot die.
Having named these Prerogatives of a most August and Imperial Crown, what shall
I call that barbarous and inhumane Principle and Purpose of bringing the King
to Judgment before the Kings Tribunal, and then to smite him with the Sword
which he alone is to draw; the King, I say, whom the Law it self openly
declares can never die? There is no necessity of curbing arbitrary government
by such inhumane Tyranny upon the sacred Person of the King, since whatever may
be done in the administration of the Government, either against the Laws of the
Country, or inconsistent with the good and profit of the People, the blame and
punishment of it is cast upon the public Ministers: so that it was not
flattery, but the highest Justice which gave ground to this noted maxim, Nor
can he err, or do wrong. But as he offends by his Ministers, so is he punished.
That the King cannot err, nor do any wrong; because the whole blame and all
the punishment is wont, and ought to fall upon the public Ministers and
Counselors, whose duty it is to admonish the Prince, and to deny their
concurrence with him in any thing that is unjust; and to resign their place,
rather than obey him when he commands any thing contrary to Law.

Nay, The Heir of the Crown is by the death of his Predecessor ipso facto
cleared from all guilt.
the Laws are so sollicitous for the safety of the Prince, as of him who is to
maintain and preserve the Law, that the next Heir to the Crown, whatsoever
Crime he might be guilty or accused of whilst he was a private person, yet by
the death of his Predecessor, as by a certain postliminious Absolution, he is
freed from all taint and guilt; and his stepping up into the Throne purges him
from all defects. It is enough to curb him that holds the Reins of the
Government, That he must expect the Judgment of God.

Nevertheless, Yet it is not lawful to rule arbitrarily.
it is not lawful for the King to rule arbitrarily in England, oppress his
Subjects, or make and abrogate Laws by his sole Authority. But as the Law
allows a decorous administration of absolute Authority in some things to the
King, so does it assign to the Commons others, What Rights belong to
Parliaments.
and those no inconsiderable Privileges in the Kingdom, in common with the
King, that so the joint Authority in Government might the more easily engage
the Subjects to obedience.

To make and repeal Laws.
For, for the making and repealing of Laws, and the interpreting and explaining
former ambiguous Statutes; Impose Taxes.
for raising of Money out of the ordinary course, Legitimate Bastards.
when there is occasion for it; legitimating of Bastards; naturalizing of
Strangers; altering and settling the Rights of Possessions; Enact the Worship
of God.
confirming by civil Sanctions the Divine Worship, after it has by the
Convention of the Clergy been formed according to the Word of God; setting
Rates upon Weights and Measures, Set Rates on Weights and Measures.
and the like; that the people may not seem to suffer any thing without their
own consent and concurrence, the Votes of Parliament, which is the supreme
Court of England, and in conjunction with the King, under God, has a certain
Omnipotence in this little World, are necessarily required.

What the Parliament of England is.
The Parliament is an Assembly of the States of the Kingdom, consisting of the
Bishops, Lords, and Representatives of the Commons, called by the King who is
the Head of it, who meet and sit in two distinct places called the Upper and
Lower Houses, in respect of dignity not of situation. The Upper House (which
is called the House of Lords) contains two Estates, The Upper House of it.
to wit, the Spiritual Lords who are the Bishops, and the Temporal who are
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons; the Judges of the Kingdom assisting to
give advice in matter of Law, but not to vote.

The Lower.
The Lower House consists of the third Estate of the Kingdom, who are the
Commons, and is therefore called also the House of Commons; they are chosen by
the plurality of Voices of the Freeholders of the Counties, and Freemen of
Corporations, two Knights for each County or Shire, and two Burgesses for the
most part for every City and Corporation-Town, according to the use and custom
of the place.

The day and place of the meeting of the Parliament is appointed by the King;
The time and place appointed by the King.
by him also it is prorogued, transferred, and adjourned to another place, or
dissolved at his pleasure.

The Peers are summoned to attend in Parliament by Writs severally directed to
them, They are called by Writs.
and signed by the King. To the rest the Sheriffs of the several Counties by
virtue of a Writ out of the Chancery, give notice that the King within a
certain time orders an Election to be made of Knights and Burgesses, which he
commands to be made by the Sheriff in time and place convenient.

Vetus Rescripti formula ad Dynastas.
Rescriptum Regis ad Dynastas seu Pares sic sonat: Carolus Dei gratia, etc.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, etc. (si Episcopos compellet) Consanguineo
nostro (si Duces, Marchiones vel Comites alloquatur) Dilecto and fideli nostro
(si Barons.) Quia de advisamento Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, Nos, and Statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam Parlamentum nostrum ad Westmonast.
etc. teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Angliae colloquium habere and
tractatum; vobis in fide and Dilectione (si ad Episcopos mittatur Rescriptum)
per fidem and Allegiantiam (si ad Pares) quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter
injungendo mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and
periculis imminentibus, cessante quacunque excusatione, die and loco dictis,
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Proceribus, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri;
and hoc, sicut Nos and honorem nostram, ac salutem Regni praedicti and
Ecclesiae sanctae, Expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis, (si ad Episcopos scribat) praemonere Decanum and Capitulum Ecclesiae
vestrae tolumque Clerum vestrae Dioeceseos, quod idem Decanus and Archidiaconi
in propriis personis, ac dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos
Procuratores idoneos, plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and
Clero habentes, praedictis die and loco personaliter intersint, ad
consentiendum his quae tum ibidem de communi concilio Regni nostri (Divina
favente clementia) contigerit ordinari.

Test Meipso, etc.

The ancient form of the Writ to the Peers.
The Kings Writ to the Nobles or Peers, runs thus: CHARLES by the grace of God,
etc. to the most Reverend Father in Christ ( if it speaks to any of the
Bishops) to Our Cousin ( if it is addressed to any Duke, Marquess, or Earl) To
our Beloved and Faithful (if to a Baron.) Whereas by the advice of Our Council
We have ordained that Our Parliament shall be holden at Westminster, etc. for
the dispatch of certain difficult and urgent Affairs concerning (or pertaining
to) Us, and the State and Defense of Our Kingdom of England, and of the Church
of England, and there to hold a Colloquy and Treat with you and with the rest
of the Prelates, Great men and Nobles of Our said Kingdom of England: Therefore
We, by the Fidelity and Love (if the Writ be sent to the Bishops) by the
Fidelity and Allegiance, ( if to any of the Peers) which you owe to Us,
straightly injoyning, command you, that in consideration of the difficulty of
the aforesaid Affairs, and of the Dangers impending, laying aside all Excuses,
at the day and place aforesaid you personally appear to treat with Us, together
with the rest of the Prelates, Great men, and Nobles, concerning the Affairs
aforesaid, and thereupon give Us your counsel. And this you are not to omit, as
you love Us, and Our Honor, and the Safety of Our said Kingdom, and the
expedition of the said Affairs.

And if the Writ be directed to a Bishop, it goes on further thus: And you are
to forewarn the Dean and Chapter of your Church, and all the Clergy of your
Diocese, that the said Dean and the Archdeacons be personally present; and the
said Chapter by one, and the said Clergy by two sufficient Procurators, having
full and sufficient power from the said Chapter and Clergy, at the day and
place aforesaid, to Consent to those things which then and there (by the favor
of the divine Clemency) shall happen to be ordained by the Common Council of
Our Kingdom.

Witness my self, etc.

Ad Communes, seu Inferioris Confessus Senatores.
Aliud Rescriptum ad Vicecomites and Praesides Civitatum, seu Municipiorum,
conceptis hisce verbis ita se habet: Rex Vicecomiti salutem. Quia de
advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, etc. (progreditur ut superius) and
ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus Regni nostri Colloquium habere
and tractatum; Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod facta Proclamatione
in Comitatu tuo, post receptionem hujus Brevis nostri, Parliamenti tenendi die
and loco praedictis, duos Milites gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos and discretos
Comitatus praedicti, and de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius duos Cives, and
de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus and magis sufficientibus,
libere and indifferenter per illos qui Electioni huic interfuerint, juxta
formam Statutorum inde edictorum and provisorum, eligi, and nomina eorundem
Militum, Civium and Burgensium in quibusdam Indenturis inter te and illos qui
hujusmodi Electioni interfuerint conficiendis, sive hujusmodi electi praesentes
fuerint sive absentes, inseri, eosque ad dictum diem and locum venire facies:
Ita quod iidem Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
Communitate praedicti Comitatus, ac dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se and
Communitatibus Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad
faciendum and consentiendum his quae tum ibidem de communi Concilio Regni
nostri (favente Deo) contigerit ordinari super negotiis ante dictis, ita ne pro
defectu potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam Electionem Militum, Civium
aut Burgensium praedictorum, praedicta negotia infecta maneant quovis modo.
Nolumus tamen quod tu nec aliquis alius Vicecomes dicti Regni nostri
aliqualiter sit electus.

To the Members of the House of Commons.
Another Writ directed to the Sheriffs and Chief Magistrates of Cities and
Corporations, runs thus: The King to the Sheriff greeting. Whereas by the
Advice and Assent of Our Council, etc. (as before) then and there to hold a
Colloquy and Treaty with Our Prelates, Great men, and Nobles of Our Kingdom,
etc. We command and straightly enjoin you that a Proclamation being made in
your County (Court) after the receipt of this Our Writ, concerning Our
Parliament to be holden at the day and place aforesaid; you do cause two
Knights of the most fitting and discreet of your County aforesaid, and of every
City in the said County two Citizens, and of every Burrow (or Corporation) two
Burgesses of the most discreet and sufficient, to be freely and indifferently
chosen, according to the form of the Statutes in that case made and provided,
by those who shall be then present at the said Election; and you are also to
insert the names of the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses (whether the
persons so elected be present or absent) in certain Indentures to be made
betwixt you and those who shall be present at the said Election, and you shall
cause them to appear at the day and place aforesaid: so as the said Knights
have full and sufficient power for themselves and the Community of the
aforesaid County, and the said Citizens and Burgesses for themselves and the
Communities of the said Cities and Corporations, severally to do and consent to
those things which (by the favor of God) shall by the Common Council of Our
Kingdom be ordained concerning the Affairs aforesaid; so that by the want of
such Power, or by the improvident Election of the Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses aforesaid, the Affairs aforesaid be not in any way left unfinished (
undispatched). Yet We will not that you or any other Sheriff of Our said
Kingdom be by any means elected.

These things being punctually performed according to exactness of Law, The
manner of meeting.
the Members in a solemn and splendid Procession, such as may imprint an Awe
and Reverence in the minds of the People, go first to Church, and then to the
Parliament House. The King declares the causes of their meeting in the Upper
House.
And at that time the King coming into the House of Lords, and having called up
the Members of the House of Commons, either speaks to them himself, or causes
the Lord Chancellor to declare to them the weighty causes of their meeting, and
what it is he would have them consult and deliberate about for the Public Good.

The King is not obliged afterward, unless he please, to be present at their
Consultations, except at the end of a Session, that he may give the strength
and vigor of a Law to their Bills.

The Knights and Burgesses of the Lower House have severally the Oath of
Allegiance administered unto them by one appointed for that effect by the King;
which amongst other things, contains this clause: All and every one of the
Members of the House of Commons take the Oath of Allegiance to the King.
I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against
all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and Dignity; and make known unto his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and traitorous Conspiracies which I shall
know and hoar of to be against him or any of them, etc.

But lest any one being advanced to the high Honor and Dignity of consulting
with the King, and sharing in some part of the Government, should forget that
he is still a Subject; the better to keep him within the bounds of duty, he is
to take another Oath of Supremacy in these words: And of Supremacy.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, That the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities; and do promise from
henceforth I shall hear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors; and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Pre-eminences, and Authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united or annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the contents of this Book.

They choose a Speaker, whom they accompany to the King, beseeching his Majesty
to approve their Election.
Being thus obliged to their duty upon their entry into this auspicious Honor
by the Votes of the Lower House (according to the Kings designation or
nomination) a Speaker is chosen, whom they accompany to the King, beseeching
his Majesty to approve their election; which the King readily grants. This
being done, the Speaker in the name of himself and of all the Commons, thanks
the King, and begs of his Majesty that they may enjoy their Privileges, and
have the freedom of debating; and that if any one in the heat of discourse
should speak too warmly, And not to be offended with their freedom in speech.
his Majesty would not take it ill, nor be offended; and that they may have
free access to his Majesty and the Upper House so often as occasion shall
require. Which being granted, they are dismissed.

All may petition, but by the mediation of Deputies.
All men heretofore were admitted to petition this August Assembly, provided
their Petitions were preferred within six days after the opening of the
Parliament, and by the hands of some appointed by the Upper House; it belonging
to them to judge what were fitting to be presented in Parliament, and to reject
such as were trivial or seditious.

Each House has power to consult, debate, The way of debating and communicating
opinions betwixt both Houses.
and form Bills about the matters proposed by the King, or concerning the
making or abrogating of Laws; so that what is agreed upon in the one House, is
by Messengers to be sent to the other: and if both concur in judgment after the
matter has been debated, the Assent is marked over the head of the Bill (if it
be in the Lords House) in this form of words: Les Seigneurs out assentes; The
Lords have consented. And in the House of Commons, thus: Les Communes out
assentes; The Commons have consented.

But if they disagree, many times both Houses, or Committees chosen by them,
meet in conference in a convenient place, which is called the Painted Chamber;
where the Lords covered and sitting, in solemn manner receive the Commons
standing uncovered, and both argue the matter in debate. If in such Conferences
opinions disagree (as it happens sometimes) the thing is laid aside; but if
they concur, the Bill is carried to the King: which if he approve of, it is
written upon, Le Roy le veut, By the Kings consent the Bills are made Laws;
The King wills it; whereby, as by a Soul infused into the body, it receives
life, and passes into a perfect Law, to be afterward promulgated to the
people: If on the contrary the King approve not the Bills brought to him, he
uses to write over head, Le Roy s'avisera, The King will consider of it: Or
otherwise rejected.
sometimes he utterly rejects them, and then they are wholly laid aside.

But matters of Religion (which require the Kings more especial care) are not
so entirely committed by him to the Parliament, Religious matters a^ ^ommit^ed
by the King to the Clergy.
but to the Convocation of the Clergy to be handled, unless for the sanction of
Parliament to give them the authority of a Law, which otherwise they could not
sufficiently have. Which by the Deans, Archdeacons, and Deputies of the Clergy,
are holden in the Convocation.
The Deans, Archdeacons, two Prebendaries commissionated by the several
Chapters, and as many Priests out of every Diocese, meet in an appointed place
to consult about affairs of that nature; where having first chosen a
Prolocutor, they settle points of Religion, Ceremonies, and other matters
belonging to the Church, and the imposition of Subsidies also, in name of the
Clergy: yet in these latter times their Acts bind not the People, Their Acts
bind not the People, without the consent of the King and Parliament.
until (as we said before) they be passed into a Law by the King, with consent
of both Houses of Parliament. And so cautious have our Kings been that Laymen
should not meddle in such affairs, that, as it is recorded in History, Queen
Elizabeth severely checked the Parliament for having appointed a Fast without
^sking her leave; nor would she be satisfied, till they begged her Majesty's
pardon for it.

That we may return to the Authority of Parliament, each House has its several
and distinct Privileges. The Rights and Privileges of the Upper House.
The House of Lords not only concurs in Council and making of Laws, but has
also power of Judicature and giving Judgment, and so of administering an Oath,
especially in weightier Causes, as in the corruption of Judges and Magistrates,
and in highest Appeals: which yet, the Lawyers say, cannot lawfully be brought
to a trial, without the consent and warrant of the King; and is never done,
unless the Judges of the Law do assist.

Of the Lower.
The House of Commons claims to it self the privilege of petitioning and
proposing Laws, or of prosecuting, but never of judging, unless within its own
walls, and over the Members of their own House, nor that neither beyond a Fine
and Imprisonment. By ancient custom that House was so far from pronouncing any
Sentence (much less in cases of Life and Death) in the name of the People,
against the meanest Servant in England, that it never took to it self the power
of administering an Oath. It is also extant in the Rolls, to this purpose: Upon
the humble supplication of the House of Commons, that whereas all Parliamentary
Judgment belongs to the King and the Peers, and not to the Commons, unless by a
Grant and Permission from the King, it would please the Kings Majesty that they
be not, contrary to custom, obliged to give Judgment; whereupon the King for
the future excused them from that trouble, reserving the Parliamentary power of
Judging for the time to come to the King and House of Lords only, (save only
in making Laws, or imposing Taxes and Subsidies) unless when it shall otherwise
seem fit to the Kings Majesty to require their particular counsel and assent
for dispatching the public Affairs of the Nation.

Nay, it was of old the custom also, that if any Controversy or Doubt arose
about the validity of the Election of the Members of the House of Commons, the
matter was not determined by the other Members of the same House, but either by
the Lords in the Upper House, or by the Judges in Chancery. And if any of them
also departed from the Parliament without leave from the King and both Houses,
he was brought before the Kings Privy Council or King's Bench, to receive
sentence for his faults; but he was never punished at the will and pleasure of
his own House.

This also is peculiar to the House of Commons, (that we may again return to
their Privileges) that it belongs to them first to debate and form the Bill
for raising Money from the People.

Such therefore is the wonderful temper of our Monarchy, that the King, Lords,
and Commons have their several parts in the public administration of Affairs;
yet with that harmonious proportion, that All can help, but none of them hurt
the Public. For the Prerogative of the King that gives him the supreme power
of Government, and of Peace and War, tends to this, that he may have strength
enough to defend the Laws against the Factions of the Nobility, and the Tumults
and Insurrections of the people: whilst the Nobles, by the high Authority they
have in giving Judgment and making Laws, can on the one hand put a stop to
tyrannical attempts, if any should be offered by the King; and on the other,
curb the insolence of a tumultuous and seditious common People. Nor are the
Commons, through the privilege they have of accusing any man, and giving or
denying Money, unprovided of means of restraining the licentiousness of the
Lords and Privy-Counsellors, and of preventing the arbitrariness of the Prince.

The providence of the Law thae the Members might debate freely and without
fear.
The Laws are very careful that the liberty of Debating and Voting be not
obstructed through fear and the insolence of wicked men; for it is enjoined
under severe penalties, that no Member of Parliament come to the House with
hidden or open Arms, nor that any other person armed with a Sword or any other
Weapon, presume to walk in the Palace-yard or near the House, thereby to give
cause of terror and apprehension, or to lessen the reverence of the place.
Yea, it has been the custom, that the Members of Parliament and their menial
Servants, should during the sitting of Parliament, be protected from arrests
for debt, or other slight crimes; but the Privilege of Parliament excuses no
man that is guilty of Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace, from the
ordinary prosecution of Law. Yet if by the mistake either of the Magistrate or
Officer, any Parliament Man or their Servants happen to be arrested, they
cannot be set at liberty according to Law, but by a Writ (assigning the cause)
directed out of the Chancery.

So much heretofore did both Houses contain themselves within the bounds of
modesty, The modesty of the Parliament.
that if any one inconsiderately offended against the received customs, or
spoke any way irreverently of the King, he was severely punished for the fault,
and that at the suit and instance of the House of which he was a Member.

The Kings also did very seldom, What honor Kings were wont to show the
Parliament.

But when occasion required, reduced them into order.


unless it were for weighty causes, act any thing that might give offense to so
August an Assembly: Yet sometimes, upon high provocations, some of our mildest
Princes have severely rebuked the whole Parliament, and caused some Members to
be brought to the Bar to answer for their offenses; and have punished others by
Fine, Imprisonment, or Death, according to the nature of their crimes.

These were the old customs, and those the men that made England for many Ages
past to flourish, The happiness of the Kingdom under this Government.
being happy at home, and renowned abroad; until too much happiness (as often
happens in humane affairs) with Luxury and all sorts of Vice, brought in
amongst us Pride, Ambition, and the contempt of the Laws both of God and man;
so that with mutual emulation and envy men began to covet and invade the Rights
of one another, to despise and set at naught, rather than to reverence and obey
the King, Religion, and Laws, and to gape after Novelties, rather than to
acquiesce in what was most excellently established.

Of late, What were the beginnings of the Troubles raised by some Members of
the House of Commons.
some perverse men (and they at first but a few) who had screwed themselves
into the Lower House, being desirous of changes, and crafty Promoters of
public Debates, began to clamor about the Rights and Liberties of the People,
and Power of Parliaments, to arrogate to themselves unheard of Privileges, to
be very busy where they were no ways concerned, take upon them what they were
not capable of effecting, and at length breaking out into insolent Expressions
and Invectives against the the Kings power, calling into question the Tunnage
and Poundage, which the Kings of England in all times enjoyed, and forbidding
them to be paid to the King; nay, and to offer violence to their Speaker
within the very walls of the House; and in a word, to shake off their ancient
modesty, all reverence which they ought to bear to the Majesty of their King,
and to trample under foot the sacred Customs of the Kingdom and Privileges of
Parliament.

Hence mutual Jealousies betwixt the King and Parliament.

And then the dissolution of Parliaments.


Hence arose mutual Heart-burnings and Jealousies, that the King designed to
invade the Liberties of the Parliament, and the Parliament to encroach upon the
Prerogative of the Crown. For this reason the King put an end to several
Parliaments much sooner than many desired, (but not without precedents in
former times) and checked the rashness of some by imprisonment. Being some time
afterward solicited, he refused to call new Parliaments, that so the Heats and
Animosities might be allayed, and that they might learn for the future to bring
along with them Modesty and greater Gravity to so great a Council.

This gave occasion of stirring the people up against the King.
But that gave occasion to crafty and restless men of spreading their poison all
over England; so that every where they gave it out, That Religion was ruined,
the public Liberty oppressed, and the Laws in danger of being subverted; hoping
that it would be no difficult matter to persuade credulous people of this, who
were greedy of Novelties, and prone to listen to Calumnies and Slanders,
especially of the great men. They reproached the King with bitter Railings,
calling him uxorious, imprudent, addicted to the Popish Religion, covetous, and
what else they knew to be infamous and hateful to the People. They censured the
best of his actions, and strained them to the worst sense. They wonderfully
aggravated his Misfortunes and Failings, and were more injurious than ill
fortune her self in their horrid constructions.

Amongst so many Complaints and Outcries, And yet the Kingdom in a most
flourishing condition.
if you demand what real calamity happened, Britain was never in a more
flourishing condition; stately Buildings both public and private every where
reared, not only for convenience, but even for Ostentation and Luxury; Trade
increasing daily both in compass and profit, had already enlarged it self to
both the Indies; only unhappy in this, that with the Wealth of Strangers,
foreign Vices were also imported: Arts of all sorts never looked gayer in
Colleges, Courts, and Shops; nor were the wealthy Inhabitants ever prouder;
Justice was administered according to Law; nor was any man deprived of Life or
Goods, but by the lawful Verdict of a Jury of his Countrymen, to whom these
things ought to be of highest value: all the parts of Government were so
administered, that they seemed to conspire together for the public good; save
only in this, that they could not repress the insolency and wantonness that
sprung from so great prosperity; and (which is not to be dissembled) being long
unaccustomed to War, we had been unfortunate in some foreign expeditions;
Though unfortunate in War abroad, and some Taxes imposed at home.
and the people were incensed at some impositions at home, which though very
moderate, and countenanced by public necessity and good reason in Law, yet
gave occasion to the people to pretend that the Right and Property of the
Subject was oppressed, Some seditious persons are punished.
and to outcries of Injustice; and also the imprisonment and lopping off the
ears of four or five seditious persons, sentenced by the Judges of the
Star Chamber, seemed to be punishments too severe for those halcyon days of
Peace and Tranquillity. To this may be added, that the Jurisdiction and
Censures of Spiritual Courts wrought pity in some, and indignation in others.
Besides, the muster of Malcontents was made greater by some scrupulous
Puritans who interpreted the enjoining of Ceremonies and things indifferent in
the Worship of God, New Ceremonies startle the Puritans.
in the Canons of the Church, to be the Forerunners of Popery.

We may also take along with us the Zeal of the Archbishop in exempting the
Clergy from the Suits and Injuries of Laics, and preferring them to civil
employments; which drew a great deal of envy and ill will not only upon
himself, but upon all the Churchmen also: The Archbishop endeavoring to
impose the Liturgy of England upon the Scots, offends them.
as also his endeavoring to bring into the Church of Scotland the use of the
Service Book of England; which, though his design was laudable, that these
three neighboring Nations, being under the government of one and the same
King, might also be joined in an uniform manner of Worship, was yet
unseasonable and ill timed, as we shall a little more fully relate.

Upon which pretext, but for other causes, they grow turbulent.
Matters in Scotland were then ripe for a Rebellion: for many took it ill that
the King denied them the Honors and Titles to which they aspired; others were
vexed that they were forced to part with some portion of the Tithes (though but
moderate) which they had, upon the dissolution of the Monasteries, in the
minority of King James, obtained from the Crown, for making a competent Stipend
for Ministers, who then served the Cures at what easy rates the Patrons were
pleased to allow them; but most could not digest, that the absolute Authority
which they had for a long time usurped over their Vassals and Tenants, should
be taken from them and annexed to the Crown.

These choosing rather to shake the State than quit their hold; those again,
rather to get Titles of Honor by the seditious Acclamations of the Mobile,
than to want them, took occasion of the Liturgy and Ceremonies, to buz the
people in the ear that the reformed Religion was to be overturned to make way
for Popery; They take Arms; alter the Government both in Church and State.

The King marches against them;


so that having taken up Arms and born down all that were of a contrary
opinion, they new model Church and State according to their own humor.

The King resolving to reduce those by Arms, whom he could not reclaim by the
milder causes of admonition, being accompanied by the Flower of the Youth, and
Nobility of England, who voluntarily, and at their own charge, set out upon the
expedition, marches to the borders; but having by clemency and concessions
brought them over to obedience, And upon Articles makes Peace with them.

The Scots innovating the Articles, cause a new War.


which he preferred before Hostility and Arms, he condescended to Articles of
Peace, and disbanded his Army.

The Scots afterward insisting upon Articles different from those that were
agreed upon, occasion new Broils and Dissensions; which when neither
Commissioners, Messengers, nor mutual Letters could compose, both sides prepare
afresh for a new War.

On the Kings side the Earl of Strafford, then Deputy of Ireland, raised an
Army of eight thousand men with the assistance of the Parliament of Ireland,
being to be paid by them; and being come over again into England, bestirs
himself in raising another Army here.

A Parliament is called: A Parliament is called in England,
wherein a certain Courtier making bad use of his instructions, did (purposely,
as most believed, that he might confound affairs, and increase Animosities
betwixt the King and Parliament) somewhat haughtily demand twelve Subsidies,
when the House of Commons had offered six, in lieu of the Ship Money: and this
raised new discontents and grievances; And dissolved.
for putting a stop to which in those troublesome times, the Parliament was
sooner dissolved than many could have wished.

The Scots making a secret Combination with the Factious, invade England.
In the mean time the Scots, whose Forces were not so dispersed, but that they
might be speedily drawn together into a body, nicking the opportunity, and by
Agents entering into a Combination with the factious of England, under pretext
of petitioning the King, came in a hostile manner into England; and having beat
some Troops that guarded the passage of the River Tine, put all into fear and
consternation, took Newcastle and other Towns unprovided for defense, and
fortified them.

Having made a Truce, the Judgment of the Parliament is expected.
And though Strafford, with the new-raised Army under his command, had
undertaken to drive them out of the Kingdom; yet the most merciful King chose
rather to refer the matter to a Parliament, than without public consent to
pollute the Kingdom with blood and slaughter. A Truce was therefore made,
whereby the Scots were allowed a free Trade and Commerce, with liberty to raise
Contributions in the Counties where they lay; and so a Parliament was called,
by whose prudence and Loyalty it was hoped all roots and Fibers of Animosities
might be extirpated.

The Parliament meets. The Factious in it.
The Parliament being met, the Factious who in great numbers had got into the
House of Commons, trusting now to the Patronage of the Scots, and the Disorders
of the times, set about their business manfully; they represent Grievances both
public and private* accuse Courtiers and Magistrates, and dart obliquely
reproaches against the King himself, exaggerating all with the highest strains
of their Rhetoric. Who under pretext of reforming Grievances, endeavor to
new-model the Government both in Church and State And by what steps.
Under pretext of reforming these Abuses, they labor to overturn both Church
and State, and, in imitation of the Scots, to new-model the Government; and
that by these steps: If, in the first place, they could deprive the King of the
Counsels and Assistance, of his most faithful Subjects, and by loading him with
Reproaches and false Crimes, render him odious to the People, and strip him of
all Power and Authority, they would next screw themselves into public Offices
and the power of the Militia; and then with absolute dominion give Laws both to
the King and People.

The Earl of Strafford and Archbishop of Canterbury are accused of
High Treason, Many are accused; the E. of Strafford, and Arshb. of Canterbury.
both the English and Scots impeaching them. Against Strafford, also out of
Ireland (where the greatest matter of accusation was to be picked up) both
Witnesses and Accusers are brought. For whilst he was Deputy of Ireland; he had
by some severities (which though perhaps they could not stand the test of the
punctilio's and niceties of Law, yet were necessary for the public) raised the
indignation of the Inhabitants; in that he endeavored to reclaim the native
Irish from their wonted Barbarity, to Industry, Civility, and better Manners,
and to enure them to the Customs and Practices of the English. Whence in a
short time he had been so successful in this, that having settled Trades,
Husbandry, and Commerce amongst those lazy and stubborn people, they began to
flourish more than in all Ages before, and to bring money into the Exchequer of
England, which by Rebellions they had so often exhausted before. From amongst
these, though they were Roman Catholics, and sworn enemies to the English
Government, and even then plotting a Conspiracy against it, Accusers in name of
the Kingdom of Ireland, and Witnesses were sent for, who being prone enough of
themselves to the work, that they might the more securely attempt the Rebellion
which then they hatched in their minds, (the wise Deputy being taken off) were
by all civilities and kind offices caressed by the Factious, that by
accumulated crimes they might overwhelm Strafford. The Lord Keeper Finch was
also accused, The L. Keeper, Judges,
and all the Judges, who being sworn, had after long deliberation, declared in
favor of the King, as to the lawfulness of Ship Money: Twelve Bishops also,
And twelve Bishops.
who by the riotous Rabble having been barred from coming into the House of
Lords, protested against all Laws that should be made as invalid, until all
that were concerned in the Council of the Kingdom might safely be present.
Others withdrew, to avoid the impendent storm.

The terrified Judges are freely discharged.
The Judges scared with this Parliamentary Thunderclap, and taught to obey their
Lords and Masters, are at last all freely discharged; and some of them
continued in their places, or promoted to higher. The Bishops also being
deprived of the right of voting in the House of Lords.
The Bishops having lost their power of voting in the Lords House by a Law made
in their absence, being likewise set at liberty, Canterbury is reserved for a
future Sacrifice. All the Storm, at present, fell upon the head of the Earl of
Strafford, whose Tragedy, since it lay heavy upon the King during his whole
life, and at his death, and that he by the Rebels was reckoned the most guilty,
I shall more fully relate, that by the instance of one, judgment may be made of
the rest, what kind of men they were who were so hated by the Parliament.

Strafford is brought to his trial before the House of Lords the King
overhearing.
With great pomp he is accused by the Commons of twenty eight Articles of High
Treason before the House of Lords; all the Commons were present, of whom six of
the most violent were his Prosecutors or Managers of the Trial; the King also,
Queen and Prince being there privately behind the Curtain. The weight of his
Impeachment lay in this: That in Ireland he had acted many things arbitrarily
contrary to Law: That in time of Peace he had raised Money of the Inhabitants
against their wills by Military Exactions: That he had advised the King to
force the Subjects of England to obedience by foreign Arms, and to make War
against Scotland.

The Trial lasted many days; during which, The Earl in his defense clears
himself of the Accusation.
the Earl with great presence of mind and judgment defending himself, so
refuted the Arguments of his Prosecutors, that amongst so many Articles there
was not one (even in the judgment of his enemies) that could amount to Treason,
nor could all put together be constructed an acumulative Treason; which enraged
the House of Commons so far, that having no color of Law to take his life,
they make a new Law ex post facto, The House of Commons make a new Law, whereby
they make him guilty of Treason.

Not without opposition, many dissenting.


whereby he is made guilty of High Treason, with a clause therein, That it
should not be made a Precedent in other Courts.

But this past not without great debate and opposition, many speaking and
arguing to the contrary, and fifty nine of the chief Members of the House
dissenting; whose names were posted up in public places, that being exposed to
the view and fury of the Mobile, they might learn to vote with the Factious for
the future, if they had not rather be torn in pieces alive.

This Bill was in two days time past and engrossed in the House of Commons, and
carried up to the Lords for their consent; but a matter of such moment was more
seriously deliberated about there. The Lords deliberating more seriously.
The Factious impatient of this delay, stir up the Rabble and Dregs of the
People, who armed with Staves and Clubs, and what Weapons Rage put into their
hands, The Rabble beset the House,
came rushing to the Parliament House, roaring out, Justice, Justice; and
growing daily more and more insolent, morning and evening persisted in their
riotous Clamours.

These Blades besetting the House of Lords, And hinder the Lords and Bishops
from entering it; then they break into Westminster-Abbey.
lay hands upon what Lords and Bishops they please, and tossing them to and
fro, hinder them from entering, and threaten them worse if they obstinately
refused to comply with the Commons. Next, they break in into Westminster-Abbey,
pull down the Organs, rob the Vestments and sacred Furniture of the Church; And
afterward run in tumult to White Hall. And answer the K. sawcily.
and then with furious clamours run to White Hall the Kings own house.

Nay, they proceeded to that impudence, as to dare to affront the King by saucy
and insolent Answers, when his Majesty from a Balcony told them as they passed
by White Hall, that they should keep at home and mind their business.

Whilst the Justices of Peace repress the Tumults, they are imprisoned by the
factious House.
Whilst some of the Justices of Peace, according to their Oath and duty,
imprison those of that Rabble whom they could catch, to be kept there for
condign punishment; they themselves are clapped up by the factious House of
Commons; pretending that it was free for all to come and petition the
Parliament: though they had caused the Gates of London to be shut against the
men of Kent, who came to petition the contrary, and frightened others who
intended to have done the like. And when some discreet and good men had desired
the Factious, that they would at length lay the Devils whom they had raised,
they made answer, That they ought rather to thank their Friends.

The factious Members of Parliament consult with the Apprentices, and teach
them the time and manner of tumultuating.
Nay, so far was the Parliamentary Dignity debased, that many times Members of
the House of Commons came to the Clubs of Apprentices, where they consulted
about, related and examined the affairs that past in Parliament, what was
designed to be done, what parts they themselves were to act, and when. Hence
their Tumults became, by this kind of schooling, in a manner to be regular,
being distributed into proper Classes and Fraternities, as of Porters,
Watermen, Tailors, etc. who under pretext of petitioning, at the least hint
from their Demagogues flocked together into bodies. And that once for all, we
may lay open the nature of this Sore, if any difficult knot occurred, which by
other arts they could not unty, they presently betook themselves to this Sword
to cut it.

By this means many being terrified, Whereby the Members being frightened,
forbear coming to the House, and are therefore excluded.

Whence the Authority of Parliament wears out of date.


and thinking it safer to keep at home, and abstain from coming, with danger to
the House, for that fault alone they were excluded by the prevailing Faction.
Others who did appear, durst not for fear of their own lives, give their Votes
freely for the public Good: so that from that time forward all authority of
Parliament seemed to be worn out of date, since the Riffraff of the People
challenged the right of voting in Parliament, and put a restraint upon the
liberty of the rest.

But to return to Strafford: The Lords pass the Bill against the Earl of
Strafford.
The Lords being overcome by these Arguments, succumb; and scarcely a third
part of them being present, the Bill of the House of Commons past in the Lords
House, by the plurality of seven voices.

The King is not so easily prevailed upon, The Kings consent is very hardly
obtained,
though the riotous Rabble, hardly forbearing their hands, continually plagued
him with Clamours and Threatenings; and the Noblemen and Courtiers that were
about him, plied him incessantly with their Prayers and Remonstrances. Till the
Judges pronounced it lawful, the Bishops removed his scruples,

And Strafford advised him to it.


Nor would he sign the Bill until the Judges, who durst not so much as mutter
against the actions of the Parliament and People, satisfied him that he might
do it in Law, and some Bishops in Conscience; and until the brave Earl had by a
Letter persuaded and almost besought him to do it, like another Curtius, that
he might fall a Sacrifice for the public Peace, and the safety of the Royal
Family.

The Sentence being past against the Earl, The King by Letters desires the
execution may be delayed
the the King immediately sent the Prince with Letters to the Lords, earnestly
recommending it to them, that, at least, they would delay the execution for
some time. The Lords deny it.
But they having sent twelve of their number to wait upon his Majesty, persuade
him that without great danger to himself and Family, it could not be done.

Courtiers fearful of their condition, freely resign their places.
The fall of so great a man from the very Pinnacle of Honor, terrified the
inferior Lords who bore public Offices. The Master of the Court of Wards, the
Lord High Treasurer, who had with great integrity discharged that Office, and
the Princes Governor, freely resign their places; like some Creatures, who
biting off the Prize of the chase, escape the fury of the Huntsmen.

The Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace comply with the times In that thing
alone the King withstood the will of the Parliament: In the rest he left
himself in a manner at their discretion.

He suffers the Jurisdiction of the Court of Stannaries, of the Court of the
President of Wales, to be lessened.


The Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace, who were formerly in Office, comply
with the times, and worship the rising Sun.

In this thing almost alone the King abandoned not himself wholly to the will
of the Parliament: for afterward he granted them every thing that they
themselves were not ashamed to ask.

The Jurisdiction of the Kings honorable Privy Council; that of the Court of
Stannaries, wherein by Patent from the King, the Lord Warden decided all
Controversies relating to the Laborers in the Mines, and the Officers
concerned in that work; as also of the Court of the President and Council of
Wales established in the marches betwixt England and Wales, wherein, as in
Chancery, Lawsuits amongst the Inhabitants, were by the Kings Substitute
determined according to the Rules of Equity, were stinted and limited by
narrower bounds.

The extent of the Forests also be abridged. The Court of the Star Chamber,
The extent also of the Kings Forests and Chaces was abridged into a narrower
compass. The Star Chamber, wherein the Chancellor of the Kingdom being
President, greater Crimes, which were not at all, or not sufficiently provided
against by any particular positive Law, were tried and punished; such as
Sedition, Conspiracy, Faction, Scandalum Magnatum, etc. and those also who by
cunning or power eluded the force of the Law, was wholly abrogated.

And of the High Commission, to be abrogated.
The Court of High Commission, wherein the Archbishop presiding, some Nobles and
the learned in the Law, by the Kings authority, past sentence upon the more
enormous Crimes that fell under Ecclesiastical censure, suffered the same fate
also.

The Court of the Lord President and Council of the North was abolished, As
also that of the Lord President and Council of the North.
which for a long time had administered Justice to that part of the Kingdom, and
wherein Seditions, Conspiracies, and Associations, were by Royal authority
suppressed, and Lawsuits about civil matters determined amongst those who wanted
money to go, according to the Laws, for a trial to London.

With all these the King readily parted, in prospect of the public good,
though they were shining Jewels in the Imperial Crown.

He suffered all Monopolies to be rescinded, He allows Monopolies to be
rescinded.
leaving it fully to the Parliament to punish all those who in prosecution of
them had acted any thing contrary to Law and Justice.

He renounced also his Right of raising Soldiers, He yields up also his right
of levying Soldiers, Ship Money, Tunnage and Poundage.
and the Ship Money, (in lieu of which alone the former Parliament had offered
him six hundred thousand pounds:) He also freely parted with Tunnage and
Poundage, which none of the Kings his Predecessors, who without any
interruption had enjoyed it past all prescription, would ever consent to.

And that all Grievances might be timely remedied for the future, Allows also a
Triennial Parliament.
and that no Great man or Magistrate might infringe the lately-granted
Concessions, or oppress the People, if he himself should omit to call a
Parliament once in three years, he gave power to the Chancellor to issue out
Writs for that effect; and the Chancellor failing, to the Lords and Sheriffs;
and in fault of them, to the People to meet for Elections.

Lastly, at their desire he granted that which some magnified as a favor
exceeding all former benefits, and others complained of as a mischief
surpassing all future Grievances, And that the present Parliament should not be
dissolved without the consent of both Houses.
to wit, That they might have time to pay the public Debts, and secure to
Posterity the Privileges granted by his Majesty, he suffered a Law to pass
whereby the Parliament had leave to sit until by consent of both Houses it
should be thought fit to dissolve it; as if he would make amends for the many
intervals of Parliaments, by the long continuance of one. Which, however others
may interpret it, was an argument of his great candor and sincerity toward
his Subjects, or at least a symptom of a mind not inclined to Violence and War.

Yet with these the Factious are not pleased
No man would think now but that the Kings Power was abundantly limited, and
that the Property of the Subject and Privileges of Parliament were
sufficiently enlarged. But alas! these Harpies are not satisfied; and one of
them made answer to a Gentleman that put the question to him, What more has the
King now to grant? That he may, said he, lay aside all Authority, and commit
himself and the management of all Affairs to our care.

But are thereby emboldened to raise Animosities and Divisions.
That the Factious might attain their ends, they suggest so many Fears and
Jealousies to the weaker and less discerning Members, that like the heads of
Hydra, more Divisions and Animosities sprung from the Kings grace and desire of
appeasing them; and his Concessions so far from satisfying them, increased
only their thirst, and made them insolent in demanding more: as it usually
happens in popular Councils, where the people once infatuated with Jealousies,
some dance to the Pipes of others; others, that they may not appear shorter
sighted, or less public spirited than the rest, see Plots beyond the Moon, and
look for joints in a Bull-rush.

This amongst others is chiefly to be observed, That the King having given
secret orders to the Army then on foot (which at his own charge he had raised
against the Scots, though after the Truce they were paid by the Parliament) to
march to London, that he might more conveniently repress the Tumults and
Insolences of the People; it was by the Factious charged upon him as a Crime.
But though he might lawfully do it, yet they examined many Officers and
Soldiers about the matter, and finding none privy to it, they made it their
chief care, by laying all the blame at the Kings door, to incense the People
more against him.

Now the Parliament has leisure, The Scots are sent home.
the Power being in their hands, to send the Scots home to their own Country;
who having received a promise of three hundred thousand pounds English to be
paid within three years, and being loaded with Thanks, Pay, and Booty (of which
they were not so free to the English Army) they departed; both the English and
Irish Armies being at the same time disbanded. Nay, The English and Irish
Armies are also disbanded.
it was hotly disputed which of the Armies should first be dismissed, this or
that, till at length with much ado it past in Parliament, that both should be
disbanded together.

The King followed the Scots into Scotland, The K. follows the Scots into their
Country.
where having called a Parliament, and having granted and confirmed by Law
whatever Avarice, Ambition, and Wantonness could devise, to his own loss he
reconciles all Parties, and for that time heals up all wounds of War and
Dissension. But the Parliament dogs the King with Commissioners as spies over
all his actions, who under pretext of cementing a stricter Union with their
Friends and dear Brethren, might break off their friendship to the King; and
indeed by tales, whispers, and crafty insinuations, they had very near spoiled
all the Kings business at that time. The Parliament of England also during this
space, was by the Votes of both Houses prorogued to a certain day.

And upon his return is feasted by the Londoners.
The King upon his return was received with applause in London, and with the
Queen and Royal Issue magnificently feasted by the City; which the
Parliamentarians and some others took ill, lest the Kings Majesty being
elevated by those Congratulations of the Citizens, might think the people had
received sufficient satisfaction, or that his own affairs were settled to
advantage. And the King having sent for the Lord Mayor and chief Citizens to
Hampton Court, gave them in recompense a sumptuous and Princely Treat; which
grated upon the Factious, who were resolved to mingle sorrows with their joys.

The Factious congratulate the Kings return by a defamatory Declaration.
After some days, they congratulate his return with a Declaration, or rather an
infamous Libel. In it the Parliamentarians mustered up all the grievances of
the State, or rather the murmurings of insolent and wanton men; aggravating
with the utmost spite and malice, whatever had been committed by the
Courtiers, Courts, Magistrates, or Kings Officers; what calamities or
misfortunes had happened during his whole reign, yea, and those things also,
which being reformed, ought justly to have been buried in silence; and at the
same time cause it to be printed and published.


This was forged during the Kings absence, being moved under other pretexts by
the chief Sticklers of the House; and having been debated from three in the
afternoon, all night long, until ten next morning, and many wise men in the
mean time, through age and infirmity, and others (which is far worse) through
fear and cowardice, withdrawing; it was at last with much ado approved by the
plurality of eleven voices.

To which the King shortly answers.
The King finding fault that they had made it public without expecting his
Answer, a few days after published another Declaration in refutation of it.

This was in a manner the first Declaration of War. For though the King
endeavored a Cure by somentations and mollifying Remedies, yet the Sore
festered, and was not to be cured without Fire and Sword.

The Rabble again broke out into Tumults, New Tumults for snatching the power
of the Militia out of the K.'s hands.
under color of the Ceremonies, Liturgy, and Church Government. The Factious
whisper that the power of the Militia must be taken out of the Kings hands,
which they intended immediately to seize. By which it clearly appeared, that
the boldness of the disaffected, and the ways of sedition, were rather
encouraged than conquered by patience; and that the Troubles were no less
raised by the consent, The K. obviates the Sedition,
than by the artifice and machination of the Factious; the King having
discovered some of them to have been accessory to the Scottish Invasion. That
the King therefore might not always suffer things to go on, but obviate, and
timely stifle the growing Rebellion in the bud; by accusing the Heads of it of
Treason.
he accuses five Commoners and one of the Peers of High Treason, and desires
them to be brought to a fair trial according to Law, before the Judges of the
Kingdom.

But the Faction growing now more powerful Whom the House of Commons takes into
protection.
and numerous in the Parliament (many good men also being over sollicitous lest
the Privileges of Parliament might be in the least infringed) the House of
Commons, which durst never before own the defense of any who were accused of
Felony, Murder, or Treason, takes them into protection; and so far from
complying with the King who undertook the prosecution himself, they rather
accuse him as invading the Privileges of Parliament, and will not suffer any
Member to be brought to the Bar, or taken off by accusations from the care of
the Public, or that the Judges and Arbitrators of the Affairs of the Kingdom,
should be disgraced by criminal Processes.

Wherefore the K. enters the House of Commons in person,
The King being provoked at this, by the advice of some of his Privy Council,
who were themselves Members of the House, went to Westminster Hall, attended
with about an hundred Noblemen and Gentlemen with their Servants, and commands
that no body else be suffered to come up stairs, and that they should not upon
any provocation offer the least affront to any man: Entering the House of
Commons, accompanied only by the Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, That he may
demand them:
he demands the Incendiaries to be delivered up to him, and promises to proceed
against them according to the known Laws.

Who fled.
They being warned, as it was reported, by means of the Earl of H. and of a Lady
who was now willing to set off her wit as formerly she had done her beauty, the
gifts of different Ages, amongst the Parliament Men, had withdrawn themselves.
Wherefore the King having accused the Abscondents, returned without any hurt or
injury done to any man. But when he perceived that the Members were in a chaff,
The K. afterward desisted, and in a manner acknowledged his fault.
and highly displeased, he mildly remitted the Suit; and that he might soften
the angry minds of the men, he retracted what he had done, and in a manner
begged pardon for his fault.

But the Factious take thence occasion of slandering, and of raising jealo^sies
and stirs.
Nevertheless they who lay continually at the catch, to blow the Coals of
Jealousies and Offenses, taking hold of this opportunity of inveighing against
the King, set the minds of the ignorant agog, and scattered abroad in all
places such sparks of Division as were enough to put the whole Kingdom in a
flame.

Buckinghamshire and Essex petition.
The Rabble of the neighboring Counties, to wit, of Buckinghamshire and Essex,
are egged on; that being armed in several bodies, they might come and petition,
that their Members might have free liberty of voting, and that their
Privileges might be kept inviolate: Although the Kentish-men who came to
supplicate on the other side, were denied liberty to enter the Gates of London;
and others who were about to do the like, were restrained by threats and
reproaches. So that by polling and in a manner mustering the people, they give
the signal to War. The accused Members abscond in London, and with a Guard of
Citizens are conducted to the Parliament House.
The accused Members abscond in London until they might feel the pulses, and
stir up the Citizens to draw out for their Guard, and conduct them to the House
in arms and triumph. The King being advertised of this, though at that time by
the care and contrivance of Gurney the then Lord Mayor, many valiant and loyal
men offered themselves to mix with the Crowd, and being scattered through the
streets like Spectators, to oppose the Army if they attempted any thing against
the King; The K. withdraws to Windsor-Castle.
yet his Majesty hoping that these storms might break and spend themselves by
giving way to them, he with the Queen removed to Windsor-Castle.

But afterward the Quarrel rising higher, having sent the Queen beyond Sea,
under pretext of accompanying her eldest Daughter lately married to the Prince
of Orange, over into Holland; Sends the Q into Holland.
but in reality that she might pass the Winter secure from the future storm,
and having sent for the Prince, whom, Sends for the Prince.
as he was informed, the Factious did intend to seize by authority of
Parliament, he moves toward York; Moves toward York. Having first sent
pacificatory Letters to the Parliament.
but not before he wrote to the Parliament, giving them the reasons of his
departure, persuading them by all means to Peace, and desiring them, That
whatever it was they so much desired that he would grant and do for them, they
would set it down in writing; that without ambiguiety they would state what the
Parliament and People claimed; and what on the other hand was to be granted to
the King: and he religiously protests that he would have the Rights of others
no less to be inviolate than his own, and that he would most willingly give his
consent to all things that might contribute to the restoring of Peace, and the
just Rights of his Crown and Kingdom.

Which notwithstanding the House of Commons misinterpret as contrary to the
Privileges of Parl. and pretend to be in great fear.
They not only slight, but caluminate this goodness of so gracious a King, as
if it were contrary to the Privileges of Parliament, to be informed what was
fit to be done, and that their consultations should be interrupted by Letters.
It can hardly be expressed how much the House of Commons proud of the favor of
the Multitude, pretended to be scared at these admonitions to Peace, as
portending new dangers and ruin in disguise.

Daring, alone, to demand the power of the Militia:
Hence laying hold of the opportunity, the House of Commons being only the
third and lowest Estate of the Kingdom, (the Lords being as yet averse from so
unjust a desire) had the boldness to demand that the power of all Castles and
Forts, and of the Militia, should be put into their hands.

Which when they could not obtain, they stir up the Corporations to take up
Arms of their own accord.

The House of Commons pass a Vote for ordering the Militia by Deputies; and


When they could not obtain this from the King, they move all the Towns and
Corporations that sided with them, that, as of their own accord, they should
make musters, train up the Youth in Military Discipline, and divide them into
Companies; which was afterward confirmed and approved in the House of Commons,
as done according to Law.

They pass also a Vote in their own House, that by Authority of Parliament,
Deputies should be named in each County, To exercise, arm, draw out and muster
the Youth, and those that were fit to carry Arms, that they might be ready upon
the future Orders of Parliament, for suppressing Rebellions, resisting
Invasions, etc.

having prevailed with the Lords, with joint address, they demand the Militia
of the King, upon pretense of dangers.
Having at length by their known Arts prevailed with the Lords to give their
consent, both Houses join in an Address to the King: That it was a thing not
only expedient, but necessary to be done, as well for himself as for the
State; pretending fears from France, Germany, and Spain, who then were all in
Arms; and the intelligence they had from Paris, Venice, and Rome, that the
restless Papists and ill men were plotting and contriving how they might
overset the Parliament of England, and the reformed Religion.

The King, The K. allows a share in the power of the Militia, reserving to
himself the supreme Authority: he exhorts them to moderation and peace.
willing to grant any thing for Peace sake, yields them a share in the power of
the Militia for a certain time, reserving to himself the supreme Authority,
whereby he might be able to maintain the Dignity of the Crown, and the Rights
of Parliament: He approves also the Deputies appointed by them, (some Londoners
excepted) and does pathetically exhort and adjure them, That at length laying
aside vain fears and mutual jealousies, they would calmly and seriously
consider by what means the troubled State, divided into several Factions, and
torn almost into pieces by it self, might be united again into one, and that
since no former Prince had made greater Concessions to his Subjects, they would
peaceably enjoy them.

But they slighting this Indulgence of the King, But the Factious slight these
things, fill the rest with idle fears, and by them stir up the People.
and his sound Admonitions, impose upon the rest with their bugbears of Fears
and Jealousies. They ordered strict Watch to be kept in suspected places, the
Beacons to be watched, and prepare Pilots, as for a War.

The People are daily stirred up with false Rumors spread amongst the
Multitude; On Sundays when they are in Church at their Devotion, they are put
into panick fears, as if the Papists (who were to come no man knew whence) were
ready to burn their houses, and to mingle their Blood with their Prayers; and
by and by again, that their throats were to be cut by enemies lurking in the
Woods and Vaults under ground. And many, though not the wisest, of the
Londoners were persuaded that the River of Thames was to be blown up by
Gunpowder to drown the City in the nightime; so ridiculous were the surmises
that gave occasion to most fatal changes.

By these and suchlike tricks the Populace is frightened out of their senses,
and resolved to do any thing to rid themselves of these apprehensions.

Fearing that the K. might possess himself of the Magazine of Hull.
Amongst the other preparatiss to War (all the particulars whereof it is not our
design to trace) the cunninger sort smelt a Plot; as if the King in his
progress to the North, intended to seize the Town and well-provided Magazine of
Hull, which might be of great consequence in carrying on the War.

They send Sir John Hotham to prevent it.
That they might prevent this, the Factious of their own head, without any
authority from both Houses, give the government of the place to Sir John
Hotham, which he instantly secured with a Garrison and the assistance of some
Townsmen.

Who shuts the Gates against the King,
So soon as the King had notice of this, he marched thither attended with his
Nobles and Servants; but the Gates being shut, and Soldiers planted upon the
Walls, he is denied entrance. The King being highly offended, commands the
Governor to let him enter attended only with twenty Gentlemen on horseback;
And is proclaimed Traitor.
but he refusing to let him in, unless alone, is proclaimed a Traitor: and the
King by Letters to the Parliament complains, and demands reparation for the
affront.

He is justified by the House of Commons.
But the House of Commons approve Sir John Hotham's Fact, and vote that the King
had violated the Privileges of Parliament, in proclaiming a Member of the
House guilty of Treason. Before he was heard in their House, they give Orders
to the Earl of Warwick to send some Soldiers from on board into the Town,
Afterward repenting of what he had done, and being about to deliver up the Town
to the K. he is taken, and with his Son beheaded.
and to transport the Magazine from thence to London. But Sir John Hotham
repenting too late, when he perceived that these Sparks had put the whole
Country into a flame; having afterward obtained pardon, and being about to
deliver up the Town to the King, was taken, and paid to the Parliament what he
owed to the King; both he and his Son being beheaded.

Amongst these preludes to War, The Parl. sends Proposals of Peace to the King.
there is some mention and hopes of peace; for after some months the Parliament
send an Answer to the King's Proposals which he made at Windsor upon his
departure for the North, in nineteen Articles or Demands; of which, this is the
sum.

1. That all the King's Privy Council, great Officers, The Parl. Propositions
to the King.
and Ministers of State may be put out, excepting such as the Parliament shall
approve, and to assign them an Oath.

2. That all affairs of State be managed by the Parliament, except such matters
as are transferred by them to the Privy Council, and to be concluded by the
major part of the Nobility under their hands; the full number not to exceed 25,
nor under 15: and if any place fall void in the interval of Parliament, then
(the major part of the Council) to choose one to be confirmed at the next
Session of Parliament.

3. That all the great Officers of the Kingdom shall be chosen with approbation
of Parliament, etc. as before said.

4. The government and education of the King's Children, by Parliament, etc. ut
supra.

5. Their Marriages to be treated and concluded by Parliament, etc.

6. The Laws against Papists, Priests, and others, be executed without
Toleration or Dispensation, except by Parliament.

7. No Popish Lord or Peer to have vote in Parliament, and their children to be
educated in the Protestant Faith.

8. To Reform Church Government as the Parliament shall advise.

9. To settle the Militia as the Parliament have ordered, and for the King to
recall all his Declarations published against their Ordinances therein.

10. All Privy-Counsellers and Judges to take Oath for maintenance of the
Petition of Right, and other Statutes which shall be made this Parliament.

11. All Officers placed by Parliament to hold their places quam diu been se
gesserint.

12. All Members of Parliament put out during this time, be restored again.

13. The Justice of Parliament to pass upon all Delinquents, and they to appear
or abide their censure.

14. The general Pardon to pass with Exceptions, as the Parliament shall advise.

15. All Forts and Castles of the Kingdom to be disposed of by Parliament, ut
supra.

16. The King to discharge all his Guards and Forces now in being, and not to
raise any other but in case of actual Rebellion.

17. The King to enter into a strict Alliance with all Reformed States, for
their assistance to recover the Rights of his Royal Sister and her Princely
Issue, to those Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them.

18. To clear the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members by Act of Parliament.

19. No Peer hereafter to be made shall sit in Parliament without their consent.

And these Articles being confirmed, the Parliament engage to make him a happy
Prince.

The King answers.
To these Commands rather than Articles of Peace, being such as were more proper
to move Indignation, than to gain an Assent; the King sends an Answer by two
noble and discreet Lords, the Marquess of Hertford and the Earl of Southampton,
The matter comes to nothing, as all future Treaties and Propositions
who were enjoined to treat on more equal terms in the House of Lords. But they
not being admitted, the Treaty came to nothing.

And because in this place we have made mention of Peace and Proposals, we are
to take notice, that afterward in the heat of the War, at the instance of the
King, Propositions of Peace being mutually sent, and Commissioners on both
sides twice meeting to treat about it, nothing could be effected, and mostly by
the Parliaments fault.

For seeing they proposed such severe Conditions on their own parts, The Parl.
proposing most rigid Conditions.
and which tended only to their own advantages; and the King, on the other
hand, such just and equitable Terms, more favorable to the Parliament and
State, than to himself and Family; the People began to be enraged and to fall
off daily from the Parliament.

The King of France also, (how sincerely, The mediation of the K. of France,
the States of the United Provinces, and of the Scots, is rejected.
I shall not judge) and the States of the United Provinces interposed for
accommodating the differences; but were rejected by the Parliament: and the
Scots, who likewise offered to mediate, were refused by the King as partial.
But farewell, Peace; Bellona is now at the doors.

The People being in the disposition we mentioned before, The Parl. seizes the
Militia.
Deputies were sent with Commissions into all the Counties; and the
Parliamentarian Rebels by force and their own authority, invade the Militia,
which they could not obtain from the King by petitioning.

The King on the contrary commands them to desist upon pain of Treason, The K.
commands the contrary, citing Laws that are against it.
citing the Act of the 25 Edw. 3. whereby, To contrive the death of the King,
Queen, or Prince, to violate the Queen or the Wife of the Prince, to take up
Arms against the King, to assist the Kings enemies within or without the
Kingdom, to counterfeit the great Seal or Kings Coin, are for the future
declared to be Treason, having also alleged other Acts, whereby it is
declared, That the power of the Militia and taking up of Arms, belongs only to
the King.

They answer.
But they make answer, That the Letter of the Law is for the King, but the mind
of it for them: That it is not forbidden to take up Arms against the Kings
Person, but against his Authority; which being in all Courts of Judicature, was
most eminently in the Parliament.

And the K.'s Majesty replies,
To this the King replies, That that distinction was condemned above three
hundred years since, when the Spencers under that cover carrying on Sedition,
were condemned to death by the Parliament. That besides, the present Parliament
was not free, but the better part of the Members being excluded, the rest were
slaves to the Faction.

And opposes the Aggressors.
These courses taking no effect, the King also sends Deputies into all Counties,
with authority from his Majesty, to array and arm the Subjects, and to have fit
men in readiness (if necessity should require) for suppressing Rebellions and
Seditions. And from this we may date our Sorrows and Calamities: whilst the
King endeavoring to maintain his ancient Rights, and they again to invade
them, War breaks out in the Kingdom.

But the Match was unequal, on what side soever the Right stood: The
Parliament, superior in strength, prevails, and in most Counties usurps the
Government; the Royal Cause being very weak, and in a few Counties struggling
for life: With no greater difficulty also the Fleet under the command of the
Earl of Warwick, is divided; but all this still without any fighting. They
skirmish on both sides in Apologies and Manifesto's, wherein the K. has the
better.
There was much skirmishing, indeed on both sides by Apologies and Manifesto's;
but after that the King, in the judgment of most men, had got the better on it
at the Pen, at length they come to try the matter by Armies and the Sword.

The Parl. levies an Army,
It was easy for the Parliament to raise an Army in London, a City abounding
with swarms of seditious and restless men, where so many Arms, so great
quantity of Provision and Ammunition, so much Money, and so many thousand
pieces of Ordnance were ready at hand. Where by the public Declarations of so
many specious Causes, for which it might seem even honorable to die, and the
plausible Motto's in their Colors, they inflamed the minds of the deluded
Rabble more than with the sound of the Trumpet or Drum; pretending, Having
deceived the People by wheedles,
forsooth, That they took Arms for the defense of the Kings Person, and to
remove evil Counselors from him; for maintaining the Privileges of
Parliament, and the preservation of the Reformed Religion; for asserting the
Laws and ancient Government of England, nay and for securing their Religion,
Lives, and Estates: and therefore inviting all to their assistance.

By which Artifices the Preachers being bewitched, And the Ministers.
who were desirous of a change in the Church Government, and somewhat tickled
with the hopes (which the Rebels had roundly promised) that the Livings of the
Loyal Clergy, and the fat Benefices of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, would
fall to their share in the Dividend; they sound the Trumpet to Rebellion from
the Pulpit, from whence they ought to have preached the Gospel of Peace.

The People upon this, spurred on with other hopes of a future Golden Age, and
of the temporal reign of the Messiah, comes flocking from all quarters, the men
bringing a vast quantity of Money and Plate, and the women their Wedding-Rings,
Thimbles, and Bodkins, and without any regard to their Families, by a strange
kind of a phrenzy, casting them into the public Stock or Treasury. The men
strove who should be first to list themselves in this holy War: whence in a
short time, there was an Army of about twenty thousand men got together, before
the King had levied five hundred for his defense; and they also having more
Cannon than he had Muskets in his possession.

They raise Pay.
For raising Pay for their Army, besides the profuse Contributions and
Benevolences of the People, they seize the Goods of the Nobility and Gentry,
whom they knew to be of the Kings Party; they fall also upon the Revenues of
the Bishops, Prince, Queen, and of the King himself, by way of sequestration:
so that the Kings Majesty was forced to complain, That they had not left him
enough to live on. And now they thought there was no more to be done, but to
march, and seize the person of the King, who was overcome; and in a manner
taken in a toil; which they doubted not to promise themselves to be done within
the space of a month.

Who favor the King.
But the Will of God was otherwise: for the Juggles of the Rebels had not so
blinded the understanding of the English, but that most part of the Lords and
Peers of the Upper House, and almost an equal number of the Lower, who for
Estates and Quality far exceeded the rest, went over to the Kings Party. Many
also of those who tarried at London favored the Royal Cause in secret, and in
all Counties of the Kingdom there were many Gentlemen and common people that
stood for the interest of the King.

By their assistance and his own authority, the King raises an Army, such as he
could.
By the assistance of these and the Royal Authority, which, like the Sun in an
eclipse, drew together a crowd of Spectators, and by a certain pity and
commiseration of some men who were ashamed to behold the Head of the Kingdom
depressed into such a condition, as to be forced to fly from the Imperial City
to York, from York to Nottingham, from Nottingham into Shropshire and the
borders of Wales; after he had wandered up and down above four months, long and
in vain imploring the help and assistance of his Subjects, the King at length
got together a kind of a small Army, which afterward increased to greater
Forces; the people the more readily flocking to the King, because with him they
thought the Government must stand or fall. Many of the Nobility and Gentry also
brought what Forces they could to the Kings Party, amongst whom (not to rob any
of the Honor due to them) the Loyalty and Interest of the two Marquesses of
Hertford and Newcastle was eminently conspicuous; of whom the first brought
with him a considerable Body of Dutch; and the other, almost at his own charge,
raised no inconsiderable Army in the North: the Queen also sending over Moneys
and Arms, which by pawning her Jewels she had raised; for which dutiful office
to her Husband, the Rebels accuse her of Treason.

Whilst these Clouds overcast the Sky at home, The Irish Rebellion intervenes.
a dismal Tempest thunders from abroad upon the heads of the English, which
(because it was of no small moment as to our affairs) that I may not wholly
pass by in silence, the Reader must cross the Sea with me into Ireland.

The Irish, who always bore impatiently the Yoke of the English Government, and
out of a natural aversion heightened by the emulation of different Religions,
watched for an opportunity to shake off the one, and to assert the other; I
mean, the Roman Catholic Religion, did now attempt the Enterprise, which long
before they had formed in their minds. For the whole Nation of a sudden, and,
which was strange, by a clandestine and concealed Conspiracy, fell upon the
English scattered over Ireland, who were secure, and expected no such thing,
turn them out of house and hold, and without distinction of Age or Sex, without
respect to Affinity or Relation, barbarously butcher many thousands, like so
many humane Sacrifices to their Superstition. And had not the Conspiracy been
detected at Dublin, and in other places, the more cautious running to Arms had
not withstood their fury, the English name was in a fair way of being totally
extinguished in Ireland.

The good luck was, that the very day before the intended Insurrection, the
mystery of the Plot was discovered at Dublin by an Irish Footman belonging to
Sir John Clotwaithie, who having refused to act the part that was put upon him
in the Conspiracy, opened the whole Intrigue to his Master, who presently
informed the Privy Council of it. Though many of the Conspirators fled, yet two
of the chief Incendiaries and Promoters of the Rebellion, who had also
undertaken to surprise Dublin-Castle, I mean, Macquire and Macmahon, the
Incendiaries of the Irish Rebellion, are taken and carried to London.
the Lord Macquire and Macmahon, were apprehended. Being committed to Prison,
they were afterward conveyed to London; where having long suffered the
incommodities of a Prison, (that we may at once make an end of them) they made
their escape; but being by another Irishman betrayed, in the absence of the
King, who was then inevitably engaged in a War with his Subjects of England,
they were taken, and at the Kings-bench-bar tried for High Treason. Macquire
being found guilty by a Jury, There to be punished with the utmost rigor.
had sentence pronounced against him according to the Laws of the Country: That
he should be dragged to Tyburn in a Hurdle, hanged by the neck till he be half
dead, his privy Members and Bowels burnt before his face, his Head cut off and
set upon London Bridge, and his Quarters upon four Gates of the City. This
Sentence was punctually executed in the presence of the Sheriff of London, and
fifteen thousand Spectators at least.

Macquire upon the brink of death.
Nor is it to be omitted that the Sheriff having adjured Macquire by the
dreadful Tribunal of God, before which shortly he was to appear, and the
clearing and easing of his Conscience, which was then or never to be done, that
he would ingenuously confess whom he knew to be guilty of the same Crime;
though the Rope was about his neck, and he half up the Ladder, Constantly
asserts the innocence of the K.
yet by name he acquitted King Charles from being any ways privy to it;
solemnly professing that he knew no Englishman but one, and he a Papist, that
had any hand in the matter. Nay, and being cast off the Ladder, and when after
he had tried what hanging was, he was a little reprieved, and had no small
hopes given him of a pardon; he still persisted in the same protestation.

But in the Pulpits, Clubs, and public Pamphlets, Upon whom nevertheless the
Rebels charge the Crime.
the Crime was charged upon King Charles; nor did the Rebels blush to asperse
even the sacred and innocent Majesty of the King with so heinous a guilt,
hoping that whilst they continued so boldly to vent their Calumnies and
Slanders against him, some of them at least would stick.

The Irish Nobility and Priests, Who were the Authors of it,
who were the chief Actors in this Tragedy, were encouraged to the Villainy by
the late successes of the Scots, who (to speak in the language of Sir John
Temple, a Privy-Counsellor of that Kingdom, And what opportunities they made
use of.
who wrote the History of those Troubles) having happily succeeded in their
attempts, obtained by their last Commotions considerable Privileges from the
King. To this add, that our intestine Troubles seemed to offer fair
opportunity of changes, it being very rational and easy to conjecture, that
the English being ready to fall together by the ears at home, there was no fear
that they would cross over to Ireland to defend and assist their Colonies in
that Kingdom. Their boldness was increased by the Interregnum occasioned by the
murder of Strafford, and the change of the Magistrates, of whom the severer and
best acquainted with the State of that Kingdom, were by the interest of the
Irish Lords, whilst they prosecuted Strafford in England, either turned out of
place, or accused of High Treason, men who were either ignorant of the Affairs
and State of Ireland, or who were prone to Rebellion, being put into their
places.

Being thus in a readiness, the unseasonable disbanding of an Army of eight
thousand Irish who had been raised for the Scottish expedition, did not a
little strengthen their resolution: for though the King after the pacification
of the Scots, lest they might occasion Stirs in Ireland, had permitted the
Spanish Ambassador to transport four thousand of them; yet the Irish Lords put
on by the Conspirators, got the Parliament, under pretext that the French King
might take it ill, earnestly to beseech that it might not be done. And
afterward when the King had ordered the same number to be raised for the
service of the French, without any reasons alleged, they utterly rejected it.
Very few of the Captains and Officers of that Army dishonored themselves by
joining in the Rebellion; but the private Soldiers, whose custom it is to be
insolent, and at length appear valiant when they are about to be dismissed from
the dangers of War, easily rushed into that Villainy.

By what arts they stir up the Colonies to join with them in Rebellion.
The Lords and Priests being soothed with these so many fair opportunities of
fishing in troubled waters, that they might weaken our Colonies, divide and
distract their thoughts, and in the mean time incense the Natives to slaughter
and rapine, they cast about all ways. To the English they brag, That the Queen
is in their Army, that the King was coming with an Army to their assistance;
that the Scots were agreed with him; and to make that the more credible,
amongst the slaughter of the English they spare the Scots: They give out that
they have the Kings Commission, and act by virtue of his authority; showing
indeed a counterfeit Commission to which one Plunket, with the consent of many
Lords and Priests at Farn-Abbey, had appended the Kings Seal taken from another
old Commission, as appeared by the confessions of a great many afterward; That
they defend the King's Cause against the Puritans. Amongst their own men they
divulge counterfeit Letters, whereby they pretend to be informed from England,
That there was an Act lately past whereby all the Irish were to be forced to go
to Church and assist at the Devotion of the Protestants, upon pain of
forfeiture; for the first offense, of their Chattels; for the second, of their
Lands and Inheritances; and for the third, of their Lives. They propose,
besides, to the Natives the hopes of Liberty, and of recovering their ancient
Customs: That the English Yoke is to be cast off, a King to be chosen of their
own Nation, and the Goods and Estates of the English to be divided amongst the
Natives.

By this hope of booty, and of living at their own liberty for the future, the
Irish are allured to the War; and being egged on with fury and rage, they
committed such horrid and heinous Crimes, as hardly any Age can parallel.

The King foresaw the Storm a coming whilst he was in Scotland; and therefore
that he might prevent it whilst it was a gathering, he presently dispatched Sir
James Hamilton to the Lords and others of his Majesty's Privy Council of
Ireland, with instructions, and what money he could raise of his own and from
his friends on the sudden. He earnestly desires the assistance of the
Parliament of Scotland, and acquaints the Parliament of England with it also:
But the one, under pretext that Ireland was under the dominion of England,
refuse their assistance; and the other takes but little notice of it. The
Factious tacitly rejoicing that new Troubles were arising to the King, and that
Kingly government being abolished alike in all the three Kingdoms, they would
shortly be turned into so many free Commonwealths.

The zeal of the English for the revenge and defense of their Colonies.
But the Sparks breaking out into a flame, and the report of the Irish barbarity
being in every bodies mouth, the Parliament was enraged, and all were filled
with an extraordinary zeal of revenging the blood of their Countrymen
treacherously killed, and of defending and protecting the surviving. For the
charges of a War, in a short time three hundred thousand pound English was
raised, partly by benevolent Contributions, and partly out of the price of the
Lands and Inheritances of the Rebels, which by the Parliament were sold, to be
after the Victory (that the goodness of the Cause made them not doubt of)
distributed amongst the Purchasers; Is eluded by the intestine Broils betwixt
the King and Parliament,
and many thousand English listed themselves for the service. Nevertheless,
such was the misery of this Nation, that that which is wont to procure some
short Peace at least, amongst those who are at greatest variance, served only
to inflame our Broils.

And mutual Accusations.
On the one hand, they who were altogether given to changes, buzzing I know not
what fears and jealousies into the ears of those who were but too prone to make
the worst of things, obtain in Parliament, that the War be not carried on in
the name of the King, nor that any Soldier who had showed his Loyalty to the
King, or had served in the Scottish Expedition, should be admitted into this
War. And for managing the War they also prefer factious men, and such as were
ungrateful to the King. On the other hand, the King intended to lead the Army
against the Rebels in person, urging and insisting, That he might use the right
and power of War, which the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom entrusted him with.

The King at length desiring to overcome his Competitors by courtesy and
yielding, Which at length are quieted upon the K.'s yielding his Right.
if he could not by power and strength, consents that the War be carried on in
his own and the Parliaments name, and that the Commissions should run in the
name of the King and Parliament; granting the Parliament the power of levying
and arming the Army, and of choosing the Generals and Commanders; and the King
reserving to himself no liberty of making Peace or pardoning the Rebels without
the consent of Parliament.

Yet neither so did the swellings of the Parliament abate: for not long after,
They break out again.
(the Civil War breaking out in England) the Parliament make use of an hundred
thousand pound raised for the Irish War, and two or three Regiments of men that
were to be sent over for suppressing that Rebellion, for oppressing of the King
here at home. Nay, and they make no scruple to employ the money that was
charitably collected for the relief of the poor distressed Protestants, and for
building of Churches, in paying their own Soldiers.

On the other side, the King's Soldiers seize the Ammunition sent by the
Parliament toward Chester; which, so soon as they gave it out that it was
designed for the War in Ireland, the King commanded to be restored. The
Parliament, that by putting indignities upon the King, they might raise their
own Reputation, alleging some silly slight suspicions, are not ashamed to
impute the Irish Rebellion to the King as the Author of it. But, as the truth
was, his Majesty retorts the crime and infamy of it with far better reasons,
upon the factious Members of Parliament.

Yet these things hinder not but that our Auxiliary forces b^at the Irish
Rebels, The English thrice beat the Irish.
and put them to flight in all places, kill, plunder, burn, and destroy many
thousands of the Natives, and by a great slaughter revenge the murder of their
Countrymen. But at the same time they lay all the Country waste and desolate;
And laid the Country so waste, that for want of necessaries, they suffered a
great deal of misery;
which at length was no less prejudicial to themselves, than to the Natives:
for the War increasing in England, the Soldiers wanting Corn, Ammunition,
Clothes, Pay, and indeed all things necessary, and at length being unable to
support their wants, it is hardly to be expressed what miseries and calamities
our Countrymen suffered in Ireland; And desire to be recalled.
and having long struggled with these difficulties, and with all importunity,
but in vain, begged assistance from the Parliament, The Privy Council of the
Kingdom, Commanders of the Army, and the Soldiers themselves write to the
King, earnestly begging to be disbanded, or employed in other service, where
they might have any Enemy but Hunger to fight with.

Wherefore the K. commands them to make a Truce with the Irish; and the Scots
marching into England,
The King at length, seeing the Scots were coming with assistance to the
Parliament-forces, being too weak to make head against the Rebellion, moved on
the one hand by his own necessities, and on the other by the importunate
Prayers of his Subjects, commands a Truce to be made with the Irish for a year,
that in the mean time, if it were possible, he might make Peace upon good terms.

He calls over the Soldiers for his own defense.
A Truce being made with the Irish, and Forces being left sufficient for
maintaining the Garrisons, the Soldiers return from Ireland to the assistance
of the King, whose fortune against the Parliament at home manifestly declined.
But the Scots, who inhabited the greatest part of Vlster, By whom the Truce is
broken.
supplied with Pay and Ammunition by the Parliament, refuse the Truce; as also
some English in Connaught and Vlster, who lived in good correspondence with the
Scots.

A little after, the Lord Inchiqueen who commanded the Munster-Forces, having
brought over some thousands of men to the Kings assistance, when he thought
himself not treated according to his dignity and merit, flying over secretly
into Ireland, tampers first with those of Cork, and then with all such of the
Province of Munster as were on the English side, and having drawn them over to
the Parliament, he rejects the Truce; and is presently assisted by the Scottish
Forces, and supplied with Money, Provisions, and Ammunition from the Parliament.

Ireland being now delivered from the English Soldiers, the Natives lay hold
on the opportunity of recovering the whole Kingdom under the command of Owen To
General of the Rebels, and having broken the truce which they had solemnly
made, and arming of a sudden, they had surprised and seized the Marquess of
Ormond, not dreaming of any such thing, had he not, being informed of it a
little before, by by-ways mays made his escape to Dublin. Having afterward
joined their Forces, The K's Forces are attacked both by the Irish and the
Parliamentarians.
those who were willing to keep the Truce, being instigated to the contrary by
the Nuncio who produced the Popes Bull, they all together besiege the City of
Dublin by Land, whilst at the same time the Parliament-Ships shut up the Haven.

The Marquess being overmatched by the Forces of three Nations, And being
overmatched, whatever was on the K.'s side in Ireland is delivered up to the
Parl.
acquaints the King with his condition; who sends him instructions that if he
could not defend the City, he should rather deliver it up to the Parliament,
than suffer it to fall into the hands of the Irish. Having therefore agreed
upon Articles, amongst which it was one, That he should have liberty to go to
the King, that he might give his Majesty an account of all the affairs of
Ireland; the Marquess returned into England, and found the King at
Hampton Court, environed by the Parliaments Rebel-Souldiers: where being
informed that he was to be apprehended by Order of Parliament, he secretly
withdrew into France, that he might escape their Snares.

The K. afterward being imprisoned, the Marquess of Ormond returns with new
in^tructions and authority, whereby he joins all Parties into one for
delivering the King. With whom many English, Some Irish,
Not long after, when the King was committed to Prison in the Isle of Wight, and
that the Rebels had cut off all hopes of restoring Peace and Liberty by their
Vote of no more addressing to the King, (of which more hereafter) having
received new instruction, he returned in quality of Lord Lieutenant into
Ireland, where he endeavored with all care to make the best Peace he could,
and to unite the English, Scots, and Irish for the assistance of the King.

The Lord Inchiqueen with the English under his command, joins him.

Some Irish commanded by Preston and Taaff, not forgetting their former Truce,
make no scruple to join with them; others being still in doubt what to do.

And Scots join.
The Scots forbear hostility against the Kings Party, and march against the
Rebels; but give hopes that at length they may unite with the Marquess.

But the Parliament Governor resisting,
And now Jones Governor of Dublin, and the Parliament-forces there, the very
same who with so bitter and vehement Reproaches inveighed against the Truce and
Peace made by Ormond with the Papists, as the utter ruining of their Religion,
was caught in the same embraces of the Whore of Babylon: Associates with the
Irish Rebels.
for without either conscience or shame they at length make a strict League,
and unite their Forces with Owen To the General of the Rebels, a man infamous
for the blood and slaughter of the English against the Kings Army and the
Protestants.

The discourse returns to the Troubles of England.
But now from foreign miseries, (though indeed they be not altogether foreign)
which though happening in very distant times, yet for avoiding frequent
digressions, we thought fit to present to the Reader under one view; Let us now
return to our own, which were carried on with far greater and more pitched
Battles, though with less slaughter and treachery, the fire burning but slowly,
because, to our sorrow, the fuel was the longer to last.

Many Battles with various success, The King and Parl. fight; and the Victory
inclining to the King, the Rebels lose Courage,
and in several places, were fought betwixt the Kings Forces and the
Parliament-Rebels, till at length Fortune breathing favorably upon the Kings
Banners, the Rebels began to lose courage, and many that had been Sticklers in
the Faction, to desert and fall off from their Party.

The Parliament being reduced to streights, And invite the Scots to their
assistance.
invite the Scots to their assistance; and that they might revive the expiring
and almost extinct opinion of the people which formerly they had enjoyed, and
the admiration they were had in for wonderful zeal for the Public Good and
purity of Religion, and at the same time time drain the peoples Purses of their
money, they have recourse to their often-practised tricks.

They forge new Calumnies against the King, By what Arts they confirm the
people in their errors: by calumnies, to wit, against the K. spread amongst
the Rabble.
and those of his Party; and spread abroad everywhere amongst the people, As if
the King affected an absolute tyrannical Power, and that he would forfeit the
Estates of all those who had been against him; that he would make Slaves of
their persons, and leave no place for pardon, nor the least footstep of their
ancient Liberty; nay, and that renouncing the reformed Religion, he was about
to bring in Popery, whereby all would be forced to go to Mass. And that the
silly ignorant people might not want Pretexts for their obstinacy, they
persuade the Rabble, That the Kings Soldiers being accustomed to eat men's
flesh, would feed and feast upon them; nay, and that their Dogs and Horses,
bred up to the same dishes, were already gaping for their carcasses.

Some Sacrifices being offered to public Justice;
They appoint some remarkable Sacrifices to be offered to Public Justice; for
so was that barbarous practice of pleasing the Rabble with bloody Spectacles,
and gratifying their own cruel revenge, at that time called amongst the
ignorant people: Amongst these were Sir John Hotham and his Son, Carey, and
especially (that the friendship of the Scots might be cemented with Episcopal
blood) William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury; he being condemned of
High Treason, by a partial and factious sentence of the House of Peers, (who
according to the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, cannot, without the Kings
consent, adjudge the meanest person to death;) and they by a Council of War.

Prayers, Fasts, and Thanksgivings appointed; superstitious Pictures burnt,
Crosses and Images pulled down;
They appoint days of Fasting and public Prayers, and of Thanksgiving also, for
inconsiderable Victories; publicly, and with great solemnity burn the Pictures
of our Savior, the Virgin and Saints, and so renew their Martyrdom; and with
no ordinary devotion pull down Crosses and Standards bearing the Images of
Saints, though they were not only ornamental but useful in the chief streets
of London.

Episcopacy and Service Book being abrogated,

An Assembly is called;


They also vote the abrogation of Episcopacy and Service Book, and commit it to
the care of the Assembly to frame a new Church Government, and manner of Divine
Worship, instead of them; of which, the Reader I hope will pardon me, if
contrary to my custom I discourse a little more largely. To this Assembly two
Ministers of the most zealous Enemies of the Bishops and Liturgy, are called,
and come by authority of the House of Commons; some of the Episcopal Clergy
being also invited, who having no command from the King, refuse to come, and
give place to some of the more eminent Scottish Ministers to mingle with them.

These having long hatched, at length bring forth a Confession of Faith, Which
makes a Confession of Faith,
a Catechism containing the heads of the Christian Religion, and a Directory or
Scheme of public Worship; wherein no Set-forms were prescribed, but a certain
Rule whereby, according to general heads appointed for all occasions, the
Levites of the new Law were instructed to pour out their extemporary and
conceived Prayers. The Presbyterian Government and Worship were likewise
established, to be administered by Pastors, And a new Presbyterian Government in
the Church.
Teachers, Lay Elders, and Deacons, in four Courts, to wit, the Parochial,
Classical, Provincial, and National.

The Parochial Court consisted of one or two Lay Elders at least, and one or
two Pastors or Ministers, according to the nature of the place. These had power
to rule over the Parishoners, and weekly to meet; to call before them the
Parishoners, and to take inspection into their lives and manners, admitting
those whom they thought worthy, to the Communion of the Lords Supper; reproving
and publicly censuring others, nay, and for some time debaring them from the
Sacrament, if they were guilty of any offense that might give scandal to the
Congregation; and to excommunicate those that would not submit.

The Classical Court or Presbytery, was to meet once a month or oftener, and
was made up of the Deputies of twelve Parishes at least, two out of each, the
one a Churchman, and the other a Laick; or sometimes more. To these it
belonged to take cognizance of the aforementioned matters, especially if any
difficulty or Appeal intervened; to correct the Ministers themselves, give
orders to the These Expectants were young men who stood candidates for the
Ministry, and sought to obtain Orders.
Expectants, pronounce sentence of Excommunication, and to determine Cases of
Conscience, and Controversies in Doctrine.

The Provincial Court or Assembly consisting of Deputies from the several
Classes or Presbyteries of the whole Province both of the Church and Laity, had
an authority superior to the former. Over all was the National Assembly, the
supreme Judicature in Ecclesiastical affairs, which had power to make or
rescind the Canons or Laws of the Church, inflict severer punishments, and to
determine all points concerning Manners, Church Discipline, and Government.
From the lowest to the highest of these Courts, it was lawful to appeal.

This assembly endeavored to have no Sect allowed the liberty of Worship, but
all to be extirpated. But when they could not obtain this from the Parliament,
in which were many Independents, Erastians, Anabaptists, and Atheists, the
Rabble interposeth, and very often, whilst the Presbyterians were at the helm,
disturb the religious meetings of the other Sectarians by hurling of Stones
amongst them. The liberty of a great many being, contrary to expectation,
restrained, the Parliament settle the Presbyterian government only for three
years, that in that time they might have a trial how it would fadge.

This Novelty set men's humors wonderfully a working. Many Politicians and
Lawyers being highly displeased.
The Politicians and Lawyers were highly offended that there were as many
Judicatures established as there were Parishes in England, and these almost
arbitrary, putting the Rule into the hands of unskilful men, and for the most
part incapable of government, and began to foresee at a distance I know not
what calamities, ready to spring from thence, in Families, Parishes, Counties,
nay and in the whole Kingdom also. And others also.
Most part of the people grumble to be put again to School, and to be taught
the Rudiments and Principles of their Religion, wherein they thought themselves
already very well instructed.

Those that were zealous for Episcopal government and the Service Book, bite
the bit. But none repined more than the Independants, Anabaptists, and the
other Sects, who saw their beloved liberty of Conscience in danger; for which
they had at first taken up Arms against the King, hazarded their lives in so
many battles, and suffered so much labor, cost, watchings, and danger.

Nevertheless, the Government went bravely on in London, but so and so in the
other Cities and populous Towns, and but very coldly in the Country; so that
the triennial Essay being over, and no new Act made to confirm it, it had much
ado to keep life. And thus far concerning Church Affairs, which we thought fit
to relate together, though they happened not all at the same time.

Let us now return to the other arts whereby they wheadled the Scots. Bishops
Lands are sold at easy rates.
Amongst which it was of greatest moment, no less for endearing the Scots to
them, than for raising their power and authority amongst the Natives, to sell
the Bishops Lands at very easy rates; so that Purchasers flocked in from all
quarters, who with the materials of demolished Palaces, and the Timber they cut
down, having paid for their Purchases, got large and entire Manors almost for
nothing. And (that once for all I may tell it) they lay Excise, Customs, and
such heavy and continual Taxes and Impositions upon the people, as none of all
the Kings that ever sat upon the Throne of England durst ever before that time
impose; and such as were not only sufficient to defray all public expenses,
but in some measure also the insatiable avarice and voraciousness of their
Factors and Agents; besides what they got by plundering, sequestration and
other ways. The Scots being allured by these Morsels, are tooth and nail for
the interests of the Parliament.

The Scots consent,
The Scots, the declared enemies of Episcopacy, fearing the worst, if the King
should obtain the victory over the Parliament, and being drawn in by the
aforementioned baits, enter into Articles of a Confederacy; among which, to
give a color of honesty and integrity to the rest, the chief was, That no hurt
be attempted against his Majesty's person, nor prejudice done to the Rights or
Heirs of the Crown: an Oath being likewise taken by the Members of both Houses,
Having entered into Covenant.
and all the Inhabitants of both Kingdoms being forced to do the same. This
they call the Solemn League and Covenant; and in it promise, That according to
their Places and Callings, they shall endeavor the preservation of the
reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and Government: The reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches: and shall endeavor
to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction
and uniformity in Religion, etc. That they shall also endeavor the extirpation
of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc. That they
shall mutually endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; and to preserve and defend the
Kings Majesty's person and authority in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms; That the World may bear witness
with their Consciences of their Loyalty, that they have no thoughts or
intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness: That they shall
endeavor to discover all Incendiaries and Malignants (branding with those
aspersions all that favored the Kings Party) that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment: That they shall endeavor that
the Kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to Posterity; shall
assist and defend all those that enter into that League and Covenant, and shall
zealously and constantly all the days of their lives continue therein.

No inconsiderable Authors of entering into this Covenant, were the
Independents, Anabaptists, Wherein the Independents are Ringleaders.
and Republicans, and the chief and most severe in forcing it upon others who
were unwilling to take the same; though many of themselves purposely refrained
from swearing it, lest upon that account they should oblige themselves to the
defense of the Kings person.

It is also to be observed, that the clause of defending the Kings Majesty's
person and authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdoms, was by their artifices foisted in contrary to the
sense and tenor of the Covenant, under color, forsooth, that the safety of
his Majesty's person was sufficiently secured by other Oaths; that the
repetition of the same promise would but harden the Kings mind against the
Parliament, and make the People scrupulous in obeying the same: But in reality,
as appeared afterward, that all obstacles being as much as might be removed,
they might make way for the murder of the King. Who take the Covenant with an
honest design, are called Presbyterians.
These things being contrived and carried on betwixt the factious Scots and
English, those who took that Covenant with an honest purpose, as many good men
did, being won over by fear, delusion, or false hope, called themselves
Presbyterians; other Factious of less note, as Independents, Anabaptists, and
other Fanatics, not disdaining to list themselves in the same Cause.

These cruelly persecute all Dissenters who will not engage in that holy
Covenant, They cruelly persecute Dissenters.
though they had acted nothing before against the Parliamentary Faction, though
they had not refused to pay any Taxes and Impositions, nay, though they had
freely contributed for the pay of the Parliament-forces. The Parsons,
especially who enjoyed fat Benefices, are sequestrated, and deprived of their
Houses, Goods, and Livings, put into Prisons and Dungeons for many years
together, nay, and put on board of Ships upon the Thames, in the heat of
Summer, in order to transportation, without being either accused or heard;
where they suffered all the incommodities of hunger, watching, and nastiness.

The fruit of the Covenant.
By the Religion of this Covenant, Children were taught to persecute, inform
against, and rob their Parents, Fathers their Children, Servants their Masters,
Wives their Husbands; so that the mutual Offices to which men are bound in
society, were denied to those that differed from them in opinion.

For these reasons many, contrary to the Dictates of Conscience, run into the
noose of the Covenant, and at length, whether that they thought themselves
obnoxious to the Kings Laws, or really bound in conscience by their Oath, they
seriously espoused the Party of the Parliament.

Learned men dispute against it.
Against this, many learned and pious men took up the Cudgels, and in several
Treatises (amongst which was the Judgment of the University of Oxford, an
unanswerable piece in Latin) confuted it as contrary to the Laws both of God
and man; the Covenanters in the mean time making no answer, but with force and
the sharper Arguments of the Sword.

The Scots again come into England.
The Scots who faithfully promised the King to give him no trouble in his
affairs in England, having by those previous artifices cleared their way into
that Kingdom, with twenty thousand men come to the assistance of the
Parliament. But first, for forms sake, they send Commissioners to the King to
persuade him, being inclinable enough of himself, to make peace with the
Parliament, and to offer themselves as Mediators of the Controversy: but the
King having rejected them as unjust and partial Judges, and commanded them to
mind their own affairs at home; they call a Parliament against all Law, in the
Kings name, and then declare War.

The King foreseeing the Storm that was like to fall upon himself and Party,
The King looks to himself.
had provided against it as well as possibly he could. The Lords and Members of
the House of Commons, who, though they were excluded the Houses, thought it
their duty still to stand by the Public, came over to the Kings side; and the
former to the number of forty, with the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and the
latter above two hundred, The Parliament at Oxford.
transfer the Parliament to Oxford; where being called to Council before they
were admitted to take Arms by the King, they held a Session of Parliament by
the Kings authority, nothing being wanting to the power and dignity of a
Parliament, but Walls and the place appointed by the Kings Writ.

To these the King gave strictly in charge, that they would do what lay in
their power to avert the Storm, or at least consult how they might be able to
resist it. This Parliament wrote to the Scots that they would not in an hostile
manner invade the King and Kingdom of England, nor violate the Pacification
formerly made: They declare it Treason to take up Arms against the King, or
without his consent to call a foreign Nation into the Kingdom; and that
therefore the Rump-Parliament sitting at Westminster, were upon both accounts
guilty of High Treason. They also pass an Act for raising as much money as
could reasonably be expected from the exhausted Counties and Towns which still
continued in obedience to the King, for defraying the charges of a double War
now approaching.

The K. writes to the Scots.
The King also by Letters earnestly dehorted the Scots from that unlawful
attempt, and prohibits them by Proclamation, That being his Subjects, and
obliged by so many bonds, they would not come to the assistance of Rebels. But
this, being signed by the hands of nineteen Lords, the prevailing Rebels of
Scotland, with matchless insolence in Subjects, cause it publicly to be burnt
by the common Hangman.

Sends the Marquess of Hamilton to draw them back into Scotland.
The Marquess of Hamilton is commanded to keep the Scots at home, that they
might not meddle in the affairs of another Kingdom; who being discovered to
have unfaithfully discharged that Office, having under pretext of danger fled
out of Scotland to the King, was afterward committed to Prison. The Marquess of
Montross being made General and Commissioner of Scotland, Being deluded by him,
he sends the Marquess of Montross.
is dispatched thither, that by giving them a diversion at home, they might be
kept from invading England. This Commission was valiantly discharged by the
Marquess, having with a handful of men, and those raw and undisciplined, put
whole Armies to flight, and everywhere wasted the Country.

The Scots nevertheless pursue the War against the K. and prevail.
However, the Scots pursuing their point, left not England, before by the help
of Fairfax they had routed no small part of the Kings Army, which they had long
diverted from quelling the Parliamentarians elsewhere; taken Newcastle, and
other strong places, and handed on the Victory into the more Southern parts.
Henceforward the Kings affairs do daily decline, and were at length totally
ruined, Victory everywhere smiling upon the Rebels.

The Republican Rebels having obtained many Victories, began to vent their
hatred and indignation against the Lords, and especially after the last
Newberry-Fight, they grew sick of the Earl of Manchester. For he in a Council
of War giving his opinion, and exhorting them to Peace, which he judged more
expedient to the State, seemed not so thorough-paced and fierce upon the War as
they could have desired: and being therefore, in a long Speech, accused by
Cromwell in the Lower House, he defends himself in the Upper, retorting the
accusation: So that both Houses thought it more convenient to compose the
difference betwixt them, than to enter into the merits of the Cause.

The Kings Forces being at length scattered and broken by the Scots on the one
hand, The K.'s Party goes to wrack.
and the Parliament-Rebels on the other, Pay and Provisions being wanting, and
Factions arising betwixt the Commanders of the Army and the Lords (that all
things might conspire to draw down Judgments upon us) His Majesty had in his
mind, first, His Majesty having in vain essayed the English,
to come to London and trust himself in the hands of the Parliament; next, to
cast himself into the arms of the English Army: but being rejected by both, and
his affairs in a very doubtful condition, Casts himself into the hands of the
Scots.
he ventured to betake himself to the Scots, the French Ambassador, who then
was in the Scottish Army, and some Scottish Commanders having obtained from
them promises of honor, safety, and freedom for his Majesty's person.

This revived former Grudges betwixt the English and Scottish Rebels, Former
grudges are revived betwixt the English and Scottish Rebels.
which had almost broken out into a War.

It was likewise given out, that the Earl of Essex, who from a General was now
become a private person, would join with the Lords and Commons that conspired
for their ruin, in new Articles and Resolutions with the Scots; but his sudden
death, occasioned by lying on the ground when he was all in a sweat after
hunting, dissipated all those rumors. Nevertheless, the Rebels thought fit, at
public cost, to humor him with magnificent Funerals, as being more for their
interest to show gratitude to a dead friend, than to have him perhaps a living
enemy.

Provocations given to the Scots.
Upon this they began to deny the Scots their Pay, put a necessity upon them of
exacting Money and free Quarters from the Counties where they lay, expose them
to hatred, extenuate their merits, undervalue the courage of the Nation, call
them mercenary Soldiers of fortune, whilst they in the mean time paid them
only with Reproaches; threaten to drive them out of the Kingdom by force of
Arms, publicly provoke them, and at length march Northward against their
Brethren. The Presbyterians holding their peace.
Nor durst the English Presbyterians, who favored the Scots, say much to the
contrary, lest they should seem more concerned for the insolence of a foreign
Nation, than the honor of their Countrymen.

Debates betwixt the Scots and Parliament of England.
At length after long Debates, the Scots pretending that it was contrary to the
Laws of Nations and Hospitality to deliver up the King, who of his own accord
put himself under their protection, into the hands of the Parliamentarians; our
Republican Rebels on the other hand, urging in the name of the Parliament, That
the Scots serving and receiving pay in England, ought not to have received the
King into their Army, and much less keep him there against the will of the
Parliament; but after some formal previous Treaties, that might serve to
enhaunce the price, The Scots having got money deliver the K. up to the Parl.
upon pretext that he would not take the Covenant.
it was resolved that the King should be delivered up to the
Parliamentarian-Rebels.

And that they might have a specious color for so horrid an action, They urge
the King to take the Covenant, pretending that without that they could not
lawfully take him with them into Scotland. The King promises to take that Oath,
provided he were satisfied in some scruples of Conscience, concerning
Church Government: which Province was committed to the Minister Heuderson the
then Oracle of the Kirk, who weakly and unsuccessfully attempted it: for in
their disputes the King, in the judgment of all, had the better on it; but money
prevailed. The Scots having received an hundred thousand pounds English in
ready money, and the promise of an hundred thousand more to be paid within a
year, draw out of England, leaving the King to the mercy of the Parliament; but
with this condition, That no injury should be offered to his Majesty's person,
and that he might be received in one of his houses in or about London with
honor, safety, and freedom, that so he might be prevailed with by Arguments
from both Nations to confirm and approve their Propositions.

The King being received at Newcastle by the Parliament-Commissioners, The K.
being received by the Parliament-Commissioners, is conducted to Holmely- house.
four Lords and eight Commoners, was with a guard of Soldiers conducted to
Holmeby house in Northamptonshire, where he suffered a splendid, indeed, but
close imprisonment; all who had either actually been, or suspected to be of his
Party, being removed from him, nay, and his domestic Chaplains also, whose
assistance he had often desired of the Parliament.

The Conquerours now in striving for the Booty and Government, The Rebels
disagree amongst themselves.

An account, by way of digression, of the beginnings, progress, sects and
opinions of the Factious.


did no longer dissemble their opinions, but divide themselves into various
Sects and Names; which hitherto we called by the common name of Factious or
Rebels, but shall now divide them into their several Classes and Forms, as
likewise showing by what cunning and degrees they who got into power, advanced
to the Supremacy. Which that we may the more clearly do, it will not be amiss
to look into some past Ages.

It is not to be denied but that the seeds of Faction were sowed in England
from the very beginning of the Reformation. The seeds of them sown in the very
reformation;
Nor are the Roman Catholics to be proud of this, since they have given the
examples to others, by subjecting the Crowns and Scepters of Kings, to the
Mitre of the Pope and Keys of St. Peter, and are no less dangerous to Kings,
whom they have pulled from their Thrones, and exposed to the Daggers of
Assassinates.

Concerning Church Government, the Liturgy and Ceremonies, which were
established by Kings and Parliaments.
From that time some, but in no great number, are for shaking off Rome in every
thing, and not leaving the least monument of the ancient Church Government or
Liturgy.

But the greater number, and those the wiser, thinking it enough to retrench
what was superfluous and superstitious, are for retaining Episcopal government
and a public reformed Liturgy: the one, because it suited well with
Monarchical government and civil interest of the State; and the other, because
it seemed pious and adapted to the public Worship of God.

Both these, as being consonant to primitive Constitutions, Kings and
Parliaments, wisely to prevent the inconveniences that happen from skipping
from one extreme to another, thought fit to establish by Laws, and to inflict
severe Penalties upon Dissenters.

Hence arose Disputes and Controversies; scandalous Libels from the
Anti-Episcoparians; suspensions, depravations, etc. from the Bishops.
This at first gave ground to heart-burnings, afterward to reasonings about the
matter, and the licentious humor of disputing prevailing to more bitter
Controversies; so that at length (as it usually happens amongst Brethren who
differ in points of Religion) they fell to Contentions and invective
Disputations, the common enemy egging them on on both sides.

And thus the Quarrel being managed with mutual hatred and animosity, the
Anti-Episcopal Party, or the Jesuits in their name, defame the established
Church with Reproaches and scandalous Libels; which forced from the Bishops and
Ecclesiastical Courts, Suspensions, Deprivations, Imprisonments, and
Banishments.

But that severity, Whereby the Bishops got hatred, and the Anti-Episcoparians
pity; which ended in a Conspiracy against the Hierarchy;
though executed according to the prescript of Law, drew hatred upon the
Prelates, and made the Anti-Episcoparians to be pitied, and the rather that
they seemed to suffer for Conscience Sake, and the purity of Gospel Worship;
being otherwise, in appearance, men of strict lives and conversations, zealous
Preachers, fervent in Prayer, ready to do pious Offices, and in a word, in all
things else very good men. And this made many Towns, Noblemen and Gentlemen
take them into protection, make very much of them, and at length joins with
them in opinion, and conspire together against the Hierarchy or
Church Government.

Who despairing to procure the abolition of it from the Kings, Wherein all the
Sects and Factions agree, raising scruples betwixt the K. and Parl. that
seeming to stand up for the Parl. they might be esteemed popular men, and be
chosen to serve in Parl. when occasion offered.
they hope to compass it by Parliament, and therefore they endeavor to lessen
the Royal Authority by magnifying a Parliamentary power; wherein being assisted
by all the other Sects of Fanatics, the seditious and turbulent off-scourings
of Christians and Subjects, they begin to make a distinction betwixt, and
divide the Royal Prerogative from the Liberty of the People, two things that
are very consistent together; that laying hold on that pretext, they might set
up for publick-spirited men, and be thought the Patriots of the Nation.

Having by this means, at length, raised their Authority amongst the common
People, so as to be chosen Members of Parliament, they set all their Engines at
work for accomplishing their intended Project; there is nothing in their mouths
but the Rights of the People, Privileges of Parliament, and the public
Liberty; they lay open to the quick the faults of the Magistrates and
Courtiers; in scandalous Pamphlets they inveigh against Episcopacy and the
established government of the Church; censure the Manners and Pluralities of
Churchmen; they expose the administration of public government; and make it
their care and study, Wherein they censure the public administration of the
Government.
in all things, to weaken the Kings Power, and lessen his Reputation.

To these their cunning contrivances a commodious occasion happened: Whilst in
the Reign of King James, They take occasion from a War to make division
betwixt the K. and Parl.
Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, the Kings Son-in-law, having been
engaged in the German War, was, with his whole Family, by the Imperial Forces
driven out of his Territories. To defend the Cause of the Protestant Religion,
which seemed to be in danger, and to restore this banished Prince so nearly
allied to the King, were made specious pretexts for their following ill
designs. And by these pretenses they endeavor but in vain to engage that wise
King in a War, until Prince Charles seconding their Addresses, and the Emperor
refusing to agree to reasonable terms of Peace, he was rouzed up to Arms.

The K. being engaged in a War, and frustrated of assistance from the Parl. is
necessitated without a Parl. to raise money.
War being thereupon proclaimed, whilst preparations were making, and all Europe
expected great matters from England, the Parliament, upon I know not what
slight Grievances, Jealousies, and Suspicions, leave the King in the lurch; so
that unless King Charles, upon the death of his Father, would make himself
ridiculous to the World, he was necessitated to raise money by his own
authority, laying on unusual Taxes and Impositions, by virtue not only of old
dormant Laws, but also of new interpretations; without calling a Parliament,
which is customary on more urgent occasions.

This incensed the people, occasioned fears and combinations against the K.
This incensed the People, and afforded a plentiful crop of Murmurs and
Complaints, and inclined good and honest Subjects, who were far from any
thoughts of Innovations; but alarmed with the fears of Arbitrary Government,
and the loss of the Liberty of the Subject, (as they imagined) to plot and
combine with the Factious Malcontents, for curbing the power of the King.

All these Sects at first, though differing in opinions and designs, were
called by the name of Puritans.

During the rage of the Civil War, after that the Scots came to the assistance
of the Parliament, and many had been noosed into the Solemn League and
Covenant, When the Presbyterians first challenged publicly that name.
the Presbyterians were powerful both in wealth and number, raise their heads
above the rest: Nor can they be excused from Rebellion, who having abolished
the Church Government and Liturgy, introduced the Presbytery and Directory in
place thereof, aiming at the change of Civil Government also from Monarchy to
an Aristocracy, Aristocraticks.
though they pretended to retain the name and person of a King; and making use
of the assistance of the other Sects who fought openly under their Banners,
though they cunningly concealed their designs. Democraticks.


Next came into play the better sort of Independents, and some of the Tribe of
Anabaptists, who wished for no settled National Church Government, and who liked
a Democracy best; yet still retaining the name and person of a King. But the
chief was a Faction most properly so called, consisting of the rigidest sort of
Presbyterians, and a medly of many other Fanatics, who having destroyed the
Monarchy and the Royal Family root and branch, were, some of them, for an
Oligarchy, others for Anarchy, Oligarchicks^
and most for a Democracy; Christonaticks or Fifth-monarchy-men.
I may also add a Christocraty, that Fifth-monarchy which not a few longed
for, wherein worldly Powers, Magistrates, and all profane Authority being
brought down and trodden under foot, Christ with his Saints might exercise
dominion over the wicked and ungodly of the Earth.

Who deserve most the name of Rebels and Traitors.
These are they who are in a more particular sense to be called Rebels and
Traitors to the Government; who, though they all looked different ways, and
served in the Presbyterian Armies for some time, yet they were the firebrarnds
that kindled civil Dissensions among them, till getting the power in their
hands (into which by degrees they had screwed themselves) they had the boldness
to fall off from the rest, set up for themselves in their own names, and
publicly to magnify their own Achievements.

The original and artifices,
At first, whilst the clouds of Troubles were but a gathering, these factious
Rebels were hardly distinguished by any name, but skulk'd under the cloak of
good Patriots and the godly Party. But in the mean time they carefully watched
all occasions of blowing up the fire of a Civil War; Whereby they put all into
confusion,
and so soon as the War flamed out, and the State was all in disorder, lest
differences might be taken up, they used all arts to make the King jealous of
his Parliament, and the Parliament again of the King, every where throwing in
Bones of Contention, and, as it is the custom of all Demagogues, distracted the
thoughts of the giddy and lightheaded Multitude with jealousies and fears.

Raise up War.
By this their indefatigable industry in calumniating the King, and exposing of
him in all things to the hatred of the people, they first alienate the minds of
the Multitude from their Prince, and then from Peace. Oppose all Union and
Peace.
When they observed any Proposals made by the Parliament to the King, or by the
King to the Parliament, which in probability might heal the wounds of
Contention and War, and restore a solid Peace they slily perplex and disturb
the Negotiation; when they prosper they swell in their demands, lest what they
had already got by force of Arms, By what Arts:
they might seem to acquire precariously and by concession; but if fortune
frowned upon them, then were they for rouzing despondent minds, That in that
condition they would not think of making Peace, when in their low fortune they
must of necessity submit to harder Conditions; nor that they would so far abase
the honor of Parliament, as to seem to do any thing through fear or force.

Nay, and by false Reports, counterfeit Letters, and suborned Witnesses, they
pretend to discover strange Plots and monstrous Dangers disguised under the
specious mask of Friendship. They adjure others by the bowels of love and pity
to the Commonwealth, by their affection to the public and the Cause of Christ;
and in long Speeches and Arguments plead, That in carrying on the War they
should rather expect to know the will and pleasure of God (so they thought fit
to speak) in a matter of so great consequence, than to make Peace with the King
upon unsure Conditions prejudicial to the Public.

The easy and credulous who are apt to suspect any thing, and those also who
were conscious of their own guilt, being entangled by these Artifices, they
propose so hard Conditions to the King, that he could not with a safe
conscience, honor, and the safety of his Friends, consent to them; whilst they
slighted and rejected his Majesty's Letters and most just Proposals almost
twenty times sent to them.

In the mean time these good men, In the mean time they make their own
advantage of the War.
whilst they boast of their extraordinary zeal for the public Liberty and the
pure reformed Religion, making use of the War for their own private advantages,
step into the greatest and most profitable places of the State. And then having
got deeper rooting, Their growth.
by degrees they win upon others, and draw them into the Conspiracy, making
great progresses both in the Parliament and Country; in this, stirring up the
Mobile to prefer Petitions, or rather putting the peoples names to Petitions
framed by two or three of their own Faction; and in the other, by cunning and
knavery accommodating the Authority of Parliament to their own arts and devices.

Indefatigable industry in the Parliament.
By this means it was no difficult matter, either at midnight or early in the
morning, when the other Members that differed them appeared not, or were absent
about their own private affairs, to snatch an opportunity of carrying things by
vote, and to lay hold on occasion by the forelock; so that the less, but more
vigilant part, by degrees circumvented the greater, but less sedulous.

If any thing were moved in Parliament that they would not have pass, or which
at a distance they foresaw might be hurtful to their practices, they vigorously
opposed it, or by shams, evasions, scruples started in the heat of debate, and
the like arts, got it put off till another time. If the greater number of
Voices were against them, they brought in some other Bill over head and
shoulders, that might invalidate the former, and elude the intention thereof.
If they contrived any thing that might give suspicion to their Adversaries, or
that they despaired to obtain in a full House, they send the Presbyterians of
an Errand into the Country, either about real and urgent business, or feigned
necessities: In the unavoidable absence, or supine neglect of whom, they got
any thing voted and past with a nemine contradicente.

And in Cabals.
Nor did their private Clubs and Cabals a little promote their designs; where
having laid their heads together, they took their best measures before hand,
how they should behave themselves in public, and what Province every one was
to undertake.

By these and suchlike arts, Having got into power, they take the title of
Independents.
that branch of the Rebels being advanced to no small power, and separated (as
we said before) from the Presbyterians, under the name of Independents, who
would have no Head, make head against them. This Title did well quadrate to all
the other Sects in general, and was used by them, because depending on the
government of no National Church, nor Civil Power, they ordered all things
relating to Doctrine and Church Discipline in their private Congregations. Not
that most part of them had any concern for Religion, but that that specious
Profession giving a comprehensive latitude to all Sects, Anabaptists, Quakers,
Millenaries, and all other Fanatics, they might swell the number and power of
their Faction; whom others, in derision, called the Holy Brethren, a name they
themselves affected.

Nevertheless, that they might enlarge their Party, They enlarge their Party by
complying with the humors of all men.
and by a hypocritical humanity and readiness to condescend hook in the good
will of many, they sollicitously strike in with men of all Persuasions, and by
allurements suitable to their tempers, feel their Pulses: To the godly they
promise Reformation of Divine Worship; sweeten the Preachers with the hopes of
the Revenues of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, and of establishing
Presbytery by Law, allowing still liberty to tender Consciences; do really
grant indemnity to Heretics and Schismatics; draw in the Ambitious by honor
and titles; feeding the Covetous with money under the notion of Pensions or
Rewards for good services: they threaten the Obnoxious; protect Malefactors;
and in a word, They prosecute their opposers.
no man resolutely opposed them, but was by Emissaries and Spies, whom they had
in all places, Letters intercepted, misinterpreted words and actions, brought
into suspicion and danger. Whoever they admitted into their friendship and
service, though the most infamous and flagitious wretch living, Protect all
sorts of men.
yet in all things they protected him; and amongst others, the Speaker of the
House of Commons, who being a man for their turn, when he was accused of
Bribery, they brought him off, gave him money and gained him to their Party, as
one that would be no less serviceable to them for all that, and the more
faithful to their Party, as he was the more obnoxious and guilty.

Try to bring over the E. of Essex and other Nobles to their Party.
They tamper also with the Earl of Essex, who being dejected by his defeat in
Cornwall, they thought might be grown more tractable; and therefore they put it
to him, if he would for the future be for a downright Commonwealth. Upon which
condition they promise, To put him at the head of a new Army, to be paid
monthly, and supplied with Ammunition and all necessary Provisions. But he
refusing, it was said, that the same Conditions were privately offered to other
Noblemen; not that they had any respect for the Lords, whom shortly they
intended to turn out and to level with the Commoners, but that they might
poison them with their own venom, and rise to greater authority by drawing more
over to their side. But in vain.
But they being of a contrary mind, and more inclinable to the Kings Party, no
sooner rejected the offers, but the Rebels cast their eyes upon another.

Under pretext of the Self-denying Ordinance, they overreach the
Presbyterians, deprive them of all Places Civil and Military;
By a new and specious Ordinance, whereby they said they would reform the
Parliament, and restore it to its integrity, to which they gave the title of
the Self-denying Ordinance; they clipped the Presbyterians wings, and confirmed
their own strength. For by this Ordinance it was provided, that none of either
House, after a limited day, should bear any Office Military or Civil; whereby
it was brought about that many of the emulous Faction were obliged to resign
the places they held.

This gives them a fair opportunity of altering the whole Civil State, and new
modelling the Army, Which they and their Adherents invade.
as they called it; to the administration of which, the Candidates of that
Faction are for the most part preferred: nor could some Republican Lords long
refrain from the ambition of the rest, hunting after all opportunities of
Preferment, and turning the Self-denying Ordinance into an Act of pure
Self-love.

Essex, who suited not so well with their temper, New Commanders of the Army,
Fairfax.
being laid aside, they give the command of the Army to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
only Son to Fardinand Lord Fairfax, a valiant man indeed, and of a good
natural disposition, but easy and forward to undertake and execute any thing
that he was put upon, as a sure Tool to work the effect which was designed by
the hand that managed it; wherefore he was the more readily chosen by both
Parties. To him they join Cromwell with the Title of Lieutenant General, but
with intention of being his Governor; Cromwell.
by whom some Officers at first desired only to be commanded for a time,
though afterward, contrary to the intent of the Self-denying Ordinance, they
were established and commissionated by authority of Parliament. This last
having wholly run out his Estate, which was not very great, resolved to trade
in Religion for repairing his broken Fortune, and for that end became the
Ringleader and Stickler for the Schismatics: and by means of these he was
chosen a Member of Parliament. Would you see him painted to the life in his
natural colors, and such as his own Party have drawn him in, in their public
Writings? He was a great Master in Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, who lifting up
his eyes to Heaven, and laying his hand upon his breast, would invoke the Name
of God, weep, pray, and bewail his sins, till he stabbed him he spoke to, under
the fifth rib. I mention not his Ambition, Avarice, and Pride, which the
Republicans, who were before his Brethren and Companions, afterward openly
charged him with.

Colonels, Captains, etc. Schismatics.
The Colonels, Captains, and inferior Officers, are for the most part chosen
from among the Schismatics, or those that were no great enemies unto them. In
the mean while Cromwell's Son-in-law, and his other Relations and Friends, have
the chief Commands in the Army bestowed upon them.

Their industry.
These, having got so fair an opportunity, did not trifle away their time, but
were busy in all places, running up and down, exhorting and sometimes
preaching to the Soldiers, that they might gain their affection; by whose
favorable assistance they make way for themselves to be elected into the
vacant places in the House of Commons. For when the Freeholders and Inhabitants
of Corporations were about by a free election to choose new Burgesses in place
of the dead or excluded Members, with Soldiers in Arms they were forced
through fear to choose the Officers of the Army, or such at least as they
approved of. To get men of their Party into the Parl.
So that in a short time many of these being admitted into the
Parliament House, and the Self-denying Ordinance being laid aside, all Offices
and Affairs, both Civil and Military, were managed by the self-same persons.

And celebrating their mighty deeds.
And that popular applause and fame might not be wanting to celebrate their
excellent undertakings, hackney Presses and mercenary Scriblers are set a work
to publish all their actions with wonderful Encomiums and Elegies, which in
weekly Mercuries and Penny Diaries, are exposed to the perusal of the
News-greedy people, and every line swollen with the praises of Cromwell.

So soon as they perceived the Royal interest almost reduced to a pinch, They
more openly attack the Presbyterians,
and the Parliament-Rebels in a manner secure of victory, they bend their
designs against the Presbyterians, their rival Faction; which, though
predominant in number of Voices, yet began to totter and shake.

They endeavor to lessen their Reputation, By publishing defamatory VVritings
against them,
and by degrees to weaken their Force; publish Libels to disgrace and ridicule
the Church Discipline, enveighing against the right of Tithes, and the avarice,
pride, and severity of the Preachers.

Nay, And setting them upon duties that were ungrateful to the people;
and that they might heap more hatred upon their heads, they charge them, who
of their own accords too officiously hastened to bring all into confusion and
disorder, with the more rigid parts of Reformation that were most ungrateful to
the people; such, as to press their Covenant with rigor upon those that
refused to take it, exact Fines, squeeze money from the people, and (that they
might entail infamy upon them to Posterity) under color of visiting Colleges,
to banish the most learned men out of the Universities. Mingling themselves in
their Cabals,
Upon pretext of friendship they steal into all the Presbyterian Cabals, that
by raising scruples and delays, their Consultations might turn to Smoke, and
themselves be exposed to public Derision.

Having pretty well succeeded in this, Turning them out of governments.

Disbanding the Forces that befriended them, dismissing the Scots, and drawing
over the Ringleaders to their Party.


they resolve to go thorough-stitch with it, by turning out of the government
of Garrison-towns and Forts all those who declared for Presbytery. They
likewise cause all the Forces that were almost in every County, though but in
small numbers, to be disbanded, except the Army commanded by Fairfax. They send
the Scots home out of England: by bribes or fear they draw over the leading-men
amongst the Presbyterians, that they would either openly own their Cause; or
secretly under the name and badge of Presbyterians, diving into their secrets,
usefully and securely serve the ends of the Republicans; amongst whom the two
chief were, Philip Skippon and Stephen Marshal.
Philip Skippon, and Stephen Marshal, the first Major General of the Army; and
the other a Minister, and the Oracle of the Presbyterians: both cunning Knaves,
who under pretext of moderating and reconciling differences, minded their own
advantages, fooled the Presbyterians, and not a little promoted the affairs of
the Independents.

The series of the History is again continued.

The Presbyterians still prevailing in the Parl. they resolve to lessen and
divide the Army.


The Presbyterians having made sure of Victory, and, which is more, of the King,
and being as yet more numerous in both Houses, are now in greater fear from
their own Servants the Army in pay, than heretofore from the enemy; and being
sollicitous how to rid themselves from that Yoke, after much debate, they
appoint, That for easing the Country of charges, twelve thousand of them should
be sent over into Ireland, the rest to be disbanded, except six thousand Horse,
two thousand Dragoons, and six thousand Foot.

These to be carried over by Skippon into Ireland, and those under the command
of Fairfax to be divided into the several Counties of the Kingdom, with intent,
as they said, They might be in a readiness to stifle all Tumults in the bud,
and that they themselves being in a body together, might not attempt any
Innovations.

The Soldiers mutiny, the Officers secretly applauding them, though vexed in
show, who (the seditious succeeding to their mind) join with them.
Many Officers and all the private Soldiers that were Sectarians, smelling a
far off that by that trick they would be wormed out of the power which they had
got, and the Military authority fall wholly into the hands of the
Presbyterians, put the rest of the Soldiers in fear that they were to be
disbanded without their Pay, or all transported into Ireland, there to be
consumed with labor, sickness, hunger, and nakedness.

Hence the Soldiers began to mutiny, object their little Reasons to the
contrary, and at length to break out into Sedition. The Officers in the mean
time pretended in show to be angry at these things, to repress, and by all
means resist the mutinous common Soldiers; but secretly they encourage them in
the business, and industriously foment their fury. And the Sedition succeeding
according to their wishes, they lay aside the Mask, withdraw from London to
head the Mutineers in the Camp, and all together enter into a Confederacy
against the Parliament; amongst whom Cromwell was the chief, Cromwell among the
first.
who lately, calling God to witness, had professed, That he was certain the
Soldiers would at the first word of command throw down their Arms at the
Parliaments feet; and had solemnly sworn, That he rather wished himself and
whole Family burnt, than that the Army should break out into Sedition. They who
were true to the Parl. being disbanded.
And so they turn out of place about an hundred Captains and Officers, who
chose rather to be true to the Parliament, than to enter into that Confederacy.

The private Soldiers had opportunity to begin this attempt by means of the
Adjutators. These, This they attempt by means of the Adjutators.
by connivance of the Officers, were chosen two out of every Regiment of Horse
and Foot, and had power from their Fellow Soldiers to keep Councils, judge
what was fit to be done for the common good, and by Spies dispersed through all
quarters and Garrisons inform the rest.

These Adjutators at length usurp the authority of Colonels, not thinking it
enough to have meetings amongst themselves, but in Councils of War challenge
place amongst the principal Officers; nor barely concerning themselves in the
interest of the private Soldiers, they meddle in the ordering and government
of the whole Army; and not only so, but bestir themselves also in the affairs
of the whole People, as well of England as Ireland, and in reforming the
government of both; the chief Officers, till the Parliament was by their mutual
Conspiracy ruined, scarcely mustering against it.

They design a Commonwealth.
These men have nothing in their mouths but the Liberty and Power of the People,
and professedly labor to erect a Democracy, giving being, birth, and name to a
popular Commonwealth, another sort of Republic.

They carry away the King out of the Parliaments custody; sooth him with fair
promises and kind Offices.
The Soldiers grown thus insolent and bold, stand not in awe to seize and carry
away the King out of the Parliaments custody, who upon the treacherous
discovery of a certain Earl, they understood was by the Captain of the Guard,
with full authority, to be brought to London; and having done so, they
endeavor to please him with officious and flattering promises of greater
liberty and freedom, and more dutiful usage; pretending to lament his
condition, as being by the severity of the Parliament, in a manner, buried
alive within his own Palace, as in a Prison, deprived of the company of his
Friends and Servants; Professing (which to them was more than an Oath) that
they would never lay down their Arms until they had put the Scepter into his
hands, and procured better Conditions for his Friends.

They allow him the assistance of his Chaplains, the exercise of his Religion,
and a free correspondence with the Queen, by Messengers and Letters, without
any examination. His Royal Children were likewise suffered to visit him, that
so far at least he might seem to be at home, and to enjoy the dearest part of
his Kingdom. In so much, that the Camp seemed to be transformed into the Court,
whilst his Majesty's domestic Servants return with joy to their Master, and
Courtiers increase daily in number.

And that they may seem to be serious in treating with the King about the
settling of affairs, they frame Propositions, whereby they gave it out, That
things were contrived to the best for the interest of his Majesty, of
themselves, and of the Public; They frame Propositions whereby they would
provide for the interest of the King, of themselves, and of the Public; and
soften them for the Kings sake.
to which if the King would condescend, they engage on their parts immediately
to restore him to the height of Royal Majesty. When afterward the King liked
them not as they were proposed by their Commissioners, they soften them, and
made as if they had almost accommodated them to the intentions of the King;
nay, one or two of his Majesty's Servants, whenever they had a mind to it,
were permitted to be present in their Councils of War.

In the mean time they publish Declarations and Remonstrances to the dishonor
of the Parliament; By Declarations they envy against the Parliament. Accuse
several Members of Treason.
accuse them of Covetousness, Selfishness, Ambition, Injustice, Cruelty, and
Tyranny; demand their Arrears; accuse eleven able Commoners, and as many Peers
of the contrary Faction, of High Treason, and having brought frivolous Articles
against them, they urge, that being excluded the House, they may be brought to
a Trial. They desire, nay command, Command the Parl. to be dissolved.
that the present Parliament be within a prefixed time dissolved, foreseeing
that to be the only way whereby they might hope to gratify the People, and
that a new and better Parliament should be called in place of it, thereby to
flatter the hopes of wretched Sufferers.

It is not to be denied, but that they proposed many useful things, that they
might cajole the people; They propose useful things to the people, and pretend
to mind the K.'s interest;
wherein they never forgot, sometimes obliquely, and sometimes also directly to
speak in favor of the King; and that to this purpose: That the King, Queen,
and Royal Family be restored to their just Rights, without which, they cry, no
solid Peace can be expected. Yet for the most part they play fast and loose by
Conditions annexed, or ambiguous words, But in ambiguous words.
so that afterward they might easily extricate themselves from these Promises,
provided they had the luck to get the better of the Presbyterians.

They march against the Parliament.
But when the Parliament thought it neither honorable nor safe to comply with
these military demands, the Army inverting now the Cause, declare for the King
and People, and march against the Parliament. The Parl. prepares for defense.
On the other hand, the Parliament with the Londoners prepare for a defense,
and vote that the King should be invited to London, the people in a manner
forcing them to it, who with importunate Petitions and Clamours, thundered
tumultuously in Westminster Hall.

But the Speakers of both Houses, with many Members flying to the Camp, the
Citizens are appeased upon the fair promises of the Army;
In the mean time the Speakers of both Houses, with about fifty Members, partly
Aristocraticks, and partly Democraticks, privily fly from London and betake
themselves to the Camp, in great consternation, pretending violence offered
unto them by their Fellow Members, Citizens, and some disbanded Soldiers, and
demand reparation by Arms: yet all this while they left others of their own
stamp behind them in the Parliament, that might blow the Coals, and disappoint
the Councils of the rest.

The Citizens, who like men in an Ague after a burning heat, fall presently
into a shaking cold, were easily appeased by the fair promises of the Army,
That the King should be restored (which was their only desire) the Parliament
dissolved, and public Peace and Justice settled. But the Country People, who
heretofore were in a readiness to flock to the assistance of London, were now
equally disgusted both with the Citizens and Parliament, as those who having
first kindled the War, were still unwilling to put out the flame, and seemed to
be the only men that shut their Gates against Peace that was ready to return
into the Kingdom. And without any previous Articles, open their Gates to the
Soldiers.
What Is now to be done? The Parliament desponds; and the officious Citizens,
who were for the Army and Faction, open the Gates, and without any previous
Articles, tamely deliver up the City to the mercy of the Soldiers.

Upon this the fugitive Members are with no small pomp instantly restored to
their places. The fugitive Members are restored; the accused Presbyterians
fly; others temporize, all lose courage.

Some Commoners, the Mayor and Leadingmen of the City, with some Lords, are
clapped up in Prison.


The accused Presbyterians fly; and some, as it is usual, temporizing, strike
in with the victorious Party, and the rest lose courage. From that time forward
the History of the Evils they had done, is to be read in those they suffer.
Some of the Members of the House of Commons, the Mayor also, and many chief
Citizens being committed to the Tower, smart for their late fear and cowardice
in abandoning the safety of their fellow-Citizens, and their former obstinacy
and insolence against the King. Seven or eight Lords accused of Treason, are
cast into Prison; but afterward the heat of Emulation by little and little
cooling, and being almost quite over, the Prisoners, without any Indictments
brought against them, are discharged from their loathsome Prisons, to be an
example to others, not to presume hereafter to resist. Nor could this satisfy
them, unless also to show their strength, and the continence and discipline of
the Soldiers, the Commanders of the Army led their men with Artillery and
Ammunition, as in triumph over the Citizens, through the chief streets of
London.

When the Army had now mastered the two strong Forts of the Kingdom, the
Parliament and the City of London, being doubly victorious over their friends
and enemies, there remained no more to be done, but how they might at their
leisure settle and confirm themselves in the Power which now they had obtained.
A new Lieutenant and Garrison are put into the Tower of London.
The Lieutenant and Garrison of the Tower of London, are chosen out of the
dregs of the Citizens; but such as had nobilitated themselves by being Slaves
to the Faction, the old Lieutenant with the accustomed Garrison being turned
out for no other fault, but that he favored the Presbyterians. The Colonels
and Officers of the Army changed.
The Commissioners who had the power of ordering the whole Army, as also the
Colonels, Captains, and other Officers, are forced to turn out, to make way for
men of a new mould.

The Posts and Chains of the City being pulled down.
But some may think that it was overdoing, that when the Citizens had long ago
laid aside their Arms and their resolution, yet the Works and Fortifications of
the City should be demolished, under pretext that the Kingdom was now in Peace;
and then the Posts and Chains in the streets removed, that the Horse might have
freer passage into all the corners of the Town, and no hold left to the
Citizens and the women from which they might in probability kick.

A popular Republican is set over the Fleet.
Moreover, that they might establish their Government both by Sea and Land,
Rainsborough, the Bell-weather of the Republicans, is set over the Fleet.
Fairfax made General of the Forces both in England and Ireland.

Thanks are given to the Army,


Fairfax is appointed General of the Forces not only in England, but in
Ireland also, that that Country might the more speedily be succored. The Army
has the thanks not only of the Parliament and of the Ministers from the
Pulpit, but likewise of the honest Citizens, who now entertain and feast in
their houses the very men whom a little before they intended to drive from
their Walls. A months Pay besides, And Pay.
as a token of kindness, is appointed for the Soldiers, for their good
services to the Parliament.

It Is long in suspense to what side the Parl. should adhere.
It was for a long time hotly disputed to which side the Parliament should
adhere, whether the Acts of the Army or Parliament ought to be annulled, since
both of them, according to the different number of Voices, had by turns been
resciended; and being uncertain how to get out of that Labyrinth, that the
Parliament might not seem to be interrupted, or force put upon them whereby
their authority would be weakened, or that they might seem to approve the right
of changing sides, which they had long ago condemned in the Members that
followed the King. They are now for both, by and by again for either of the
two, and of a sudden again for neither. However, The flight of the Members of
Parl. is approved.
they resolve that the separation of the flying Members, and their conjunction
with the Army is altogether to be approved, as being lawfully done for the
public good.

By which successes the Commanders of the Army and Ring leaders of the Faction,
were so puffed up, The Rebels having got the power into their hands, forget the
K. some being for an Oligarchy, and others for Democraty.
that they quite forgot their old Friends and Fellow Soldiers. There was no
more mention now of dissolving the Parliament, calling a new one, nor of the
Promises whereby they had so often imposed upon the King and People. All their
care is to mind their own advantage, and how to settle that Oligarchy, which
now they seemed to be in possession of.

But the Adjutators and all the popular Republicans are no less busy and
sollicitous to have that Parliament dissolved, and a new one, under the name of
a Representative by the free election of the People, called, with a limitation
of their power and time of sitting, that so they might introduce a Democraty.

Both Parties being out of dread of the Presbyterians, All conspire against
Monarchy and the K.
equally conspire the ruin of the King and Monarchy.

It had been long before privately proposed amongst some, to assassinate the
King, Whose murder they plot; some privately,
whilst he was in the Scottish Army; that they might at the same time glut
their malice, and throw the odium of the fact upon the Scots. Afterward one
Rolf a Shoemaker, instigated by some, armed himself for the Regicide. That
Fellow being informed that the King intended to make his escape out of a window
when he was in the Isle of Wight, lay in wait with a Musket several nights,
that he might shoot him as by accident.

Others by a Council of War.
But now several fiercely urge, that he should be forthwith and secretly
dispatched, or at least that being condemned by a Council of War, he should be
beheaded.

Some under pretext of a Parliamentary Authority.
But it seemed more generous and safe to the leading Rebels to protract time,
and manage the matter gradually by wiles and crafty fetches, until being
countenanced by a color of Authority, they might, under a sham of satisfying
public Justice, perpetrate the matchless Villainy. And thus they ordered it. To
which they make way gradually, sending Propositions to the K. with a pretense
of peace, but in reality to find a cause of accusing him:
Conditions of Peace were to be proposed to the King; but such, as if he
consented to them, he himself would renounce the Crown: and if he refused, he
would be deposed by the Votes of others; and so be, over and above, reckoned
obstinate by the people; which would give them a more specious pretext for
accomplishing their design.

For this end it is contrived and obtained, that the Parliament should again
send to the King Propositions, but such as were rather imperious and hard
Commands, than Conditions of Peace to be treated about, which being granted, he
would pluck off his Crown with his own hands. Which, though the Commanders of
the Army had procured in Parl. yet in the Camp they persuade the K. not to
condescend to them.
To which, though the Commanders of the Army and Cromwell in the first place,
had given their Votes in the Parliament; yet in the Camp they advised the King
not to condescend to them, promising that they would either obtain or command
more reasonable Conditions for him; and seemed to detest those as proceeding
from the hautiness and severity of the Presbyterians.

The K. makes answer to the Parl. proposals,
His Majesty being deluded by that artifice, makes answer to this purpose: That
the Propositions were such, as he could not in honor and conscience consent to
them, being such as could not reconcile all interests, nor settle a lasting
Peace in the Kingdom: Appeals to the Demands of the Army, as more conducing to
peace.
He appeals rather to the Proposals of the Army, as much more conducing to the
satisfaction of all interests, and a fit subject for a personal conference
betwixt himself and the two Houses (which he earnestly desired;) for which
cause his Majesty would have Commissioners from the Army admitted.

Cromwell and the rest of the Commanders of the Army were extremely well
satisfied with this Answer, Where at Cromwell and the Commanders seem to rejoice.
as if the King himself gave greater honor to the Army than to the Parliament;
and therefore on their parts they promise all good Offices to his Majesty.

In the mean time they take all courses to incense the rest against the King,
But from thence labor to incense the rest of the Members against him.
pretending themselves much ashamed that they could not perform all they
promised; and excuse themselves sometimes because of the reverence that was due
to the Parliament, and sometimes again because of the peremptoriness of the
Adjutators: They juggle with the K. putting him by turns in hope and fear.
at length they began to juggle and quite fall off, to give a contrary sense to
their promises, and to suggest apprehensions to the King, as if the Adjutators
and Republicans designed his Majesty's death, whose insolent attempts they
could not moderate nor at present repress; mingling with all, promises that if
they could cut the combs of the Adjutators, and restore the lost Discipline of
the Army, they would without delay perform what they had undertaken.

With which his Majesty being moved, At which his Majesty being moved, makes
his escape to the Isle of Wight.
(seeing it was worse to distrust than to be deceived) he privately made his
escape from the Army, and (as sat would have it) fled to the Isle of Wight,
the government of which (as it seems probable) was just before put into the
hands of Colonel Hammond a dear friend to Cromwell, that there he might play his
part in this business. To this man's protection the King commits himself,
running of his own accord into the Snare which the Rebels had long ago laid for
him.

From thence he speedily writes to the Parl. sending also Concessions;
But that he might not be wanting to the public whilst the Parliament were at a
stand, wondering whither he might have fled, his Majesty wrote to them, sending
therewith Concessions that were too easy and great to be expected, or indeed
to be wished for by any; adding thereto invincible Arguments, why he could not
consent to the Proposals lately sent him by the Parliament. Upon which he
demands a Treaty with the Parl.
He proposes his own Concessions and the Demands of the Army, as a fit subject
for a personal Treaty: and for the sake of the People and Kingdom, earnestly
desires it, being willing on his own part to condescend to any thing, that by
any means he might procure Peace and Tranquillity to his languishing Kingdoms.

Thus the Rebels oppose and take occasion of asking Demands preliminary to the
Treaty.
The Republicans of both sorts, as well they that were for a few, as for a
many-headed Commonwealth, endeavoring by all means to put a stop to the Peace
proposed and offered by the King, take hereby occasion to oppose to his
Majesty's most just desires, four unreasonable Demands, as preliminary
cautions; which if his Majesty would consent to, they promise to treat about
the rest.

I. That the Parliament should have power to raise, settle and maintain the
Forces by Sea and Land, within the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, etc.
without the Kings consent; it being declared High Treason for any others, to
the number of thirty, to meet together without the authority of Parliament.

II. That it should be lawful to the two Houses to sit and adjourn themselves
when and where they pleased.

III. That all Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations, and other proceedings
against either House of Parliament during the War, should be declared void and
null.

IV. That all Titles and Honor of Peerage conferred on any by the King since
his Majesty left the Parliament, and since the great Seal was carried away,
should he declared void. All these things they demand that the King would
consent might be past into Law; if not, that things must remain as they were.

In the mean time the Scottish Commissioners who were then at London, Which the
Scots oppose both in Parl. and before the King.
give in their Reasons in writing against these Demands; and when,
nevertheless, they saw that they were sent to the King, they protest against
them in his Majesty's presence, as being flatly opposite to Religion, the
Crown, and the Agreements made betwixt the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

What can the King do to get out of these streights? If he grant the Demands,
he voluntarily resignes up the Government; and if he refuse, he must be deposed
with the ignominious brand of Obstinacy.

The King though wanted neither greatness of Soul nor Wisdom, The King answers.
and therefore sends presently back an Answer: That the necessity of complying
with all engaged interests in these great distempers for a perfect settlement
of Peace, his Majesty finds to be none of the least difficulties he has met
with since the time of his afflictions; which is too visible, when at the same
time that the two Houses of the English Parliament do present to his Majesty
several Bills and Propositions for his consent, the Commissioners for Scotland
do openly protest against them: so that were nothing in the case but the
consideration of that difference, his Majesty cannot imagine how to give such
an answer to what is now proposed, as thereby to promise himself his great end,
A Perfect Peace. And when his Majesty farther considers how impossible it is
(in the condition he now stands) to fulfill the desires of his two Houses, since
the only ancient and known ways of passing Laws, are either by his Majesty's
personal assent in the House of Peers, or by Commission under his great Seal of
England; he cannot but wonder at such failings in the manner of address which
is now made unto him, unless his two Houses intend that his Majesty shall allow
of a great Seal made without his authority, before there be any consideration
had thereupon in a Treaty; which as it may hereafter hazard the security it
self, so for the present it seems very unreasonable to his Majesty. And though
his Majesty is willing to believe that the intention of very many of both
Houses, in sending those Bills before a Treaty, was only to obtain a Trust
from him, and not to take any advantage by passing them, to force other things
from him, which are either against his conscience or honor; yet his Majesty
believes it is clear to all understandings, that these Bills contain (as they
are now penned) not only the divesting himself of all Sovereignty, and that
without possibility of recovering it either to him or his Successors, (except
by repeal of these Bills) but also the making his Concessions guilty of the
greatest pressures that can be made upon the Subject, as in other particulars,
so by giving an arbitrary and unlimited power to the two Houses for ever, to
raise and levy, for Land and Sea-service, of what persons (without distinction
and quality) and to what numbers they please; and likewise for the payment of
the Arrears, to levy what moneys, in such sort, and by such ways and means (and
by consequence upon the Estates of whatsoever persons) as they shall think fit
and appoint; which is utterly inconsistent with the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, and his Majesty's trust in protecting them: so that if the major part
of both Houses shall think it necessary to put the rest of the Propositions
into Bills, his Majesty leaves the world to judge how unsafe it would be for
him to consent thereunto; and if not, what a strange condition (after passing
those four Bills) his Majesty and all his Subjects would be cast into. And here
his Majesty thinks it not unfit to wish his two Houses to consider well of the
manner of their proceeding; that when his Majesty desires a personal Treaty
with them for the settling of a Peace, they in answer propose the very subject
matter of the most essential part thereof to be first granted; a thing which
will be hardly credible to Posterity: Wherefore his Majesty declares, that
neither the desire of being freed from this tedious and irksome condition of
life his Majesty has so long suffered, nor the apprehension of what shall
befall him in case his two Houses shall not afford him a personal Treaty, shall
make him change his resolution of not consenting to any Act, till the whole be
concluded. Yet then he intends not only to give full and reasonable
satisfaction in the particulars presented to him; but also to make good all
other Concessions mentioned in his Message of the 16th of November. last, which
he thought would have produced better effects than what he finds in the Bills
and Propositions now presented unto him.

And yet his Majesty cannot give over, but now again earnestly presses for a
personal Treaty, (so passionately is he affected with the advantages which
Peace will bring to his Majesty and all his Subjects) of which he will not at
all despair, (there being no other visible way to obtain a well-grounded
Peace). However, his Majesty is very much at ease within himself, for having
fulfilled the offices both of a Christian and a King; and will patiently wait
the good pleasure of Almighty God, to incline the hearts of his two Houses to
consider their King, and compassionate their Fellow Subjects miseries.

The King having delivered this Answer sealed up, to be carried to the
Parliament, the Earl of D. who hankered too much after the Oligarchick
Republicans, desired it to be opened again, that the Commissioners might be
acquainted with what they brought back, as he said, was fitting, they being
Commissioners and not Posts or Couriers; (though no such thing was contained in
their public instructions) he having past his promise that no prejudice should
therefrom accrue to the King.

Is confined to close imprisonment.
But so soon as the King, to satisfy them, had read over his Answer himself,
without any respect had to their faith and promise, they confine the best of
Princes to closer imprisonment in ^arisborough-Castle, where then he was: They
put from him all his Servants, except some new comers and enemies whom they
placed about his person rather in derision, and as a Guard, than for attending
and serving him. And that he might not have the use of the least bit of Paper
secretly conveyed to him by any Messenger, they set Sentinels at all the
entries, at the doors and windows of his Chamber.

The Oligarchick Commanders reduce the Democraticks to order, and restore
Military Discipline.
The Oligarchick Rebels, Cromwell and the other Commanders of the Army being
resolved to pursue their design, the Kings Answer wrought no good effect in
the Parliament; yet the emulation of the Democratick Republicans, and of the
Adjutators, for some time put a stop to their proceedings. That they might
suppress this Party, of whom they had now enough, a general muster of the
Forces is appointed, amongst whom one whole Regiment having got the
Democratical Proposals, which they termed the Ordinance of the People, put into
writing, they carried the Paper as a signal in their hats; the Oligarchick
Republicans by their solicitations had gained one or two Regiments; and the
rest of the Army consisted of both Parties promiscuously jumbled together. The
chief Commanders who were of the first (as the inferior were of the other
Party) drawing together into a ring, they command the private Soldiers to
throw away their Paper-signals; which when they refused to do, according as
they had laid the design, they break in amongst them, and pulling out some of
the more saucy fellows of the Regiment, they cause them presently to be shot to
death; which made the rest throw away their Badges, and submit to the pleasure
of the Generals.

This danger being over, They openly rail against the King,
they began to publish the villainy they had so long concealed, to rail openly
against the King in the House, make Speeches, exhort the other Members, and to
contrive four Interdicts rather than Votes: whereby,

1. It is resolved, And pass a Vote of none Addresses to the King.
That the Lords and Commons do declare that they will make no further Addresses
or Applications to the King.

2. That no Application or Address be made to the King by any person
whatsoever, without leave of both Houses.

3. That the person or persons that shall make breach of this Order, shall
incur the penalties of High Treason.

4. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive no more any
Message from the King to both or either Houses of Parliament, or to any other
person.

But neither were these carried in the House of Commons, without tricks and the
usual artifices. But surreptitiously in the Lower House;
For before any mention was made of these Propositions in the House, forty or
fifty leading-men, who for the most part would have withstood those attempts,
are sent into their several Counties upon pretext of raising money to pay off
the Soldiers, that by their absence, fewer opposing, and the greater part of
the House being packt, the matter might be easily carried. Nevertheless, this
execrable motion (made to the scandal of mankind) of abjuring their King, was
debated to and again, from ten in the morning until seven at night, and had
not, after all, found the Votes rather tired out than persuaded, unless the
chief of the Oligarchick Party had given them hopes that they would attempt
nothing worse against the King. The three last Votes past in the space of half
an hour with much precipitation, whilst the Factious got into the places of the
dissenting Members, who had withdrawn out of the House to take a little
refreshment.

By force and threats in the Upper House.
However, the Upper House was more hardly brought over to an assent: for there
the Debate lasted many days, until Commissioners coming from the Army upon
pretext of thanking the Lower House for those Votes, and protesting the Army
would protect the Commons therein, threatened the Lords if they persisted to
oppose them, and shortly after, whilst they still delayed, forced them out of
fear to consent, two Regiments of Soldiers being sent into Westminster Hall,
under color of a Guard to the Lower House; but in reality to awe the
dissenting Lords. This having terrified the three or four Lords that met, who
at that time often usurped to themselves the authority of the Upper House,
(many stealing out of the way) they agree to the Votes of the House of Commons.
And then Commissioners were likewise sent from the Army to thank the Lords for
that good service done to the Kingdom, and solemnly to assure them in name of
the whole Army, That they would maintain and defend the Rights and Privileges
of the Upper House.

Cromwell excuses himself of perfidiousness.
The Reader may be pleased to observe what Cloak Cromwell used for this
perfidiousness. This Blade, whilst he was praying that Almighty God would be
pleased to prosper his endeavors in raising again the King to the Throne and
Majesty of his Ancestors; here the words stuck between his teeth, so that he
could not utter one word more; which he interpreting as a sign of Gods
displeasure, concluded the King to be rejected of God. But to others he roundly
expressed himself, That it was lawful to circumvent a wicked deceiver, by craft
and deceit.

After this comes out a Proclamation, They publish a Declaration,
by authority of the House of Commons, wherein the sticklers both for Oligarchy
and Democracy, who agreed very well together against the King, declare the
Reasons that inclined them to pass those Votes of none Addresses to his Majesty.

This they stuff with all the Calumnies that were raised against the King,
Which they stuff with all the Calumnies they can against the King.
by the Clubs and Conferences of his lewdest enemies, or by uncertain Rumors
spread abroad by themselves; to which they add other Aspersions, which though
they had been bawled over and over again in the House, yet were found not to
have had the least shadow of truth, and were only invented and exaggerated to
create greater hatred.

They cause this infamous Libel to be sent about into all the Parishes of the
Kingdom, They command it to be read publicly by the Ministers in all
Parish-Churches,
being secure that no body durst, or indeed could undergo the danger of
answering it, since all the Presses were narrowly watched. The Ministers are
commanded to read it to the people in the Church, and to preach as well as they
could in praise of it.

And that they might be the more willing to serve the end, And sooth them with
promises, that they may comm^nd it in their sermons.
it was at the same time voted in the House of Commons, That the Tithes and
Dean and Chapters Rents should be paid to the Preachers; seeming to be very
sollicitous for the Cause of God and Religion, when in reality they intended to
cheat the Church of them, and to convert them to profane use. Nay, the Justices
of Peace are everywhere enjoined to force the Laics, who refused, to pay them.
They endeavor by their Emissaries to procure gratulatory Petitions.
They likewise hoped to stir up the people by Emissaries and Soldiers
everywhere dispersed, by Anabaptists, Schismatics, and Heretics, who were
most diligent in propagating their affairs, to approve what the Parliament had
done by congratulatory Addresses, and to demand some severer punishment to be
inflicted upon the King.

But it happened contrariwise: for three Answers and Apologies at least came
out within a short time, The K. Majesty is justified by many Apologies.
(one of which was written with the Kings own hand) wherein his Majesty was
most clearly acquitted from those reproachful Imputations, and the Accusations
retorted upon the Faction it self, which was proved to be guilty of all the
crimes that it maliciously and falsely fastened upon the King; and that with so
great evidence and perspicuity, that no man durst offer so much as to mutter
against it.

The Parsons coldly execute their orders: very few congratulate.
In the mean time the Ministers coldly obey their commands: and some few
gratulatory Addresses by the industry of Sectarians, are with much ado extorted
from a few Counties, and signed but with the hands of some obscure and
notoriously malicious Villains.

All the people grumble and fret.
Now the people began to grumble and fret, to accuse the Sectarians, and
especially the Soldiers of juggling and imposture; and to curse them all.
Afterward came Petitions from a great many Counties, Many petition for a
personal Treaty with the King,
and those also which always were for the Parliament, earnestly entreating that
a personal Treaty might be had with the King, that the Army might be paid and
disbanded, that assistance in the mean time should be sent over into Ireland,
that England might be eased from Oppressions, and from contributing to the
charges of an unnecessary Army, which it was no longer able to bear.

At length it came to that, that a great many of these humble Petitions signed
with the hands of infinite numbers of men, The Rebels in vain opposing it.
had almost confounded the repugnancy of the Parliament; the Commanders of the
Army in the several Counties, and the Parliament Commissioners, who for the
most part did all now comply with the victorious Party, in vain using all their
endeavors by threats of sequestrations, imprisonments, banishment, and death,
and now and then by flattery and golden promises, to make them desist and be
silent.

Nor can we pass over, without a remark,
the changing Tides of Divine Vengeance, or of Popular Inconstancy; whilst the
very same Parliament, from which the first tumults of petitioning against the
King had their rise, does now complain that the dignity of the Members are
endangered by an undesired confluence of Petitioners.

The first that led the van in petitioning were the Essex-men, in numbers
unusual before these times, First were the Essex-men;
who were so many that they might have compelled those whom they came to
supplicate. Next, those of Surrey, who are abused by the Soldiers.
Next came the Surrey-men, who being unarmed, were upon a slight occasion
barbarously treated by the Soldiers near the very door of the
Parliament House; being severely beaten, forced to fly, some killed, more
wounded, all plundered, and that by order of the House, and command of the
Officers; nay, the Rioters had the thanks of the Lower House, and rewards for
the fact; that so the people might for the future beware of licentious
petitioning, which heretofore was judged a part of their Right.

But all they get by their Tyranny in laboring to stifle the Grievances and
Complaints of the oppressed people, But nevertheless, more Petitions come from
other Counties;
was to incense the other Counties to ply them more frequently with Petitions:
who seeing they could procure no remedy by complaining, from Prayers and
Petitions they betake themselves to Arms. The liberty of the King and People
(which heretofore the deluded Rabble thought to be inconsistent) are again born
in colors, by the men of Kent, And the Kentish and Essex men with several
others being repulsed, betake themselves to Arms.
Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Yorkshire, and other Northern Counties, South and
North Wales also, and at length of Surrey, who were inflamed with a greater
desire of vengeance; many Nobles ( the Earl of Holland, Wiot, and Duke of
Buckingham, etc.) who were unluckily discovered to have entered into a
Conspiracy at London, joining them too hastily.

The Fleet also falls off from the Parl.
The Seamen also being carried with the same tide of Commiseration toward the
King, fall off, and seventeen men of War, having put the Republican Admiral
Rainsborough on shore, come over to Prince Charles.

The Scots rise in arms for delivering the K. out of prison.
The Scots also by order of their Parliament take up Arms for delivering the
King out of Prison wherein he was basely detained, and make an Irruption into
the Northern parts of England, with a numerous army under the command of
Hamilton; being joined by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with a considerable body of
English: But whether it was the wonted ill fortune of the King, or of Hamilton
himself, or rather the decree and purpose of Almighty God, the English first,
by intervals, and one after another, The English are overcome by the enemy.
were routed and killed by the enemy: for it was a matter of small difficulty
for an old Army provided with Ammunition and all other necessaries of War,
commanded by vigilant and expert Generals and Officers, to defeat and put to
flight a tumultuary body of raw Countrymen rather than Soldiers, destitute of
Arms and warlike provisions, and for most part without Commanders, whilst they
come to engage by Parties one after another.

Nevertheless, Colchester in Essex, and Pembrooke the chief Town of that County
in Wales, though they were unprovided for a Siege, gave the Rebels no little
work to do. Nor did Pontfract-Castle fall dishonourably into their hands; out
of which about thirty Horsemen breaking through the Forces that besieged the
place, pulled Rainsborough (lately Admiral and now General of the Northern
Army, who had brought some thousands of Auxiliary Troops to make an end of the
Siege) out of his Bed in Duncaster a fortified Tower, twelve miles distant from
Pontfract; and because he refused to be carried away with them as a Prisoner,
killed him. Nay, the Garrison being reduced to the utmost extremity, all had
free liberty to depart to their own houses, except two Soldiers; to whom it
was permitted even by Articles, either to die in the Bed of Honor fighting, or
to arm themselves and strive to break through the enemy. Which both of them
watching their opportunity, got on horseback, and performed almost without a
wound.

The Scots through the unskilfulness and cowardice of their Generals, And the
Scots.
or (which I am not willing to suspect) their treachery, leading the Army in
two bodies forty miles distant one from another, are without any trouble routed
by Cromwell, who unexpectedly falling upon the main body, Hamilton the General
being taken.
put it to flight, and all the rest into consternation; many being killed and
taken, amongst whom was Hamilton the General.

The rest he pursued into Scotland; where Argile with the Forces he had raised,
being no less an Army at home than Cromwell was abroad, reduced them in a short
time to such streights, that the Army which had been raised by order of
Parliament, was forced to lay down Arms, and submit to the discretion of
Argile's Faction. Then was a new Parliament called, all being excluded who had
taken up Arms, or voted for engaging in a War for the delivery of the King. In
this the Acts of the last Parliament were recinded, the War declared to have
been unlawful, Cromwell had the public thanks, and Argile privately engaged (as
Cromwell himself boasted) that he would concur with the Oligarchicks of England,
and root out Monarchy (when occasion offered) in Scotland as well as in England.

The ships prepare to make a defection from the Prince, matters succeeding ill
at Land.
Besides, many Ships, the Tide turning, according to the innate levine of
Seamen, prepare to make defection from the Prince, casting themselves into the
protection of the Earl of Warwick, who had won their hearts by frequent
Largesses, and who was set over a new Fleet for a time, that he might draw over
the Seamen again to the obedience of the Parliament: but being beset with the
Spies Of the Oligarchick Rebels, and having done their job, he justly received
the usual Reward from these Masters, that is, he was turned out and laid aside.

The Parl. in the mean time think of making peace.
Whilst the Army is busied in these Wars, the Members of Parliament being a
little rid of the yoke of the Army and Cromwell that were now at a distance, and
seriously considering how ill all the People of the Kingdom would resent the
injuries done to the King, and how ticklish their own affairs stood, they begin
to think of Peace; and growing wise behind hand, The Act of None Addresses is
rescinded.
against the advice of the Oligarchick Republicans, they rescind the Votes of
None Addresses, by the unanimous consent of both Houses. They appoint a
Conference with the K. by Commissioner in the Isle of Wight.
They appoint a Conference* with the King for composing Differences; but by
Commissioners, and that in the Isle of Wight. For this purpose they
commissionate five Lords for the Upper House, and ten Commoners for the Lower.
The Propositions to be debated in that Conference, are prescribed to the
Commissioners.

That the Translator relates all which verbatim, though it be contrary to the
design of this Work, and of the Author, who has only entered the short
Articles marked with the numbers I.II.III. I hope the Reader will not dislike,
since the Articles at large contain so excellent a description of the Changes
that were then intended to be made in the Government of England, that it is
thought very fit to publish them according to the perfect Copy printed by order
of both Houses the 29th of August, 1648.

May it please your Majesty:
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name,
and on the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Commissioners
of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of the Kingdom of
Scotland; Do humbly present unto your Majesty the humble desires and
Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms respectively; unto which we do pray your Majesty's Assent: And
that they and all such Bills as shall be tendered to your Majesty in pursuance
of them, or any of them, may be Established and Enacted for Statutes and Acts
of Parliament, by your Majesty's Royal Assent in the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms respectively.

I.
WHereas both Houses of the Parliament of England have been necessitated to
undertake a War in their just and lawful defense; and afterward both Kingdoms
of England and Scotland joined in Solemn League and Covenant, were engaged to
prosecute the same.

That by Act of Parliament in each Kingdom respectively, all Oaths,
Declarations, and Proclamations heretofore had, or hereafter to be had against
both or either of the Houses of the Parliament of England, the Parliament of
the Kingdom of Scotland, and the late Convention of Estates in Scotland, or
Committees flowing from the Parliament or Convention in Scotland, or their
Ordinances and Proceedings; or against any for adhering unto them, or for doing
or executing any Office, Place, or Charge, by any Authority derived from them;
and all Judgments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainders, and Inquisitions, in
any the said Causes; and all Grants thereupon made or had, or to be made or
had, be declared Null, suppressed and forbidden. And that this be publicly
intimated in all Parish-Churches within his Majesty's Dominions, and all other
places needful.

II.
That his Majesty, according to the laudable example of his Royal Father of
happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; and that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms
respectively, for enjoining the taking thereof by all the Subjects of the three
Kingdoms; and the Ordinances concerning the manner of taking the same in both
Kingdoms, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament respectively, with such Penalties
as by mutual advice of both Kingdoms shall be agreed upon.

III.
That a Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans, and
Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and Prebendaries; and all
Chaunters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, Succentors, and Sacrists;
all Vicars Choril, and Choresters, old Vicars, and new Vicars of any Cathedral
or Collegiate-Church, and all other their Underofficers, out of the Church of
England, and Dominion of Wales; and out of the Church of Ireland, with such
alterations concerning the Estates of Prelates, as shall agree with the
Articles of the late Treaty of the date at Edinburgh, 29 November, 1643. and
joint Declaration of both Kingdoms.

IV.
That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

V.
That Reformation of Religion, according to the Covenant, be settled by Act of
Parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon,
after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines.

For as much as both Kingdoms are mutually obliged by the same Covenant, to
endeavor the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in matters of Religion, That
such Unity and Uniformity in Religion, according to the Covenant, as after
consultation had with the Divines of both Kingdoms now assembled, is or shall
be jointly agreed upon by both Houses of the Parliament of England, and by the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament of both
Kingdoms respectively.

VI.
That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits, Priests; Papists, and Popish
Recusants, from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and for the better
discovering, and speedy conviction of Popish Recusants, an Oath be established
by Act of Parliament to be administered to them, wherein they shall abjure and
renounce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
worshipping of the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes and Images, and all other
Popish Superstitions and Errors; and refusing the said Oath, being tendered in
such manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be a sufficient
Conviction of Popish Recu^ancy.

An Act or Acts of Parliament for Education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

VIII.
An Act or Acts for the true Levy of the Penalties against them; which
Penalties to be levied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree
on, wherein to be provided that his Majesty shall have no loss.

IX.
That an Act or Acts be passed in Parliament, whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed,
and a stricter course taken to prevent the Saying or Hearing of Mass in the
Court, or any other part of this Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Ireland.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the four last preceding
Propositions, in such manner as the Estates of the Parliament there shall think
fit.

X.
That the King do give his Royal assent to an Act for the due observation of
the Lords Day.

XI.
And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovasions in Churches and Chapels,
in and about the Worship of God.

XII.
And for the better advancement of the preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts
of this Kingdom.

XIII.
And to the Bill against the enjoying the pluralities of Benefices by Spiritual
Persons and Non-Residency.

XIV.
And to an Act to be framed and agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, for
the reforming and regulating of both Universities, of the Colleges of
Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton.

XV.
And to such Act or Acts for raising of Moneys for the payment and satisfying
of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other public uses, as
shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament; and that if the King
do not give his Assent thereunto, then it being done by both Houses of
Parliament, the same shall be as valid to all intents and purposes as if the
Royal Assent had been given thereunto.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland.

And that his Majesty give assurance of his consenting in the Parliament of
Scotland, to an Act, acknowledging and ratifying the Acts of the Convention of
Estates of Scotland, called by the Council and Conservers of the Peace, and the
Commissioners for the common Burdens, and assembled the two and twentieth day
of June, 1643. and several times continued since: and of the Parliament of that
Kingdom since convened.

XVI.
That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England assembled, shall,
during the space of twenty years, from the first of July, 1646. arm, train, and
discipline, or cause to be armed, trained, and disciplined, all the Forces of
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, already raised both
for Sea and Land-service; and shall from time to time during the said space of
twenty years, raise, levy, arm, train, and discipline, or cause to be raised,
levied, armed, trained, and disciplined, any other Forces for Land and
Sea-service in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and places aforesaid, as in their
Judgments they shall from time to time, during the said space of twenty years,
think fit and appoint; and that neither the the King, his Heirs, or Successors,
nor any other but such as shall act by the authority or approbation of the said
Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of twenty years, exercise any of
the Powers aforesaid.

And the like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament
there shall think fit.

That Moneys be raised and levied for the maintenance and use of the said
Forces for Land-service, and of the Navy and Forces for Sea-service, in such
sort, and by such ways and means as the said Lords and Commons shall from time
to time, during the said space of twenty years, think fit and appoint, and not
otherwise. That all the said Forces both for Land and Sea-service, so raised or
levied, or to be raised or levied, and also the Admiralty and Navy, shall from
time to time, during the said space of twenty years, be employed, managed,
ordered, and disposed by the said Lords and Commons in such sort, and by such
ways and means as they shall think fit and appoint, and not otherwise. And the
said Lords and Commons, during the said space of twenty years, shall have power,

1. To suppress all Forces raised or to be raised, without authority and
consent of the said Lords and Commons, to the disturbance of the public Peace
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

2. To suppress any foreign Forces who shall invade or endeavor to invade the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey and
Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

3. To conjoyn such Forces of the Kingdom of England, with the Forces of the
Kingdom of Scotland, as the said Lords and Commons shall from time to time,
during the said space of twenty years, judge fit and necessary: To resist all
foreign Invasions, and to suppress any Forces raised or to be raised against,
or within either of the said Kingdoms; to the disturbance of the public Peace
of the said Kingdoms, or any of them, by any authority under the Great Seal, or
other Warrant whatsoever, without consent of the said Lords and Commons of the
Parliament of England, and the Parliament or the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively; And that no Forces of either Kingdom, shall go into or
continue in the other Kingdom without the advice and desire of the said Lords
and Commons of the Parliament of England, and the Parliament of the Kingdom of
Scotland, or such as shall be by them appointed for that purpose; And that
after the expiration of the said twenty years, neither the King, his Heirs or
Successors, or any person or persons by color or pretense of any Commission,
Power, Deputation, or Authority to be derived from the King, his Heirs or
Successors, or any of them, shall raise, arm, train, discipline, employ, order,
manage, disband, or dispose any of the Forces by Sea or Land, of the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, the Dominion of Wales, Isles of Guernsey and Jersey,
and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed; Nor exercise any of the said Powers or
Authorities in the precedent Articles mentioned and expressed to be during the
said space of twenty years in the said Lords and Commons; Nor do any act or
thing concerning the execution of the said Powers or Authorities, or any of
them, without the consent of the said Lords and Commons first had and obtained.
That after the expiration of the said twenty years, in all cases wherein the
Lords and Commons shall declare the safety of the Kingdom to be concerned, and
shall thereupon pass any Bill or Bills for the raising, arming, training,
disciplining, employing, mannaging, ordering, or disposing of the Forces by Sea
or Land, of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, Isles
of Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or any part of the
said Forces, or concerning the Admiralty and Navy, or concerning the levying of
Moneys for the raising, maintenance, or use of the said Forces for
Land-service, or for the Navy, and Forces for Sea-service, or of any part of
them; and if that the Royal Assent to such Bill or Bills shall not be given in
the House of Peers within such time after the passing thereof by both Houses of
Parliament, as the said Houses shall judge fit and convenient; That then such
Bill or Bills so passed by the said Lords and Commons as aforesaid, and to
which the Royal Assent shall not be given, as is herein before expressed, shall
nevertheless, after declaration of the said Lords and Commons made in that
behalf, have the force and strength of an Act or Acts of Parliament; and shall
be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if the Royal Assent had been given
thereunto.

Provided, that nothing herein before contained shall extend to the taking away
of the ordinary legal power of Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Coroners, Constables, Headboroughs, or other Officers of Justice not being
Military Officers, concerning the administration of Justice, so as neither the
said Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Coroners, Constables,
Headboroughs, and other Officers, nor any of them, do levy, conduct, employ, or
command any Forces whatsoever, by color or pretense of any Commission of
Array, or extraordinary command from his Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors,
without the consent of the said Lords and Commons.

And if any persons shall be gathered and assembled together in warlike manner,
or otherwise to the number of thirty persons, and shall not forthwith disband
themselves, being required thereto by the said Lords and Commons, or command
from them, or any by them, especially authorized for that purpose; then such
person or persons not so disbanding themselves, shall be guilty and incur the
pains of High Treason, being first declared guilty of such offense by the said
Lords and Commons; any Commission under the great Seal or other Warrant to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

And he or they that shall offend herein, to be incapable of any pardon from
his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, and their Estates shall be disposed as
the said Lords and Commons shall think fit, and not otherwise.

Provided that the City of London shall have and enjoy all their Rights,
Liberties, and Franchises, Customs and Usages in the raising and employing the
Forces of that City, for the defense thereof, in as full and ample manner, to
all intents and purposes, as they have or might have used or enjoyed the same
at any time, before the making of the said Act or Proposition; To the end that
City may be fully assured it is not the intention of the Parliament to take
from them any privileges, or immunities in raising or disposing of their
Forces, which they have or might have used or enjoyed heretofore.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament there
shall think fit.

XVII.
That by Act of Parliament, all Peers made since the day that Edward Lord
Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, deserted the Parliament, and
that the said Great Seal was surreptitiously conveyed away from the Parliament,
being the one and twentieth day of May, 1642. and who shall be hereafter made,
shall not sit or vote in the Parliament of England, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament: And that all Honor and Title conferred on any without
consent of both Houses of Parliament, since the twentieth day of May, 1642.
being the day that both Houses declared. That the King seduced by evil Council,
intended to raise War against the Parliament, be declared Null and Void.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, those being excepted whose Parents were
passed the Great Seal before the fourth of June, 1644.

XVIII.
That an Act be passed in the Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively, for
confirmation of the Treaties passed betwixt the two Kingdoms (viz.) the large
Treaty, the late Treaty for the coming of the Scots Army into England, and the
settling of the Garrison of Barwick of the 29th of November, 1643. and the
Treaty concerning Ireland of the 6th of August, 1642. for the bringing of ten
thousand Scots into the Province of Vlster in Ireland, with all other
Ordinances and Proceedings passed betwixt the two Kingdoms, and whereunto they
are obliged by the aforesaid Treaties.

And that Algernon Earl of Northumberland, John Earl of Rutland, Philip Earl of
Pembrooke and Mungomery, Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, James Earl of Suffolk,
William Earl of Salisbury, Robert Earl of Warwick, Edward Earl of Manchester,
Henry Earl of Stanford, Francis Lord Dacres, Philip Lord Wharton, Francis Lord
Willoughby, Dudly Lord North, John Lord Hunsdon, William Lord Gray, Edward Lord
Howard of Estrick, Thomas Lord Bruce, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Mr. Nathaniel
Fines, Sir William Armine, Sir Philip Stapilton, Sir Henry Vane senior, Mr.
William Perpoint, Sir Edward Aiscough, Sir William Strickland, Sir Arthur
Hesilrig, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas Widdington, Mr.
John Toll, Mr. Gilbert Millington, Sir William Constable, Sir John Wray, Sir
Henry Vain junior, Mr. Henry Darley, Oliver Saint John Esquire his Majesty's
Sollicitor-General, Mr. Denzel Hollis, Mr. Alexander Rigby, Mr. Cornelius
Holland, Mr. Samuel Vassell, Mr. Peregrin Pelham, John Glyn Esquire Recorder of
London; Mr. Henry Martin, Mr. Alderman Hoyle, Mr. John Blakiston, Mr. Sergeant
Wild, Mr. Richard Barwis, Sir Anthony Irby, Mr. Ashurst, Mr. Bellingham, and
Mr. Tolson, Members of both Houses of the Parliament of England, shall be the
Commissioners for the Kingdom of England, for conservation of the Peace between
the two Kingdoms to act according to the Powers in that behalf expressed in the
Articles of the large Treaty, and not otherwise.

That his Majesty give his Assent to what the two Kingdoms shall agree upon in
prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty, which are not yet finished.

That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively, for
establishing the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, bearing date the 30th day
of January, 1643. in England, and 1644. in Scotland, with the Qualifications
ensuing.

1 Qualification. That the persons who shall expect no pardon, be only these
following: Rupert and Maurice, Count Palatines of Rhine. James Earl of Darby.
John Earl of Bristol. William Earl of New Castle. Francis Lord Cottington.
George Lord Digby. Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely. Sir Robert Heath Knight. Dr.
Bramhall Bishop of Derry. Sir William Widdrington. Col. George Goring. Henry
Jermin Esquire Sir Ralph Hopton. Sir John Biron. Sir Francis Doddington. Sir John
Strangewayes. Mr. Endymion Porter. Sir George Radcliffe. Sir Marmaduke
Langdale. Henry Vaughan Esquire now called Sir Hen. Vaughan. Sir Francis
Windibanke. Sir Richard Greenvill. Mr. Edward Hide, now called Sir Edw. Hide.
Sir John Marley. Sir Nicholas Cole. Sir Thomas Riddel Jun. Sir John Colepepper.
Mr. Richard Lloyd, now called Sir Rich. Lloyd. Mr. David Jenkins. Sir George
Strode. George Carteret Esquire now called Sir Geo. Carteret. Sir Charles Dallison
Knight. Richard Lane Esquire now called Sir Rich. Lane. Sir Edward Nicholas. John
Ashburnham Esquire Sir Edward Herbert Knight. his Majesty's Attorney General. Lord Rae.
George Gourdon, sometime Marquess of Huntly. James Graham, sometime Earl of
Montross. Robert Dalyell, sometime Earl of Carnewath. James Gordon, sometime
Viscount of Aboyne. Lodowick Linsey, sometime Earl of Crawford. James Ogley,
sometime Earl of Airby. Alester Madonald. Gordon, Younger of Gight. Col. John
Cockram. Graham of Gorthie. Mr. John Maxwell, sometime pretended Bishop of Ross.


And all such others as being processed by the Estates for Treason, shall be
condemned before the Act of Oblivion be passed.

2 Qualification. All Papists and Popish Recusants, who have been, now are, or
shall be actually in Arms, or voluntarily assisting against the Parliaments or
Estates of either Kingdom; and by name, The Marquess of Winton. Edward Earl of
Worcester. Lord Brudnell. Carell Mollinex Esquire Lord Arundel of Warder. Sir
Francis Howard. Sir John Winter. Sir Charles Smith. Sir John Prestan. Sir Bazil
Brook. Lord Audley, Earl of Castlehaven in the Kingdom of Ireland. William
Shelden of Beely, Esquire. Sir Henry Beddingfield.


3 Qualification. All persons who have had any hand in the plotting, designing,
or assisting the Rebellion of Ireland, except such persons who having only
assisted the said Rebellion, have rendered themselves, or come into the
Parliament of England.

4 Qualification. That Humfrey Bennet Esquire Sir Edward Ford. Sir John Penruddock.
Sir George Vaughan. Sir John Weld. Sir Robert Lee. Sir John Pate. John Ackland.
Edmond Windham Esquire Sir John Fitzharbert. Sir Edw. Lawrence. Sir Ralph Dutton.
Henry Lingen Esquire Sir Hen. Fletcher. Sir Rich. Minshall. Laurence Halestead.
John Denham Esquire Sir Edmund Fortescue. Peter Sainthill Esquire Sir Tho. Tildisley.
Sir Hen. Griffith. Michael Wharton Esquire Sir Hen. Spiller. Mr. Geo. Benyon, now
called Sir Geo. Benyon. Sir Edw. Walgrave. Sir Edw. Bishop. Sir William Russell
of Worcestershire. Thomas Lee of Adlington, Esquire Sir John Girlington. Sir Paul
Neale. Sir William Thorold. Sir Edward Hussy. Sir Tho. Lyddell Sen. Sir Philip
Musgrave. Sir John Digby of Nottinghamshire. Sir Robert Owseley. Sir John Many.
Lord Cholmley. Sir Tho. Aston. Sir Lewis Dives. Sir Peter Osbourne. Samuel
Thornton Esquire Sir John Lucas. John Claney Esquire Sir Tho. Chedle. Sir Nicholas
Kemish. Hugh Lloyd Esquire Sir Nicholas Cripse. Sir Peter Ricaut.


And all such of the Scottish Nation as have concurred in the Votes at Oxford,
against the Kingdom of Scotland and their proceedings, or have sworn or
subscribed the Declaration against the Convention and Covenant; and all such as
have assisted the Rebellion in the North, or the Invasion in the South of the
said Kingdom of Scotland, or the late Invasion made there by the Irish and
their Adherents, be removed from his Majesty's Councils, and be restrained from
coming within the Verge of the Court; and that they may not, without the advice
and consent of both Houses of the Parliament of England, or the Estates in the
Parliament of Scotland respectively, bear any Office, or have any Employment
concerning the State or Commonwealth. And in case any of them shall offend
therein, to be guilty of High Treason, and incapable of any pardon from his
Majesty, and their Estates to be disposed as both Houses of the Parliament of
England, or the Estates of the Parliament in Scotland respectively shall think
fit: And that one full third part upon full value of the Estates of the persons
aforesaid, made incapable of Employment as aforesaid, be employed for the
payment of the public Debts and Damages, according to the Declaration.

Branch 1. That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves late Members
of either House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but
have also sat in the unlawful Assembly at Oxford, called or pretended by some
to be a Parliament, and voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not voluntarily
rendered themselves before the last of October, 1644. be removed from his
Majesty's Councils, and be restrained from coming within the Verge of the
Court. And that they may not, without advice and consent of both Kingdoms, bear
any Office, or have any Employment concerning the State or Commonwealth. And in
case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of High Treason, and
incapable of any pardon by his Majesty, and their Estates to be disposed as
both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively shall think fit.

Branch 2. That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves Members of
either House of Parliament, who have sat in the unlawful Assembly at Oxford,
called or pretended by some to be a Parliament, and have not voluntarily
rendered themselves before the last of October, 1644. be removed from his
Majesty's Councils, and restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court;
and that they may not, without the advice and consent of both Houses of
Parliament, bear any Office, or have any Employment concerning the State or
Commonwealth. And in case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of
High Treason, and incapable of any pardon from his Majesty, and their Estates
to be disposed as both Houses of the Parliament of England shall think fit.

Branch 3. That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves Members of
either House of Parliament, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to
the Enemies thereof, and have not rendered themselves before the last of
October, 1644. be removed from his Majesty's Councils, and be restrained from
coming within the Verge of the Court; and that they may not, without the advice
and consent of both Houses of Parliament, bear any Office, or have any
Employment concerning the State or Commonwealth. And in case any of them shall
offend therein, to be guilty of High Treason, and incapable of any pardon from
his Majesty, and their Estates to be disposed as both Houses of Parliament in
England shall think fit.

5 Qualification. That all Judges and Officers, toward the Law, Common or
Civil, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, be
incapable of any place of Judicature or Office toward the Law, Common or
Civil: And that all Sergeants, Counselors, and Attorneys, Doctors, Advocates,
Proctors of the Law, Common or Civil, who have deserted the Parliament, and
adhered to the Enemies thereof, be incapable of any practice in the Law, Common
or Civil, either in public or private; and shall not be capable of any
preferment or employment in the Commonwealth, without the advice and consent of
both Houses of Parliament: And that no Bishop or Clergyman, no Master or
Fellow of any College or Hall in either of the Universities, or elsewhere, or
any Master of School or Hospital, or any Ecclesiastical person, who has
deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, shall hold or
enjoy, or be capable of any preferment or employment in Church or Commonwealth;
but all their said several preferments, places, and promotions, shall be
utterly void, as if they were naturally dead; nor shall they otherwise use
their Function of the Ministry, without advice and consent of both Houses of
Parliament: Provided that no Laps shall incurr by such vacancy, until six
months past, after notice thereof.

6 Qualification. That all persons who have been actually in Arms against the
Parliament, or have counseled or voluntarily assisted the Enemies thereof, are
disabled to be Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, or other head-Officers
of any City or Corporation, Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or to sit or
serve as Members, or Assistants in either of the Houses of Parliament, or to
have any Military employment in this Kingdom, without the consent of both
Houses of Parliament.

7 Qualification. The persons of all others to be free of all personal censure,
notwithstanding any Act, or thing done in, or concerning this War, they taking
the Covenant.

8 Qualification. The Estates of those persons excepted in the first three
precedent Qualifications; and the Estates of Edward Lord Littleton, and of
William Laud late Archbishop of Canterbury, to pay public Debts and Damages.

9 Qualification. Branch 1. That two full parts in three, to be divided of all
the Estates of the Members of either House of Parliament, who have not only
deserted the Parliament, but have also voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have
not rendered themselves before the first of December, 1645. shall be taken and
employed for the payment of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom.

Branch 2. That two full parts in three, to be divided of the Estates of such
late Members of either House of Parliament, as sat in the unlawful Assembly at
Oxford, and shall not have rendered themselves before the first of December,
1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the public Debts and
Damages of the Kingdom.

Branch 3. That one full moity of the Estates of such persons, late Members of
either of the Houses of Parliament, who have deserted the Parliament, and
adhered to the Enemies thereof, and shall not have rendered themselves before
the first of December, 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the
public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom.

10 Qualification. That a full third part of the value of the Estates of all
Judges and Officers toward the Law, Common or Civil, and of all Sergeants,
Counselors, and Attorneys, Doctors, Advocates, and Proctors of the Law, Common
or Civil: And of all Bishops, Clergymen, Masters and Fellows of any College
or Hall in either of the Universities, or elsewhere: And of all Masters of
Schools or Hospitals, and of all Ecclesiastical persons who have deserted the
Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, and have not rendered themselves
to the Parliament before the first of December, 1645. shall be taken and
employed for the payment of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom.

That a full sixth part on the full value of the Estates of the persons
excepted in the sixth Qualification, concerning such as have been actually in
Arms against the Parliament, or have counseled or voluntarily assisted the
Enemies thereof and are disabled according to the said Qualification, be taken
and employed for the payment of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom.

11 Qualification. That the persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers, and
others of the Kingdom of England, who in Lands or Goods be not worth two
hundred pounds sterling; and the persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers
and others of the Kingdom of Scotland, who in Lands or Goods be not worth one
hundred pounds sterling, be at liberty and discharged.

Branch 1. This Proposition to stand as to the English, and as to the Scots
likewise; if the Parliament of Scotland or their Commissioners shall so think
fit.

Branch 2. That the 1 of May last, is now the day limited for the persons to
come in that are comprised within the former Qualifications. Provided that all
and every the Delinquents which by or according to the several and respective
Ordinances or Orders made by both or either of the Houses of Parliament, on or
before the 24th day of April, 1647. are to be admitted to make their Fines and
Compositions under the rates and proportions of the Qualifications aforesaid,
shall according to the said Ordinances and Orders, respectively be thereto
admitted; and further also, that no person or persons whatsoever (except such
Papists as having been in Arms, or voluntarily assisted against the Parliament,
have by concealing their quality, procured their admission to Composition)
which have already compounded, or shall hereafter compound and be thereto
admitted by both Houses of Parliament, at any of the rates and proportions
aforesaid, or under respectively, shall be put to pay any other Fine than that
they have or shall respectively so compound for, (except for such Estates, or
such of their Estates, and for such values thereof respectively as have been or
shall be concealed or omitted in the particulars whereupon they compound;) and
that all and every of them shall have thereupon their Pardons in such manner
and form as is agreed by both Houses of Parliament.

That an Act be passed whereby the Debts of the Kingdom, and the persons of
Delinquents, and the value of their Estates may be known; and which Act shall
appoint in what manner the Confiscations and Proportions beforementioned may
be leavied, and applied to the discharge of the said Engagements.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of Parliament, or such as
shall have power from them, shall think fit.

XIX.
That an Act of Parliament be passed, to declare and make void the Cessation of
Ireland, and all Treaties and Conclusions of Peace, or any Articles thereupon
with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of Parliament. And to settle
the prosecution of the War of Ireland in both Houses of the Parliament of
England, to be managed by them; and the King to assist, and to do no act to
discountenance or molest them therein.

That Reformation of Religion, according to the Covenant, be settled in the
Kingdom of Ireland by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses of the
Parliament of England have agreed, or shall agree upon, after Consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines here.

That the Deputy or chief Governor, or other Governors of Ireland, and the
Presidents of the several Provinces of that Kingdom, be nominated by both the
Houses of the Parliament of England; or in the intervals of Parliament, by such
Committees of both Houses of Parliament as both Houses of the Parliament of
England shall nominate and appoint for that purpose. And that the Chancellor,
or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of the Great Seal or Treasury,
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Duchy,
Secretaries of State, Master of the Rolls, Judges of both Benches, and Barons
of the Exchequer of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the
Vice-Treasurer, and the Treasurers at Wars of the Kingdom of Ireland, be
nominated by both Houses of the Parliament of England, to continue Quam diu se
been gesserint, and in the intervals of Parliament, by the aforementioned
Committees, to be approved or disallowed by both Houses at their next sitting.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the nomination of the Lords
of the Privy Council, Lords of Session, and Exchequer, Officers of State, and
Justice-General, in such manner as the Estates of Parliament there shall think
fit.

That the Militia of the City of London and Liberties thereof, may be in the
ordering and government of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common
Council assembled, or such as they shall from time to time appoint, (whereof
the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs for the time being to be three:) to be employed and
directed from time to time in such manner as shall be agreed on and appointed
by both Houses of Parliament.

That no Citizen of the City of London, nor any of the Forces of the said City,
shall be drawn forth or compelled to go out of the said City or Liberties
thereof for Military service, without their own free consent.

That an Act be passed for the granting and confirming of the Charters,
Customs, Liberties, and Franchises of the City of London, notwithstanding any
Nonuser, Misuser, or Abuser.

That the Tower of London may be in the government of the City of London, and
the chief Officer and Governor thereof from time to time be nominated, and
removeable by the Common Council: And for prevention of inconveniences which
may happen by the long intermission of Common Councils, it is desired that
there may be an Act, that all Bylaws and Ordinances already made, or hereafter
to be made by the Council assembled, touching the calling, continuing,
directing, and regulating the same Common Councils, shall be as effectual in
the Law to all intents and purposes, as if the same were particularly enacted
by the Authority of Parliament: And that the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons
in Common Council, may add to or repeal the said Ordinances from time to time
as they shall see cause.

That such other Propositions as shall be made for the City, for their further
safety, welfare, and government, and shall be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, may be granted and confirmed by Act of Parliament.

That all Grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs, Process, proceedings, and
other things passed under the Great Seal of England, in the custody of the
Lords and other Commissioners appointed by both Houses of Parliament for the
custody thereof, be, and by Act of Parliament with the Royal assent, shall be
declared and enacted to be of like full force and effect to all intents and
purposes, as the same or like Grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs,
Process, Proceedings, and other things under any Great Seal of England, in any
time heretofore were, or have been; And that for time to come, the said Great
Seal now remaining in custody of the said Commissioners, continue, and be used
for the Great Seal of England; And that all Grants, Commissions, Presentations,
Writs, Process, Proceedings, and other things whatsoever passed under or by any
authority of any other Great Seal, since the 22th day of May, Anno Dom. 1642.
or hereafter to be passed, be Invalid, and of no effect, to all intents and
purposes: Except such Writs, Process, and Commissions, as being passed under
any other Great Seal than the said Great Seal in the custody of the
Commissioners aforesaid, on or after the said 22th day of May, and before the
28th day of November, Anno Dom. 1643. were afterward proceeded upon, returned
into, or put in ure in any the Kings Courts at Westminster: And except the
Grant to Mr. Justice Bacon, to be one of the Justices of the King's Bench: And
except all Acts and proceedings by virtue of any such Commissions of
Jail-delivery, Assize, and Nisi prius, or Oyer and Terminer, passed under any
other Great Seal than the Seal aforesaid in custody of the said Commissioners,
before the first of October, 1642.

And that all Grants of Offices, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, made or
passed under the Great Seal of Ireland, unto any person or persons, Bodies
politic or corporate, since the Cessation made in Ireland, the fifteenth day
of September, 1643. shall be null and void. And that all Honors and Titles
conferred upon any person or persons in the said Kingdom of Ireland, since the
said Cessation, shall be null and void.

That the several Ordinances, the one entitled, An Ordinance of Parliament for
abolishing of Archbishops and Bishops within the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, and for se^ing of their Lands and Possessions upon Trustees
for the use of the Commonwealth; the other entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, for appointing the sale of Bishops Lands
for the use of the Commonwealth; be confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

These were the Conditions of Peace proposed by the Parliament as the subject
matter of that Conference, which all passionately wished, and a great many
fought for. They were the very same that had been heretofore sent to the King
when he was at Hampton Court, and not only rejected by his Majesty, but by the
Army also, as being too unreasonable: No notice taken of the Scots.

To what Conditions the Commissioners are tied.


they only differed in this, that in those last there was no mention made of
the Scots.

In the mean time the Pacificators are invested with no other authority but
that of answering the Royal Arguments, and of returning Reasons to induce the
King to assent: they had no power of softening any Proposition, or altering the
least word, nay, nor so much as of omitting the Preface. Their Instructions
likewise bear, that they are to acquaint the Parliament with the Kings
Concessions, and the whole progress of the Negotiation, to treat altogether in
writing, nay, and to debate the Propositions as they lay in order, not
descending to a new Proposition, until the former was adjusted.

The Conference to be held at Newport.
Nor was it thought enough that the Conditions and Commissioners were so
strictly limited; they confine the Conference also to the Town of Newport in
the Isle of Wight, and the continuance of it to the space of forty days.

The King also, who was to be present at the Conference, was so far well
treated as to be permitted to come out of his Prison and have that Island
allowed him for a larger confinement; but upon promise given, that he would not
depart out the Island within forty days after the conclusion of the Conference:
and the sly Oligarchick and Democratick Republicans, who had a hand in the
Councils, were the Authors of those scruples and restrictions. The K. is
allowed his necessary servants
With great caution the Parliament permitted some of his Majesty's necessary
Servants, by name, some Lawyers, Divines, and a Secretary to be present; but
not to be admitted into the Conference, only to be without behind the Curtain
in the Lobby. So that the King alone was singly to sustain the person of a
Politician and Divine, against the ablest Parliamentarian Politicians and
Divines of the whole Kingdom.

In managing the Conference, the King alone, The K.'s wonderful prudence in the
Conference.
with such incredible Prudence and Eloquence, sifted and bafled all their
strongest Arguments, with so great lenity and readiness of condescension,
granted their Demands even when he had made it appear they were unreasonable
(so far as with Honor and a safe Conscience he could) that he ravished them
all into admiration of him; and, which was an Argument of a supernatural Wit,
he brought over the Commissioners who were his most inveterate enemies, even
against their will, to his Opinion, (though their Employment, and the danger of
their heads, obliged them, against their Conscience, to continue in opposition
to him.) Without doubt, in this, as in all things else, he gave a glorious
proof of his Fatherly goodness, in that with his own loss and prejudice only
he would gladly have redeemed his people from the havoc and miseries of War.

The Conference had for some time been taken up in composing affairs, In the
middle of the Treaty the Parliamentarians require that the Marquess of Ormond's
Commission be recalled.
when of a sudden news is brought to the Parliament, that the Marquess of
Ormond was arrived in Ireland to govern that Kingdom in quality of Lord Deputy,
by authority from the King; and that he was to settle a Peace there, upon the
best conditions he could; as also to levy an Army for delivering the King out
of prison. Upon this, Letters are sent to the Commissioners in the Isle of
Wight, with instructions to demand of the King, that he would recall Ormond's
Commission, and turn him out of that authority which was somewhat uneasy to
the Pacificators.

In the mean while, report is made to the Parliament by piece-meals of what was
transacted in the Conference; where many with a mind as averse, as the Kings
was inclinable to peace, The K.'s Answers are censured in Parl.
quible at and censure the least punctilio of every thing, unless all were
condescended to in every tittle according to their own words and prescribed
form: for they were afraid (which some of them openly professed) that the
Propositions being fully granted, and no more place left for Animosity or
Grievance, they might, if not by force from the people, yet out of shame be
compelled to conclude a Peace in good earnest, which they only desired in
show. For the the King having, The K. unexpectedly granted many things.
contrary to the opinion of all, condescended to many things, had not only
admitted the subject matter, but also the scrupulosities and niceties of words.

To the Preface, which aimed not so much at the public Peace, as the branding
of himself and his party with a note of Ignominy, he would not consent, but
with this clause, That nothing in that Conference should be taken for granted,
unless all were aagreed upon in general.

He agreed to the Is It Proposition, of recalling the Declarations; to the XVIth,
of the Forces; the XIXth, of the government of Ireland; the XVth, of the
payment of public Debts, Provided these Debts were stated within the space of
two years; to the XVIIth, of anulling Titles of Honors; the XIXth, of the
chief Magistrates of the Kingdom; the XIXth, of the Great Seal; the XIXth, of
the Privileges of London. Of the Court of Wards There is no mension of the
Court of Wards in these Articles, tho it is expressed both here and in Baker's
Chronicle, and perhaps was thought of after these Articles were printed.
, provided he had an hundred thousand pound a year paid him in lieu of it.

In all these points he made himself an easy prey to the avarice and ambition
of others; and that he might render the Kingdom more peaceable to others, he
even suffered it to be snatched out of his own hands.

He gave his consent to all the Articles of the IIId Proposition, except one,
concerning Bishops and their Revenues; yet in that he was not altogether
wanting to the desires of the Parliament: for whatever did not plainly appear
to be of Divine Institution, he allowed might be abrogated; so that he suffered
Archiepiscopacy to be abolished, Episcopal Jurisdiction also, that is, the
exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the state and privilege of
holding Ecclesiastical Courts; but he would not suffer the power of conferring
Orders ( and administering Church Censures) as being Apostolical, to be altered
and lessened.

But at length the little Rabbis of the Assembly and Pacificators interweaving
with the other Arguments, which he could better refute, that of invincible
Necessity, and promising privately, that if he would consent to these at
present, they would hereafter enlarge his Bonds, as also giving him hopes that
the Parliament would condescend to him in other matters, provided in this he
would remit somewhat of his strictness of Conscience; he consents that for the
space of three years, Orders shall not be conferred by the Bishops, without the
consent of Presbyters; nay, that the power of Ordaining shall be suspended,
until twenty Divines of his choosing, and an Assembly called by the Parliament,
do meet, determine, and settle the Government of the Church; to which he
promised to acquiesce, if the Parliament would do the like: In the mean time he
is not against it, but that Presbytery may be settled for a trial.

Abhorring the thought of Sacrilege, he would not suffer Bishops and
Church Lands to be divided and alienated from the Church; but permitted them to
be let out by lease for ninety nine years, paying a small yearly rent for the
maintenance of the Bishops, and as a token of their Tenure, provided after the
expiring of the Lease, they should return to the Crown to be employed for the
use of the Church: which, in the mean time, he was firmly resolved to redeem
with his money, and to restore them to the Churchmen to whom in right they
belonged.

Nor would he (being mindful of his Friends amidst his own dangers) consent to
the XVIIIth Proposition, concerning Delinquents; but he allowed,

I. That they might be moderately fined.

II. That they may be debarred from the Kings presence and coming to Court:
that some of them also may be banished, but not as Traitors, nor yet to lose
their Lives and Estates, if they act to the contrary.

III. That for three years they be excluded from sitting in Parliament.

IV. That they might be brought to trial, if it were thought fit, and be
condignly punished, if they had acted any thing against the known Laws of
England, (which certainly favored the Kings Party): But he thought it unjust
that any man should be punished for his Loyalty to him, according to the
dictates of his Conscience, and the municipal Laws, by a Law made ex post
facto. Yet he condescended to other Articles of the same Proposition, upon this
condition, that pious and learned Churchmen, free from scandal, might enjoy a
third of their Livings, and not be totally deprived of the liberty of preaching.

He could not, as he said, recall the Authorities which he had given to the
Marquess of Ormond, at the very time when himself was confined to prison. The
Parliament agreed with him in the rest: which succeeding, then, according to
the Concessions in the XIXth Proposition, the Parliament should have the sole
administration of the affairs of Ireland. In the mean time, however, he wrote
to the Marquess of Ormond, commanding him to refrain from the execution of his
power, so long as the Conference and any hopes of Peace continued.

Whilst the Conference lasted, the King, The K. makes some Proposals.
that he might not still suffer so hard usage, and that he might try how the
Members of Parliament were affected toward him, gave some very just and useful
Proposals to be sent to the Parliament.

First, he desires, To which the Parl. in a great part consent.
That he may have leave to repair forthwith to Westminster, or any of his
houses near London, where he may treat with his Parliament at nearer distance,
with honor, safety, and freedom. Which desire, the Parliament having felt the
pulse of the City, and being encouraged under the hands of the most part and
best of the Citizens, promised, so soon as the Propositions were granted,
should be allowed him.

Secondly, the King demands, That he may be restored to the possession of the
Lands and Revenues of the Crown.

Thirdly, That he may have compensation for his lawful Rights which the
Parliament have thought fit to abolish. To these also the Parliament willingly
consent.

Fourthly, That by an Act of Oblivion the memory of all things that had been
done in time of the War, might be abolished. To this Proposal they did not
consent, but with cautions and limitations, that gave liberty to the
Parliamentarians to bring Actions against any almost of the Kings Party.

The promising ho^es of Peace*
Matters being near composed beyond all men's expectation, though perhaps not so
as every one desired, the Commissioners for Pacification, full of thoughts of
Peace, promised the same to the King, though in that they were false Prophets:
for they thought (as well they might) that the Parliament would in some measure
abate in their rigid demands, when the King to mollify them, had stripped
himself of the Government both of England and Ireland. Nay, the glad hopes of
Concord begun to cherish the drooping minds of all people; which without doubt
would have followed, had not factious and rebellious men, Are disappointed by
the Rebels*
who by clandestine arts had already driven us into a War, now openly and with
force of Arms disappointed the desired fruit of the Conference, and the Peace
that was ready to be concluded. Now in what manner they accomplished that, it
will be necessary I should with all possible sincerity relate.

In what manner.
In the heat of the Conference, that part of the Army which had prospered in the
War, and was returned home victorious, commanded by Fairfax, whom Ireton as a
bad Genius haunted, was encamped so near London, that in half a days time they
might march thither and suppress their unprovided Adversaries, if any sudden
occasion required. In the mean time Fairfax, The Commanders of the Army pretend
to be pleased with Peace.
Ireton, and the rest of the Colonels behaved themselves very submissively in
public, pretend that they will always obey the Ordinances of Parliament, and
that public Peace will be to them of all men most acceptable; that so being
eased from the fatigues and labors of War, they may mind their own affairs,
and after so much toil and danger, at length enjoy rest and peace. But
privately having consulted with the Members of Parliament of their own Faction,
they suffer Consults to be held amongst the inferior Officers and private
Soldiers of the Army, They stir up the common Soldiers against it; and to
destroy the King,
and, at the instigation of their Emissaries, Petitions to be framed, wherein
it was desired that the Treaty with the King should be broken up, and all the
Enemies of the Commonwealth indifferently (thereby craftily glancing at the
person of the King) brought to condign punishment: These also they caused to be
printed and published, that they might feel the pulse of the people. Nor was it
doubted, but that the chief Commanders and Colonels were the Authors of those
Petitions; and that by their Emissaries (and particularly by Hugh Peter's, a
Renegado from, and the reproach of the Ministry, an impudent saucy fellow)
they were dispersed into all places, whereby they wheadled the Soldiers, who
in their own nature were sufficiently prone to Booty and Innovations.

In the mean while, The soldiers are drawn together near London.
the Country People (whom we mentioned before to have made some stirs) being
dispersed, and Garrisons and Governors placed in the several Counties, all the
Soldiers of the Kingdom are commanded to repair to Fairfax's Camp; who in
great numbers, many following the prevailing Party, flocked together victorious
and triumphant. Ireton, Ireton makes a Remonstrance against the Peace;
upon a rumor spread abroad amongst the people of a difference betwixt him and
Fairfax, lurking privately in Windsor-Castle, and having called some of his
Consorts of the Lower House, publishes a Remonstrance, with great ostentation
of words and affected eloquence, wherein, in name of the Army, by captious
quirks and subtilties, And that in name of the Army.
he argues against the Peace made with the King, and the Remonstrance of his
Majesty, nay and desires Justice against the King himself: That those Members
who the year before had been impeached of High Treason by the Army, might be
brought to trial; and that all who staid in Parliament heretofore, when the
Speakers and rest of the Members of their Faction fled to the Army, should be
excluded: That the Soldiers Arrears should be paid out of the Kings Revenue,
and the Deans and Chapters Lands, to be distributed for this use especially,
and also for other public charges: That the present Parliament should be
dissolved, and a better course taken for the future that the people should
choose a Representative which should have the supreme administration of the
Government. These and several other things of that nature, he very imperiously
demands.

The Army being called together,
The end of the Conference now approaching, (which the Republicans of both sorts
in the Parliament, endeavored by all Arts to stave off and protract, that the
Army might more conveniently join) the Commanders of the Army being informed
from the Isle of Wight of the progress of affairs, and of the opportunities
that were proper for their turn, call a Field-Council, And a Fast appointed,
wherein all the Colonels and inferior Officers meet; and there they give
themselves to fasting and prayer.

(Which was often abused by them)
For we must know, that these Sons of the Earth had great intimacy and
correspondence with Heaven, as they pretended; and when they were about to act
any thing contrary to the Law of Nature, the Light of Reason, or the Laws of
God and man, they used to begin the work with Prayers to Almighty God, in a
doubtful manner proposing the case; and the matter being first discussed
between the Majesty of Heaven and themselves, they then, by turning and winding
their Prayers, shape an Answer to their designs; which like a divine Oracle
rendered to the praying inquirers, they impose upon the common Soldiers as an
Article of Faith, though the matter had been long before hatched in their
thoughts: nor durst any man gainsay it, who had not a mind to have his name
dashed out of the Roll of the Saints. And hence it was that the people dreaded
their Fasts and Prayers, as ominous Prodigies.

The Pageantry of their Devotion being over, It is read and approved;
Ireton's Remonstrance was read, and applauded too by the Soldiers, as if it
dropped from Heaven; they prefix to it the formidable title of the Army, as an
Act and Deed approved by all, And presented to the Parl. in name of the Army
and People.
and order it to be presented to the Parliament in the name of the Army and
People of England, who if they had been called to give their votes, scarcely
one of a thousand would have consented to it; and all the rest could not but
have cursed the perfidious Author of the villainy, with all his Adherents, as
the Bane and plague of mankind.

But the Lower House making a virtue of the necessity of the times,
Nevertheless, the Lower House persists in considering of the Kings Concessions;
at which the Commanders of the Army are angry, and carry the K. away from the
Isle of Wight.
take the courage to lay aside for some time that Remonstrance, and to apply
themselves to the examining and discussing of the Royal Concessions which then
lay before them. The Commanders of the Army taking it very ill to be thus
slighted by them, who ought to have thanked them for all the honor and dignity
they enjoyed, sent some Troops into the Isle of Wight, who having seized the
King, removed him out of the Island, and clapped him up prisoner in Hurst-Castle
opposite to the Island on the main-land-side, a narrow, nasty, and unwholesome
place, by reason it is encompassed by the Sea. At the same time they march to
London, They march to London and post themselves about the Parliament House.
and put Garrisons into the Kings Palace, and the Noblemens houses adjoining
the Palace-yard and Houses of Parliament, having posted the Army in the
neighboring places about.

The Soldiers hoped that this beginning would put the dissenting Members into
such a fear, that they would hide in holes and corners, (which had been very
usual with them) and that men of their own Faction being sole Masters of the
Parliament, they might do what they pleased under the cloak of the Authority of
Parliament, which would justify their Violence, and make what Laws soever
might conduce to their profit and advantage.

Yet the Members meet,
But the event answered not their expectations: for most part of the Members,
(as if at that time they had been assisted by divine inspiration) not at all
terrified by the muttering and anger of the Soldiers, nor the clashing of
Arms, thinking themselves sufficiently secure by their character of
Parliament Men, meet to consult in a greater number than ordinary.

And debate about the Kings Concessions.
Both that day and the following, the Lower House debated hotly about the Kings
Concessions, whilst in the mean time the Republicans of both sorts raise
scruples, jangle, make parties, and with long Speeches protract the time about
Presbytery and the Covenant, neither of which they liked; amongst whom no man
was so fierce as Sir Henry Vane, who in the Isle of Wight had persuaded the
King to grant no more, seeing he had already yielded so many and so great
Privileges to the Parliament, as he thought it neither lawful for them to
expect nor take, which he promised also publicly to assert: This man, I say,
inveighed bitterly against the Conditions of Peace, as if under the mask of
Concessions, and the show of settling Peace, Danger lay hid, and that his
Majesty laid a Snare for subverting the public Liberty of Parliament and
People; and all this, that he might gain time for the whole Army to post
themselves in the City.

They vote them to be a sufficient ground for a Peace,
At length a Vote is passed, That the Kings Concessions were a sufficient ground
for Peace. This past by the voices of two hundred, hardly threescore opposing
it. The House of Lords agreeing to it.
The Lords having next day assented to it in the same terms, the Parliament was
adjourned for a week, till that Commotion might be somewhat appeased.
Commissioners are forthwith sent from the House of Commons to acquaint Fairfax
and the Commanders of the Army with the matter.

This so incensed the Oligarchick Rebels, This incensed the Oligarchick Rebels.
that the Speaker of the House of Commons, who had already greedily swallowed
down their poison, or at least temporized and turned to either side as the
Faction prevailed, threatened forthwith publicly in the House, That they would
never be suffered any more to meet in Parliament, if they obstinately persisted
in that opinion. The Commanders of the Army beset the Parl. house; imprison
many Members; debar others from entering;
And indeed the day appointed for the next Session, some Colonels guarded by a
Regiment or two of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse, beset all the avenues to the
House of Commons, apprehend forty Members of the more resolute and wise, who
dissented from them; debar about one hundred and fifty more from entering the
House* and suffer none to go in but such as they knew to be devoted to their
Faction. Some had slipped in undiscovered, Some they carry away by force out of
the House.
by a Note they call out under pretext of speaking with some Friend or Client
at the door; and though they alleged the authority and privilege of
Parliament, yet they seize and hurry them away in the very Court.

The captive Members being many ways tossed and abused, are exposed to
derision, And abuse the Captives.
and the miseries of a long and nasty imprisonment; amongst whom were many who
having asserted the Parliament-Cause, as Generals, Governors, and Colonels,
were thus thanked for their good services. Nay, and William Prynn, a fierce
Asserter of the Opinions he once entertained, that indefatigable Author of
voluminous Writings for the Parliament, stuck fast in the same mire with the
rest; the Spectators every where admiring the inscrutable Judgments of God, who
suffered them to be so unworthily treated by their Slaves and Servants, who
themselves were the Subjects that first took up Arms against their King, and
audaciously laid hands on him. All this was done under the honest and specious
color of purging and reforming the House.

The Oligarchick Faction, to the number of about forty men, snatches the
Authority: Who are still overruled by the soldiers.
Thus the Lower House is reduced to a Junto of a few men, to wit, the eighth
part of the just number, and these wholly enslaved to the Army, whose
Commanders coming as freely into the House as the Rumpers went into the Camp,
they daily conferred Notes together; and it is first resolved in a Council of
War, what was to be proposed to be enacted in Parliament, which then served
under the Army, and lent them Authority to palliate their Machinations.

Of so many hundred Members, there scarcely remained forty in the House, a
number unfit to bear the name of the Commons of England; and these not only
the least, but the most part consisting of a remnant of the dregs of the House;
and many of them Commanders in the Army. So that there remained nothing of a
Parliament but the name; the rest abominating such horrid wickedness, and
shunning their company and conversation; amongst whom were some who being
deluded with the sham of Conscience, had espoused the Party of the Republicans.

They enact concerning the highest affairs, and of bringing the King to a trial.
Thus a few fellows (about twenty of them for the most part continually
dissenting) blush not to usurp to themselves alone the supreme power of
ordering the affairs of England, of bringing the King to a trial, making and
abrogating the Laws of their Country, and overturning the ancient and
fundamental Government of the Nation. They confirm the Vote for Non Addresses,
which had been craftily and surreptitiously made, They confirm the Votes of
None Addresses, and rescind that concerning a Conference with the King.
and afterward repealed by both Houses in full number. But the other Votes,
for having a Conference with the King, and especially that which declared the
Kings Concessions to be a sufficient ground for a Peace, they rescind and
scornfully raze out of their Journal; as an Act unworthy of Parliament. New
Orders in place of the former, pass in this House of Commons, whereby they
invade the Government by Votes, which before they had snatched by Arms.

They first vote, They pass Votes preliminary to the Kings murder.
That all Power resides in the People.

Secondly, That that Power belongs to the Peoples Representatives (meaning
themselves) in the House of Commons.

Thirdly, That the Votes of the Commons have the force of a Law, without the
consent of the King or House of Lords, a M. Horatius Cons. of Rome caused a Law
to pass, Ut quod tributim plebes jussisset, populum teneret; that is, That what
Laws or Orders the Com-Counc. or Tribes of Rome should make, should oblige the
body of the Commonwealth by which the Senate and Nobility lost their power; and
way was made for the turning that State into a Democracy, to the ruin of it.
Live. l. 3. c. 55 They erect a Trib. of subjects against the K.
plain Horatian Law, that what the lowest Order of the People enacteth, binds
the whole body of them.

Fourthly, That to take Arms and make War against the Representatives of the
People or the Parliament, is High Treason.

Fifthly, That the King himself took up Arms against the Parliament, and that
therefore he is guilty of all the blood shed in this Civil War (that so they
might seem to excuse themselves of the Villainy) and ought by his own blood to
expiate it.

These were the Preludes to that most horrid and abominable Villainy, (I tremble
to mention it) which it behoved them to bring about by degrees: for trusting
now to their great power, which indeed was as great as they thought fit to take
to themselves, they had the boldness to erect a new Tribunal of most abject
wretches against the King, to which they give the name of the High Court of
Justice, thinking that its name might procure it reverence. And appoint 150
Judges of their own Faction to do the fact.
In this Mock-Court they appoint an hundred and fifty Judges, (that they might
in number at least represent the people) the most factious Sticklers of the
whole Faction; to whom they give power of arraigning, trying, judging, and
condemning Charles Stuart King of England.

Some Nobles and Judges also.
In the number of these, they appoint six Earls out of the House of Lords, and
the Judges also of the Kingdom lately chosen by themselves. But the greater
part consist of the Commanders of the Army, Commanders of the Army, Members of
the House of Com. Mechanics, Bankrupts,
who first conspired the murder of the King, and the Members of the House of
Commons who were the most inveterate enemies to Monarchy. The rest were Rascals
raked out of the Kennel of London, or the Neighborhood. Amongst these some
were Cobblers, Brewers, Silversmiths, and other Mechanics, the greater part
were Bankrupt Spend-thrifts, Debauchees and Whoremasters, who nevertheless by
the Disciples of the Sect were called Saints. All obnoxious men.
Nay, there was none of them but did expect impunity for his cheating the
Public, Sacrilege, Bribery, and other enormous Crimes; or did hope to glut
his Avarice with the Kings Revenue, Houses, Furniture, or gainful places to be
conferred upon him for so bold an attempt: or, in a word, that was not drawn in
and allured up to the horrid fact by the tamperings, threats, and promises of
Cromwell, Ireton, and the other Commanders of the Army.

The Upper H. is slighted.
In the mean time there was hardly any regard had to the Lords; and it was
commonly believed, that being now terrified by so many and so great dangers,
they would of their own accords absent from the House, except four or five that
were slaves to that Republican Faction. But the Republicans send them their
Bills to be confirmed
The Rebels thought that the authority of these was sufficient to confirm any
attempt whatsoever, as they had already oftener than once experienced. Nor
indeed were their hopes altogether frustrated. However, when the matter came to
the push, their luck proved somewhat worse than they expected: They are
rejected as hurtful and unlawful.
for a few Lords used daily to come to the House; but that day when the Bill
for trying the King was to be brought to the Lords House for their consent,
unexpectedly seventeen Lords were present, who all (not excepting those who
favored the Republicans) not only deny their consent, but cast the Bill over
the Bar, as destructive and contrary to Law.

This enraged the Oligarchick Rebels, Wherefore the Lords are dash^ out of the
number of the Kings Judges,
and put them upon thoughts of revenge, taking it hainously that so public an
affront and disgrace had been put upon them. However, at present they thought
it enough to dash all the Lords out of the number of the Kings Judges.

By and by also the Judges of the Kingdom were struck out of that black List,
And the Judges of the Kingdom, as contrary to their Bill.
because being privately asked their opinions in that affair, (though through
the interest of this Faction they had been lately by authority of Parliament
raised to their places) they had answered, That it was against the known and
received Laws and Customs of England to bring the King to a Trial.

For a President of this Court, They choose a President of the Court,
who might match it in fame and reputation, they pitch upon one John Bradshaw,
a base-born broken Pettifogger, a fellow of a brazen forehead, and an insolent
and saucy tongue, who a little before was of no value amongst those of his own
Gang. And an Attorney General.
One Cook they make Attorney General, a fellow of the same stamp, poor,
guilty, (as was reported) of Polygamy, who had played a thousand tricks and
cheats to get Bread, and now was ready to do any villainy in hopes of profit.

They privately consult for some days about the matter and form of the
Arraignment, or the manner of perpetrating the Villainy; where in drawing the
Kings Indictment, one Dorislaus a Doctor of the Laws, a German, who was either
banished or had fled his Country, took the greatest pains.

In the mean time all the Presbyterian Ministers of London, in a manner, and
more out of several Counties; yea, and some out of the Independents also,
declare against the thing in their Sermons from the Pulpit, in Conferences,
monitory Letters, Petitions, Protestations, and public Remonstrances. They
earnestly beg, In the mean time the Presbyterian Ministers cry out against it.
That contrary to so many dreadful Imprecations and Oaths, contrary to public
and private Faith confirmed by Declarations and Promises, contrary to the Law
of Nations, the Word of God and sacred Rules of Religion, nay, and contrary to
the welfare of the State, they would not defile their own hands and the Kingdom
with Royal Blood. The Scots also protest against it. The States General
intercede

English Lo^ds offer them^ves Hostages for the King.


The Scots by their Commissioners protest against it. The Ambassadors of the
States General of the United Provinces (if they faithfully performed their
Masters Orders) intercede. Some English Noblemen, to wit, the Earl of
Southampton, the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, and Earl of
Lyndsey, etc. do what lies in their power; they neither spare prayers nor
money; offer themselves as Hostages, or, if the Republicans demanded it, their
lives, as being only guilty, if the King had offended in any thing. The people
whisper their rage, The whole People rages.
for that was all they could now do; hardly restraining their unarmed fury. Our
present King, then Prince CHARLES, used all means to assist his Father in this
danger. Besides, the Ambassadors of the States General, whom he had procured
to be sent, he daily dispatched Agents as well from the Prince of Orange as
himself, and such as were Relations, Kinsmen, and Friends to Cromwell, Ireton,
and the rest of the Conspirators; who being warranted with full power, might by
prayers, promises, threats, or what arguments they judged fit, either dissuade
them from that unparalled Barbarity, or at least for some time prevail with
them to delay the execution of the Villainy.

Nor was Bradshaw the bloody President secure from violent hands; Burghill lies
in wait for Bradshaw;
for one Burghill armed with sword and pistol, watched him one night behind
Gray's Inn-gate when he was to come home late; But in vain, and with danger of
his life.
but missing of his design that night, because Bradshaw did not come home,
next day being betrayed by one Cook, to whom he had discovered the matter, he
was brought before the Parricides. However, his Guards being drunk, finding an
occasion of an escape, he saved his own life, having only laid in wait for
another man's.

But all was in vain: But all attempts are in vain,
for the Rebels slighting these things, pretend Gods providence and the motions
of the Holy Ghost, for their warrant and security. Peter's a brazen-faced
Hypocrite, Peter's from the Pulpit encouraging the Judges.
who being disgracefully whipped out of Cambridge, ever after that clove close to
the Schismatics, bids them from the Pulpit, Go on and prosper; that now was
the time When the Saints should bind Princes in chains, and their Nobles with
fetters of iron: so lewdly did that profane Knave interpret holy Scripture;
telling them, That they need not question but this Prophecy was to be fulfilled
by them: and in the Sermon he addresses himself to the holy Judges (the title
he thought fit to give them) and protests, that he was certain there were in
the Army five thousand men, no less Saints than those that conversed with God
himself in Heaven. Then kneeling in the Pulpit with floods of forced tears, and
lifted up hands, he earnestly begs, in the name of the People of England, That
they would do Justice against CHARLES, and not suffer Benhadad the enemy to
escape. Nay, he most insolently inveighed against Monarchy it self, and
straining his virulent wit, he relates the History, How the Trees choosing a
King, and the Vine and Olive Tree refusing the office, they submitted
themselves to the sharper government of the bramble; and compared Kingly
government to briars. By such kind of Arguments he stirs up and confirms those
new Judges, who of their own nature were already but too much enraged and
fiercely bent against the King.

Accusers and Witnesses against the K. are cited by a Herald.
There was another besides Peter's the Preacher, an Herald, one Sergeant Dendy
also employed, who (being environed with a Guard of Horse, for fear of being
stoned) by sound of Trumpet, cited all those to appear who had any crime to
object against the King; and this he did first in Westminster Hall, and then in
the most public places of the City.

The King is brought to the Bar.
Before these Judges of the new Court, the most August Charles, already stripped
of three most flourishing Kingdoms by the Rebels, and having now no more but
Life to be deprived of, is brought without the least sign in his countenance
of any discomposure of mind.

Is indicted in name of the People of England.
His indictment is read, wherein he is accused, In the name of the People of
England, of Treason, Tyranny, Murders, and of all Rapines that were occasioned
by the War; with the highest aggravations of the Crimes. But the whole stress
of the Indictment lay in this, That he had made War against the Parliament;
which the Army under the Parliaments pay had long ago trampled under foot,
scarcely any shadow of it remaining. Great was the company of Spectators, who
with groans, sighs, and tears, lamented the condition of the best of Princes.

Nor without injustice can I pass over the brave action of the heroic Lady
Fairfax, The Lady Fairfax publicly contradicting it.
Daughter to the Lord Vere, who out of a Belcony that looked into the Court,
cried out publicly, That that was a lie; that the tenth part of the People was
not guilty of that Villainy, but that it was a contrivance of the Traitor
Cromwell. And this she did with great danger of her life.

The King having heard this Indictment, He calls into question the Authority of
the Court.
with a majesty in his looks and words, that cannot be expressed, puts the
question to those new Judges, By what Authority they brought their King to the
Bar, contrary to the public Faith which was very lately made to him when he
entered into a Conference with the Members of both Houses. By what lawful
Authority, said he emphatically. He knew indeed there were many unlawful and
powerful Combinations of men in the world, as of Thieves and Robbers by the
Highways. He desires they would tell him by what Authority they had taken that
Power, (such as it was upon them) and he would be willing to answer; but if
they could not, he bids them think well upon it, before they go farther from
one sin to a greater: That he had a Trust committed to him by God by an ancient
and lawful Descent; and that he would not betray it by answering to a new and
unlawful Authority.

The President replying, Which the President affirming to be derived from the
People that choose the King, the King denies it
That he was brought to answer in the name of the People of England, of which
he was elected King. The King made answer, That England was never an Elective
Kingdom, but an Hereditary Kingdom for near these thousand years. That he did
stand more for the liberty of the People, by rejecting their usurped Power,
than any of them that came to be his pretended Judges did by supporting it.
That he did not come there as submitting to the Court: That he would stand as
much for the Privilege of the House of Commons as any man there whatsoever;
but that he saw no House of Lords there, that might, together with a King,
constitute a Parliament But then that neither one nor both the Houses, nor any
other Tribunal upon Earth, had any power to judge the King of England; much
less a parcel of packed Judges of the Lower House, who were masked only with
the oppressed power of that Court.
. That if they would show him a legal authority, warranted by the Word of God,
the Scriptures, or warranted by the Constitutions of the Kingdom, he would
answer: for that he did avow, that it was as great a sin to withstand lawful
Authority, as it is to submit to a tyrannical or any ways unlawful Authority.
The President in the mean time often interrupted him, and at length commanding
him to be carried back to Prison.

The King is again and a third time brought to the bar.
Yet was the good King a second and a third time brought before the Bar of the
Common People, where the President puts him in mind of his Indictment, and
commands him to answer to the Articles brought against him, or otherways to
listen to his sentence. But the King still protested against the Authority of
the Court; affirming, That his life was not so dear to him, as his Honor,
Conscience, the Laws and the Liberties of the People; which that they might not
perish all at once, there were great reasons why he could not make his defense
before those Judges, nor acknowledge a new form of Judicature: for what power
had ever Subjects, or by what Laws was it granted them, to erect a Court
against their King? That it could not be warranted by Gods Laws, which on the
contrary command obedience to Princes; not by the Laws of the Land, since by
them no Impeachment can lie against the King, And being about to allege
Reasons against the Authority of the Court,
they all going in his name: nor do they allow the House of Commons the power
of judging the meanest Subject of England. And that lastly, that pretended
Power could not flow from any Authority or Commission from the People, since
they had never asked the question of the tenth man (he might have said, of the
thousandth) of the Kingdom.

The President interrupting him again, as before, takes him up now more
insolently, The President interrupts and takes him up.
bids him be mindful of his condition: tells him, that the Court is
sufficiently satisfied, and do affirm their own Jurisdiction; and that no
Reasons were to be heard that declined the Authority of the Court. But show me
that Court, answered the King, where Reason is not to be heard. We show it you
here, replied the President; and the next time you come, you will know more of
their pleasure. But the King urged, That at least he might be permitted to give
in his Reasons in writing; to which if they could give him satisfaction, he
would not decline their Jurisdiction. Here the President, not satisfied to deny
his modest suit, but falling also into a heat, commanded the Prisoner to be
carried away; who made no other return but this, Remember it is your King whom
you refuse to hear: it will be in vain for my Subjects to expect Justice from
you, when you will not hear your King make his lawful defense.

Now the King is the fourth time brought before this unjust Court of Justice;
where the President, The King is a fourth time brought to the bar; refuses to
plead:
in his Scarlet-robe, bitterly taxes the King of Contumacy, and runs out in
commendation of the Patience of the Court. He bids him at length submit to the
Court, or to expect his Sentence. But the King constantly refuses to plead
before them; telling them however, That he had something to say that concerned
the Peace of the Kingdom, Desires a Conference with the Lords and Commons.
and the Liberty of the Subject, wherein he desires to be heard before the
Lords and Commons. Yet they refuse to grant him that favor, which is not wont
to be denied to men of the meanest condition; pretending it would delay and put
a stop to Justice. To which the King replied, That it would be better to admit
the delay of a day or two, than to hasten a Sentence that might bring on that
trouble and perpetual inconvenience to the Kingdom, that the Child that is
unborn might repent it. For if I had had, said he, respect to my Life more than
the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberties of the Subject, certainly I should
have made a particular defense for my self: for by that at leastwise I might
have delayed an ugly Sentence, which I believe will pass upon me; and that the
Zeal to my Country had not overborn the care that I have of my own
preservation, I should have gone another way to work than I have done. Now
since a hasty Sentence once past may be sooner repented than recalled, I
desire, that having something to say more for the Peace of the Kingdom, and the
Liberty of the Subject, than for my own particular, I may be heard before
Sentence be given.

One of the Judges pricked in Conscience.
Upon which Colonel Downs, one of the Judges, being pricked in Conscience,
(contrary to what had been privately agreed upon amongst the Judges) desires
that they may withdraw and debate that Proposal privately. Though this
extremely vexed the President, Cromwell, and most of the rest, yet that they
might not seem publicly to quarrel among themselves, they all withdraw into an
adjoining Chamber; where Downs being paid off with flouts and jeers,
intermingled with no small threats, they return wonderfully unanimous and
agreeing into Court.

The President in a set-speech makes way for the Sentence.
Then the President with the same inhumane barbarity that he began, proceeds to
Sentence; having premised a long Speech, wherein he aggravates the Contumacy of
the King, and the haynousness of the Crime; he asserts the Power of
Parliaments, producing instances both foreign and domestic, (especially from
Scotland, how aptly the Scots are to look to it) wherein the People have
punished their Kings; and that the Power of the People of England over their
King, was not less than that of other Nations; that the King's guilt was
greater than that of all others, seeing that (according to the wish of
Caligula) he had endeavored to have cut off the head of the whole Nation, by
undertaking a War against the Parliament.

Having ended his Harangue, Orders the Sentence to be read.
he orders the Sentence to be read, in these words: That whereas the Commons of
England in Parliament had appointed them an High Court of Justice for the
trying of Charles Steuart King of England; before whom he had been three times
convented, and at first time a Charge of High Treason, and other Crimes and
Misdemeanors, was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of England, etc. Which
Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, he the said Charles Steuart was
required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do, etc.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, the Court does adjudge, That he the said
Charles Steuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be
put to death by severing his Head from his Body.

The Sentence being pronounced, All the Judges that were present, stand up and
confirm the Sentence.
sixty seven Judges that were present, as lifted up by the conscience of the
Villainy they had conspired in, at the desire of the President, (the thing
having been privately concerted) stand up and confirm the same; the rest,
(amongst whom was Fairfax) for the horror of the Crime, not daring to be
present.

Then was his sacred Majesty hurried away by the Soldiers to be by them (most
like to his Savior) scoffed at before he suffered; The soldiers carry away
the King, scoff at him,
who laying aside all reverence to the name of a King, as if they led their
Captive in triumph with cruel barbarity, (the aforesaid Peter's setting them on)
whereas in the beginning they cried, Justice, Justice; so now they cry,
Execution, Execution; like the Jews of old, Crucify him, Crucify him: And
barbarously use him.
They spit upon his Clothes as he passed by; nay, one or two had the boldness
to spit in his majestic face, which one of his Judges, a Colonel, took notice
of to many then present, commending the bravery of his Soldiers; and more
beheld with horror: They blew the smoke of Tobacco, a thing which they knew
his Majesty hated, in his sacred mouth, throwing their broken Pipes in his way
as he passed along: They also enjoin inhumane rudeness to others, beating those
who with a hat or bow saluted him as he passed; nay, whilst one more
compassionate than the rest, sighing, said, God have mercy upon him, they
knocked him down dead: Rushing into his Chamber both by day and by night, they
allowed him no retirement, nor any private discourse not so much as with his
Chaplain: When with much ado they had suffered one Bishop only, I mean, of
London, to have access unto him, with loud laughing they interrupt him in
paying his Devotions according to the Rite of the Church of England; and even
then when he was preparing for his last, they disturb him with scoffs and
frivolous and impertinent Questions.

His Majesty behaves himself courageously and prudently,
But he with great presence of mind, whilst they cried out, Justice and
Execution, turning to those that were about him, said, Alas, poor Souls, for a
piece of money they would do so for their Commanders. Wiping off the Spittle
when they spit upon him, all that came from him was, Christ has suffered more
for my sake. He so convincingly confuted the Commanders, Soldiers, and other
impertinent Anabaptists, who with their cavils and silly disputes came to tempt
him, that he put most of them to silence. He took so little notice of their
ridiculous mirth, that by contemning it, he disappointed their saucy petulance.
Nay, though he was straightened with time, And prepares himself for his last
sufferings.
and disturbed with the noise of barbarous Soldiers, yet with a religious and
sedate mind, spending his time in the confession of his sins, forgiving his
Enemies, taking the Sacrament, holy reading and meditation, and in all the
other duties of Piety, he finds the favor of God amidst the hatred of men, and
vanquishes and drives away the terrors of death even before they approach.

Whilst these things are done openly in view of the people, the execrable and
merciless Judges, The Judges, before the publication of Sentence, consult about
the kind, manner, and time of the Murder.
in the mean time, in their private Cabals allot every one the part he is to
act, what words and Gestures they are to use; consulting together about the
time, place, kind, and all the manner and solemnity of the Murder: where, I am
ashamed to mention, what dismal kinds of death were proposed for condemned
Caesar, even before the Sentence, according as the wantonness, cruelty, or
hatred of the several tempers did suggest, though I have been informed of it by
most credible persons. Some vote that his Head and Quarters may be set up in
public places, a punishment inflicted upon Traitors, as a lasting Infamy after
their death; some would have him hanged after the manner of Murderers, Robbers,
and Thieves; others again are of opinion that he should suffer in his Crown and
Robes, as a Monument of the Power of the People over their King. At length they
agree that it will suffice, that he lose his head upon a Scaffold to be erected
before the Banqueting House of White Hall, that from the same place where he
used to mount the Throne, and appear in the sacred pomp of Majesty, he might
pass to the Block, and cast off the Ornaments of Royalty, where he commonly put
them on. This was the Triumph, these the Trophies of a victorious Revenge. And
because they had been told, that the King would not submit his Neck to the Ax
of his Subjects, they order iron Rings and Staples to be made upon the
Scaffold, that if he resisted, he might be drawn down to the Block by the head
and hands.

But it is not to be omitted, that amongst these Preliminaries to death,
Proposals are tendered unto him, upon granting which, he is offered his life.
some Soldiers, the day before the execution, offered Proposals; which if he
would at length assent to, they promised to grant him life and the name of
King. But having heard one or two of them read, he rejected them, saying to
this effect: I had rather suffer a thousand deaths, than so to prostitute my
Honor and the Liberty of my People.

He is permitted to take his leave of his Children.
And, that I may not pass by unmentioned the least piece of humanity showed to
him, they give him leave to take his Farewell of his Children; to wit, of the
Lady Elizabeth then eleven years old, and the Duke of Gloucester nine. What the
King gave them in charge.
Here the King charged to tell the Queen, that his thoughts had never strayed
from her, and that his love would be the same to the last; that she should
command the Prince in his name (if it pleased God to advance him to the Throne)
to pardon his Enemies, etc. withal, he commanded her and her second Brother
(the Duke of York who sometime before had made his escape from the Parliament)
to be subject to the Prince and obey their Mother: he bid her also read Bishop
Andrews Sermons, Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, and Bishop Laud's Book against
Fisher, which would ground her against Popery.

Then he said to the Duke of Gloucester, Mark, Child, what I say; they will cut
off my head, and perhaps make thee a King: but mark what I say, You must not be
King so long as your Brother Charles and James do live; for they will cut off
your Brothers heads (when they can catch them) and cut thy head off too at
last: and therefore I charge you do not be made a King by them. To which the
Child (looking wishfully upon the King) answered, I will be torn in pieces
first.

The K. is led to execution.
Now was the fatal day when the King, fortified against death by Innocence and
Piety, came out of St. James's house, (now the Royal Prison) and walked afoot
through the Park, with a cheerful countenance, as if he had been going a
hunting. The Soldiers and guard of Partisans marching slowly, he bid them go
faster, saying, That he now went before them to strive for an heavenly Crown,
with less solicitude than he had often encouraged his Soldiers to fight for
an earthly Diadem.

Being brought into the Banqueting House, he spent an hour in prayer, that
having recommended his Soul to God, he might have some leisure-time before
death to be spent amongst the Soldiers. As he went out from thence upon the
Scaffold that was covered with dismal black, the first Objects that present
themselves to his view, are Executioners in Vizard-masques, a Block and an Ax;
which yet do not so damp his Royal Courage, but that he showed his care for the
living to be far greater than his apprehensions of dying: for looking round
upon the People, who by numerous Guards of Horse were kept at a great distance,
and perceiving that he could not be heard by them, He speaks to Col. Tomlinson,
and the other Instruments of the Regicide.
he waved (as it is probable) the discourse that he intended to deliver to the
Multitude, and addressed himself to Colonel Tomlinson, and the other
Instruments of the Regicide, in these following words.

I Shall be very little heard of any body else; His Maj. had not spoken, but
that otherwise he might have been thought to submit to the guilt.
I shall therefore speak a word to you here. Indeed I could have held my peace
very well, if I did not think that holding my peace would make some men think
that I did submit to the Guilt as well as to the Punishment: But I think it is
my duty to God first, and then to my Country, to clear my self both as an
honest man, a good King, and a good Christian. I shall begin first with my
Innocence; and in troath, I think it not very needful for me to insist long
upon this: He did not begin the War.
for all the world knows that I did never begin a War with the two Houses of
Parliament; and I call God to witness, unto whom I must shortly give an
account, that I did never intend to incroach upon their Privileges: They began
upon me; But the two Houses.
it is the Militia they began upon: They confessed the Militia was mine, but
they thought it fit to have it from me. And to be short, if any body will look
to the dates of Commissions, of their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the
Declaration, he will see clearly that they began those unhappy Troubles, not I.
So as for the guilt of those enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope
that God will clear me on it. His Majesty lays not the the guilt upon the two
Houses,
I will not, (for I am in charity) and God forbid that I should lay it upon the
two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free
of this Guilt; Ill Instruments the cause of it.
but I believe that ill Instruments between them and me, have been the chief
cause of all this Bloodshed: So that as I find my self clear of this, I hope
(and pray God) that they may too. Yet for all this, God forbid that I should be
so ill a Christian, as not to say, that Gods Judgments are just upon me; many
times he does pay injustice by an unjust Sentence, One unjust sentence punished
with another.
that is ordinary: I will say this, That unjust Sentence that I suffered to
take effect, is punished by an unjust Sentence upon me: So far I have said, to
show you, That I am an innocent man. Now to show you that I am a good
Christian, I hope there is a good man here ( pointing to the Bishop of London)
that will bear me witness, His Majesty forgives all the world, even the Causers
of his death.
that I have forgiven all the world, and even those in particular that have
been the chief Causers of my death: who they are, God knows, I do not desire to
know; I pray God forgive them. But this is not all, my Charity must go further;
I wish they may repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that
particular: I pray God, with St. Stephen, that this be not laid to their
charge; and withal, that they may take the way to the Peace of the Kingdom; for
my charity commands me not only to forgive particular men, but to endeavor to
the last gasp, the Peace of the Kingdom. So (Sirs) I do wish with all my Soul,
Prays that they may take the right way to Peace.
(I see there are some here that will carry it further) that they endeavor the
Peace of the Kingdom. (Sirs) I must show you, both how you are out of the way,
and put you in a way. First, you are out of the way; for certainly all the ways
you ever had yet, as far as I could find by any thing, is in the way of
Conquest: certainly this is an ill way; Conquest an ill way, seldom just.
for Conquest, in my Opinion, is never just, except there be a just and good
cause, either for matter of Wrong, or a just Title; and then if you go beyond
the first Quarrel that ye have, that makes it unjust at the end, that was just
at first: for if there be only matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery;
as a private Soldier said to Alexander, That he was a great Robber, himself
was but a petty Robber: And so, Sirs, for the way you are in, I think you are
much out of the way. To give God his due, the K. his due, and the People their
due, is the right way. Give God his due in settling his Church.
Now, Sirs, to put you into the way; believe it, you shall never go right, nor
God will never prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due, (that
is my Successor) and the People their due; I am as much for them as any of
you. You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church, according to
the Scripture, (which is now out of order) and to set you in a way
particularly, now I cannot; but only this: A National Synod freely called, As
to the K. it concerning himself, his Majesty waves it.
freely debating among themselves, must settle this, when every Opinion is
freely heard. For the King, indeed, I will not, the Laws of the Land will
clearly instruct you for that; therefore, because it concerns mine own
particular, Peoples liberty consists in having government, not in sharing it.
I only give you a touch of it. For the People, truly I desire their liberty
and freedom as much as any body whomsoever: But I must tell you, that their
liberty and freedom consists in having government under those Laws, by which
their lives and theirs may be most their own; it is not in having a share in
the government, that is nothing pertaining to them: A Subject and a Sovereign
are clean different things; and therefore until you do that, I mean, that you
put the People into that liberty, as I say, certainly they will never enjoy
themselves.

Sirs, it was for this that now I am come hither: for if I would have given way
to an Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I need not have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it
be not laid to your charge) that I am the MARTYR of the People. His Majesty the
Martyr of the People.
In troth, Sirs, I shall not hold you any longer; I will only say this to you,
That I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have put
this, what I have said, a little better digested than I have done; and
therefore I hope you will excuse me. I have delivered my Conscience: I pray God
you take those courses that are best for the good of the Kingdoms and your own
salvation.

Being thus about to conclude his most innocent and meek Speech, the Bishop of
London gave him a hint, That if his Majesty thought fit, he would say somewhat
as to his Religion; not that any man living suspected that, of which he had
given so clear proofs during the whole course of his life, but that he might,
according to custom, satisfy the People.

To which the King replied, He professes he dies a Christian of the Church of
England.
I thank you very heartily, my Lord, for I had almost forgotten it. In troth,
Sirs, my Conscience in Religion, I think, is very well known to all the World;
and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian, according to
the Profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by my Father,
and that honest man I think will witness it.

Then turning to the Officers, he said, Sirs, excuse me for this same; I have a
good Cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no more. But a little after,
I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no disturbance can be,
no disturbance in the World.

He is beheaded
Afterward kneeling down by the Block, as at a Desk, and having said a short
Prayer, he most humbly resigned his sacred head to his Maker to be struck off
by a masked Executioner; which was quickly done at one blow. So fell CHARLES;
and so with him expired the Honor and Soul of Great Britain.

Barbarous Cruelty against him dead. Against his body.
Nor are they satisfied to have exercised their Rage and Cruelty against him,
whilst he was alive: they dishonor his martyred Body; wash their hands and dip
their sticks in his Blood; set to sale the Block cut into pieces, and the Sand
underneath it moistened with Royal Blood; and make money also of his Hair. All
which were by the Spectators bought up upon different motives: some as dear
Pledges and Relics of a Prince whom they adored; others, that they might never
want a Cure for the Kings Evil, a Prerogative which our Kings are believed to
enjoy; but many also, that they might have and show in triumph the Spoils of
their Enemy. Cromwell, that he might to the full glut his traitorous eyes with
that Spectacle, having opened the Coffin wherein the Body was carried from the
Scaffold into the Palace, curiously viewed it, and with his fingers severed the
head from the shouldiers, as we have been informed by Eyewitnesses.

Afterward they give the Body to be embowelled by a rascally Quack-Physician,
and some Surgeons of the Army, most inveterate Enemies to the very name of a
King, (his Majesty's own Servants being removed) who had orders carefully to
enquire (which was the same to them as if they had been commanded positively to
affirm) whether he had not the Venereal Distemper, or any signs of Frigidity;
with a design to take an occasion from thence of branding either himself or
Posterity with Infamy. But that Villainy was crushed in the Egg by the presence
of an honest Physician, who getting to be admitted to the Dissection, overawed
them by his reverence and authority: the same person having also reputed that
by the healthfulness and vigor of his Constitution, he might have outlived
most men; so that all who consider the humourous temper both of his body and
mind, are fully now satisfied of it.

Nay, Against his soul.
that they might strain their Malice to the highest pitch of Cruelty, they make
no less scruple to murder the Soul of the King, and as easily damn him to the
flames of Hell, as they are wont to canonize all their own for Saints.

They make it their business also to blacken his Memory amongst men; Against
his fame and memory to posterity.
they cause his Statue that stood over the Porch of St. Paul's Church, and
another that was placed amongst the Statues of his Predecessors in the Royal
Exchange of London, to be thrown down, putting these words into the empty Nich,
The Tyrant the last of Kings is gone.
Exit Tyrannus regum ultimus; most false both in the presage and crime. They
employ the mercenary Pen of the Son of a certain S^rivener one Milton, from a
musty Pedant, ^ampt into a new Secretary, whose Talent lying in Satyrs and
Libels, and his Tongue being dipped in the blackest and basest venom, might
forge an (...), or Image-breaking; and by his livid and malicious Wit, publish
a Defense of the Kings Murder against Salmasius.

They rob the Bishop of London, They carry away all the Royal Writings that
they might not be published
who was long kept a Prisoner, of all the Papers which his Majesty had
delivered unto him, and ransaking all Clothes, Trunks, and Boxes, they search
into every corner, that they might hinder any Paper written with the Royal
hand, from coming into the public; by which indeed they deprived mankind of
many rare Monuments of Prudence and Piety.

Nevertheless, a golden book of the Kings Meditations saw the light.
Nevertheless, by the extraordinary providence of Almighty God, to their eternal
shame and confusion, and the everlasting praise of the boundless and Royal
Virtue of the King, a Book of MEDITATIONS or SOLLILOQVIES, saw the light, a
posthumous work of which, whosoever impartially considers the weight of matter,
the quaintness of style, the strength of Reasons, and the ardour of Piety,
must, in spite of Envy, acknowledge that amongst Writers he deserved the
Kingdom, and that those ill minds that wrested from him the Civil Government,
must render him the dominion of Letters.

The extraordinary grief of the people.
No King, not only of Britain alone, but that ever sat upon the Throne, left
the World more bewailed and lamented. For the news of his death being spread
over England, made women miscarry, cast both men and women into Fits,
Convulsions, and Melancholy; nay, some were so surprised, that they outlived
not the suddenness of the Consternation: The Pulpits in all places uttered
nothing but Sighs and Groans: The same persons with useless grief bewailing him
now he was gone, who because of difference of Opinion concerning
Church Government, had no great kindness for him whilst he was alive. The very
little Children (who seldom mind such things) bursting out into Tears, could
hardly be comforted. Men of all sorts, and almost of all Sects, enlarged in his
praises, comparing him to Job, David, and Solomon, for Patience, Piety, and
Wisdom. Nor can I my self forbear in this place to hoist sail, and with all the
skill I have, launch out into the Ocean of his Virtues; though the nature of an
Abridgment I am now about, does lay an embargo upon my liberty. I shall
therefore by a few, and those clouded beams, give you what sight I can of that
Sun.

He was indeed a Prince to be reckoned amongst the best of all past Ages, The
Character of the late King.
whose great endowments of mind, and greater Virtues, rendered him in the
opinion of all, even his greatest Enemies, Worthy of Government, if he had not
governed: who by all men's confession, attained to that height of perfection,
that he was the same in all places, and at all times; that the course of his
Virtues was even and steady, his countenance and looks the same in the most
different kinds of fortune that he had tried; as if from the Torrid he had
removed into the Frigid Zone, without the least alteration in his temper. Who
pleased even the unwilling, and as by a kind of Charm, mitigated the hatred of
many, won his enemies to Friendship, and turned Railings into Praises. Who so
excelled in Prudence and all Heroic Virtues, that through Calumnies and
Reproaches he shone out with greater luster.

His Enemies feigned him to be a man of weak Judgment, but found him to be a
match, if not superior, to the choicest Politicians and Divines: They reviled
him as cowardly and fickle, without faith, and of feminine inconstancy; but in
Battles they felt him to be valiant, perceived him undaunted in Threats,
Dangers, and Disgraces, and unshaken in Prison and at Death. They slandered him
as a Papist, but saw him in his Writings to be a Champion for the Reformed
Apostolical Religion; defending it not only by his Pen, but with his Blood.
They who maligned him as cruel and bloodthirsty, advanced to that
licentiousness of calumniating, only through the clemency of their King,
to which the Rebels promised themselves a too easy retreat, until by the
favor of fortune, being transported beyond the bonds of pardon, they choose
rather to deny mercy to a Prince of so much clemency, than to ask it of him
when he was disarmed.

If any thing could be objected to him, it was so far from being a fault in so
rare a Prince, that it was the height of an unseasonable Virtue, inconsistent
with so vicious and corrupt an Age; that is, too much Lenity to the cruel,
Candor to the disingenuous and crafty, a strict Justice and Certitude, which
is not commonly the Virtue of Kings, a Modesty that distrusted his own
Abilities, and a Mind so far from pride, that he was more apt to comply with
the worse Counsels of others, than to stick to the best of his own; as if he
had indeed believed the Calumnies of his Enemies to be true.

He was a great Example of Living, but a greater of Dying; We hate whilst it is
in being, and anxiously bustle for when it is gone.

The Rebels exercise Arbitrary Dominion over the Lives and Estates of others.
The great Defender of the Laws being now cut off, and the Government unhinged,
the new Usurpers thought it time to turn all topsie-turvy, and to make Laws
according to their own pleasure. They order CHARLES the Second, by the name of
CHARLES STEVART, and the Duke of York, wheresoever they could be found, to be
put to death. They forbid any man to call Charles the II. King, or to pray for
him, his Brother, or any of the Royal Family.
Out comes presently an Ordinance, under pain of High Treason, That no man
should presume to declare CHARLES STEUART, commonly called Prince of Wales,
King: And as if this had been but a small matter, That no man should pray for
CHARLES the Second, under the name of Prince of Wales, King of Scotland, or
eldest Son of the King, or for the Duke of York, or any of the Royal Family,
under pain of Sequestration.

Monarchy and the House of Lords being both abolished, the first under pretext
of change, The Monarch being cut off, they presently murder Monarchy; they also
abrogate the House of Lords.

Turns out the Lord Mayor of London.


uselesness and danger, and the other both of uselesness and danger; they make
an Ordinance for changing the most ancient Government of England into a
Democraty or Popular Commonwealth: and because the Mayor of London refused to
publish the Ordinance, they turn him out of his Office, fine him in two
thousand pounds, and commit him to the Tower; notwithstanding his alleging,
That such an act was to be performed by the Sheriffs, and not the Mayor of
London, and that being bound by so many Oaths, he could not in conscience do
it. A dull blockhead, one of the Kings Judges, was forthwith put into his
place, and that others upon account of conscience, might not boggle at any of
their commands, they abolish the Oath which all men upon their entry into
public place, were obliged to take to the Kings Majesty. They alter the Common
Council of the City also.
They purge the Common Council of the City, which was wont to consist of the
richer and graver Citizens, and turn out many Aldermen; making this their
color for it, that the year before (though at the desire of the major part of
the Parliament) They had signed the Petition for a personal Conference with the
King; and filled their places with the abject Riff-raff of the Rabble, many of
them very young, and most of them broken fellows.

They also turn out the Recorder, Town Clerk, and other Officers of the City,
who had refused to attend the Mayor at the publishing of the Ordinance for
abolishing of Monarchy; other factious Villains of their own Gang, being
preferred to their places; who leading the other Citizens by the noses, the
City of London in a trice became obedient to the Orders of the Mock-Parliament.
And repeal all Laws against Heresies and Schisms.

They engage the Preachers to themselves by the Kings Rents.

Punish the Gainsayers.


With one single Vote they repeal all the ancient Laws made against Sects and
Schisms. They deprive the Ministers of the promised Revenues, I mean, of Deans
and Chapters Lands: They also make profession of easing tender Consciences from
the burden of Tithes, assigning some thousands a year out of the Kings
Revenue, for Stipends and Salaries for the Preachers; that so they might be at
the beck of the Republicans, and be at length by Office constrained with mutual
Assistance and Pay to conspire against Monarchy. Nay, it was debated, whether
they should not for some time shut the Church-doors, and restrain the
licentiousness of Presbyterians: but milder Councils prevailing, some having
been imprisoned, and others threatened with death, all are commanded upon pain
of Sequestration to refrain from Invectives, and to comply with their Rulers in
keeping Fasts and Thanksgiving-days, and whatever else concerned the affairs of
the Church. They break down the Kings Arms and Statues that were set up in
public places, and put up their own instead of them. They coin new money with
the impression of a Cross and Harp, as the Arms of England and Ireland. In a
word, as by Law, and in full right, they invade and appropriate to themselves
all the Regalia, which as by way of Sequestration they had before usurped.

Sparing no body.
From henceforward, without any regard to Justice and Honesty, they spare
neither Sex nor any Order of men. The Kings Children who remained in England,
to wit, the Lady Elizabeth and Henry Duke of Gloucester, Princes of singular
accomplishments of Nature, are many ways basely used by them. Amongst the
Regicides it was moved oftener than once, whether they had not better put her
out Apprentice to a Trade, that she might get her living, than to breed her up
in a lazy life at the charge of the Public. From the gentle tuition of the
Earl of N. she is turned over to the severer discipline of another, with
orders, that when there was no occasion for it, she should not be treated as
the Daughter of a King: Afterward she was confined to Carisborough-Castle in
the Isle of Wight, under the custody of one Mildmay, an inspired fool, but
implacable enemy to the Royal Family; that she poor Lady, thus put in mind of
her Fathers Imprisonment and Murder, being already consumptive, might the
sooner be brought to her end. And indeed, when through the irksomness of
Prison, Grief, and Sickness, she visibly and daily decayed and pined away, the
inhumane Traitors deny her the assistance of a Physician; nay, the Physician
whose presence she earnestly desired, they so frighten from his duty, that he
durst not wait upon her. She being dead, they send the Duke of Gloucester into
banishment, having allowed him a small piece of money (that I may not omit any
act of their humanity) to carry him over into Flanders.

They basely treat the Countess of Carlisle, by an usage unworthy of her Sex
and Quality, as being one who of too much a friend before, was now become an
Enemy, and commit her to the Tower of London. Duke Hamilton and the Earl of
Holland, who now too lately repented their having been the first of the Lords
and chief of the Factious, who for their own safety, had too much served the
times against the King, and of the Royal Party, the heroic Lord Capel, a prime
Champion both for his King and Country, are by the same President Bradshaw, who
dyed red with Royal blood, knew not what it was to spare the blood of other
men, in the same Court of Justice sentenced to lose their heads. Whom the
Rebels thought fit they banished, and seized all Estates and Inheritances, how
large soever, at their own discretion. There was a debate amongst them about
making a Law, that whosoever was by them suspected to be an ill willer to the
Commonwealth, or an enemy to the Army, might be brought to a trial before a
Council of War, and sentenced by them as they thought fit.

Nay, they order the stately Fabrics of the Royal Houses and Palaces, to be
thrown down, that Kings for the future might not have a house of their own to
cover their heads under; God any stately Temples wherein he might be
worshipped, or the Kingdom any public Structures to show its magnificence. St.
Paul's Church in London, that of Salisbury, and the Kings house of
Hampton Court, Fabrics that may compare for stateliness with the best of
Europe, with much ado escaped the fury of their desolating hands.

The Government committed to the Council of forty men.
A Council of forty persons is erected, which by a gentle name to the common
people, they call the Keepers of the Liberties, who altogether, or at least
seven of the number, had the full administration of the Commonwealth. Amongst
these were three or four contemptible Lords, Slaves to the Republican Faction
admitted, of whom Bradshaw was made Head, with the Title of Lord President, and
a yearly Salary of two thousand pounds, as the price of Regicide.

A subscription is enjoined.
Moreover, a Writing is commanded to be taken by all, whereby they were bound to
approve whatsoever the Rebels had acted against the King and Kingdom. Yet when
many had refused to take it, they were nevertheless admitted upon this
condition, That with their lives and fortunes, they should maintain and defend
for the future, the State and Mock-Parliament in the same condition they were.
Henceforward none of the secluded Members, nor of those who had withdrawn, were
admitted into the House, unless they approved underhand the late Villainies.
Nevertheless, they command all to appear against a certain day, or otherways to
be excluded for ever, and others chosen in their places. So that some for fear
of Sequestration, and I know not what hurt and damage they were apprehensive
of, others out of hopes of profit to be got in public changes, by a base
temporizing, strike in with the Republican Usurpers, and are admitted into a
share of the labor and danger, but not of the Government.

About the same time the secluded Members meet in Lincolns-Inne to consult
together, S. inveighs bitterly against the Regicides.
and take the advice of S. a Lawyer, what was fittest to be done in the present
state of affairs. But he readily gave his opinion, that the late changes were
made against the tenor of the Laws, the Customs and Interest of the Country,
and the Dictates of right Reason; and that no commerce could be kept with the
Usurpers, without the guilt and horrid crime of Treason: and indeed he
frightened many of the Members from coming to the House, who could never
afterward be brought to join in council with the Regicides. Nevertheless, By
and by falls off to the same Party.
within a few days he himself became a leading-man in the Rebel-Parliament, and
the Council of the Keepers of the Liberties, and submitted to their Authority:
nay, and did not reject the place of Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
conferred upon him by the same men, though the King before the Troubles had
honored him with the title of his Attorney General.

These things are carried on under pretext of speedy settling the State; They
labor to establish an Oligarchy.

The Democraticks oppose it.


but in reality with design to secure the Government to themselves: to whom
all the rest almost being cowed into a submission, the Popular Republicans
only resist. These demand that the Representative so often desired and so
often promised, might be established by a free and equal election of the
people, the Rump of the Mock-Parliament being dismissed. Inveigh,
In Writings and Conferences they inveigh against the arbitrary dominion of the
Usurpers, the High Court of Justice, Council of State,
or of the Keepers of the Liberties, as only the softer names of a harder
Tyranny; nay, they cry out against the Kings murder as unjust, and committed
against all Law and just Authority; that the People had changed but not shaken
off the Yoke; that they had rather live ten years under the government of the
worst of Kings, than one year under their dominion; that the loins of King
Charles were lighter than their little finger. So great force has truth, as
that it draws such Expressions even from the unwilling. At length they fly to
Arms, Resist with Arms.
and the private Soldiers, especially the Troopers, who formerly consented
with them in most things, being everywhere stirred up, they at length begin to
gather together in form of an Army.

But the Usurpers who were never wanting to occasion, obviate the beginnings;
and under pretext of composing Differences amongst honest men, who minded the
same things, though they mutually entertained bad opinions one of another,
having corrupted and gained some of them to their Party, they suddenly fall
upon the rest and defeat them, They are defeated by the Usurpers.
disarm the Prisoners, and having caused the chief Authors of the Stirs to be
shot, and others to be punished more mildly, they terrify all the rest from
disturbing for the future the Rulers, either with cutting Truths, or sharper
Arms.

They publish a Proclamation, that no man should accuse them of Tyranny.
The Usurpers being fixed in the Saddle, publish a Proclamation, forbidding all
men to accuse them of Tyranny, to object any thing against them by word or in
writing, or to attempt any alteration, under pain of High Treason. Appoint a
Thanksgiving.
They appoint a solemn Thanksgiving-day to render public thanks to God for
their prosperous success against the Democraticks, that so by mocking of God,
they might the more easily make the silly people rejoice in their Calamities.
And the same day they are sumptuously feasted by the Mayor and Aldermen of
London, Are feasted by the City.
not without the Reproaches and Curses of almost all the Spectators; where
amidst the tears and miseries of a great many that perished by a famine that
then raged, they junket it deliciously. Fairfax and Cromwell are complemented
with splendid Presents of Gold and Silver. And that the wretched Citizens might
not seem to have lost all their labor in feeding these Ravens, they bestow
upon them the Kings new Park, Which they recompense.
under color of making them some recompense for their late Magnificence; but
in reality, that the distracted men being allured by the sweetness of that
morcel, might be won over to their Party, and wish well to the new Government.

Henceforward there is nothing to them sacred or holy: They either distribute
amongst themselves, or sell at easy rates the Kings Houshold-furniture, They
sell the Kings Houses, Houshold-furniture, etc.
Lands and Houses, the Revenues and Lands of the Church, which belonged to the
Deans and Chapters, and which remained entire till now by the Votes of both
Houses of Parliament, for the use of the new Clergy, or Presbyterian Ministry:
That by these arts they might both glut their own Avarice, and by involving
many in the same guilt with themselves, make them firmer to their Faction.

Nor being yet satiated by the Crown and Church Lands, and the Estates of the
Noblemen and Gentlemen, who disagreeing from them, made up the far greater part
of the Kingdom, which they had seized long ago by way of Sequestration; nor by
the Goods and Chattels of those aforementioned whom they had plundered, and the
vast sums of money which those that had been for the King daily paid for
redeeming their Estates, and purchasing favor; they daily raise an incredible
quantity of money from the Customs and the Excise, (a Tax which before would
not have been endured in England): They burden the people with most heavy Taxes.
Not to mention the secret Veins of Wealth, I mean Bribes and Gifts, which
those that stood for Places or had business and Lawsuits, slipped privately into
their pockets. Nay, they were not ashamed to flea the so-often fleeced people
by a most heavy Imposition of ninety thousand pounds a month to pay the idle
Soldiers.

Invade Ireland;
However, the spoils and government of one Kingdom was not enough to satisfy
them; they invade the Irish also that were ready to submit to the King, (whom
whilst they were Rebels, most part of them praised, few at least did hostilely
assault them) promising themselves certain victory over them; and hoping that
Ireland being subdued, they might easily reduce Scotland and France, as being
divided at home; And threatened the whole world.
and many of them had the confidence openly to glory, that they would break
that Yoke wherewith the Kings of the Earth oppress the People. Nor truly could
any man have told where the fierceness of this Scourge would have ended, and
where that Flood would have spent it self, unless the divine Majesty, which
has hollowed a channel for the Sea, set bounds and limits to it, and said,
Hither shall thou come, and no further, had not opposed the over-swelling pride
of these Waters, and commanded his Angel to sound the Retreat.

A Chronological INDEX FOR This First Part.
Old Style.
MDCXXV.
KIng James being dead, March 27.
CHARLES the First succeeds King of Great Britain. He marries Henrietta Maria
Sister to Louis XIII. June 14.
King of France.
MDCXXV, VI, VII, VIII.
The King calls three Parliaments, and little or nothing done, as often
dissolves them.
MDCXXX.
Prince CHARLES is born. May 29.

MDCXXXIII.
James Duke of York is born. October 14.

MDCXXXVII.
Prin, Burton, Bastwick, having lost their ears, June.
are put in prison. July 23.
The Scots grow rebellious.

The King meets the Scots intending to invade England; but having made a
Pacification, disbands his Army.

April 13. May 5.
The Stirs of the Scots occasioned the Kings calling of a Parliament at
Westminster; which was dissolved without any success. Aug.
So the Scots invade England, and take Newcastle: The King marches against them;
but having made a Truce, calls a Parliament at Westminster. November 3.
The Parliament meets, and under pretext of Reformation, put all into Confusion.
November. December.
Thomas Wentworth Earl of Strafford, Deputy of Ireland, and William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, are accused.

May 12.
The Deputy of Ireland condemned by a Law made for the purpose, is beheaded. May
10.
The King also by Act of Parliament grants, That the Parliament shall not be
dissolved without the consent of both Houses. May 2.
William of Nassaw Son to Frederick Prince of Orange, is married to Mary
Daughter to K. Charles. August.
The Scots full of money return into their own Country: The King follows them
into Scotland. October 23.
The Irish conspire against the English, and cruelly fall upon them. November. 25.
The King returns to London from Scotland. December 1.
A Remonstrance of the Lower House offered to the King.

January 3.
The King accuses five Commoners, and one Lord of High Treason. The King goes
into the House of Commons. January 4.
The King withdraws from London. January 10.
Sends a Pacificatory Letter to the Parliament. January 20.
Sends the Queen into Holland with her Daughter. February 23.
He himself goes toward York. February 28.
Sir John Hotham shuts the Gates of Hull against the King. April 23.
Unjust Propositions of Peace are made by the Parliament to the King. June 2.
The Parliament raising an Army, August 22.
the King at length sets up his Standard at Nottingham. Both Armies engage at
Edgehill, October 23.
and both challenge the Victory.
MDCXLIII.
A Treaty of Peace appointed at Oxford comes to nothing. Feb. March, April.
The Earl of Newcastle gets the better of Fairsax, July 13.
Commander of the Rebels in the North. In the West, Waller a Commander of the
Rebels, June 30.
is routed by the Kings Party. Prince Rupert takes Bristol. July 27.
Maurice his Brother takes Exeter. September 4.
In the mean time the King himself besieges Gloucester. August 10.
Essex, General of the Rebels, relieves Gloucester. September.
The King meets Essex upon his return, September. 20.
and fights him at Nubury, The English Rebels put to a straight, Jun. Sept. 25.
call in the Scots and take the Covenant. The King therefore makes a Truce with
the Irish for a year. September. 15.

MDCXLIII, IV.
James Marquess of Hamilton is committed to prison. January 3.
The Scots again enter England. January 16.
The King holds a Parliament at Oxford. January 22.
The Earl of Montross is sent Commissioner into Scotland. May.
Essex and Waller, Generals of the Rebels, march toward Oxford. June 29.
The King defeats Waller at Cropredian-bridge. Then pursues Essex into the West.
July.
The Scots in the mean time joined with the English, defeat the Cavaliers at
Marston-moore. And then take York by surrender. September. 1, 2.
In the West the King breaks all Essex his Forces. October 27.
Upon his return he is met by Manchester at Newbury, where they fight a second
time. December. 23.
Alexander Carey is beheaded.

January 1, 2.
Hotham the Father and Son are beheaded. January 10.
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury is beheaded. February 20.
Macquire an Irish Lord is hanged. February.
The Treaty of Peace at Uxbridge comes to nothing. June 14.
Fairfax General of the Parliament Forces, defeats the King at Naseby.
Henceforward all by degrees fell into the hands of the Parliament.

April 27.
The King having in vain tried the English, departing privately from Oxford, May
5.
commits himself into the hands of the Scots. June 24.
Fairfax takes Oxford by composition. September.
Robert Earl of Essex dies.

January 30.
The Scots sell the King to the English, and return fraighted with Money.
February 16.
The King is made close Prisoner in Holdenby-Castle. March.
The Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, delivers up Dublin to the
English. June 4.
The Army take the King out of Prison. And march against the Parliament. The
Speakers of both Houses, with fifty other Members, July 29.
fly to the Camp. The Soldiers attend the Members that fled to West-minster.
August 6.
Unjust Conditions of Peace are proposed to the King at Hampton Court.
September 7.
The King makes his escape to the Isle of Wight. November. 11.
From thence writing Pacificatory Letters, December. 24.
they propose to him four Demands as preliminary to a Conference. The King is
made close Prisoner.
MDCXLVII, VIII.
The Parliament votes no more Addresses to the King. January 17.
The Counties everywhere stir; the Kentish, Essex-men, May. June.
and some others, take up Arms. The Duke of Buckingham, Francis his Brother,
July 5:
and Earl of Holland, in vain take up Arms. The Fleet comes over to the Prince
of Wales. July.
The Scots commanded by Duke Hamilton, advance into England. They are defeated
by Cromwell, and Hamilton taken. August 17.
Fairfax takes Colchester upon surrender. August 28.
Rainsborough, a Commander of the Parliament Army, October 29.
killed at Duncaster. A Conference appointed with the King in the Isle of
Wight. Sept. October.
The Marquess of Ormond returns Lord Lieutenant into Ireland. November.
The Remonstrance of Ireton is approved in a Council of War. November. 16.
And is presented to the Parliament in name of the Army and People of England.
November. 20.
The King is carried from the Isle of Wight to Hurst-Castle. December. 1.
Nevertheless, the Parliament votes, December. 5.
That the Kings Concessions are a sufficient ground for a Peace. Many
Parliament Men are made Prisoners by the Soldiers. December. 6, 7.


January 4.
The rest amongst other and unheard things, vote, That all Power is originally
in the People. January 6.
Then, That the King himself is to be brought to a trial. January 20.22, 23, 27.
The King therefore is brought to the Bar. The King is brought a fourth time,
and condemned. January 30.
CHARLES the best of Kings, by unparalled Villainy is beheaded. March 9.
James Duke of Hamilton, Henry Earl of Holland, and the generous Arthur Lord
Capel, are beheaded. March 17.
Lastly, Monarchy it felf is abolished by the Regicides. May 30.
The Act is proclaimed by the mock-Mayor of London. May.
The Democratical Republicans stirring in Arms, are routed. June 7.
Solemn Thanksgivings appointed for the Victory, and the Conquerours feasted by
the Londoners.

September 8:
The Lady Elizabeth, Daughter of Charles the Martyr, dies in her Fathers Prison.
FINIS.
A short HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE Rise and Progress OF THE Late Troubles IN
ENGLAND: AND ALSO Of the KING's Miraculous Escape after the Battle at Worcester.
The Second Part.
NOW are the Cruel Regicides Masters of England, The state of Affairs after the
Regicide, in England, Scotland,
but of England alone. The Scots were in suspense, not being, as yet, fully
resolved, whether they should settle Charles the Second in his Fathers Throne,
or, usurping the Sovereignty, should Govern Scotland as a Commonwealth
themselves. Ireland, Ireland,
almost entirely for the King, was ready utterly to shake off the Yoke of the
Mock Parliament. And the Islands belonging to England.
The Islands belonging to England, not only the adjacent, as Jersey, Man, and
Silly, but the more remote also in America, to wit, Bermudos, the Caribbe
Islands, Virginia, and New England, upon the Continent, which had been
heretofore planted with English Colonies, refuse to obey the Usurpers.

The Regicides resolving the worst against Ireland, Forbid Trading with the
Islands and Plantations, and for what end.
Ireland was to be the first Seat of War, shortly to be subdued, whilst the
Scots were for some time left to themselves. They think it enough at present,
to discharge all Trading with the Islands and Plantations; that no Sugar,
Indico, Tobacco, and Cotton should be from thence imported into England; nor
any Clothes, and other necessary Provisions for Life, be transported from
England thither; hoping, by this Fetch, that either being glutted with their
own Commodities, or at least pinched through the want of ours, they would be
forced to comply: Nor was it doubted, but some time or other, as occasion
offered, they would bring them under the Yoke.

Now there was one thing mainly necessary for their future Designs, which (as
they were pleased to flatter themselves) was easy to be obtained. They sooth
the Dutch.
The Friendship and Alliance of no Nation, nor People, seemed more commodious
and necessary to them, than that of the Dutch, both in respect of Neighborhood
and Situation of the Country, and of the Humor and Inclination of the People;
nor did they want a pretext of making application to them. For Strikland, who,
from the beginning of the Troubles, had been Ambassador, or Envoy with the
States of the United Provinces, being kindly treated by them: Dorislaus being
sent Ambassador,
They thought fit to send over Dorislaus, who had had a chief hand in framing
the Kings Indictment, as their Ambassador, And for what purpose:
to Complement and Thank them in their Name, assure them of mutual good
Offices, justify to them by Reasons their Proceedings against the King, and to
color the Villainy by the specious Authority of what Laws he could scrape
together. Besides, he had it in Instructions (if he found it convenient) to let
fall some mention of a Coalition, or Conjunction, and to offer and press it;
seeing if it could be effected by the Consent of both Nations, they might laugh
at all Designs and Attempts of Foreigners, and share betwixt themselves the
Trade of the whole World.

But that Negotiation proved unsuccessful, But without success:
the Prince of Orange being Stat-holder, and the People detested the Murder of
the King. Some Scots also, who, though at a distance, had speedy notice of his
Arrival, entering his Lodgings before he had had Audience, For the Ambassador
is killed by some Scots,
with many Wounds killed Dorislaus, and made their escape before they could be
apprehended. Thus the shedding of Royal Blood is punished by Bloody hands, and
by the just Judgment of God, And that with safety.
whatever may be the Injustice of Men, the Crime is brought home to the Author.
The Regicides often demanded of the States Reparation for the Fact, but without
any success.

But the Democratical Party in England, A Petition preserved to the Regicides
by the Democratical Party;
managing things now somewhat more cautiously, laid not aside their
discontents. Walwin, Prince, Lilburn, Overton, and others of that Gang, prefer
a Petition to the Rump Parliament, wherein they propose many good things, which
might be useful to the Public, They are committed to P^^son for it.
mingling with them Reproaches that were not altogether false: For which they
were committed to Prison, there to lie by it, till the fierceness of their
tempers were allayed.

Another from the private Soldiers,
Nevertheless, the private Soldiers of Ingoldsby's Regiment grow Seditious at
Oxford, under pretense of Petitioning; That the Rump-Parliament might be
dissolved, a lawful Representative chosen in place of it; that the Laws might
be rendered into the vulgar Language; and those that were superfluous
abolished; that there might be a Register kept of all Men's Lands and Estates;
that every one might know what Title they had to what they possessed; that the
Excise, and all unlawful Exactions might be abolished. To which they added over
and above, (to increase their Party, not that they repented for the Kings
Murder,) that Charles the Second might be chief Magistrate of the Kingdom. But
the Colonel hastening thither, Is suppressed in the Birth.
and having caused some few to be shot to death, by a timely remedy stifled the
Tumult in the Birth.

A third and smarter Petition from the Officers of the Army;
Yet from these Embers a new Flame broke out; for some Officers in Fairfax his
Army, present a smarter Petition to the same purpose, though in different words.

To the former they add, That the Tithes being abolished, or converted to
another use, the Ministers might have more certain Stipends; that the public
Money might be more sparingly distributed amongst the Parliament Men; and that
the Soldiers should have their pay. Which the Regicides elude,
The Rump-Parliament durst not slight this; but gives them good words, and
being conscious to themselves, how often they, by Declarations, had promised,
and how many times they had been reproached with unfaithfulness and breach of
Promise, they set apart a day weekly for deliberating about these Proposals.
First, Concerning the Government and Representative, where having examined and
considered the Nature of all States and Republics, from that of Rome, even to
Ragusa, they pretend to search out a kind of Government, which might be best
and most suitable for England. But they could find none that was exquisit
enough, nor that seemed adapted to the Genius of this People. And so, like
Penelope, By doing much to no purpose.
weaving and unweaving their Web, they put off the time, until the matter might
be forgotten, or something of greater moment intervene.

I know not whether it be worth the while here to mention the Prohibition made
by the French at that time, Some Trade with us, Prohibited by the French:
of any Trade with us in Woollen and Linen Manufacture; which drew from the
Regicides a reciprocal Prohibition, that no Wine, nor Silk Stuffs should from
thence be Imported into England. With the French by us.
It was likewise to our advantage, Ordered in Flanders, that no Ships nor Goods
taken by Privateers, should be Condemned or Sold in their Harbors.

But it is worth taking notice of, that a severer Inquisition was appointed
against the Ministers all England over, The Ministers of the Church of England
are Persecuted,
under pretext of Reforming the Church, and introducing the Orthodox Religion;
and all were cruelly persecuted, not only they who stuck close to the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of England; but even they who wished well to it,
or had any Conversation with Men of that Persuasion: Ignorant men in the mean
time (I speak of the generality) Laics, Shepherds, and men void of all
Learning, being put into the Ministry, and some of them preferred to two or
three Livings at a time, which before they cried out against as abominable.

Especially the ^elch.
Let North Wales be one Instance for all of that Reformation; where, about some
hundreds, and of these not a few Good, Grave and very Learned Divines, were
turned out of their Livings: And Powell, Cradock, Floid, and a few other
Ignorant Vagabonds that had no certain Habitation, going about in the mean time
as Itinerant Evangelists, Preaching, or rather Canting from the Pulpit,
devoured vast Revenues; for the Commissaries let out for a trifle, the remnant
of the Tithes for feeding such Ravens, who were to be accountable to the
Rump-Parliament for them at Neversmass.

The rest are cherished.
Moreover, the Regicides distribute amongst their own Clergy the Augmentations,
which were the residue of the Tithes, and of Bishops and Deans Rents, that
could find no Purchasers, especially amongst those who had not an hundred
Pounds a year. But that only during pleasure, and for a time, that they might
have them at their beck, and buy the Endeavors, Voices, and Affections of so
many men; and that they also being more vigilant Spies, over suspected Persons,
might pry into their Faults, their Expressions and Councils, and inform them of
all.

An Expedition into Ireland, under the Command of Cromwell.
And now England is wholly taken up in preparations for a War in Ireland,
whither Cromwell is sent as General of the Army. He having Mustered his Men,
hastens his March to the Coast, and filling Bristol, Chester, and Milford-Haven
with Soldiers, prepares for his Expedition. The Reader therefore must pass
over with me into Ireland, that he may be able to give a Judgment of the
Inhabitants, and how to dispose them into their several Ranks, that he may
discover their various dispositions, and the ends they drove at.

The Inhabitants of Ireland are either Natives or Planters: The Irish are
ranked into several classes. The Native Irish.
And these last either Ancient or Late. Those I call Natives, who first of all
Inhabited the Island, or were descended from them; and are either Noblemen and
Gentlemen: Yeomen and Husbandmen, the Roman Catholic Clergy and Bishops; with
other Free Denizens. The Native Nobles, either wholly enjoy their Ancient
Lands; or, being subdued by the Kings of England, and for their Rebellion
forfeiting part of their Lands, enjoy what remains, and Rent the rest of the
Proprietors for a small matter. These live in the Mountains and Woods, where
they imperiously domineer over their Tenants and Vassals; and know exactly the
Bounds and Limits of their Lands; trusting to this, that in future Revolutions,
whatsoever they challenge for their own, will again, as by a Postliminous
Right, return to them as to the lawful Proprietors and Masters.

The Titular Clergy and Bishops (for we must know that those of the Roman
Communion have their own Clergy, Priests and Bishops, secretly appointed by the
Pope, who live only upon Charitable Contributions) privately perform the Duties
of Religious Worship, after the manner of the Church of Rome, in the same
manner as if they were authorized by Law, and were not contrary to our Customs;
His Majesty conniving at the Errors of an obstinate and stiff-necked Nation.
But for all this, we must know, that there is an Orthodox Clergy also all over
Ireland, consisting not only of English, but of Irish men born, who every where
enjoy the Tithes. But after the first breaking out of the Rebellion, both, as
well the English as Natives, were forced to fly and withdraw.

The greatest part are Strangers, but Free Denizens, who, though they are
sprung from English Race, yet partly by Marriage, partly being Naturalized,
through long Conversation and Custom having forgot their Original Stock, are in
Clothes, Humor, and Carriage, transformed into the Manners of the Natives.

The Pope's Nuncio head of the Rebels.
The Chief and Head of all these, though a Stranger, was John Baptista Renuncio,
Prince and Bishop of Firma, the Popes Nuncio; who passing through France on his
Journey to Ireland, did not wait upon the Queen of England being then there,
and openly threatened, that he would suffer no man to remain in Ireland that
wished well to the King, or who should be found to favor the English or their
Affairs.

These kindled, and in all places blew the Coals of Rebellion, and, that the
Breach might not be made up again, used all means by Rapine, Murder, and all
sorts of Villainy to put things into confusion; to overthrow the Government,
renounce the King, choose a King of the Ancient Race, or of some new Family,
whether the Pope or King of Spain, or to erect a new Commonwealth of the
Clergy and Deputies of the Nobles. Yet I must except Clanricard, Taff, and some
few more; who though they were zealous Roman Catholics, Some Catholic Nobles
Loyal to the King.
yet persevered in their Loyalty and Obedience to the King.

Irish Planters.
Planters I call all those, who being of the Roman Catholic Religion, from the
time of Henry II. went over from England into Ireland, and in a continued
Succession, continued there until the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. These also
being privy to the Conspiracy, whether that they might maintain the Roman
Catholic Religion in security, Why they fell off,
and at the same time increase their civil Jurisdictions and Immunities, or
carried away with the Tide of Rebellion; or, in a word, that they might secure
themselves and their Estates in a common Rapine, had already joined with the
other Papists, Being before most Loyal.
who nevertheless, before that time could never be endured to pollute
themselves with such barbarous Cruelty, and so many unparalleled Murders, or
to fall off from the Government of England.

They who lately went over into Ireland about the latter end of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, either for the Wars, or for Planting and Settling there, were
for most part faithful to the King, except those who were deluded by the
Authority of Parliament, or infected with Presbytery by the Neighboring Scots.

A Colony of Scots transported into Vlster, The Irish Scots,
by Authority from King James, had increased to the number of forty thousand
Families. These in the beginning of the Troubles, following the Ceremonies of
their Countrymen, sided with the Parliament. But King Charles being beheaded,
and the English Monarchy quite overturned, Now fight for the King.
they changed their minds, and set themselves valiantly upon revenge, under the
Command of the Earl of Ards, Colonel Monro, Audley Mervin, and Sir Robert
Stewart.

Coot Governor of Derry, Monck of Dundalk, Coot, Monck, and Jones, stand for
the Rump-Parliament,
and Principally Jones Governor of Dublin, stood for the Rump-Parliament. But
O-brian Earl of Inchiqueen Governor of Munster, Inchiqueen for the King.
with that whole Province, and all his Forces, who had sworn to be true to the
King and Parliament jointly, after the Murder of the King renouncing the
Rump-Parliament, declare now for the King alone, Hitherto we have taken pains
to describe the various Inclinations, Designs, and Purposes of the Irish, now
let us see by what Orphean Harp or Charm, they were united into one.

In the first Part we told you, how the Marquess of Ormond was forced by the
treachery of the Irish, How the Royalists joined together.
to deliver up to Jones, Dublin with the whole Garrison, and all that continued
in their Duty. From that time the Pope's Nuncio Commanded in Chief, except in
those places which were under Jones, Coot, and Monck, which espoused the Party
of the Rump-Parliament. He took to himself the whole Power, made Laws,
pronounced Judgments, The arrogance of the Pope's Nuncio was his ruin,
drew up and mustered Armies, managed the War, and imposed money, with an
absolute and despotick Authority. But by this means he became both hated and
despised, so that having received one blow after another (especially Preston's
Forces being defeated by Jones, And the cause of Preston's defeat.

The Union of the Irish in favor of the King.

Who humbly dedesire the Queen and Prince of Wales to send over the Marquess of
Ormond with supplies and Authority.


he grew weak both in Men and Authority. This opportunity was laid hold upon by
Clanricard, who Commanded one Army in Vlster, and Taff who Commanded another in
Munster, who having consulted with Inchiqueen, resolved upon it as the most
expedient course, to implore the Royal Assistance again, Unite together into
one, and to send forthwith to the Queen and Prince of Wales to acquaint them
with what they had done; confessing that the Truce was not faithfully observed,
and discovering those by whose fault and instigation it was broken: They
moreover most humbly beg, that the Marquess of Ormond may be sent over with
Authority and Supplies, and engage upon conditions which were not disliked by
the King, to fight under his Banner, till the broken Forces of the
Rump-Parliament should be utterly destroyed, and his Majesty and they
themselves fully restored to their former peace.

The Popes Nuncio suspecting that matters would fall out so, The Nuncio frets,
and that the storm which his Government had raised, would break over his own
head, forbids any farther Treaty, threatens the Contraveeners with dire
Punishments; and at length strikes those that persisted in their purpose, with
the usual Weapon of Excommunication. But that blunt Thunderbolt scared no body;
And being besieged,
for they march against him, and besiege him in the Town of Galloway: Whilst,
in the mean time, the Lord O-brian diverts the Succors that Ouen-Ro-Oneal
designed to bring to his Party. Capitulates for a departure.
Then the Pope's Nuncio despairing of relief, capitulated for a dishonorable
Retreat, and departed. Whilst these matters were acting, the Glorious King
Charles the First, Murdered by the Hands of Rebel Parricides, Crowned his Death
with Martyrdom.

Nevertheless, the Marquess of Ormond being rid of that difficulty, Ormond
coming to Kilkenny, where a general meeting of the Irish was held, they come to
Articles of agreement.
and having a new Commission and Instructions from King Charles the Second,
repairs to Cork, and shortly after to Kilkenny, where a Parliament, or
Convention of the States of Ireland was then kept; and after long Debates on
each side, they came to a great many Articles of Agreement; of which, this was
the substance.

After a Recognition, whereby they owned his Majesty for Sovereign, and lawful
King of Ireland, and that they would to the utmost defend him with their Lives
and Fortunes; they agree, That the King should give the Irish free liberty of
their Religion. That if it seemed fit to the Deputies or Commissioners, (who
were appointed to the number of eighteen) a Parliament should be called within
two Months, wherein Papists as well as others should have liberty of free
Voting; and that the King shall confirm their Acts, provided they be not
grievous to Protestants. All Acts and Decrees past since August 1641, that
might be dishonorable to the Irish Nation, shall be repealed. That all Law
Suits, Sentences, Actions, or Processes commenced or determined since that
time, be wholly abolished, and that the Irish be restored to the Lands and
Estates whereof they had been dispossessed. That all Impediments be removed,
that were wont to bar the Irish Papists from sitting in Parliament. That all
Debts be reckoned to be in the same state as they were in, in the Year 1641,
and that no body be molested nor troubled upon that account. That the Lands of
the Barons and Nobles in the Counties of Toumond, Clare, Tipperrary, Limmerick,
Kilkenny, and Wicklo, be adjudged to the ancient Possessors, and their Titles
made good by new Acts. That Inns be Erected for the Students in Law, wherever
the Lord Lieutenant shall think convenient; and where Degrees also in the Law
may be taken, as well as in England. That Places and Titles of Honor, and
beneficial Offices, may be free both to Papists and Protestants. That the use
and Exercise of Arms, Commands, and Governments, may be in the power of the
same; and that during the War, five thousand Irish Foot, and two thousand Horse
be kept in pay. That the Court of Wards be abolished, and in lieu of it, twelve
thousand pounds a year paid into the Kings Exchequer. That no Peer have
liberty to Vote by Proxy: That the Nobles be obliged within five years to
purchase Lands, a Baron to the value of two hundred pounds a year, a Viscount
four hundred, an Earl six hundred, a Marquess, eight hundred, and a Duke a
thousand. That they may be free to treat of the independance of the Parliament
of Ireland, upon that of England. That those of the Kings Privy Council shall
meddle with no Affairs, but the Public: That Suits about Titles be referred to
the Judges of the Kingdom, to whom it belongs to try them. That the Acts
against the Exportation of Irish Wool, Tallow, and other Goods out of the
Kingdom, be repealed. That they who have been under any pretext, Fined, or
Punished, in the County of Ulster, since the first of King James, shall be
relieved according to Equity. That the Inhabitants and Citizens of Cork,
Youghal, and Dungarban, be restored to their Possessions, that they were turned
out of in the beginning of the War, provided they give Security for their
Loyalty, and that they shall not be troublesome to the Garrisons. That an Act
of Oblivion be past, of all things before committed, those excepted, who stand
guilty of Barbarous and Inhumane Crimes. That it be lawful to none of the
Nobles to Farm the Customs. That Laws be made against Monopolies. That the
Jurisdiction of the Court called, Castle-Chamber, -- be moderated. That the Law
be abrogated, which ordained, That Horses should not draw the Plow by the Tail,
and that the Straw should not be burnt to separate the Corn from it. That Law
Suits about Sea Matters, shall be decided in the Chancery of Ireland. That, for
the future, all Actions, about the want of Title, shall be suppressed, if the
owners have from ancient times possessed the Lands by any Right. That also all
Interest for Moneys, since the beginning of the Troubles, be discharged, and
that, for the following years, it exceed not five per Cent. a Year. That the
Deputies or Commissioners shall impose sufficient Taxes, for carrying on the
War, both by Sea and Land; either by way of Excise, or any other way, that they
shall judge most convenient for the Public. That Justices of the Peace shall
have Power to determine Suits, under the value of ten Shillings. That the
Governors of the Popish Persuasion, enjoy the Governments and Commands that
they are at present in possession of. That the Tenths of taken Ships, and
Impositions upon Commodities, shall remain in the hands of those to whom they
have been granted, until further order be taken about all these things. That
the Commission of Oyer and Terminer, Grand Assizes, and Jail-delivery, shall
have Power, according to the standing Laws, of punishing Murders, Felony,
Thefts, and Robberies, until the twentieth of May following. That Courts be
established, according to the Will and Pleasure of the Deputies, or
Commissioners, in matters belonging to themselves. That the Romish Priests, who
behave themselves modestly, shall not at all be molested; but shall enjoy the
Salaries paid them by the Laics for their maintenance, and the enclosures of
the ancient demolished Monasteries and Abbeys. As to other matters, that the
King, with consent of his Parliament, shall order them. For expeding of those
Conditions, the Papists chose about fifteen Deputies, or Commissioners, that,
as so many Mediators, betwixt the King and the People, they might bring back
the Confirmation of them.

So dear did a frail and transitory Peace with Rebels cost the King. But
necessity is a prevalent Orator, that persuades Men even to unbeseeming, and,
many times, to dishonorable Resolutions. Nevertheless, the Lord Lieutenant,
whether willingly, or unwillingly, agrees to these Articles. And the Peace is
instantly proclaimed by the Heralds.

But Oven Ro-Oneal, and the Native Irish, Ouen-Ro-Oneal, Jones, and some
others, find fault with the A^ticles of Pacification.
that were on his side, refused to acquiesce to these Conditions of
Pacification, under pretext, that their Religion was not sufficiently secured.
Jones also, and others, find fault with the Commissions, as too ample, and (as
they gave it out) unseasonable; and that likewise they were patcht up with the
King, without the Authority of Parliament.

But the Lord Ards, with the rest of the Scots, who abominating the
Rump-Parliament, first favored, and then struck in with the Kings Party,
bestir themselves bravely in taking in the Castles and Garrisons, which held
out for the Rebels in Vlster.

The Lord Lieutenant being General, in the mean time, had many and great
Affairs to mind. The Lord Deputy, also General of the Forces, sets about a
d^fficult work.
Men, Arms, Money, Ammunition, and all Military Provisions are wanting; which
nevertheless were to be raised amongst Men of contrary Interests, different
Persuasions, and who mutually hated one another. The English, indeed, were of
themselves ready to undergo any danger; but they were but few in number, and of
bad Correspondence with the Irish, by reason of their ancient Feuds and
Animosities: And suspecting their Courage, no less than their Loyalty, they
decline to serve with them under the same Ensigns. The Irish again being in a
great part Treacherous, Bloody, and Perfidious, divided amongst themselves into
several Factions, were more apt to sheathe their Swords in one another Bowels,
than to fight against the Common Enemy. Nevertheless by his own Presence,
Wisdom, Diligence, and at his own Charges, being assisted with seven or eight
trusty Commanders, he luckily mastered all these difficulties. He found the
Magazines of Ireland exhausted, the Treasury empty, and the Citizens and
Inhabitants, in whose Hands was all the money of the Kingdom, very unwilling
and sparing to contribute, and the Roman Clergy opposing and undermining his
Designs.

Wherefore in the beginning he got together a small Army, And at length raises
an Army.
which being increased in number by the conjunction of Inchiqueens Forces, and
the rest of the English his fellow Soldiers, for the first Months he provided
them pay either of his own money, or what he could borrow from others. And
marches against Jones Governor of Dublin.
Thus being pretty well provided with Men and Ammunition, he marches through
Queens County straight against Jones, and by the way, takes in some Castles
belonging to Ouen-Ro-Oneal, of which the most remarkable were Kildare and
Talboth.

Jones having had certain intelligence of this March, advanced to meet the Lord
Lieutenant: But being informed by his Spies, that he was coming with a greater
Army, than he was able to encounter, and distrusting his own Soldiers, he
forthwith returns to Dublin. The Lord Deputy, in the mean time, passes the
River Liff -- where having called a Council of Inchiqueen, Taff, Dillo,
Preston, and the rest of the Principal Commanders, they consult what was best
to be done; whether they should besiege Dublin, or, directing their course
another way, take the Towns about, or else rather block up the City, and at the
same time have an eye upon the other places. Which place, after a Council of
War, he first views.
Being as yet doubtful what to do, they advance to view Dublin, and so to take
a resolution upon the spot. But Jones expected them with an Army without the
Walls, but under the Cannon of the Town. Both Armies were drawn up, but without
any Skirmishing. That night the Lord Deputy Quartred at Finglass, Jones
preparing for a defense, sends the superfluous Cavalry to Drogheda;
three miles distant from Dublin: Next day all the Papists, both Men and Women,
that were unfit for War, are thrust out of the Town; and the Cavalry that were
needless in the Siege, are sent to Drogheda, at the mouth of the River of Boin,
that they might incommode the Enemy in the Rere, and take care to send
Provisions into the place.

So soon as the Lord Lieutenant had notice of this, he sends the Lord
Inchiqueen, Who are forthwith pursued by Inchiqueen,
Lieutenant General, to pursue Jones's Horse, and if opportunity offered, to
take in the Towns on all hands. In the mean time he thought it not convenient
to divide his Army, but to encamp and entrench himself with his whole Forces
near Dublin, that he might intercept the Provisions going into the place, and
entice the Soldiers and Citizens to desert it; not doubting but that the
Soldiers would be easily inclinable to do so, Affairs being doubtful, his
Neighborhood affording opportunity, and the City being straightened for want of
Provisions; and the rather knowing, that most of the Soldiers who were in
Garrison had formerly sworn to be true to him. This he found to be a successful
resolution; for about two thousand by stealth, and as every one best could,
taking occasion to get out, came over to his Camp. Nay, he was not wanting to
essay Jones himself, by many fair Promises which he made him one after another.
But he, that he might oppose Art to Art, having threatened the Deserters with
most severe Punishments, pretended a willingness to comply with honorable
Conditions, and shuffled off the Treaty with shifts and delays, though
sometimes he seemed to be at a stand and uncertain what to do. However he sent
private intelligence to the Rump-Parliament, and the General, in what dangerous
straits he was; earnestly beseeching them to hasten the sending him Relief. In
the mean time he surrounds the Walls, views the Works, repairs what is
defective, casts up new Works, plants Palisadoes, drives sharp Stakes into the
ground; and did what lay in his power to fortify the place: Nay, and having
sallied out upon the Enemies Camp near Finglass, he took, amongst other
Prisoners, a Relation of his own, whom, for a terror to all others, that they
might not desert, he caused to be hanged.

Inchiqueen on his part, falls in upon a Troop of Jones's Horse, And being
partly slain and taken, and partly made to fly to Drogheda, in a short time he
took the Town it self,
and beat them in their Quarters; and next morning pursuing the rest, that were
Commanded by the Younger Coot, he easily put them to the rout; so that most
part of them being either killed or taken, he pursues the rest as far as
Drogheda; in which place the Soldiers and Towns-People being put into great
consternation, in a Weeks time he reduced it under his own power.

About the same time the Lieutenant-Gederal Inchiqueen had notice given him of
an Agreement betwixt Ouen-Ro-Oneal and Monck made at Dundalk, whereby all
necessary Provisions, Powder, Shot, and Money were to be furnished for the
relief of Derry, blockt up by the Lord Ards and Scots; and that Oven afterward
should make an Inrode into Leinster and Munster, that by this Stratagem he
might draw off the Lord Lieutenant from the Siege of Dublin. And beats Farell
upon his return from relieving of Derry.
To put this in Execution, Farell is Commanded out with five hundred Foot, and
three hundred Horse. But Inchiqueen waiting for him in his return, charged him,
routed him, and obtained the Booty he intended After that, having received
fresh recruits of Men, he besieges Dundalk, Takes Dundalk,
which notwithstanding Moncks resistance, the Soldiers delivered up after two
days Siege, And other Towns,
with all the Artillery and Ammunition: And being thus encouraged by the Smiles
of Fortune, and choosing rather to make advantage of his Victories, than to
enjoy them, he reduced, Green-Castle, Neury and Trim. After which good
Services, And victoriously returns to the Lord Lieutenant.
he returns to the Lord Lieutenant, having left Garrisons in the places he had
taken, better provided of Men, Money, and Ammunition, than before.

But seeing we have in this place made mention of Ouen-Ro-Oneal, it is fit we
relate a great Action of his, before we continue the History of the Siege of
Dublin. The Lord Ards, with the other Commanders, had driven all the English
Forces out of Vlster; only Derry, under the Command of the Elder Coot,
remaining, which could give them any molestation. It is a City seated upon Logh
Foil, where it contracts it self into narrower compass, and is on each side
beautified with goodly Meadows and Pastures, as the Water is enriched with
Fishes. Heretofore a Colony of English, under the Conduct of Colonel Docwray,
was there established; and many Londoners flocking thither afterward, it was
called Londonderry; the delightfulness of which place, drew to it so vast a
number of Inhabitants, that it became, without Controversy, Londonderry
straightened by Ards,
the chief City of Vlster. Ards used all diligence to reduce this last place,
but not by Storm, Approaches, or Mines, but by Building new Forts, or taking
those that were round it, that so intercepting all Relief by Sea and Land, it
might at length be forced to surrender. And, indeed, Provisions being
exhausted, and all other necessaries wanting, they had been reduced to utmost
straits, had not Ouen-Ro-Oneal, in the very nick of extremity, and when the
Garrison were at the last gasp, brought them succor. For he, though he had
been, in a late overthrow, sufficiently banged by Inchiqueen, yet hastens with
five thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse, to snatch the City out of the Jaws
of the Enemy; Is relieved by Ouen-Ro-Oneal,
which, indeed, he performed very successfully and seasonably. For swift-flying
Fame having brought the news of his approach, Ards thought it safer presently
to draw off his Army, than rashly to sight this Enemy, that had the English in
the City to assist him, and leave Garrisons in Convenient places, that might
curb and block up the Town, till upon Ouen's departure, the Siege might be
renewed again.

But Oven, with the joint assistance of the Besieged, takes in all the
Neighboring Forts, and restored distressed Londonderry to full liberty.

Now the Reader is to take notice what Reward he had from the Rump-Parliament,
Who made an Agreement with Coot and Monck, to be Confirmed by the
Rump-Parliament.
for so important an Action. He had made an Agreement in writing, Signed and
Sealed, with Coot and Monck, for relieving Londonderry, in name of the
Rump-Parliament, which was sent into England to be Confirmed by the Members.
Letters were likewise sent in Favor of Oven, commending and extolling him for
a Just Enemy; a strict observer of his Faith, a Man of Constancy and
Resolution, and true to his word, and who, if they thought it fit, would be
very useful to their Cause. And both of them flatter him with hopes, as if
there were no doubt to be made of the Consent of the Rump-Parliament.

The Rump-Parliament trisled away time in deliberating about these Conditions,
until they might have intelligence of the overthrow of Ormond, and of the
Successes of Cromwell. And yet is ignominiously rejected.
And then they reject Ouen-Ro-Oneal; thanking Coot and Monck for their
Faithfulness, and good Services they had rendered to the Parliament.

But without longer digression, let us return to Dublin, and Inchiqueen, who
having performed Actions beyond expectation, returned triumphantly to Finglass,
where the Lord Lieutenant had settled his Camp. A Council of War being held
there, it was resolved to besiege Dublin; but yet to try first if they could
reduce it by Hunger, rather than by a Storm and Assault, lest that Royal City,
and Capital of all Ireland, might be Sacked, or Burnt by the enraged Soldiers;
and Friends and Foes be equally destroyed. Dublin is besieged.
It was therefore thought fit to attack it on both sides; and for that end, the
Lord Dillo being left with five hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot, to block
up the North and farther side of the City, the Lord Lieutenant himself, with
the rest of the Army, crossing the River, lies down upon the other and South
side of it.

But whilst they are passing over to go to Rathmecus, (where the River being
narrower, afforded a more convenient place for building a Fort, to hinder
Importations into the Town) the English Fleet comes in view, with relief to the
Besieged; Reynolds and Venables bring relief from England.
wherein were embarked Colonel Reynolds, Commander of the Horse, and Venables,
who had the Command, not only of his own Foot, but also of the Regiment newly
raised by Monck and others. They, all in Health and good Plight, had set Sail
from Chester; and, with a prosperous Wind, arrived at Dublin, bringing with
them all necessary Provisions. With them also came no small number of
Temporizers, The Lord Lieutenant being informed by Deserters, that Cromwell was
to Sail to Munster,
who presently flying over to the Royal Camp, give it out for a certain, that
no more Men were to come to the relief of Dublin; but that the whole English
Army was to sail to Munster, where it was clear, that many of their Friends,
and not a few of Inchiqueens Men, who loved changes, would join with them.

He resolves to send thither Inchiqueen, with the greatest part of his Forces,
So soon as the Lord Lieutenant heard this, he forthwith designs Inchiqueen for
Munster, with the choicest of his Foot, and almost the whole Horse, with orders
to oppose the Enemy, encourage and confirm the Province, and to beware of those
whose Fidelity and Honesty was suspected. And with the rest to block up Dublin,
and intercept Provisions.
He, in the mean time, resolved to raise the Siege, and encamp his Soldiers at
some distance, in two or three distinct Camps, where being strongly entrenched,
they might assist one another, if occasion required, watch the Enemy's motion,
and hinder Provisions from being conveyed into the Town.

But at the very instant, The Commanders allured with the h^pes of Booty,
obtain first leave to straiten the Besieged, by Fortifying an old Castle near
the Walls.
the Commanders repining that they should be disappointed of the Booty, which
they thought themselves sure of, whisper about, that they observed the Enemies
Horse feeding without the Walls; and that if an old demolished Castle, called
Baggo^s-wreath about a Musket shot from the Walls, were new Fortified, which
might be done in a Nights time, the Enemy might be hindered both from Forage and
Provisions, which being wanting, Dublin must of necessity be surrendered within
the space of a Week. And therefore they earnestly desire, that before they drew
off, they might have leave to attempt this.

The Counsel, upon viewing the place, The Counsel took;
was thought good; and it was not long before the Army was drawn out, and a
choice made of Pioneers for the Work: To whom Orders were given to repair the
Castle, raise it higher, and cast up a Wall about it, whilst the Horse and Foot
were in readiness behind to defend them. About Midnight the Lord Lieutenant
came, thinking that the work had been almost finished: but finding that it was
not as yet begun, by their mistaking the way, having severely chid the
Laborers, and placed another Overseer over them, he encourages them to the
work; then returning to the Camp, he kept Watch all the rest of the Night, and
by break of day gave Orders that the Army should stand to their Arms, and be in
a readiness, But the work not as yet finished, Jones unexpectedly fall in upon
them,
whilst he refreshed himself a little in Bed. But before he had been there an
hour, he was wakened out of sleep by the noise and firing of Shot; and starting
up immediately to see what the matter was, Alas! he found too late, that the
Soldiers had been negligent in keeping Watch; and that in the mean time Jones
had broken in into that half-repaired Castle, and that the Captain of the Guard
being at first onset killed, all his Men were turned to a shameful flight.
These things succeeding so well with the Enemy, their boldness (as it usually
happens) increasing with their good Fortune, not only the whole Soldiers, And
having defeated all the Forces of the besiegers, obtains a great Victory.
to the number of twelve hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot, but a great
many of the Citizens also came rushing out of the Town, and fiercely charge the
Kings Forces, who were in disorder, putting all into Confusion, there being
nothing but Horror, Noise, Slaughter, and flying of Men, to be heard or seen.
In this deplorable state of Affairs, the Lord Lieutenant having with Sword in
Hand, Prayers, and Entreaties, in vain endeavored to stop and rally the
Fugitives, he breaks through the thick of the Enemy, crosses the River, and
encourages Dillo with all speed to come to the assistance of the Army, and fall
upon the Enemy, now wearied, and busy at Plunder. But he finds them, tho they
had not as yet seen the Enemies Face, seized with a panick Fear, throwing away
their Arms, and betaking themselves to flight.

In this fatal Engagement, the wealthy Camp is plundered, and all that during
the space of a whole year, had been with much Labor, and most diligent care
gathered together, is scattered in the twinkling of an Eye. Three thousand Men
were killed, two thousand and one hundred private Soldiers, an hundred and
fifty Officers, higher and lower, taken, above eight thousand Arms, the Tents,
Warlike Engines, all the Baggage and Ammunition fell all into the hands of the
devouring Enemy.

A great Overthrow indeed, and which gave an incurable wound to the Royal Cause
in Ireland. Part of the Kings Soldiers fly to Drogheda.

The Lord Lieutenant to Kilkenny,


The Kings Soldiers taking the advice that was given them in their slight,
betake themselves to Drogheda. The Lord Lieutenant hastens to Kilkenny, that he
might muster his broken Forces, having, upon his march, summoned the strong
Castle of Bellison, upon pretext that Dublin was taken, which surrendered. There
having represented to the Convention of Estates that were still sitting, what
loss he had sustained, and having moved them for Supplies and Money, And th^n
to Drogheda,
he sets forward to Drogheda with three hundred Horse: And that in a very
opportune time; for Jones had hastened thither with some Horse, that by the sole
presence of the Conqueror, he might reduce the City, now in disorder, by the
news of the late overthrow and confusion of the Soldiers. And delivers it from
the fear of Jones,
But the coming of the Lord Lieutenant scaring away Jones, the Fear and Danger
were both quickly over.

Next he Fortifies Trim, Neury, Dundalk, And also Fortifies other places.
and other neighboring places, putting strong Garrisons where it was needful;
he views all places, gives Orders, and prepares for a vigorous defense; being
resolved to meet Cromwell, if he came that way, whilst his Horse relieving the
places that were in danger, he might in the beginning of the Spring raise a new
Army.

But in that also his hopes were in vain. In the mean time Cromwell slighting
Munster, arrives a^ Dublin;
For Cromwell having received the glad tidings of the Victory, set Sail from
Milford-Haven, and that he might pursue the Point upon the discomfited Enemy,
and carry the Wound home to the Heart, he steers his Course straight to Dublin,
with a Fleet of about an hundred Ships, Men of War and Tenders; and, wholly
slighting Munster, arrived there in the Month of August, One thousand six
hundred and forty nine, where having put ashore the Soldiers, With fifteen
thousand old Soldiers;
with the Artillery, Ammunition and Baggage, he makes a General-Muster, of
about fifteen thousand Men, most of them old Soldiers; for he thought it
better to excel in Valor than in Number, and to take along with him stout
Hands, and not many Heads. He declares Jones Lieutenant General, Ireton
Major General, and Reynolds General of the Horse, assigning to every one their
several Offices. He orders Venables to march to Derry to the Elder Coot, with a
Regiment of Horse, and two Regiments of Foot. Of whom he marches with ten
thousand to Drogheda;
He himself, with ten thousand Men, marches straight to Drogheda, having
committed the care of the Fleet to Aiskew the Admiral.

Which was defended by Sir Arthur Aston and the Flower of the Kings Army.
In this Town the Lord Liuetenant had put the Flower of his Veterane Soldiers,
most English, under the Command of Sir Arthur Aston, a Gentleman Renowned in
the Wars, both at home and abroad, but for the most part unfortunate. And here
Cromwell resolved to make his first Essay of the War. Aston, on the contrary,
laid his Design to tire out, and break the Enemy, insolent through Victory, by
the badness of the Weather, Watching and Hunger; then expose them to be
harrassed and alarmed by the Lord Lieutenants Horse, and the Foot that were
shortly to be recruited, until the Royalists being reassured, and increased in
force, might have the courage to provoke the Cromwellians, and fight them in a
pitched Battle.

But he flatters himself in vain; for Cromwell attacks not the place by opening
of Trenches, slow Approaches, and the other acts of a Siege: Cromwell forthwith
batters the Walls:
But having forthwith caused a Battery to be raised on the North side of the
Town, and planted with Guns, he so plied the place with continual Shooting,
that he quickly made two Breaches in the Wall; and immediately Commands an
Assault to be made, that with Courage and Resolution they might force their
entry into the place. He himself commanding the attack, makes his way into the
Town, and kills all he meets.
But this having been twice unsuccessfully attempted, he himself, with Ireton,
commanding the Attack, with Indignation and Courage, redoubled by the former
repulses, they make the way which they found not, into the Town, and put to the
Sword all they meet, without favor or compassion. The Governor, with some of
the Soldiers, fled instantly to the Castle, a place strong by Art and Nature;
but the Cromwellians entering Pell-mell with them, (some of whom clambered up
the Walls, not without the help of the Soldiers of the Garrison,) they were
all put to the Sword. Some flying into the Church, are killed as Sacrifices at
the Divine Altars; not a few poor wretches having got up to the Church Roof,
were forced to tumble down, by the smoke of kindled Hay and Gunpowder. There
was but one single Person that saved his life by despair, who for fear of the
Flames, throwing himself headlong down from the top of the Church, fell amongst
the Enemies, without any other hurt, but that he broke his Leg; whom, for the
extraordinariness of the thing, they spared and kept alive. The rest fleeing to
the Ramparts begged quarter, but in vain. All are knocked down wheresoever they
are found, The sad spectacle of the Town taken.
neither the Gown nor the Dwelling House affored any Protection, nor was there
any great respect had to either Sex. The Soldiers continued three days in
cruelly slaying the Towns-People that had carried Arms, whom they dragged out
of their lurking holes, and in Pillaging and Plundering the Town: Nay, and
those also who after the fifth day came creeping out of their hiding-places,
were most inhumanly put to death.

The number of the slain.
About four thousand Men died in that Butchery, rather than Fight. So within the
short space of one Week, was that City undone, which for whole three years
together had resisted all the Rage and Attempts of the Irish Rebels.

The Garrisons about, either deserted, or easily surrendered.
This Town being thus taken and plundered, the Royal Cause was quite
extinguished in Ireland: For all the other Garrisons were terrified into so
great a consternation, that they trembled at the very Name of Cromwell. The
Towns or Places that were sufficiently provided, make either no resistance at
all, or but very faintly. The Garrison of Dundalk in great fear betake
themselves to flight, in their haste leaving behind them their Brass Guns.
Neury, Green-Castle and Trim, with some others, surrender with a little less
dishonor, and fall under the power of the Enemy.

The Lord Lieutenant is deserted by many of the English Soldiers;
The Lord Lieutenants Levies, in the mean time, go slowly on. The English in
many places falling off to the contrary Party, which had Fortune, and most of
their Countrymen on their side; yet, whether it was through the Severity of
Discipline, or the Example and Authority of the Commanders, they were with much
ado for some time kept together; but at length, most desert and quit the
Service: There were some however, whom shame, a sense of Honesty, But yet not
by all.
and a respect they owed to their Commanders, still retained within the bounds
of Loyalty and Duty.

The Irish fall likewise into pieces; some hating the Lord Lieutenant as a
Calvinist, The Irish ill affected toward him.
whom God would never bless; others not dissembling their satisfaction at the
unsuccessful Battle of Dublin, and the taking of Drogheda much more, wherein
more of the English and Royal Party perished; which gave them hopes that for
the future, the Government must of necessity fall into the Hands of the Roman
Catholics, or rather be changed. The Towns who had engaged to pay money into
the Exchequer, either wholly refuse to do it, or do it but slowly. Nay, the
Roman Catholics set light by all that the Convention of Estates and Deputies
acted. The Titular Clergy, and truly Implicit Papists, refuse to pay any
Taxes. And when, accordng to the circumstances of Time, Places, and Persons,
they were perhaps, somewhat rigidly exacted, they presently complain, and cry
out of breach of Faith, and that the Conditions of Peace are violated, and
under pretext of a just and equitable Government, an absolute Tyranny
exercised. Factions and Animosities began to arise amongst the Soldiers also;
some following the Roman Catholics, and others the Royal Catholics, whilst
many weary of the War, were ready to save stakes and compound with the
Rump-Parliament. Nevertheless the Lord Lieutenant raised an Army, such as he
could; Yet he raises an Army.
but not such as he durst engage Cromwell with, which nevertheless might appear
now and then at a distance, cut off some of his Parties, and often intercept
his Provisions.

Cromwell understanding his designs, resolved not to be idle, nor to let slip
his opportunities; but laying hold of occasion by the Fore-lock, he gives Huson
the Command of Dublin, Huson, put into the Government of Dublin,
with Orders to molest and give no rest to all the Country about, with the
Auxiliary Forces that were joined him. And he himself passing by Dublin,
Cromwell marches to Wexford,
marches straight to Wexford.

This is but a little Town, though a convenient Harbor for Ships; and for
Importing Provisions and other necessaries of War into the very heart of
Ireland, more Commodious than the Port of Dublin. This place being summoned to
render, Summons it to render.
the Governor Synott seemed not at first averse; only delayed time, until he
might receive a supply of five hundred Men under Colonel Buther. At length,
there being no more hopes of a Surrender, Cromwell forthwith attacks it; Then
making an attack, he first takes the Castle, And then the Town.
and at first makes himself Master of a Castle (not without suspicion of
treachery) that commanded the Walls; then battering the Town and Walls with his
great Guns, the Garrison being disordered with so sudden a misfortune, and
forsaking their Posts, he takes the Town. Nevertheless, the Wexfordians
flocking together into the Marketplace, as if their blood after a little
fainting fit had more impetuously burst out of the heart, their All being at
stake, they made a brave resistance: but the Match was unequal; for they all
fell under the Sword of the Conqueror; and so the Garrison paid dear for their
late standing to the defense of the Town; which being plundered, was committed
to the Government of Colonel Shelburn.

Wexford being thus subdued, the Neighboring Places surrender of their own
accord, Wickelow, Arklow, and which hardly deserve the naming, Euiscorven and
Fuernes. It was now about the middle of November, when the coldness of the
Weather, and continual Rains seemed to require that the Soldiers, who were
troubled with Fluxes, and other Diseases which attend a Camp, should be sent
into Winter Quarters. Nevertheless, Thence he marches to Ross, with an Army
sick and much weakened;
Cromwell is for new Victories, and straight marches to Ross. The River Barrow
runs by this Town, affording a safe Harbor for Ships of eight hundred Tun
Burden, which may lay their sides to the very Walls, and it is situated four
miles above Waterford upon the Suir that falls into the Barrow. Of which Taff
was Governor, having just received a supply of fifteen hund^ed men.

Yet upon the first attempt he surrenders the Town, and marches to Kilkenny
with fifteen hundred men.


The Lord Taff was Governor of this place; and on the other side of the River
was the Army, with the Lord Lieutenant, the Earls of Clanricard, Ards, and
Castle-Haven; who, in view of Cromwell, sent a relief of fifteen hundred men
into the Town. Yet for all that, Cromwell attempts the place, and with six or
seven great shot, softens the Governors resolution; who, delivering up the
Town with the Canon, upon condition to march out with the Garrison to Kilkenny,
about six hundred English falling off to the Enemy, he marches thither with
fifteen hundred. A horrid piece of Villainy, and not to be excused; were it not
for the bad Correspondence that was betwixt the English and Irish Soldiers,
and that he would preserve his own Irish entire for a Battle, and divide at
least Cromwells Forces by the multitude of Garrisons; his Army being already
much impaired, and hardly able to wagg, worn out by Fatigue, Fluxes, lying
abroad in the Fields, and for want of Winter Quarters.

Peace betwixt the Lord Lieutenant, and Oaen,
About this time, by the Mediation of Daniel Oneal, a Peace was made betwixt the
Lord Lieutenan, and Ouen-Ro-Oneal, with the rest of the Irish Papists, almost
upon the same Conditions as we told you formerly had been offered to the
Rump-Parliament, and were rejected by them; and thereupon both Forces Join. Who
shortly after dies.
But Oven shortly after died.

Nor is it here to be passed over in silence, how the Princes Rupert and
Maurice, with no more than six Ships, The Princes Rupert and Maurice, with six
Ships, hover upon the Irish Coast, and Blake pursuing them, they fly to
Kingsale:
the remaining part of that Fleet which two years before fell off from the
Rump-Parliament, had the boldness to infest the Seas, hover upon the Coast of
Ireland, put in Soldiers and Ammunition, and by all ways divert the supplies
of the Enemy. But Blake and Popham pursuing them with a stronger Fleet, they
were fain to sly to King sale; and from thence, the Seamen being idle, and
running away to the Enemy, that they might consult their own safety, Being
blockt up there, they escape through the Enemies Fleet, and set Sail for
Portugal.
prevent the danger that might befall them from the defection of Munster, which
they might foresee, and that they might have the opportunity of Sea-room, Wind
and Tide favoring them, they break through the whole Fleet of the Enemies, and
with the loss only of two Ships, escaping out of that noose, they steer their
Course toward Portugal.

But this is out of the Rode. I now return to Cromwell, Estionege being taken,
Cromwell makes a Bridge of Boats over the Barrow.
whose Victories were such, as could not be limited by the banks of the River
of Barrow. For he cast over it a Bridge of Boats at Ross; having first taken
Estionege, a small, but Walled Town, standing upon this side of the same River,
five Miles above Ross. Afterward having past a great part of his Horse, with
his nimblest Foot, he reduces Carick, a Town upon the River Suir, eight miles
above Waterford; He takes Carick and Passage,
then quickly crossing the River, he takes Passage, a very strong Fort with
five Canon, lying two Miles below Waterford, where the Conjunction of the two
Rivers Suir and Barrow, by the impetuosity of the Current, render it difficult
for Vessels to reach the Town. Nay, he had the boldness to attaque Waterford it
self, He attempts Waterford, but in vain.
though in vain. But Dungarvan, which the English Soldiers might have
defended, with the Canon and Ammunition, is delivered up into his hands.

And now at length Cromwell begins to think of Winter Quarters for refreshing
of his Men, Now at length he bethinks himself of Winter Quarters.
who were not above four thousand Sound and in Health. The Lord Lieutenant, on
the other hand, had eight thousand, which, though for the most part they were
raw Men, yet were very conveniently posted. But what he had best to do, or
whether to go, he was uncertain. For neither could he march back to Dublin,
being at such a distance, without a necessity of Fighing; nor yet Winter in
those parts, without the greatest Inconvenience, the Enemy being posted about
him on all Hands, who would continually Allarm him, and intercept his
Provisions.

Whilst he was casting about in his mind what course to take, the most
desirable, All Munster revolts.
and by Cromwell, long expected defection happened; for all Munster, that had
stood for the King, revolted to the Rump-Parliament. Some combined Soldiers
had long ago given hopes of this, if ever occasion offered; and now Cromwell
being upon their Borders, and past the River Barrow, when they saw Succors at
hand, they attempt the performance of what they had promised.

The Treachery long ago ^ss^ied at Youghal,
The first sparks of this Flame, appeared long ago at Youghal; which the Mayor,
and a great many Citizens, conspiring with two Colonels, and other Commanders,
agreed to deliver into the hands of Cromwell. The Lord Inchiqueen smelling the
Treachery, seized the Mayor and Soldiers, and committed them to Prison in
Cork, Youghal, and King sale, until they might be brought to a fair Trial. But
that kind of Custody was unlucky, since thereby the sparks spread farther. Is
now accomplished at Cork,
For the Colonels being too negligently kept at Cork, draw over the Commanders,
one after another, into the same Conspiracy; and in the absence of Inchiqueen,
whilst the Soldiers carelessly kept the Guard, they of a sudden seize the
Town. From thence the sparks fly into Youghal, Kingsale, Bandon-Bridge, Mallow,
and other places, and by the coming of the Lord Broghill, Colonel Far, and a
great many of Cromwell's Forces, was fomented into a Conflagration.

Where Inchiqueen's Lady and Children are imprisoned,
Inchiqueens House at Cork was plundered; where neither the modesty of the
dress could protect his Lady, nor innocent Age his Children; for all together
were clapped up in Prison, and there detained, till by an exchange, that happened
shortly after, they were set at liberty. Here at length Cromwell in the
beginning of December, And Cromwell puts his Men into Winter Quarters.
put his Men into Winter Quarters, and disappointed the Lord Lieutenant, who
had intercepted his way, on his return to Dublin with an Army double in number.
Nor will it be amiss in this place, to take notice of the death of Jones, Jones
dies.
for it happened about the same time; who basely stained the Reputation that he
gained in subduing the Irish Rebels, by the defending, even unto the last, the
Cause of the Murderers of the King.

The Lord Lieutenant, in the mean time, The Lord Lieutenant calls a general
Council, and persuades Dissenters to Union:
that he might provide, what lay in his power, against ensuing Storms, calls a
general Council, where representing how grateful and profitable the Divisions
and Animosities were to the Enemy; he entreats the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry
to mutual Peace and Concord, showing them how that might be done. Which they
all pretend.
This produced amongst all a pretense of Sorrow for what was past, of true
Friendship, by shaking Hands, and promises of mutual Assistance, in causing the
Commands of the Lord Lieutenant to be obeyed, pay raised for the Soldiers,
Quarters, and other necessaries for the War provided, and in persuading the
Inhabitants, especially of Limmerick, Waterford, and Galloway, to Obedience and
Submission.

This put the Lord Lieutenant in heart again, who, whilst Cromwell refreshed
his Men in Winter Quarters, resolves to recover Wexford, He endeavouors to
recover Passage by Farell;
and Passage: For the effecting of which, Inchiqueen, Armstrong, and Trevers,
are designed for the one, and Farell, with the Forces of Ouen-Ro-Oneal, for the
other. Farell, marching secretly to Passage, falls into the Snare that he had
laid for others. For Cromwell presently having notice of the Design, Who, by
Zankie, is intercepted and put to flight;
Colonel Zankie pursues him in the Rear, Alarms, and puts him to flight, kills
three hundred, takes two hundred, and had not suffered a Man to escape, if, in
the nick of time, Farell had not, in great disorder, crossed the River in Boats.

In vain imploring the assistance of the Waterfordians.
By this misfortune it plainly appeared how the Waterfordians were affected,
whilst, though Farell earnestly begged it, they denied the use of their Boats,
of which they had plenty, to the poor Fugitives; nor would they suffer them in
this danger to enter the Town, nor any of them to Winter without the Walls,
though it was put to their option, to choose what Men and Colonels they pleased;
nor would they afford them any Pay, or Money for providing Victuals, and other
necessaries.

Inchiqueen being about to recover Wexford, is hindered by Nelson.
Neither did the Wexford Expedition succeed better; for Inchiqueen marching
thither, when he was but five Miles from the place, by cross Fortune, he met
with Major General Nelson, who had then Command in those parts: Inchiqueen
charged him; and although he put some of his Men to flight, yet he was taught
by the rest, that it would not be so easy a matter to subdue Wexford: And
Huson marching toward Arklow, frightened him from proceeding farther: The
Soldiers in the mean time agreeing ill among themselves.

Cromwell having received Recruits from England, divides his Forces, and
marches against the Enemy.
About the same time Cromwell received a seasonable supply, both of Men and
Ammunition partly from Bristol, and partly from Milford Haven. And so being
sufficiently recruited, about the latter end of February, he drew out his Army,
and resolved to fall upon the Enemy. And therefore he thought fit to divide his
Forces, and march different ways, that he might amuse the Enemy, as not knowing
whither he designed. He himself goes before with the light Horsemen, and part
of the Foot, by Maltow, the upper way into the County of Tipperary. By another
way, Ireton and Reynolds, with the rest of the Horse and Foot, the Artillery
and Ammuition, march toward Carick; Broghill, with some Horse, being left
behind to scour the Country, secure Munster, fly too and again, and watch the
motions of the Enemy. Ingoldsby had Orders with a Select Party to hover about
Limmerick, where he fell in into the Quarters of three hundred of Inchiqueens
Horse, with three Colonels, and other Commanders, and routed them; two of which
Colonels, Broghill condemned to be shot to death.

Cromwell takes in Cahir Castle, standing upon a high Rock in the River Suir;
as also, He easily takes a great many Garrisons.
the Castles of Kiltemon, Foldea-Bridge, Clogen, and Roghill, and lies down
before Calan, a Town of the same name with the River; where Ireton and Reynolds
join him with the other part of the Army, having, upon their March, reduced
several Castles, as Arkemon, Dunder, Knoctovery, Bullinard, and others; and
having besieged Calan with three Camps, and Raynolds having put an hundred and
fifty Horse to flight, in a days time they take it, putting all to the Sword,
except Butlers Men, who being summoned, surrendered before a Gun was fired.
After that, they make themselves Masters of Fethered, and Thomas Town, with the
adjacent places. Calls Huson with his P^ers to join him.
And now Cromwell calls Huson from Dublin, to join him with what supplies the
Men of Wexford, and the neighboring Garrisons could afford, which amounted to
three thousand five hundred. He, having by the by taken Belsannon, and Kildare,
comes to Lochlin, which being without any difficulty reduced, he crosses the
Barrow, and joins Cromwell. The first thing they attempt after this
Conjunction, making now eleven thousand Foot, and about four thousand Horse,
was to besiege the Town of Gora; They jointly take Gora.
which place, either trusting too much to its own Strength, or relying on
Ormonds Regiment, under the Command of Hammond, was, to its own misfortune, so
bold as to make a resistance. But after that the Walls had for some time been
battered, the Garrison began to Mutiny, and the place was instantly
surrendered; the Conqueror inflicting no other punishment upon them, but the
causing the Colonel and the Commanders to be shot to death.

Then they march to Kilkenny, the place where the Committee of the Estates met.
From thence they march to Kilkenny, through which runs the River Noir, a
pleasant place, and, without comparison, the chief of all the Inland Towns of
Ireland; but withal, the Springhead of an execrable Rebellion; and the
Center, as I may justly call it, from which all the Treasons, and damnable
Councils against the King, Country, and Religion, were as so many Lines drawn;
it was, as yet, the seat of the Commitee of Estates, who, upon the approach of
the danger, fled to Athlome -- upon the River Shannon -- upon the Borders of
Connaght, as a place more secure for their Consultations. Kilkenny is divided
into three parts, one on the farther side of the River, the other with a Castle
opposite unto it, and the third separated from the other two by Walls. Cromwell
lies down before it, and according to the Custom of War, summons it to
surrender: The Governor refusing, without more delay, he attaques it by force,
and having observed a convenient place, he presently raises a Battery, and from
thence plays upon the Town.

The Governor now perceiving the danger, causes forthwith two works to be cast
up within the Walls, with Palisadoes, and Engines laid in the way to hinder an
entry, whilst the Soldiers, in a full Body, were posted behind to receive the
Enemy, if they attempted it. The Breaches being made in the Walls, the
Retrenchments within appear. Therefore to facilitate the Assault, Ewers is
commanded, with a thousand Men, to fetch a compass about, and at the same time
to attaque the other Town adjoining to this. Here they come to blows, but with
more Resolution than Success; the Besiegers being beat off, with the loss of
about seventy Men, two Colonels, and other Commanders. Nevertheless Ewers gains
the Town, which though divided from the other, yet served to straiten it, and
distract the Garrison. Next Night another Officer is sent over the River with a
Body of Men, that by break of day he might break in into the other Town; which
he having performed with the loss of thirty Men, whilst he attempted to burn
down the Gate, to make way into the City over the Bridge, about fifty being
exposed to shot, fell. At length the Governor perceiving himself attacqued on
all hands, and that there was no hopes of relief: He capitulates, and upon
these Conditions, delivers up the City into the hands of the Enemy, That the
Canon, Arms, Which having made a brave Resistance, at length yields upon
Condition
and all the Ammunition, should be delivered to Cromwell; all the Citizens have
leave to continue in the place, or to remove any where else, as they thought
fit: That the Officers and Soldiers, should with Arms, Bag and Baggage, march
to Athlome, and that the Citizens should pay two thousand pounds to Cromwell.
And so in eight days time, (for the Siege lasted no longer) Kilkenny was
reduced under Subjection, which for a great many years had given Laws to all
the rest.

The Siege of Clonmel.
Next upon the Stage of War succeeds Clonmell, a considerable well Peopled Town,
and walled round, lying upon the Suir, four Leagues from Waterford. This place
was defended by Hugh Boy-Oneal, with a Garrison of two thousand Foot, and an
hundred Horse; whose Reputation was much heightened by his Pains and Assiduity,
as having caused several considerable works to be made for the security of the
place. Hither does Cromwell now convert the stress of the War: and having
encamped, and strongly entrenched himself, he sends two thousand five hundred
Horse, under the command of Reynolds, Reynolds is s^nt to hinder the Lord
Lieutenants Levies,
and Theophilus Jones, the Brother of the late Jones, to hinder the Lord
Lieutenants Levies, and to reduce Towns every where, as occasion did present.

For he understood that the Lord Lieutenant having held a Council of the Irish
Nobility and Bishops, at Baltimore, in West Mead, it was resolved, that on the
one hand, that is to say, in the North, Cromwell should be kept in play, and
harressed with frequent Incursions, whilst he should make greater Levies, and
join together the Forces of the Counties: that on the other hand, to wit, in
the South, the Bishop of Ross should relieve the Besieged in Clonmell, or at
least give Cromwell some diversion.

With good success.
But Reynolds being much stronger in Horse, prevents the Lord Lieutenant, and,
as if he had had him in a Toil, renders all unsafe; nor did he desist, before
he had driven the Earl of Castle-haven, and all the Governors of Castles, into
Connaght. Nay, and over and above, he took Bala-house, near to Trim; and forced
Finagh, and other neighboring places, to Surrender.

But a greater storm was coming upon the English out of Munster; Broghill takes
the Bishop of Ross coming to the relief of Clonmell, and hangs him up.
for the Bishop of Ross pitying the Condition of so many brave Men, that were
Besieged in Clonmel, advanced to their relief with four thousand Foot, and
three hundred Horse. But Broghill meeting him with twelve hundred Foot, and
fourteen hundred Horse, part of which he himself had, and part he had received
from Cromwell, he easily defeated, and put them all to slight, having slain and
wounded seven hundred, and taken an hundred Prisoners, and amongst them the
Bishop, whom, because he had turned his Myter into a Helmet, and used the
Temporal Sword, instead of the Spiritual, he caused ignominiously to be hanged
before Caringdred, which Garrison, he having lately taken in Munster, the
Captain would not deliver up, till he was terrified by that sad Spectacle.

In the mean time the Siege of Clonmel is carried on; The Garrison forsake
Clonmel, and make their escape by night:
and though the Garrison bravely defended it, and had beat off the Enemy in a
fierce Assault, with the loss of Colonel Culham, and many others; yet fearing,
since there was no hopes of Relief; that they would at length fall as
Sacrifices, under the bloody hands of Cromwell, packing up Bag and Baggage,
about Midnight they desert the Town, and secure themselves by flight. The
Mayor and Towns-People, destitute of Defense, without mentioning the departure
of the Garrison, desire a Cessation and Parley; and upon condition of saving
their Houses from being Plundered, and of liberty of living as they had
formerly done, they very willingly open their Gates.

But the morning discovering the trick, Whom Cromwell in vain pursues.
Cromwell was vexed, and sends some Troops to pursue the Garrison in the Rear.
But they were before got out of reach, having in the night time past the Hills
and most difficult ways; but the Cromwellians overtaking many Straglers, who by
reason of their Wounds, or other hindrances staid behind; amongst them there
were not a few Women, put them all without Mercy to the Sword. He easily
subdues several small places.
Afterward the little Towns that lay about Duncannon, Waterford, and Carlow,
were taken in, that these stronger Garrisons being more and more straightened, if
they could not by Force and Assault, they might at least, at length be starved
into a Compliance and Submission.

The Exploits of the Elder Coot in Ulster.
Nor were the other Cromwellian Commanders less successful, in the remaing parts
of Ireland. For the Elder Coot joined to Venables in Vlster, not to mention any
but the principal strong holds, took Culmore, Done, Ems Castle, seated in Logh
Suile, Colrane, famous for a Salmon fishing, standing commodiously upon the
River Wane, Armagh, and (the Scots and Irish, to the number three thousand four
hundred, whom Monro, a Scottish Man, brought to raise the Siege, being cut off)
Karick Fergus, Belfast, Castlefordan, Carlingford, Margraff, Monagh, and
Liskelagh. At length he routed Eyer-Marmahon, Who takes the Bishop of Cloger,
the General of an Army, and hangs him up.
Bishop of Cloger, who, by the Votes of the Vlster Nobility, being substituted
in place of the late Oneal, commanded four thousand Foot, and four hundred
Horse. But coming to an Engagement, they were all broken and dispersed, and
their Mitered General taken and Hanged. It is observable of this Army, that
they were all Roman Catholics, who upon that account more confidently promised
themselves the Victory. Charlemont cost a great deal of Labor and Pains, nor
at length would the Garrison surrender it, but upon very honorable terms.
Huson also subdued Kilmalock, Husons Victories.
Hariston, Hau, Blackwater, Rabrig, Talbo, Ath, Dermit Castle, and which we
mentioned before, Kildare, Belsannon, and Lochlin. I purposely omit Yekrohan,
and other places which Reynolds and other Commanders subdued to the rest of
Logh Foyl.

It was about the beginning of May, Cromwell, Ireland being almost subdued
within the space of a year, is recalled for the Scottish expedition.
when Cromwell, within less than a year, with wonderful success, having carried
his victorious Ensigns through three Provinces of Ireland, like a thunderbolt
of War; of whom it might truly have been said, (and to his praise, had he
fought for his Prince) Veni, vidi vici, I came, I saw, I overcame, is now
recalled to fresh Labors, and to a new War against the Scots, of which I shall
hasten to the Relation, after I have given the Reader, in one glance, a view of
the remaining affairs of Ireland.

Cromwell therefore hastening his expedition, leaves Ireton, his Son in Law, He
leaves his Son in Law, Ireton, General in Ireland; to whom Waterford being
Besieged yields, upon Conditions.
General of the Forces of Ireland; who without longer delay besieges Waterford,
and at the same time two other Castles, Carlow and Duncannon. Preston Commanded
Waterford; not very willing to hold out a place difficult to be maintained, by
reason it was beset on all hands, and no hopes of relief. Nevertheless, at
first he seemed to carry high, and demands Conditions accordingly, which being
rejected by the Enemy, when he perceived himself shut up within the Walls,
Batteries raised, and the great Guns begin to roar, he abates a little of his
height, and at length condescends to these Articles: That the Ships, Guns,
Ammunition, and public Provisions, shall be delivered up to the Commonwealth.
That the Governor, all the Colonels, inferior Officers and Soldiers, with
their Horses, shall march out with Drums beating, flying Colors, charged
Muskets, lighted Matches, and have safe conduct to Athlome. -- That the Sick
and wounded Towns-People shall remain there, until they recover. That such as
intended to transport their Families beyond Sea, shall have three Months time
to do it in. That those who would stay at home, shall be free from all
Injuries. That the Servants of Preston shall have liberty to pack up, and carry
away all his Goods that he has, either in this place, And in the same manner,
Carlow and Duncannon.
or elsewhere, at Carlow. In the same manner, and upon the same Conditions,
out of Carlow and Duncannon, fifteen hundred Men marched, all under the Command
of young Preston, for the elder was at that time sick.

But it is now time to return to the Lord Lieutenant, The Papist Clergy basely
affected toward the Lord Lieutenant;
whom, as the Papist Clergy had by all means formerly withstood; so now affairs
declining and daily running into Ruin, they licentiously slight and despise;
for they grow openly mutinous, and infect others with the same itch of Rioting.
They accuse the Lord Lieutenant in presence of the Lord O-Bryan, Inchiqueen, as
the Disturber of the Affairs of Ireland, From whom they endeavor to alienate
the mind of Inchiqueen.
whose continuing longer at the Helm, would quickly be the ruin of the
Government; but that if he alone would undertake the management of Affairs,
being a person descended of the ancient Race of their Kings, whom they had
found to be a Valiant, Watchful, Faithful, As also the Lord Lieutenant from
Inchiqueen.
and Successful General, they all promise to swear Obedience to him, and
willingly submit to his Government. On the other hand, they whisper the Lord
Lieutenant in the Ear, that Inchiqueen, having been an inveterate Rebel, had
not as yet laid aside the thoughts of his ancient Enmity; nor would he
cordially defend the cause of those; against whom he had been so long
accustomed to draw his Sword, that if the Lord Lieutenant would consent to lay
him aside, the Irish would unanimously join, and in all things obey his
Commands. Thus, whilst by an abominable Treachery and Hatred to either, they
strive to Calumniate and Blacken both, they make it their business to propagate
Faction and Divisions.

But the Lord Lieutenant meeting the Bishops and Great Men, earnestly exhorts
them, The Lord Lieutenant exhorts to Concord and Obedience,
That at length laying aside all private Grudges and Animosities, which still
remained to be composed, they would consult the Public Interest, become
Friends, and unanimously prepare for a more vigorous defense. That they would
reflect upon the great danger they were in, three Provinces being already
almost wholly subdued, and the last not like to resist much longer. That if his
Government was less grateful to them, and was a hindrance to the defense of the
Country, he would hasten his departure, Being ready to renounce the Government
for the Public good.
and commit the charge to another. (For he had already secretly obtained leave
to depart, from the King, being still at Jersey, and had got the Government
conferred on Clanricard.) When they heard this, all of them pretended
extraordinary Sorrow, that they would submit to his Will and Pleasure, banish
all mutual Jealousies, The Irish at present seem sorrowful;
and persuade the Towns to Obedience. They departed with glad and cheerful
Countenances, as abundantly satisfied, though they were still inwardly
discontented: So true it is, That those whom God intends to destroy, he first
infatuates.

For the Inhabitants, and Roman Catholic Clergy, combining privately together,
kept Clubs and Cabals, and dispersed infamous Libels, wherein they show the
Rancour of their Minds, But presently again fall to Calumniating,
by calumniating the Lord Lieutenant, as unactive, Cowardly and Treacherous;
finding fault with the Commissions that were granted to Officers of the
Reformed Religion; and repining that the War should be committed to the Ca^e
and Conduct of unfit Men, wholly addicted to Whoring, Gaming, Gluttony, and
Impiety. The Bishops of Cork, and Toam, and of Clonfert, and the rest of the
Clergy, Thuamensis, Clonfertensis. And declare his Government void.
declare the Government void, and the Followers of the Lord Lieutenant liable
to Excommunication. And therefore they order the Army to be Disbanded before
they could think of the raising of another. Nevertheless the Lord Lieutenant,
that he might as much as lay in his Power, preserve the Forces in their Duty
and Loyalty to the King, he left the charge of them to the Earl of Clanricard,
with the Title of Lord Deputy, who being admitted by the unanimous consent of
all that stuck to the Kings Party, He therefore yields, and app^ints Clanricard
his Deputy:

Who having made new Levies,


took upon himself the management of the War. A general Muster being thereupon
appointed, new Levies are made, the Soldiers Exercised, necessaries for the
War provided, and all things prepared afresh, the Clergy being very Zealous,
and the People assistant in carrying on the Work.

About that time Ireton betook himself to Winter Quarters in Dublin, that he
might consult with the Commissioners of the Commonwealth, about the future
War, and other Affairs; having left Orders to Axtel, Governor of Kilkenny, to
have an eye upon the Garrisons about Athlome. Axtel, by chance, whilst he was
upon Duty, Goes on prosperously,
fell in with Clanricards Men; who passing the Shannon at Athlome, Till Axtel,
who upon the first encounter had retreated, that he might procure Recruits,
had taken some of Iretons Garrisons, and had surprised more, if he had not
come in the nick of time. They charge Axtel, who being much inferior in
number, retreated a little, until being recruited from Wexford, and other
places, he had joined thirteen hundred men to the eight hundred which he
himself had: and then he made head against the Enemy. But so soon as they began
to Skirmish, though the Irish were five thousand Foot; and four hundred Horse
strong, yet not daring to venture a battle, they retreat to the River Shannon,
and skulk in two Boggs about Melecha fortifying themselves with Poles and
Stakes driven into the ground, and filled up with Earth, as by a double Wall.
However the English, leaving no means unessayed, and breaking through all
impediments, bravely drove them out of their Station, Beat him out of his Camp
fortified by two Lakes, and put him to flight.
and destroyed them five hundred men, who were partly slain and partly drowned.
After this overthrow, it was thought safer, in the very extremity of Winter, to
keep the Soldiers betwixt the Shannon vast Lakes, and the Collough Mountains,
than any more to molest the Enemy, whom daily Success made bolder.

The Reader may be apt to wonder that the Irish showed themselves so Cowardly
and Timorous, during the whole Series of this War, Why the Irish so Cowardly.
as if from Men they had degenerated into Women, being every where defeated,
though they fought for their Lives and Liberties. But whoever equally weighs
matters, will easily leave off to wonder. For on the one hand, he will find the
English provided of all necessaries for a War, They are compared with the
English Soldiers,
unanimous amongst themselves, all expert in War, and confiding (as it is
usual) in their continual good Fortune. The Irish, on the other hand, almost
without Arms, for most part destitute of Weapons, and other necessaries,
disagreeing also amongst themselves, miserably rent into Factions, raw and
unskillful in War, and in a manner cowed by constant ill Fortune. Besides, they
are neither comparable to the English in Foot nor Horse, how brave soever they
be in Foreign Countries. The private Soldiers, I know not whether it be by the
Skill and Knowledge they have of the Bogs and lurking Places, that they are to
soon enticed to fly; or that, through the force of an old Custom, they could
not but turn their Backs envied to the Blows of the English. Now, as to their
Horse, they are far exceeded by the English, not only in number, but also in
the quality of the Horses, and Riders. The Horses, indeed, march but softly,
but in bulk of Body, strength of Limbs, and Courage; one Troop of them, is
worth three almost of the Irish, and breaks Ranks better. And the Riders again
are for close Fighting, discharging their Pistols in the Enemies Breast, and
laying about them with their Swords. Hence it is, that in every Engagment, the
Irish presently betake themselves to flight, nor can they endure the looks,
yea, hardly the Neighing of the Horses of the English. I hope the Reader will
pardon me, that I have tacked this Apology for the Irish Nation, as an Appendix
to the work. I now return to the History.

A treaty with the Duke of Lorrain.
In the very depth of Winter, the Bishop of St. Cathdrin came seasonably, as an
Agent from the Duke of Lorrain, who, as a token of his Masters Affection,
brought with him a considerable sum of Money, and promises of more, if they
agreed in Treaty, pretending great kindness to the King, Kingdom and People.
The sums of the Proposals which he made to the afflicted Party, was: That the
Duke with ten thousand Foot, five thousand Horse and thirty Ships should come
into Ireland, and with the Title of Protector carry on the War. That the Duke
of York should Marry his Daughter. That Limmerick and Galloway, with the
Magazine, Guns and Ammunition should be put into his hands. That he should have
some cautionary Towns for security of the Moneys to be raised. That the
Inhabitants should have a care to keep the Enemy out of Connaght until his
Arrival. These Conditions were debated, but whether agreed to or not, I am
uncertain; and the Envoy departed to acquaint his master with his proceedings.
But fruitless.
But that Atlas was not strong enough to support the falling Firmament; and
there was so much time spent in the Treaty, that the oppportunity of relief
being past, showed only its bald Poll instead of the favorable Forelock.

The Spring began now to come on; but Ireland seemed to be in its autumn ready
to be cut down. All that Clanricard could do, was to show his tail, and flap
with some convulsive motions and vibrations of a dying Nation, Clanricard.
stops all the passages for the enemy into Connaght.
like the last blaze of an expiring light. He views all places, by which the
Enemy might break into Connaght; he posts Soldiers at all the passes of the
river Shannon, as also at the river Rour and the Collough mountains, wherever
any passage might be found.

In the mean time Ireton called Coot out of Vlster, with two thousand horse and
as many good foot, that he might come and join him near Galloway. Coot that he
might deceive the Enemy, pretends that he is to march to Slego, and there
stops, as if he were about to besiege that Castle; until he had drawn thither
all the Irish Forces: Yet Coot by stratagem having past the Collough mountains
got into it:
From thence turning suddenly back again, he found a pretty easy passage over
the tops of the Collough hills. Now must I relate by what means Ireton got into
Connaght. He; (having left Broghill in Munster, Ingoldsby in the parts opposite
to Limmerick, Huson in West Weath, Venables in Canan, and Zankie in Tipparary)
he marches to the River Shannon, and at three several places together, Ireton
passes the river Shannon at three places.
(not without suspicion of Treachery at Killalve) he passes over his Forces,
the Foot in boats, and the Horse for most part swimming: Whilst Huson in the
mean time alarmed Abhalone, as if he were ready to attack it. Clanricard's men
being beat out of all places, he then over a wooden Bridge sends over his Canon
and Baggage; and without longer delay joins Coot, as it had been agreed upon.

Athalone with other Garrisons are presently taken.
The Enemy being too weak to make resistance, Athalone, Portumna, Tagera and
some lesser Garrisons are taken. Then having divided the Army, Coot marches to
Galloway, Ireton to Limmerick, Farell being forced to retreat, Coot attacks
Galloway.
Coot had already forced Farel with an Army of three or four thousand men to
retreat into the Woods, Bogs and other unaccessible places about Galloway; and
therefore daring to approach nearer the place, he encamps and entrenches
himself, and so summons the Town to surrender. He is answered, That if
Conditions were offered for the whole Kingdom of Ireland, they would willingly
listen unto them. But seeing he would grant none but private and particular
Articles, both Parties prepare for a Siege.

In the mean time Limmerick is blockt up on all sides, the river Shannon being
also stopped. Ireton besieges Limmerick.
They had for about three weeks expected succors from Muskery, whose motion
Broghil observing he had opportunely beat him off, destroyed and dispersed his
Forces.

The City is therefore incessantly battered, and the approaches carried on to
the very Walls. Nor was the danger within the walls less than without; the
Plague having long raged amongst the Inhabitants, and intestine divisions a no
less grievous Plague daily increasing amongst them. Some, are for surrendering
the Town forthwith, others again, for suffering rather the utmost extremity.
The opinion that was for a surrender prevailing, Which upon Arti^les agreed
upon, but not signed, is surrendered to him.
they came to Articles; which before they were signed the Gates were opened,
and the Castle delivered to the Enemy as an Hostage. The Conditions were; That
the Soldiers should lay down their Arms, and depart whither they pleased,
except those who had embrew'd their hands in the innocent Blood of the English.
That all the Arms Guns, Ammunition and public stores should be delivered into
the possession of the Conqueror. That those that had a mind to be gone, should
have time to pack up their Goods, and Ships to transport them whithersoever
they pleased. That four and twenty should be left to the mercy of the
Conqueror. So fell that beautiful and Rich Town, much frequented by reason of
the advantages of the Sea and of the River Shannon, and strongly fortified but
withal proud of its own Strength, Wealth and Riches; which, if it had not been
divided, and if it had not again with a stiffness refused to obey the
Governors, would not in so short a time, and with so small a loss of Blood
have fallen into the Enemy's hands. He causes the Bishop of Fern and some
others to be hanged.
The Bishop of Fern with many others are hanged: And the Bishop of Limmerick
made his escape in disguise.

The death and character of Ireton.
But the place was fatal to the Conqueror; for as Limmerick fell, Ireton dies;
concerning whom, since from a mean extraction he mounted to the Pinnacle of
Government, it will not be amiss that I speak a little. In Trinity College of
Oxford he was initiated in the liberal Arts, and made therein no contemptible
Progress, afterward he applied himself to the Study of the Common Law in the
Temple; in which having got a little smattering, from his very Youth he drank
in the Errors of the Anabaptists, and assisted the Fanatics in drawing up a
Petition against the holy order of Episcopacy; which was afterward by
Pennington and a numerous rabble of Londoners, ready at that time for such
attempts, presented to the Parliament. Not long after, the Troubles daily
increasing, he struck in with Cromwell when he was in the Isle of Ely being
first admitted into his Quarters, then by Cromwell being made Governor of the
whole Island, he was presently after advanced to be his Son in law. Having
there served an Apprentiship, he enured his body to the War, by a voluntary
lying upon the ground, fasting, watching and exercises, before he came to the
Trial of it, until by degrees he at length, advanced almost to the Chief
command in the Army. Hence forward he became his inseparable Companion;
especially in assisting him in all Declarations, Articles, Letters and Treaties
that were to be made. He grew indefatigable in labor and pains, being
accustomed to spend night and day in his headpiece and boots; and in ordering
of Civil Affairs also to watch till midnight at length, as the Devil would have
it, he was one of the chief in shedding of the Royal Blood, his Memory, for
that unparalelled Villainy, being execrable to all Posterity. In Ireland he
always stood by the Anabaptistical Fanatics, relying upon their counsels for
these he gave his Vote both in Civil and Military Affairs; and with them
filled the Towns, Councils and Camp. At length this most cruel Pest of his
Country, died of the contagious Plague.

Though he was removed, Galloway pressed Coot,
yet the War still goes on. For Coot with the unanimous consent of the
Commanders, from Limmerick marches to the Siege of Galloway, which they
straightly blockt up both by Sea and Lannd, Clanricard, having got leave to
depart: Nor was it long before it was delivered to the Enemy, upon Conditions
not unlike to those of Limmerick. Is taken.
And thus Galloway, the most noted staple of all Ireland, strong in
fortifications, considerable for buildings, riches, numerousness of
inhabitants, and open trade by Sea, submits to the yoke of the Enemies, in
resisting of whom they had formerly denied the Lord Lieutenant their
assistance. And also consumed by the Plague.
But as if they had not been sufficiently punished by War, the hand of God
chastised them with a severe punishment, a following Plague having within the
space of a year and a half swept away twelve thousand of the Inhabitants.

Now was Ireland fully subdued; Ireland being now totally subdued, is governed
by four Commissioners.
and henceforward the pleasure of the Commissioners went for Law; they being
Jones, Corbet, Ludlow, and Weaver. To these it seemed good to begin their
Government by the suppression of the Tories; a kind of robbers who have always,
Who first suppress the Tories.
but not in so great numbers infested Ireland. Nor is it a new thing amongst
barbarous Nations, who whenever they find themselves oppressed by the
Governors of Provinces, or otherways have run out their Estates and are
broken, presently to shake off the Laws, Public enemies.
refuse to labor the Ground, and despise Trades. Wherefore they betake
themselves to the Mountains, Deserts, Bogs and Rocks, according as the Country
is naturally fortified, declare War against all other Mortals, and live by
Rapine. Such are the Banditi in Italy and Spain, the Cossacks to Poland, and
others in other Countries; and that we may not go far for an example of such
wickedness, such are the Moss Troopers in Scotland, as will hereafter appear.
For these in the night time lurk in Woods, Caves and Dens; but in the day time
break out suddenly upon Travelers, or men about their lawful Business, and rob
them both of Life and Money. And as often as they get together into a body,
with desperate Barbarity, they burn and pillage Villages, add presently betake
themselves to their lurking holes again. They are a kind of land Pirates; who
wandering amongst Lakes and Bogs, according to the light-footedness of the
Nation, they safely skip over the Quagmires and loose ground, wherein strangers
unacquainted with the places that follow them commonly stick. They therefore
give orders to the Soldiers, who had now nothing else to do, to divide
themselves into small parties, and so to environ, hunt, and kill them like wild
Beasts, which being done, they either mutually betrayed one another, or found
their holds and lurking places to be so unsafe for them, that in two years time
there was none of those Enemies of mankind any where to be seen.

In the mean time, It is consulted about a Successor to the late Ireton.
Lambert is chosen Deputy of Ireland.
the Rump-Parliament consult about a Deputy, who might succeed to Ireton, and
sit at the Helm in the administration of the Affairs of Ireland; and by
unanimous Vote they pitch upon Lambert. But whilst he is prepairing for his
passage with greater Pomp than the times required, Whose Commission, whilst,
whether it happened by the advice of the Commissioners (who at that time
affecting Equality, did not like such preeminence) or through the cunning of
Cromwell, (at whose beck the Affairs of Ireland were managed, and who had
lately privately married his Daughter, Iretons Widow to Colonel Fleetwood,) The
Rump-Parliament changing their resolution, He is commanded to supply only the
place of a Commissioner.
he has orders to lay aside his Title to Deputy, and go over to Ireland as a
Commissioner. Which, Lambert a man most ambitious of Rule, and impatient to be
baffled in the Honor that had been promised him; taking ill, and far worse,
that the Command of the Army should be divided amongst men unacquainted with
War, he thought it better wholely to renounce the Government of Ireland.
Fleetwood therefore, embracing the same Conditions, having celebrated his
marriage with the aforementioned Widow, Lambert refusing, Fleetwood is sent.
passes over into Ireland in Quality of chief of the Commissioners, and besides
of Major General.

Now that the Reader may know who this man was, and to give some light to what
follows after, His Character.
I thought fit to premise these few things. He was the son of a Knight, the
youngest of many Brothers, who, to get an honest living, applied himself to the
study of the common Law; until that the flame of Civil War spreading, he
changed his profession, turned Soldier, and under the Earl of Essex served as a
Gentleman Volunteer. Afterward rising from one degree to another, till he
became a Colonel, he aspired to the marriage of Cromwell's Daughter, (as we
have now related) she being a Widow and he a Widower. His Religion from the
Cradle was of the strickt new Cut; and if he was not a stout professor of
Anabaptism, yet he loved to be thought a great favourer of it, not only that
he might serve a turn, and engage in a reciprocal aid and benevolence, but
because he was inwardly and sincerely so. As he was no cunning man himself, so
neither was he reckoned a a great prier into the Counsils of other men: And
being so qualified, he became dear to the common Soldiers, and for that no ways
suspected by the more Powerful. In a word, he was no ill man, but that by
taking up Arms against his own King; he had for ever stained his Reputation by
the horrid Crime of Treason and Rebellion.

The broken remnant of the Irish forces yield to Broghill,
Now were the Rump-Parliament masters of all Ireland, except of a few scattered
Forces, who here and there lurked in obscure and unaccessible places: Of whom
the greatest part sculked in Munster, under the command of Sullivan O-Beare;
and some in Vlster under Farel. The former at length submit to Broghill; but
upon this Condition, that they might go beyond Sea, in Ships provided by the
Rump-Parliament for that affect: And Ludlow;
the latter, to Colonel Ludlow, upon the same Conditions. Having first obtained
liberty to go beyond Sea.
And afterward all the Military part of the Nation followed their example, and
six and twenty thousand departed the Kingdom, some to Spain, some to France,
and the rest whither they pleased, the English accommodating them with Vessels
for their Transportation; so that within the space of eight months, Ireland was
left destitute of all its fighting Men, as being impatient of the English yoke.

Then was a High Court of Justice Erected, consisting of most of every Sect of
the Counties, where that assembly met, sometimes Cook, and sometimes another
presiding there, for a strict enquiring into, and no less severe punishment of
those who were the beginners of the Rebellion. No man was pardoned, who had
dipped his Hands in the Blood of the English. But of that sort of Men, all
Ireland could not furnish above two hundred, The first Authors of the Rebellion
are brought to Trial;
so great a havoc had either the Sword or Plague made, or else the rest
mingling with those who departed the Ringdom, under that disguise seasonably
withdrew; or at least there were not English enough left to be Witnesses of
their Barbarity.

But it will not be amiss to mention one, or two of the most obstinate Rebels;
such as Philem Oneal, by the Pope, Especially Phi-Oneal, and Luke-O-Tool,
created Earl of Vlster, and Luke O-Tool. Lying Fame had spread it abroad, that
Charles the First had granted those two liberty to stir up the Rebellion, that
he might cut out work for the Parliament, that then was bent upon Sedition.
This base and false Rumor was industriously fomented by the Parliamentarians,
that they might load the best of Kings with Envy; nor indeed did the Irish at
that time endeavor to falsify the Report: of this both of them are accused:
but though they had hopes given them of Life and Reward, if they would confess,
yet, with solemn Imprecations, both of them acquitted the King; Who at their
death acquitted the King from a false and scandal^ (...) report.
and by the just Judgment of God, though by the hands of unjust Men, they paid
the just reward of Rebellion and Murder with their Lives, and were Hanged. So
sure is Justice, though sometimes she be slow in pursuing Malefactors.

The Plague rages in Ireland,
About that time the Plague raged all over Ireland, as if Humane Vengeance were
not sufficient to chastise the madness of that Nation, without the concurrence
of the Divine. This was the grievous Sickness of any that for fifty years
backwards, had plagued that whole Nation; so that (which is strange) there was
but one House free in all Dublin. Especially at Dublin:
And that they might suffer under a double Pestilence, the profane People,
laying aside all sense of Shame, became more Lewd and Licentions both toward
God and Man; just as in the time of Thucydides, when the Laws of God and Man
were equally despised.

And a grievous Famine also.
Not long before, if not about the same time, so great a scarcity and Famine was
sent upon them from above, that, with horror, I mention it, the starved
Mothers Sacrificed to their Bellies the dear Fruit of their Wombs; nor (as it
is written of Saguntum) could inexorable hunger be satisfied with less than
humane Flesh.

Now though these Evils fell heaviest upon the Irish, Both English and Irish
are burdened with Taxes.
yet it is not to be omitted, that a most heavy Tax, of six and thirty thousand
pounds per Month, was imposed equally upon the English and Irish; and that upon
the Irish too, when so many Lands and Estates lay desolate without Possessours,
and when there were neither Men nor Cattle to labor the Land; especially by
reason of the multitude of Tories, who every where carried away the Fruits and
Corn, so that some Landlords being disappointed of the hopes of their Crops,
betook themselves to flight; others complained that their Crops were not
sufficient to furnish them with Bread, and other necessaries for their
Families; and not a few sold their Inheritances for two or three years
purchase. In the mean time the idle Soldiers, The Soldiers in the mean time
live at their ease, and the Commanders grow rich.
to the number of twenty thousand, and the most of them Anabaptists, alone live
plentifully upon the Money they got in Ireland, and the Pay they received in
England, and their Commanders heaped up Estates.

All Law being administered at the pleasure of four or five Judges, All Law in a
manner Arbitrary.
was in a manner Arbitrary; and depended upon the Wills of the Commissioners,
and chief Commanders of the Army; nay, and sometimes of the Soldiers,
especially the Anabaptists, against whose Judgment, if the Court at any time
pronounced, they cry out of the breach of Faith, and the violation of the Laws
of God and Man.

About that time the Rebels surprised two or three very strong Forts, near
Galloway, Some Forts surprised by the Rebels, are recovered by Reynolds.
Emsbuffen, Ernescrought, and Arran, which were situate in some of the
numerous Islands on that Coast. But Reynolds having conveyed over fifteen
hundred Men upon Planks, reduced them to his Obedience, giving the men liberty
to remove to other places.

At length they came to the division and distribution of the Lands and
Possessions of the Irish, That all might receive their shares, The distribution
of the Irish Lands, as a punishment for their Rebellion.
which either they had gained in the Wars, or by Moneys subscribed and paid in
the year 1642, for suppressing the Rebellion, they had purchased upon the
public Faith. But upon the first publication many are accused of the same
Crime; Many of the Kings Party fall under the same censure.
as the Marquess of Ormond, Lord Inchiqueen, and as many as had been for the
King, and had put a stop to the impetuous torrent of the first Rebellion: And
tho whatever was remaining in Ireland, was due to their Faithfulness and
Valor, yet they stick in the same Mire, and are made liable to the forfeiture
of their Lives and Fortunes: nor were any to be spared, who enjoyed plentiful
Estates, or had enough to stay the voracious Appetites of those insatiable
Harpies. Nay, if they could find out any one that for the space of a day, had
fallen off from the Obedience of the Rump-Parliament, he came off very well, if
he was but only sequestrated; and redeemed his Sequestration at two years
purchase of his Estate.

The Popish Nobles are condemned of Treason.
All the Popish Nobles, who had, either in the beginning been Rebels, or
afterward born Arms for the King, are condemned of High Treason, their Estates
forfeited, and their Lives also, The Neutrals are fined in a fifth part of
their Estates.
if they could be apprehended, Both the English and the Irish Papists, who had
been Neutro, and favored neither side, are Fined in the fifth part of their
Estates to be Levied into the Exchequer.

Strife betwixt the new and old Soldiers about dividing the Spoil,
But for easing of the Public Charges, there was a heavy dispute betwixt the
new Soldiers, that came lately over into Ireland, under the Command of
Cromwell, and the Veterans, who had served the Parliament, in suppressing the
Rebellion in its first rise. These the new Soldiers endeavored by all means
to have disbanded, as being for the most part Anabaptists, and Sectarians; and,
indeed, their Intention was to cheat them of their pay, and promised dividend
of Lands. But the ancient Soldiers refusing to be so dismissed, after much
jangling and debate, Is at length composed.
at length they agreed Friendly upon these Articles; to wit, that being
disbanded, they should monthly receive half pay, until the distribution of the
Lands should be made, and that they should enjoy their due proportion of the
same. With this they were pleased, and had it in a great part performed.

They had often labored hard about the dividing and appropriating of the Irish
Lands: Mathematicians met, and laying their Heads together made Divisions; but
in a rude manner only, by a general Estimate, some by the view, others by
measuring. But neither way could they find half enough to satisfy the
Creditors, till they came to William Petty, The way of measuring the Lands
invented by Sir William Petty, a Doctor of Physic.
a Doctor of Physic, but a most expert Geometrician, who is now, by the bounty
of the King, Knighted. He undertook, in the space of thirteen Months, to
measure all Ireland, (in respect of forfeited Lands) Geometrically, and to
allow every one their several Portions: and, indeed, performed it. For having
got several expert Artists for making his Instruments, he divided the work of
Surveying into five or six parts, assigning each part fit and proper
Instruments: and taught ingenious Men how they should set about their several
Provinces; whilst he himself sitting at home could, upon their reports,
calculate and compare the whole. By this means he measured five millions, or
more, of English Acres; and by the help of a Chain, and other Instruments, he
ran over an hundred thousand Miles, five times the circumference of the World.
So is all Ireland divided into parts, and every one has his share by lot.

Now do the Sectarian Vultures, from all parts, The Sectarians flocking
together in Troops,
come flocking to the rich Spoils of Ireland, as to a fat Carcass, and, like
Locusts, devour all the Provinces; of which, Cromwell having had notice, least
such a confluence of People, might occasion Sedition, especially seeing he
perceived the Anabaptists and Sectarians always skrewing themselves into
profitable places, both Civil and Military, who being for the most part
Democratical, would not fail to oppose that Sublimity and Pre-eminence, to
which he aspired, that he might crush the Serpent in the Egg, and baffle their
Power, as if he minded other Affairs; Cromwell calls home Fleetwood from
Ireland,
he recalls from Ireland his Son in Law, Fleetwood, upon pretext of using his
Council at home, but in reallity, that he might have an eye over the designs
and motions of the Man, and by taking off the Head and Patron, As being too
favorable to them:

And sends his Son Henry at first as his Substitute,


disappoint the Practices and Councils of the Democraticks.

Therefore, in place of Fleetwood, he sends Henry, the younger of his two Sons,
into Ireland, but not as his Successor, only with the Title of a Commissioner,
and Major General of the Army: And having for two years space made a trial of
his Juvenile Prudence, he raised him to a higher degree. Henry took it ill at
first, to be denied the Honor of a Title, when he had the Power given him; and
being instigated by the whisperings of Flatterers, he desired of his Father,
that he might Govern Ireland with the Name of Deputy. But Cromwell, not without
a check, denying it, that unseasonable Ambition was stifled in the bud. But
whilst he alone sat at the Helm, two other Commissioners, or rather
Privy-Counsellors, Hammond and Goodwin are added.

Who in the first place takes upon him the care of Religion,
He made it his chief business, in the first place, to restore the Worship of
God, tho not to its ancient Beauty, yet to some better Order; by degrees giving
back the Churches and Pulpits, which were wholly possessed by the Anabaptists,
to the Ministers. Nay, he caused his own Child to be publicly Baptized in the
Cathedral-Church, a rare thing at that time, and made a Christening Feast. And
farther, he protected the Preachers from all Affronts, Of the Preachers,
and the troublesome interruptions of the Sectaries, in time of Divine Service.
Now does the College of Dublin, which had been long neglected, raise its head
out of Obscurity. And of the College,
Henry himself being chosen the Chancellor, or Patron thereof; nay,
School-Exercises, (but after the Presbyterian way) and Degrees in Arts and
Professions are instituted: and which was most acceptable to the Scholars, at
his own Charges he bought the Library of Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, not to be
named but with Honor, and made a present of it to the College.

Nor was he less careful of the Civil, As also of Civil affairs of Justice,
than Ecclesiastical affairs; for Justice in the Courts began now to show it
self, as much as it could under a Tyrannical and Violent Government. Stately
Houses were built in the Cities, And Trade*
and the Country abounded in Pasture and Corn. Trade began also to flourish, in
exporting to all places Tallow, Hides, Salt Flesh and Fish, and Ambergrise.
Henry moreover allowed a free access to all, and liberty of petitioning; nay,
and illustrated his Bounty with some kind beams toward the Royalists, The
Royalists being received more mildly.
by easing those who had been forfeited and sequestrated, remitting one half of
the Money, that had been imposed upon them, giving gracious words; liberty of
playing with him, and many times admitting them to his Table.

Steel, at the Solicitation of Fleetwood, His Assistants and Counselors.
is made Chancellor of Ireland, which rouzed a little the drooping Minds of
the Sectaries; but, which was soon dashed, by the advancement of Berry to the
place of Baron of the Exchequer, and of Pepis to that of Lord Chief Justice,
who both stuck close to Henry. In Council he made use of Broghill, Coot, and
Hill, and of the same, with Morgan and some others in the Army, governing the
Commonwealth very well, according to the present state of Affairs.

Cromwell calls a Parliament at London.
About that time a Parliament is called at London, to consist of Members of the
three Kingdoms, thirty being nominated for Ireland. In it the Irish Papists
accused of Treason, are declared Rebels, and therefore their Estates and
Inheritances are forfeited; for discovering of whom, The Irish are commanded to
Abjure Popery. Henry's clemency, as to that particular.
a strict Oath of Abjuration of Popery is imposed upon all suspected Persons;
in the execution whereof, Henry showed himself merciful, and very seldom put
any to that Trial. But the division and distribution of the Lands, which was
heretofore appointed and begun, is now brought to an issue.

The Irish are enjoined to transplant themselves into Connaght,
The transplanting of all the Irish into Connaght, is again brought upon the
Stage, being the invention of one Spencer, who, by way of Dialogue, wrote of
the affairs of Ireland, and afterward insisted upon by Ireton, who by all
means commended the practice thereof. Now are all commanded to pack up bag and
baggage, change their Habitation, and to remove into that Province, where Lands
were to be assigned to them in Inheritance, according to the pleasure of
Commissioners; the Forts, Cities, Towns, and Passages, And what was the cause
of it:
being only reserved for the use of the English, with all the Seacoast within
a Mile of the Sea. For that Province being for the most part surrounded by the
River Shannon, vast Lakes, and the Collough Mountains, and so divided from the
rest, cut off from them all hopes and power of rising any more against the
English. None are spared but the laboring men, and some whom favor and
popular necessity procured a permission to stay. If Ireton had lived to these
times, he would have made it absolutely necessary to have brought over
Husbandmen, and Trades-People from England, who are paid much dearer for
their work and labor than the Irish are.

But, Good God! How many cunning Tricks, Yet it is by many cunningly evaded.
frauds and inventions did the Irish find out for avoiding the sting of that
Order? So that it reached none but the simpler and honester sort of People. Nay
I am ashamed to divulge the horrid oppression and covetuousness of our Factors;
who when they met with the more innocent and plain, they impose upon them with
tricks and juggling, and so tire them out until they got their Lands from them
for little or nothing, which they sell dear unto others; and the suspicion of a
sudden Insurrection again amongst the Irish, because they parted so easily with
their Inheritances, is laid at their door as a ruin

We purposely pass by matters of less importance, least what we are about by
the by should swell up to too vast a bulk. The Officers of the Army what by
craft, and what by force turning Richard out of the Supreme Power; and the
Rump-Parliament after five years interment being raised again from the dead,
Henry neglecting both his own and brothers interest.
the eyes of all are fixed upon Henry. It was thought by some that he would
defend his own Authority, and vindicate that of his Brother. Others hoped that
he would favor the Royal Cause, and so make his interest with the King, the
Navy especially giving no obscure marks of their inclination; and the Army and
Kingdom of Ireland being ready enough to promote such an Enterprise. Nor dare I
swear; that he entertained no such Projects. But the Lord Broghill and Coot
deserting him in dubious Affairs; and Steel and Tomlinson old Commissioners,
managing, and Waller and Corbet new ones, continually soliciting him, he at
length resigns himself to the Will and Pleasure of the Rump-Parliament, and
returns into England, there to give an account of his administration.

Delivers up the Government to the revived Rump-Parliament.
Hitherto we have dwelt in Ireland, that without interruption, we might give the
Reader an account of the Affairs of that Kingdom. Now bringing our discourse
back to former years, we must return to the Democratical Republicans, who after
the murder of the King, swayed Affairs in England, under the Olygarchicks.
These being upstarts promoted for the most part men of their own Edition to
places of honor and profit. Which the Londoners took so ill, that the Mayor
and Aldermen came and petitioned the Rump-Parliament, A Petition of the
Magistrates of London, to the Rump-Parliament, for their Citizens turned out of
the common Council.
that the chief Citizens or that some of them at least, might be again admitted
into the common Council of the City. These were about three hundred, whom
either age, or wealth at least recommended: But the year before the
Rump-Parliament had turned a great many of them out, and judged them unworthy
of carrying any office in the City; for no other reason, but because they had
signed the Petition making Peace with the King, which the greater and sounder
part of the Parliament were also for. But that desire of the Mayor and
Aldermen, though they seriously alleged the want of ingenious and honest men,
of moderate Estates for discharging the offices of the City, is rejected with
contempt, Is rejected with contempt.
nor would they have any but the Riff Raff and inconsiderable rabble to manage
Public Affairs; as being such who measured good and evil according to the will
and pleasure of their Masters.

Whilst these things are carried on at London, The attempts of King Charles
the Second for himself and his Subjects,
CHARLES the Second was not asleep, nor did he neglect his Affairs, though the
Regicides carried all before them in England, but moves every stone, and leaves
nothing unessayd, that the wit and power of man could devise or execrate, for
resetling the undone Nations, asserting the public Liberty, and (the Regicide
being revenged,) recovering his ancient Inheritance.

He implores the assistance of Foreign Kings and Princes; By asking help from
Foreign Princes.
who are all equally concerned according to the Supreme Power they have
received from God, and their common duty, to give Sanctuary to the oppressed;
but especially to Kings, whom above all men living they ought to protect, not
only upon the account of Kindred and Cognation, but also for fear of Contagion,
least the horrid example of Rebellion might have an influence upon their own
Subjects; that if perchance, they should be reduced to the like streights, they
might likewise obtain the like help and assistance.

He sends Ambassadors to the Emperor and German Princes, to the Grand
Signior, By several Ambassadors, especially of the Spaniard by Hide afterward
Chancelour of England and Earl of Clarendon,
the great Duke of Moscovie, the Kings of Poland, Denmark, and Sweden, to the
republic of Venice and the States General of the united Provinces. He sends
into Spain, from whence he had the greatest expectation, the Lord Edward Hide,
who had formerly been Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer and was afterward Lord
Chancellor and Earl of Clarendon, whose Iuvenile and vegete wit, And the French
in person,
might put life into the aged head of Cottington. In France, besides a
particular Ambassador, the Queen Mother and Duke of York were there, and the
King himself to solicit his own affairs.

But with little success every where,
But alas! almost every where unsuccessfully the distance of place hindering
the aid of some; and either the want of money, domestic seditions, or dangers
from neigbours, obstructing the assistances of others. None are touched with
the sense or pity of the Calamities of another. The Turk delivering up the
Ambassador Hide brother to the Chancelour into the hands of the
Rump-Parliament, who being brought to London is beheaded.
The Ottoman Court dealt barbarously, in that for a little money, they
delivered up the Ambassador, Henry Hide a most accomplished Gentleman into the
hands of the Rump-Parliament, who being brought over into England, for his
unshaken Loyalty, without any pretext of ancient Law, he was beheaded before
the Royal Exchange in London.

France with promises, gives hope of large assistance, The French flattering
with vain hopes,
so long as they could procure any help from the Subjects of the King of
England; especially from James Duke of YORK, who commanding the English and
Irish that served the French in Flanders, had given many Noble and Illustrious
proofs of his Heroic Valor and Courage: And at length making a league with
the Regicides.
Until that Blake had beaten the French Fleet under the Command of the Duke of
Vendosme which came to the relief of Dunkirk at that time besieged by the
Spaniards. Then, they sent Burdex to treat of peace at London, whilst the
Regicides expected no less than a declaration of War: And having afterward
entered into a strict alliance; they inwardly rejoiced that the Kings Majesty
was deluded, and no small stop put to the fury of the Rebels.

The Spaniard seemed to be grieved at the Kings Murder; The Spaniard declining
to meddle in other peoples business.
but excused himself that it did not belong to him to determine about the
controversies of England, nor did he take pleasure to meddle in other Peoples
Affairs out of his own Terrritories; but that in the mean time he should be
ready to do the King all the kindness he could within his Countries.
Nevertheless, not long after Ascham being killed, (which I shall shortly
relate) he was the first King who Commanded his Hedge Ambassador Don Alonso de
Cardenas, And being the first of all that owned and complemented the
Commonwealth of England,
to Worship the rising sun of the Commonwealth, wish the Parrcides all
happiness; entreat the continuance of Friendship and good Correspondence
betwixt his Kingdoms and the New Commonwealth, and promised severely to
punish the Wicked Murderers of Ascham.

Now there are some not obscure Reasons why the great Mind of so Wise a King,
For what Reasons chiefly instigated thereunto.
was by so unexpected a change (that rather discovered than altered his
Inclinations,) brought over to the contrary side: For besides Ancient and
Paternal enmities with Queen Elizabeth, Philip himself had particular Quarrels
against Charles. It wounded him deep, that his Sister being courted in
Marriage, even so far as to have had an interview and conference with her, she
should afterward be slighted for a Daughter of France, though a Princess of
extraordinary Worth. Besides the old offense stuck still in his Mind, that our
King was the first of all who honorably received a splendid Embassy from the
Duke of Braganza, and after he had successfully dispatched his business sent
him away in triumph. To this may be added the mischance of Don Oquenda, not
many years before, under whose Command several Ships carrying Men and Arms for
a recruit to the War of Flanders, being forced into the English Harbors by the
Dutch who pursued them, were under our Castles, though then in Peace with
Spain, suffered to be torn, sunk, and burnt; our Fleet rather threateningly
rebuking, then stoutly driving off the Enemy. Which discontents not expiring
with the Murdered King, are hurtful now to his Son. But after all, his new
Friends as a reward of the amity freely offered them, by stealth and without
any Declaration of War, having sometimes after invaded the West Indies, that
is, the very Bowels of the Spanish Empire: And their attempt upon Hispaniola,
being disappointed, he at length, laying aside all hatred, obliged CHALES the
Second by all sorts of good Offices, and entertaind him in his Territories for
the ruin of the Regicides.

The King of Portugal being able to do little,
The King of Portugal showed a generous Soul, (of which hereafter) had his
Strength corresponded with his Inclinations. But what would one who hardly as
yet sat steady in his own lately recovered Throne, do for another expulsed
Prince? The truth is, though he had then flourished in the quiet enjoyment of
his own just Rights, he was not Potent enough to undertake such a War; as could
restore a banished King, and much less at that time when he could hardly on the
one hand repel the Spaniard who offered at all, and on the other, keep even
with the Dutch, who in the East Indies and all over the Ocean strove for the
mastery.

And Sueden fickle.
Suedland at first good natured, changed as Affairs altered. Frederick Duke of
Holstein supplied the Earl of Montross, The Duke of Holstein brought some
succors. The Dane indigent of money. The Pole engaged in domestic troubles.

Others benevolent, but not much to the purpose.


who was then ready to Sail into Scotland with Men, Money, Ships and Arms, for
the Service of the King. Danemark having its Treasury exhausted for the Cause
of the King's Father, and running into a new War, was able to do no more. The
Rebellious Cossacks, and Neighboring Nations who had rendered the Peace
uncertain, made the King of Poland sparing in his Assistance. Yet the Scottish
Subjects, who lived in those Countries, as they were commanded gave what help
they were able to give. And so did the Emperor of Moscovie, Elector of
Brandenbourg, Archbishop of Mentz, and other Princes of Germany show their
Affections to the King.

But alas! what was all that to the fitting out of a Fleet, and raising of an
Army? to the providing of Arms, Ammunition and Necessaries of War? perhaps a
little more than might defray the Charges of Ambassadors, and relieve the
Poverty of Courtiers. The King's chief hope in his own Subjects;
All the hope was now in the Loyalty and Benevolence of Subjects; who, though
many of them were wheedled by the Artifices of the Regicides, or the fawnings
of Prosperity, Ambition of rising to higher Employments, or the coveteousness
of other men's Estates, which they hoped might be had for little or nothing, and
these, because Justice delayed to strike, drawn in to the number of above fifty
thousand, Of whom a great many extremely well affected, but very weak in
strength.
yet a far greater number kept their Loyalty and Allegiance to the King
inviolated. but being stunned with the sudden horror of the Kings Murder, and
amazed at the continual Victories of the Regicides, they knew not what to do,
or whither to turn themselves. They knew not as yet, what it was to Associate,
and they had no opportunity of rising; the Regicides having a watchful Eye over
all the Countries, and their Spies and Emissaries wresting all the Actions and
Sayings of Honest men into the worst Sense.

Nevertheless many Royalists in disguise crossed the Sea and waited upon the
King; and others who came hither from the King, were by his Friends informed
what to do. All that they could do, was gradually to confer Councils, encourage
one another, plot and contrive, gather supplies, and by blowing the Coals,
raise such a Flame as might at length destroy the Enemy. Yet some of them, of
whom I shall mention two, Sir Charles Berkly, and Sir Henry Slingsby, were
taken by the watchfulness of Informers; but both made their escape; though the
last falling again into the Noose, paid for his Loyalty, and lost his Head by
Sentence of the High Court of Justice.

Ascham, who he was:
About that time Ascham, whom I named a little before, a Fellow of obscure
Birth, desiring to show his Gifts and get himself a Name, by writing against
the King, and for the abominable change of Government, which the less it beeame
him to do, for that heretofore (under the Earl of Northumberland) he had had
the institution of the Young Duke of Gloucester, is therefore in quality of
Envoy with Ribera an Italian, An envoy from the Rump-Parliament to the King of
Spain,
as his Interpreter sent into Spain to treat of Affairs. But he had got himself
so much hatred by his Writings that were published, and the Employment he now
undertook, that some conspired a revenge, and suddenly breaking into his
Chamber at Madrid, against all Law and Equity killed both him and Ribera his
Interpreter. He is privately killed with his Interpreter. One of the Murderers
taken, making his escape suffers for it.
The Ambassador of Venice gave Sanctuary to one of the Murderers; another
being taken making his escape, publicly suffered for it. The rest to the
number of three took Sanctuary in a Church till the Ecclesiastics should have
time to take cognizance of the Cause. But by delaying of time, and lengthening
out the debate, the English also infesting the West Indies, they at length get
clearly off.

It is fit we should also mention the good Offices of the emulous King of
Portugal, The King of Portugal offends the Regicides, because he would not
force Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice cut of his Harbors, when Blake desired
to fight them. Blake therefore takes some Porteguese Ships laden with Sugar,
and sends them into England. The Princes hardly escaping, sail to America.
and how for the sake of our Prince he provoked the Rebel Hornets. Prince
Rupert and Prince Maurice, when they fled from Ireland, found Protection at
Lisbon: But Blake Admiral of the Fleet for the Rump-Parliament pursuing them
hither, desires leave to sight the Prince's Ships. The King of Portugal
thinking that the Laws of Hospitality were not so to be violated, seeing it was
not safe for him openly to refuse, he shifts the matter, and forces not the
Princes to put out to Sea. Blake being highly offended at this, Cruises upon
the Coast; and at length meeting with a Fleet of seven or eight Sail of Ships
laden with Sugers, he takes them and sends them into England. He himself, in
the mean time having pursued the Princes who had put to Sea again, comes up
with them at Carthagena, a Spanish Town in the Streights, and in the Bay of
Vera, forces them ashore; but both of them escaped in one of their Ships, and
Sailing with one or two more Ships to the West Indies, they leave Spain to be
sufficiently mauled by the Parliament.

But a terrible Hurricane which is frequent in the Torrid Zone, Where Maurice
was unhappily cast away,
having separated Maurice from his Brother, he was cast away with his Ship and
Men in the dreadful Storm. Here we cannot but sigh at our Calamities, in the
dismal fate of so Illustrious a Youth. Unhappy English, who with blind rage
have consumed the Relicts of the Palatinat! and accursed Broils of Britain,
that shipwrack't that Life which escaped the Sword of Austria! I should give
way to lamentations, if our shame could add Glory to the Dead, or give comfort
to the surviving Family. But a Valiant man is not to be by womanish houling
lamented; neither does true Grief require an ambitious pomp of Words, nor great
sorrow admit it. Let us only then, which is all we can do, with our Tears wash
out the stain of our unlucky Age; to which Crime it is no small accession, that
the Ocean and other World are also polluted with the destruction of the Royal
Family. But Prince Rupert (which was some comfort) having sent his Goods into
France; Rupert returning back to the Coast of France.
with much ado was saved.

I return to Portugal, from whence the steam of Sugar attracted an Ambassador
to London. Now would God the Supreme disposer of all things, The Portuguese
Ships are restored.
suffer that so remarkable constancy of so good a King, should turn to the
damage of his Subjects. For the Ships being restored, the War that was
threatened, was upon supplication averted, a new League made, and the Peace
afterward more religiously observed. The Rebels, indeed, think it below them to
make reparation for damages; yet they make them good by a War they were to
engage in with the Dutch and Spaniards, to the great advantage of the
Portuguese. I mention not the Glory of assisting distressed Princes, a rare
thing amongst Kings. But after all, he himself has no cause to fear, but that
his kindness showed to a King, heretofore in distress, will, by the same
Prince, who never forgets those that have deserved well of him, now raised to
the Throne of his Ancestors, and joined to him in Affinity, be repayed to him
and his Subjects with plentiful interest.

But now we have affairs nearer home, Strickland, the Ambassador, being
slighted in Holland, returns home.
and with the Dutch again to consider. Strickland having long resided in
Holland, as Ambassador, is now slighted; and being allowed no more a place in
the Assembly of the States, he returns home. But that the Parricides might
repay one Affront with another, they command Jacobin Vanodenskirk, the Dutch
Ambassador to depart the Kingdom of England, The Dutch Ambassador is
commanded to depart England,
upon pretext that the King being dead, the Negotiation with the States was now
at an end. But soon after, as if they repented what they had done, Schaepie is
sent to treat of Peace, who, though he was but an Agent, and empowred only by
one City, to wit, Amsterdam, to treat, yet, by the Rump-Parliament, To whom
another presently succeeds from Amsterdam.

St. Jones and Strickland are sent into Holland with great Equipage.


he is honored with the Title of Ambassador, who take occasion, on the other
hand to send two Ambassadors with Royal and Magnificent Equipage, to wit,
Oliver St. Jones, one of the Members of the Rump-Parliament, and Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and Walter Strickland. These have Instructions, To
clap up a Peace, and that by a Coalition of both Nations into one, they might
live under the same Government, have the mutual Privileges of Habitation,
Trading and Harbors of each Country indifferently: But these were not to be
divulged, but piece and piece, and by degrees, if they found the People
inclineable, and fit to comply with such Propositions.

Who nevertheless being fooled by the States,
But the States had no inclination to settle a Peace, until they found the
success of the affairs in Scotland. But after much ado, having at length given
Audience to the Ambassadors, they put them off from day to day, till they
proposed, at long run, some long winded Articles of Peace, drawn up in the time
of Henry VII, to be considered; which, so soon as the Ambassadors had
rejected, they devise others to drive away time, until the Ambassadors,
finding themselves fooled, might hasten their departure. But, during their stay
in Holland, the States were necessitated to place a Guard at their Door; And
exposed to continual dangers;
nor was that sufficient to secure them from Affronts, but that their Windows
were every night broken, or they themselves disturbed by I know not what
Bug-bears and Apparitions. There was also a strong report, that a certain
Relation of St. Jones came to his House, that, with a Bow-string, he might
strangle him after the manner of the Turks Mutes, but that because he saw no
way to escape, if he had committed the Fact, he abstained from attempting it.
The Ambassadors being startled at these things, and daily fearing worse, They
return without doing of any thing.
and not knowing how long they might stay, nor what answer bring back, they
return without any effect of their Negotiation.

This enraged the Parricides,
But great were the Disorders that this Affront occasioned, and severe was the
Revenge which the Parricides hatched in their Hearts; being resolved, that if
the affairs in Scotland succeeded according to their wishes, they would never
rest nor sheath their Sword, before they had forced by Arms the Conditions,
which by Ambassadors they could not obtain. In the mean time they thought it
enough at present, to give out Letters of Reprisal, And made them give out
Letters of Reprisal.
and by other men's hands, revenge the Injuries done to themselves; and to make
an Act, that no Merchandise, of what Country soever it were, should be brought
into England, unless imported in English Bottoms by English Seamen, or
fraighted by English Merchants.

Let us make a trip over to Sweden, Whitlock Sails to Sweden with a splendid
Embassy for the Que^n
the Queen whereof had lately sent an Envoy to Compliment and Congratulate the
Regicides: To her therefore Whitlock is sent in a splendid Embassy, to return
the Honor and Compliment, and also to make Peace with her, to which she very
willingly consented. But the Queen being shorttly after removed, or, to use a
softer expession, having resigned the Crown, Who resigning the Crown, the King
sends ov^r Bond Ambassador to Cromwell.
the King of Sweden sends over a Reciprocal, and no less Honorable Embassy, by
the Lord Christopher Bond, a Senator of the Kingdom, to Cromwell, who then had
the chief administration of the Government.

The Isles of Silly lay very convenient for molesting the Trade of the English.
An expedition for reducing the Isles of Silly.
There the Royalists cruising too and again with four or five small Vessels,
did no little hurt to the Regicides, and would have done much more, could they
have been morgaged to the Dutch, as it was commonly reported. For plucking out
of this Thorn, great preparations are made at Plymouth, not above fifteen
Leagues distant from the Islands. Where Blake and Popham having provided some
small Vessels and Boats, they take the opportunity, and set Sail from thence in
the night time, with three hundred Soldiers, besides Seamen, and having had a
fair Wind, next morning they come to the Land. There are in all ten adjacent
Islands, divided only by narrow Passages of an Eddy Sea, and on all sides
secured by Shelves and Rocks. In three hours time they take Threscoe and
Briari, Of which two, after a conflict of three hours continuance, are taken.
with the loss of fifteen Men: but of the Garrison, a Boat being sunck, about
forty were drowned, one hundred and twenty made Prisoners, and about forty
Guns taken, which the Royalists out of two Friggats, had planted upon the
shore. The raging of the Sea appeasing the Fury of the Soldiers, made for two
days time a Cessation, not unlike to a Peace. But on the third day, when it was
Calm, they began to thunder on both sides with their great Guns, on the one
hand from Threscoe, and the other Islands, and on the other, from St. Mary's
Grimsby Haven, being betwixt them. The rest at length surrender upon articles.
But the Governor Greenvill, now Earl of Bath, wanting supplies, at length,
upon pretty good Conditions, surrenders the Island.

As also upon Barbados, an Island in America.
Shortly after, that continual Victories might drop into to the lap of the
Rebels, news was brought from the Caribbe Islands, that Barbados, the richest
of them, had delivered it self up into the power of Aisckew, according to the
example of which the rest would take their measures. He, with eighteen or
twenty Sail of Men of War, had steered his Course to the West Indies, to reduce
those Islands once more under the yoke of England; and setting upon them
unexpectedly, he took twenty or thirty Dutch Ships, who in contempt of two
Acts, drove a Trade with them; cruising off and on in sight of the Island, he
blocked it up for the space of six Months, and at length, a Sedition arising
amongst the Planters, he forced the Lord Willoughby, whom the King had made
Governor of it, to surrender.

Whilst these things are acting in the Indies, they erect of new in England, a
High Court of Justice, as they were pleased to call it, A high Court of Justice
is again erected, and that a standing Court.
not upon the account of a present Emergent; but to continue for six Months,
which if it could pass without the envy of Tyranny and Oppression, might be
adjourned de die in diem. Keeble is by the Rump-Parliament made President of
this Court, being assisted by others, and fifty Assessors of the popular
Faction. Most of these being Soldiers, were ready at the beck of the General,
to smite the Prisoner as an Enemy; all the rest were Creatures of the new
Commonwealth, whose hopes and whole Estates depended upon the favor of the
Parricides; except, perhaps, one or two, who had more Zeal than Judgment. And
this horrid Violence, unheard of under the Government of our Kings past in all
Ages, is imposed upon the ignorant multitude, under the specious name of
Justice. These Men had Power to bring before them, try and punish without
appeal, any that had held Correspondence with the King, Queen, Duke of York,
the Royalists, or Irish, that had assisted them by Word, or Deed, or received
them into their Houses, or that had delivered up any Castle, Town, or Ship, or
had attempted any such Surrender; besides many other Crimes of the same nature.
Now if you inquire into the constitution of the Court, and whence it derived
its Authority, you must know, that it was first appointed against the Kings
Majesty, by those who were so far from having any Power of administering
Justice, that, by our Laws, and Customs, they had not the Power to condemn the
meanest Slave; then against the Nobles; afterward as occasion offered, it was
of ten made use of; but now was turned into a custom. If any man was suspected
of plotting and contriving against the Public, he was presently dragged before
this supreme Tribunal, and exposed to the Calumnies of pettifogging Lawyers,
who for a little Reputation and Profit sold their Souls in pleading against
him; who having none to defend his Cause, and being terrified or shamed out of
Countenance, without the Evidence of two Witnesses, or the Verdict of a Jury of
twelve men, (which has only force in England) he is Condemned, and why should
not I say Murdered?

A lively description of the sad faee of affairs
It was, indeed no small matter of terror, to see a drawn Sword hanging as by
an Hair over all men's naked Heads, at every minute ready to fall upon them.
About that time especially, and afterward when Cromwell had got the chief
administration of the Government, whole swarms of informers wandered about in
all places, Informers swarm in all places.
both public and private, sacred and profane. They listened in Churches,
sneaked into companies in Taverns and Alehouses, and went to wrestling in the
Rings. Noblemen and Gentelmens Servants were corrupted, that they might
discover what their Masters talked at Table; the chief Vintners or their
Drawers at least were feed, to hearken to the free discourses of their
Customers over their Wine, either in the room or skulking behind the Hangings,
or thin partition Walls. Such kind of Spies and eave-droppers, Nothing secure
from Spies.
Hiero the Tyrant of Syracusa used to employ, who were called (...) and (...),
In a word, Prisons were full of accusers that they might accuse; so that there
was no Village free from snarlings nor snares. The Cities themselves were
filled with solitude, silence, trembling and fear. All flocked into the
Country, not for pleasure or the Society of their Neighbors, but where they
could find solitude and retreat; where the Barrenness and desertness of the
place might neither allure Soldiers nor secure Informers; where they might
neither be known, nor have acquaintance, and where avoiding the company of men,
they might have the satisfaction of being secure, without the pleasure of the
Country or company. All Neighborhood, Society, and intimacy were suspected.
Those who where naturally averse from ill things, yet often deceived, because
they had been deceived before. Into such confusion had the Rout, the disturber
of common Peace, put all things. Who had a thousand tricks to do mischief,
With observant eyes do curious Spies run about, and were not idle when they
had nothing to do. They tope it stoutly that by a gentle rack they may pump out
the secrets of the heart. They pry into words and actions, but much more into
men's looks, the interpreters of the mind. It is their business to hanker about
for Rumors, and spread reports, to rouse the drooping hopes of the credulous,
and to foment them with strange stories, which afterward vanishing into smoke,
they might be cowed and rendered more pusillanimous for the future.

The Noblemen and Gentlemen who had been of the contrary side, are pursued with
secret whispers and calumnies wherever they could be picked up, only to vex
them; the more moderate are obnoxious to Suspicions: Those who were found any
way to have assisted or corresponded with the King, were either forced to bribe
lustily or to stand a Trial. There were also a kind of Duckoys and Trapans, A
New set of Trapans come in play,
of all men the most accursed, whose chief study was to teaze the more
hotheaded and choleric, and draw them thereby into Capital snares; and when
they had thus caught them, inform against them that they might be brought to a
Trial, or oppress them with secret Calumnies. Who amongst others, are fatal to
Colonel Andrews.
Colonel Andrews thus circumvented lost his Head. Nor was the president
Bradshaw ashamed openly to declare in Court, that by counterfeit Letters he had
corresponded with him in the name of the King. Thus was the Estate of the Lord
Craven confiscated; By the craft of these, the Lord Craven is forfeited.
though being no way obnoxious, but for a large Estate which he possessed in
England, he lived beyond Seas in Holland. Whither one Faulkner of that Gang, a
turn-coat to the Kings Party, being sent, (but for what end I dare not affirm,)
laid a snare for him. One single evidence, and he infamous too, was sufficient
to the partial and mercenary Judges, for the fellow was afterward for the same
deposition convicted of perjury, who having given under his hand contrary to
what he had sworn, to the Judges eyes belied his venal Tongue. These are the
counterfeiters of Commissions, of the King's Signet, forgers of writings and
hands, and the Cony-catchers of Novices. They of their own accord give men
Authority to raise Soldiers, And others brought into the danger of their lives.
and then turn that Authority to their ruin, Deliver Letters, which they
venture to do, though (as they say) upon the Peril of High Treason, and then
inform the Soldiers that they might seize the Parties with the Letters, bring
them before the new Court, and point blank condemn them to Death. In the mean
time there was no accusing of the clandestine authors of the Villainy, Whilst
the accursed authors are secure,
and far less bringing them to Justice. So that it clearly appeared that these
were not the crimes of private men, but publicly deliberated, As being put
upon these tricks by the Regicides.
forged in the shop of the Politicians, and committed to the Myrmidons, who as
Jackcalls to the Lions, might make it their business, to hunt out for Crimes,
which the High Court of Justice might run down.

The Scots being long uncertain what to do, The Scots consent to Monarchy, and
that in the person of Charles the Second, those that were of a contrary opinion
not daring to resist: Yet they disagree about the conditions.
and divided into diverse Factions, at length resolve upon Monarchical
Government, and proclaming CHARLES the Second King. A few who relished a
Republic, being of the same mind with the Regicides, concealed their rancour,
not daring to discover themselves, nor resist. But upon what Conditions he
should be admitted to the Throne is seriously debated; nor never well agreed
upon. Most of the Highlanders, firmly maintain that no other Articles are to be
demanded of his Majesty but the ancicient promises which the Laws enjoined at
the inauguration of Kings. Others, to wit the Covenanters, would have him first
to subscribe the Solemn League and Covenant, give signs of sorrow and
repentance for his Father and Mother's sins; and all banished and turned out of
Court who had carried Arms for his Father, or had not as yet taken the
Covenant. I mention not the rest; as being but a few, whose minds were either
corrupted by Bribes and Pensions from the Regicides,, or were infected with the
contagion of their Friends the Democraticks; At length CHARLES the Second is
proclaimed King of Scotland England, and Ireland;
and who urged severer terms, that they might raise new scruples, and cut off
all way for the King's admission. At length, the middle party prevailing,
CHARLES the Second is by Heralds, in all public Place, proclaimed King of
Scotland, England and Ireland.

And Windram is sent to the King from the Convention of Estates,
In the mean while the debate growing long in the Convention of Estates, and
Committee of the Kirk, who were to consider of the matter and to draw it up
into Form, they themselves at length resolve to send Windram, Lord of
Libberton, to try the Kings mind; who having delivered him Letters full of
sorrow, and regret, for the horrid and unparallelled Murder of his Father, That
he might inform him upon what conditions he was to be admitted.
assures him that the Scots were ready to obey him, had proclaimed him King and
Successor to the Crown, and that upon the following Conditions, they would
admit him to the Supreme administration of the Government.

The Proposals were to this effect. That the King should subscribe the Solemn
League and Covenant, Which were to this purpose.
and consent by act of Parliament that all his Subjects should take it,
confirming all that they had done for that purpose. That he should confirm the
acts of the two last Sessions of the Parliament; which condemns Duke Hamilton's
late engagement and irruption into England. That he should recall his Commission
to Montross, whereby he had Power to raise Soldiers in Scotland, or bring them
into Scotland from abroad. That he would renounce his right of Negative Vote.
That he would suffer no Papist about him, and lastly, that he would appoint a
place in Holland, where Commissioners might wait upon his Majesty, for
adjusting of these proposals and of other things that might be previous to his
voyage.

The King having read the Letters writes back to the Scots by Fleeming.
These Proposals were made in the Isle of Jersey, where the King with many of
his Courtiers then was, who, having received the Letters, made Windram very
welcome; and not long after sent Sir William Fleeming to the Scottish Nobility
and Committee of the Kirk with Letters of reciprocal congratulation. At length
he writes to them by Windram. Afterward by the same Windram;

And appoints Breda in Holland for a Treaty.


That he was well pleased with their obedience and indignation against the
Regicides, exhorts them, that they would seriously endeavor the restoring of
Peace and Concord; that for that end he should not be wanting in any thing; and
bids them for that purpose send Commissioners to Breda, with whom he would
treat about the re-establishing of Peace.

The King being willing to deliberate about these matters more seriously, Then
deliberates with his Friends.
privately demands the Opinions of his Friends, writing to those whose Affairs
hindered them from waiting Personally upon him. But so many Heads, so many
Minds; yet the Opinions were divided chiefly into two. Of whom some dread all
concord with the Scots:
Some persuade him not at all to listen to the Scots, there being treachery hid
under the specious Cloak of obedience. They represent to him his Father as an
Instance of it, who had been long gulled with fair promises, until he was
forced to be severe to his most faithful Subjects; and then afterward was
delivered up to the pleasure of the Faction. That they would cloth him with
the Name and Title of a King, but keep all the Power and real Authority in
their own hands. And that if he offered for the future to resist, and get his
neck from under the Yoke, they would deliver him up to the English Regicides,
or kill him with their own hands. That he would do better to stick by Montross,
than by the united Forces of Scotland, whom he had found to be faithful and
brave in doubtful and difficult times, and magnanimous and fortunate at a
pinch; that with his own, and the Forces of his Friends, succors from abroad,
and the aid of the English, Irish, and Scots, he might mount his Throne in
spite of all the attempts and endeavors of his Enemies.

Others again magnified the Authority of Parliament, and the Power of the
Covenanters, Others persuade him to listen to the Scots,
giving it out, that the English also who loved Presbytery, secretly favored
the Scots, though at present they discovered not themselves; that it would
procure him likewise reputation abroad, to be owned King of Scotland: As the
Queen Mother also did.
That the Queen also exhorted him to make Peace with the Scots; who though at
first they proposed severe and grievous Conditions of Union, yet his Majesty
would in progress of time obtain more easy terms, the Covenanters by long
conversation and frequent Offices being won over to calmer and milder
Dispositions; that they consulted their own Interests, under the Veil of Divine
Worship and Cloak of Religion, and that by complying with the Times, he would
at length find the Scots more tractable and submissive to his his Will and
Pleasure. Thus the King betwixt Scylla and Charybdis, was for some time at a
stand,
uncertain to what side to adhere, but resolving to determine himself for the
future as occasion did present.

Windram being sent into Scotland, the Kings Answer is kindly received, and
joyful hopes of concord begin to shine out over the whole Nation. The King
acquaints Montross with the Treaty to be held with the Scots at Breda:
The Kings Majesty, in the mean time writes to Montross, to whom he had
formerly given a Commission to invade Scotland, acquainting him with what the
Scots had done, what answer he had sent to them, and that a Treaty was to be
held at Breda for settling a Peace: That he nevertheless should go on in
levying Soldiers, that he might with as many men as possibly he could make be
ready in Scotland, at the time that the Scots began their Treaty. For so he
doubted not but that they would insist upon easier terms, when they perceived
him in a readiness to revenge by Arms the injuries that might be offered to
him. Now his Majesty thought it fit to leave Jersey, And presently leaves the
Isle of Jersey.
both because he had intelligence that the Rump-Parliament were preparing a
Fleet, for invading the Island; and also that all things necessary might be in
readiness against the time of the following Treaty.

In the mean time the convention of the Estates of Scotland consult about
Proposals, The convention of the Estates of Scotland choose Commissioners,
and the choosing of Commissioners to be sent to the King: Where the Ministers
forgetting all Modesty and Justice, propose Conditions extremely rigid,
difficult and impossible; for qualifying and mitigating which the Laymen
bestir themselves; and at length they jointly agree upon this. That the
Commissioners be the Earls of Cassils and Louthian, the Lord Burleigh, and
Lord of Liberton; Smith and Jeffreys to represent the Laity; and Brodie,
Lawson, And agree upon Articles to be sent to the King.
and Wood, the Clergy. That the Proposals should be these. That a Proclamation
should be issued out, prohibiting all Excommunicated Persons to come to Court.
That the King should bind himself by his Royal Promise under Hand and Seal, to
take the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant of the three
Kingdoms. That he should besides ratify all Acts of Parliament, whereby the
League and Covenant, Presbyterian Government, the Directory of Worship,
Confession of Faith and Catechism are enjoined; and that he should use the same
in his own Family, and not suffer them to be innovated or abolished by any.
Moreover that in all Civil Affairs, he should govern according to the direction
of Parliament, and in Ecclesiasticals, according to that of the Assembly of the
Kirk. Which, proposed at Breda:
These Proposals are after a Sermon, were delivered by the Earl of Cassils at
Breda. The King asking if they had any more to say? They answer, Nothing; and
after, if they were obliged by any engagement to be revenged on the Regicides?
They answer, By none.

And presently after a few more by other Commissioners; especially against
Montross.
Whilst his Majesty was consulting about these, other Commissioners come, to
wit, Murrey and the Earl of Carnwath, with some few additions to the former
Proposals; as that His Majesty would forbid Montross and his Followers to enter
the Kingdom, and by his assent confirm the last Acts of Parliament.

And now it is time to relate the misfortune of Montross. He being honored
with the Kings Commission, uses all his endeavors amongst the Sweeds, The
deplorable fate of that Excellent Hero is related;
Danes, Poles, Germans, and all the Northern Nations, that being furnished and
assisted with Men, Money, Arms and Provisions, he might pass over into
Scotland. And without delay, having for haste left behind King with a Body of
Horse in Sweden, who designed to follow him; and Ogilbey also in Holland to
gather the disbanded Soldiers of the Prince of Oranges Army, Who with a small
handful of men arrives too soon in Scotland.
who misapplied the Money designed for that purpose; with fifteen hundred Arms
furnished by the Queen of Sweden, fuor Ships, (of which two were cast away upon
the Rocks) and four hundred raw Soldiers raised in a hurry, he arrives at the
Isles of Orkney; and there having joined about a thousand of the Islanders,
most part Fishermen, he set Sail and landed at the Wick of Cathness; cheerfully
reflecting upon what he had done before, and full of hopes, that he should in a
short time get together a considerable Army, by the concourse of those who had
heretofore been for the King.

But, alas! that hope deceived Montross. The Nation was now of another mind, He
is sadly disappointed of his hopes, the Nation being now worn out with
troubles, and inclinable to peace.
being tired out and broken with the Wars, their dangers over, inclinable to
Peace; and restrained by the severities of the Covenanters. The whole Country
was in Arms, so soon as they heard of his arrival. The Parliament happened at
that time to be sitting, and not without the King's Command, and had seven or
eight thousand men under the Command of Lesly. The Clans chose rather to have a
Peace from any Masters, than an uncertain one, though more favorable; and to
enjoy with security rather an incommodious rest, than with the danger of
Fortune to endeavor a change by stirs. Nay many who were even ready to lay
down their lives for the King, having now at length capitulated with the
Parliament, and promised obedience and submission, think they cannot act
contrary without a Crime.

Nevertheless he takes Dumbeath Castle, He takes Dumbeath.
with a resolute mind advances farther; and expecting that the Earl of Seaforth
would join him with two thousand Men, And hastens to p^ssess himself of a Pass.
But Straughan was at hand with three hundred Horse.
whom he had raised for the King: He hastens to possess himself of a narrow and
difficult pass, which being taken, would facilitate their Conjunction. But
Straughan met him upon his march, who was sent before by Lesly with three
hundred choice Horse, that he might watch his motion, beat up his Quarters,
withstand his Progress, intercept Men and Provisions that might be sent to his
Camp, and if a fair occasion offered, not only Skirmish with him, Who
perceiving his opportunity, falls upon him, easily routs and puts his men to
flight.
but put it to the hazard of a Battle. This Man perceiving them to be out of
order, weary, and only Foot, in an open and plain Champion, falls suddenly in
upon them, and tries the fortune of War; and with that success, that the
Soldiers of the Isles at once throwing away both their Arms and Courage,
betake themselves to flight.

The Germans in the mean time defending themselves, Montross betakes himself to
flight, and being spent with three days fasting, confiding in a treacherous
man, is brought to Leslie,
until getting leave to depart, they sailed over Seas. All the Baggage was
taken by Straughan and the Standard, bearing the Figure of a Head cut off, with
this Motto, Judica and vindica causam, Domine, Judge and avenge the Cause, O
Lord. Montross fled, and having changed his Clothes with a certain High-lander,
for three or four days he lurked, accompanied only with one Servant, till being
weakened and spent with Hunger and Fasting, he trusted himself with the Lord of
Aston, who, although he had formerly served under him, yet, having changed his
Faith with his Fortune, betrayed him to Leslie for a reward of two thousand
pounds. The Lord Freuderick, Colonel Hurrie, Francis Hay of Dalgetty, another
Hay of Naughton, Sibbald, Gray, Spotswood, and others were likewise taken by
Straughan.

And from thence into the Jaws of his Enemies, and is basely used at
Edinburrough:
But Montross is made a subject of triumph, when he was come within a Mile of
Edinburrough, is ordered to be bound by the Hangman, in a Chair, and planted
backwards in a Cart, that he might be seen of all, the Executioner riding with
his Cap on upon the Beast that drew the Cart; and in that posture he is carried
to the Tolbooth, the public Prison for Malefactors; many of the Spectators
bursting out into Tears, when they reflected upon the changeableness and
inconstancy of Fortune.

Next day he is in Parliament accused of heinous Crimes,
Next day he is arraigned at the Bar of the Parliament. It is objected against
him, That he had stopped the Kings Ears to the Parliament, and to the rest of his
Subjects, who gave him good Counsel; That he had brought over the Irish Rebels
to make War in the very heart of the Kingdom: That he had heretofore slain some
of the Parliamentarians; That he had committed many Spoils, Depopulations, and
Devastations, in the Lands of the Marquess of Argile; That he had ill treated
some Ministers upon his first coming into Scotland; That upon his second
landing in Scotland, he had brought foreign Soldiers with him, and that
without Commission, for what was known to others; That he had been ill affected
toward all Covenanters, and that he had basely broken the League and Covenant,
which he had solemnly taken and Sworn. These were the Crimes that were laid to
his Charge. But he foreseeing that a defense would not stand him in any stead,
answers in short and general terms; Which he shortly answered and refuted.
That it was very well known he had made the Invasion by Commission from the
King; that he had never acted any thing, which was not approved by the Kings
Command, and his own Conscience; that by the League and Covenant he was bound
to obey the Kings Majesty as well as the Commons. He was only brought twice
before the Parliament, and a third time to receive Sentence, Nevertheless he is
Condemned by Chancellor Loudon, to suffer in a most horrid manner.
pronounced by Chancellor Loudon, with all maginable bitterness and Contempt,
which he undauntedly, and without the least Sign of Consternation, heard given
against him in these Words.

That next day, the one and twentieth of March, one thousand six hundred and
fifty, he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross in Edinburrough, until he
died, his History and Declaration being tied about his neck, and to hang three
hours in public view of all the People, after which he should be beheaded and
quartered, his Head to be fixed upon the Talbooth of Edinburrough, and his Legs
and Arms over the Gates of the Cities, Sterling, Glascow, Dundee, and Aberdeen:
And in case he repented (whereby the Sentence of Excommunication may be taken
off by the Kirk) the bulk of his Body should be buried in the Gray Friars, if
not, in the Borough Moor (a place like TYBVRN). Nothing did his Blood
descended from the Race of the ancient Nobility, nor his Heroic Virtues, avail
him; nor could the Clemency that he had used toward the Vanquished, nor the
Kings Commission, whereby he had undertaken the War, procure him any Favor.
Neither, indeed, did he desire any Favor, but with a brave and undaunted Mind,
told them, That he thought it no less honorable to have his Head put upon the
Tolbooth, than to have his Picture hang in the Kings Bedchamber: wishing that
he had Flesh and Parts enough to be set up in all places, as a monument of his
unshaken Loyalty to the King. He piously and courageously suffered the public
shame he was put to, Next day he suffered a barbarous and inhumane death.
with so much Force in answering the Ministers, such sincerity in speaking to
the People, and so much Zeal and Fervor in his Devotions, that he made the
Ministers ashamed, cleared his Innocence to the People, and gave a proof of his
Piety toward God. None of the Spectatours could refrain from Tears; unless it
was the Lady Lorn, who could not forbear laughing; but her Note and Carriage
was changed, when she might have seen the Head of her Father-in-Law, Argile,
cut off in the same place, as it happened not many years after. Three or four
Gentlemen more, who could give any hopes of retrieving the Kings Affairs, that
were now sinking in Scotland, were overwhelmed in the same ruin, and publicly
put to death.

The news of this horrid Cruelty no sooner came to the Kings Ears, but, The
King was extremely grieved at this misfortune, and expostulates with Murrey.
afflicted with extreme Sorrow, he sent for Murrey, and told him, that he was
grieved at the Heart, that during the very Treaty, when he thought the minds of
all to be disposed to Peace, the Parliament had polluted themselves with the
Blood of his best Subjects; demanding an account of the whole Tragedy, and of
the Blood that was spilt. Yet he judged it most convenient, Yet he conceals his
Anger.
not to give way to his just Anger, but rather to moderate and restrain his
Indignation, no hopes being now left him him, but what depended on the Scots.

The Scots make answer, That they still persist in the same Mind and Loyalty
toward his Majesty. That they gladly heard that there were hopes of restoring
Peace: That he should not be moved with Obstacles that, at first hearing, were
grievous: That nothing had been acted in the case of Montross, that the King
himself could repent of, or that did not consist with Reason and Justice. The
Scots labor to soften and appease the King,
This Answer past by Plurality of Votes in Parliament, though two and thirty
Republicans opposed it. That he should hasten his Voyage into Scotland: That
they were ready with all their Might and Force to stand by and defend him
against his Enemies; tho they had intercepted Letters written to Montross,
which they chose rather to bury in Oblivion, than mention.

At length, the King, Who at length consents to their Articles,
by the advice of William, Prince of Orange, and others, consents to the
Articles of the Scots, with some little Qualification and Restriction; and
bidding farewell to most of his Faithful Domestic Servants, and to the
Churchmen, his Chaplains, whose company he thought would not be acceptable to
the Scots, And together with the Commissioners, that in different Ships, he
puts out to Sea; by whom he is on Board plied with new Proposals, about the
Solemn League and Covenant.
he, with the Commissioners, but in different Ships, set Sail from Scheveling
in Holland, directing his Course toward the River of Spey. But by that time
they were a little out at Sea, the Commissioners came to the King, having, as
they said, received new Instructions, and entreat him that he would Subscribe
and Confirm the Solemn League and Covenant, according to the Commands they had
received from the Parliament. For he had signed the National Covenant already,
and promised not to be against this; he had allowed it also to be imposed upon
all others; and told them, that if he might give his Reasons personally to the
Parliament, why he could not subscribe it, he would comply. Which with
reluctance he subcribes in presence of Witnesses,
This so stuck with the King, and vexed him so much, that he was about to have
changed his Course, and failed back again to Holland. But being prevailed upon,
he at length subscribed; and that no place of doubting might be left, five or
six are called to subscribe as witnesses to the Act and Deed. No sooner was
this Evil over, but he fell into danger by continual storms, and English
Frigates, that lay in wait for him, of all things most to be feared. For those
that looked from Land, believed those Frigates to have been up with the Kings
Ships, though indeed they saw not one another by reason of a Cloud that
interposed. And so after so many dangers, And at length, after many dangers,
arrives in the Spey;
under the protection of Almighty God, they all safely arrived in the Spey.

With the general applause of the People.
The People were not a little gladded by the Kings Landing in Scotland,
testifying their Joys with Shouts, and Acclamations and Bonefires. But the
Commissioners, that with show of greater Honor they might conduct him to
Edinburrough, put back those, that in sense of Duty came to salute and honor
him, and beat off others with Fists and Sticks, that more importunately
approached. He is splendidly entertained at Aberdeen;
He was splendidly entertained by the Magistrates of Aberdeen, who, for a
pledge of their Love, presented him with fifteen hundred Marks, which he
distributed amongst his indigent, and almost famished Servants. And that
occasioned a Proclamation for securing their Money, That such as thought fit to
bestow any thing for the interest of the King, it should only be brought into
the public Treasury. The Magistrates of Dundee entertained him likewise
magnificently, And at Dundee also.
saving that a Member of Montross was to be seen upon a Poll, on the top of the
Town Hall; and that the Estates urged him to sign new Articles. Afterward he
came to Edinburrough, And when he came to Edinburrough, he was solemnly
proclaimed King of Scotland, England, and Ireland. There he is managed at the
pleasure of Commissioners, and continually vexed by the Ministers.
amidst the reiterated and joyful Acclamations of all the People, and is again
by the Heralds proclaimed King of Scotland, England, and Ireland.

The Kings Majesty is managed according to the pleasure of some Commissioners;
access is allowed to such as they thought fit, all others being kept back. His
Guard is Commanded by the Lord Lorn, Son to the Marquess of Argile, by whom all
the avenues are observed, that no man might envy that splendid custody. In the
mean time the Presbyterian Ministers, talk of nothing but Crimes; now
inveighing against the Sins of his Father, and by and by again, against the
Idolatry and Heresy of his Mother, and the obstinacy of both, toward the
Reformation, the Government and Church of Christ: They never rest telling him
of Wars, Slaughter, Bloodshed, of his Education and living amongst Bishops, Men
of no Religion, and that in a saucy manner, without the least sense of
reverence or shame. Laboring to make him a new Creature, by lessons of
Repentance and Humility, severe rebukes and admonitions, that he might carry
his Cross, before he put on his Crown, and mount by the Valley of Bacha, to the
Throne of regal Authority. And all these things they so absurdly and clownishly
set about, that their Doctrins and Instructions were more apt to make him
nauseate and eternally hate their ways, than to gain him to a liking or assent
to their Opinions. The King one evening walking in the Garden, a couple of
dapper Covenant Levites making up to him, and very severely chid him for
profaning the Lords Day by a Walk; By the Laics also almost divested of his
Royal Power.
though he had heard two Sermons, and been publicly at Morning and Evening
Prayers that day, besides other private Meditations that he was much given to.
The Laity also instead of a Crown of Gold shining with Jewels, which they
bragged they would Crown him with, the precious Stones being secretly and by
degrees picked out of it, give him one of Feathers, such as Demetrius truly
said, no man in his senses would stoop and take up from the ground, by allowing
him his Robes, the Name of Majesty, and Ensigns of a King, with the troubles
and difficulties of doing Justice, (though that also must be administered after
their way;) whilst they invaded and reserved to themselves, the substantial
Prerogatives of making Laws, and Peace, and War.

The Regicides informed of all that past, look to themselves.
But these things could not be so kept up from the Regicides (though the
Parliaments clawed one another, with mutual signs of good will, by Conferences
and Messengers, at least no Hostility as yet appears) but that by their Friends
and Emissaries in Holland and Scotland, who were well paid for their pains,
they were informed of the whole series of the pacification. And therefore they
consult how they might provide before hand, against a storm that haug over
their heads. Therefore passing by Fairfax, who favored the S^ots,
There was an Army in readiness under the Command of Fairfax; but that General
was not very prone to enter into a War with the Scots; who had not as yet
provoked the English by any injuries; they suspected him rather to have a
kindness for that Nation; and to be inwardly displeased at the Murder of the
King, and subversion of the Government. They therefore recall Cromwell out of
Ireland, Cromwell is recalled from Ireland, who with much solemnity and
applause returns to London:
to give him the charge of the Scottish War. He quickly returning home Crowned
with Victories and Success, in a triumphant manner entered London amidst a crowd
of Attendants, Friends, Citizens, and Members of the Rump-Parliament, Guarded
by a Troop of Horse and a Regiment of Foot, and amongst them Fairfax himself,
went out two miles to meet him, and congratulate his Arrival. But when they
were come to Tyburn, the place of public Execution, where a great crowd of
spectators were gathered together, a certain flatterer pointing with his finger
to the Multitude; Good God! Sir, (said he) what a number of People come to
welcome you home? He smiling, made answer, But how many more do you think,
would flock together to see me hanged, if that should happen? There was nothing
more unlikely at that time; and yet there was a presage in these words, which
he often repeated and used in discourse.

The Regicides and he having consulted, it is thought fit to ease the Lord
Fairfax of the burden; and Cromwell is declared Captain General of all the
Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; And is presently declared Captain
General of the Forces in place of Fairfax, for an immediate Invasion of
Scotland. The Scots send Dehortatory Letters;
who undertakes the War against the Scots, having ordered Soldiers and
Provisions to be sent toward Berwick. The Scots instantly send Letters to the
Rump-Parliament, Cromwell, and Haselrigg Governor of New Castle; wherein they
complain that the Rump-Parliament design an Invasion of their Country; and that
contrary to the Union agreed upon betwixt both Nations, and the public Faith
mutually given, no War being denounced, the Cause not published, nor their
Answers expected, without giving them time to repent, if they had offended in
any thing. To which the English Officers answer.
But that the Scene might be continued, The English Officers give an Answer,
The sum of which, that the Genius of these times may the better appear to
Posterity, I shall here shortly relate. And after a Preface, it was to this
purpose.

We are blamed for the Murder of the King, for which we are bound rather to
give God thanks, and applaud the Parliament, since the King was guilty of more
bloodshed than the cruelty of all his Predecessors; an obstinate Enemy of
Reformation, and of all good men; who besides taught his Son to follow his
footsteps: Him the sounder part of the People, (the timorous and bad Members
being secluded) justly put to death; God Almighty showed them the who way at
first, approving it by wonderful successes and continual benedictions. What is
on the other hand objected, that the Treaty, the Law of Arms, and the League
and Covenant are violated, by a War made before it be denounced, but that
Treaty is already abrogated by Hamilton, at the Command of his own Parliament;
unless it be thought that the English only are bound by the Religion of
Treaties and Agreements, but the Scots not at all. Let them pretend their
League and Covenant; but withal, let them consider that therein Religion and
the Liberty of the Subject is in the first place to be secured,
and that the honor and defense of the King is designed but in the second
place, and in order to the former; since therefore these two thwart one
another, it is but just that that which is last, and more ignoble be dispensed
with. As to what concerns the establishment of Presbytery, it was not certainly
the intention of the Covenant, by force of Arms, to impose it upon people
whether they would or not, unless it could be made out by Holy Scripture, and
Arguments of sound reason; to which they themselves were ready to subscribe.
Afterward they profess in the Name of God, and with bowels full of love and
compassion, That it would be their greatest joy, if without Arms they might
obtain satisfaction and security. This they cause to be dispersed among the
Scots that came to Market to Berwick, thereby to wheedle them, and create a
good Opinion of themselves, and stir up Factions among the People.

Cromwell also gives the Scots sweet words; Cromwell also wheadles the common
people of Scotland with sweet words.
having published a Declaration, and caused it by his Agents to be dispersed
through Scotland: Wherein he bids the honest Inhabitants, through whose
Countries the Army was to march, to be of good courage; he having no quarrel
with them; and not to depart from their Houses; it being his intention to do
injury to no man, but rather to protect all. He moreover puts them in mind of
the modesty and good discipline of the Soldiers, whereof they themselves were
eye witnesses, when he pursued Duke Hamilton 's men into the heart of the
Kingdom, telling them that from that was past, they should make a Judgment of
what was to come. That he took to heart all the concerns of good men; and that
now he drew his Sword against the Authors of wrongs, who had lately polluted
both England and Scotland with Blood and Slaughter, and who would involve them
into new Miseries, having admitted into their bosom the King, an open favourer
of wickedness.

But in vain, seeing all fled, leaving no victuals behind them.
But he sings to the deaf, they being now sufficiently acquainted with his
tricks and fallacies: For the Inhabitants flying with what Goods they could
carry with them, betook themselves to places of more security; nor was there a
bit of Victuals to be found in that Country, but what was brought in the Ships
that waited upon the Coast.

Cromwell having entered Scotland,
About the end of June, one thousand six hundred and fifty, after four days
march in the Enemies Country, he came to Musselbrough, within a few miles of
Edenborrough, with five thousand five hundred Horse, eleven thousand Foot,
sixteen field pieces, and all sorts of warlike Provisions.

The Scots encamp betwixt Leeth and Edenburrough.
In the mean time the Scots were not idle; but having levied an Army under the
Command of Old Leslie, with much expedition, part of the Forces were encamped
and strongly entrenched betwixt Leeth and Edenburrough. To whose assistance
flocked daily Soldiers raised in all parts, who had taken the Covenant, and
neither served under Montross nor Hamilton. No respect in the mean time was had
to the King, who was left at St. Johnston, upon pretext, that he had not spent
time enough in Prayers and the Works of Mortification, for receiving the mold
and impression of Presbytery.

Cromwell afterward draws up his Army in Battalia, within a mile of the
Scottish Camp, Cromwell shows himself, and provokes them to Battle: Then thinks
of falling in upon their Camp, but thinks it safer to march back to
Musselbrough to ref^esh his Soldiers.
and took the Field that he might provoke them to come to Battle. But the Scots
not inclining to come to an Engagement, he went up to Arthurs seat near
Edenburrough, that he might view the Enemy, and consider whether he had not
best to fall into their Camp, whilst his Forces were as yet in good plight,
and the Scots not altogether well prepared.

But the Officers dissuaded him from that enterprise as being full of danger,
if not also rash. Wherefore perceiving that no good was to be done that way, he
marches toward Musselbrough to refresh his Soldiers, Lambert beats back the
enemy in pursuit of the English.

Straughan offers great matters, relying not only on the Prayers, but also the
Horse of the Clergy.


leaving a Guard behind, that might keep the Enemy in play, if perchance they
might charge him in the Rear. And indeed, they did so, and beat and put that
party to flight; pursuing them, until Lambert with another Body of men, put a
stop to their Victory, though he received two wounds. Many were killed in that
Engagement; which nevertheless was but as a prelude to the Slaughter of the
night following. For Straughan had undertaken, with fifteen hundred Horse
raised by the Clergy, to have Cromwell either alive or dead. For that end
Prayers were poured forth in the Churches, and the Ministers roaring from the
Pulpits, implored, nay, I had almost said, commanded the Victory: As if God
Almighty had been obliged in duty by all means to assist his own Saints, purged
from the leaven of Malignancy, and joined to himself by Covenant, against
King-killing Heretics and Sectarians.

In the mean time Straughan falls in suddenly and briskly upon the
Cromwellians, He falls upon the English.
and puts their Out-Guards into Disorder, but with no happy success, But is
beat off, and loses his Horse.
for the Enemy coming up in Bodies one after another, beat off the Black-Coat
men, and pursued them even to the Camp; Straughan himself having been
dismounted, and with much ado escaping into the Town. The flying and
consternation was so great, that the Pursuers had almost entered the Enemies
Camp, had not the Kings Majesty, who came that morning, been happily there. For
he, causing the Cannon to be turned against the Fugitives, The King reduces the
terrified Soldiers into order.
threatened to Fire upon them, if they rallied not, and drew up again in order,
under the protection of the Guns of the Camp, that so the Troops one after
another might be received into the Camp. His Majesty lay in his Clothes all
that night upon the ground, For which the Soldiers show him very great Honor.
without a wink of sleep; but the Soldiers next morning being sensible from
what danger he had delivered the Army, and how much he had deserved at their
hands, had C. R. marked with a Coal or Match, some upon their Hats and Caps,
and others on their Coats, as a badge of their gratitude.

The Commanders are angry; The Ministers pray him to withdraw:
The Council of War was very angry at these things; and the Ministers coming,
earnestly beg of him, that he would withdraw, and not expose himself to the
dangers of War: They pretend to be in Covenant with God, as no King was; and
that That Life, which was to be preferred before the Lives of ten thousand
private Soldiers, was not to be exposed to the Enemy; with many things of that
nature. But the King obstinately refusing, and judging it unworthy, that he who
swayed the Royal Scepter, and wore the Crown, should fear Wounds, or shun the
shedding of his Blood for his Subjects: The Commanders also come and intercede
with him: They beseech, urge, and at length not obscurely threaten, that if he
would not, he might shift for himself; and if he desired not to meet with worse
usage, he would remove to some other place: These reasons so prevailed, that at
length he withdrew. To whom with much ado he at length listens.
Then do the Nobles and Ministers inquire into the Authors of the Kings coming,
and order almost a thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot to be disbanded, as
being Malignants; or that they had not at all, or too late taken the Covenant,
without any previous signs of Repentance. But Cromwell at that time knew none
of these things, The Prisoners are sent home in Cromwells Coach.
who without any ransom sent the Prisoners, whom he had taken, in his own
Coach to Edenburrough, that by that good Office he might oblige the Kirk,
having not as yet lost all hopes of the Ministers; or at least that he might
have an occasion of getting Intelligence of the affairs of the Enemies.

Cromwell marches back to Dunbar, Cromwell returns to Dunbar,
where the Ships rode at Anchor, that he might refresh his faint Soldiers with
Provisions, give them some rest, and draw the Scots farther off from their
Camp; but being impatient of delay, after a few days he marched back again, And
from thence suddenly marching back again, disturbs the joys of the Scots.
and found much rejoicing and feasting at Edenburrough, for the departure of
the English, which his sudden approach quickly put a stop to. David Leslie is
sent to Cromwell from the Comittee of the Kirk to acquaint him; That the King
stumbling at, The Kirk and States renounce the defense of Malignants.
and refusing to subscribe to the Declaration offered him by the Committee of
Estates, and Commissioners of the Kirk, concerning his former Carriage, and
resolution for the future, is cause of just Grief and Offense, in reference to
the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof. And therefore they do
declare, that they do not, nor will not espouse any malignant Party or Quarrel,
but that they fight merely upon their former Grounds and Principles, in the
cause of God and the Kingdom, nor will they own the King, nor his Interest,
farther than he owns and prosecutes the Cause of God, etc.

Cromwell takes two Forts in view of the Scots;
Cromwell perceiving that there was no way to allure the Scots to a Battle,
marches toward Pentland Hills, and in sight of the Army, takes in Collington
and Red-house, both garrisoned by Soldiers, that so he might draw the Scots
out of their Trenches. But when neither that could do, he drew up his Army,
marches too and again about the Camp, views, provokes them, and threatens a
present attempt. Nevertheless the Scots keep to their resolution, sometimes,
Who budg not for all that;
indeed, skirmishing with, and harassing the Enemy, but not daring to put it to
the trial of a Battle: Until the Soldiers were enured by Skirkmishes and
slight Engagements, to look the Cromwellians in the Face, use their Arms, And
to wash off the Aspersion of Cowardice, they give Cromwell assurance that they
would shortly fight him,
and lay aside all fear; and that they might at length, with no great labor,
defeat Cromwell's Forces, tired out and weakened, by the badness of Air, Cold,
Hunger, watching and frequent Skirmishing.

But, because a rumor was spread abroad, that the Scots kept within their Dens
and lurking holes with a whole Skin, not daring, (like Cowards) to hazard a
Battle, that they might wipe off that Aspersion, they send a splendid message
to Cromwell, to assure him, that within a few days he should have experience of
the contrary. And that they might be as good as their word, And march to the
right hand, and come to a halt.
two days after drawing out their Forces, they march to the right hand, as
toward Sterling, and after a short march halt. Cromwell, that he might not
seem to decline an opportunity of Fighting, now by them offered, He presently
following, finds a Marish betwixt them.
advances against, and follows them: But when he came within Musket Shot of
the Enemy, he puts Spurs to his Horse and advances, that he himself might view,
what it was that hindered the Scots from coming on: Finding a great Marish
there, which could not without difficulty be passed over, with his great Guns
(which was all he could do) he thunders against the Army, to which the Scots,
on the other side, return the like answer. This roaring of great Guns lasted
about the space of two hours, with no great loss on either side, and then both
draw-off, put an end to that kind of Mock-fight.

Cromwell returning to his Camp, From thence he marches to Musselbrough to
hinder its being surprised, and presently after to Haddington,
on Pentland Hills, has intelligence that the Enemy was about to surprise
Musselbrough, and intercept the Provisions, which he usually received in Boats
from Dunbar. Therefore they march thither in the dead of the Night, and having
refreshed the Army, they put on board Ships fifteen hundred Men, who being sick
or wounded, were not able to carry Arms, and the rest march toward Haddington.
The Scots are at their heels Skirmishing with them in the Rear, and flouting
and jeering them; nor were they sooner encamped, but that they were set upon;
yet only to disturb and allarm them, Next day to Dunbar, the Scots molesting
them in their march,
not to engage them with the whole Army. Next day the Cromwellians march to
Dunbar, midway betwixt Berwick and Edenburrough, upon the Sea shore;
Lamner-moor Hills to the South, being almost impassable. The Scots sent a Body
of Men to Cobberspath, who, though they were but few in number, might hinder a
far greater to pass over the Hills; Who encamp thereabouts.
and pitch their Camp about Dunbar. This being a very Rainy night, the Officers
rambled up and down, and the private Soldiers, I know not by whose Order, had
put out their Matches, (which as it usually happens when things go amiss,) was
imputed to Treachery) though there was a strong Guard kept next to the English.

About break of day Lambert first falls in upon the Scots, and presently after
Cromwell, who obtain a great Victory.
But Cromwell having that night refreshed and cherished his Soldiers in good
Lodging, in the Town of Dunbar, divided his Forces about break of day, and
sends Lambert first to charge the main Guard of the Scots; he himself follows
after, and after a sharp dispute, wherein most part being wounded, many were
killed, he dispersed them all, and follows them to the Camp, where presently
there was nothing but noise and confusion, Men running to and again, they knew
not whither, the groaning and sighing of dying Men, shouts and joyful
acclamations of the Conquerours, flying and slaughter. Three thousand are
killed, nine thousand taken Prisoners; fifteen thousand Arms, all the Artillery
and Ammunition, with above two hundred Colors fall into the hands of the
Victorious. The Prisoners, (after the wounded sick and weak, and those that
were of no value were set at liberty) are sent to New Castle, in England; where
by the Governor Haselrig many of them were starved, having nothing to eat but
green Cabbage Leaves, and Oats in a small proportion: The more Robust that
outlived this Diet, are condemned to the Sugar-Mills, and by the English
Planters are transported to the West Indies.

Whilst these things were acting, the Pulpits of Edenburrough resound with
Prayers, and promise a certain and speedy Victory, and that the Feet of those
who brought glad tidings were at hand. But whilst they are hourly in
expectation of joyful, they receive sad and sorrowful news; Leslie himself the
Messenger of the defeat, renders vain the confidence of the Pulpits.
Leslie himself arrives about ten of the Clock the same day, and assures them
of a total overthrow. So dangerous a thing it is to pass a Judgment of God
Almighty, and, by the line of our weak Reason, to fathom the depth of
unsearchable Providence. For the purposes of a sincere heart, are many times
disappointed by corrupt affections.

Cromwell marching back victorious, during the general Consternation, takes,
Leeth, Edinburrough and Leeth forthwith yield to the Conqueror;

But the Castle inexpugnable by Situation and Art, holds out.


Edenburrough, and the neighboring Garrisons on this side of the Forth. Only
Edenburrough Castle durst hold out. It is built on a high abrupt Rock,
inexpugnable by Situation and Art, to which there is no way to mount, but by
one steep side of a Hill, and that but for two, or three together. Dundass had
the command of this place, with a Garrison of forty Soldiers, fifty great
Guns, and a full Magazine. He presently causes works to be cast up, Therefore
he commands works to be cast up against it,
to secure the City from the Castle, inviting from thence the Edenburrough
Ministers, who had fled thither for security and protection. He commands all
the Ships, Vessels, and Boats, From thence he pursues the remn^nt of the Army
to Sterling, but in vain; and leaving that place, visits the Ministers at
Glasgow, endeavoring to allure them to h^s side: and by Letters tries what he
could work upon Ker and Straughan.
that were in the Forth, either to be broken, or to be brought into Leeth, that
all hopes might be cut off, of transporting Men or Ammunition unto the Enemy,
on the other side.

From thence he marches to Sterling, whither all the Scottish Cavalry, and the
remnant of the Foot had escaped. But finding it stronger, than at that time of
the year it could be taken, without success he turns aside to Glascow, there to
wheedle and try the Pulse of the Ministers, who managed all things at their
pleasure, some he sollicits, others he cajoals and flatters with extraordinary
fair Promises, and a little mollifies them, charming and taming the Sirens with
a Cant. He sends likewise to the Committee of Estates, and to try the
inclinations of two eminent Commanders of the Army, Straughan, and Ker,
employing in all places sly and cunning Foxes, who partly with flattering
speeches, and partly by threats and snubs, might bend the minds of their
Countrymen unto his Party, or crush their Resolutions. For two or three days
the good man did negotiate with the Ministers; during which time the Soldiers
interred a Member of the Marquis of Montross, that was put up upon the Gate,
After three days, having taken Jedbrough, he returns to Edenburrough.
being in that more generous and just, than they who had denied it Burial.
However, that he might not lose all his labor, he takes Jedbrough, and returns
to Edenburrough; and a little after, a Fleet arrives at Leeth with fresh
Soldiers, Money, Hay, and all sorts of Provisions.

But because the Rode betwixt Edenburrough and England, was infested by a
dangerous sort of Robbers, called Moss-Troopers. In pursuit of those, Monck
marches against Robbers;
Monck marches out with a Morter-piece, and some Fieldpieces, and a choice
Body of Horse and Foot, who having intelligence that they had taken their
nights Quarters in Dilcon House, not far from Haddington, he beset the House in
the night time, and having plied them with the Morter-piece and Fieldpieces,
next morning he took them all. Roslan Castle fell next into his hands; Takes
Roslan, and the strong Castle of Tantallon:
and then Tantallon, which being seated on a craggy Rock, is on three sides
encompassed with the Sea, and strongly fortified to the Land, standing half way
betwixt Edenburrough and Dunbar. This Castle was so long battered by Monck,
until breaches being made in the Walls, As Fenwick did Hume Castle, almost as
strong.
the Garrison surrendered: though when James the fourth of Scotland besieged
it, for many months it had resisted the fury of great Guns. About the same time
Fenwick takes Hume Castle standing upon a very high and unaccessable Rock, the
Garrison having free Liberty to depart.

But we must return to Edenburrough Castle, for reducing of which Cromwell left
no means unessayed. Cromwell earnestly sets about the reduction of Edinburrough
Castle.
At first he resolved to attack it by Mines, and having employed both English
and Scottish Colliers, who were accustomed to dig in the Coalpits, he falls to
mining; and by the force of fire endeavors to soften the stone: But all in
vain because of the hardness of the Rock, And having therefore, in vain essayed
Mines, he batters it with h^s Cannon.
which was proof against all his Arts. When therefore he could not blow it up
into the Air, he endeavors to batter it down to the ground, and sets men at
work night and day to raise a battery, so near the walls of the Castle, that by
uncessant battering he might at length make a breach, which being with much
labor and pains finished, and fortified with Gabions and baskets full of
Earth, he plants thereon, four mortar pieces, and six great Guns, and without
intermission batters the place with great noise and damage. Dundas being
terrified desires a conference with the Provost of Aberdeen, Till the
Governor, having in vain desired a conference and liberty to write to the
Council of Scotland,
and another (whose name I know not) both being at that time in Edenburrough.
These men refusing a conference with him, in the next place, he desires leave
to send a Messenger to know the minds of the Council of Scotland, as to the
relieving of the place. But since neither that was granted, Cromwell denying
him the liberty to send a Messenger, both parties resolve to continue the
Siege. At length, the Governor's Wife being bruised by a Granado-shell, And
his Wife at length being bruised by a Granado-shell,
and an hundred and fifty Soldiers who had been privately put in for a supply,
occasioning Tumults and Sedition, the Governor took a pretext of surrendering
the Castle which he resolved to do before, if he could have an honest color
for it; and having sent a Deputy to Cromwell, both parties agreed upon these
Articles. Consented to these Articles,
That the Castle should be surrendered to his Excellency Oliver Cromwell, with
all the Ordinance, Arms, Magazine, and Furniture of War thereunto belonging, on
Tuesday the 24 of December. 2. That the Governor, Officers and Soldiers should
march with Drums beating etc. in Military posture, to such place as they shall
appoint. 3. The public movables, private writs and evidences to be removed to
Sterling. 4. That Proclamation should be made for all that had Goods in the
Castle, to come or send to own and receive them. 5. All sick Officers and
Soldiers as well as hurt, to have liberty to stay in Edenburrough, and the
English to provide Horses and Wagons for the Governor, and other Officers;
and Hostages to be given on the Scots part for performance.

And delivers up the Castle,
In the Castle were taken three and fifty piece of Cannon, some of them
considerable both for size and beauty; eight thousand Arms, fourscore barrels
of Gunpowder, and all the Kings Hangings, Tapestry and Jewels. So fell, (as I
may say) that winged Castle, its Wings being broken; and that strong place,
that gloried in it is Virginity, as having never as yet submitted to a
Conqueror, is now deflowred by Cromwell. The Scots cry, it was taken by silver
Bullets: But of hidden and obscure matters, I shall not willingly pass a
Judgment.

In the mean time, The Scots consult what is best to be done,
the Scottish Nobility on the other side of Forth in a Parliament held at St.
Johnston, consult what is to be done in this desperate State of Affairs, for
preserving the rest of their Country, and regaining what was lost: Where the
King's Majesty was little regarded, The King slighted, resolves to fly to the
Highlanders, who were in Arms apart;
who being daily more and more offended against the Presbyterians, resolves to
fly to the Highlanders, throw himself into their Arms, take the Patronage of
them, and to try a common Fortune with those of his Subjects, who, being
rejected by the Covenanters, were in Arms separately by themselves; and if it
had not been for the reverence and awe they stood in of the King, And by whom
he was invited:
would have flown in the faces of those Contrymen of theirs, at least would
have been very troublesome unto them. And now being informed how basely the
King was used by the Covenanters, they invite him to them, promising to protect
and defend him; these were the Marquess of Huntley, Earls of Athol and
Seaforth, the Lords Ogilby, and Gordon, Middleton and several other great men.
The King had already listened to these, and secretly casts about with himself
how he might make his escape out of the hands of those Covenanters. Therefore
mounting on Horseback without Boots, as if he had been going a Hawking, with
three or four more in Company, he slips out of Town, And privately flies to the
house of the Lord Diddop.
and directs his Journey to the house of the Lord Vicount Diddop, with a
purpose to abscond, until the return of the Messengers, who had been sent to
learn the minds of the Highlanders, whether or not they were able, and were
indeed willing to assist him.

In the mean time an Englishman having discovered where the King was, great
debates arise amongst the Nobles, whether the Scots should leave him to shift
for himself, and only look to themselves; or having made submission unto him,
and promised greater obedience for the future, they should use his means and
Authority for reconciling all parties and persuasions. This was liked of by
most; and for that end Montgomery is quickly dispatched, with a trusty party of
Horse, Montgomery follows him,
that he might represent to his Majesty how dangerous that forsaking of the
Covenanters, would be to himself and his Affairs; entreat him to return; and
promise better usage for the future. In pursuance of his orders, he came and
beset the Lord Diddop's house in the night time, and entering in the morning,
And prevails with his Majesty to return.
fell at his Majesty's feet, and pressed him so urgently, that by his and
others persuasion, he was prevailed upon to return back with him to St.
Johnston.

The Prince of Orange dies.
About that time, as an accession to other Calamities, the Death of the Prince
of Orange happened. He had fallen sick of the small Pox, which at first seemed
to threaten no danger; having been let Blood, put on clean Linen, and eaten
Flesh unseasonably, he suddenly dies; and, indeed, too soon for the King, and
his own Family. But he left a posthumous Son, the present Prince, to inherit
his just Rights and Dignities in the United Provinces.

The Scots at length admit all to the War.
Now began the minds of the Scots to bend by degrees. Heretofore none to be
admitted into the War, but he who first gave a confession of his Faith, and
whose Religion was no ways suspected. Flatterers, who could countefeit Godly
looks and grimaces, were freely admitted; but men of Courage, who had
signalized themselves in the Wars, were put back: No Water could serve them to
quench the fire, but what came from the clear Fountain Head; no Sword, but the
Holy Sword of the Spirit was to be drawn against the Enemy. But not till they
took the Covenant.
Now all are sharers in the War, yet not before they had confessed their Sins,
and by a kind of Repentance scowred their Consciences. The Marquess of Hamilton
is obliged of new to take the Covenant; as also the Earls of Lauderdale, Those
that resisted, were by the King's means united to the rest,
Crawford, Buchan, the Lords, Diddop, Levingstone, and many other Persons of
great Quality. Nay and the English also, as the Duke of Buckingham, Lord
Wilmot, Earl of Cleveland, Massey and others, whose names I do not remember,
are associated.

But Middleton and Huntley, not satisfied with the Act of Indemnity, having
joined the forces of the Earl of Athol, march against them, and defeat Browns
Regiment; and had also engaged Lesly, had not the coming of the King put an end
to the Controversy, all being relaxed from Excommunication, taking the
Covenant, and associated into the War.

Whilst these things are in agitation on the other side of Forth, the effects
of Cromwell's Letters and practices began to appear, The Ministers disagree
among themselves.
in that Seeds of Sedition being sown amongst the Scots, the foundations of the
Kirk were miserably shaken; the Remonstrators from the Pulpit railing at the
King and his Ministers; and publishing Libels, (nay at length appealing to
Cromwell) against General Assemblies, which they sawcily enveigh against,
because they prohibited their clamorous buffoonery: And in all places cry, that
it was lawful for none that were truly Godly to take up Arms, for the cause
above mentioned, at the Command of the Parliament, King, or Kirk.

The Remonstrance subscribed by many;
All the South part of Scotland, with greatest part of the Ministers, and the
Horse that were Commanded by Ker, and Straughan, are drawn in to subscribe the
Remonstrance; wherein they spew out the poison of their rancour against all
those, Who had called in the King too hastily, before he had given certain
marks of sincere Repentance and Conversion to God; and before they had sounded
the minds of the Parricides, who had not had satisfaction; objecting to them
much more of the same stuff: At last they propose ways for remedying those
Evils. The Parliament and Assembly of the Kirk at first essay to mitigate and
appease those violent Spirits with Lenities, inviting them to send
Commissioners to St. Johnston, that if they had any remaining Scrupules, Who
behaving themselves seditiously,
they might be removed without noise. But they returning an answer more
insolently, propose Sterling as a place of greater security to both meetings.

Ker is ordered to apprehend Straughan, who presently after died.
That the Parliament might repress that Sedition, they order Ker to apprehend
Straughan, and bring him to Justice: But he discovering the Train, instantly
sled into Cromwell's Camp, where soon after dying, he concluded the Catastrophe
of his Fortune. And so Ker alone has the command of the Horse.

Cromwell pursue, Ker:
Cromwell now despairing of the intestine dissentions amongst the Scots,
pursues Ker; and having ordered Lambert and Whaley with five Regiments of Foot,
and an hundred Dragoons, to keep along the South side of the River Clide, he
himself advances on the North side. Lambert marching through Peebles, quartered
at Hamilton; which Ker being informed of by his Scouts, and knowing that
Cromwell was absent, with fifteen hundred Horse, Who unexpectedly falls upon
Lambert,
he suddenly falls upon Lambert in the night time, and that very successfully
at first, till by chance a Tree being laid cross the street in the middle of
the Town, which a Captain with a Company defended, put a stop to their
Progress, whilst Lambert drew up his Men, and, surrounding the Enemy, charged
them on the Rear. And having made a considerable slaughter of them, and Ker
himself, who was shot through the hand, being taken, But unfortunately.
he pursued the rest to Air, which Town being presently taken, was secured with
a Garrison. And so those of the old Army that hitherto remained, are quite
broken and dispersed, whether more to the grief or satisfaction of the King, I
cannot tell.

About the same time a great Conspiracy of Presbyterians, A Conspiracy
discovered at London.
both Ministers and Laymen is discovered at London; which took vent first in
Scotland, and was by Cromwell, upon some suspicions he had not without ground
conceived, recommended to the Regicides of England to be sifted. A Ship bound
for the Isle of Man, to acquaint the Earl of Derby with the whole Scheme of the
matter was, by stress of weather, accidentally forced into Air: The Soldiers
searching the Ship, detect the secret, afterward the Conspiratours are brought
to Examination at London; and by the mutual accusations one of another, the
whole Intrigue was laid open. That at the instigation of Massey, and some
Scots, they had designed to raise Money and Arms, For raising an Army in
Scotland, to invade England.
and therewith levy an Army in Scotland, which being joined to Ker, the Duke of
Buckingham, Lord Wilmot, and Massy, should invade England; Of this are
accused, Jenkins, Case, Drake, Love, and many other Ministers, besides Laymen,
Gibbons, Cook, Potter, etc. Adams, Alured, Bains, and others are brought in,
who had taken the League and Covenant of the three Nations, as they used to
call it, and had served under Essex, and who professed that they had stood on
the Covenanters side, that they might pump out all things, but were secretly of
another mind, All that were found guilty of this, are condemned, and two suffer.
that they might so be able to give a clearer Evidence before the High Court of
Justice; all of them being convicted are condemned to Death; which two,
undauntedly suffered; Love, he and Gibbons were the two that suffered.
one of whom, (that I may take notice of it by the by) by an unseasonable
Sermon, formerly disturbed the treaty of Vxbridge, rashly inveighing against
all Reconciliation, as if it were not lawful for those that professed the
Christian Religion, to have any Peace, or Commerce with the Followers of
Antichrist, giving that Name to the Royalists. The rest being sufficiently
warned, by the punishment of those two, and professing Sorrow and Repentance
are one after another gradually dismissed, and set at liberty.

Another Conspiracy in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge-shire,
Scarcely was that Conspiracy stifled, but a new Sedition arose amongst the
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge-shire men, which was nevertheless smothered in
the birth, all the undertakers being dispersed; of whom, in Norfolk alone,
fifty Men, by Sentence of the High Court of Justice, But in vain;
were hanged for that attempt. And that we may insist no longer upon these
Tragedies, The Welshmen with like success.
a great many Welsh in Cardigan-shire gathered together, which in a short time
might have looked like an Army, had not the Forces, who were ready in all
places round about, drawn together, and quenched that Fire with Blood. But this
is only a digression, which may somewhat serve to excuse the Scottish Invasion,
that happened this year.

But let us return again to Scotland, The King is Crowned at Scoon,
where now the solemn Coronation of the Kings Majesty is appointed to be at
Scoon, seven and forty Kings having heretofore put on the Crown of Scotland
in that place; where it was performed with as much Pomp, considering the times,
and the diminution of their strength, as it had been celebrated in more
flourishing ages. The Marquess of Argile put the Crown upon his Head, with
joyful acclamations of the People, firing of Guns, splendid Feasting, and
Bonefires in all places.

And now Scotland is wholly taken up, in preparations for War, levying of
Soldiers, And sets himself wholly to the defense of the Kingdom.
raising Money, and disciplining the Forces. The King himself views the
Garrisons that border on Fiffe and Forth, and prepares for defense. From thence
he visits the Highlanders, that he might compose the Feuds and Quarrels that
were amongst them; but as if they had been possessed with Furies, Dissentions
are extinguished.
and as if fresh flames had burst daily out of the dead Embers, they bitterly
quarrel and contend about Command and Governments; until by order of Parliament
the very Names of the Factious are abrogated, and all are freely admitted into
the Army, though Argile opposed it. Commissioners are likewise appointed, to
remove all impediments, who have Power given them, both of examining and
punishing Friends and Favorers of the Rebel- Parricides; The Favorers of the
Rebel-Parricides are punished.
and whilst many received the condign punishments of these Crimes, Wariston and
Cheeseley timely made their escape to Cromwells Camp. The King sets up his
Standard at Aberdeen; The King sets up his standard,
to which from all places about, Volunteers, and Honorary Soldiers flock in
great numbers. From thence the King marches to Sterling, and having mustered
the Army, makes Duke Hamilton his Lieutenant General, David Leslie Major
General, Middleton, Major General of the Horse, and Massey, General of the
English Troops. And having mustered his Army, encamps at Torwood.
Having assigned to all their several Offices, he Encamps and Entrenches at
Torwood, four miles from Sterling, that he may train up, and put Life in his
raw and unexperienced Soldiers, by Skirmishings, and fighting in Parties,
before he put them to the Trial of a pitched Battle; and that he might in the
mean time raise more Forces; in the doing whereof, whilst the Earl of Eglinton,
and some other persons of Quality, are busy at Dumbarton, they are of a sudden
surprised by Lilburn.

The Scots celebrate the Kings-Birth-day.
Amidst the great Cares and Dangers that all lay under, the Kings Birthday was
celebrated with all due Solemnity; to the Honor whereof, the Town of Dundee
made splendid presents; to wit, A most excellent Pavilion, six Fieldpieces,
with Carriages and Ammunition, and which procured them greatest thanks, a
complete well armed Regiment of Horse, a mark of true Affection.

Cromwell visits Torwood Not daring to attempt it.
Cromwell in the mean time loyters not; but his Soldiers being furnished with
new Clothes, Money, and all other necessaries sent from London, through
New-bridge and Hamilton he marches to Torwood, where furiously moving too and
again, he views in all places, if an attempt might any where be made upon the
Camp. But when he found it so well fortified on all sides, that without danger
there was nothing to be attempted upon it, having taken Calendar House, he
dares the Scots to come out,

Overton, in the mean while, Overton passes Forth;
being provided of Ships, flat bottomed Boats, and other Vessels for
transporting of Horse and Foot, with sixteen hundred Foot, and four Troops of
Horse, puts out into the Forth, with orders to Land at the Queens Ferry, which
he easily performed, beating off the Scots that resisted him; and presently
casting up a hasty work he entrenched himself, And presently after, Lambert,
and sends to Lambert to come to his assistance; who at the same place, passing
over two Regiments of Foot, and as many of Horse, he was met by Colonel Sr.
John Brown and Major General Hobourn, with four thousand men, Horse and Foot.
It was stoutly fought on both sides; Who obtained a Victory over the Scots.
but with unhappy success to the Scots, of whom two thousand were killed, and
twelve hundred taken, with two and forty Colors, and amongst those Brown, who
lived not long after the Battle. Thus the English got so sure sootting on the
other side of Forth, that all the Forces of Scotland were not able to drive
them thence. Whilst these things are done at Forth, Cromwell hovers about the
King's Camp, as if he were every minute about to attack them; but only to the
end that he might keep them in play, until Lambert had routed the Scots, as we
have just now related.

The King now leaving Torwood, encamps in Sterling Park. But the Scots seized
with a panick fear, upon the first summons surrender the Castle of Inchgarvey,
Garrisons being summoned, presently surrender.
an impregnable place standing in the middle of the Forth, leaving behind them
sixteen piece of Cannon, and Blackness, Brantiland also, on the other side of
the Frith over against Leeth, surrenders no less disgracefully, delivering up
the Guns, Ammunition and Ships. Cromwell being informed of these successes,
would not lose time by waiting the motions of the King's Army: Wherefore he
passed over to Brantiland, whence sending Whaley to take in the smaller
Garrisons which lay upon the Coast of Fiffe, he himself marches toward St.
Johnston, Cromwell takes the town of St. Johnston,
which the King had entrusted to the defense of the Lord Duffus with twelve
hundred men, though to no purpose: For Cromwell having drained the water out of
the Mote and Ditches, and battering the Walls with his Cannon, forces a
surrender of the place.

The King, in the mean time marches straight to England,
Cromwell being now at a great distance from Sterling, and wholely taken up
about these matters, the King having given the best Orders he could about the
Affairs of Scotland, sets out upon his march into England, that in that Kingdom
of his, he might try his fate, which had been very cross to him in the other.
By Carlisle,
Therefore on the last of July one thousand six hundred fifty one, at Carlisle
he enters England with about fourteen thousand men, Horse and Foot. But the
Soldiers march with so much hardship, and so severe discipline, that hardly any
Age has seen the like; Troublesome to no man.
so that from Carlisle to Worcester, about two hundred Miles distant from one
another, no man, much less any house received the least injury; if you will except
the breaking of one Orchard, and the taking of four or five Apples; for which,
notwithstanding, the Soldier that committed it was presently shot to Death. In
the chief Towns he is pr^claimed King of England, etc.
In all places on their march, the Garrisons are summoned in the Kings name to
surrender, but without any success: And in the more eminent places, by Heralds
CHARLES the Second is proclaimed King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland;
the people in the mean while being in great Consternation.

So soon as the news of this expedition was by Post brought to the
Rump-Parliament, The Parricides quaking at the news of it,
and the report flying that the King having mounted his Soldiers on Horses
which he found upon the Rode, hastened his March toward London, as it is
common to fear, to make dangers far greater than they are, such Horror and
Consternation invaded the minds of the Parricides and Rebels, that in despair
they began to cast about for lurking holes and places of escape, and accused
Cromwell of rashness and precipitancy: Until they had notice that the King had
diverted to Worcester, and received fresh comforts from Cromwell's Letters, who
bad them be of good cheer, and use their utmost force, to obviat that last
danger, and wholely destroy the Enemy.

Harrison on the left hand with three thousand Horse, waited the motion of the
King's Army, Harrison and Lambert wait the motions of the King, and in vain
oppose him at Warrington Bridge.
being for that end left behind on the Borders of England; after followed
Lambert, with two thousand; both as occasion offered, harassing and hindering
them in their March. At Warrington Bridge, they made the chiefest attempt, to
hinder the King's Forces to pass it. But before the Bridge could be cut,
Lambert's men being engaged and forced to retreat, the Scots get over. And now
leaving London Rode, they resolve to rest at Worcester, a City situated upon
the Savern; from whence they hoped to receive succors from Wales, and make
great levies in Gloucester and Oxford shires by the means of Muffey, who
heretofore had with reputation been Governor of Gloucester for the Parliament.
Thither therefore they march, and having met with one repulse from some of the
Paliament Soldiers that were there by chance, The King easily possesses
himself of Worcester.
they possess the City, but were much weakened and impaired in strength by the
tediousness and length of the march.

He kindly invites the Londoners to his assistance,
From hence, the Kings Majesty, by Letters, invites the Lord Mayor and
Common Council of London, to Arm for his Defense, and for their own just
Liberties; promising Pardon to all for what was past, except the Murderers of
his Father. But these Letters are burnt at the Royal Exchange by the Hand of
the Common Hangman; Who unworthily receive his Letters.
a Copy of them is also burnt by the Hand of the Speaker Lental at a general
Muster of the Trained-bands of London, in Moor-fields.

He demands aid of all his Subjects.
The King presently after his arrival, in Pitchford-field near Worcester, by
Proclamation, Commands all from sixteen to sixty years of Age, according to the
Ancient Laws of the Kingdom, Many Gentlemen come;
to come to his Assistance. In obedience to that Proclamation, shortly after,
Francis Lord Talbot, eldest Son of the Earl of Shreusbury, with sixty Horse,
Thomas Hornihold with forty, John Mashburn with forty, John Parkinton, Walter
Blunt, Ralph Clair, and many more both Knights and Esquires, But only two
thousand of the Common People.
besides two thousand common People, come in this desperate State of Affairs to
hazard their Lives in the Kings Service. The conjunction of these makes in all
fourteen thousand; two thousand Scots, either for fear, or because of the
tediousness of the March having dropped off by the way. Why so few came in.
Why more did not come into the Kings Camp, any Man may guess at the reason of
it; to wit, That the late suppression of the Insurrection of the Welsh,
Londoners, and Norfolk, and Suffolk Men, and the cruelty of the Rump-Parliament
in punishing the fruitless attempts of rising, run in all Peoples Minds.
Besides the sudden and unexpected coming of the King, gave no truce to the well
affected, of animating one another, and of associating for his Service. Nor,
lastly, could the injuries done by the Scots not long before in England, be got
out of the Minds of the English; it seeming much the same to them, whether they
suffered Bondage under the Tyranny of their Contrymen, or the Insolence of
the Scots. And above all, we are to consider the great diligence of the
Republicans of both sorts, in stirring up the Countries, increasing their
Forces, and in observing and suppressing those who were Loyal to the King.

Cromwell, who left Monck in Scotland with Eight thousand Men to carry on his
Victories there, being now come back into England, Cromwell with a vast Army
Besieges Worcester.
animates with new Vigor the Forces of the Rebel-Parricides; and presently
joining his Men with Lambert, Harrison, Gray and Fleetwood, and those who from
all parts came flocking in partly voluntarily, and partly by compulsion, he
made up an Army (if some be not mistaken in their reckoning) of fourscore
thousand Men, and more, whom he posts round the City of Worcester.

But the brave, The Earl of Derby with a handful of new raised Men,
though unfortunate attempts of the Earl of Derby which happened about that
time, are not to be past over in silence. He with a small handful of two
hundred and fifty Men, from his own Isle of Man, arrived at a little Town in
Lancashire, and in that Country raised almost fif^n hundred Men; with whom he
marches to ^chester, there to join five hundred more; b^ to his misfortune he
met with Lilburn a Colonel of the Rump-Parliament Forces, with sixteen hundred
Men. For coming presently to blow up the Town of Wigan, Is defeated by Lilburn.
after a smart conflict the Earl is defeated, who having received two wounds,
by By-ways cross the Country he flies to Worcester, the Lord Widderington, Sir
Thomas Tilsley, Matthew Bointon and Trollop, Colonels, with Lieutenant Colonel
Galliard being killed, and Sir William Throgmorton, Colonel Richard Leg, with
four other Officers, and forty Private Soldiers taken.

Cromwell in the mean time views the Kings Camp, Massey is beat out of Upton,
which the Cromwellians possess themselves of.
uncertain as yet in what part to fall on: He thought it, however, fit to make
his first attempt at Vpton, seven Miles above Worcester to the South, where
there is a Stonebridge over the Savern. Massey had broken the Bridge, and
accidentally left a Plank from one Arch to another, lying secure with two
hundred and fifty Horse in the Neighboring Town, and no Guard left to defend
the pass. But the Cromwellians laying hold of the occasion, stradling upon the
Plank, pass over one after another; and increasing in number, they possess
themselves of Vpton Church, and for some time defend it, until more Swimming
over the River on Horseback, and crossing the Bridge that was now in some
manner repaired, came up to their Assistance. Massey takes the Allarm too late,
and having received a grievous wound in the Hand is forced to Retreat to
Worcester. Then upon a Bridge of Boats, they pass the small River Team, which
running at some distance to the West, falls into the Savern a little below the
Town. Soon after a like Bridge of Boats being made over the Savern it self,
they joined all their Forces under Bun-hill, within a Mile of Worcester, and
march toward the City, as challenging the Kings Forces to come out.

The night following, Middleton in the night time Sallies cut upon the Enemy,
Middleton with fifteen hundred Horse and Foot, all Scots, resolves to Sally
out upon the Enemy. But the Cromwellians were in readiness, having had timely
Intelligence given them by a Tailor, who was hanged for his Treachery:
Nevertheless the Royalists attempt to break into the Camp, To his loss.
but in vain, and having lost Major Knox with some others, they Retreat back
again. And now the third of September came, a Day fatal to, and never to be
forgot by the Scots for the overthrow they received at Dunbar the year before;
when the King with a Council of War, viewing the Enemies from the high Steeple
of the Cathedral-Church, perceived them upon their March toward the Town. All
presently Arm, The King himself marches out to defend Powick-bridge.
and the King himself marches out to the defense of Powick-bridge, and to
hinder the Enemies passing over the Bridge of Boats, which we just now
mentioned. Which the Enemies possess themselves of.
The King was scarcely got back into the Town, when Montgomery who defended the
Bridge, being dangerously wounded, and destitute of Gunpouder, Kreth also
another Commander being taken, returns to the City. Whilst these things were
acting, the Kings Majesty turning toward the East Side of the Town, resolves
to hazard a Battle. There is a sharp engagement at Perry-wood, where the King
behaved himself most valiantly:
Therefore with a considerable Body of Foot, but a small number of Horse (for
the Scottish Cavalry scarce budg'd) he marches against the Enemy at Perry-wood
with a most undaunted and present Mind, being followed by the Dukes of Hamilton
and Buckingham, and Sir Alexander Forbes, at the Head of his Foot. But being
overpowered by number,
At the first charge he beat the Van and made himself Master of the Artillery;
but afterward, though with wonderful Sagacity he gave orders in the heat and
confusion of the Fight, faced the greatest dangers with a High and Steady Mind,
not to be matched by others; and with his own Hand did many brave Actions,
though at that time he gave illustrious proofs of his Personal Valor even in
the Judgment of his Enemies; yet being overpowred by fresh Men, whom Cromwell
in great numbers sent in, he despaired not, but that he might reserve himself
for better Fortune, He returns into the Town.
thought it best to retreat in time, and save himself in the Town; but he was
for some time stopped by a Wagon laden with Ammunition, which the Wheel being
accidentally broken, lay cross Sudbury-Gate. However, alighting from his Horse,
he went in on Foot; and presently mounting another, Where in vain encouraging
his Men now in disorder, he slips out at St. Martins Gate. He exhorts the Horse
to renew the Fight; but they are deaf to all entreaties.
he used all manner of persuasions to encourage the Soldiers who now were
giving over to renew the Engagement; till the danger growing greater and
greater, by St. Martins-gate he went out to the Horse, Commanded by David
Leslie, being almost whole entire, and directed his course toward
Barbon-bridge, earnestly entreating the Horse that they should take Courage,
and hasten to the Assistance of the Foot, who were put to utmost extremity. But
many refused, some threw away their Arms, all slunk away and chose rather to
decline the danger, than by fighting stoutly, either make that the last day of
their Life, or the first of their Victory. But whilst the King is making his
escape, the Earl of Cleveland, Sir James Hamilton, Colonel Careliss and some
other worthy and Loyal Gentlemen, with the remains of the Horse, renewing the
fight at Sudbury-Gate, put a stop to the Enemy for some time, till Fleetwood on
the West Side having past the River, broke into the Town through the Suburbs of
St. John; and Cromwell, The Town is taken, and the Fort Royal, the Soulders that
kept it being put to the Sword.
having thrown down Sudbury-gate, beat off the Earl and the rest. From thence
he marched on victorious to the Fort Royal, maintained by Colonel Drummond with
fifteen hundred Soldiers; who having refused to surrender it, was Attacked on
all Hands, and cut off with all his Men. Deplorable and sad was the Countenance
of the Town after that: The Victorious Soldiers on the one Hand, Killing,
breaking into Houses, Plundering, Sacking, Roaring and Threatening; on the other
hand, the Subdued flying, turning their backs to be cut and slasht, and with
stretched out hands begging Quarters; some in vain resisting sold their lives
as dear as they could; whilst the Citizens, to no purpose, prayed, lamented
and bewailed. All the Streets are strowed with dead and mangled Bodies. Here
were to be seen some that begged Relief; and there again others weltering in
their own gore, who desired that at once an end might be put to their lives and
miseries. The Dead Bodies lay unburied for the space of three days or more,
which was a loathsome spectacle, that increased the horror of the Action.

Three thousand and five hundred Private Soldiers were slain. The number of
the slain,
Duke Hamilton having his Thigh broken, lived but four or five days after the
Battle. Forbess was shot through both his Legs. Five thousand were taken
Prisoners, And Prisoners.
some Towns-people, but most Scots; amongst whom were the Earls of Rothes,
Karnewath, Kelly, the Lord Sinclare, Montgomery, the General of Artillery, as
also of English, Colonel Graves, and Fanshaw Secretary to the King, with the
Officers of the Scots Army, all the Baggage, and an hundred and five and fifty
Colors.

The King leaving the Scottish Horse, betakes himself to By ways,
The Kings Majesty having a little beyond Barbon-bridge left Leslie, who
resolved to march with the Horse that were almost entire, by Newport straight
into Scotland, and being attended by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earls of Derby
and Lauderdale, the Lords Wilmot, Talbot and other Persons of Quality, with
about fifty Horse, followed By-ways; partly that he might refresh himself with
sleep, and partly that he might disappoint those that pursued him. And at the
persuasion of the Earl of Derby, goes toward Boscobel.
Upon their Journey, the Earl of Derby told the King, That lately when he was
defeated by Lilburn, one Pendrel harbored him safely in Boscobel-house; but
that he was a Papist. Thither the King resolved to betake himself. This House
is distant from Worcester twenty six Miles, stands in Shropshire, upon the
borders of Staffordshire; seated betwixt Tong-Castle and Brewood in a woody
place very fit for a retreat. One Gifford that was well acquainted with the
Ways, leaving Kedderminster on the Left Hand, When they came to the House
called Whitladies.
conducted him by Stonebridge; and at Whiteladies an old Monastery of
Cistertian Nuns in the midst of the Woods, about a Mile from Boscobel, having
knocked up another Pendrel about midnight, he and his Company are let in. Whilst
the King had his Hair cut off in this House, and burnt in the Fire, his Hands
blackned with Soot, and shifting his Clothes put on an old Country Suit, two
other Pendrells Brothers, Richard, who lived in a Neighboring little Farm at
Hobbal, and William in Boscobel, are sent for, whom the Earl of Derby
acquainting them with the disaster, He commits himself to the hiding of the
Pendrels Brothers.
and showing them the Kings Majesty, Beseeches for Gods sake their Loyalty, and
all that was Good and Sacred, to keep him safe, and forthwith find out some
place for him where he might securely lurk.

The honest Contrymen promising to do what lay in their Power, Richard by a
back door led him out into the next Wood; Wilmot having been before ordered to
go on Horseback to London, Wilmot being before sent to London.
where at the sign of the Green Dragon by the Vintry in Thames Street, the King
had resolved to meet him; John Pendrell promising to show him a way which he
might more securely follow.

After that the Nobles had taken the best care they could of the King, Whilst
the Nobles essay to overtake Lesly.
they consult about their own safety, and think it safest to follow, and if
they could overtake Leslie, because of the number of men he had with him, that
might secure them from a few straggling Soldiers, and because they were got so
far on their way, that a considerable body of the Rebels could hardly overtake
them. They were not far from thence, when they protected the Lord Livingstone,
Captain of the King's Troop of Guards, from the Enemies that pursued him; but
that good fortune lasted not long: For soon after, when they had advanced
beyond Newport, They are dispersed by Lilburn's men, Derby and others being
taken.
they fall in amongst Lilburn's men, who easily rout and put them to slight,
being quite spent with fatigue; the Earl of Derby (whom the impious Rebels
afterward condemned in a Council of War, and put to Death), Lauderdale, (who
for his Loyalty suffered a tedious Imprisonment, until the King's Restoration)
and others, whom it would be long to name, being taken. In the mean time the
Duke of Buckingham, Livingstone, Talbot, with many others, severally shifting
for themselves, made their escapes, and at length went beyond Sea.

Nay Lesly was not got far beyond Newport, Lesly and his men, became a prey to
the Enemy,
when he is beset by the Enemies, and all his men either dispersed or taken;
and particularly, the Earl of Cleveland, who had overtaken Lesly after the
Battle, Kenmore, the Lord Wentworth and Middleton. Most of the dispersed
straglers were by the Country people, not without a brand of Cruelty, which
the English Nation abhors, Or (what was worse) to the Country People.
knocked down, wherever they were found, with Staves, Pitch-forks, ^lails, and
what weapons rage and fury put into their hands; a very unsuitable return,
indeed, to the moderation and continence, which not long before, they had
showed amongst them upon their march. Massey, being wounded in the hand, Massey
yielding himself to a noble Lady, is
fled of his own accord to the protection of the Countess of Stanford; under
whose husband, the father of Gray, he had formerly served in Glocestershire.
From thence after a fortnights stay, C^st into the Tower of London:
he was carried to the Tower of London, where he endured the irksomness of a
tedious imprisonment, From whence he escapes in disguise.
and being to be brought to his Trial before the High Court of Justice, he
changed Clothes with a certain Porter, and made his escape.

The Kingdom of Scotland thus taken, and most part of the Nobility cut off,
truckles under the Victorious Arms of the English; and had not the Supreme
Judge of all things reserved a root, from which the Royal Issue and cause might
spring out again of new, and had not the same right hand of the Duke of
Albemarle, (whom as yet we must call Monck,) that gave the Wound, also wrought
the Cure, it had been undone for ever.

A full account where the King lurked in England.
But now what befell the King, the Care of Providence, Hopes of the English Race,
and Defender of the Church, since the English, I know, are insatiably desirous
to be informed of it, and that hardly in any Age a more remarkable adventure
has happened, I shall, according, as I have heard it from the King's own
Mouth, relate with some exactness and curiosity.

The King went into the Wood in the very nick of time, as will appear. For
within less than half an Hour, the Soldiers of Colonel Ashenhurst come in
quest of him, Ashenhurst's Soldiers search the Monastery.
hunt all over the Monastery, and running from Chamber to Chamber, search into
all secret places, recesses, and hidden corners. Yet, as Fate would have it,
they made no enquiry abroad out of the House, for it rained all Day, and the
droppings from the Trees made the Grass very wet; so that what did hurt to
others, saved the King. For whilst he lurked amongst the thick shrubs of the
Woods, Richard Pendrell borrowed a Blanket for him to cover him in the Rain,
and furnished him with a Bill, that he might seem busy in mending Hedges,
entreating the Wife of a Countryman, one Francis Yates that was related to
him, that if she had any Victuals ready she would bring it into the Wood. A
Countrey-man's Wife brings Victuals into the Wood for the King to feed upon.
She without delay brings forth some Milk and Sugar, with a few Eggs and
Butter. The King somewhat startled at the coming of the Woman, because of the
babbling the Sex is subject to, asked her, Can you be true to any one that has
served the King? Yes, Sir, answered she, I Will die sooner than betray you. At
which the King, being reassured, fed heartily on the Victuals that were brought
him.

Toward the Evening, Richard brings him into his House that stood hard by, In
the Evening he comes to Richard Pendrell's House;
where he prepares for a New Journey, that he was to take that Night. For the
King amongst other things had asked, If he knew any Faithful, Honest Man living
upon the Severn, who might provide him a hiding place for a short space, From
thence intending to go into Wales.
till he might find an opportunity of passing over into Wales; for in that
Country he wanted not Faithful Friends, by whose means he might either get to
London, or lurk more securely amongst the Rocks and Mountains. Being therefore
informed of one Wolf (but a Papist by Religion) living at Madely, five Miles
from thence, That Night he goes on Foot toward the Severn, Richard Pendrell
being his Guide: He is frightened by a Miller.
and one from the Severn, at nine of the Clock at Night, accompanied with
Richard, he sets out to go thither. But they were hardly gone the first mile,
when they had a Water-mill to pass by, where they must cross the River on a
Wooden Bridge: The Gate which they opened making a noise, the Miller comes out,
and in a threatening tone asks them whither they were going so late at Night;
and bids them stand. Pendrell terrified by that unexpected thunderclap, leaving
the Bridge, hastily wades through the Water, and is followed by his August
Companion, who in the thick darkness, was not so much guided by his sight, as
by the rattling of his Leathern Breeches. The Pursive Fat Miller soon gave over
the pursuit; and the rest of the way was free from danger.

At Madely he is lodged in a Barn,
At length they come to Madely, where Pendrell knocking at the Door, is
presently let in. The Guest is kindly received by Wolf, who being acquainted
with the design, lodges him in the Barn, because in the day time his House was
seldom free from Soldiers. They send to be informed of an opportunity of
passing the River, and have news brought back, that not only the Bridges are
guarded by Soldiers, but also the Ferry-Boats most strictly observed, and
therefore it would be very difficult and unsafe to pass the River. The River
being strictly guarded, he returns into the Wood from whence he came.
When it was night he was received into the House, where the good Woman stained
his Hands and Face somewhat more with a Decoction of Galls, and having taken
his leave, he returns back the same way on Foot to Boscobel, there to stay for
a more commodious opportunity of traveling.

Being come back before Day, he tarried in the Wood, till Richard went to see
if any Soldiers were in Boscobel House; but he finds none there save Colonel
Carlos, whom we mentioned before to have, with others, kept the Cromwellians in
Play at Sudbury-gate, who being born thereabouts, was just come to a Friends
House, to beg a little Bread. Early in the Morning he is by Carlos brought into
Boscobel-house*
Carlos being informed who lay hid in the Wood, with the two Pendrells went
straight out to him, and after joyful Congratulations on all hands, they
conduct him into the House; but the Sand that was got into his Shoes, whilst he
ran through the River, had rubbed the Skin off, and fetched Blood from his Feet,
which a poor Woman cured by washing them. Having taken refreshment, he climbs
up upon an Oak.
Then both being refreshed with Countrey-fare, they forthwith return back into
the Wood; where climbing up to the top of a thick and leafy Oak, they spend the
Day there: The King after long watching falling fast asleep upon the Arms and
in the Bosom of Carlos. In the Night time he is hid in a Priests-hole.
At Night they come down, and, being very hungry, return to the House, where
they were showed a Place called a Priests-hole, almost unscrutable, which
pleased the King so well, that whilst he stayed there he would trust himself no
more abroad.

Humphrey, another of the five Brothers of the Pendrells, who kept a Mill hard
by, had gone to Sheffual to pay his Assessment; where, in the House of Captain
Broadway Collector of the Money, he accidentally met with an Oliverian Colonel,
who very earnestly sought after the King; and hearing that this Countryman
lived near the Abbey of Whitladies, he asked him if he knew any thing of the
King, or of the Abbey: Pendrell the Miller being asked concerning the King,
adding, That if any would discover him, he might gain a thousand pounds
Sterling; but that if he were found to have concealed, or hid him, he would
undoubtedly suffer death for it. Yet honest Humphrey, preferring the safety of
the King, and his own honesty before any hopes of gain, faithfully kept
Counsel, Preserved his Loyalty unviolated.
and made answer, that he knew nothing. When he returned home at Night, he
relates the whole matter to the King, who the next Day, being Sunday, spent a
great part of the Day in an Arbor adjoining the House in reading the
Scriptures.

In the mean time John Pendrell, when he was showing the Lord Wilmot his way to
London, found it every where so pestered with Soldiers, that he thought it
safest to hide him and his Horse in a Marle-pit, Wilmot coming out of a
Marle-pit, is committed to the care of Whitgrave.
until he could find out a more commodious lurking place; and at length he
happily committed him to the trust of Whitgrave and Hudlestone, (though both
Roman Catholics) Hudlestone being Tutor in the House to Mr. Whitgrave's three
Sons. These having in the Night time sent the Horse to Colonel Lane's, their
intimate acquaintance, who had formerly served the King, Hospitably entertained
Wilmot at Mosely. The King having notice of this from John at his return, he
forthwith sends him back to find out Wilmot, who had before changed his
Lodging, and removed to Bentley, the House of Colonel Lane: Being found there
at length, and acquainted with the Kings mind, he promises next night to return
and meet the King at Mosely, five miles distant from Boscobel. John being come
back to Boscobel, the King resolved to go thither and see Wilmot: But the
unlucky rubbing off the skin of his feet, which we mentioned, made him unable
to walk it a foot. Therefore mounting the Miller Humphrey's Beast, To visit
whom the King, mounted on a Millers Beast, goes to Mosely.
upon an old coarse Saddle, and bidding farewell to Carlos, he goes to Mosely,
the four Pendrels and Francis Yates being his Guard. Whither so soon as he was
come, he dismissed the contrymen with many promises, which have been since
largely performed.

Then did Whitgrave and Hudlestone conduct him to Wilmot, with whom having had
a long conference about his Affairs, and taken some refreshment of food, he was
led into a private Chamber to repose himself and sleep. But next day Whitgrave
had some notice, Soldiers come to seize Whitgrave,
that Soldiers were coming to seize him, as one that had formerly served in the
King's Army. And so, indeed, they came, yet he being innocent would not avoid
them; but the King slipping into a private place, and the doors being all
instantly opened, he confidently speaks to them; and by the testimony of
Neighbors, and other Arguments, so clearly convinced them of the contrary of
what they suspected, And depart.
that without so much as coming up the stairs, of their own accord they left
him, without any further disturbance.

The same day Soldiers make a new search in the Abbey, The King is again
searched after in the Abbey.
having been informed by an Ensign who was made Prisoner, that the King
certainly absconded there; for that he had seen him with some other Company
arrive there, and that he had observed no such person depart from thence. They
therefore break into all the Rooms, search every Chamber, Closet, and Corner;
break down the Wanescot and partition walls, and seek in every little hole, but
in vain. Then they examine the Master of the House, with a charged Musket cockt
at his Breast; threatening him, that if he did not forthwith bring forth the
King, he should die upon the spot. But he absolutely denies that he knew the
King; yet confessed that many came to his house that night, who having eat up
all his Victuals went off again. The Soldiers there upon turning to the Ensign,
soundly banged him for telling a lie.

The night following his Majesty having drawn a Bill of Exchange upon a
Merchant in London, for Money to be paid to his Landlord, that if it should
come to the knowledge of the Parricides, that he had been harbored in that
house, he with the rest concerned might have wherewithal to shift for
themselves, and get beyond Sea, took his leave of Whitgrave, his Wife, and
Hudlestone; and committed himself and Wilmot to the protection of Colonel Lane,
to be conducted to Bently. He removes to Bently, from thence to go to Bristol
as the servant of Jane Lane.
Where his sister Jane Lane undertook to carry him to Bristol where he hoped he
might have a passage; having in this manner laid her design. She procured from
a certain Colonel of the Rebels, a passport for her self, a Gentleman and his
Wife, with one Servant, mounted upon two Horses, that they might safely and
without molestation travel to the house of one Norton near Bristol, whose Wife
was ready to lie in. Her sister Jane must needs be at her Labor; and could not
have better Company to go along with her, than her Cousin and her Husband;
which was a Scheme very well contrived. Without more delay, the King mounts on
Horseback, riding before Jane as her Servant. Lassels, her Cousin, He sets
forth upon his journey, accompanied with Lassels and Wilmot,
with his Wife follows after: Wilmot rides before with a Hawk on his Fist, as a
stranger who had accidentally met them on the Rode; resolving so soon as they
came near Bristol, to strike off to the house of his friend Sir John Winter,
there to expect the Issue of things. The design being thus laid, in a good time
they set forward upon their Journey.

The first remarkable accident that happened, At Bromsgrove he falls in
discourse with a Smith about himself.
was at Bromsgrove; for the King's Horse losing a Shoe, His Majesty was to
carry him to a Smith to be shod. The King asking him, what News he heard?
Nothing, answered he, but that Cromwell had routed the Scots, and that though
all the rest were slain, or taken Prisoners, yet the King had made his escape.
Perhaps, replied the King, he has got by by-ways back into Scotland. No, said
the Smith, that is not very likely; he rather lurks secretly somewhere in
England, and I wish I knew where he were, for I might get a thousand Pounds by
taking him. After the Horse was shod, the King departed, and upon the Rode,
told his Mistress what discourse he had had with the Smith. When they were come
near to Stratford, they had a mind to foard over the River of Avon, about a
mile below the Town: But drawing nearer, they perceived Soldiers Horses feeding
in the Meadows, and the Troopers lying upon the ground, on the other side.
There they consult what was best to be done. The King was for going confidently
on; but Lassels, thinking still on the Injury which he had lately received from
the Soldiers, thought it safer to turn aside to the next Town; the King
yielding to his fear, At Stratford he passes through Soldiers without any hurt.
whilst they rode along the Streets, they met the same Soldiers whom they had
avoided; yet without the least molestation, they civilly giving hat for hat. At
night they came to the Crown in Cirencester, where the King pretending himself
sick, went presently into a Chamber. Next Evening they came to Marsfield,
Lodges at Cirencester,
where they lodged at a Relations of Jane's. On the third day, leaving Bristol
three Miles to the left, Then at Marsfield, and the third day at Norton, where
he pretends himself sick.
they arrived at Norton's house; where Jane caused a Bed to be made in a
private Chamber for the King, who she said, was the Son of one of her Father's
Tenants, and was sick of an Ague, getting Doctor Gorge to give him somewhat for
his Distemper.

As he came out of his Chamber in the morning, Gorge asked him, what he heard
of the King and of the Battle? But seeing he faultered in his Answer, And is
visited by Doctor Gorge
I am afraid, says he, you are a Roundhead; but I will try what Metal you are
made of; and taking him presently into the Buttery, he drinks to him the King's
Health in a Glass of Wine, which the King pledging, assured him that he never
was a man of that Stamp. The morning following, the King eating a piece of
Bread and Cheese in the Buttery, fell into discourse with a bragging fellow
there present, In the Buttery he discourses with a bragging fellow about the
King.
who boasted that he had been at Worcester fight, and talked largely of many
things that happened there. Says the King to him, Have you ever seen the King?
Twenty times, answered he; What kind of man is he then? Then looking on the
King more steadfastly, He is, said he, four fingers breadth taller than you.
Afterward taking off his hat to the Mistress of the House, as she
accidentally past through the Parlour. The Butler eying him more attentively,
and observing his Countenance, suspected him to be the King, He is discovered
by the Butler,
and finding a private occasion fell upon his Knees, asking him if it were not
so. The King enjoining him silence, confessed he was. This man's name was John
Pope, who five years before had been a Soldier under his Majesty in the West,
when he was Prince of Wales; and being afterward disbanded, he had served
several Masters, before he came to be Butler to this Norton; from that time
forward, he performed a great many good Offices to his Majesty with
extraordinary Fidelity. A most faithful man;
For first he was sent to Bristol to find out a Ship: But could find none there
that within a Month was to sail either to France or Spain. Whilst he discoursed
with the King of several that had served his Majesty, he pitched upon one
Windham, whom he thought fit to try in the present streights, and who lived at
Trent in Dorcetshire.

VVilmot coming, as it had been agreed upon, By whose means VVilmot is
introduced.
to Norton's House, is by night introduced to the King by Pope, and, after they
had consulted together, presently sent to Trent, to enquire if Windham could
receive and conceal the King in his house, until he might find an opportunity
of a passage over Sea. He sounds VVindham's mind,
Windham presently made answer, that he thought himself extremely happy, that
amongst so many Noble and Loyal Subjects, he reckoned him chiefly worthy of
that honor: That he was therefore ready not only to venture his Life, Family,
and Estate, but even to sacrifice all to his Majesty's Service. With good
success.
But withal begs leave to impart the secret not only to his Mother and Wife,
but also to four Servants, of whose faithfulness both to his Majesty and
himself he was fully assured. VVilmot consented, and assuring him that the King
would be there three days after, he returned.

But the night before, Norton's Wife was brought to Bed, after a hard and
dangerous Labor, and was not to be left by her Sister, (for so she called
Jane) in that Condition. That she might therefore have a civil pretext of
departing, a Letter is pretended to have been just then brought from her Aged
and Decrepit Father; Jane counterfeits Letters as from her dying Father.
wherein he acquaints her, that since her departure he had been grievously ill,
and that he stood in need of her present assistance; he therefore bids her, if
she tendered her Father's Life, to hasten home. The Letters being produced, and
the Rumor spread over the Family, Jane and Lassels take their farewell, leaving
his Wife with the Lady in the straw, For a pretext of departing late at Night.
and with their Servant, whom the Kings Majesty personated, they depart.
Rogers, who by by-ways had conducted VVilmot from VVinter's house to Nortons,
was their Guide; and they lodged the first night at Carew-Castle seven miles on
this side Trent. They go to Carew-Castle,
The appointed hour of their coming drawing nigh, Windham and his Wife, as if
to take a walk, went out to meet them; and send the King privately into the
house, by one whom they had chosen for that purpose: And next day to Trent,
where VVindam lived.
Jane and Lassels in the mean time are publicly received as Relations, who
coming from a place far distant, were to be gone next day. In this place the
King's Majesty stayed securely nineteen days, expecting a Vessel at leisure,
and having been several times disappointed. But one day it happened that the
Country People fell to ringing of Bells, with more than usual Solemnity; and
the King, enquiring into the cause of this extraordinary rejoicing, A report of
the King's Death.
was told, that it was for the joyful News of the King's Death, which was
confidently reported. But whilst they consulted, and cast about a long time
concerning a passage, Windham bethought himself of one Elden a Merchant,
formerly a Captain under CHARLES the First, who since that, drove a
considerable trade at Lime, that he possibly might procure a Vessel, since he
had assisted the Lord Berkley in distress with a safe passage. Therefore
Windham is dispatched to him to learn, whether or not he could procure a safe
passage for VVilmot, and another Nobleman, who had made their escape from
Worcester fight. He readily listened to it, and presently went to Chayermouth,
near to Lime; Elden freights a Ship at Chayermouth.
where having sent for the Master of a Ship, he asked him, under promise of
secrecy, if he durst venture to carry VVilmot and his servant safely over to
France. He undertook it, and bargains with a Captain for threescore Pound,
which he obliged himself under Hand and Seal to pay him, after he had carried a
Nobleman over to France. The hour and day, when he was to put them on Board in
a Boat, are prefixed.

Hitherto all things succeeding according to their expectation; there only
wanted a pretext of staying in Lodgings, till all things might be made ready
for their passage. For that end Henry Peter's, VVindham's Servant, Peters's
device whereby he provides lodgings in that place.
who was privy to the design, applies himself to an Hostess at Chayermouth,
and, amongst other discourses, told her that he was servant to a worthy
Nobleman, who was deeply in Love with a Maid that had neither Father nor
Mother, who lived not far off, and was as much in Love with him: But that her
Guardian opposing the Marriage, he resolved to steal her away by Night. He
therefore asks her, if she would for some hours entertain them in her house;
and at the same time gives her a small Gift as a pledge of a greater reward,
and drinks a Glass of Wine with her. The woman softened by the present, and
touched with Compassion for the young Lady, promises to serve them. Leaving
therefore Trent, the King sets out toward Chayermouth, with Juliana Conisbey
his pretended Bride, who was privy to the matter, The King goes thither,
carrying Juliana Conisbey with him as his Bride.
riding behind him upon the same Horse. The Lord Wilmot, Colonel Windham, and
Henry Peter's accompany them; and were met by Elden, who carried them into a
private house, whither he went under pretext of viewing a little Farm: Here the
King's Majesty discovered himself unto him, giving him a small present as an
earnest of future Gratitude. From thence the Merchant goes to Lime, that he
might give notice to the Master of the Ship, to be in readiness to put to Sea
at the appointed time; The King with the rest went to their Lodgings at
Chayermouth; and Peter's to stay for the Boat. But having waited till it was
almost day, he returned without any News of the arrival of the Boat. But losing
hopes of a Ship, he presently departs
This put them all into disorder; and made them think of taking other measures,
there was no safe place here to stay in; and the King was resolved not to
loyter a moment.

After a short consultation, the King with Juliana, and the Colonel
accompanying them, advance toward Bridport, there to expect the coming of the
Lord VVilmot and Peter's in an appointed Inn. Peter's being to go to Lime to
learn from the Merchant the reason of the disappointment: And VVilmot staying
behind in the Inn, upon pretext of new shooing his Horse. But Elden the
Merchant, who thought that by this time they had made half their Voyage, could
not imagine the reason of the breach of promise, nor could he attribute it to
any thing else, save that the man taking his leave of his Friends, it being
then the Market Day at Lime, had drank so much as to make him forget the
prefixed time. Why the Master of the Vessel failed so foully.
But it was known afterward, that the Master of the Vessel being come home, to
take clean Clothes and other necessaries for his Voyage with him, was locked up
in his Chamber, and bolted in by his Wife: For that very day a Proclamation had
been made in the Town, whereby it was declared Death for any Person to aid or
conceal the King; and a thousand Pounds promised to any that could apprehend
him. This put the woman into so great fear, lest her Husband in doing that
Office, which he had confessed to his Wife to have taken upon him, might suffer
Shipwreck on Shore: She therefore used Entreaties, Tears, and almost Violence,
to hinder him from it; and at length screamed out, thereby to allarm the
Neighborhood. Being therefore overcome by so much importunity, he kept at
home, and committed himself to the direction of his Wife.

Upon the way to Bridport Windham went a little before the King, to view the
Rode; They came to Bridport full of Soldiers.
and coming near the Town, he found it to be full of Soldiers. For there was a
Muster that day, and a taking on of Soldiers, for an Expedition against the
Isle of Jersey, under Haines. Windham was therefore for the Kings going to
another place, but he laying aside all fear would needs enter the Town, lest he
might seem to have deceived VVilmot, and partly also that he might refresh
himself, tired out with night-watching and traveling, and wait for the coming
of VVilmot. The Colonel took care to provide a Chamber and Victuals; which was
no easy matter to be done amongst so many Guests. The King, in the mean time
was employed in carrying the Horses into the Stable, and looking after them;
nor could he avoid talking with the Soldiers in the yard about his Journey.
Where the King was very near discovered by an Hostler.
But the Hostler looking him in the face as he delivered him the Horses, told
him, You are welcome, I know you very well. Where did you know me? answered the
King. At Exeter, said he; (for the King had continued long there during the
heat of the War,) I lived two years in an Inn there. And so did I, replied the
King, in the Service of Master Porter. I am glad I have met with a Countryman;
but I perceive you are so busy that you have no time to drink with me, when I
come back from London, we'll talk of old Stories. Being pleased with these
promises, and full of Business, or God Almighty casting a Mist before his Eyes,
he forbore all farther discourse.

Shortly after, VVilmot passing through the Town, they take Horse, and
following the straight Rode to London, they met with several Travelers in the
way; and amongst those one who had formerly been a Servant to CHARLES the
First: From thence, as good luck would have it, to Broad-VVindsor.
Therefore thinking it most convenient to turn out of the Rode, they followed
the next way upon the left hand; and having rid a long time, toward night they
came to a Village called Broad-windsor. Windham goes before to enquire where
they were; what the name of the Village was, and whither the way led: And by
good luck he stumbled upon an Innkeeper an old Servant of his own, who had
been also a Soldier in the Kings Army, pleased with this good Fortune, he
speaks him kindly, and because it grew dark he easily obtained Lodging that
night for his Company. However it was not long before the Constable came with
forty Soldiers at his back, Where he is disquieted by Soldiers quartering there,
who marching to the Sea Coast to be transported over to Jersey, must be
quartered there. The House being pestered with them, the Kings Majesty had but
a very narrow Lodging, yet that was not all the inconvenience. For about
midnight a Woman that followed the Soldiers fell into Labor: Which being
noised about, the People of the Village flocked together, and kept a bawling
and heavy rout about the keeping of the Child and Mother, which continued till
break of day, And the Country People.
when the Soldiers, weary of the jangle, hastened to their Ships.

During the hubbub, let us look back a little to Chayremouth, where the Shoeing
of a Horse went near to have cost the Lord Wilmot dear, Wilmot is in danger at
Chayremouth,
by a discourse started betwixt the Smith and the Hostler. The Smith asking,
From whence came these Gentlemen? From Exeter, as they say, answered the
Hostler. Upon a suspicion occasioned by his Horses Shoes.
To whom the Smith replied, but I dare swear these last Shoes were put on in
the North. All other circumstances being considered; to wit, that the Saddles
were not taken off in the night time, that, though Travelers, they had sat up
all night, and that the Servant went out of the Inn early in the morning, they
presently conclude that they were Persons of Quality, who flying, after the
late Worcester fight, had wandered thither, The Hostler consults the Minister
of the place,
and that perhaps the King was amongst them. So that the Hostler, hoping to
make his Fortune, went to consult the Minister of the place, one Westley a
great stickler for the Regicides, what he had best to do on this occasion. But
neither was it fit to disturb him at his Morning Prayers; nor durst the Hostler
stay till they were winded out, for fear of losing the Vails he expected from
the Gentleman that was upon parting, and therefore returning, Who having
seriously weighed the matter,
without any thing done, he lets him go. The Smith having blazed about the
story, presently came the Minister, solicitously enquiring of the Innkeeper,
what the Travelers were that he had lodged that night; from whence they came,
whither they were going, and what was their Business there? His suspicion being
increased by the Inn-keeper's answers, he runs to Butler, the next Colonel, for
obtaining a Warrant to raise the Country and Soldiers for apprehending the
King. He hunts after the King, tho too late,
The Colonel refusing, Captain Massey, quartered hard by, having gathered
together as many Horse as he could in the hurry, follows after on the London
Rode as far as Dorchester; but the King, die divine Providence, having quitted
the Rode, he returned disappointed of his fair hopes.

Especially in Sir Hugh Windham 's house.
This set all the Soldiers about a working, who search all places and suspected
houses, especially that of Sir Hugh Windham, Uncle to the Colonel, where they
left not a Chest nor corner unsearched, and having made the whole Family
Prisoners, they will needs have a young Lady of extraordinary Beauty and Parts
to be the King in disguise; nor did they let her go, till by an undoubted
experiment they had found out her Sex.

The King's steps, however, are to be traced by a surer Guide. The King returns
to Trent having sent VVilmot to Coventry.
For after mature deliberation, it was resolved upon, that he should return to
his known recess at Trent; and that the Lord Wilmot with Peter's should hasten
to Salisbury, that there he might advise with John Coventry, the eldest Son of
the Lord Keeper Coventry by a second Marriage, by what means the King might
either securely pass the Seas, or at least find a new retirement; for it was to
be feared lest staying too long in one place, he might be discovered. After a
consultation with Coventry, application is made to one Mrs. Hide, a Widow, who
lived at a Village called Heal, within a mile of Salisbury, that she would look
out for a lurking place; and Robert Philips, who had been a Colonel in the Army
of CHARLES the First, is sent to Southampton to freight a Vessel. He, returning
from thence, A ship freighted at Southampton, but without Success.
assured them that a Ship and all things necessary were in readiness for a
Transportation. But it fell out unluckily, that the same Ship, whilst the King
was going to the Widows House, was taken up, and engaged to carry over Soldiers
and Ammunition to the Isle of Jersey. Philips being therefore disappointed of
his hopes, begs assistance of Colonel Gunter, whom he met with by chance, in
that affair. The King g^es to Heal.
The King in the mean time came to the Widows House in the night time, and goes
to Supper, Doctor Henchman, afterward Bishop of Salisbury, with other Guests,
sitting with him at Table. After Supper, he privately disclosed himself to the
Widow, and entreated shelter from her; and though she had never seen him before
but once, and that seven years before in passing, yet at first sight she knew
him. She therefore advises him early in the morning to depart toward London,
but having turned out of the way, to come back about one of the Clock in the
afternoon, at what time he should by a back door be let into the House; for
that being a Market day at Salisbury, and all her Servants and other Witnesses
being gone thither by her permission, she her self would let him in. The thing
was accordingly done: For the King and Colonel Philips, taking formally leave
of the Mistress of the House, mounted on Horseback, Having taken leave in the
morning, he returns ^ack, without the knowledge of the Servants, and is hid.
and go to see Stonehenge; but at the appointed hour returned back again; here
the Colonel carrying away the Horses, the King is hid in a secret place, which
had been made in the time of the War, for securing of Jewels and Goods of
greatest value.

In the mean time, by means of Colonel Gunter, a Vessel was hired at
Bright-helmstead in Sussex; which so soon as the King knew, all things being in
a readiness for a departure, his Majesty in good earnest takes leave of the
Lady, From thence he hastens to Bright-Helmstead, Gunter having hired a Vessel;
and in the night time, accompanied by Colonel Philips, he removed to the house
of one Simmons, near Portsmouth, and came next day in the Evening to an Inn at
Bright-helmstead; where all sit down at Table together, the King, Gunter,
Wilmot, Mansel a Merchant, and Tetershal Master of the Vessel, opposite to the
King. The Master of the Vessel, Where at Supper he is known, by the Master of
the Bark.
rising from Supper, called the Merchant aside, and expostulated with him for
having deceived him, in recommending the King to him, instead of another person
pretended. The Merchant confidently denies it, and urges him to be as good as
his word. But he affirmed that he knew him for certain to be the King, though
in a mean and ordinary habit he past for a Servant, and that he remembered him
very well since the time that at his own and others intercession, he had
cleared a Fleet of Colliers bound thither from New Castle, which were stopped in
the Downs. Nor indeed could, or ought the Merchant be ignorant of the
Proclamation, whereby it was declared Death for any one to receive him into
house or harbor, Who being afraid of the Parliaments Proclamation,
and the large reward of a Thousand Pounds, promised to him that could discover
and apprehend him. Mansel perceiving that the man understood the design;
immediately addresses himself to the King, who being informed of the humor and
honesty of the Master, With diffiulty undertakes the thing,
his Majesty and Wilmot ply him with promises, and give him a considerable
Freight in hand. Whereupon, promising to be faithful unto them, he departs to
make all things ready for their passage. The Vessel lay at Shoram four Miles
from thence, as yet half laden with Coals, which he had not sold, most of the
Seamen being at Bright-helmstead: Those he knocks up in the night time, bidding
them make haste to the Vessel, which having slipped its Anchors was at drift, and
might be stranded or cast away upon the Rocks, that he himself would presently
follow after. In the mean time he orders his Wife to go and buy a Bottle of
Brandy, and another of Sack, and to give him clean Clothes to take along with
him. But why so late in the night? His Wife, who smelt it out, ^ncouraging him
to the bus^ness.
said she; would it not do as well in the morning? He still urging her, and
cutting off all delays, It Is the King, said the Woman, whom I suspect you are
to carry over: Pray God you may carry him safe, though I and my small Children
should for ever after go a Begging. The Innkeeper also being by that time got
drunk, and addressing himself to the King, took his hand and kissed it, saying,
Who you are, whence you come, or whither you are going, I know not; yet I pray
God he may bless and preserve you: If I guess aright, I shall be an Earl, and
my Wife a Countess. And the Truth is, some discovered it was the King, so that
presently after his escape, the News of it was whispered all about the Country.

The hour of departure approaching, they take Horse and go to the Shore, Being
got on board they coast along the Shore, as bound for the Isle of VVight.
the Master pretending that they were Merchants of the Isle of Wight, that had
bought the rest of the Coals, and that they were to carry them thither. About
five in the morning they went on Board, and spent a great part of the day
coasting along the Shore. Toward Sun setting the Master stands off, as
directing his course toward the Isle of Wight. But Wilmot, who appeared to be
the chief Passenger, as if his mind had changed with the Wind, after a little
squabble with the Master in presence of the Seamen, as it had been agreed upon,
altered his bargain, and, instead of the Isle of Wight, ordered him to run over
to France; In the Evening they arrive in Normandy.
so that in the dusk of the Evening, they arrived at Fern, an inconsiderable
Port in Normandy, and at length gained the much longed for Shore. The King very
skilful in Navigation.
During the passage, the Master wondered that his Majesty understood their
course better than he himself did. Nor is it to be omitted, what an ignorant
Seaman wittily blurted out by chance. The King, whilst the Vessel was under
Sail, sitting with the Master in the Cabin, the fellow coming in, claps down by
them, and blows the Smoke of his Tobacco in his face: At which the Master being
vexed, bid him begone quickly, and not trouble the Gentleman with his Smoke.
The fellow rising to go out, in Dudgeon made answer, That a Cat might look upon
a King; a common Proverb in England.

Now was the King's Majesty safely landed in France, where rendering first
thanks to Almighty God, the Protector and Avenger of all Kings, Lord of the
Earth and Sea, who stills the raging of the Winds and Waves, He professes much
gratitude to the Master, and kindly invites him to stay with him, and share in
his Fortune. But he, wishing his Majesty all Prosperity and Happiness, chose
rather, with danger, The Master of the Vessel being kindly dismissed arrives
the same night at Pool.
to return home to his Wife and Children. He therefore puts out to Sea again,
and the Wind presently turning, he came the same night to Pool, a Port in
Dorcetshire, and there sold his Coals. But the King arriving at Rouen, applies
himself to Sambourn and Parker, English Merchants, who provide his Majesty with
new Clothes, The King having changed his Clothes at Rouen,
dividing his old ones betwixt themselves, to be kept as Holy Relicts.

Doctor Earl, since Bishop of Worcester, formerly one of his Majesty's
Chaplains, living then at Rouen, came to pay him a Visit; but at first sight
knew him not, Where by chance he found Doctor Earl,
whether it was that the smuttiness of his Face, or the want of Hair had
eclipsed his Majestic looks, or that the amazement of the unexpected sight
dulled the Doctors eyesight: It is certain, that he sought Charles in Charles,
until taking a fuller view of his Sacred Countenance, his Joys grew more
certain, and falling down and embracing the Knees of his dearest Master, he
begged pardon that he had not sooner performed that Duty, and burst out in
Tears of obsequious Joy.

Next day, the News being already carried to Paris, the Queen of England, He
goes to Paris;
and Duke of Orleans, with a great Train of Nobility, went out to meet and
welcome his Majesty, and introduced him into the City amidst the Applauses of
the People. All desire to see and embrace him whom Providence had preserved to
be the Ornament and delight of Mankind, praying from their hearts, that God
would still keep and defend him for the hope and support of England, and bless
him with all Blessings.

Thus he escaped safe out of the Snares of his Enemies, by whose means since we
Englishmen have all triumphed over our Enemies; over whose Sacred Head had not
the Angels kept Guard, Whose safely was an illustrious Testimony of Divine
Providence.
it had certainly perished. That amongst so many men of mean Condition, of so
contrary Religions, amongst so many Women, naturally given to babbling, and so
many timorous People, who were frightened at the very name of Death, and, in a
word, that amongst so many broken and indigent persons, to whom a great reward
could not but be acceptable, no body during the space of two Months ever
betrayed him; is certainly (if ever there was any) an amazing work of the Hand
and Providence of God. And this alone might have been sufficient, to confound
the Arrogance of Rebels, who so often boasted of Providence; and to teach all
Worldlings, by an invincible Argument, how dear to God the safety of his
Anointed is.

After the defeat of Worcester, Cromwell in a Triumphant manner made his entry
into London, Cromwell, having sent the Prisoners before, comes to London.
having sent before him five thousand Prisoners; who being sufficiently exposed
to the Scoffs and derision of the People, are either clapped up in Prisons, or
sent to the New World, there to drudge in the Sugar Mills.

In the mean time Monck, who was deservedly afterward Created Duke of
Albermarle, being made General of the English Forces, to the number of six
thousand, Sterling Castle surrendered to Monck.
which Cromwell had left behind him in Scotland, attacques Sterling-Castle, and
takes it by surrender, with all the Guns, Ammunition, much Provision, five
thousand Arms, the Registers, Coffers, Jewels, and several Monuments and
Relics of Kings, together with that lofty Inscription, Nobis haec invicta
dedere, centum sex proavi; Colonel Alured surprised and took the Aged Earl of
Levin, the Earl of Crawford-Lindsey, Noblemen taken by Alured.
Lord Ogilby, and many other Noblemen, whilst they were met for raising of
Soldiers at Ellet, a Town in Pearthshire; Sir Philip Musgrave also, the Provost
of St. Johnstone, and others, being about the same business, are taken at
Dumfrise. But Dundee, because it had the boldness to hold out, Dundee was a
prey to the Conqueror.
was stormed and taken by assault, and the whole Town left to the mercy of the
Soldiers, who killed and plundered all they found. Aberdeen, and other Towns
and Forts, being warned by this sad example, of their own accord yielded to the
Enemy.

A little after the Marquess of Argile, All Scotland in the power of the
English, who strengthen themselves by new Citadels.
made a show of maintaining the Interest of the Kingdom, as also the
Highlanders, but, having obtained indifferent good Conditions, they also yield,
and submit their necks to the English Yoke. Afterward four Citadels are built,
strong both by Art and Situation, to which, by Sea, men and Provisions might
easily be transported from England; to wit, at Air, Innerness, St. Johnston,
and Leith; besides Sterling Castle, standing on the Brow of a Hill, and
Edingburrough Castle, which we described before. Nay in every County they keep
a Garrison in some Castle or other, that if any new Rebellion should arise, they
might have opportunity to suppress it wherever it happened in Scotland. Nor
could the main Land of Scotland put bounds to the Victory of the English, And
subdue Orkney and the Isles.
who slighting the dangers of those raging and voracious Seas, carry their
Victories over to the Isles, Orkney and Shetland.

But as when the Serpent is bruised in the Head, he often threatens with his
Tail; so the Marquess of Huntley, Earls of Glencairn and Athol, The Scots rise,
but in vain.
Midleton, and others, stir the Embers, and raise new flames of a War. But
Morgan easily reduced them, having, before they could join, routed the chief of
them. Henceforward, they who had been accustomed to be most unruly and
disobedient, when occasion of Kicking offered, are fain to bite upon the Bit,
and upon capitulation promise to live quietly for the future.

The administration of civil Affairs in Scotland, by Judges for the most part
English;
Now are Judicatures and Courts of Justices opened in Scotland, for which end,
amongst other Itinerary Judges, are sent from England, George Smith, John
Marss, Edward Moseley, to whom were added of the Scots, the Lord Craighall,
Lockhart, and Swinton, not to be forgotten. A Council of State is also made up
of English, not of the best Quality, And a Council of State.
who were matched by some Scots mingled with them; nay in every Shire a Meeting
is called, wherein, renouncing the King, they are obliged to subscribe to the
English Government, and to unite into one Commonwealth with the English. And
at length they are commanded to send thirty Commissioners to the Parliament of
England. Nor is it to be denied but that they were English, Thirty
Commissioners from thence allowed to sit and Vote in the Parliament of England.
though from Scotland, who were appointed to that Office, except the Marquess
of Argile and Lord of Swinton, which two were the only Scots that hearded
themselves into that Parliament. The use of Arms is likewise denied to that
Nation, nay and of Horses also, except only for some necessary ends and uses.
Besides, their Commerce and Negotiations with Foreigners are narrowly observed,
lest under that pretext they might hatch mischief against the Commonwealth of
England. So much they got by disturbing the quiet of England, The Scots had
what they deserved.
and by meddling in the stirs and troubles of others; nay, and by being the
Authors of the innumerable Calamities which we suffered. So they fell into the
Pit that they dug for us, and were taken in the Snares which they had laid for
the Innocent; nor was there any hopes of a Deliverer, or an Avenger, till God
should think fit to look down from his Mountain, and having chastised the
perverseness of the People, have Mercy upon them.

But so much for Scotland; Hains subdues Jersey.
let us therefore leave it, and return to matters that properly concern our
selves. Jersey must now come upon the Stage, for the subduing whereof, Hains,
with great preparations of Soldiers, and all things necessary, is empowred;
who, passing over thither with about seventy sail of Ships, great and small,
for three days space was beat off from several places of the Island, by Sir
George Cartright Governor of the Island, since deservedly, Under Chamberlain
of the King's Household, though sooner than was expected, he afterward obtained
the Victory: For making a descent in the night time, and Bovil, who commanded
the Cavalier Party, doing his utmost to hinder the Enemies Landing, being
killed in the first Encounter; the rest, seized with a sudden fear and
Consternation, are put to flight. The Inhabitants after that, submitted to the
will and pleasure of their new Masters; Elizabeth Castle also standing upon a
Rock, and at high water encompassed by the Sea, being battered and torn with
great Guns and Mortar-Peeces, one of which was so fatal, as at one blow to kill
or mangle eight and forty Soldiers, after two Months siege capitulates, upon
Condition, that the Governor and Garrison with Bag and Baggage should have
liberty to pass over into France. The Isle of Mann also taken.
Next follows the Isle of Mann, this place, though defended by Feminine Valor,
to wit, by the Countess of Derby, yet vied so much in honor with men, that it
was doubtful, whether, in the Royal Cause, Sir George Cartright, or she, fell
the last Victim under the Hands of the Traitors.

An Act of Oblivion passes
All the Provinces thus subdued, an Act of Oblivion passes, whereby the memory
of what was past being abolished, all Crimes whatsoever are pardoned. But this
was hampered with so many Limitations, Restrictions, Exceptions, and ensnaring
Clauses, that there was little hopes for true Penitents to expect any good from
it. But such, But not without the instance of Cromwell.
however, as it was, Cromwell alone was to be thanked for it, by him chiefly it
was proposed, and by his means and endeavors it past in the Rump-Parliament,
that, by so doing, he might by a show of kindness claw the suffering and
vanquished People, and at the same time heap hatred and indignation upon the
Heads of his fellow Traitors. For now, forsooth, it was time to put an end to
Rapine and Violence. Did they take so much pleasure in undoing Estates, and
ruining Families? There was enough allowed to anger and revenge: That it was
altogether fit to show Clemency and Mercy to the Guilty, who having
sufficiently paid for their faults, now at length sued for pardon.

The Soldiers displeased with the Rump.
But the hatred and animosities betwixt the Rump and the Soldiers, the Seeds
whereof had been long ago sown, though during the common danger they appeared
not, began now to show themselves, and, after long and mutual grudges, to break
out into Flames, and to devour one another. So rare a thing it is for Thieves
and Robbers, to agree long together. The Soldiers object, Which with these
Crimes they load,
that these men did for ever appropriate to themselves and their Friends all
places of Honor and Command, barring all others from any share with them; and
that under color of the public good, they divided amongst themselves all
profitable Offices, without any regard to the Public. For what end had they
taken Arms against the King? exposed their lives to so many dangers, ripped up
the bowels of their Countrymen and friends? Did they bring the King to the
Block, ( for in that execrable Villainy they triumphed) that they might only
settle them in their Seats, so as they might securely live at their ease for
ever, and, right or wrong, domineer over all without any distinction, and
Murder and Sacrifice to their own private Lust or Revenge, as many Subjects as
they pleased? Away with it, say they, it were better to return to the old way
of Government, Raise King CHARLES from the Dead, and submit to his Rule, seeing
it was known that he followed the Laws, and accordingly squared the
administration of his Government. They therefore earnestly desire, That at
length an end might be put to the Parliament, a new and fair Representative
chosen by the good people, and that the Laws might be reformed; besides the
many other things which had already so often cloyed them with Petitions.

The goodly Warriors made these specious demands, As minding only their own
advantages,
not out of a pure zeal for the Public good; but that having baulked them, by
determining their Authority, they themselves might have their turn in the
Government; hoping that by branding them with these reproachful Characters,
they would at length be fain to put the Power into their hands.

The Objections are boldly enough answered.
On the other hand the Rump-Members, Magisterially grave, by a long possession
of Authority, bid the Soldiers mind their own Affairs, look to their Arms, and
obey Orders, that they, to whom the care of the Commonwealth was committed,
and the business of settling a new Government, having long labored in the
Affair, with no small Progress, would at length by the help of God bring it to
perfection. They bid them have a care, in the mean time, that they make no
Tumults, seeing they who had pulled a King from his Throne, wanted neither
Resolution nor Force to reduce into order licentious Soldiers, though milder
courses were more pleasant to them.

The Soldiers reply.
But the Soldiers disdaining that they should be thought pragmatical, and
medlers in Affairs that did not belong unto them, answer those State-Advisers,
That they were not Mercenary Soldiers, nor had not taken up Arms only in
Prospect of pay, but for maintenance of the Public Liberty, neither would they
lay them down till they found the common Fruit of their endeavors. That they
ought not to boast of putting the King to Death, (so they mutually gloried in
that Horrid Villainy) since they only stood by, as in Disguise and Masquerade;
but that they by their Valor, and at their own Peril, accomplished the thing,
at the mention of which they would have started, had they not been encouraged,
and set on by men of the Sword.

The Rump, therefore, being now more afraid of their Servants and idle
Soldiers, than formerly of the Royal Enemy, endeavor by all ways to reduce
them to Obedience, or at least fairly to dismiss and disband them, Of whom
therefore the Rump, under another pretense, order a great part to be disbanded.
but still under another pretense, alleging that the Commonwealth was not able
to entertain so many idle and lazy Soldiers. Wherefore, under color of
lessening the Charges of the Public, they pass an Act for Disbanding part of
the Army, and the rest to have but half pay, and to be divided and separated in
several Countries; that at once they might secure themselves against the
attempts of the Cavaliers, and take from their own Soldiers all opportunity of
making Innovations.

The Soldiers smell out the design, and it pricked them to the heart, that they
were now to be cast down from that height, from whence they received plentiful
incomes, and almost shared in the Government: They take it very ill to be cut
short of their pay, of their domineering, after their accustomed manner, in the
Countries, and of making their own advantages in suppressing the beginnings of
Sedition. Therefore the Officers refuse to be disbanded, reciprocally
pretending the Public good. The Soldiers refusing, and demanding a new
Representative,
They also frame a Petition, such as they had formerly presented, with
proposals much to the same effect, and desire a speedier answer; nor would they
lay down their Arms, before the remnant of the old Parliament being abolished,
a Representative were lawfully chosen, and that for the greater expedition, An
equal numb^r of both consult in common,
some of the Officers of the Army, as Commissioners, should be admitted into
the House, or at least sit and debate about the Proposals with the Members of
Parliament. The Rump condescending to this, twelve of each party meet and
consult in common: Where, Oliver St John's, more skilful than the rest in the
Common Law, But without any Fruit.
raising scruples, and perplexing matters that were clear in themselves, so
confounded the Rude Soldiers, that about one word, they spent above two Months.

These Proposals were also debated in the Rump: The Rumpers are divided about
the manner of the Representative,
but since it would be tedious to mention all of them, I shall briefly, only
relate with what sharpness and quite opposite Opinions they clashed about the
Representative. Some were for shaping it after this manner, some after another,
and some after none at all. The Presbyterians, who were but few in number, are
for having it conform to the Solemn League and Covenant, a strict and previous
Inquisition being made into the Manners and Religion of the men. The Vtopians
dreamt of, I know not what Olygarchy made up of the Godlier Party, winnowed and
sifted to the highest Purity. Others were for a kind of Circulation, that every
one successively and in course might have their turns in the Government. And
about the Time;
Besides there was no less strife about the Time. Some thought it very
dangerous, nay, without doubt fatal, to assign any day of dissolution, and to
introduce a new Representative. Not willing to give the Power rashly out of
their own hands.
Others would have no such change to be made, but every third, fourth, or fifth
year. But those who were in Power, think it safest, that new Members should be
chosen in place of those that died or were turned out. And most Votes agreed in
this; which they forthwith enacted, though the night before they had privately
promised the contrary to the Officers, to wit that they would model a new
Representative.

Cromwell flying to the House, and objecting to them Misdemeanors and other
horrid Crimes,
So soon as Cromwell heard of that, he hastens to the Parliament House, ordering
ten or twelve Soldiers to follow him, and stay for him at the door. He himself,
accompanied only with Fleetwood, entering in: To this purpose spoke to the
Speaker: You have sufficiently imposed upon the People, and provided for your
selves and Relations; you have long cheated the Country, by your sitting here
under pretext of settling the Commonwealth, reforming the Laws, and procuring
the Common Good; whilst in the mean time you have only invaded the Wealth of
the State, screwed your selves and Relations into all Places of Honor and
Profit, to feed your own Luxury and Impiety. Then stamping with his Foot, which
was the Signal to the Soldiers without, For shame, said he, get ye gone, give
place to honester Men, Commands all to be gone.
and those that will more faithfully discharge their Trust. But whilst all,
surprised by this sudden Consternation, held their tongues, one had the
boldness to tell him, It suits ill with your Excellencies Justice, to brand us
all promiscuously and in general, without any Proof of a Crime. At which being
a little more heated, taking hold of one by the Cloak, Thou art a Whoremaster,
says he; to another, Thou art an Adulterer; to a third, Thou art a Drunkard and
Glutton; to a fourth, Thou art an Extortioner: And the Musketeers rushing in,
he excludes them all, And they delaying, by the assistance of the Soldiers he
expelled them the House,
and commands the Parliament to be dissolved; whilst Harrison gently pulled the
Speaker out of his Chair, being unwilling to rise, and sent him going. So that
that vast, horrid, and many-headed Monster, whose Bellowing had made all Europe
to shake, is by one single Puff of Cromwell's Breath dispersed and scattered,
no body regretting, but rather all the People rejoicing at it. So, Government
basely got, is basely lost. Nay, to complete their Punishment, And makes them
ridiculous.
they were ridiculed, a Bill being set upon the Door, with, This House is to be
Let. They were also Lampoon'd by the Ballad-singers about Town, who cried
publicly about the City, Twelve Parliament Men for a Penny. Next day the
Council of State, and Privy Council, are in the same manner sent packing by
Cromwell, lest, if any remained, the Rooks might breed again.

By this so acceptable an Action, he so blotted out the Memory of his past
Villainies, that for a time he was rather looked upon as a Savior; The People
rejoicing,
the Shouts and Bonfires that were made, sufficiently expressing the Joys of
the People, for being delivered from so cruel a Yoke. They praise the Freedom
the General took, And much applauding him.
in not fearing to charge his Impotent Masters to their Faces, with the Vices
that were publicly talked of; some few in the mean time observing, that whilst
he himself now accused those whom before he had commended, he had then
preferred such as he might afterward most justly accuse. For he had so purged
the Parliament, as casting away the Flower, he had for his own purpose reserved
the Bran, to be likewise thrown away when he had a mind to it. The Rump-Members
loaded with public Hatred, and sad Hearts, departed home, as they were
commanded; for there was a Necessity that they must fall at the Pleasure of
those, at whose Pleasure they chose to stand; and since they could not thrive
in their Trade, without obeying their Guardians, the Injuries of the Soldiers
were to be born with, and only whispered. But they find no other Patron. The
Public, indeed, grieved not at their Disaster, as if the Office of the Laws
had been shut; but triumphantly insulted over them, as a Den of Thieves now
broken up and dispersed.

But the Commonwealth was still reserved to sadder Bondage, Cromwell now, as
General of the Army, arrogating to himself the Supreme Authority. Yet that he
might remove all suspicion of any such ambitious Design, and render the same
more secure and stable by gradual and crafty Insinuations; as also that he
might gull the Demotratical Republicans, They consult, in the mean time, what
is fittest to be done.
it is decreed in a Council of the Officers, That the Supreme Power should be
committed to Godly and Pious Men, to the number of an hundred and forty four,
during the space of six Months; who should have power to moderate, and with
such Prudence settle all things, that all Sin and Vice being rooted out, Peace
and Concord might flourish in the Nations. Therefore the Officers of the Army,
The Officers advance the Godly to the Government,
with Consent of Cromwell, call out of every County and Corporation a
proportionable number of the holiest Men whom either they knew, or could find
out, (the civiller, or rather most pragmatical sort of the Private Soldiers
being permitted to name some) whom they place at the Helm of Government, to
consult about the difficult Affairs of Three Kingdoms: Illiterate Men for the
most part, Chosen from among the Off-scowrings of the People, and out of all
Sects:
and the Off-scowrings of the People; and these also Bigots, Anabaptists,
Fifth-monarchy-men, Democraticks, Fanatics, and, in a word, the most villainous
Incendiaries of all the Sects. But with those were mingled Cromwell's cunninger
Adherents, whom, being most obnoxious, he had endeared to himself by Favor,
that as occasion offered they might sway the rest, and check their mad Counsels.

These being met in the Parliament House, Who having chosen a Speaker,

Take the Name of The Parliament of England;


their first Care is to choose one Rous, a Smatterer in Letters, for Speaker;
and then, to give themselves a Title; which, after much Preliminary Dispute,
was at length concluded to be, The Parliament of England. This done, they set
to work. But, Good God! what strange Confusion presently arose? Which Cromwell
and the other cunning Rogues foreseeing would undoubtedly happen, laughed in
their Sleeve, that they being hampered and entangled in Difficulties, would
with universal Applause and Gratulation deliver up to Cromwell alone the sole
Administration of Government.

They resolved to make way for the Monarchy of Christ upon Earth, prophesying
his Personal Presence to be at hand: Therefore they pronounce Priesthood to be
Popery; And presently show their madness, in falling soul of the Ministers,
Colleges, and Nobility.
paying of Tithes, Judaism; the Laws of England, the Remains of the Norman
Yoke; Schools and Colleges, Heathenish Seminaries of curious and vain Learning;
Nobility, lastly, and Honors, contray to the Law of Nature, and Christianity:
all which they would have wholly abolished, and plucked up by the Roots; and
without doubt had done so, had not the few of Sense that were amongst them put
a stop to it.

They abolish all Courts of Justice.
However, in effect they abolish the Court of Chancery, and all the Judicatures
that were wont to be kept in Westminster Hall. By one or two Acts was that
prodigious Parliament renowned: Appoint Justices of Peace to celebrate Marriage.
For, Marriage, which from the very Birth of the Church of England was never
celebrated but by Churchmen, they commit to the Care of Justices of the Peace;
as if in an Affair of so great moment, there were no need of Solemn Prayers,
nor of the Benediction of the Church. They leave also the Publication of the
Bans of Matrimony, which used always thrice to be made in time of Divine
Service, to the choice of the Parties, either to have it made in the Church or
Marketplace. A Register also is appointed to be kept, not of the Christnings,
but of the Birth of Children: so that from hence you may guess what a kind of
new Reformers these were.

But when Cromwell had suffered them to give the People sufficient Proofs of
their Madness, and to work Fear and Hatred also in their Fellow Subjects, some
of them who had more sense, The sounder part deliver up the Government to
Cromwell, who with reluctance accepts it;
upon a day appointed went with their Speaker to attend him, earnestly
beseeching him to take upon himself the Supreme Authority, now again fallen at
his Feet. Cromwell made a show of wonder, denying utterly and rejecting it; but
at length, with much ado, suffered himself to be prevailed upon; but with this
Condition, That an Instrument or Form of the Thing, under Hand and Seal, should
be given him.

This being done, though the Inferior Officers of the Army and the Republicans
were against it, who promised to themselves profitable Places under that
Government, and a Licencious Liberty of domineering, or at least constant and
standing Commands in the Army; yet Lambert, Lambert chiefly, and by his
persuasion the rest of the Officers consenting.
who at present promised himself the Second Place in the Government, and
afterterwards the First, hiding a proud Ambition under a Cloak of Humility, by
Words, and by his Example, persuaded the other Officers not only to comply
with that Monarchy, but also to stickle for and desire it. So now the Name of a
Commonwealth stinks, and the Popular State, which heretofore they gloried in,
is despised. The Single Government of One Person only pleases them; and, what
heretofore they had cursed with so many private and public Imprecations, after
a Consultation with the Officers, is declared to be the Government of this
Nation. Yet Cromwell would not accept of it by the Title of KING, But he would
be called Protector, not King.
though he was persuaded to it by many, lest he might seem to make Shipwreck of
all Modesty, and too openly to prevaricate: But joining together a
Commonwealth, and Single Government, which formerly were inconsistent, under
the Title of Protector he takes into his Hands the Reins of Government,
modelled according to the Conditions of an Instrument, which here we shall
insert.

THE Instrument of Government.
THat the Supreme Legislative Authority should be in a Single Person and the
People in Parliament; but the Administration thereof to be left to the Lord
Protector and to his Council, whereof the Number was not to be above Twenty and
one.

That all Charters, Patents, Writs, and Commissions, should be passed by the
Protector: All Power of Magistracy, Honors, and Titles, to be derived from
him. Likewise the Pardon of all Offenses, excepting Treason and Murder. He also
to have the Administration of all things, with the Advice of his Council, and
according to the Tenor of this Instrument.

That the Militia, sitting the Parliament, should be in the disposal of the
Protector and the Parliament; but in the Intervals, in the Protector and his
Council. The Power also of making Peace and War with Foreign Princes, to be in
the Protector and his Council: but he to have no Authority of Repealing or
Making any Laws, without the Consent of Parliament.

That the Parliament should be called before the end of Six Months then next
ensuing, and afterward once in Three years, or oftener if need require; and
that it should not be in the Protector's Power to Dissolve the same for the
first Five Months, without the Consent of the House.

That the Number of Members for England should consist of full Four hundred,
Elected according to an equal Distribution: for Scotland Thirty, and for
Ireland the like Number; the Number for each County and City to be also
assigned.

That the Calling of such Parliament should be under the Seal of the
Commonwealth, by Writs to the Sheriff in the Protector's Name. But if the
Protector should not call the same within the times limited, the Chancellor
then to do it, under the Penalty of High Treason; and if he should fail
therein, then that the Sheriffs should peform it. And after such Election
should be made, to be transmitted by the Chief Magistrate, by Indenture, to the
Chancellor, signed with his Hand, Twenty days before the Sitting of the same
Parliament. Also if the Sheriff or Mayor should make a false Return, that he be
fined in Two thousand Marks.

That none should be capable to Elect, who had ever born Arms against the
Parliament, or been Actors in the Irish Rebellion. Nor that any Papist should
ever be capable to give his Voice. And that all Elections against these Rules
should be void, and the Transgressors fined at Two years Value of their
Revenues, and a third part of their Goods.

That no Person under the age of One and twenty years, should be capable of
being Elected; nor any other than of known Credit, fearing God, and of good
Behavior.

No Man likewise to have Power of Electing, whose Estate should not be worth 20
l. per An. Sterling.

That the Return of the Persons Elected should be transmitted by Prothonotary
in Chancery, unto the Council of State, within two days after they should come
to his Hands, to the end that Judgment might be made of the Persons, if any
Question should arise touching the Lawfulness of the Choice.

That Sixty Members should be accounted a Parliament, in case the rest be
absent. Nevertheless, that it should be lawful to the Protector to call a
Parliament when he shall see cause.

That the Bills agreed on in Parliament should be presented to the Protector,
for his Assent thereto; and if he should not give his Assent to them within
Twenty days, that then they should have the force of Laws without it.

That if any Counselor of State should die, or be outed of his Place for
Corruption, in the Intervals of Parliament, the Protector, with the rest of the
Council, to substitute another in his stead.

That a certain Annual Tax should be made throughout the Three Commonwealths,
for the Maintenance of Ten thousand Horse, and Fifteen thousand Foot; which Tax
should also supply the Charge of the Navy: And that this Rate should not be
lessened or altered by the Parliament, without the Consent of the Protector and
his Council. But if it should not be thought necessary hereafter that any Army
should be maintained, then whatsoever Surplusage of this Tax should be, to be
kept in the Treasury for sudden Emergencies.

That if there might happen to be occasion of making extraordinary Choices, and
to raise new Forces, it should not be done without Consent of Parliament; but
that in the Intervals of Parliament it should be lawful for the Protector and
his said Council, both to make new Laws, and to raise Moneys for the present
Exigencies.

That all the Lands, Forests, and Jurisdictions, not then sold by the
Parliament, whether they had belonged to the King, Queen, Prince, Bishops, or
any Delinquents whatsoever, should thenceforth remain to the Protector.

That the Office of Protector should thenceforth be Elective; but that none of
the King's Line should be ever capable thereof; and that the Election should
belong to the Council.

That for the present Oliver Cromwell should be Protector.

That the Great Offices of the Commonwealth, viz. Chancellor, Keeper of the
Seal, Governor of Ireland, Admiral, Treasurer, in case they should become void
in Parliament-time, to be filled up by the approbation of Parliament; and in
the Intervals, by the like approbation of the Council.

That the Christian Religion, as it is contained by Holy Scripture, should be
the Public Profession of the Nation; and that those who were to have the Care
thereof, should have their Support from the Public; so that it be with some
other more convenient Maintenance, and less subject to Envy, than by Tithes.

That no Man shall be by any Fine or Penalty whatsoever, forced to Comply with
the said Public Profession, otherwise than by Persuasions and Arguments.

That no man Professing Faith in Christ, should be prohibited the Exercise of
his own Religion, so that he disturb not any other: but that neither Popery or
Prelacy should be permitted the least Favor or License; and that all Laws to
the contrary should be void.

That all Agreements made by Parliament should be firm and stable; All Articles
of Peace made with Domestic Enemies, made good.

That all Protectors, in their Order, should be obliged by Oath, at their first
taking upon them the Government, by all means to procure the Peace, Welfare,
and Quiet of the Commonwealth; by no means to violate the present Agreements;
and lastly, to his Power to administer all things according to the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs of England.

Cromwell swears to his own Conditions, and presently chooses Counselors out of
every Sect.
To these Conditions Cromwell swears, and then cunningly chooses his
Privy-Counsellors; which he so dexterously packed, that though they differed in
Quality and Inclinations amongst themselves, yet all were equally at his
devotion. Of every Sect he chooses some Leading Men, by whose means he might
gain the rest of the same Stamp: Officers also of the Army, especially the
Higher, and those who were most in Favor and Authority with the People.
Amongst them were Anabaptists, Independents, and Presbyterians; Irish and
Scots; all sorts of Republicans; and, until all Liberty of Ingenuous Minds was
restrained, some Royalists also. The Reins of these so many and different
Opinions, Factions, Nations, and Sects, the skilful Driver, being himself of no
Faith nor certain Profession, took into his Hands, and turned them at his
pleasure; now inclining to one side, now to the other; sometime approving the
greater, and sometime the smaller number of Votes; being ready at every turn to
dismiss those that were headstrong. And thus assisted by his Counselors, he
takes upon him the Administration of the Commonwealth.

What were the thoughts of men in this great Revolution.
Out of fear, few withstand this so great a Change in Affairs, and many applaud
it: Those who are of a contrary Opinion, stand in amaze, and conceal their
Thoughts. Presbyterians, Independents, Royalists, Neutralists, and all, choose
rather to acquiesce under his Government, than eternally to be enslaved to the
Pleasure of mad Fanatics. The exulting Soldiers are cock-ahoop: Now Colleges
are freed from the fear of Ruin; the Common-Laws are secured from danger; the
Nobility, though maimed, yet still seemed to be in being; the Presbyterians,
secure of their Tithes and Discipline, though not coactive, triumph: nor are
the Royalists much grieved, being now sure of a Single Person, and hoping that
the Scepter and Crown, after one or two Turns more, would at length be settled
upon the right Basis, the Royal Family. Every Commander of the Army talks of
Golden days, as if now their Places were to last for ever; nor does the meanest
Soldier despair, but that by degrees he may mount to the top of the Government.
But Lambert and other Chief Officers, besides the plentiful Estates wherewith
they are enriched at present, skip for joy that they are admitted into a share
of the Government, hoping within a little after the death of the aged
Protector, to be raised higher.

Amidst these Domestic Revolutions at home, England wanted not a Foreign
Enemy; A War with Holland.
they had a heavy War with Holland upon their Shoulders, which being begun two
years before, and till then continued, seemed like to terminate in the Ruin of
one of the two Nations, had not God othewise decreed. The Dutch were netled at
the Letters of Reprisal, The use of it.
which being promiscuously granted, Pirates from all Places, who liked better to
live by Rapine, than by honest Courses, infesting the Seas, had taken above
Fourscore Sail of Ships; as also at the Order of Parliament, That no Goods
should be Imported from abroad, unless in English Bottoms, or Ships of the
Country where the Commodities were originally to be had. And that People were
too late foolishly bent upon War: For when it was in their Power to have
assisted the King against His Rebellious Subjects, then would they neither aid
Him with Counsel, Money, Intercession, Credit, nor any other way; nay, I wish
it might not be said, that some of them assisted the Rebels. But now, when the
Princes of Europe veiled their Crowns and Scepters before the Parricides, they
think themselves able to make Head against them, and vie for Pre-eminence.
Nothing now is to be heard amongst them, but forthwith resisting Force by
Force: The Public Places resound with Ballads and Songs against the Villainous
Regicides and Sectarians, and Booksellers Shops are adorned with Pictures. The
Flushingers exceeded all the rest in Folly, who boasted, that their own Ships
alone were able to beat the English. But the High and Mighty States were not of
that Judgment; Different Opinions of the States of the United Provinces about
that Matter.
they were divided into Three Parts: One Part was not only for entertaining a
Peace and good Correspondence with the Regicides, but also for Leaguing into a
stricter Amity: Others, favoring the Popular Opinion, did all that lay in
their power to thwart that; and that Confederating with Neighboring Princes,
they should endeavor to restore the King of Great Britain to the Throne of his
Ancestors: A third Party taking a middle way, thought it best to mind their own
Interests, carry fair and civilly with the Rebels, thereby to secure their
Trade, and the free use of the Seas; but, in the mean time, if the Parricides
carried it high, and slighted their Friendship, that with a well-appointed
Fleet of an hundred and fifty Men of War, they should forthwith quell them.

The last Opinion prevailing, The middle Opinion prevailing, Ambassadors for
Pacification are sent into England.
Four Ambassadors for Pacification are appointed to go into England; the Heers
Catz, Schaep, Vandeperre, and Neuport, who had long been resident there. They
renew the Treaty which St. John's had broken up, beginning at the same Article
where he had left off. The Oligarchicks hereupon seem sorry for what was past;
and presaging a future Coalition with the English into one Commonwealth, carry
very civilly, and kindly receive them. Then the Dutch Ambassadors, without
denouncing of War, make some mention of an hundred and fifty Men of War, which
they had in readiness to scowr the Seas from Pirates, and securing Navigation;
but without any Intention to molest us, which was far from their thoughts.

But in the heat of the Treaty it unluckily fell out, In the heat of the Treaty
a sharp Engagement happened.
that a great Fight happened betwixt Blake and Trump, the Admirals of both
Nations; but I am uncertain who gave the first Provocation. We alleged, That
the Dutch refused to strike Sail, which is a Mark of Prerogative and Dominion
that we demand of all Foreign Ships; and that Trump being warned to do so by a
Gun without a Bullet, was the first that fired a Broadside, and that by order
from his Masters. However, from which Side soever the Provocation was given,
May 24. 1652. both Fleets desperately engaged in the Afternoon, and fought it
out stoutly, till dark night hid the horrid Spectacle from the Eyes of Men.
From this Engagement the Dutch, double to us in number, with the loss of two
Ships, and as much, if not more mauled than we, departed. But seeing the Dutch
could obtain no Victory in that unexpected Aggression, The Dutch excuse the
matter,
their Ambassadors excuse the Matter, as having been a fortuitous Engagement,
when they themselves thought of nothing less. Yet both Sides prepare for War;
which was not at all ungrateful to the English, as being certain they could so
long protract it, until the Dutch being forced to a Coalition, would at length
yield; or being reduced to extremity, of which they entertained no doubtful
Hopes, considering the Opportunity of our Ports, and the Number of their
well-equipped Fleet, they would be glad to submit to the Will of the
Conquerors. Both Parties were obstinate, and prepared all things that might be
necessary to destroy one another. The Dutch Confederate with the Danes; But
confederate with the Danes,
who therefore lay first an Embargo upon a Fleet of the English in the Sundt,
and afterward carry them into Copenhagen, being laden with Masts, Pitch, Hemp,
and Sail-cloth, which at that time the Regicides were in great want of, though
they had got a pretty good Supply from the West Indies, and the Northern Parts
of Scotland. The King of England, besides, offers them a Squadron of English
Ships for their Assistance; which nevertheless they would not suffer to carry
the English Colors, but in their own Ports, lest the Breach betwixt the two
Commonwealths might prove irreparable. Both Parties in the mean while press
Seamen, set out Ships, increase the number of their Sailors, yea and put
Land-Soldiers on Board too. All hopes of Peace now vanishing, the Ambassadors
return home; and a second and third Engagement happened at Sea. And fight again
and again.
No Age before that can show an Instance that ever any People, not only of
Europe, but of the whole World, engaged at Sea with such roaring of Great Guns,
such Fury, Courage, and Resolution of Men, and so much Blood and Slaughter, as
the English and Dutch did during that War, though with continual ill Success to
the Dutch; except that in the Straits, near Legorn, John van Galen, who was
killed by a Cannon-bullet, and had young Trump for his Successor, having sunk
two of our Ships, and taken a third, that was afterward regained by a
Stratagem, had the better of us through our own negligence. But then
Revolutions happening amongst us at home, At length they sue for Peace, Cromwell
being now at the Helm.
when Cromwell had invaded the Government, by the the Mediation of Stones and
Dolman, Englishmen, who favored the Dutch, four new Ambassadors come over
again, Bevering, Jounstal, Neuport, and Perre, at first to learn what Advantage
they might expect from that turn of Affairs, and accordingly then to treat of
Peace.

The Dutch now thrice overcome, had sufficient experience of the English
Strength, having Seventeen hundred Merchant-Ships taken, many Men of War sunk
and disabled, a great many Sea-Commanders slain, no Trade by Sea, and Sedition
at home rising almost to a Rebellion. But the fourth and last Engagement, above
all the rest, gave a clear Demonstration, what Side Victory inclined to; when
not a few were punished with Imprisonment, Infamy, and Death, for their
Miscarriage at Sea; others allured and encouraged with Promises, Rewards, Hopes
of Booty, and full Cups of Brandy: and as if Holland lay at stake in the
Fortune of this Engagement, and that they were to use their utmost and last
Efforts for the defense of their Country, they restore Discipline, build
stronger Ships, cast Guns that carried further, and give Commands to trusty,
valiant, and daring Men: Nay, some of the States General are ordered to go on
Board, as Eyewitnesses of the Valor or Cowardice of their Men. At length the
English Fleet, commanded by Monck, having waited for the Dutch six Months upon
their own Coast, they set out from the Texel and Weelings, and bore up toward
ours, A fourth Engagement, most fatal to the Dutch: Trump being killed,
and, with as many Ships as they could fit out, briskly came to an Engagement;
but after a long Dispute, with such Success, that Trump in the Admiral-Ship
bearing in bravely amongst the English, was shot dead in the Breast; a Man of
great Courage, (for Valor is to be praised even in an Enemy) and most skilful
in Sea affairs: after his Death, the Enemy was put to flight, and great
slaughter committed amongst them. In that Engagement seven and twenty Dutch
Ships were either sunk or burnt, And 2000 besides.
two thousand Seamen and Soldiers killed, a thousand taken, with six Captains:
Whereas of the English there were not above four hundred Men, and one small
Ship wanting, about seven hundred wounded, most of whom afterward recovered.

Cromwell claps up a Peace with the Dutch and Danes;
These things succeeding so ill, the Dutch clap up a Peace with Cromwell, the
Danes also being comprehended in the Treaty. He hinted a little at a Coalition,
only for Forms sake, which the Dutch Ambassadors rejecting, he waved it,
having other things in design. But Bevering and Newport privately promise, in
the Name of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, And lays a snare for the
Prince of Orange.
and engage themselves, That neither the Prince of Orange, (an innocent Babe,
then in the Cradle) nor any of his Race, should ever be chosen Statholder, or
Admiral of their Provinces; and that he should never have the Vote of their
Provinces in the States General, for being elected General of the Forces. Which
they got at length confirmed by the States at Groningen: The rest of the
Provinces, in the mean time, crying out against it.

But the Peace made with the Dutch, had almost disturbed ours at home.
S^ditious Seamen.
For the Seamen complaining that they were defrauded of their Pay, tumultuously
and seditiously flock together in a great Body, and with murmuring and Threats
fly to Whitehall, bitterly railing, and demanding their due; till Cromwell,
attended with some Officers, rushing out, drew their Swords, killed some
Seamen, dispersed the rest, and so composed the Tumult.

But we must not so dismiss the Dutch: For it happened that War breaking out with
Holland, three Ships, the Savior, Samson, and St. George, Three Hansiatick
Ships are stopped,
were freighted by some Amsterdam-Merchants, under borrowed Names, from
Hamborough and Lubeck, Hanse-Towns, to bring Goods from St. Lucar in Spain to
Amsterdam. But the laden Ships by Storms and contrary Winds being forced into
the Downs, fell in amongst the English Frigates, that were more formidable than
the Winds: Which being searched, they found them very richly laden, having on
board to the value of Four hundred thousand Pounds English, in Plate and other
rich Commodities; and stopped them until they had acquainted the Parricides
with the Booty. They presently order them to be brought up into the River of
Thames, where it was pretended, that the Silver and Goods were consigned to the
Spanish Ambassador, Don Alonso de Cadenas, who used all his Endeavors to have
them cleared. But the Parricides, under pretext of doing Justice, refer the
Matter to the Court of Admiralty; which by long Delays protracts the Suit; till
the Silver, upon pretext of the Public Necessity, being brought ashore, and
Coined in the Tower of London, was in Oliver's Protectorship Condemned with the
rest of the Goods. And condemned.


Let us now make a step over to the Portuguese; Cromwell is reconciled to the
King of Portugal.
whose King's Excuse Cromwell took in very good part, seeing he pretended
sorrow for what he had done: Wherefore he discharges the Ships laden with
Sugar, upon reparation of the English Losses, and enters into Alliance with
him; for confirmation whereof, Medows is sent over to Portugal with the
Ambassador, who then was upon his return.

The Ambassadors Brother, Don Pantaleon Sa,
But I must not here pass over the Ambassadors Brother, Don Pantaleon Sa, who
had not the luck to return again into his own Country. For he walking one
Evening in the New Exchange of London, and resenting an Affront which he
thought he had received from one Gerard, the Night following he repairs to the
same Place, attended by the Retinue of his Brother the Ambassador, and with
Sword and Pistol falls indifferently upon Men and Women. A great Hubbub rising
upon this, Colonel May, an Irishman, drew, and alone beat off the Portuguese,
the Authors of the Tumult. However, next morning Don Pantaleon Sa was carried
out of his Brother's House, For a Murder committed in London,
to be tried for the Murder of one Greenway, an innocent Person, who was
unexpectedly and unfortunately killed in the Scuffle; and was shortly after
brought to the Bar before Rolls Chief Justice of England, having some Doctors
of the Civil Law for Assessors; where the Prisoner having pleaded and much
insisted upon the Privileges of the Ambassador, he is notwithstanding found
guilty, and condemned. But having afterward, by the help of a certain
Mistress, made his escape out of Prison, either by the Discovery of a pretended
Friend, or the diligent Search of the Keepers, he was again apprehended, and
six months after beheaded upon Tower Hill, Is beheaded;
his Countenance looking so pale, that he seemed to have been dead before he
died.

At the same time, and upon the same place, And Gerard at the same time also,
for standing up for the Kings Interest^
Gerard, for a different Cause, and with far greater Resolution, suffered the
same Death: For he was condemned by the High Court of Justice (as they called
it) for asserting the Royal Cause; and upon the same Scaffold where the
Portuguese afterward suffered, he cheerfully and undauntedly had his Head
struck off upon the Block. So by Death they seemed to be made Friends, who so
lately sought one another Life.

Vowell, a Schoolmaster, Vowell hanged for the same Cause.
was hanged for the same Cause; who bravely upbraiding the Judges to their
Faces with Injustice, he cited the Judges and Cromwell to appear before the
Judgment Seat of God, who will render to every one according to their Works.

But let us return to our King, who having an Appartment in the Louvre, did not
lazily lament his Misfortunes, but tried all ways whereby he might better his
cross Fortune, and set things to rights again: He uses all Endeavors to
procure the Favor of the King, the Cardinal, and Princes. He mediates a Peace
betwixt Spain and France; but in vain, seeing the Cardinal was against it. His
next Care was, by persuading some, and appeasing others, to reconcile the
Princes of the Blood of France to the King, The King of England uses all
Endeavors to oblige the French King;
who were in a bad understanding because of the Cardinal: At length he
prevailed with the Duke of Lorrain, who was joined with the Princes against the
King, to depart peaceably out of France, though he had entered it full of Anger
and Revenge. But this cost Our King dear: For whilst He and the Duke of York
were in a private Conference with Lorrain, the Duke of Beaufort coming in by
chance, discovered it to the Princes of the contrary Faction; who casting the
blame upon the King, that Lorrain afterward forsook them, But being basely
used,
made the French bespatter Him and all His Retinue with bitter Railleries and
Calumnies. He being a little moved at these things, removed to St. Germans,
until he was informed that Burdeauxe de Neufville had made a firm Peace with
Cromwell; and then through Liege and Aix la Chapel he went to Cologne in
Germany, He removes to Cologne.
where by the Burgomaster and Senators he was invited to a Banquet, and
welcomed with all the Expressions of Joy and Friendship.

His Friends in England, in the mean time, use all endeavors.
The Royalists in England at first knew not what Hand to turn to; yet they cast
about all ways how they might restore the King to His ancient Dignity, and by
shaking off the Yoke of Tyranny, recover at length their own Liberty. The
Parricides were indeed but few in number, in comparison of them; but they were
such as exceeded them in craftiness, and, being victorious, had the Arms and
Money in their Hands; and besides, were so well served by their clandestine
Spies, Cromwell counter-endeavours.
that they had a watchful eye over all; so that they could not confer Counsels,
nor discourse privately together, nor so much as whisper any Business. And this
was the reason that all Stirs and Attempts of Liberty were prevented. The
Prebyterians also, though they wished well to the King, yet for the most part
stuck obstinately to their Principles, neither advising nor associating with
the Royalists, but rather entertaining their old grudge and hatred against
them. Yet by mutual Exhortations they do somewhat.
The Royalists nevertheless finding by degrees Opportunities of conferring
together, did by faithful Messengers, by Ciphers and Characters, by Signs and
the dumb Language of Fingers, exhort, animate, and stir up Parties against
Cromwell. Some of the bolder sort openly disobeyed his Commands; many
unwillingly complied, under pretext of Laws to the contrary; whilst others with
various Colors and Pretenses, some pretending themselves Presbyterians, others
Republicans, and others again Anabaptists, were still jumbling Affairs, and
Plotting.

At length Royal Commissioners began to be appointed all over England; The
matter was at length undertaken by Comm^ssioners,
the Chief to remain in London, and the Inferior in the several Counties and
Provinces; with Power to act, and by Messengers going to and again, to give one
another and the Kings Majesty intelligence of the Beginning and Progress of
Affairs, and of the opportuonities of Acting. Among these were some
Presbyterians, but not many. These Commissioners were empowered to draw as many
others as they could into the same Association; which they set about after this
manner: Every one, according as they could, acquainted their trusty Companions
with their purpose of Rising, the Place, and Time; but that privately, and one
only at a time, Very cau^iously;
lest if the Matter afterward should come to be detected, there might be no
more but one Witness against the Party accused. So the Affair was spread
amongst a vast number of Men, and the more to be feared, that it was
communicated to so many.

Few Nobles, either of higher or lower Quality, but were made acquainted with
the Design; and though some declined the Danger, yet most of them kept Counsel:
Nay, many Republicans, The Republicans also conspiring with them,
who now were more displeased with the Tyranny of Cromwell, than the Lawful
Government of the King, join in the same Resolution; namely, Overton, who
heretofore had been Governor of Scotland, and Wildman, both Leading Men. They
had hopes that the Republicans and Royalists being associated together, they
might either overcome, or at least force Cromwell to come to better Terms; and
that then turning their Arms against the Royalists, they might easily subdue
them. For the report was, That 2000 Horse, and vast numbers of Foot, all
Republicans, had listed themselves for that Service.

And some Governors of Places.
The Governors of Towns and Forts give also hopes of joining in the
Confederacy: Cannon are likewise provided, and one day first, then another, and
a third, are appointed for the Insurrection; that rising at the same time in
all Counties, they might every way divert and divide the Enemy, and in this
uncertainty what Course to take, overcome him.

But Cromwell discovering the Design, easily disappoints it;
But Cromwell is not ignorant of these Contrivances; he employs all his Arts and
Might to get a clear discovery of the Scheme and Series of the whole Business,
to bring to light the Plotters, and especially that he might detect the Lords
and Chief Persons of Quality, break their Measures, and by a false Insurrection
spoil their true Rising. By that means he suppressed the Conspiracy of the
Cornish and Shropshire Men, by stirring them up to precipitate their Rising.
Some rising too soon,
At Hessen-Moor also, in Yorkshire, a numerous Meeting is appointed to be,
amongst whom Fairfax himself was reported to have given hopes of appearing: But
he being beset by the Craft and Artifices of Cromwell, abstained from Action.
There the Earl of Rochester, whom we have often mentioned by the Name of the
Lord Wilmot, and Sir Nicholas Armorer, met at the appointed time, that they
might Head the rest: But both of them, few appearing, and most part falling off
for fear, Others cowardly;
betook themselves presently to flight, and being taken at Ailsbury by the
Rebels, with much ado made their escape. Sir Henry Slingsby and Sir Richard
Maleverer being with others taken, are committed to Prison. A great many People
appeared that night also in Sherwood-Forest near Nottingham: But being partly
betrayed, and partly smitten with fear, and divided about the Choice of a
Commander, they all fly; of which, a great many, being apprehended, suffer a
tedious Imprisonment for it. At the same time, about Three hundred Wiltshire
Men rising, under the Command of Wagstaff Major General of the Army, broke into
Salisbury, where two Judges of the Kingdom were then holding the Assizes, whom
they seized, but afterward civilly dismissed. From thence for some days they
wander up and down, in vain expecting Auxiliary Forces; till at length many of
them disappeared, and the rest were defeated in their Quarters by Crook's
Regiment, Wagstaff escaping safe in the dark. London, Kent, and the other
Counties, And all disappointed of their Hopes.
taking warning from the Misfortunes of their Brethren, forbore at present to
make any Disturbance; but yet they could not escape the Intelligence of
Cromwell. Many Persons of Great Quality committed to Prison:
The Earl of Oxford, Lords Willoughby of Parham, Newport, and Compton,
Littleton, Peyton, Packington, Ashburnham, Russel, Leg, Philips, Halsey, and
many others, whom I shall not name, being seized, are committed to a long and
irksom Imprisonment, and some transported to the Plantations. The Republicans
also, Wildman, Overton, and (much about the same time) Vane, are made Prisoners.

All the Prisoners who were clearly convicted of the Fact, are severely
punished: Many shed their generous Blood, Not a few put to death.
some being beheaded at Salisbury, and some at Exeter; as Penruddock, Groves,
Lucas: and others died upon a Gibbet, who ought to have had their Memories
eternized in Statues. But not many of the rest were put to death, as not being
taken in the Fact, or escaping in the Crowd of so many concerned, or, lastly,
not any one accusing another.

Cromwell's Arts of Discovery.
Now the Reader is to know how Cromwell came to the knowledge of the matter. He
had given power to the public Postmasters, who were all at his devotion, to
stop suspected People, open and secretly read their Letters, and if they
appeared to insinuate any thing tending to an Insurrection, to give him an
account of them; if there were any thing found ambiguously written, to write it
down, till he might have an opportunity either of seizing or branding the
Parties with pregnant suspicion. He narrowly observed all Posts and Messengers,
caused them sometimes to be stopped, and carefully searched from Head to Foot,
terrifying them with Threats and Imprisonments, and plying them with Wine and
other Engines of Discovery, he found out the most hidden Secrets. He therefore
hired and dispersed about many Spies and Eve-droppers; nay, Spies mingled
amongst the Cavaliers;
and some clandestine ones amongst the Cavaliers themselves, who openly stood
up for the King and Royal Cause, but Men of no Estates nor Honesty, who prying
into all the Secrets they could, gave intelligence of them. But these Men did
but little Service being accustomed to detect things that were publicly known,
and sometimes contradictory. He gained a considerable and topping Traitor, one
Manning, Especially one Manning that lived at Court,
whose Father died in defense of the Royal Cause, as he himself had formerly
served the King, and received a Wound in the Foot; being a Gentleman of a good
Family, and by Religion a Roman Catholic: who notwithstanding, that he might
be the more acceptable, and make way for his future Treachery, daring in a
manner to mock God, took the Sacrament, after the manner of the Church of
England. Cromwell by Craft and Allurements wholly debauched this Man into his
Party; who insinuated himself into the King's Service, and the Society of the
Courtiers, under pretext of raising amongst the Royalists Six thousand pounds
English a year, for the Use of His Majesty, Cromwell in the mean time privately
paying the Money. Under this specious color, he securely dived into the
Counsels of the King and of His Friends, and weekly sends an Account of them;
till at length (as no Treason can be long concealed) the Rat discovered
himself, and being guilty of the Death of so many Brave Men, Who at length was
justly put to death.
by his own Blood, which was all he could do, he expiated his Crime.

Cromwell calls a Parliament of Commoners only,
But a Parliament is now called at London, though not after the ancient manner:
The Commons are only called to sit and consult in Parliament; nor these
neither freely elected by all the People. But before they were suffered to
enter the House, Cromwell spoke to them to this purpose: Wherein he brags of
his own good Deeds.
That some years ago none would have thought of such a Door of Hope; that he
knew there were yet many Humors and Interests, and that Humors were above
Interest; that the Condition of England was like Israel in the Wilderness; that
this was a Healing Day; there was neither Nobleman, nor Gentleman, nor Yeoman
before known by any Distinction; we had not any that bore Rule or Authority,
but a great Contempt of Magistracy and Christ's Ordinances: That the Fifth
Monarchy was highly cried up by Persons who would assume the Government; but
that desired thing wanted greater manifestation than appeared, for such Men to
change the Authority by. He desired this Honorable Assembly to remedy all
these Disorders; showed, That the Wars with Portugal, France, and the Dutch, do
and did eat up the Assessments; That swarms of Jesuits are crept in to make
Divisions, which were grown so wide, that nothing but his Government could
remedy them: And let Men say what they will, he could speak it with comfort
before a Greater than any of them. Then he showed what he had done during his
Government: First, his Endeavors of reforming the Laws, having joined all
Parties to assist in that great Work: Next, his filling the Benches with the
Ablest Lawyers: Then his Regulation of the Court of Chancery, and his Darling
Ordinance for the Approbation of Ministers (which hindered all that list from
invading the Ministry) by Men of both Persuasions, Presbyterians and
Independents, etc. And lastly, his being Instrumental to call a Free
Parliament; which he valued, and would keep it so above his Life.

Then he showed the Advantage of the Peace with the Dutch, Dane, and Suede,
Which he would have the Parliament to confirm.
and the Protestant Interest, which he would have them improve and intend
chiefly: That they were now upon the Edge of Canaan: That he spoke not as their
Lord, but their Fellow Servants: And then bad them go and choose their Speaker.
Cromwell having spoken to this effect, the Members, without returning him
Thanks, as is usual, went to the House.

Lenthall being again chosen Speaker, But they, on the contrary, nibble at the
Instrument of Government, The Officers and Courtiers opposing it,
they fall first upon the New Instrument of Government; all the Clauses and
Articles whereof they thoroughly sift and examine. The Officers of the Army who
were Privy-Counsellors, and all who depended on Cromwell, vigorusly oppose
that, saying, That that Instrument was to be taken for the Basis and Foundation
of the Government, no ways to be called in question, since by the Authority
thereof the Parliament met; and that it would be contrary to the Dictates of
Natural Reason, to bring it to a Trial. Nay, many, and particularly Lambert,
threaten, That if the Parliament did not approve and confirm it, they
themselves would call another, nay a third, and a fourth, till it should be at
length established by Public Consent. But the Republicans urging the same.
But the Republicans stood stiff to the contrary, making answer, That the
Government was usurped by Craft and Force, not procured by Right, nor confirmed
by the Free Votes of the People; that it laid Snares for the Liberty of the
Commonwealth, and made way for a most grievous Tyranny. One amongst the rest,
in the heat of the Debate, was so bold as to say, That since they were
approaching so near to Monarchy, it were better to call one of the Royal Family
to the Government, than that Cromwell should usurp the Scepter and Crown.

But Cromwell severely checks these Debates,
Cromwell being informed of these Debates, comes in great rage to the
Parliament, and tells them to this effect: That they were not called together
that they might confound and turn all things again into the former Chaos, but
that they should build upon the Foundation and Groundwork already laid down,
and not to be altered: That his Authority could not be called in question,
unless at the same time they invalidated their own Power; since the present
Parliament was called by him, and by him had liberty to consult: That he alone
had the Right of settling Fundamentals, upon which they had power to raise and
beautify Superstructures: That he was resolved to maintain the Government and
Supreme Power in a Single Person, to call a Parliament once in Three years, not
to sit above Five months without his Consent, etc. That to violate or innovate
these things, should neither be in the Power of the Protector nor Parliament:
That in other things they might consult and enact as they pleased for the
Public Good.

And obliges all that would enter the House to own the Government.
But because Admonition might not be sufficient, he thinks fit to apply Force.
Next day a Guard of Soldiers being set before the Door of the House, no Man was
suffered to enter, unless he signed the following Recognition: I shall be
faithful to the Lord Protector, and shall not endeavor to change the
Government of a Single Person. Many who could not swallow that Bit, are
debarred from the Privilege of Sitting. Nevertheless, so many Republicans took
the Recognition, as made the Cromwellian Faction and Republican almost equal;
some who underhand favored the King joining themselves to each Side, enflaming
Animosities, and, as much as might be, setting the Parties, who seriously
treated these Affairs, at greater variance: Insomuch, However, he left all his
Labor.
that after five Months continual jangling and debate, Cromwell was not able to
bring his Affairs to any good issue in this Parliament.

Nor do the Republican Spirits only prevail in the Parliament, but also in the
Army. The Republican Soldiers conspire his ruin.
For these consult and plot together, how they might apprehend Cromwell, and
bring him before the Parliament, to be accused and condemned of Treason;
thinking with themselves, that if they could lay Hands upon him, and make him
Prisoner, there would be a sudden change of Affairs; and that his Favorers and
Adherents being thereby baulked, would sculk and shift for themselves. The
truth is, the Officers of Three thousand Horse, and of no inconsiderable number
of Foot, frequently met in Somerset House, and elsewhere, about the contriving
and carrying on of that Design: But before the Matter came to maturity, Which
he smelling out, presently dissolved the Parliament.
by the Treachery of Pride, it came to Cromwell's Ears, who, by a hasty
Dissolution of the Parliament, prevented all those Machinations, and disbanded
those Officers.

In the mean time Cromwell having received a splendid Embassy from Sueden, He
makes Peace with Sueden,
with equal Magnificence, he concluded a Peace with that Crown, and dismissed
the Ambassadors with hopes of a nearer Alliance. He makes Peace also with
France, And France.
and promises to send over Assistance thither, if the Affairs of England would
permit him.

But all this while, the specious Pretext of Supreme Authority was wanting to
these Attempts. The Parliament had denied their Collective Votes; to make that
up therefore, it remains, that the Distributive Votes of all the People be had,
and that the Officers break the Ice. For Support of his Authority he procures
Gratulatory Addresses from the Officers of the Army in Scotland,
Wherefore Gratulatory Petitions or Addresses are sent by the Commanders of the
several Regiments of the Army in Scotland, whereby they thank the Lord
Protector for having changed the Form of Public Government to the better. They
pray him to go on in the discharge of that Province which by Providence he has
undertaken; promising with their Lives and Fortunes to maintain and defend him
in all difficulties. Then from the Officers in England,
But amongst the English Officers there was a necessity of a wheadling Pretext;
to wit, That the Malignants and Enemies of the Country now triumphed, as if the
Army breaking into Discords and Divisions, would presently renounce their
General Cromwell: That therefore a Petition of that nature must needs be
framed, wherein by applauding the Protector, they would convince those that
were of a contrary Opinion. With much ado he obtained that amongst the
Republicans; but at length (some refusing to sign it, as venturing rather
Cromwell's Displeasure and Revenge, than by a sneaking Compliance to betray the
Rights and Privileges of the People) all the rest agree to the Petition. The
Army thus leading the Dance, And afterward from some Corporations.
some Corporations and Counties follow; and these, possessed by what Spirit I
know not, heap so many and so great Elogies upon the Man, that striving to
outdo others in Hyperbolical Cant and Flattery, they fall into Blasphemy, and
blush not most profanely to attribute to this Man, Titles that are peculiar to
God Almighty.

He affected to be a Promoter of Justice,
In the mean time ( to give the Devil his Due) he restores Justice, as well
Distributive, as Commutative, almost to its ancient Dignity and Splendor; the
Judges without Covetousness discharging their Duties, according to Law and
Equity; and the Laws (unless some few that particularly concerned Cromwell)
having full and free course in all Courts, without hindrance or delay. Men's
Manners also, And a rigid Censurer of Manners,
at least outwardly, seemed to be reformed to the better, whether by really
substracting the Fuel of Luxury, or through fear of the Ancient Laws, now
revived and put in execution. His own Court also was regulated according to a
severe Discipline; here no Drunkard, nor Whoremonger, nor any guilty of
Bribery, was to be found, without severe Punishment. Trade began again to
prosper; and, in a word, gentle Peace to flourish all over England.

He studied also to gain an Opinion of extraordinary Sanctity among the
Churchmen; And a Favourer of the Clergy,
for no Man affected to seem more tender of the Clergy than he, though he would
not list himself in any particular Sect, nor espouse particular Opinions: He
was, indeed, more inclined toward the Independents, his Affairs so requiring;
but a severe Enemy to all the Orthodox Clergy of England. He gave it out, That
it was his only wish and desire to see the Church in Peace, and that all would
gather together into one Sheepfold, under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ, and
mutually love one another; whilst underhand he set them together by the Ears,
Whose Divisions nevertheless he foments, whilst he seemed earnest in composing
of them.
and promoted their Dissentions. He projected some specious Proposals of
Reconciliation betwixt the Presbyterians and Independents; but when they were
upon the point of agreement, he put them again at greater variance. Under
pretext also of moderating and pacifying the Divisions of the Scottish
Remonstrators and Assembly-men, he blows up the Embers, and kindles greater
Flames amongst them. By turns he used to countenance all sorts of Fanatics,
that the hair-brained People might the more obstinately stick to their Whimseys
and Scruples; of whom, if he could frame any one to his own Temper, by prying
into his Secrets, he showed himself easy and tractable to the Opinions and
Punctilio's of any Religion. He had moreover the knack of wheadling and
alluring all with hopes of Favors, and fawning Offices, but so, as they must
know, there was no resisting of the Bridle; if otherwise, he would break out
into Anger, Industriously suppressing the Insolence of the Presbyterians.
and thunder Threatenings. If he perceived that the Presbyterians began to raise
their Crests, be troublesome to their Neighbors, seem uneasy under the
Government, or meddle in Civil Affairs, then would he threaten and denounce all
Evils to the Sect, and let loose against them the Anabaptists, Quakers, and the
rest of the Fanatics, who took pleasure in disputing with the Preachers, and
interrupting them in their Divine Worship; and by such Brutes he created no
small trouble to the swelling Presbyterians: Nay, he was heard by many to
glory, that he had curbed that Insolent Sect (as he used privately to call it)
which would suffer none but it self, so that they had humbly begged his leave,
and thanked him for granting them permission to Preach and perform Divine
Worship after their manner, in their own Congregations, and to those who were
willing to submit to their Government.

Though the Public Use of the Service Book was denied to the Episcopal Party,
yet in Private Houses he allows them the Use of their Rites. He not only
cherished, He was ill-affected toward the Church of England, tho he was
accustomed to caress some few.
but seemed also mightily to love Dr. Brownrigg, a Bishop, and other Learned
Men, whom heretofore he was acquainted with at Cambridge, whilst they were
suffered by the Parliament to live there, and commanded them to visit him
often: yet it was his custom, so soon as they were gone, to forget, calumniate,
and deride them. If any were suspected by him to promote the Royal Cause, or to
contrive against himself, they must be sent to Foreign Plantations, chained and
imprisoned, severely checked, interrupted in their Sermons, haled before
Officers or Justices of the Peace, and not dismissed till they found Security
for their Good Behavior, and the keeping of the Peace. Nevertheless, though
the State of the Church seemed now sad and deplorable, yet it is not to be
denied, but that milder Courses were used, than under the rigid Tyranny of
others that went before.

The Independents get into the Chief Places of Honor and Profit, He hugged the
Independents:
whom he countenanced with his own Familiarity; and at length gave them liberty
to call an Assembly at the Savoy, that the Preachers or Prelates of the
Independent Churches in all Counties meeting there, might make a Confession of
their Faith, and justify themselves from absurd Opinions, with which they were
branded by some: but especially, and indeed, that they might show their Numbers
and Strength, and by knowing one another, associate together into a stricter
Union. Though this Meeting was not celebrated till Richard was possessed of the
Government, yet the Grant of it was obtained in Oliver's time. Nor was he an
enemy to Fanatics,
He allows a Toleration of Religion to all sorts of Fanatics. Though publicly
he detested, And Roman Catholics.
and seemed an implacable Enemy to the Papists; yet he was very familiar with
some of them, and very obliging toward them: Nay, once he set afoot a Treaty
with them, about a general Toleration of Religion, converting the third part of
their Rents, wherein by our Laws they are fined, into a certain Sum of Money.
But because they could not agree upon the Money-consideration, and that he
smelt out that it would be ungrateful to the People, and give occasion of Stirs
and Commotions, he thought it more expedient for that time to desist. But what
success soever that Affair had, he gave to all Liberty of Mass privately; and
Priests and Jesuits, who by the Law are guilty of Death if they set foot in
England, had never greater freedom, nor did they ever more boldly carry on
their Designs, in the Camp, Courts, and Pulpits, some of them being even raised
to Promotion; so that amongst the unstable and ill-grounded, they reaped no
small Harvest of Proselytes.

He creates Censurers of the Preachers out of every S^ct;
He appointed a Convention of Laymen and Churchmen, as well Presbyterians and
Independents, as also Anabaptists, who had power to judge of Promotions, and
the Collation of Ecclesiastical Benefices, vacant by Death or Deposition; to
call before them, and examine Competitors, put Questions to them concerning
their Manners and Learning, and especially about the Marks of the In-dwelling
of the Holy Spirit; and sometimes about Civil Matters, as, If they liked a
Popular State. It was lawful to these either to admit to, or debar from the
Cure of Souls, whom they pleased, without any regard to Ordination. I shall not
mention how much, according to the various Tempers of the Men, by
Solicitations, Promises, Gifts, Who basely minded their own Profit.
and Bribes, things were Symoniacally transacted in that kind of Office,
Laymen, Soldiers, Bankrupt Tradesmen, and Shopkeepers, being also admitted
into the Ministry, and mingled with some skilful Preachers who had been
Ordained.

He endears and obliges to himself Seculars, He studies to ingratiate himself
with all men, according to their various Humors: With the Nobility,
by specious Offices, such as were accommodated to the different Humors of the
Men. The Nobles and Great Men (for with some few of them he had an Intimacy) he
delighted with Raillery and Jesting, contended with them in mimical Gestures,
and entertained them with merry Collations, Music, Hunting, and Hawking. But
the Godly, The Godly,
and those that professed much Piety, he would humor with holy Conferences,
Prayers also (when it was needful), and Expounding of Sacred Scripture. O! how
he would magnify Divine Mercy, casting his Eyes up to Heaven, and laying his
Hand on his Breast, in show adoring his Maker with Tears and Sighs! When he was
in the Country, Country People,
he used once or oftener a Year, to give the Neighbors about, a Buck, to be run
down in his Park, and some Money to buy Wine to make merry with. And also the
Soldiers.
He would often make Feasts for the Inferior Officers, and whilst they were a
feeding, before they had satisfied their Hunger, cause the Drums to beat, and
let in the Private Soldiers to fall on, and snatch away the half-eaten Dishes.
The robust and sturdy Soldiers he loved to divert with violent and hurtful
Exercises; as by making them sometimes throw a burning Coal into one another
Boots, or Cushions at one another Heads. When the Officers had sufficiently
laughed, and tired themselves with these Preludes, he would wheedle them to
open their Hearts freely; and by that means he drew some Secrets from the
unwary, which afterward they wished might have been wrapped up in everlasting
darkness: whilst he, in the mean time, pumping the Opinions of all others,
concealed his own. Let not the Reader take it ill, that I have taken notice of
such Trifles; which, indeed, would not be worth the minding, had not Matters of
great moment depended on these idle and ridiculous Toys. For whatever he could
catch by that Artifice, he kept in his Mind, till he thought fit to discover
and apply them to his own Purposes.

Always glancing at his own Profit:
He was rich in Promises, but at the same time very sparing of Gifts; for he
never bestowed a Place or Office, till first he weighed it exactly in the
Scales of his own Profit, that he might thereby reap considerable Advantage to
himself; as, when he advanced his Countrymen, the more sagacious, or such as
were ready to undertake any thing, to Preferments. He had the knack of prying
into, and winding about the Minds of all, even of his Enemies themselves,
besetting them with Snares, Artifices, and Wiles. If he perceived any one
caught in the Trap, his way was to put him upon odious Employments, as Raising
and Collecting Assessments, informing against and accusing of others; and so he
endeavored to render him hateful to the rest: But if he was altogether
inflexible, and would not conform to his Humor, then would he turn him off,
and make him lose all his past long Services.

A most cunning Diver into the Manners of Men.
No Man dived more cunningly into the Manners of Men, and into the Tempers of
those with whom he had Business to do, nor sooner discovered their Talent; no
Man knew more of Men; nay, if there was any Man in all England that was
singular in any Art or Faculty, he could not be hid from him. And most
prodigious Hypocrite.
He had an absolute command over all the Passions and Affections of his own
Mind; could weep when he saw his Friend in Tears, yet without any Grief; he
would seem to hug in his Bosom, and show all kind of Civility to the Man whom
he hated: sometimes he would break out into Fury and Rage, and scold till he
came to Blows; but next day again be sorry for his Transports, and from thence
take occasion of sawning and slattering. But enough of the Tyrant: Let us now
say somewhat of the King.

He had not been long at Cologne, King Charles finds for the Duke of Gloucester
his Brother from France,
before he had News of his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, whom, being as yet a
Child, the Parricides had sent Beyond Sea, and for no other end, as was
believed by many, but that he might make Shipwreck of his Faith and Religion.
He lived, indeed, in great danger, amongst Roman Catholics, who tampered with
him, threatening him with the Everlasting Wrath of God, and Temporal
Punishments, if he embraced not the Roman Catholic Faith. But though he
bravely resisted the Temptation, and by an unparallelled Example maintained the
Orthodox Religion, the Kings Majesty, nevertheless, fearing his young and
tender years, Lest the Stripling might be in danger of h^ Religion amongst
Catholics.
lest at length he might be prevailed upon, either by the Importunity of those
Men, or the Allurements of his Mother, sent the Marquess of Ormond into France,
with pathetick and dehortatory Letters, to take him out of the Hands and
Custody of the Queen Mother, and bring him to Cologne. The Princess Mary came
also from Holland, and many other Nobles, who went with the King to Dus^^^dorp,
to visit the Prince of Neuburgh, and the (...) of Mentz. His Majesty also
saluted the (...) of Sweden upon her Journey into Italy, (...) from Frankfort
on the Mane; and ha^^^g ^^^en leave of the Princess, his Sister, whom (...)
accompanied to the Spaw-waters, he re^^^^ed to Cologne: (...) by a certain
Astrologer, Oneal.
Where the Bishop of Avignon, that he might gain Credit to Astrological
Predictions, sent him out of France a Scheme calculated by one Oneal a
Mathematician, wherein he predicted, That in the Year One thousand six hundred
and sixty, the King should certainly enter England in a triumphant manner;
which since, to our wonder, we have seen fulfilled, all the People triumphantly
rejoicing. Whether he foretold this by the Principles of his Art, or
fortuitously, I shall not determine. The King, notwithstanding, bends His
Thoughts toward England, watching every Opportunity to be laid hold on, for
the advancement of His Affairs.

In the mean time, whilst He with great tranquillity of Mind suffered greatest
Adversity, Cromwell had neither Rest nor Security in his Prosperity, Cromwell
continually dogged with anxious and biting Cares,
since the time the last Whirlwind had blown with so much fury and force;
whether he was lashed by the Furies of an ill Conscience, or terrified with
growing Dangers, he never was at ease. In the daytime his Looks were intent
upon new and unusual Spectacles; he took particular notice of the Carriage,
Manners, Habit, and Language of all Strangers, especially if they seemed
joyful: He never stirred abroad but with strong Guards, wearing Armor
underneath his Clothes, and Offensive Weapons, as a Sword, Faulchion, and
several Pistols; Thinks himself safe no where.
never coming back the straight Public Rode, or the same way, nor never
passing but in great haste and with speed. How many Locks and Keys are for the
Doors of his House? Seldom he slept above three Nights together in the same
Chamber; nor in any, that had not two or three Back-doors, Guards being set at
all of them.

Let us here mention one Passage, which though indeed ridiculous, had
nevertheless almost cost him his Life. Being much troubled with the Stone, he
used sometimes to swill down several sorts of Liquor, and then stir his Body by
some violent kind of Motion, as Riding hard on Horseback, or Jolting in a
Coach, that by such Agitation he might disburden his Bladder. Wherefore one day
he took with him his Secretary Thurlow, that they two by themselves might
privately use this Exercise, in a Coach in Hide-Park. When they were come
thither, Cromwell himself got up into the Coach-box, Getting into the Coach-box
to exercise his Body,
drawn by six stout Horses, lately presented him by the Count Oldenburgh: But
so soon as he began to snap his Whip, the Horses run away, and the Postilion
who was to guide them being thrown off of the Forehorse, they fall a fretting,
and grow unruly, and not knowing their Master, toss their new Driver from his
Seat upon the Pole; He was very near being torn to pieces alive by Horses.
who falling from thence upon the Ground, and being entangled in his Coat, was
dragged up and down, till having received many Bruises, and a Pocket-Pistol
going off in his Pocket, his Coat rent, and he escaped from the very Jaws of
Death; a Troop of Guards that waited without the Park, hastening in to his
Assistance, God Almighty thought it not fit that this Plague of England should
thus expire, though he was not far from the just punishment of his Crimes, that
is, from being torn to pieces alive by unruly Horses. But this made work for
Poets and Post-boys, and afforded pleasant Discourse in Taverns.

Of new he oppresses the Royalists, whom he spoils of the tenth part of their
Goods,
Cromwell now growing bare of Money, dispersed his Soldiers over the Country,
allowing them free Quarters instead of Pay; taking a pretext from a late
Insurrection, without any accusation or proof of a Crime, to plunder all those
who had been sequestrated for the Royal Cause, commanding them to pay the
tenth part of their Goods, and of their yearly Rents; unless they could
compound for it, by laying down a Sum of Money, as had been often done before.
The Public Faith, and Act of Oblivion stood them in no stead; though it had
cost vast Sums of Money, Withot any distinction.
or had been stipulated by Articles upon the surrender of Garrisons and strong
places: Nor did the innocence of many, who had not meddled in these Affairs, in
the least excuse them; all are equally involved in the Guilt, and must all
alike part with their Money.

He sets Major Generals over Provinces,
New Major Generals are appointed to raise the Moneys in all Counties, to the
number of fourteen, each having their Province, which perhaps reached three or
four Counties, over which, as amongst the Romans, the Military Tribunes, so
these were appointed with almost an absolute Power. Who had great power given
them over suspected persons.
And that they might not seem thus to domineer only for Money, they are
empowered to make inquiry into all those who had carried Arms for the King, or
had favored that Cause; those who had heretofore bought up Arms, or had hired
or let out Posthorses; into Private Assemblies; those who live at too high a
rate, when it is not known how they are able to afford it; into Vagabonds and
Idle Persons; into those that frequent any sort of Game; those who slight, or
are averse from the established Governments; into such as raise Tumults or
Sedition; those who haunt Taverns, Tippling and Eating-houses; into unlearned
and scandalous Ministers and Schoolmasters: All such the Major Generals had
power to inquire into, call before them, and punish. To these were joined
Assessors in the several Counties, Towns and Provinces, for most part chosen
out of the very Sink of the People, though others of better note were sometimes
mingled with them; these had Power upon common Fame, proper Knowledge, or bare
Conjecture, to inform against others, make them appear, and accuse them before
the Major General of the Army, with whom they sat as Assessors in giving
Judgment. Good God! how Princely these fellows carry it! Especially over
Ministers turned out of their Livings, who are not permitted so much as to
teach little Children.
how big and proud do they look, despising and slighting all others of what
rank and quality soever? Nothing pleased them more than to insult over, and
oppress the Ministers of the Church of England, sufficiently already born down;
who being long ago turned out of their Houses and Livings, these Blades would
not so much as suffer them to teach little Children, thereby to get Bread to
themselves and Families, unless some Fanatic interceded for them, which
happened rarely, and but to a few. The Royalists being right or wrong before
sequestered, must now suffer a Decimation; and be threatened with Imprisonment,
Bonds, and Transportation, which sometimes were actually inflicted. Licentious
indeed was the Rule of these Men, they carry all things Arbitrarily, and with
Despotick Authority; making themselves Judges of Controversies, (though they
were ignorant of, and despised all Forms and Methods of Process,) which they
constantly decided in favors of the Faction and their Party. They imposed new
and unusual Punishments; nay, and made new Laws: Raised People out of their
Beds at Midnight, and committed them to Goals; nay, and caused Constables, who
have the power of keeping the Peace in Country Villages, to be whipped, and put
in the Stocks; compelled Persons of Quality, who had appeared for neither
Party; nay, such as had been for the Parliament, and others also, who
heretofore by hereditary right had si^ten in the House of Lords, to come and
give their Votes in the Elections for Parliament Men. At length their
Exorbitant Power being suspected to Cromwell himself, they are wholly abolished.
Being at length drunk with that Exorbitant Power, they hardly acknowledged the
Protector himself, and begun to spurn against the mighty Tyrant; which made him
by degrees lessen their Power, and upon the approach of a Parliament wholly
abolish it.

About the same time Cromwell sends one of his Bedchamber Envoy into Poland,
there to Congratulate the Victories of the King of Sweden; with a present of
four brave Horses, as a Testimony of his Affection.

Whether or not, Private Affairs be worth the relating, may be a doubt; yet,
that the inclinations of the People may be known, I shall mention some
Passages. Some Imprisoned for the Royal Cause,
Davison, Holder, and Thorold, are brought into suspicion of acting for the
King, and of using endeavors to bring him in; therefore they are committed to
a Provost Marshal, to be shortly brought to Trial before the High Court of
Justice. In the mean time, having obtained leave from him to walk abroad, they
wheadled the Soldier into a by place, whom, because he refused to consent to
their escape, they Pistolled. For a Murder afterward committed, are brought to
a Trial, and acquitted by a Jury.
But being afterward apprehended, they are brought to their Trial for Murder
before the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in Westminster Hall, and
submitted themselves to the Verdict of a Jury of Twelve Men; a Trial that only
pleases our Contrymen, as being according to Law. Nevertheless, though they
were taken in the fact, and that the Judge himself had promised to use his
endeavors to have these Men Condemned; yet, I know not what scruples being
started, the Jury brought them in, Not guilty; which thing vexed Cromwell, who
had resolved with himself that they should certainly die for it.

This instance made him inveigh bitterly against the ancient way of Trial;
After the same manner Lilburn escaped Death; and Stawell thrice.
reflecting also how Lilburn two years before, by the same means escaped his
fury; and as luckily also, one Stawell, who was a Knight, notwitstanding the
Capitulation he had made upon the surrender of his Garrison, being thrice
brought to a Trial of his Life, (a barbarous thing, and contrary to Law, to be
again tried for one and the same crime) was thrice acquitted by the Jury. This,
though the strongest Bulwark against Tyranny, he affirms ought to be taken
away, as a hindrance to Justice; complaining, The Tyrant objects against the
Ancient Custom of a Jury of twelve Men.
That Sacred Justice was rashly put into the Hands of the Profane, Common
People; that the weightiest matters of Law did not depend upon the Sentences of
the Learned in the Law, but upon the Pleasure and Prejudices of a Company of
Men, destitute of all Ingenious Learning, nay, and almost of Common Sense. That
it was more consonant to Justice, that fifty Men chosen out of the flower of
the whole Nation, should determine of Lives and Fortunes. Under these Colors
and Pretexts, he subverted the wholesome Constitutions of our Forefathers, and
invented a new way of Butchery of his own.

But I desire that both our Contrymen and Foreigners would take notice, This
wholesome Custom is justied.
that this Custom of Trial by a Jury of Twelve Men, founded on Reason and
Equity, granted us by the singular favor both of the Saxon and Norman Kings,
and practiced amongst us time out of mind, though it was in this Age for a
short time intermitted, yet it was approved by the Public desires of all. The
truest Judges of the Commons, are the Commons; as of the Nobles, their Peers;
since Men of the same Rank and Quality are aptest to love, and not to envy one
another. Besides, if the Sheriff empannel any who bear you a grudge, you may
challenge and reject them. How are they to be accused of ignorance, since the
matter of Fact is known by Evidence, who allege, and by their Oath prove it in
open Court? and the point of Law they are to be directed by the Judges who are
versed therein. The Fact is better examined by a plain and uncorrupted
Conscience, than cunning, that serves the ends of another. The Judges and Bench
have only their Duty to mind, Consult for the common Interest, and with the
public good procure the favor of their Princes. On the other hand, those whom
the offended Conqueror appoints as Arbiters of your Life and Fortune, obeying
the pleasure of one Master, and obsequiously oppress you. Accused Subjects,
whom before they looked upon as Servants, they now sternly frown upon as
Public Enemies; and without more ado, find them guilty of Treason, and condemn
them to suffer accordingly. It is a Compendious and rare way of Justice,
indeed, to have the same Men to be the Accusers, Witnesses, Informers, Judges;
nay, and plainly, the Executioners, and very often also the Authors of the
Crimes.

About this time great Troubles happened in Piedmont in Savoy: for the Duke of
that Country, by Military force, drove many of the Reformed Religion out of
their own Habitations, not without Blood and Slaughter. Cromwell takes upon him
their Protection, writing for that end to the Suitzers and French King;
Cromwell assists the Protestants oppressed by the Duke of Savoy.
and having sent a Messenger to visit them, who might intercede for them, and
relieve their Wants with Money. For the Money that was charitably raised for
their use all over England, he partly, indeed, distributed amongst them, but
reserved the greatest part for other Times and Occasions.

At that time England was in a Fermentation, secretly designing a War; whereof
the Mediterranean felt the first Effort, which afterward fell upon Spain,
though not with the same force and violence. An Expedition into the
Mediterranean Sea under Blake;
Blake was made Admiral of the first Fleet, being ordered to sail into the
Mediterranean, there to give a Proof of our Strength by Sea, to block up
Algiers, Tripoly, and Tunis, and having redeemed the English Captives, to make
Peace with these Towns, or rather Nests of Pirates; which if they refused, to
reduce them by force to better terms. The Divan of Algiers, upon payment of the
just Ransoms, and having mutually interchanged honorable Presents with the
English, Who easily agreeing with the Algerines,
without any difficulty restore the Captives, and publish an Edict whereby free
Commerce for the future is allowed to the English Nation. He chastises the
Pride of those of Tunis, by burning their Ships in the very Harbor.
But he chastises the Insolence of those of Tunis, who had answered proudly,
having sent in some Ships, and burnt eight of theirs in Porto-Ferina; which
having broken and humbled the Infidels, at length they agree to a Peace.

Another greater into America.
But the other Expedition required greater preparatives; as being carried on by
the remains of the Dissenting and Disbanded Soldiers, to wit, of Essex,
Waller, and Massey's Armies, etc. some Royalists and Republicans also, but
sparingly joined with them. The first reason of it.
For these being for the most part indigent and dangerous at home, watched all
opportunities of innovation; and therefore business is found out for them
abroad, that they might not be troublesome to others, but ease England a little
by the departure of so many Men. The second.
The Protector made his brags openly, that by a War with Spain, the Nation
would attain to much Glory, Wealth, and large Dominions in the West Indies: The
third.
And not only cut off the Sinews of War whereby the Spaniards infested Europe,
but also hinder the Influx of the Spirits and Life of it, by intercepting their
Riches. Nor did he doubt of an easy and cheap Victory. The fourth.
For the Spaniards were but few, and those dispersed over the vast Territories
of America; and that it was credible, that the Natives, weary of their hard and
tedious Bondage, would upon the first glimpse of liberty, rise up against the
Tyranny of the Spaniards. That though the Towns were well fortified, yet they
were unprepared for making a resistance, the Soldiers being unaccustomed to
War; nay, though Garrisoned by such as had been inured to fighting, yet all
relief by Sea being stopped, and the Land not affording Provisions either for the
English, or the Inhabitants, they must in a short time be starved out. The
fifth.
The neighboring Plantations of our Contrymen, besides, accustomed to the
Climat and Diet, could yearly furnish supplies; so that there could neither be
any want of Soldiers for subduing the Provinces, nor of People to be
Transported into better Plantations. N^y, (and which went a great way,) there
was not wanting a certain Divine, that gave vent to the Ambition which flamed
sufficiently of it self, and who well understood the Enthusiastic humor of
Cromwell. This Man bid him, Go, and prosper; calls him, A Stone cut out of the
Mountains without Hands, that should break the Pride of the Spaniard, crush
Antichrist, and make way for the Purity of the Gospel over the whole World.
Swollen therefore with this hope, he sends for Officers and Commanders from all
Places, sollicits, wheadles them with good words and with fair Promises of
their past Arrears, and I know not what Mountains of Gold persuades them to
undertake the Voyage. He raises also private Soldiers, and fits out a
considerable Fleet; he makes Penn Admiral at Sea, Penn Admiral at Sea, and
Venables General at Land.
and Vennables General of the Land Forces, Men that could not set their Horses
together; joining with them Commissioners, who were acquainted with the
Humors, and Language of the Inhabitants, and skilful in the Harbors and
advantages of Places, with whose advice the Generals were to manage all
matters; and presently orders them to make sail to the Caribbee Islands, there
shortly to expect all necessary Provisions from England.

The Spaniard being afraid.
Whilst these things are carrying on in England, the Neighboring Princes were
at a stand what to think on it; but the Spaniard was most startled, who from
Dunkirk sent the Marquess of Leda to learn if he intended to keep the Peace
with him. But he from the Answers conjecturing the Design, speedily returns,
and repented too late of his too early honoring an Usurper.

They arrive first at Barbados;
In six or seven weeks time, with a fair Wind, they arrived at Barbados, the
most flourishing of all the Islands; from thence sailing to St. Christophers,
and other Circumjacent Islands, they raise nine or ten thousand Men, not so
much Soldiers, as Porters, Slaves, and Rogues, who in hopes of Booty, not with
design to undergo the Perils and Toils of a Military Life, engaged in the
Service; fitter to make up a number, than to sight. Trusting to this Army
(though I must confess some old Soldiers were mingled with them) Arms and
Ammunition not being as yet brought from England, (so that instead of Pikes
many were fain to make use of Poles) they sail to the Island of Hispaniola,
Afterward they sail to Hispaniola, with a design to proceed to Carthagena
after they had taken St. Domingo.
that surprising and making sure of St. Domingo the chief Town, and leaving
there a Magazine with as many Soldiers as they could spare, they might proceed
to Carthagena; but when they came in view of St. Domingo, having landed part of
the Soldiers near the Town, whilst the rest fetched a compass about, that they
might attack it on the other side, the signal is expected. But these having
fatally sailed ten Leagues beyond the place appointed for the landing, put
ashore in another place, and marching through a Sandy and thick Woody Country,
But they are first overcome by the heat and thirst,
they were so scorched and burnt up with heat and thirst, that some being quite
spent, fell dead by the way; many straggling to find somewhat to assuage their
thirst, were killed by the Enemy: the rest hardly able to go or stand upon
their Legs, at length join their Companions. There, Orders were published,
which were as grievous to their Minds as the drought had been to their Bodies,
whereby They are commanded upon pain of Death to bring all the Gold, Silver,
and Rich Goods that they should find, into a Common Treasury. The hope of booty
had hitherto kept up their Spirits; but now being destitute of all comfort, and
sensible of their present and past fatigues, they were setting forward on their
march toward St. Domingo; when after a sudden volley of small shot, Then by
the Inhabitants,
three hundred Cow-hunters armed with Lances break out of the Woods upon them,
and having put them into disorder killed them till they were weary. But next
Day, the Army being refreshed as well as they could, their design succeeded
somewhat better.

At length drawing off their Forces, they bid adieu to that unhappy Land,
having lost six hundred Men or more. Then they set sail toward Jamaica, to the
Westward, a pleasant Island, and, as it were, a Garden of Delights; which they
easily become Masters of, the Spaniards Capitulating to be gone; And at length
by a Plague in Jamaica, whither they had betaken themselves.
but there a direful Plague, the avenger of Wickedness, raged amongst the
English, which within six Months infected and swept away the whole Army except
two Soldiers. Afterward new Soldiers, and fresh supplies coming by little
and little to their refreshment, they drive all the Spaniards out of Jamaica,
which extends in length threescore Leagues, and thirty in breadth, and bravely
repulsed those that attempted to come back again; becoming Masters of the whole
Island, and raising Forts in several places for their defense. Thus Divine
Wisdom baffles the Pride and Vanity of Man.

The Spaniard declaring War, Cromwell assists the French upon these Conditions.
The Spaniard to be revenged Proclaims War against Cromwell: And he on the other
hand makes a League with the French, that at the Peril and Charges of others,
he might give the Spaniard his Hands full on it. It was therefore agreed, That
Cromwell should send six thousand Men over into Flanders, to be paid by the
French; and that the second Town that should be taken, should belong to the
English; and that CHARLES King of England, with all His Court and Family,
should be Banished France, lest he might any way be aiding and assisting to the
Enemy. The Duke of York, the Kings Brother, forseeing that, renounces the
French Service, wherein he had hitherto bravely behaved himself under Marshal
Turen; King CHARLES and the Duke of York being invited, go into Flanders,
and shortly after both the King and He, are by Don John of Austria and others
invited to come into Flanders, having a Pension of Nine thousand pounds English
a year settled upon them, which his Majesty after his return into England fully
repaid. Where the Duke serves the Spaniard.
They came first to Brussels; and there the Duke is made General of the
English, Scots and Irish, who left the French Army at the Kings Command, and
now served the Spaniard.

Manasses Ben Israel, a Jew, desires liberty for his Nation to live and Trade
in England.
At that time one Manasses Ben Israel, a Jewish Rabbi, came from Holland, and
desired leave of the Protector that the Jews might be suffered to live in
England, and enjoy a Free Trade, using many Arguments for obtaining that
Favor; as, in the first place, The Innocence of their Lives, and the Gain that
would accrue from their Trade; and others easy to be deduced from the Native
Genius and Qualities of that People: But the advantage he most boasted of, was,
their Art in giving the best Intelligence, seeing they knew the secret Designs
and Counsels of all Princes; these he promises to discover to him, and at the
same time to defeat the Counsels that might be prejudicial to his Interests.
Lastly, which was the strongest Argument of all, he promises a great Sum in
ready Money, and some Thousands of Pounds yearly to be paid into the Exchequer.
To which Cromwell listens, in hopes of gain:
Such golden Promises, with the sweet smell of Gain, soon prevailed, the
Exchequer especially at that time being exhausted, much Debt contracted, and
Cromwell casting about all ways how he might have Money to defray the Public
Charges. But a fair and honest Pretext was wanting: Therefore, on a day
prefixed, But having first consulted Divines,
Divines are called to meet, and give their Judgments about this Matter; Why,
since we pray to God for the Conversion of the Jews, we should banish them our
Society; as if we, who are enlightened by the bright Beams of the Gospel, ought
to be afraid of our Religion because of Jews? He being assured of a great many
Votes, made no doubt but that they would comply with him: But, alas! what a
Tide of Contradiction had he to stem? Of whom some, contrary to his
expectation, are of a contrary Opinion.
Some Divines on the day appointed disputing to the contrary, not without some
inward heat and anger, so that they seemed rather to decline than promote the
Determination of the Controversy, by opposing this rapid Motion. However, he
resolved to connive, and allow them liberty to trade in England, with an
Indulgence of their Religion according to the Rites of Moses, without any
public Examination going before, or (as it is usual amongst Catholics) coming
yearly after, and without teaching or catechizing them.

The English Fleet, Commanded by Montague and Blake,
But this Year was famous for the Actions of Mountague, since Earl of Sandwich,
and of Blake: For they with a Joynt-Commission commanding the Fleet, whilst
they were cruising upon the Coast of Spain, without the Straits Mouth, met with
Eight great Spanish Ships, whom Stainer presently engages with Three Frigates
only; for the rest could not come up because of the Wind: but with so much
Bravery and Resolution he plied them with his Broadsides, that within three or
four Hours space he mastered them all; Defeats eight Spanish Ships richly
laden; whereof two were taken.
one being sunk, another burnt, two escaping into Cadiz, and two more forced
ashore and broke to pieces, wherein were lost Sixty thousand Wedges of Silver,
besides other rich Goods of vast Value. However, two of them fell into the
hands of the Victorious, with a great deal of Coined Gold, to the quantity of
Six hundred thousand Pieces, much Silver, curiously-wrought Plate, and other
things of value, together with two Sons of the Marquess de Baydexio, Don Joseph
de Savega, and Don Francisco de Lopes; the Marquess himself, with his Lady, and
Daughter, who was to be married to the Son of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, being
burnt. The two Brothers that remained alive, were by Cromwell discharged
without any Ransom.

England now being sufficiently plagued by those petty Tyrants whom they called
Major-Generals, A second Parliament, c^nsisting only of Co^moners, wherein
Scots and Irish are admitted,
who (as we said before) began to be uneasy to all, another Parliament is
called; but not after the ancient manner, but only made up of the Commoners or
People; Thirty being called out of Scotland, and as many from Ireland; Cromwell
tampering with many, and the Major Generals hindering the Elections and Votes of
several, that the House might not be filled with Republicans. In the mean while
no Man is suffered to enter the House, till first he subscribed to the
Authority of the Protector; so that by that means most of the Republicans of
either sort are excluded from sitting. Suits better with Cromwells Interests
Sir Thomas Widdrington is chosen Speaker. Many things passed here in favor of
Cromwell: as, That it should be Treason to conspire his Death: and, That the
Royal Family should be renounced. Nor is it in this place to be omitted, that
about this time many things were publicly talked of to the prejudice of the
King: as, That he was Consumptive, and could not live long; That he was also
Melancholy, and inclinable to a Monastic Life, laying aside all desire of
Government; and that the Duke of York was a Professed Papist; that by that
means they might wheedle over the credulous and unwary to their Party, by
removing every thing that might curb and keep them in awe. The Customs are
renewed; a vast Triennial Tax also imposed upon all Houses built upon new
Foundations in London, and witbin Ten miles round, that every one of them
should pay a years Rent.

At length, Since they would have made him King,
at the Motion of a certain Citizen of London, the Parliament resolves to give
Cromwell the Title of King, with most of the Ensigns of Royalty, which he had
already long ago usurped; and many Members apply themselves to him, beseeching
him that he would vouchsafe to accept of it: which he sometimes made a show as
if he would embrace; but by and by again appeared doubtful, and at length
shifted it off.

I think it will not displease the Reader if I give in this place a short hint
at the main Reasons whereby the Members of Parliament endeavored to incline
Cromwell to accept of the Title of King, which inwardly he was most ambitious
of, though outwardly he affected a reluctance. This Affair was by the
Parliament committed to the diligent management of six or seven of their
number. Alleging these Reasons for it:
These Men urged, That the name of King had always been in vogue from the very
beginning in this Nation, for the space of above thirteen hundred years; that
the Person of the King had sometime displeased the People; but that the Title
was never before abrogated; that moreover the same was fitted to our Laws, and
the Humor of the People, and approved not only by the Votes of the preceding,
but of this present Prarliament also. To which he answering,
Cromwell answers, That these were persuasive, but no cogent Arguments; that
the Title of Protector might be adapted to the Laws; that Providence was
against them, which has now altered the Name; and that he could not without a
Crime displease so many Godly and Religious Men. But the Commissioners reply,
They strongly reply.
That the Title ought to be fitted to the Laws, not the Laws to Titles; nay,
that the Innovation of Titles is suspected as a Cloak for Underhand Tyranny,
and that the disadvantages of such a kind of change are never felt in in the
same Age; for which very Reason, when King James came to the Crown of this
Kingdom, the Parliament would not give way that in his Title, instead of
England and Scotland, he should insert Great Britain. That by refusing the
Title of King, he does not derogate so much from himself, as from the Nation;
whose Honor it is to be governed by a King. That the supreme Magistrate was
never designed by the Name of Protector, unless for a time, during the Nonage
of the King, for the Administration of the Government, and a Title for the most
part unfortunate. That that Name at present having its Original from the
Soldiers, sounded Victory, and might be lawfully rescinded by another
Parliament. That the Title of King being once abolished, the Government would
become mutable and unsafe, not durable, if the Foundation tottered; that in the
space of five years it had been three or four times altered, and was yet as
wavering, as heretofore the alteration of Title was ominous to the Roman
People, who neither could endure the Name of Prince, nor of Perpetual Dictator,
nor of the Prince of the Senate, till at length the Pleasure of Caesar went for
Law. The chief Argument.
But the strongest Argument of all was, The Statutes of the Ninth of Edward the
Fourth, and of the Third of Henry the Seventh, wherein it was enacted, That no
Man carrying Arms, though unjustly, for the King in being, shall be punished
for it; and that in the late Wars, more trusting to that Law, were in Arms for
the King, than of those who loved his Cause. That as to Providence, it was no
less conspicuous in changing the Government again into Monarchy, for avoiding
confusion, and quelling a tumultuous People, than in changing the Name of a
Monarch into that of Protector. That, lastly, Good and Godly Men would submit
to a Decree of Parliament, though perhaps they might seem to differ in private.
A great deal of time is spent betwixt Cromwell and the Committee in mutual
Answers and Replies; but after much affectation of Words, they still fell upon
the same Heads again.

There was no less to do with the private Addresses of different Parties; Who
they were that would have had him take the Title of King.
most of the Pettyfogging Lawyers, the Commissioners for the Great Seal, the
Judges, and some of the Officers of the Army, relying upon the former Reasons,
entreat, urge, and earnestly importune him, That he would consent to take upon
him the Name of King. And who on the other hand as fiercely opposed it.
On the other hand, the Anabaptists, Sectarians, and Democratical Republicans,
by Letters, Conferences, and Monitory Petitions, wearied him with their
importunities to the contrary. Many also of the Soldiers and inferior
Officers, laying their Heads together, frame a Petition to the same purpose.
But he, during the whole transaction, dismisses all with the same uncertainty
and doubts; however he severely chid the Soldiers, biding them mind their own
business, for what had they to do with the Resolutions of Parliament? that they
should look to their Arms, and keep themselves modestly within their own
bounds, not meddling in Civil Affairs; but that if they did forget their Duty
and Obedience, neither God Almighty, nor he himself would be wanting to reduce
them into order.

The Cavaliers for several reasons were for the first Advice.
The Cavaliers are Tooth and Nail for his complying with the first Advice, as
being a Matter which they thought would not a little contribute to the reviving
of their Cause, whilst continual jangling and and dissentions would thereby
arise betwixt the Republicans and Cromwell; and the Office of King being again
introduced, the only Quarrel would then be betwixt two Families, which of the
two had the better Title, the one having it by undoubted right, and the other
by none at all. And besides, thereby it would be made manifest for what cause
the War was in a great part begun, to wit, the sole Ambition of Cromwell. But
he having taken time to weigh with himself all their Opinions, thought it more
modest and suitable to his Interest, to retain his more than Regal Authority,
circumscribed by no Laws, under the submissive Title of Protector, Cromwell
rejecting the Crown which be so earnestly coveted,
than by coveting an August Name, render himself ridiculous to the World. At
length having called the Parliament unto him, He tells them, That at present he
durst not take upon him the Administration of the Government with the Title of
King; though he was resolved in future Parliaments to introduce it by degrees,
how humbly soever at present he carried himself, and utterly rejected the same.

I cannot tell whether or not it be worth the mentioning, what many interpreted
as a bad presage. Whilst the Members of Parliament were going up to the
Banqueting House in Whitehall, to have the last Debate with Cromwell about that
Affair, his eldest Son Richard being in company with them, the old Stairs by
which they mounted being overcharged with weight broke with them, so that many
fell to the ground; of whom not a few had bruises in their Legs and Arms, and
amongst the rest Richard being grievously wounded, lay by it a long time.

But since Cromwell refused the Title of King, With much ado, he obtained from
the Parliament the Title of Protector,
the Parliament, by the superiority of two Voices only, confirmed to him that
of Protector, which he had taken before; and that they might not seem to have
done nothing at all, they agreed about reforming the Instrument of Government,
and added a House of Peers, or Lords, to be chosen by him, That these Men might
as occasion offered, be a check sometimes to the Commons when they proceeded
too hastily. They give him likewise Power of appointing his Successor or next
Heir. That no Man, however lawfully elected according to the abovementioned
Conditions, should under any pretext whatsoever, be excluded from sitting in
Parliament.

And is solemnly Inaugurated by the Speaker.
On a day appointed the Members march to Westminster Hall, there solemnly to
Inaugurate Cromwell, and to receive his consent. So soon as he had mounted a
Stage erected for that purpose, round which the Members of Parliament sat,
Widdrington the Speaker reaching to him the Ensigns of Majesty, to wit, a long
Purple Robe lined wtth Ermin, the Holy Bible, a Sword and Scepter, thus he
speaks to him, standing near him under a Canopy of State. This Robe of Purple
is an Emblem of Magistracy, and imports Righteousness and Justice; when you
have put on this Vestment, I may say, you are a Gown-man. This Robe is of a
mixed Color, to show the mixture of Justice and Mercy. Indeed a Magistrate must
have two Hands, Plectentem and Amplectentem, to cherish and to punish. The
Bible is a Book that contains the Holy Scriptures, in which you have the
happiness to be well versed. This Book of Life consists of two Testaments's,
the Old and New: The first shows Christum Velatum; the second, Christum
Revelatum; Christ Veiled and Revealed: It is a Book of Books, and does contain
both Precepts and Examples for good Government. Here is a Scepter not unlike a
Staff, for you are to be a Staff to the weak and poor: It is of Ancient use in
this kind. It Is said in Scripture, That the Scepter shall not depart from
Judah. It was of like use in other Kingdoms; Homer the Greeek Poet calls Kings
and Princes, Scepter-bearers. The last thing is a Sword, not a Military, but
Civil Sword: it is a Sword rather of Defense than Offense; not to defend your
self only, but your People also. If I might presume to fix a Motto upon this
Sword, as the Valiant Lord Talbot had upon his, it should be this, Ego sum
Domini Protectoris, ad protegendum Populum; I am the Protectors, to protect his
People. Then having given him his Oath, and read over the Articles of
Government, with sound of Trumpet he is Proclaimed Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. but with faint
Acclamations from the People. Hence you may understand what, and how great
things the Power of a Tyrant, counterfeit Virtue, Lawyers fetches, fawning
hope, anxious fear, love of novelty, and specious pretexts, could, against all
right and reason, bring to pass, amongst Men in all things else, for most part,
very Prudent and Wise: That in the like case I may use the Words of another.
These things being thus performed, the Parliament shortly after were dismissed
for three or four Months, and Cromwell has time to make choice of his Peers for
the other House.

But we must not omit to take notice in this place of that unbridled
licentiousness of Heretics, which grew greater and greater daily. The sink of
Heretics of these times:
Besides Arrianism against the Divinity of our Savior Jesus Christ, and other
abominable Errors, which one Biddle profanely and yet safely maintained before
the Parliament; the Blasphemies also of Copps against the Holy Name of God; and
Fry, who heretofore scattred his Poisons in the Parliament House; besides
Erbury, who as with impunity he sowed the monstrous Seeds of Heresies amongst
the Soldiers, and in the City, whilst he was in health, so dying he breathed
out his last in Blasphemy; Saltmarsh also, and other Sectarians, whose
Fanatical Errors, by the Enthusiasm of Cromwell, and the other Officers of the
Army, were again conjured from Hell; a new and unheard of Generation of Quakers
sprung up, of whom the Parliament brought before them a considerable
Ringleader, that I shall now briefly discourse of.

Of whom Naylor had the impudence to give himself out for Jesus Christ;
James Naylor was the Man, who had heretofore served under Lambert, and now had
the impudence to personate Jesus Christ, imitating his Words, Looks, and
Carriage: And to so great madness he grew, that his Boldness increasing through
the Applauses of some, and the Admiration of others, he would represent him in
all things. For mounting a Horses Colt, he came riding toward the City of
Bristol, those of his Sect strewing the Way with Leaves and Boughs of Trees,
and crying, Hosanna, Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the
Lord. But the Madness stops not here neither; for the distracted Fellow affects
Divine Honors, as if he could raise the Dead, heal the Sick, and fast after
the Example of Christ. At length the Parliament tired out with the continued
Clamours of Accusers, having cited him to appear before them, sentence him to
be publicly Whipped, Until he was Whipped and Imprisoned, who deserved a
thousand times to be put to Death.
Pilloried, and committed to perpetual Imprisonment. But the Parliament being
dissolved, this Monster of Mankind was set at liberty by an Order of the
Rump-Parliament, when it revived again.

Sundercome a Republican plots against Cromwell.
About that time Cromwell's Life was in danger from one Sundercome a Republican.
It was said, that he was suborned by Alonso de Cardenas, formerly Ambassador
in England from the King of Spain, and then living in Flanders, to kill him. He
had often taken a House fit for committing the Fact; but his Hopes always
failing him, he got him a Blunderbuss that could discharge twelve Bullets at a
time, resolving with that, out of an Arbor upon the side of the Rode, where the
Way grows narrow, at Hammersmith near London, to shoot Cromwell as he past in
his Coach to Hampton Court, and forthwith mounting a fleet Horse, make his
Escape on the opposite side. But because there was a necessity of having
another privy to the Design, when the time that he was to go drew near, one
Toop belonging to the Guards is engaged in the Plot. Who being betrayed by
another Conspirator, is brought to a Trial, and condemned:
But one Assassine betrays another; Toop, Sundercome: who that he might be the
first that suffered for Treason under this Government, by a new Statute is
arraigned, and condemned for conspiring the Death of the Protector. However,
some few hours before the time of his designed Execution, But he prevented the
Executioner by a sudden Death.
he was found dead in his Bed, though his Body appeared found, there being no
Marks of Violence either inwardly or outwardly to be discovered. Of which
thing, according to the diversity of Humors, People might severally judge as
they pleased.

In the mean while the fiercer Fifth-Monarchy-men and Republicans, making all
the Preparations they could for a sudden Insurrection against the new Monarchy
in the Bud, are discovered, The Republicans rising are apprehended.
and presently seized; amongst other things, a Standard being taken, bearing a
Lion Couchant, with this Inscription, Quis suscitabit eum? Who shall rouse him?
This Rising then being wholly defeated, Lawson a Sea-Commander, Colonel
Harrison, Rich, and several Officers of the Army, with Danvers, and others, who
could not endure the Regal Authority of Cromwell, are clapped up in Prison.
Lambert also, when he perceived that all his Hopes of Succession were cut off
by an Ordinance of Parliament, began to tack about, and strike in with the
Republicans: Lambert being Disbanded,
Which so soon as Cromwell had notice of, he presently recalled his Commission,
and disbanded him, Fleetwood is put in his place.
appointing Fleetwood to be next to himself in Power; for he thought it neither
safe nor fit, that he should have the Chief Command in the Army, who professed
himself an open Enemy to the Civil Government.

Cromwells Lords of the very dregs of the People,
Cromwell, in the mean time, that he might by fair and gentle means draw over
more of the Republicans, and endear them to himself, promoted many of them into
the House of Lords, that they might seem to share with himself in the
Government; but such mean Fellows, of no Birth nor Merit, raised out of the
Dregs of the Rabble, who were contemptible and ridiculous to the real Lords and
Peers, could neither give nor receive any Splendor or Nobility. Would ye have
a List of some of them? Let Pride then lead the Dance; a most abject Rascal,
who had served a Brewer; and that he might now with greater security cheat the
Public, he purchases a Grant for Brewing Beer for the Protector's Family, and
for serving the Fleet at Sea. Huson was another, who not long before cobbled
old Shoes in a Stall. Berkstead, who heretofore sold Needles, Bodkins, and
Thimbles, and would have run on an Errand any where for a little Money; but who
now by Cromwell was preferred to the Honorable Charge of Lieutenant of the
Tower of London. Cooper, who had been a Haberdasher of Small-wares in
Southwark. Berry, a Woodmonger; and Whaley, a broken Clothier, who had removed
into Scotland until the breaking out of the Wars. I shall name no more of them,
that I may not turn the Readers Stomach. In the mean time, Some of the Nobility
being mingled with them who disdain, such companions:
he joins to them for Companions five or six of the Ancient Nobility, and gives
them place in the House of Lords; who nevertheless refuse to herd with the
rest, and all refrain the House, that they might not pollute their Blood by
such a Contagion. Others called out of the House of Commons to this Other
House, prefer their own Seats, and will not be reckoned amongst those Peers.
The two Sons, and one Son-in-Law of Cromwell, Falconberge also his Son-in-law,
and both his own Sons.
are brought into this House: For it is to be observed, that he had lately
married his two younger Daughters (the eldest having formerly married to
Cleypole) the one to Mr. Rich, Nephew to the then Earl of Warwick, who lived
not long after; and the other to the Lord Falconberge, of whom now we speak;
Henry Cromwell his younger Son, whom he made Deputy of Ireland, and Richard the
elder: of whom, since I am to mention him in the Sequel, it will be fit I speak
a little at present, before I leave this House of Lords.

That Cromwell might remove all suspicion of arrogating to himself and Family
the Supreme Authority, Of whom he sends Richard to lead a Country Life,
he sends his eldest Son Richard into the Country, to take his Pleasure in
Hunting and Hawking: Where he, a Man of a good Nature, courteous and affable,
far from the Tricks of his Father, receiving the Common People hospitably,
diverting himself with the Gentry, and behaving himself civilly to all, besides
many good Offices that he did at Court and elsewhere, not only gained the
Applause of the People, but obliged a great many Persons of Note and Quality.
But at length his Father took him off of these Toys, and by degrees inured him
to Public Business; ordering him first to sit in the Committee of Trade, then
in the House of Commons, and now at last having called him, as we have just now
said, up to the House of Lords. Who at length is made Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, and one of his Father^s Privy Council.
Besides, he made him Chancellor of the University of Oxford, one of his
Privy Council, and a Colonel of the Army; that he might show him not only to
the People, but to the Soldiers; and that he might insinuate with all, and as
much as he could make himself Friends by Conversation.

A Parliament of two Houses, who agree ill betwixt themselves, the Bastard
Peers being despised by the Lower House.
And now the day was come when the whole Parliament was to meet, as well the
Republicans, who in the beginning of the Parliament had been excluded by
Cromwell, for refusing to subscribe to the Condition required, as the Lords or
Peers who by Oliver's Writ filled the Upper House. But the Reader cannot but
wonder, how disdainfully the Members of the Lower House looked upon those new
Lords, asking them with scorn, By what Authority they sat? to what end? and
for what purpose were they called hither? Nay, they could not refrain from
ridiculing and scoffing at them, nor be induced to have any thing to do, or
consult in common with these Men. On the contrary, the Lords (as they were
instructed by Cromwell) fawned, complied, wheadled, and courted their
Friendship, leaving no means unessayed whereby they might soften and make them
more gentle. But they continue to be morose, untractable, and refractory to
every thing: Which Cromwell observing, and especially because he understood
that the Cavaliers were hatching new Designs; that the King was in a readiness,
with I know not how many thousand Men, to invade England; and that the Marquess
of Ormond was really in the Land, secretly laboring to raise the Country; for
these Reasons he forthwith dissolved that fictitious, and, as I may say, And
therefore that Parliament is dissolved. New Designs of the Cavaliers are
disappointed by Cromwell, they being discovered by secret Spies.
Comical Parliament.

It was not long before the Stirs began more clearly to appear; one Corkar, a
Parson in Sussex, who nevertheless had heretofore had a hand in killing
Rainsborough at Doncaster, Sir Richard Willis, and many others, who had served
and been well rewarded by the King, and had opportunity of passing to and again
betwixt Cromwell and His Majesty, and discovering all secret Intrigues, having
basely betrayed the Design. A General Insurrection was designed almost all over
England, especially in Hull, London, Sussex, Surrey, and many other Places;
which the King himself, with Foreign Forces commanded by Marsin, intended to
Head. But all proved in vain; the Matter, as we have said, having been
discovered to Cromwell by treacherous and clandestine Spies.

The Marquess of Ormond with much ado made his Escape, having by the Assistance
of Doctor Quarterman procured a Boat in Sussex: Many are brought to Trial for
their Life.
And now a vast number of Persons apprehended, are loaded with the suspicion of
guilt: and therefore the High Court of Justice, a true Object of Derision, had
it not been polluted with Blood, is again appointed, Lisle being President.
Before this Court are brought Mordant Son to the Earl of Peterborough, two
Stapleys, Woodcock, Sir Henry Slingsby, Hewet Doctor of Divinity, Mallory,
Rivers, Dyke, and many more. Hewet is condemned for Contumacy, in not
acknowledging the Authority of the Court. Slingsby, because being formerly a
Prisoner in Hull, he had treated with Waters about the Delivery of Hull-Fort
into the hands of the King. Mordant is absolved by the Majority only of one
Voice; when within a quarter of an hour after Pride came in, who would
certainly have voted to the contrary: so near he seemed to the very Jaws of
Death. Woodcock defended himself so ingeniously, that he came off. The rest
were either not found Guilty, or obtained Cromwell's Pardon for accusing of
others, or, in short, were condemned of High Treason. Hewet and Slingsby were
both beheaded. Two of the more remarkable are beheaded: Four others drawn,
hanged, and quartered
But four others were drawn, hanged, and quartered, their Privy Members and
Bowels burnt, their Heads set up upon London Bridge, and their Quarters upon
four Gates of the City. The Common sort being safe by their Number, after a
long Imprisonment, at length denying the Fact upon Oath, are dismissed. Thus
they who for attempting to slay a Tyrant deserved a Triumphal Arch, and highest
Honors, falling into the bloody Hands of their Enemies, suffer a cruel and
ignominious Death.

Cromwell for greater security levies new Troops of H^rse, consisting of
Volunteers.
But that he might provide against such Stirs for the future, and more securely
settle his illgot and unsafe Government, besides the Soldiers of the Army, he
levies Troops of Horse in the several Counties, which for the most part were
made up of Volunteers, whom either ambition of domineering, hope of Preferment,
prospect of Booty, or at least the tediousness of an idle and lazy Life,
allured into the Service. Of these he gave the Command to some of his Relations
and fast Friends. Though at present their Pay was but small, Eight pound a
year, yet by getting into profitable Places, and plundring the Cavaliers upon
all occasions, they were in good hopes of feathering their Nests. Their Duty
was to watch over the Counties, to be present at Public Fairs and other
numerous Meetings, to hinder private Assemblies and Concourses of People, to
exact the Taxes from those who were either slow or unwilling to pay them, by
Free-Quarters, and Fines imposed upon them; to seize, besides, suspected
Persons, search their Houses, take from them the Arms which they might have for
defending themselves against Thieves in the Nightime, and, in a word, to
suppress instantly all Stirs, if any happened, in the bud.

Blake is again, but now the last time, to appear upon the Stage. He being this
year sent to cruise in the Atlantic Ocean, had Intelligence that the Spanish
Fleet, richly laden with Silver and Plate, had out of fear put into the Island
of Tenariff, resolving to keep in the Port of Sancta Cruce, until Blake should
be forced to return home, either by the Winter Weather, or the want of Victuals
and Provisions. Wherefore steering his Course thither, he found the Harbor in
shape of a Crescent, defended by seven Forts lying round it, and two Castles
placed at the Points, with seventeen Ships riding therein, their Heads standing
toward the Mouth of the Harbor, that they might fire with greater certainty
upon those that offered to enter: nor could the Governor forbear to jear and
slout at the English. Blake with unparalleled boldness burns the Spanish Fleet
in the very Harbor of Sancta Cruce.
Blake therefore entering the Mouth of the Harbor with his Frigates, thunders
Broadsides and small Shot against the Castles, till the Soldiers flying from
thence, he Manned his Boats with Seamen, and sent them in, who destroyed and
burnt all the Spanish Ships that were there. Which being done, he made use of a
favorable Wind, which as it had brought him thither, so carried him off again,
more satisfied with his Revenge than Booty.

His Death, Character; and Actions.
But farewell to Blake, who in that Expedition died of a Scurvey and Dropsy: A
Man deserving Praise even from an Enemy; who having heretofore diligently plied
his Studies, took his Degree of Master of Arts in Wadham-College in Oxford, and
lived long a quiet and Country-life in Somersetshire; till afterward, the Civil
War breaking out, he was engaged into the Service by some Parliamentarians, and
defended Lime and Taunton even to a Miracle against the King. Then being
advanced to a Command at Sea, he subdued the Isles of Silly at home; after
which, being honored with the Title and Place of Admiral, he became famous by
many Actions abroad: For he humbled the Pride of France, reduced Portugal into
order, broke the Strength of the Dutch, and drove them off of the Sea,
suppressed the Pirates, and, lastly, triumphed twice over Spain: In this alone
to be blamed, that he stuck to the Side of the Parricides.

The Dane makes War against the Swede, ^ow victorious in Poland.
About that time a dreadful War broke out betwixt two Northern Nations.
Frederick the Third, King of Denmark, egged on by his Confederates the King of
Poland and Elector of Brandenburg, invades the Territories of Carolus Gustavus
King of Sweden, then Victorious in Poland; The Swede hastening his return,
invades Denmark, revenges himself on the Dane, and reduces him to extremity.
and breaking the Truce, besieges Bremersford, and other strong Places in
Bremen. Which so soon as Carolus Gustavus had Intelligence of, leaving Poland
the best way he could, he marched his Forces through Gassue, Pomerania, and the
Duchy of Mecklenbourg, into Holstein, recovers what he had lost, and drives
Frederick, who was unable to give him Battle, into the Islands; then he
over-runs all Jutland and Holstein; and having the opportunity of a hard
Winter, (not without danger to himself and Army,) he boldly marched over the
Sea, upon the Ice, into Fuinen; and having subdued it, and the Islands about,
one after another, in the same manner he enters Zeeland, divided from them by a
narrow Frith, where, by the same Storm of a sudden War, he had overwhelmed
Copenhagen, had not a Peace been made at Roschild, by the Mediation of Medows,
(who with Jepson was by Oliver sent from England as Mediators of Peace, he to
the Swede, and the other to the Dane) and the Intervention of the Ambassadors
of other Princes: for which timely Service King Frederick made Medows Knight of
the Elephant, and a Nobleman of Denmark: And King Charles the Second of
England, as a Testimony of His Favor for the good Offices done to his Kinsman,
honored him likewise with Knighthood.

The War breaking out again afterward betwixt the Kings, the Swede having
possessed himself of Croneberg, and the greatest part of Denmark, and blocked
up Copenhagen by a long and obstinate Siege, both Parties implore the
Assistance of Neighboring Nations; Afterward he demands Assistance from the
English, and the Dane from the Dutch.
Carolus Gustavus, of the English; and Frederick, of the Dutch. The Swede
wanted Ships and Seamen; the Dane, all kind of Relief, to wit, Soldiers, Ships,
and Ammunition. The Swede offered the English for their Security, and a Reward
of their Pains, Gluckstadt, with a small Territory on the other side of the
Elbe (which nevertheless was not in his power), and Leth-Fort upon the River
Wese. But the English demanding either Gottenberg on the Baltic Sea near the
Sound, or Elsenburg that lies in the Mouth of the Baltic, Cromwell and the
Swede disagree about the Terms. Cromwell sends thither a Fleet, and two
Mediators.
Nevertheless, Oliver fits out a pretty considerable Fleet in England; and,
that he might watch all Opportunities of advantage for the English, sends it
into Denmark, under the Command of Goodson; but the Ice and Winter-Colds
hindered it from advancing beyond Scagen: and at length Richard sent a greater,
under the Command of Admiral Montague, who was afterward made Earl of
Sandwich, and Knight of the Garter. But the Dutch being secure that the English
would not interfere and molest them, that they might maintain a Free Trade
through the Sound, and at the same time assist the King of Denmark, The Dutch
likewise assist the Dane, having fought the Swedes at Sea.
reduced to the utmost extremity, fitted out a Fleet, under the Command of
General Opdam, provided with all Necessaries; which having engaged in a
Sea Fight with the Swedes, with equal Loss on both Sides, they supplied
Copenhagen with Ammunition, and plenty of all Provisions.

The French by the assistance of the English take Montmidy; and presently after
Mardyke Fort, which is given to the English to be defended.
To Flanders now the series of this short History calls me, where the Affairs of
the Spaniards began to decline and grow daily worse and worse. A well appointed
Army of six thousand English under the Command of Reynolds is landed at Calis;
of which some assist the French in taking Montmidy, and being afterward all
joined with the French, they take Mardyke Fort two Miles distant from Dunkirk,
which was given to the English to be kept during the Winter, who fortify it
round with Palisadoes, besides a Wall and Ditch, and render it impregnable.
Nevertheless the most illustrious Duke of York resolved to attaque it, bringing
therefore about four thousand Men before it, partly English, Scots, and Irish,
and partly Spaniards, The Duke of York in vain attempts it.
he attacks it in the Nightime by an Assault. But he found Morgan Governor
of the place in a readiness, who in watchfulness was not inferior to him; but
in this much superior, that under the cover of a strong Fort he fought against
an Enemy in the open Fields; wherefore after he had by all ways attempted, but
in vain, to storm the place, at length he sounded the Retreat: But the Marshall
d' Aumont came not so well off at Ostend; for being tempted thither by hopes
given him that the Town would be betrayed into his Hands, he paid for his rash
hopes, himself being made Prisoner, and many brave Men killed.

Next Spring Marshall Turen having taken in Graveling, Graveling being taken,
Dunkirk is Besieged;
he came with a vast Army of French and English to Besiege Dunkirk, and quickly
invested the Town by Land, the English Ships blocking it up by Sea. For it was
necessary either to reduce that Key of Flanders under the Power of the French,
or to try the uncertain Fortune of War, Affairs being as yet doubtful. On the
other hand, if the Spaniards suffered it to be taken, besides the loss of the
profit which they made by Pyracy and Traffic, the English would also deprive
them of the rest of their Ports, (for they easily conjectured, that Dunkirk
would fall into the Hands of the English) and open to themselves a way of
bringing an Army into the Heart of the Country. Therefore, For the relief of
which, Don John of Austria comes.
Don John of Austria, Governor of Flanders, resolved to hazard a Battle. For
that end, having drawn out of the Garrisons about some fifteen thousand Men, to
which were added four Regiments but half complete in Men, under the Duke of
York, he possesses himself of the Sandy Hills, half a Mile distant from Turen's
Camp, there, as occasion served, to hinder or raise the Siege. But next Morning
Turen having left Men enough in the Trenches, to prevent the sallying out of
the Garrison, with the rest of the Army, in this manner attacks the Spaniards.
About three hundred English under the Command of Devaux are ordered to march up
the Hill, The French fight and overcome.
and beat the Spaniards from thence, two thousand following after, and four
thousand to second them, the Horse being placed on the Wings, and behind in the
Rear. The Spaniards being drawn up, bravely received the charge, with confused
shouts of mixed Nations. But at length, though the loose Sand afforded no sure
footing to those that marched up, and that the Spaniards showred down continual
Volleys of Shot, yet the English obtain the Victory, the Spaniards being on all
hands put to flight, and killed. Then at length the French Horse fall on, and
were for a long time bravely resisted by the Duke of York, and his Brother the
Duke of Gloucester; but they both, the English Red-coats advancing, and number
overpow'ring them, are fain to give ground, and at length are beat out of the
Field. Above a thousand were killed in that Battle, fifteen hundred private
Soldiers taken, fourscore Officers, and all the Cannon and Ammunition.

Shortly after the Governor being shot, the Town is taken,
The Garrison of Dunkirk nevertheless persist in their defense, till the
Marquess of Leda being shot with a Musket Bullet, the Town lost its Life with
the Governor, and fell into the Hands of the French King, who, that he might
perform the Articles agreed upon, gives it to our Contrymen, And given to
the Engllsh as a Reward for their Service.
as a Reward of their Services, and delivered it up into the Hands of Lockart,
a Scottish Man, who had married Cromwell's Niece, and was his Ambassador in
France; for Reynolds the Winter before crossing over into England in a weak
Vessel, that he might justify himself before Cromwell, from a Crime of Treason
that he was accused of, as if he had entertained a Correspondence with the Duke
of York, was cast away at Sea. The same Year, the French, with the assistance
of the English, possessed themselves of Winoxberg, Fuern, Ypress, Oudenard, and
many other places; their Horse ravaging all Flanders almost. So way was made
for a Treaty betwixt the French King and Spaniard, whereupon a Marriage after
ensued.

Let us now return home, Cromwell began to be sick, first in Mind,
and view at nearer distance the Preludes of Cromwell's approaching Death.
Whilst he is delighted with Triumphs beyond Sea, he is hampered at home with
difficulties and gnawing Cares. For the Death of his dearest Daughter,
Besides the Death of his dearly beloved Daughter, the Lady Cleypole, who died
of an inward Imposthume in her Loins with great agony and pain, after she had
in her Hysterical fits much disquieted him, by upbraiding him sometimes with
one of his Crimes, and sometimes with another, according to the furious
distraction of that Disease: And the Republicans that grew daily grew stronger,
The Republicans created him continual troubles and vexation; especially seeing
his Son-in-law Fleetwood and his Wife seemed to favor these Men, excuse, and
intercede for them; nay, he refrained coming to his Father-in-laws House,
though he lived hard by, and ought to have comforted his dying Sister amidst
the mourning and bewailings of her Relations; and though Cromwell (as he told
it to some) had made him his Heir in his last Will and Testament. Besides,
Desborough, who had married his Sister, Pickering also, and Sidenham, whom he
had made Privy Counselors, had secret meetings with Lambert, and other leading
Men of the Republican Party, whom they openly magnified, and extolled.

But all his Distemper was not in his Mind alone; Presently after being taken
with a slight Fever,
for shortly after he was taken with a Slow Fever, that at length degenerated
into a Bastard Tertian Ague. For a Weeks time the Disease so continued without
any dangerous symptoms, (as appearing sometimes one, and sometimes another kind
of distemper) that every other Day he walked abroad: but after Dinner his five
Physicians coming to wait upon him, one of them having felt his pulse, said,
that it intermitted; at which suddenly startled, he looked pale, fell into a
Cold Sweat, almost fainted away, Which at length confined him to his Bed,
and orders himself to be carried to Bed, where being refreshed with Cordials,
he made his Will, but only about his Private and Domestic Affairs. Next
Morning early, when one of his Physicians came to visit him, he asked him, why
he looked so sad? And when he made Answer, That so it becomes any one, who had
the weighty care of his Life and Health upon him; Though he was secure of
recovering,
Ye Physicians, said he, think I shall die: Then the Company being removed,
holding his Wife by the Hand, to this purpose he spoke to him, I tell you, I
shall not die this bout; I am sure on it. And because he observed him to look
more attentively upon him at these words, Don't think (said he) that I am mad;
Trusting rashly to his silly Ministers and Flatterers,
I speak the Words of Truth, upon surer grounds than Galen or your Hippocrates
furnish you with. God Almighty himself has given that Answer, not to my
Prayers alone, but also to the Prayers of those who entertain a stricter
commerce, and greater intimacy with him. Go on cheerfully, banishing all
sadness from your looks, and deal with me as you would do with a Serving-man.
Ye may have skill in the Nature of things, yet Nature can do more than all
Physicians put together; and God is far more above Nature. But being ordered to
take his rest, because he had not slept the greatest part of the Night, as the
Physician was coming out of the Chamber, he accidentally met another, who had
been a long time very familiar with him; to whom, I am afraid, says he, our
Patient will be lightheaded. Then said he, You are certainly a Stranger in
this House: Don't you know what was done last Night? The Chaplains, and all who
are dear to God, being dispersed into several parts of the Palace, have prayed
to God for his Health, and all have brought this Answer, Who feed the Dying-man
with vain hopes, and mock God himself with their Thanks-givings.
He shall recover. Nay, to this degree of madness they came, that a Public
Fast being for his sake kept at Hampton Court, they did not so much pray to God
for his Health, as thank him for the undoubted pledges of his Recovery; and
repeated the same at Whitehall.

These Oracles of the Saints were the cause that the Physicians spoke not a
word of his danger. From Hampton Court he is brought to London.
In the mean time Cromwell leaving Hampton Court, where hitherto he had lain
sick, is brought to London; and the Physicians meet at a Consultation in the
Chamber of the aforementioned Doctor, who at that time was troubled with a
grievous Headache, and an Imposthume in his Ear. But next Morning early another
Physician coming, who had watched all Night with the Patient, and telling the
rest, how ill he had been in the last fit, The Disease growing more dangerous,
they all conclude that he could hardly outlive another. This Sentence of the
Physicians awaking the Privy Council, He is advised by his Counselors to name
his Successor;
at an appointed time they come to advise him, that he would name his
Successor. But when in a drowsy fit he answered out of purpose, they again ask
him, if he did not name Richard his eldest Son for his Successor, to which he
answered, Yes. Then being asked where his Will was which heretofore he had made
concerning the Heirs of the Kingdom, he sent to look for it in his Closet, and
other places, but in vain; for he had either burnt it himself, or some body
else had stole it. And so Richard being nominated his Heir, And so his Son
Richard nominated, shortly after he died, Sept. 3. 1658.
the Day following, being the third of September, he yielded up the Ghost about
three of the Clock in the Afternoon; not, (as it was commonly reported) carried
away by the Devil at Midnight, but in clear Daylight, and the same Day that
he had twice defeated the Scots. His Body being opened; in the Animal parts,
the Vessels of the Brain seemed to be overcharged; in the Vitals the Lungs a
little inflamed; but in the Natural, the source of the distemper appeared; The
Spleen of all other parts of his Body when opened, being most affected.
the Spleen, though sound to the Eye, being within filled with matter like to
the Lees of Oil. Nor was that Incongruous to the Disease that for a long time
he had been subject unto, seeing for at least thirty years he had at times
heavily complained of Hypochondriacal indispositions. Though his Bowels were
taken out, and his Body filled with Spices, wrapped in a fourfold Cerecloath,
but put first into a Coffin of Lead, and then into a Wooden one, yet it purged
and wrought through all, so that there was a ne^ssity of interring it before
the Solem^ (...) ^rals

But still his Character is wanting; Cromwells Character.
which without prejudice, and waving what we before observed in the series of
the History, thus take. His Birth.
He was born of honest Parents in Huntingtonshire, Childish Enthusiasms,
and from a Child gave no obscure proofs of Enthusiasm. For, as I have had it
from credible Persons, when he was a Child he reported, that one appeared to
him in the likeness of a Man, who told him that he should be a King; which his
Schoolmaster being acquainted with, whipped him for it, by his Fathers
direction. He laid an unsolid Foundation of Learning at Cambridge; but he was
soon cloyed with Studies, delighting more in Horses, and in Pastimes abroad in
the Fields. However, from one Indecent Action the Reader may conclude of the
extravagance of his Youth. Sir Oliver Cromwell his Uncle, an honest, good
Gentleman, far from the Humors of the Nephew, after the old manner kept
Christmas, with Music, Dancing, And Scurrility.
and the other Diversions of a cheerful heart, a Master of the Revels (as the
Custom was) presiding in their Plays; when, my Gentleman observing a great many
got together, daubs over his own Boots and Gloves with Ordure, and crouding in
amongst the rest whilst they were a Dancing, besmears the Clothes of the Master
of the Revels, and other Guests; so that the whole House was perfumed, but not
with the scent of Frankincense. Therefore the Master of the Revels caused him
to be Horsed upon a Pole, carried upon the Shoulders of some of the stronger
Youths, and so plunged over Head and Ears in the next Pond, there to be
thoroughly rinsed. I would add a great many more of such his nasty pranks, if I
were not afraid to offend the Readers Modesty.

After the Death of his Father, in his Youth, he married a Gentlewoman; but by
his profuse and luxurious way of living, in a short time he squandered away
both his own and Wives Estate, His youthful Luxury and Repentance.
so that he was almost reduced to Beggary. Afterward, playing the Penitent, he
gave himself wholly over to the hearing of Sermons, reading of Godly Books, and
Works of Mortification; and having hired a Brewhouse, as if he would now Brew
better than he had Baked, he plied the Brewing Trade and Husbandry. After that,
by means of Sir Robert Steward, some Royalists, and Clergymen, he was
reconciled to his Uncle, who could not before endure him, so that he made him
his Heir. But shortly after, His Penury and Want.
having again run out of all, he resolved to go to New England, and prepares
all things for that end. In the mean time, by the help of Sectarians, he was
chosen a Member of Parliament; where finding fit Companions, mad partly through
Ambition, and partly through Zeal and Religion, His Prejudice against the King.
he omitted no opportunity of fomenting Debates, and raising Calumnies to the
prejudice of the King, inventing Tales, stirring up the Embers, and blowing
about Sparks of Division, till at length he put all into a fair Flame and
Combustion. The War afterward breaking out, he served as a Captain, and really
was so, against his own King, Charles the First, a Prince of ever Blessed
Memory. But reflecting with himself on the continual Victories of the
Cavaliers, He advises the Parliamentarians.
he told the Parliamentarians, that the Rabble would never be able to fight
against the King, whose Army consisted of Gentlemen, because of the disparity
of the Cause and Motives, Honor moving the one, and Pay the other: but if they
desired to fight with equal Courage, and overcome the Enemy, they must look out
for and raise good honest Soldiers, that would fight merely for Conscience
sake, or at least place such Officers of their Forces. Many have often heard
him glory of that Advice. Having therefore obtained leave from the Parliament
to raise a Regiment, by Letters or Messengers he invited the Honest Men (as he
was pleased to call them) from among all the Soldiers in the several Counties,
with whom he had had any acquaintance, and persuaded them to take on with him.
Wherefore Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, and, in a word, all the Sink of
Fanatics, come flocking to him; so that he made up above a thousand Horse: who
in the beginning being unskilful either in handling their Arms, or managing a
Horse, by Diligence and Industry became in process of time most excellent
Soldiers; for Cromwell used them daily to look after, feed, His Military
Discipline.
and dress their Horses, and, when it was needful, to lie together on the
ground; and besides, taught them to clean and keep their Arms clear, and have
them ready for Service, to choose the best Armor, and to arm themselves to the
best advantage. Trained up in this kind of Military Exercise, they excelled all
their Fellow Soldiers in Feats of War, and obtained more Victories over their
Enemy. This was the beginning of the New Model, as they called it. These were
preferred to be Commanders and Officers in most part of the Troops of the Army;
the places of Private Soldiers being filled up with lusty strong Fellows, whom
Oliver trained up and kept in very strict Discipline. His Command and Rule.
Afterward he was made Major General of the Horse, then Lieutenant General, and
at last General; till, after all, he raised himself to the Dignity of
Protector, and invaded the highest Place of Honor and Authority. When he was
thus mounted to the top of Preferment, his first care was to break down the
Steps by which he ascended, lest Rivals might climb up by the same means. His
way of Ruling.
Few have hitherto applied greater Industry than he in the Administration of
the Commonwealth. What is Philosophically said of others, I may with
probability affirm of him; to wit, That he had two Assistant Spirits, a good,
and a bad; and that when he knocked his Breast, poured out his Prayers, Sighs,
and Tears, promising all things that were good, he was acted by his good
Genius; but when by Lying and Fallacies he carried on his Cheats, his wicked
and Traitorous Designs, then was he prompted by his bad Genius or Spirit. He
was not unworthy of Government, had he not invaded it by Villainy, Fraud,
Treachery, and the Blood not only of others, but of his own Prince also.

Richard takes into his Hands the Reins of Government,
Next day, Richard, his eldest Son, is by the Privy-Counsellors, after mutual
Consultation, saluted Protector; and is by a Herald proclaimed, first in the
conspicuous Places in London, and then all over England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Nay, the Officers of the Army though they hatched in their Breasts contrary
Counsels, which were not as yet come to maturity, came to Congratulate him, and
under their Handwriting promised to be true to, and defend him. Not so much out
of his own Ambition, as indeed by the Allurements of others.
But he was far from aspiring to it out of Ambition, and his Genius was so far
from affecting Rule, having observed, that though in the worst of time the
factious prevailed, and the Republicans proudly insulted, especially over the
Cavaliers, yet Justice used commonly to follow such Practices at the heels,
that he would have been content rather to have led a private Life in Peace,
free from hatred and danger. But Allurements and the fawnings of Fortune
blassing his Youthful Mind, and being tickled (as it is natural to Man) with
the splendor of Government, he at length complies with the temptation. I know
not what madness of the People spurred him likewise on to it; who in a kind of
a Frenzy brought him from all parts, to the number of ninety Congratulatory
Addresses, that they might worship the Rising-sun.

Richard makes a magnificent Funeral for his Father Oliver Cromwell, at a vast
charge; Cromwells expensive Funeral,
which his Counselors advised him to, for this end, that being already
sufficiently burdened with Debts, he might be reduced to greater want of Money.
But it was debated amongst the Officers, whether they should accompany the
Funeral in deep and close Mourning, for fear that being pestered in that Habit,
a Regiment or two of Cavaliers dropping out of the Clouds to disturb the
Solemnity, they might not be able to defend themselves, though Soldiers were
planted all along on both sides of the way for their security. And Enterment
amongst Royal Ashes.
He was buried in Westminster Abbey Church, which is so Conspicuous for the
Monuments of our Kings, that Europe cannot exceed it in stately and sumptuous
Tombs; as if he were there to give Laws to the Ghosts of Princes, whom he
prosecuted with so much hatred whilst alive. Ireton, Bradshaw, and all the crew
of the Regicides aspired also to that Burial amongst the Royal Ashes.

This Farce is no sooner ended, but another presently comes upon the Stage. For
the Republicans Plot and undermine, The (...) ^ill (...) t^rds Richa^d.
and by degrees attempt the ruin of Richard, which they had before hatched in
their Minds. First they repair to Fleetwood's House, upon pretext of Duty, and
of joining together in Prayers after their accustomed manner: they glance at
things first, a^ a distance; and reconcile Lambert and other disbanded Officers
to Desborough, and those that still were in Office in the Army. By and by, ^y
end^avour (...) F^twood and him together by the Ears.
they discourse of the Charge of Protector, as if by right it belonged to
Fleetwood, and by Cromwells last Will, whilst he was Compos mentis, designed
for him; but that Richard was in a surreptitious manner, and by the craft of
some of the Council substituted, when his Father had lost his Senses; that it
concerned them to be governed by a Pious and Expert Leader, such as had been
tried in many difficulties. So the Firebrand of Contention being once thrown in
amongst them, they proceed by all ways to blow it, and by fresh Fuel to raise
it to a Flame. The Relations being by this means put at variance, and mutually
incensed one against another, the Private Soldiers are tamperred with to side
with them; and that they might not seem to lose their labor, for their sakes,
they desire that the Soldiers may have their full pay, which in latter times
was cut short by two pence a week.

The next thing brought under debate, is the Government of the Army. Cromwell
had ruled Arbitrarily by mere Despotical Authority, turning out any Officer or
Soldier at his pleasure, and putting others in their places; no Man must now
take so much upon himself, nor enjoy so unlimited a Prerogative. Therefore the
Soldiers come to a Petition, wherein they humbly desire, that for the future,
The Soldiers challenge to themselves extravagant Privileges.
No Soldier be turned out of place without a Council of War, nor that any
Action be brought against a Soldier but according to Martial Law; that no
Soldier be brought to Trial for Murder, Theft, Sacrilege or Robbery, but in a
Court Marshall; and that the Soldiers have the power of choosing their own
General. These things are argued verbally before the Protector, and afterward
by Public Writings and Declarations.

When Richard perceived that the Council of State and Government were tossed
with these storms, he though it safest to betake himself to a Parliament, and
try the aid thereof in his difficulties. Therefore a Parliament is called, A
Parliament is called, wherein much time is spent in jangling without any f^uit;
to consist of two Houses, according to the Model of the Instrument of
Government; Commissioners from Scotland and Ireland being likewise admitted;
who no sooner meet, but they begin to quarrel at the new made Lords. These,
again, are inveighed against, and it is called in question, by what Right or
Law they sat in that House. Nor is there less heat in the House of Commons,
betwixt the Republicans and Court-Party; the first contending, that both the
Scots and Irish ought to be turned out of the Parliament of England, as having
no right to Vote there by any Law, being mere Slaves to the Protector, and no
ways representing the Commonwealth.

At length, after much Jangling, Yet they are reconciled.
and many Reproaches, the Members of the lower House, for Reconciliation sake,
Vote a present Conference with those of the Other House, for they studiously
avoided the name of the Upper House, about Public Affairs; provided, that
should be no prejudice to the True and Ancient Peers, and those, who during the
War had not abandoned the Commonwealth.

The Instrument of Government is sifted.
Afterward a Recognition in favor of Richard being moved, occasioned no small
stir's in the House; the Courtiers, who were devoted to his Party, and the
Republicans clashing mightily about it: taking occasion thereupon, they inveigh
against the Instrument of Government, as being extorted from a Lame Parliament,
that was neither full, nor free; and examining all the Articles of it, they let
fly against Cromwell's Ghost. Not a few who favored the Kings Intrest struck
in with these, that the contrary parties being equally balanced, nothing might
on either side be agreed upon.

They recall Overton from Banishment.
Nevertheless they repeal the order for Imprisonment of Overton the Republican,
as heretofore made by Oliver Cromwell against the standing Laws; and having
sent for him from the Isle of Jersey, where he had been detained in Prison,
they suffered him to show himself near Whitehall in a trumphant manner. They
accuse Berkstead and Butler of Treason.
Berkstead also, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and Butler, Major General
of the Army, a most insolent, haughty Man, are accused of High Treason, which
they thought sufficient to be done at present.

The Commanders of the Army urging their Proposals,
In the mean time the Officers of the Army obstinately urge their Proposals;
whose Councils were for the most part guided by many Republican Parliament Men.
When some persuaded Richard, and offered their assistance to quell these Men,
by suddenly seizing the Leaders of them when they came together to hold a
Council, Richard is wanting to himself,
he would not condescend; partly out of Cowardice, as not daring to oppose the
raging Officers; and partly also out of too much credulity, as being persuaded
by Fleetwood his Sisters Husband, and his Uncle Desborough, that the Army,
though they desired to enjoy their Privileges, and that the form of Government
might be a little altered, yet would not do any prejudice to his Person or
Interest, which they would not make ample and sufficient amends for. Richard
then thought it enough, in imitation of his Father, to look big, threaten,
chide, and roar. However they are not terrified, but rather provoked to greater
rage by that blunt Thunderbolt; nor do they only scoff and make mouths at him,
but slight him as an Ass, and attempt greater matters against him.

From hence forward, And is forsaken of his Friends.
those that formerly wished best to him, abandon him in Counsel, and every way;
nor do they think it worth the while to meddle in his Affairs, whom God had so
infatuated, as to make him neglect his own Interest. Therefore they bequeath
their Labor and Studies to the Cause of the King, as being clearly convinced
at length, that that was the only Interest that could justly and lawfully be
maintained.

But the Officers seeing their Proposals tending to maturity, frame a
Remonstrance, The Officers publish a Remonstrance,
wherein they turn the fury of their engines aganst the Name of Malignants;
complaining, That the Good Old Cause was forgot, that the Asserters of it were
every where vil fied, the great Patrons and Patriots of it (the Kings Judges)
put into Printed Lists, and marked for destruction, with the ruin of all the
Godly and the Cause together; that many Cavaliers came daily from beyond Sea,
and in presence of the People asserted the Kings Cause, and Consulted together;
with much more of this Nature. They pray, that these things may speedily be
redressed; giving no obscure marks of their Inclination of bringing in a
Democracy again. This they desire Richard to represent to the Parliament,
scaring him thus with Lightning before the Thunderclap. But the Parliament,
(some true Republicans being amongst them) out of design, as some thought, that
he might have the Army against him, And are by the Parliament discharged to
keep Consults.
pass a very imperious Vote, Prohibiting any number of Officers and Soldiers to
meet together for holding of Consults, until the Parliament should determine
about these Affairs: Which Richard delivering both in his own, and in Name of
the Parliament, and commanding their Consults to cease, in a full meeting of
the Officers, Desborough takes him up for it; so that the Officers becoming
fiercer and more angry, This made them draw into the Conspiracy the L^eutenancy
and Officers of the Militia of Lond^n.
they apply themselves to the Lieutenancy of the Militia of London, and allure
them to a consent, and to join with them, that being involved in the same guilt
with them, they might not boggle to desire the same things of the Parliament.
This by means of Ireton (the Brother of the late Ireton, the Commander) then
Lord Mayor, and of other Leading Men, they easily obtained.

After these Prelimnaries, the Officers of the Army, drawing together their
Forces before Day, Presently they beset Whitehall,
beset Whitehall, where the Protector lived, sending in, in the mean time,
Desborough and Fleetwood, earnestly to beseech him that he would presently
dissolve the Parliament, and to acquaint him, That if it were not speedily
done, the Officers would cause Fire to be set to the House, and all that
resisted to be slain. And Richard being overcone by their Prayers and
Threatenings, dissolves the Parliament.
Richard terrified with these threats, having in vain implored the Assistance
of the City, without either Guards or Soldiers to stand by him, and his
Bedchamber Men and other Servants being frightened, at length Signs a
Proclamation to be published for Dissolving the Parliament.

After this, some few days being allowed him to repent for what he had done,
and to take new Counsels, there were a great many who prognosticated all evils
to him, nay, affirmed them to be hanging over his Head; seeing now the
inveterate Enemies of his Family, swollen with Pride and Malice, who never kept
Faith to any Man, were got into Power again: He being s^rrounded with these
dangers,
That perhaps they would sooth and slatter him at present; till under pretense
of his Authority they might rob him of the Assistance and Protection of his
Friends, and then having exposed him to hatred and derision, try him for his
Life, and that under color of a Law formerly made, whereby to aspire to, or
introduce Monarchy, is declared Treason. Is persuaded to espouse the Kings
Cause.
It was moreover represented to him, That he had still a safe refuge under the
Mercy of the King, if he would expiate his Fathers Crime by his own Allegiance;
that it was the part of a King to keep his Word; that the Lord Petcombe, the
Danish Resident, had promised to send over Letters safe to the Soundt, that a
Messenger might be more securely sent afterward to the Admiral to acquaint him
with these Affairs; and that he would likewise give security on the Kings part,
that the Articles should be fulfilled: That that was no such difficult thing to
be done, since the Fleet was as yet free from Contagion, the Admiral ready to
serve the King, and both hating and hated by the Parricides; that besides,
Portsmouth and other strong Holds would join with him in a strict Confederacy;
that most part of the People also, for the sake of the King, and to revenge the
injuries done to himself, and the Parliament, abruptly dissolved, would rise in
Arms; and lastly, that all Ireland was as yet subject to his Government. Being
solicited by these and such like Arguments, he was in suspense, not knowing
what to do; he was tossed betwixt hope and fear, having missed or abused the
occasion of doing his business, sometimes preferring the Counsels of some, and
by and by again of others, and sometimes ready to run for it: till at length
being advised by Fleetwood and other Republicans (whose Opinions he had
privately asked) That it would be much safer for him to enjoy certain and sure
Privileges, ^eetwood di^wading him.
than dangerously make trial of new Experiments, with fear and astonishment he
keeps in Whitehall.

In the mean time a Council being called, the Officers that had stood for
Richard, Ingoldsby, Coff, Whaley, Fal^onberge, and Howard, are ^asheered; the
old Republican Colonels, whom his Father had formerly turned out, Lambert,
Harrison, Rich, Parker, Ok^y and others, being again brought into play. Then
the Officers of the Army, with some five or six Members of the Musty Old Rump,
The Officers agan raise the Rump from the Dead,
meeting together in the House of the Old Speaker Lenthall, require him, that
he would reassume his Chair, after a long intermission, in Parliament, and
again sit at the Helm of the Government. Which at first he refused, alleging
invincible Arguments to the contrary; but afterward, partly through the
threats and desires of Vane, and chiefly of Lambert, partly through his own
Pusillanimity, and partly through his own ambitious desire of Rule, he is
prevailed upon, and condescends. The Officers having acknowledged the injury
they had done to the Rump, and having publicly declared their sorrow for it,
and the Members obliging themselves of new, by mutual engagements, the Speaker
with his Mace before him enters the House of Commons, being attended by as many
as could be got together out of the Streets, Alehouses, Taverns, (And what
sort of Men they were:)
even the Army and Prisons; which nevertheless being computed, hardly made up
two and forty Men: by so small a Thread the Affairs of England then hung. Yet
these Varlets made no scruple to represent three States, make and unmake Laws,
Pros^ribe, Forfeit, and take to themselves the absolute Power over the Lives
and Fortunes of all.

The Articles or Engagements that they entered in, were to this purpose; And
bound to these Articles,
That all should enjoy their Liberties and Properties. That there be a fixed
and determinate proceeding in Law. That all Crimes relating to the change of
Government be abolished. That all Statutes and Ordinances remain in force,
until the contrary be Enacted. That Public Debts be punctually paid. That no
Man believing in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and acknowledging the Holy
Bible for the Word of God, be debarred from the profession of his Religion,
except Episcopal-Men and Papists. That a Zealous and Powerful Ministry be by
all means cherished. That Colleges and Schools be reformed. That at present
Fleetwood have the chief Command of the Forces both by Sea and Land. That for
the future, the Parliament have the Legislative Power, and the Council of State
the Executive. That the Protectors Debts be paid: and that he have a Liberal
Pension of Ten thousand pounds yearly, during Life, and ten thousand more in
Inheritance. And that his Mother also, during Life, have eight thousand pounds
yearly out of the Exchequer.

Send them into the Parliament House.
The Parricides being bound to these Articles, take their Seats again in the
Parliament House; but how much they valued them, they make it quickly manifest.
In the mean time, many of the old Members, to the number of above three
hundred, who had been secluded heretofore by the Officers of the Army, though
they believed the Parliament to be dissolved by the Death of Charles the First,
and the Abrogation of the House of Lords, yet, that they might avoid other
Inconveniences, desiring to be readmitted, are carefully kept out. Some few
Days after, they send Commissioners to Richard, to ask him the Question, How he
liked the change of Government, and what Debts he owed? that wheadling him with
the hopes of kind usage, they might draw from him a voluntary renunciation of
the Authority. He makes answer, That he thought it reasonable that he should
submit to their Authority, from whom he must expect protection: that his
Steward should give them an account of his Debts. Richard out of fear having
resigned up his Authority,
But nothing but a formal and express resignation would please them; to which
he seemed cheerfully to give his assent. And now at length he is commanded to
deliver up all the Goods and Household Furniture, not so much as reserving to
himself any Gold or Silver, Jewels or Hangings, Linen, or any other Goods that
might have been packed up in a small bulk; all are adjudged to the Exchequer.
Stripped of all, departs out of Whitehall.
Thus stripped of all, he is commanded to depart out of Whitehall, liable to the
Actions of all his Creditors, and perhaps to have been tried for his Life, had
they not had other Fish to fry.

Behold the perfidiousness of Mortal Men, and a wonderful instance of Divine
Providence, which presides over, and alters Humane Affairs and Governments, as
it seems Good to the Amighty! He who just now swayed the Scepter of three
Kingdoms, forced by the Calamities of a tedious Civil War to truckle under his
Vicegerents, three old Commanders, to wit, his Brother, Brother-in-law, and a
third, whom Cromwell had obliged by many and great Favors; he, I say, in the
short space of one year, is craftily turned out of all, and now stripped of his
borrowed Plumes, he becomes the object of the Raillery of Poets and Painters,
And being made a laughing stock, betakes himself again to a Country Life.
and being sufficiently lasht with the giibes and reproaches both of the
Parricides, and Rabble, as of old the Dictator was called from the Plough, so
now the Protector is sent back to the Plough.

A Chronological Table FOR THE SECOND PART.

May 3.
DOrislaus by some Scots killed in Holland. The Marquess of Ormond, Lieutenant
of Ireland, makes a Truce with the Irish. June 21.
Having raised an Army, he besieges Dublin. August 2.
Jones routs his Forces, and raises the Siege. August.
Cromwell, General of the Rebels in Ireland, arrives at Dublin. Sept. 11.
Cromwell takes Drogheda, cruelly abusing his Victory.

June.
Cromwell takes Kilkenny, the Seat of the Irish Council, by a Surrender. June.
Leaving Ireton his Son-in-Law in Ireland, he returns to England. June.
Ascham, Ambassador from the Regicides, is killed at Madrid. April 29. May 1.
The Marquess of Montross, Commissioner of Scotland, overcome in Battle, is
betrayed and taken. May 21.
And basely used by the Scots, is put to death at Edinburgh. June.
King CHARLES, having Articled with the Scots sails into Scotland. June 26.
Fairfax laying down his Commission, Cromwell is declared General of all the
Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland. July 22.
Cromwell leads an Army into Scotland. August 22.
Eusebius Andrews is beheaded at London. Cromwell defeats the Scots in a bloody
Battle at Dunbar. September. 3.
William Prince of Orange dies. October. 24.

MDCL.LI.
CHARLES the Second is Crowned in Scotland. January 1.
He enters England with an Army of Scots. August 7.
Easily possesses himself of Worcester. August 20.
James Earl of Derby is by Lilburn routed at Wiggan. August 25.
The Scots being beat by Cromwell at Worcester, September. 3.
the King escapes. Cromwell in triumph enters London. Septem. 12.
The King, after many dangers, October 2.
at length arives in Normandy. The Isle of Jersey reduced by Haines. Oct. Dec.
James Earl of Derby, Lord of Mann, October. 15.
is put to death. His Lady Carlotta generously, October. November.
but in vain defends the Isle of Mann. Henry Ireton, Son-in-law to Cromwell,
Novem. 26.
dies at Limerick in Ireland.
MDCLI, LII.
Aiskew takes the Island of Barbados by surrender. Januar. 12.
An Act of Oblivion is past in the Rump Parliament. Feb. 24.
St. John's and Strickland are sent to Holland. March 11.
The first fight at Sea between Blake and Trump. May 19.
Aiskew beats the Dutch at Sea near Plymouth. August 16.
Blake beats the Dutch again. Septem. 28.

MDCLII, LIII.
The English and Dutch fight in the Streights. March 4.
Cromwell dissolves the Rump Parliament after twelve years Tyrannical
Usurpation. April 20.
Yet he calls a new one, July 4.
to which he commits the Government. June.
The Dutch send four Ambassadors into England to treat of Peace. August 2.
Monck in a great Sea-engagement beats the Dutch, Trump being slain. Novem. 22.
Some Portuguese commit a Riot in the New Exchange in the Strand. December. 12.
The Mock Parliament resigns up the Government to Cromwell. December. 16.
Oliver Cromwell with the Title of Protector takes upon him the Administration
of the Government.

April 5.
Cromwell makes Peace with the Dutch. July 10.
Don Pantaleon Sa, brother to the Portugal Ambassador, and John Gerard are
beheaded. September. 3.
Cromwell calls a Mock Parliament which meets at Westminster. Septem. 12.
Cromwell makes the Members swear Fealty to him. October. 18.
King CHARLES leaving France, goes to Colen. November.
He sends for his Brother, Henry Duke of Gloucester.

Januar. 22.
Cromwell dissolves his Mock-Parliament. The Cavaliers stir, but in vain, in
several places of England. March. 11.
Wagstaff possesses himself of Salisbury. May 16.
Penruddock and Groves are beheaded at Exeter. June.
Henry, Cromwells younger Son, made Deputy of Ireland. May 5.
The Marquess of Leda, the Spanish Ambassador, comes to London. May 7.
Pen and Venables Commanders of the Fleet and Army take the Island of Jamaica.
October. 25.
Ten Major Generals are set over the Provinces. November.
Cromwell makes Peace with the French. The Jews sue for liberty to come and
live in England.
MDCLVI.
Cromwell makes Peace with the Portuguese. July 10.
The Swedish Ambassador is feasted by Comwell at Hampton Court. July 25.
Blake and Montague beat eight Spanish Ships, Septem. 10.
and take two of them richly laden. A Mock-Parliament of the three Nations,
England, Septem. 17.
Scotland, and Ireland is held at Westminster. James Naylor a false Christ
enters Bristol. October. 24.

MDCLVI, LVII.
Sundercome, who conspired Cromwells death, Februar. 9.
is condemned. He is found dead in his Bed in the Tower of London. Feb. 13.
Harrison, Lawson, April. 10.
and others are committed to Prison. Blake burns the Spanish Fleet in the very
Harbor of Santa-cruce. April. 20.
Cromwell refuses the Title of King, May 8.
offered him by the Parliament. He is solemnly inaugurated Protector. June 26.
And the Parliament is adjourned for six Months. Richard, Son to Cromwell, July
29.
is made Chancellor of Oxford. Jepson is sent to Sweden, August.
and Medows into Denmark. Mardike-Fort taken by the English and French. October.
23.
The Vicecount Falconberge marries Mary Daughto Cromwell. Novem. 19.

MDCLVII, LVIII.
A Parliament is again held, consisting of two Houses. Januar. 20.
Suddenly dissolved by Cromwell. February 4.
Slingsby and Hewet are beheaded. June 8.
Dunkirk is yielded to the French. June 15.
Cleypole, Cromwell's Daughter, August 6.
dies at Hampton Court. September. 3.
Oliver Cromwell, Protector, dies in Whitehall. September. 4.
Richard Cromwell publicly declared Protector. Novem. 24.
Oliver is buried in Westminster.

Januar. 27.
Richard, calls a Mock-Parliament, which is held at Westminster. February 3.
Overton is recalled from his Banishment. Febr. 14.
The Lower House vote Richard to be Recognized Protector of England, Scotland,
and Ireland. March 28.
And Vote also a present Conference with those of the Other House about Public
Affairs. April 8.
The Officers of the Army present a Remonstrance to Richard, and he to the
Parliament. April 18.
The Parliament make an Ordinance, That the Officers of the Army meet not to
hold Consults. April 22.
The Officers beset Whitehall, and Richard by Proclamation dissolves the
Parliament. May 7.
Richard being turned out, the Rump-Parliament is again revived.
FINIS.
A TABLE To the Second Part.
A.
ADdresses and gratulatory Petitions to Cromwell, page 190 Ascham the Rebel,
Ambassador in Spain, killed there, 72
B.
Blake, his Death and Character, 228
C.
Cavaliers conspire to rise for the King, but disappointed, 182, 225 Church of
England, her Ministers persecuted, 5 Cromwell Oliver, 6, 98. He procures a kind
of Amnesty to be past by the Rump, 156. Turns out the Rump, 161. Is made
Protector, 165, 166. The Instrument, 166. His Arts and Cunning, 184. Calls a
House of Commons under the name of a Parliament, 186. But cannot work 'em to
his will, 189. The manner of his Government in some matters, 190, 191, 192. His
fears and mistrust, 198. Enters into a League with France, 210. Treats with the
Jews about a Toleration, 210, 211. Calls a picked Assembly of the three Nations,
212. The point debated, whether he should take the Title of King; 214, 215. The
manner how he was inaugurated Protector, and the Speech thereat, 218. Falls
sick, 233. Dies, 236. His Character, 237. His Funeral, 341. Cromwell Richard,
217, 223. He becomes Protector, 240. Call^ a Sham-Parliament, 243. Dissolves
it, 246. He is advised to be for the King, but refuses the advice, 247. Turned
out of his Protectorship by the Rump, 250.
D.
Dorislaus sent by the Regicides into Holland, 2. Is killed there, 3. Dunbar
defeat, 106 Dunkirk taken by the English, 231 Dutch War, 171
G.
Gloucester Duke sent for to Cologn by the King, 197
H.
Heretics in Gromwel's time, 219 Hewet Dr. 225 High Court of Justice, another
erected, 79. And does a world of mischief, 80. and inf.
I.
Jamaica taken by the English, 209 Jersey subdued, 155 Ireland, Expedition
thither under Cromwell, 6. and inf. Subdued 55. Juries, endeavored to be
abolished by Cromwell, 203
K.
King Charles I. the state of Affairs after his death, 1 King Charles II. seeks
help from foreign Princes, 67. Proclaimed in Scotland, 83. Crowned there, 117.
His march into England, 120. His Escape from Worcester, 128. and inf. Arrives
in France, 150. Removes to Cologn, 180. His Restoration foretold by an
Astrologer, 198.
L.
Lambert John, his Character, 55 Lane Jane, 136 Lords of Cromwell 's making 222
Love 's Conspiracy, 115
M.
Major-Generals and their Tyranny, 200 Man-Island subdued, 156 Marriages by
Justices of Peace, 164 Montross the noble Marquess his Story, 90
N.
Nayler James, his Pranks, 220
P.
The Pendrils, 128 Petty Sir William, 61 Portugal Embassadour's Brother
beheaded, 178
R.
Rump-Parliament and Army disagree, 156 Turned out by Cromwell, 161 Brought
again into play, 249
S.
Scotland, Expedition thither under Cromwell, 98 Subdued, 152 Slingsby Sir
Henry, 183, 225 Sundercome and the Republicans conspire against Cromwell, 220,
221
V.
Van Trump killed, 176 Vowel, a condemned Royalist, cites Cromwell and his
Judges to appear before the Judgment Seat of God, 179
W.
War against the Spaniards in America, 206 Between the Danes and Swedes, 228
Worcester-Fight, 125
Part the Third: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Composing the Affairs of England By the
Restoration of King CHARLES II. And the Punishment of the Regicides, And the
Settlement of the Church and State as they were before the Rebellion.
THE Civil War of England, begun by a pernicious and fatal Parliament, A
Recapitulation of things past.
raged for the space of eight years with various successes of Battles; till the
Royalists being in all parts worsted, and not able to keep the Field, Charles
the First, the best of Kings, a Prince of most exalted but persecuted Virtue,
to avoid the victorious Arms of the English Independants, moved by ill fate or
bad counsel, cast himself into the arms of the Presbyterian Scots, by whom he
was, for a round sum of money, treacherously delivered up into the hands of
English Traitors.

Nor was it long before he was a sad instance, that the Prisons of Kings are
but little distant from their Graves.

For (what the flagitiousness of past Ages never attempted, and future Will
hardly believe) the unfortunate Prince, to make way for the Usurpation of the
Traitor Cromwell, January 30. 1648.
was forced by a scenical and mock-form of Law and Justice, to lay down his
sacred head to be struck off upon a Block. The boldest Villainy that ever any
Nation saw; and a Parricide that all the World was astonished at.

But this Villainy succeeding so prosperously, and Britain at length, September
3. 1650. and Sept. 3. 1651.
and Ireland being subdued by victorious Rebels, as the Forces of Charles the
Second were entirely routed by the defeats at Dumbar and Worcester; Cromwell the
Traitor delayed no longer the execution of his long-projected Wickedness. He
knew full well, that the name of the Parliament was grown odious to the people,
through the uneasiness of their flagitious and usurped Dominion. Turning
therefore his Arms against his hauty Masters, April 20. 1653.
he turned them out of the House, as Objects first of his own contempt, and
then of the peoples scorn. The only grateful action he did to the Kingdom.

Cromw. takes upon him the Protectorship.
And now Cromwell being Master, and impatient of a slow progress to Usurpation,
grasps the Scepter, with the lofty Title of Protector. In the mean time he
ruled more arbitrarily than a King, though he seemed to refuse the Title which
he passionately aspired to. Whether he was more remarkable for Falsehood or
Valor, the Reader may judge, since Courage he had by turns and intervals, but
was never without Hypocrisy and native Treachery.

When for the space of five years he had filled all places with Slaughter, and
Blood, with Banishments, Robberies, and all sorts of Cruelty; being implacable
to his Enemies, false to his Friends, despised abroad, grievous to others,
uneasy to himself; amidst the Pulpit-Juggles of foolish idle men, the hidden
stings and lashes of a most guilty Conscience, with a distracted mind and
enthusiastical madness, he ended his wicked days; He dies. Sep 3. 1658.
on the very day which being formerly joyful to him, because of the two bloody
Overthrows of Britain, becomes now festival to three Nations.

Richard succeeds to his villainous Usurpation, Richard succeeds.
a Son in all things unlike to his Father, and unfit for daring Resolutions.
His judgment and actions were managed by the direction and suggestions of
others; and was so easily imposed upon by their knavery, that by what followed
shortly after, Unfit for the dignity.
it appeared that only the late Cromwell had a mind able to support such a
weight.

For the Colonels of the Democratical Faction heretofore turned out, He is
despised by the Democratical Colonels.
who were more addicted to the government of the Parliament, than to that of a
Protector, when they perceived the turn of Affairs, and their old hopes
revived, revenged by the ruin of the Son, the injuries they had received from
the Father. And abusing the easiness of Richard to insolence and contempt, they
industriously set about the changing again of the Protectordom into a
Commonwealth.

Whether the Relations and Counselors of Richard were privy to the Plot, or
deluded, I cannot say, Richard's Relations combine with them
but at length they fatally deluded him. And being Accomplices of the Treachery
of the Democraticks, they were made a Cloak for the Ambition of others. Richard
therefore being advised by his Friends to dissolve the Parliament which he had
lately called, the only support of his own hopes, and terror of the
Rebel-Colonels; too late he was sensible of the treachery or ignorance of his
Friends, and too late condemned his own credulity. Richard's affairs being then
in their declension, and his Relations Fleetwood and Desborough seduced either
by vanity or knavery; The power of Lambert formerly laid aside, became now
paramount, and by joint Councils in appearance, Lambert, etc. returns to the
Army.
they managed the Affairs of the Government with equal care, though different
designs; but what Fleetwood more openly, Lambert more cunningly carried on.

And now the Officers whom old Cromwell had heretofore turned out of the Army,
being restored, they invaded the Forces, as before they did the government of
Richard. But that the matter might be brought about in the usual forms, they
appoint Prayers, the common prelude of Traitors, to be made in St. James's;
where many Independent Preachers of great note in their long-winded Prayers,
call upon God as a Witness of their Treachery. And the very same who lately
prayed for the health of Cromwell on his Deathbed, now basely and craftily
consult about the exclusion of his Son.

The Rump-Parliament is restored by the Colonels.
But whilst they hastened the execution of their late designs, they gave a
remarkable and foul instance of their inconstancy, by restoring to Supreme
Power, the Rump-Parliament, which Cromwell by their own hands six years before,
had dragged out of the House: that sink of ill men, I mean, who were infamous
by the Spoils of the public, foully stained with all sort of Knavery,
Impudence, and Avarice; and for their Crimes so universally hated of the
People, that it was a very easy matter to have raised or depressed again these
Phantoms of Government, by the like wantonness of the giddy Mobile.

To be turned out again i^ time.

Which deposes Richard


And now these Parliament-Robbers being again admitted to the Government, they
take their known places, and being above all things mindful of Cromwell's
Treachery, they turn out Richard, wavering, as yet, and tottering in his
Throne; and lay the quaking Protestoral Youth flat upon the ground. As if by
turning the infamy upon the Cromwels they might thereby wipe off their own
Reproach.

They demand an account of the Funeral-charges of his dead Father, Then exposes
him.
(wherein that prodigal Villain had outdone the burials of Kings) and of his
own Creditors; but with no design, in the mean while, to pay his Debts, only
to expose him to contempt, because of his Poverty, or to scorn, for his Luxury.

The Members of Parliament that were more innocent than themselves, And
excludes many of the Members.
or more adverse to bad Councils, by Guards set at the door, they exclude out
of the House; and presently declare the Secret and Mystery of the Government,
which with no less vanity than impudence, they styled, THE GOOD OLD CAUSE.

From the meeting of this fatal Rump again, May 8.
I shall begin my work. The first thing they now do, is to consult how they may
secure themselves, and undo the Public. That they had been formerly thrust out
by the Soldiers, The Rump prevents the power of the Colonels.
struck deep in their minds; and that they might therefore prevent future
Snares from the Colonels, they reserve to themselves the Supreme Authority in
the Army; making their Speaker Lenthal General in the Chair. And having turned
out the Officers of the Army that were for a Protectoral Dignity, they create
new ones out of the Sink of Democraticks.

But before I proceed any farther, it will be necessary both for my self and
the Reader, to give a more accurate account of the state of the English Affairs
at that time.

The fate of the Cromwels was now come: for Richard being laid aside at London,
Henry Cromwell Deputy of Ireland, submits to the Rump.
his Brother Henry, whom his Father had made Deputy of Ireland, imitating his
Brothers weakness, at the command of the Rump, delivers up the Army and
Government to Colonel Ludlow, a stern man, and trusty to the Faction, who
succeeded him.

And Monk, Governor of Scotland; and the Fleet under Lauson.
Monk, Governor of Scotland, a man often to be mentioned in our Annals,
promised to be true to the Rump-Parliament; as also did the Fleet, and
Vice Admiral Lauson.

Fleetwood also and Lambert, slighting the Oath that had been taken to the
Cromwels, made the English Forces and Trainbands of the City, swear to be true
to the Rump.

Fleetwood's temper.
Fleetwood was old Cromwell's Son-in-law, of little or no reputation in the War,
but a stout Preacher and Prayer: He hoped to have been Successor in the
Government, after the death of his Father-in-law; but being disappointed by
crafty Oliver, if he was not, because of that, glad, he was not at all
displeased at the overthrow of his Brother-in-law Richard.

Lambert's ambition.
Lambert followed another conduct; under an affected modesty disguising a proud
spirit, and aspiring to nothing less than supreme Government. He had heretofore
possessed a great share in the friendship of Cromwell; but whether for his own
or his Wife's sake, I shall not determine. Nor was he thought to be displeased
with the old man, so long as he hoped for a Successor out of his Family, and
to be adopted in the Army, where his reputation was great. He secretly despised
Cromwell's Relations, as too low and unfit for Principality; thinking that he
alone remained worthy to be advanced to Supremacy. Which afterward more
secretly, but not more justly, he attempted, rather than obtained.

The awe of Cromwell, whilst alive, gave some check, such as it was, The
deplorable state of the Commonwealth
to the dissembled madness of the Democratical Republicans. But the Family of
the Cromwels being ruined, the British affairs were in that state, that amongst
the Regicides no faith, Through the perfidiousness of the Soldiers.
love, judgment, nor truth was to be found. The furious unsettled Colonels,
without sense or honesty, laying aside all care of Reputation or Justice,
softened and fed their private hopes. The Power of the Rulers was mutually
suspected, and the Honor of the Nation wholly slighted. And the same Army of
Cromwell abandoning the Family of their General, perfidiously abolished the
Protectordom, which by perjuries they had established as a brave and memorable
Constitution.

The Rabble also were so inclined, And madness of the People.
that many desired, and all accustomed to the Yoke of Bondage, suffered the
Rump-Parliament, though of old notorious for flagitiousness, and now for
buoying up the aspiring Colonels. In the mean time all things were carried
according to the pleasure of the Rump, 1659.
and the dictates of Fanatics, the terror of the present, and presages of
future evils.

But the turns of the Government were no less odious than the vices of the
Parricides, to those who any ways concerned themselves for the Public. In the
mean time they were not free from danger, The dangers of the Nobility, and of
good men.
whom Quality, the suspicion of Loyalty to the King, Wealth, or eminent Parts
rendered obnoxious to the Jealousies of the Rulers.

The old Soldiers of the King, and such as were devoted to Charles the Second,
in the mean while, who had hearts to do and suffer any thing, rejoiced in
secret; having without the loss of reputation, or degenerating from the ancient
care they were sprung from, endured the calamities of Adversity, the long
insulting and many Rapines of Robbers, and all the shams of Fortune, with an
honest and patient Poverty.

Though the settlement of Cromwell in the government, and the unshaken fidelity
of his Adherents, had so often defeated all their endeavors of restoring the
King, yet they carefully eyed the dissensions and distractions of the
Fanatics, and the turns and revolutions of the Government.

From the confusion of things the Royalists take hopes.
And now the mutual clashings of the Rebels, gave courage to the Loyal Nobility,
secretly to contrive the restoration of their Liberty; and under pretense of a
free and full Parliament, the recovery of the just Rights of King CHARLES.
Their Enterprises.
For that end they made use of the assistance of some Presbyterians, an
inflexible sort of men, a bad presage of a certain overthrow, since they are a
kind of people that make use of good fortune, rather for the subversion than
the establishment of Kings.

Thus a framed Conspiracy all over England, produced both glory and danger to
the illustrious Undertakers.

Booth's Insurrection in Cheshire.

By whom assisted.


Sir George Booth, now Lord Delamere, appeared first in the Insurrection in
Cheshire: He was assisted with the advice and hands, by the Earls of Derby and
Kilmurry, Sir Thomas Middleton, Major General Egerton, and many others of less
note, who having incited their Countrymen to take up Arms, and having formed
an Army, they put a Garrison in Chester, an ancient City washed by the River
Dee.

Booth himself, in the mean time, with 2000 Horse and Foot, took the Field,
expecting the aid of all good men throughout England in so illustrious an
Undertaking; but with more Loyalty than Fortune.

The Rump is terrified.
At the news of so sudden an Eruption, the Rump was terrified; and being
doubtful of their New Government, startled at the present Commotions,
apprehensive of future, and conscious of the greatness of their own Crimes,
they were in fear of all men. And so much the more, that they knew that Booth
was not the sole Head of the Party, but that there were many more besides him
who hatched the same designs.

The Parricides had no other hopes of safety, but in daring boldly; wherefore
arming with expedition the fiercest of the Sectarian Rout, Prepares to fight.
doubling their Guards, and sending flying parties of the old Forces into all
Counties and Towns, they no sooner smelt out, but they prevented the designs
of the Royalists.

In the mean time Lambert is ordered with a body of Horse and Foot to march in
all haste against Booth. Lambert is sent against Booth.
But the guilty Parricides could not think themselves secure, unless they were
re-enforced with Soldiers from Scotland, and the Garrison of Dunkerk, and with
two Regiments called from Ireland, commanded by Zanchie and Axtell. After that
Booth had in vain endeavored to hinder their conjunction, both Armies come in
view one of another near Norwich; but the River that runs by the Town, hindered
the Enemy from approaching.

Booth had set a strong Guard to defend the Bridge over the River, and had
drawn up his men beyond it, but still inferior both in number and fortune. For
Lambert having gained the Bridge, Booth is defeated,
charged Booth's Forces so warmly, that the raw and unexperienced Country-Rout
were not able to endure the shock of the old and expert Soldiers.

Lambert having put all of them to flight, Chester is surrendered unto him.
Booth, after his overthrow, hunting about for a safe retreat, And flies. He is
taken, Aug. 20.
was discovered in disguise at Newport, and taken; from whence being carried to
London, he was clapped up in the Tower. His whole Estate, which was pretty
considerable, being seized; his head had likewise gone, had not a greater
destiny preserved him from the imminent cruelty of the Rump. For the shortness
of their government seems to be the cause that the punishment of Booth's Party
was rather deferred than remitted.

The short-lived Rump in the mean time were not a little proud of the overthrow
of their enemies, The confidence of the Rump upon Booth's overthrow. And the
arrogance of Lambert and his soldiers.
and emboldened by this auspicious beginning of their New Government.

And the Cheshire-Insurrection was so convenient for Lambert's interest, that
he reckoned it amongst the favors of his prosperous fortune. For having
thereby attained (which he so much desired) to the pre-eminence of a General,
he intended to triumph, not so much over Booth, as over the conquered Rump: and
indeed the mutual confidence of the Knaves was not durable; Jealousies arising
betwixt the Parliament Men and the Colonels.
for the Rump was jealous of the Army, and the Army of the Rump. Lambert in the
mean time, who had a vast power in the Army, exceeding all bounds of a private
condition, so wheadled the Officers and Soldiers, that upon their return they
drew up and signed a Petition at Derby, Sept. 16.
wherein after they had alleged many ridiculous falsehood of their dutifulness
toward the Rump, their affection to the Public, and Liberty of the People,
they saucily desire the House, that the Command of the Army should be put into
the hands of Fleetwood and Lambert; as the only means of uniting the Forces in
faithfulness and concord, which would produce a durable obedience.

October 5.
The Colonels of Fleetwood's Army at London, despising the Authority of the
Rump, more haughtily demanded the same thing.

But the cunninger Members smelt afar off these Camp-designes of the Officers,
well foreseeing what these Councils drove at at long run. And this made them
fret, rage, and threaten.

Lambert's ambition is taken noting of by Haselrigg.
Haselrigg, a hotheaded man, and a great Stickler formerly in the War, now no
less concerned in the Faction of the Democraticks, lays it out confidently,
That the Authority of the Parliament was a precacious thing; that Lambert,
following Cromwell 's steps, endeavored alterations, and that his modesty, at
long run, would prove but a Decoy to easy Fleetwood: or to this purpose.

In the mean time the Army was divided into two Factions. The Army divided.
The far greater part were for giving Laws to the Parliament, though the rest
submitted to their Authority.

And this so netled the Members, The Parl. mad,
that they could not endure the insolence of the Soldiers; but come on it what
would, they resolved to vindicate their supreme Authority, and not to suffer
any Power in the Army above their own. Thus, venturing upon a revenge,
Discharges the Country from Taxations, October 10.
(whilst the Scales were as yet a turning) if the Colonels intended to use
force, they resolved to leave the Traitors a poor Game to play; and discharge
the public from paying any Taxations, by passing a Vote, That no money shall
be raised without consent of the Parliament; and that he who did to the
contrary, should be guilty of High Treason against the Commonwealth. And this,
seeing the Army wanted money, was the neck-break of the Colonels.

Nor could any thing content the discontented Rump, And disbands some stubborn
Colonels, October. 11.
but the debarting of some of the boldest Colonels disbanded, to wit, Lambert,
Desborough, Berry, Kelsey, Ashfield, Cobbet, Creed, Packer, and Barrow.

In the mean time the Rump appoints a Supreme Council of War over the Army, No
General now, but a Council of War.
without any name of a General, consisting of Fleetwood, Monk, Haselrigg,
Ludlow, Walton, Morley, and Overton; the Soldiers in the mean time laughing in
their sleeve at the vain and impotent anger of the Members.

For Lambert and the rest of the cashered Colonels, upon mature deliberation,
resolved, The Colonels conspire against the Rump.
That seeing their interest and authority was still in force in the Army, they
would take the Field, persist in their Resolutions, and if it came to a push,
try the fidelity of the Soldiers. And because they found by experience, that
Richard lost all by delaying, they resolved to hasten their Undertaking.

The Rum orders their Friends to guard them.
The Rump in the mean time had intelligence of the violent designs of the
Colonels; and seeing hands were more necessary than heads, Moss and Morley's
Regiments are ordered next day to keep guard in Westminster.

Lambert besets the Rump.
The same morning, Lambert with undaunted boldness, and a strong body picked out
of the Forces that were best affected toward him, hastens into the old
Palace-yard, and before the Members were come, set Guards upon all the entries
into the House. Lambert stops the Speaker Lenthall coming out of his Coach, and
attended by a Troop of Guards, and presently changing the Captain, sends him
back again into the City, And despises them, October. 13
more like a Prisoner than a Speaker of the House: and so with little ado he
terrified and dispersed the rest of the Knaves.

And now Moss and Morley's Regiments guarding the silent and empty House, are
themselves beset by Lambert. Both Parties looked big, and seemed ready to come
to blows; but the night approaching, they drew off without blood: whilst the
Rump and Colonels, full of anger and hatred, mutually reproached each other,
and justly too, with Treachery, Villainy, and Tyranny.

The Colonels having turned out the Rump, consult about the Government.
But the Rump being now sent packing, and the Parliament-doors shut, the
Officers of the Army became no less inconstant Masters and Ficklers in ruling
than they had been in obeying. Next morning a great confluence of Colonels met
in Wallingford-house, to consult about settling the Government: and having first
modelled the Army, as being more considerable than the Commonwealth, by
unanimous consent, they appoint Fleetwood to be General, Lambert
Lieutenant General, and Desborough, heretofore a blunt Country-clown,
Major General of the Horse.

The Supreme Power in Civil Affairs was committed to three and twenty, Vane,
Fleetwood, They appoint a Committee of Safety. October. 23.
Ludlow, and the rest of that odious Crew, too long to be named; whom they were
pleased, by a new and unheard of Title, to call the Committee of Safety.

Thus having erected a new Scheme of Government at London, They invite the
Forces of Scotland and Ireland into their Party.
they disperse themselves into all places, endeavoring to secure themselves by
associated Villainy. Barrow they send to Ireland, Cobbet to Scotland; allure the
Forces abroad into their Party; but all in vain.

For the Army in Ireland, Monk refuses. October. 28.
whilst Ludlow was at London, declared for the Rump Parliament. Monk in the
mean time writing to Fleetwood and Lambert, sharply taxes the Army in England
with Treachery and Ambition of governing; and professes also, that for the
future he will stand by the Parliament: refuses to admit of Cobbet as an
Ambassador, but commits him to custody as a Traitor.

Monk in the mean time, being as yet, uncertain what to do, had many anxious
thoughts: He foresaw, indeed, greater security under the Rump, but if the Army
in England had the better on it, inevitable ruin; having long ago had
experience of the hatred of Lambert and Fleetwood, though disguised in their
looks: And besides the usual competition in rule, they were also looked upon as
men of different humors and manners. Monk was for a plain and modest Religion;
but they turbulent and violent in their pernicious Heresy.

Wherefore seriously weighing with himself the strength of the English Army on
the one hand, and on the other the weakness of his own Forces, the
perfidiousness of many of the Officers, and the fickleness of the Soldiers; he
thought still that he might do better in War than in Peace, and so having
resolved against the worst, he hastened his march into England. When he had
consulted about these things with his most intimate Friends at Delkeith, he
goes to Edinborough, and there in a full Council of Colonels, At Edinburrough
Monk harangues the soldiers. October. 18.
he represents the new Troubles of England: How that the Parliament was turned
out of doors by the Officers in England, without any provocation, but through
levity and an ambition of governing: That the London- Colonels having attempted
many bad things, resolved not only to bear rule over their own, but the Forces
abroad also: That it would be disgraceful to them to submit to the Commands of
another Army; That he himself was a General neither inferior to Fleetwood nor
Lambert; nor was the Army of Scotland, that had outlived so many Battles, less
to be accounted than that of England. That therefore he was firmly resolved to
march into England, to revenge the Right and Honor of the Parliament; that the
Authority might remain in their hands who gave them their Pay and Rewards.

When with much authority and greatness of mind, which do better than eloquence
in a Soldier, he had spoken to this purpose, the Soldiers were inflamed with
Zeal and Resolution; and under the command of so great a General, desire the
signal to march.

He secures the Garrisons of Scotland.
Having now confirmed the Soldiers and the Garrison of Edinburough-Castle, he
put the command of Berwick, Leeth, Air, St. Johnston, and other Castles and
Citadels, into the hands of trusty Officers. He turned out, in the mean time,
all suspected Sectarians, especially the Anabaptists, the Plague of Mankind,
whilst many of his Horse, addicted to the error or humors of the English
Army, of their own accord desert him; and leave the Foot and the rest who were
truer to their Trust. Changes the Officers, and prepares for War.
He remaintained in their places many of his own Officers, who had been lately
casheered by the London Council of War: which gained him their affection, and
Fleetwood and Lambert their hatred.

The report of this Storm coming from the North, was quickly brought to London,
and all things made greater, as it is usual at such a distance, than really
they were. This distracted the Councils of the Rulers, and put them into no
little anxiety: However, they arm against Monk, and appoint Lambert, elevated
by the overthrow of Booth's Party, General of the War, and Head of their
Faction, who was now to engage in another kind of a War, and with anothergets
General.

But seeing they stood much in awe of the prouess and conduct of Monk,
Fleetwood and the Colonels desires a Pacification. October. last.
and had him in great admiration, they thought fit first to essay him by Treaty.

Wherefore Fleetwood sent unto him Clarges, nearly allied to him, and Colonel
Talbot who served in the Scottish Army, and in great favor with the General,
to mediate a Peace and Reconciliation. With the same purpose of Pacification,
They sent Commissioners into Scotland.
Colonel Goff and Colonel Whaley followed after, with Carril and Barker, the
great Oracles of the Independents, that the Artifices of Preachers might not be
wanting in laying of Snares.

Monk received them all civilly. He had many secret Conferences with Clarges:
To the rest he publicly professed that he had no Quarrel with the Colonels
commanding in England, about Religion: That his whole design was to revenge
the Indignity done to the Parliament, Monk admits of a Pacification.
and to proceed no farther. That if they had rather take up the matter at
London, without blood, he was willing to allow time for Conferences.

The Ministers with affected flattery preached up the advantages of Peace,
presaging from more than one instance, that the divisions of Fellow Soldiers,
would be pernicious to themselves, and very advantageous to the public Enemy,
intimating the King: and indeed their Presage proved afterward to be true.

But the mercenary and canting Tongues of those preaching Mediators, wrought no
effect upon an old Soldier, who was so well acquainted with their juggling
tricks. He civilly sends back these Agents of Peace with the same security as
they came: Clarges in the mean time was before gone to London with more secret
Instructions.

And though Monk now perceived that all Agreement with the Colonels of the
English Army would prove fallacious and unsafe, yet all things not being as yet
sufficiently ordered for securing the more remote Garrisons of Scotland; he
made his advantage of what was cast in his way by chance, and labors for the
convenience of his own affairs, to protract the time of Treaty.

Monk sends Commissioners to London.
He therefore dispatches to London, Wilks, Knight, and Cloberry, as
Commissioners for the Treaty from the Army in Scotland, with Instructions how
to delay time; where for some time we'll leave them in Wallingford-house, The
Pacificators meet in Wallingford-house.
with more complement than freedom, debating with Fleetwood's Officers, though
I am not apt to believe that the desire of Pacification was sincere on both
sides.

Lambert enters York.
Lambert marching against Monk, was already got as far as York, with twelve
Regiments of men; he was weak in Foot, but strong in Horse. Here he found
Morgan, Major General of Monk's Army, recovering out of a fit of the Gout; a
man that at that time was judged inferior to none in Military skill.

Lambert, who was his old friend, and knew him to be dear to Monk, sent him
into Scotland to promote the business of Peace. Sends ^organ to Monk as a
Mediator of Peace.
He having followed Monk to Edinburrough, in a military manner declared his
business, and what he was come about; but preferring Monk's cause and honesty,
he took command under him, when because of the many Commanders lately turned
out, and others that had deserted, he was made very welcome.

Monk in the mean time having pretty well composed the affairs of his Army,
Monk invites the Nobility of Scotland to a Council. December. 13.
invites the Scottish Nobility to Council, first at Edinburrough, and then at
Berwick; where he discovered his designs unto them, beseeching them, for the
sake of their Country and of himself, that they would keep Scotland in peace,
and raise moneys to pay the Army that now was upon the march into England.

The Scottish Nobility very readily promised him money, nay, The Scots offer
assistance.
and to assist him with men and Arms in the expedition; which was an accession
to Monk's good fortune, that when he might have made use of so great assistance
from Scotland, he did not stand in need of it.

For being a man of a sharp wit, Monk considers of it.
he was not willing that Scotland should come under the power of another, the
Inhabitans being armed; nor, that they accompanying him into England, might
render his coming ungrateful at home.

Trusty Officers being left to command the Garrisons of Scotland, the Soldiers
rightly modelled, The Commissioners sign the Pacification. November. 15.
and all things in a readiness for the expedition, of a sudden news is brought
to Edinburrough that the Peace was confirmed; but upon so hard and uneasy
terms, that Monk with anger in his looks severely checked the Authors of the
hateful Reconciliation upon their return; telling them, Monk is angry.
That if the honesty of some, certainly the prudence of all of them, was to be
suspected; and committed Wilks to prison for transgressing his Commission.

The truth was, Monk's Commissioners being by Fleetwood's Officers, with a show
of honor, narrowly observed, and in a manner confined, ignorant of the Stirs
abroad, and imposed upon by false reports of the diminution of Monk's Forces,
with more haste than judgment, had clapped up an unjust Peace.

Clarges informs Monk of the affairs of London.
In the mean time Monk having had certain intelligence from Clarges, a faithful
man, that Fleetwood was daily more and more despised at London; that at York
Lambert 's Army was divided and full of Faction: judging a delay more
convenient for himself than for the Enemy, industriously protracted the Treaty.

Whereupon he prorogues the Pacification:
Having therefore sent Letters to Fleetwood, he acquainted him, That the news of
a Pacification was very acceptable to him, but that he found some things
doubtful in the Conditions, and other matters not rightly transacted by his
Commissioners; that therefore that the agreement might be more solid (all
Officers being removed) he desires the number of Commissioners to be increased,
And demands a new place of Treaty.
and Newcastle as a more proper place for their meeting.

Fleetwood and Lambert condescend.
Fleetwood condescended more out of fear than choice: but Lambert, whose whole
ability consisted in charging an Enemy, rashly and fatally deluded to his own
ruin, accepted also of the delays of Treaty.

Lambert posses himself of Newcastle. Monk goes to Caldstream, October. 8.
Lambert in the mean time moving from York, came to Newcastle; and Monk leaving
Berwick, marched along the borders of Scotland, and pitched at Caldstream, an
inconsiderable Village upon the River of Tweed, but now famous by the Pavillion
of so great a General. It was for some time the Capital of the Affairs of
Britain, and had the splendor of a City: For, -- Veios habitante Camillo,
Illic Roma fuit --
Veii was Rome, if there Camillus lived.


The season was very sharp, the ground being covered with Snow, and Lambert's
Soldiers wanting provisions and money, were forced to live upon what they
plundered from the Villages and Country about, the want of Pay being some
excuse for that licentiousness. Monk's Forces, in the mean time being provided
of all necessaries, kept themselves secure within their Camp.

Monk's Army, The number of Monk's Army.
more considerable for valor than number, consisted only of four Regiments of
Horse, commanded by Johnston, Morgan, Knight, and Cloberry, brave men, and
Commanders consummated in War: and of six Regiments of Foot, under the command
of Major General Morgan, another Morgan, Fairfax, Rhede, Lidcott, and
Hublethorn. Price and Gomble were the Chaplains, Clark Secretary, and Barrow
Physician to the General.

Whilst matters were in this state in the Camps at a distance, London was
divided by Factions. Tumults in the mean while in London.
On the one hand the Republican Sectarians whose hopes were founded on
mischief, stood for the Rump-Parliament; on the other, the Soldiers in the
City were for Fleetwood and the Committee of Safety: but juster Grievances were
to be heard amongst the frequent sighs of the good Citizens.

That the Rump-Parliament made up of most profligate wretches, was in vain
turned out, And Grievances.
if the Government must remain in the hands of the Commitee of Safety, a new
name for old Rogues; and the Cromwels had fallen in vain, if Fleetwood and
Lambert must be raised to Supreme Authority. Though the soft temper of the one
was less feared, than the imperious ambition of the other.

And some there were that at a distance wished well to Monk, and looked upon
him as a fitter Restorer of their Liberty; who taking boldness from despair,
spared not to say, That the Commonwealth was almost undone, whilst sacrilegious
Robbers contend about the Government; that England was never in so great
distress, nor reduced to such extremity; that having suffered the greatest
evils, nothing worse could befall them.

And so with bitter Invectives they reckon up the Imprisonments,
Sequestrations, continual Taxes, and the other severities they had been
obnoxious to.

That they had long enough born the burden of the accursed Parliament, and
groaned under the Yoke of an enraged Enemy: That the Power of both was
abominable, and their Bondage grievous: That wicked Parricides laughed at their
Miseries, whilst they falsely call Slavery, Peace; Cruelty and Slaughter,
Discipline: That since whether they be overcome or do submit, they must perish;
how much more honorably would they perish in the embraces of their Liberty and
Country? That slavery is less ignominious to those who attempt their freedom,
and that they had already sinned enough through cowardice: That they should
shake off the Yoke of the Jangling Traitors, and put an end to so many years
bondage: That the rash attempts of the daring have often been favored by
fortune: That secret hopes in Monk, wealth in the City, the fortune of London,
and God their Protector, were still in being: That it would be glorious to
themselves and Posterity, to have expiated the civil Troubles wantonly begun by
their Ancestors, and the Royal Blood of Charles the Martyr, by restoring his
Son with no other helps than the Loyalty of his own Subjects.

Amidst these discontented Speeches and City-tumults, The tumult of the
London-Prentices.
a vast crowd of Prentices and Serving-men got together: a bold sort of men,
accustomed to an insolent kind of City-liberty, who tired out by long slavery,
with a licentious freedom, run about in all places in a tumultuary and confused
manner, demanding a new and full Parliament, as the only Remedy to their Evils.

But Colonel Hewson, formerly a Cobbler, Is suppressed by Hewson. December. 3.
being by Fleetwood sent into the City with a Party of brisk Soldiers, in a
moment suppressed the defenseless anger of the Rabble, and the headless
Multitude, and used many severities against the Citizens.

The Grievances of the City increasing daily, The Garrison of Portsmouth rises
for the Rump.
Wetham Governor of Portsmouth admitted into the place three Members of the
late excluded Rump, and Colonels in the Army, to wit, Hazelrigg, Walton, and
Morley: against whom Fleetwood having sent Forces, they despairing of the
strength of their Friends, and having neither money nor credit, revolted to the
Enemy.

Nor was this all the misfortune that befell Fleetwood and the Committee of
Safety: The Navy endeavors the same.
for Vice Admiral Lawson with a Fleet of Ships true to the Cause, stopped the
mouth of the River of Thames, threatening to suffer none to escape by Sea, if
they did not again restore the Rump to the power of Government.

All things everywhere growing worse and worse, Fleetwood yields to the Rump.
the Committee of Safety was startled; and Fleetwood unfit for adversity, who
never could bear prosperity, and growing daily more contemptible and cheap,
neither constant in his Resolution, nor resolute in his Treachery; having sent
a fawning Messenger to Lenthal the Speaker, he prays and beseeches, more
slavishly than became a General, that the Members being forthwith called
together, they would take upon them the Government, and receive them into
favor who confessed their error. And indeed many of the Committee of Safety,
The Committee of Safety wavers.
though they were very desirous of retaining their Power, yet consulted about
the restoring of the Rump, knowing very well that their Government would not be
long, if Lambert returned victorious from the North.

Fleetwood's soldiers make defection to the Rump.
And now General Fleetwood's Regiments selling their souls and blood for Eight
pence a day, under Colonels of the Democratical Faction, return under the power
of the Rump, forgetting their yesterdays-Commander, who carried the empty Title
of General. Nor was there any public Commodity so saleable as the Treachery of
the Soldiers.

The Committee of Safety is dissolved.
This was the Exit of the two months-whirlegig of Government; the very names of
Fleetwood and Lambert grew contemptible, and Safety forsook the Committee.

So soon as Monk understood that the Fleet were for the Rump, and that the
Garrison of Portsmouth was of the same mind, having speedily recalled his
Commissioners, he broke off the Conference and Overture of Peace with Lambert.
In the mean time he wrote to him, Monk breaks off the Conference of
Pacification.
That since he understood that the Parliament by their own authority had chosen
Portsmouth for their Session, he thought it not consonant to his trust and
modesty, by private Debates to constitute a private Commonwealth; but rather
setting aside the Quarrels of the two Armies, to refer the administration of
public Affairs to their prudence and care.

The Rump restored to the Government. December. 6.
The Reverend Rump now strikes in again, in the last year of their government,
and probably the best for the Public; though reinstated more by the beggary
than the good will of the Soldiers. And this was the reason that their chief
care was for money, and that the Soldiers might be paid by the spoils of the
State. Recals Lambert's Army.
Lambert's forces are imperiously commanded back to their Garrisons, and
forthwith to leave the Field, upon pain of disobeying the Supreme Power, and
forfeiting their Duty. And at the same time news was brought to Monk's Camp,
that the Committee of Safety was broken, and the Rump again in power.

What could Lambert now between hawk and buzzard do? he was forsaken by
Fortune, deluded by Fleetwood's confidence, overreached by Monk under a color
of Peace, and despised by the Rump. Should he return to London, it was a long
and difficult march; and perhaps as late for the succor of his friends as
dangerous to himself, having such an Enemy in the rear. Should he engage Monk
in a Country improper for Horse, the ground being covered over with Ice and
Snow, it would be very uncertain, if not in vain, since in the dead of Winter
his Horse could do no feats: What to do he could not tell.

Nor were Lambert's men truer to their Trust than Fleetwood's had been at
London: The treachery of Lambert's men toward him.
for so soon as they heard of the defection of the London-Regiments, basely,
without consulting their General, nay, and slighting his authority, they submit
to the Rump.

Few now were to be seen at Lambert's door, and fewer within; nothing but
silence, and seldom any Guards: He was no more General nor cause of the War;
but where he hoped for Laurel and Triumph, he was fain to search a hiding
place: so that without any attendance, he speedily and secretly betook himself
to London. So fallacious and uncertain a thing is Power, when it is too great.

A certain kind of Triumviral Power now exerted it self in Britain under Monk,
Fleetwood, and Lambert, not much unlike to that Roman Triumvirat of Caesar,
Pompey, and Crassus.

With almost the same gallantry Monk behaved himself in Scotland, as Caesar
heretofore governed in Gallia; but out of their Governments Monk out-did
Caesar: for the Roman being come into the City, offered violence to the Senate,
and unjustly usurped the Dictatorship. The other entering London, under color
of restoring the Parliament, by a rare instance of Loyalty and Modesty,
restored the King.

Nor were the emulous and competing Crassus and Pompey more sollicitous in
drawing in Caesar, than Fleetwood and Lambert were in endeavoring to associate
Monk into the Government: for though they contributed their mutual assistance
in overturning the Rump-Parliament, yet it is certain, they hardly conspired in
any thing, but in the fear that both of them had of Monk. Fleetwood was jealous
of Lambert's ambition; and Lambert could not brook Fleetwood's authority: the
one could not admit of an Equal, nor the other of a Superior.

Monk therefore was courted by Letters from both, as having it in his power to
give the Government to what Party he pleased. Nor could Fleetwood have expected
better Conditions from Lambert, had he prevailed against Monk; which those who
favored Fleetwood in his Army perceiving, avoiding all opportunity of fighting
with Monk, lest Lambert, perchance, getting the victory, might turn out his
Rival Fleetwood. Lambert can hardly be compared to Pompey, unless it be in
boundless ambition, and the unhappy issue thereof; and Fleetwood not at all to
Crassus.

But without doubt it was the interest of the Public that both were undone,
seeing Monk getting the better, restored at length Britain to it self.

Lambert's Forces in all places having either run away or submitted, Monk
divides his Army, 1659, 60.
Monk marches into England, January 1. 1659, 60.
and under his own and Morgan's conduct, marches straight to London; a march
that will be famous in all future Ages, and memorable to Posterity.

On New-years-day, having sent before the Foot, he moved from Caldstream, and
the day after he himself followed with the Horse, and took his Quarters at
Wellar: the next day, At Morpet he receives Letters from the Mayor of London.
when he was come to Morpet, he received Letters from the Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen of London, sent by the City- Sword Bearer, wherein they earnestly
entreat him, That according to the great Trust and Power he had, having now
found an occasion, than which, Providence had never offered a greater, he would
relieve the distressed State, and call a new and full Parliament, as the only
support of their tottering Country; freely offering him the assistance and
concurrence of the City in the affair.

And now on the fourth of January, He comes to Newcastle, Jan. 4.
Monk having marched his Army over desert Mountains in deep Winter-Snow,
arrived at Newcastle, and the day following sets forward to Durham; Jan. 5.
from thence directing his march to York; near Allerton he was honorably
received by the Sheriff of the County.

Being next day come to York, He enters York.
he was met by a multitude of Citizens and Persons of Quality, and by them
splendidly conducted into the City. Having performed so great a march in so
short a time, he rested here five days, either that he might let the news of
his coming fly before him to London, or that having allowed some time, he
might by his Agents, of whom he had a great many in the City, be early informed
of the Councils of the Rump, and inclinations of the Citizens.

Here Monk met with Fairfax, a famous Soldier, and his old Companion in the
Wars; who now following his own humor, Monk meets with Fairfax at York.
had risen in Arms against Lambert, and was with no contemptible Forces, but
far greater reputation, come over to the right side, being now with more honor
an Enemy, than he had heretofore been General of the same Army.

He sends part of his Army under Morgan back into Scotland.
During this stay at York, Monk received into his service some Regiments of
Lambert's Army, having changed the Colonels and Officers; and no Enemy now
appearing anywhere, he mustered his Army, and sent back part of it under the
command of Morgan into Scotland.

He himself, with four thousand Foot, and eighteen hundred Horse, marches
forwards toward London. Such was the Army of Monk, the least and yet most
renowned body of men that ever marched through England, which being hardly a
third part in number to the enemy, buoyed up the fate of tottering Britain, and
the fortune of Charles the Second.

Monk meets Clarges at Nottingham. Jan. 19.
The Army marching from hence, and being come to Nottingham, he was met by
Clarges, who came post from London, a man deservedly of great interest and
authority with him. He secretly informed him of the designs of the Rump, the
strength of the City-Forces, the suspicions and jealousies of the Sectarians,
and that the hopes of the Citizens depended wholly on him.

The Commissioners of the Rump meet Monk at Leicester. Jan. 22.
Upon his march he was met at Leicester, and congratulated by Scot and Robinson,
Commissioners from the Rump, upon pretext of doing honor to the General, and
civilly waiting upon him in his march; but in reality as Spies to dive into his
secrets, and diligently to observe his words and actions.

Nor was Monk less circumspect, but being a great concealer of his thoughts,
and sparing in words, accommodating all his discourse to occasion, and showing
the Commissioners all imaginable respect in the Army, he confirmed them in the
opinion of his sincerity.

In this long and triumphant march, The people everywhere petition Monk for a
new Parliament.
he advanced amidst the Applause and Congratulation of all men, and everywhere
was met by the people, who, to the grief of the Commissioners, petitioned him
for a full and free Parliament, as the only Remedy to their Evils. The same
the Commissioners from the City of London desired, upon their meeting the
General at Harborough. At Northampton he met with the like. And most part of
the neighboring and more remote Counties of England, sent him Deputies and
Petitions to the same effect: all which, Monk that kept his own counsel,
civilly received, but cautiously answered.

Now was Monk arrived at St. Albans, From St. Albans he sends to the Rump, Jan.
28.
within twenty miles of London, wholly intent upon his entering the City.
Therefore by Colonel Lidcolt he prudently wrote to the Rump to acquaint them
with his approach; And that seeing he had brought with him an Army true to the
Parliament, and most observant of Discipline, he intimated to them, that it
would be unsafe to mingle his honest and faithful Soldiers with the
treacherous Forces in London, Desiring Fleetwood's Forces to be sent out of
Town.
who were so lately endeavoring changes, and their fierceness not as yet
wholly laid aside: that therefore for the safety of the Parliament, he
earnestly entreats them, that sending forthwith Fleetwood 's Forces out of
Town, they would order them Quarters to be appointed by the
Quarter-Master-General. This was the reason alleged in public, but in secret
there was another.

The Rump consented to Monk's desire, The Rump consented.
whether cordially, or rather out of fear, I shall not determine. And therefore
Fleetwood's men are ordered to leave the City, and to go and quarter in the
Country at a distance.

Fleetwood's men march angrily out. Feb. 2.
But the Pretorian Bands being long pampered in London, angrily, and with a
threatening carriage, left the City; rage being mingled with their obedience,
and the hatred of the Parties still remaining after the War.

Monk enters London.
Monk in the mean time came from St. Albans to Barnet, and the day following
being the third of February, marched into London in order. He himself in
military pomp lead the Horse through the streets of London, and, not without a
presage, took his Lodgings in Whitehall.

The Parliament had been so often garbl'd and curtailed, that it was then by
the People in derision called the Rump: But these Senatorian Conspirators, the
shame and scorn of all honest men, being of insolent tempers, and now the third
time got into power, blown up with prosperity, began more and more daily to
insult over the Public; and being in fear on both hands, from their friends as
well as foes; and knowing that their strength consisted more in Fame than in
Force, they resolved to establish their Tyranny by a new Oath, The Rump by Oath
abjures Monarchy.
and that the desperation of all Pardon might add strength to this Bond of
Iniquity, to compel the People to swear not only, that they should bear Faith
and true Allegiance to the Commonwealth of England, and the present Parliament;
but that they should also renounce and abjure all Allegiance to Charles the
Second, and the whole Royal Family: Which was the last effort of their expiring
Fortune.

In the mean time the Rumpers, being themselves employed in perpetrating the
highest Crimes, let those of Booth's Party, and of the revolting Regiments,
pass unpunished, as below their notice.

And now the Council of State, consisting of the most villainous Republicans,
The Council of State offers Monk the Oath.

He delays. He goes to the Rump. Feb. 6.


renders the Oath to Monk; which he, as taking time rather to consider than
refusing it, prudently avoided.

The third day after Monk had entered the City, being attended by Scot and
Robinson, he went to the House, where the Speaker Lenthall, a mighty man at
words, and nothing else, having commended his fidelity and good services
rendered to the Parliament, in restoring them by his Arms to their Authority,
gave him the public Thanks of the House.

And now what Speech he again made to the Rump, I shall in his own words relate.

Mr. Speaker,
AMongst the many Mercies of God to these poor Nations, your peaceable
Restitution is not the least; it is (as you sad) his work alone, and to him
belongs the glory of it. And I esteem it as a great effect of his goodness to
me, that he was pleased to make me, amongst many worthier in your service, some
way instrumental in it. I did nothing but my duty, and deserve not to receive
so great an honor and respect as you are pleased to give me at this time and
place; which I shall ever acknowledge as a high mark of your favor to me. Sir,
I shall not now trouble you with large Narratives; only give me leave to
acquaint you, That as I marched out of Scotland hither, I observed the People
in most Counties in great and earnest expectations of a Settlement; and several
Applications were made to me, with numerous Subscriptions to them. The chiefest
heads of their Desires were, for a free and full Parliament, and that you would
determine your sitting; a Gospel Ministry; encouragement of Learning and
Universities; and for admittance of the Members secluded before the year 1648.
without any previous Oath or Engagement. To which I commonly answered, That you
are now in a free Parliament; and if there be any force remaining upon you, I
would endeavor to remove it; and that you had voted to fill up your House, and
then you would be a full Parliament also; and that you had already determined
your sitting: and for the Ministry, their maintenance, the Laws, and
Universities, you had largely declared concerning them in your last
Declaration; and I was confident you would adhere to it. But as for those
Gentlemen secluded in the year 1648. I told them, you had given judgment in it,
and all people ought to acquiesce in that judgment; but to admit any Members to
sit in Parliament without a previous Oath or Engagement to serve the Government
in being, it was never done in England. But although I said it not to them, I
must say (with pardon) to you, That the less Oaths and Engagements are imposed
(with respect had to the security of the common Cause) your settlement will be
the sooner attained to. I am the more particular in these matters, to let you
see how grateful your present Consultations about these matters will be to the
people. I know all the sober Gentry will close with you, if they may be
tenderly and gently used; and I am sure you will so use them, as knowing it to
be the common concern, to accomplish and not lessen our interest; and to be
careful that neither the Cavalier nor the Fanatic Party have yet a share in
your Civil or Military Power; of the last, whose impatience to Government you
have lately had so severe experience of. I should say something of Ireland and
Scotland: indeed Ireland is in an ill settled condition, and made worse by your
interruptions, which prevented the passing an Act for the settlement of the
Estates of Adventurers and Soldiers there, which I heard you intended to have
done in a few days; and I presume it will be now quickly done, being so
necessary at this time, when the wants of the Commonwealth call for supplies:
and people will unwillingly pay Taxes for those Estates, of which they have no
legal assurance. I need not tell you how much you were abused in the nomination
of the Officers of your Armies there; their malice that deceived you has been
sufficiently manifested. I do affirm, that those now who have declared for you,
will continue faithful; and thereby convince, that as well there as here, it is
the sober interest must establish Dominion. As for Scotland, the People of that
Nation deserve to be cherished much; and I believe your late Declaration will
much glad their spirits: for nothing was more dreadful to them, than a fear to
be overrun with Fanatic Notions. I humbly recommend them to your affection
and esteem, and desire the intended Union may be prosecuted, and their Taxes
made proportionably to those in England; for which I am engaged in promise to
become a Suitor to you. And truly, Sir, I must ask leave to entreat you to make
a speedy provision for their Civil Government there, of which they have been
destitute near a year, to the ruin of many Families: and except Commissioners
for managing of the Government, and Judges to sit in Courts of Judicature, be
speedily appointed, that Country will be very miserable. I directed Mr. Gumble
(whom I lately sent to you, to give you an account of the affairs of the
Scottish Army, and to make certain Proposals in their names) to present some
persons to you, both for Commissioners and Judges, which he did; but by reason
of your great affairs, they were not dispatched: but I humbly now offer them to
your consideration.


If what the General spoke was unpremeditated, Monk's Speech suspected by the
Members.
certainly it was well his upon: but how the Rump were satisfied with his
Speech, the sequel will make it appear. Besides, his declining to take the Oath
of Abjuration the day before, the freedom of his speech mightily netled the
Rump-Abjurors, who looked upon him as a Dictator rather than an Orator,
commanding rather than petitioning; and who had seemed as much dissatisfied
with the treachery of Fanatics, as the contumacy of the Cavaliers.

The Abjurors in the mean time, those Piles in the Rump, who had the sole power
in carrying of things, began to have jealousies of the sincerity of Monk's
intentions, and of the extraordinary affection of the people toward him; and
having found an opportunity, they delayed no longer to make a trial of his
thoughts and hidden designs.

The Londoners refuse to pay Taxes.
The Government of this Rump-Parliament was grown so contemptible and loathsome
to the Londoners, that an Order past in Common Council, That unless they had a
free and full Parliament, they would not pay one farthing of Taxes: which so
startled and incensed the guilty and timorous minds of the Members, that Monk
has forthwith severe orders to march into the City, Monk is sent into the City
in Arms. Feb. 9.
commit twelve of the more saucy Citizens to the Tower of London, and by
pulling down the City-Posts and Chains, Gates and Portcullices, in a military
manner quell the boldness of the People: which if he did, then the disgrace and
hatred would equally fall upon all; and that by that means they would prove
Monk's friendship, as if he refused, they might conclude him an Enemy.

To which he offers violence
Though Monk abhorred those cruel Orders of these Rulers, yet he marched into
the City with armed Forces, and contrary to his own inclination, puts in
execution the hateful Orders of the Rump.

This unexpected Aggression of Monk astonished the City, and the People were in
consternation at it, appearing first by a profound silence, then secret
murmurings, and amazed looks; but there was more sadness than fury in the case,
and the Town seemed rather surrendered than stormed. In the mean time the
Soldiers had the chief command, slighting the Authority of the Mayor, and
Dignity of the City.

-- Et nullos Comitatu est Purpura fasces.
-- And no Scarlet nor Gold-Chain appeared.
Now did the Londoners bewail their own credulity, and the false hopes they had
conceived of Monk; and desparing of humane assistance, they directed their eyes
to Heaven, presaging no less than a perpetual Bondage to the City.

This odious obedience performed by Monk to the Rump, put the Spectators to a
plunge, The action of Monk is variously interpreted.
and suffered various interpretations. But for what he so far hazarded his own
Reputation in obeying the Rumpers after this manner, or why, by so sudden a
change of counsel and conduct, he endeavored to regain their favor again, I
shall not venture to determine. The truth is, And is presently displeased with
himself for it.
being either conscious to himself of the injury and affront done to the City,
or having too much experienced the Arts and Treachery of the Rump, and being no
less prevailed upon by the Prayers of his Friends, and the Complaints of all,
he was sensible that his too great compliance with the Rumpers reflected upon
his own Honor, and that the Indignity offered to the City, had raised him too
much Envy.

The same night being come back to Whitehall, and casting about what was to be
done in this ticklish state of affairs, he called to Council privately some of
the Officers who were his greatest Confidents, and privy to his secret
designs, and having formed a Letter, He sends an angry Letter to the Rump.
Feb. 11.
he therein angrily complaining of several things to the Rump, as, That his
services done to the House were slighted, whilst the late Traitors, who were
not much less Enemies to them than to the Commonwealth, had with them now much
more credit and esteem than he. From whence else proceed your new kindness to
Lambert and Vane? and your new offenses against me? If the perfidy of the
Fanatics had still displeased you, why did you with so much respect receive
yesterday that Leering Heretic Barebones? and the insolent Rabble of
Sectarians, which lewdly in his company approached you with a dishonest
Petition?

This kindness of the House shown to a Rabble of Heretics, is not simple
(sincere). It is the common desire of the whole Commonwealth, the general
request of the People, Citizens, Soldiers, of every one, and all, That the
number of the Members being filled up within a week, and then your sitting
determined, you should give place to a new Parliament.

These Letters he sent the next morning by Lidcot and Clobery, two Colonels to
the House.

Monk returns into the City. Feb. 12.
In the mean time he himself hastens into the City, that he might make amends
for his fault, and wipe off the infamy of the foregoing day. Having sent a
Messenger before to acquaint the Lord Mayor with his coming, and mustered his
Army in Finsbury-fields, he is entertained at a splendid Dinner in the Lord
Mayor's house. After Dinner the Mayor conducted the General to the
Common Council of the City, where in a full Assembly of the Citizens in their
formalities, Makes a Speech to the Citizens:
He declared to them his trouble to see what affronts were offered to them by
Orders from the Council of State, which he obeyed; yet disliked that he was
necessitated to comply with those Commands; but with a resolution always to run
through the greatest dangers to serve them: That he had not forgot their kind
Letter at Morpeth, wherein he affectionately concurred, but was forced to
retire backwards, like a Fencer, to make the better ground, and the more
advantageous assault. That he had sent to the House that morning, And promises
a new Parliament.
that they should issue Writs for a full Parliament; and to this end he was
come to stay with them, and see his desires fulfilled; and that they should put
a period to their sitting by the sixth of May.

Monk's Speech was with delight and universal applause heard by the Citizens;
The Citizens rejoice.
and the name of a New Parliament so pleased the minds of the People, that the
City which appeared desolate and dejected in the morning, seemed transported
with joy at night, by the ringing of Bells and Bonefires.

Now was Monk in every bodies mouth; And honor Monk;
and the Multitude not able to contain their secret joys, proclaimed him the
Honor and Deliverer of their Country; Reproaching the Rump.
praying for and blessing him in all places. Then was the Rump loaded with the
Reproaches and Imprecations of all, with so much freedom, that it seemed to be
the first step to their Liberty, thus to despise their Oppressors. Which was
offended at Monk's Letter.
Nor was this night revelling of the over-joyed People less boundless, than the
Rage of the Rumpers was before, upon the reading of Monk's Letter. They in
great indignation complain, that the violence of old, offered by Cromwell, and
more lately by Lambert, was not more grievous, than the present-imperious
boldness of Monk, in prefixing a day to their dissolution.

But the old Commissioners, Scot and Robinson, being sent into the City to the
General, they offered him the hypocritical Thanks of the Rump for his quelling
of the City; and concealing their displeasure at his Letter, they promise a
fuller Parliament: and that their dissimulation might be the more specious,
they invite Monk again to Westminster to assist them with his counsel.

The General and his Friends gave them a doubtful answer, as well knowing that
the civility of the proud Rumpers was not for naught: However, it was the
interest of both Parties to continue their dissimulation.

But the Commissioners upon their return, having brought advice of the joyful
familiarity that was betwixt the General and the Citizens, the Rump smelt out
Monk's design, and were distracted in their thoughts. Wherefore they forthwith
set about the lessening of his power in the Army; The Rump weakens Monk's
authority.
appointing a Committee of five for ordering the affairs of the Forces; which
if they could have gone through with, the English Army being altogether averse
from Monk, they had certainly ruined his fortune.

So soon as Monk heard that he was made one of five Generals, being
unaccustomed to affronts, and equally slighting the baseness and treachery of
the Rumpers, He takes it in indignation.
he took greater care of his affairs: And that he might not make use of the
counsel of Enemies and Traitors only, he desires a Conference with the old
secluded Members; upon whose sense and inclinations when he found there was
more to be grounded, And sends the secluded Members to the house. Feb. 21.
and perceived them to be fit men for qualifying matters, and not averse from
his own designs in time, he sent them to the Parliament attended by a guard of
Soldiers.

The secluded Members in the mean time entering the House again, The Abjurators
depart.
the baser and viler sort of the Abjurors being now in despair, left the House.
The rest being more moderate, continued to join with their restored
Fellow Members in the administration of the affairs of the Public.

The Votes of the fuller Parliament.
The Parliament being now increased in number, and the Vote of their own
exclusion being in the first place repealed, they appoint Monk General of all
the Forces in Britain and Ireland, and order money straight to be levied for
the Pay of the Soldiers. They appoint Montague Admiral of the Fleet; give
liberty to Booth's Prisoners, and the Captive Citizens; in whose place Lambert
was afterward clapped up in the Tower.

Whilst the Parliament was busied in the affairs of the Commonwealth, Monk
acquaints the distant Forces, with the restoration of the Parliam. Feb. 21.
Monk in the mean time wholly taken up about the care of the Forces, having
called a Council of his Colonels, dispatched Letters to all the Regiments of
the Army and their Officers, that were quartered up and down Britain and
Ireland, to certify them of the reason of the readmission of the Members, with
large assurances of their constancy to their old Profession and Principles; and
that without this Expedient there was no way to satisfy the Nation, or raise
money for the subsistence of the Army or Navy.

The distant Regiments in the mean time wanting Money and Necessaries, They
consent to him.
and having tried the experience of both fortunes, chose rather to comply, and
have their certain Pay, than to stand it out, and trust to uncertainties.

But Monk, to make sure of the Forces, And take an Oath to be true to the
Parliament.
made them all take a new Oath to be true to the Parliament; which the Colonels
and Officers of his own Army, and many of the English Forces willingly did: but
those who refused or scrupuled, he disarmed and casheered. And now Monk had the
sole power over both Armies, and received all Soldiers as bound by the same
Oath under the same General.

Monk before this had removed his Quarters from Whitehall to St. James's: There
amongst others, Monk quarters at S James's. Here he receives Letters from the
King, by the hands of Greenvile. March 18.
William Morris was a chief Confident of the General's, a man of great
solidity and prudence, as the times went. By his means Greenvile a Knight being
introduced to Monk, and all company being removed, he privately delivered him
Letters from King CHARLES.

Having read them, he makes an answer suitable to the times and the doubtful
state of affairs, resolving neither to say too much, nor to conceal all his
mind; and so tempered his expressions, that he might seem to reserve a fuller
answer in his actions. And this was the first step to the restoring the
Government to Charles the Second.

Greenvile returned to Brussels to the King with the joyful and expected news
of Monk's good inclinations toward his Majesty. But by how much the Parliament
and Monk seriously applied themselves to the settling of affairs, by so much the
more the bloody Parricides used all their Arts and Treachery, by sowing
Sedition in the Camp, and raising Tumults amongst the Sectarians in the City,
to stir up new Commotions; nor did Treachery end with the War. A new Conspiracy
of the Traitors.
For the Abjurors having no more opportunity of doing mischief in the
Parliament House, kept Cabals and secret Conferences with the lately-disbanded
Officers of the English Army, and being crushed in the head, stung with the
tail.

As to what may be gathered from the present actings of the Parliament, and the
secret inclinations of Monk, (say they) the restoration of the Government of
Charles Steuart is not far off: That therefore they thought to consider in time
that their affairs were in a slippery condition; and that without their ruin
and overthrow, Charles would not mount the Throne. That the Trophies of so many
Wars, the glorying in the assistance and protection of God, and the actions of
so many years, would not now avail them.

That it was madness, after the slaughter of so many Royalists, the killing of
so many Nobles, and the unparalled Crime of the Murder of Charles the First,
to expect from a young banished man, and exasperated by a long Exile, a Pardon,
1660.
which God Almighty would hardly give for so many Villainies.

That there remained then no remedy for them, but a daring boldness, whilst as
yet neither the Authority of the Parliament in the House, nor that of Monk in
both the Armies, was firmly enough settled. Let us therefore dare, say they, and
re-attempt Murders, Rapines, Disturbances of State, and all those Villainies
that for twenty years past have so well succeeded with us; rather than tamely
and cowardly deliver up our Liberty purchased by our bloods, into the power of
an Enemy, who will the more cruelly be revenged upon us, that he has been so
often baffled and defeated by us. Let us either by greater Crimes justify the
past, or bury our misfortunes with our lives in the ruin of the Commonwealth.

-- Trahere omnia secum
Mersa juvat, gentesque suae miscere ruinae.
If we must sink, we'll drown the State,
And involve Nations in our Fate.
Having thus concerted a Conspiracy, there wanted only an opportune Leader;
but then Lambert being the person of greatest reputation amongst the Fanatics,
was thought the fittest to undertake that Charge.

Having therefore corrupted his Keepers, Lambert escapes out of Prison. April 9.
he made his escape out of the Tower by night; then lurking privily in the
City, and consulting with the Ringleaders of the Party, they concluded amongst
themselves, O damnable madness! by corrupting the English Regiments, and
raising Sedition in the Army, to renew a Civil War.

And so Lambert secretly posts to Warwick, He gathers together an Army.
the place appointed for their meeting: Thither came Axtell, Okey, Cobbet,
Creed, and other bloody Traitors; where being joined by Turncoats and the
disbanded Soldiers of the English Regiments, whom they had allured into their
Party, they suddenly make up an Army; and so the unhappy General is once more
in command.

The first that gave Monk intelligence of Lambert's Insurrection was Colonel
Streater, who was with a Regiment of Foot quartered in Northampton.

The Council of State hearing of the escape of the Conspirators, Lambert is
proclaimed a Traitor.
proclaim Lambert and his Adherents Traitors. Monk in the mean time, lest
leaving the City of London, he might bring the public safety in danger,
resolved to reserve his main Force for greater occasions, and to send in all
haste, some Horse after Lambert to crush the design in its Infancy.

Ingoldsby is sent against Lambert.
Richard Ingoldsbey acquitted himself like a brave man, retrieving by a bold
attempt the faults, that being a Colonel under both the Cromwels, he had
formerly committed. He having Orders from Monk, with a body of Horse hastened
to join Streater's Foot at Northampton; and on the two and twentieth of April,
being Easter Day, within two miles of Daventry came in sight of the Enemy in an
open Country fit for a Horse-fight, and no less for flight.

Lambert, before his Forces were ripe for Action, being thus unexpectedly
beset, for a last proof of his Valor drew up his men in order to fight,
leaving the rest that was not in his power, Both prepare to fight,
to destiny; and Ingoldsbey did the like: both for some hours mutually
expecting the charge.

Whilst thus they delayed to engage, it was reported that Lambert made some
overtures of restoring Richard Cromwell, whom he knew Ingoldsbey to have been
much affected to, that so he might save Stakes: But he disdaining to see the
force of that scenical Prince played again, they must come to blows. Providence
appeared in the engagement: And do fight.
for hardly had they begun to skirmish, but that many of Lambert's Horse turned
to Ingoldsbey's side; the rest either daunted at the desertion of their
Companions, or the force of the Enemy, took quarters and yielded.

Which when the Commanders perceived, they began to think of running.
Ingoldsbey charging then home, put Lambert hard to it; Lambert is overcome,
who far below the great fame that he had acquired in Arms, his Courage sinking
with his Cause, and forgetting his former Reputation, And taken.
tamely yielded himself Prisoner.

With Lambert, Cobbet and Creed were taken; but Axtell and Okey making their
escape, delayed, but avoided not their deserved punishments.

And now again Lambert, forsaken of his Friends, and a Prisoner, became
sensible of his fortune. Yet this fresh madness of Rebels, had it not been
seasonably quelled by Ingoldsbey and Streater, would have again embrewed the
Nation in Blood and Slaughter, and turned all things into new Disorders.

The very day that Monk mustered the Militia of London, Ingoldsbey brought his
Prisoners to Town; Is carried a Prisoner to the Tower of London.
who were now led in triumph where they had so often triumphed by their
Villainies, passing disarmed through armed Soldiers. And thus the Civil Wars
had an end.

Not long before, March the 17th, The dissolution of the Long Parliament. March
17.
the Long and Black Parliament dissolved themselves; a Parliament infamous for
such havoc made in the State, so many impudent and unwarrantable Undertakings,
and for the murder of Charles the Martyr; being twice garbl'd, twice turned
out, twice restored, and at length much more happily ended than begun.

And now, on the five and twentieth of April, a new and more auspicuous
Parliament assembled, A new one met. April 25.
being made up, according to the ancient English custom, of Lords and Commons.
The Earl of Manchester was Speaker of the House of Lords, and Sir Harbotle
Grimstone of the Commons. And this conjunction of both Houses seemed a natural
Prelude to the Kings Restoration.

The People desire a King.
For the English accustomed to Kingly government, cried, that there remained no
other way of remedying the public Distempers, but a submission to the rightful
government of Charles the Second. So was it ordered above, that God and man
should concur in recalling the King to his Throne. And so great was the fame of
the Virtues and Accomplishments of this August young Prince, that though by
reason of a long Exile, he was by face almost unknown to all, and though he had
not had a lawful and hereditary Title to the Crown, yet they would have courted
him to accept of the Government. Nor was he less desirable, when compared and
put into the balance with those bloody Usurpers. Nay, the compassionate sense
of his adverse Fortune and tedious Exile kindled also in his Subjects an
affectionate desire of recalling him to his Right.

And the inconsiderate mistakes of the imperious Traitors at length came to
this, That the Commonwealth no less desired the King, than the King the
Government; and the languishing condition of the Public made it as, if not
more, necessary for the English to have a Prince, than for him to have a People.

The King comes to Breda.
While these things were a doing, Charles, wholly intent upon the motions of
England, leaving Brussels, a Town under the Spanish dominion, came to Breda
which belongs to his Nephew the Prince of Orange; From whence he sends Letters
to the Parliament, etc. April 14.
from whence he dispatched Sir John Greenvile with Royal Letters to both Houses
of Parliament, and Letters also to General Monk and the Officers of the Army,
to the Mayor and Common Council of London, and to Montague Admiral of the Fleet.

Which were received with so universal a Joy and Applause, that the Parliament
forthwith ordained him to be proclaimed KING in the City, and all over England,
with the accustomed Solemnities, having made a Proclamation to this purpose.

Although it can no way be doubted but that his Majesty's Right and Title to
these Crowns and Kingdoms, The Parliaments Proclamation.
is and was every way complete by the death of his most Royal Father of
glorious memory, without the ceremony or solemnity of a Proclamation; yet since
Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to the end that all good
Subjects might upon this occasion testify their duty and respect; and since
the armed violence, and other the Calamities of many years last past, have
hitherto deprived us of any opportunity wherein we might express our Loyalty
and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore the Lords and Commons now assembled
in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of
the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now present; do according
to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and unanimously acknowledge and
proclaim, That immediately upon the decease of our late Sovereign King CHARLES
the First, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the Kingdoms,
Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent Birthright, and
lawful undoubted Succession, descend and come to his most Excellent Majesty
King CHARLES the Second, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next Heir of
the Bloud-Royal of this Realm; and that by the goodness and providence of
Almighty God, he is of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the most potent, mighty,
and undoubted King. And thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit and
oblige our selves, our Heirs, and Posterities.

The King being proclaimed throughout the City with the joyful shouts and
acclamations of all, and all things being prepared for his reception, both
Houses of Parliament appointed an honorable body of Commissioners to be sent
to the King with their Letters, all men of great Quality and Birth: Obery Earl
of Oxford, Commissioners from the Lords to the King.
Charles Earl of Warwick, Lionel Earl of Middlesex, and Hereford Viscount of
Leicester, the Lords Berkley and Brooks, for the Lords.

Commissioners from the Commons.
The House of Commons chose Fairfax, Bruce, Falkland, Castletown, Herbert,
Mandiville, all Lords; Ashley-Cooper, Townsend, Booth, Holland, Chumley, and
Hollis, Knights: Who besides Letters, carried Instructions with them, humbly to
beg that his Majesty would be pleased to hasten his long wished-for return into
England.

The K. Dukes, of York and Gloucester have Presents sent them from the
Parliament.
And because they knew that the Exchequer of their exiled King could not be very
full, they order them to carry him a Present of fifty thousand Pieces of Gold;
and also ten thousand to the Duke of York, and five to the Duke of Gloucester.

Clerges, a person in great favor with the King, carried General Monk's and
the Armies Submission and Letters.

The Londoners send Commissioners and Presents.
The City of London also sent twenty Commissioners chosen out of the Flower of
the Citizens: and the wealthy Citizens present the King and his Illustrious
Brothers with twelve thousand pounds.

All things now succeeding beyond expectation, Monk was secure in his fortune,
having so dexterously managed things, The Traitors with astonishment beheld the
Revolution.
with such innocent and harmless Arts defeated the Snares and Arms of the
Parricides, and procured the public safety without blood, that the same Virtue
of the General was both hated and admired; whilst the praying Sectaries in vain
called upon God, who was not certainly the Lord of their Hosts now.

The Eleventh of May the Commissioners set sail from England, The Commissioners
sail from England,

May 11. and wait upon the K. at the Hague May 16.

Sir Thomas Clerges the first Messenger of the Kings coming.


and with all dutifulness waited upon the Kings Majesty at the Hague; where
they were gladly and kindly received by him.

Clarges had been with him before, whom the King having first knighted, sent
back into England as a Messenger of his coming; and having sent Letters to Monk
full of expressions of good will and gratitude toward the General and Army, he
designed Dover for his place of landing. In the mean time, by the Kings
command, Admiral Montague (since Earl of Sandwich) came with the Fleet upon the
Coast of Holland, and waited for the King before Scheveling.

And now all things being in a readiness for his departure, the best of Kings,
The K. went on board, May 23.
with the Dukes of York and Gloucester, came on board the Admiral. Thither they
were attended by the Queen of Bohemia their Aunt, their Sister the Princess of
Orange, and the young Prince their Nephew; where after they had taken a glad
Farewell, with a joyful Huzza of the Seamen they set sail.

Charles the Second now in possession of his Fleet, (the first Pledge of his
Government) which was speedily to waft him over to that of his Kingdoms, with a
prosperous Gale directs his course to Dover. Monk having received Letters by
Clarges, accompanied with a numerous train of Nobility and Gentry, Monk hastens
to Dover.
hastened thither to welcome him on the shore, and to pay Honor to that Virtue
at home, which he had reverenced at so great distance abroad.

So soon as the Fleet with full sail came in sight, innumerable crowds of
over-spied Spectators flocked to the shore, and Seacoast, and to every other
place from whence they might have any prospect, being desirous to see and
congratulate their restored Prince.

The Troubles of England Composed by his Majesty's happy Restoration.
There the King lands. May 25.
On the 25th of May, amidst the roaring of all the Canon in the Fleet, ecchoed
and answered from the Castle and shore, and, which was a more glorious sound,
amidst the joyful and louder Acclamations of his Subjects, AUGUST CHARLES
landed at Dover, with so much Piety, Gravity, and Gracefulness in his
Countenance, that he seemed to be come to pay his Vows to God, the Protector of
the Government. His department showed no Vanity nor Pride, but a mind rather
above the reach of them, yet capable of any fortune; and so great was his
Majesty in all his actions, that he seemed more to deserve than to desire a
Crown.

Monk receives the King upon his knees at his landing.
Here Monk falling upon his knees to welcome the King, was by his Majesty
embraced, kissed, and raised from the ground; the rest of the Nobility having
also performed their duty, the same night the best of Kings advanced to
Canterbury, The King hastens to Canterbury.

There he made Monk Knight of the Garter. May 27.


and next morning created Monk Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter,
the most illustrious Princes the Dukes of York and Gloucester putting the
George about his neck. Here the King spent Sunday, and restored the service of
the Church in the Metropolitan Church of England.

May 28. He came to Rochester.
Setting forward from hence, he lodged all night at Rochester, and next day upon
Black heath he viewed the Forces drawn up with much military pomp and
splendor: Forces heretofore only brave in shedding of Civil Blood, whose
Trophies and Triumphs were then disgraced with horrid Crimes; but now upon the
return of Charles, The K. views the Army upon the Road, and praises them.
loyally and deservedly triumphant. The Regiments drawn up in a most lovely
order, made an Army worthy of King Charles.

The King having by the famous Colonel Knight received the Salutations and
Respects of the Forces in their Arms, and having praised them for their
dutifulness and affection, proceeded forwards; the people strewing Flowers and
Leaves of Trees in the way, and in all places offering him the choicest marks
of their Honor.

When he was come near the City, The King is welcomed by the Lord Mayor and
Citizens of London.
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London welcomed him upon their knees. The Mayor
delivered his Majesty the Sword, the Badge of his Dignity, which the King
graciously gave him back again; and being conducted into a large and
richly-adorned Pavillion, was entertained at a splendid Collation.

From thence with a magnificent train of Persons of all quality, He enters
London. May 29.
over London Bridge he entered the City, amidst such a glorious appearance of
brave and great men, that scarcely in any Age the triumphal Bridge of Rome ever
bore a greater Pomp, or victorious Tyber saw, or Euphrates of old, By Tyber,
Euphrates, and Tygris, are meant the Roman, Persian, and Assyrian Empires, and
their Triumphs.
or the yet more ancient Tygris.

Along the Streets from London Bridge to White Hall, The Pomp of his entry.
on the one side in a continued order the Trained-bands of the City were drawn
up, and on the other, the Companies in their Livery-gowns, the houses on each
side being hung with Tapistry. The tops of the houses and windows were filled
with vast multitudes of Spectators, And Attendants.
the People from all places flocking to this glorious and joyful Show.

There were no less than twenty thousand richly attired on horseback. The first
that led the Cavalcade were some Troops of young Gentlemen in a various and
most rich dress and shining Arms, with Trumpets sounding before them. The
Sheriffs of London's men with their Spears, followed after; next after whom
marched six hundred of the chief Citizens, in Velvet-coats and Gold-chains.
Then followed the Kings Horse-guards, led by the Lord Gerrard their Captain.

With the cheerful music of Drums, Trumpets, and Waits, next advanced the
Sheriffs and Aldermen of London in their Scarlet-gowns, and their Horses richly
decked with Trapings; their Footmen attending them, shining with Gold and Silver.

Then followed the Kings of Arms and Heralds in their rich Coats; and next to
them the Lord Mayor, carrying in his right hand the naked Sword; and after him
the Illustrious Duke of Buckingham, and the renowned General Monk.

And now appeared Charles, the Wishes of all good men, and the Joys of the
happy, conspicuous in a triumphant Majesty: On the right hand rode the Duke of
York, on the left the Duke of Gloucester; he himself on a stately horse in the
middle, carrying all Triumphs and Diadems in his looks, which seemed then more
than humane.

After his Majesty, came his chief Courtiers and Servants. General Monk's
Lifeguard commanded by Sir Philip Howard; and then five Regiments of Horse of
Monk's Army, led by Colonel Knight.

This Triumphal Procession was brought up by a vast body of Noblemen and
Gentlemen, with red Colors fringed with Gold, in rich Attire, shining Arms,
their Swords drawn, and Plumes of Feather in their Hats.

In this order the King marched slowly through the City, amidst the shouts,
acclamations, and joyful looks of his Subjects, which he triumphantly heard and
beheld. And now entering his Royal Palace, he mounted the Throne of his
Forefathers on the twenty ninth of May, heretofore the day of his Birth, and
now of his Restoration; after he had been, since Worcester-fight, ten years
banished his Country.

The Members of both Houses of Parliament came to wait on his Majesty in the
Banqueting House, The two Houses come to congratulate the King.
there to express their joyful Congratulations for his Return, and unfeigned
Loyalty to the Government; which was eloquently done by the Earl of Manchester
for the House of Lords, and Sir Harbotle Grimstone for the Commons. The King
tired out with the Fatigues of his triumphant Journey, made them this short
Answer.

I Am so disordered by my Journey, and with the noise still sounding in my
ears, (which I confess was pleasing to me, because it expressed the Affections
of my People) as I am unfit at the present to make such a Reply as I desire;
yet thus much I shall say unto you, That I take no greater satisfaction to my
self in this my Change, than that I find my heart really set to endeavor by
all means for the restoring of this Nation to their Freedom and Happiness; and
I hope by the advice of my Parliament to assert it. Of this also you may be
confident, That next to the honor of God, from whom principally I shall ever
own this Restoration to my Crown, I shall study the welfare of my People; and
shall not only be a true Defender of the Faith, but a just Assertor of the
Laws and Liberties of my Subjects.

The night following was consecrated to Joy. The Conduits running Wine, The
night-joys of the Citizens.
and the whole City lighted by Bonfires. The loyal Citizens, willing to lull
asleep the memory of twenty years Calamities, merrily spent the night in the
noise of Trumpets, Drums, and Volleys of shot.

A happy revolution of affairs from the Kings Restoration.
The providence of God Almighty never appeared more visible in humane affairs:
for now the Golden Age returns, a Happiness too good for our times; the blessed
day shone forth, wherein King Charles being restored to his Country, restored
his Country to it self, and united Liberty and Monarchy, two things thought
incompatible under the traitorous Usurpers. The honor of the Laws, which makes
all things firm and durable, returned: The splendor of the Church of England,
and the ancient Rites of Worship, also returned; Piety coming in place of
Sectarian Superstition.

The King appoints a Privy Council, and Ministers of State.
The King having tasted a little of the delights of his Return, seriously set
about the settling of the State, entangl'd with so many Civil Dissentions, and
rent by Divisions; and in the first place appointed a Privy Council, and
disposed of the chief places of his Kingdom and Court.

The Duke of York made Admiral.
The King makes the most Illustrious James Duke of York Lord High Admiral, a
Prince renowned at home and abroad, and crowned with many Victories.

The Earl of Clarendon, Chancellor.
Edward Hide Earl of Clarendon, was made Lord Chancellor; in Eloquence not
inferior to the most famed Orators; nor in Prudence, to the greatest Statesmen.

The Earl of Southampton, Treasurer.
The uncorrupted Earl of Southampton, with Honor and Integrity, discharged the
Office of Lord High Treasurer.

The D. of Ormond, Steward of the K.'s Household.
The Illustrious charge of Steward of the Kings Household, was conferred upon the
Duke of Ormond, a Peer of a steady Judgment, of the Honesty of elder times, and
renowned both in Peace and War.

The Earl of Manchester, The E. of Manchester, Chamberlain.
whose Loyalty had been proved, was created Lord Chamberlain of the House.

Nicholas and Morris, two aged Knights, Nicholas and Morris, Secretaries of
State.
and consummated in business, were the Principal Secretaries of State.

Monk the Restorer, Monk Master of the Horse, and Duke of Albemarle.
formerly by the Kings Commission made General of all the British Forces, is
now advanced to be Master of the Horse, and honored with the Illustrious Title
of Duke of Albemarle. For his noble Extraction gave him a claim to the Honor
of the Albemarlian Family; and the bounty of the King in rewarding his good
Services, an Estate to support it.

Nor was the most Religious King less careful of the Church. Bishops restored
in the Church.
Those Bishops who had survived the fury of the Heretics, he restored to their
Sees; and chose others conspicuous for Primitive Piety, Learning, and a good
Life, in place of those that were dead; who with the same Piety and Humility
that they had suffered the Reproaches of Sectarians, and born the Calamities of
a Civil War, now in their old age carried the Miter, and governed the Church of
God.

The King made Juxon Archbishop of Canterbury and primate of all England, Will.
Juxon Archbishop of Canterbury.
a Prelate of Primitive Piety, venerable both in his books and words;
heretofore Confessor to Charles the Martyr, and his Assistent to the last,
whilst amidst the fury and reproaches of bloody Traitors, he took his leave of
this world.

-- Et nullo gemitu consensit ad ictum,
Despexitque nefas --
When without sighing, he received that Blow,
And bravely scorned the Villainies below.
And now it was no small comfort to many, that they to whom the Parricides had
formerly been liberal, were as poor as those whom they had robbed: but it was
fit that Clemency should usher in the new Administration of the Government; and
therefore Charles imitating God Almighty in mercifulness, An Act of Oblivion is
past.
past in Parliament an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion for all his Subjects,
except those who had embrewed their hands in his Fathers Blood; the rest of the
guilty Rebels being wonderfully pardoned: but whether with greater Policy or
Mercy, let Posterity judge.

The Army receives their Pay, and is disbanded.
The King now secure in his own Majesty, and the Loyalty of his Subjects,
resolved to disband the Army, which for so many years had been the Burden and
Grievance of the Nation; for the paying of which, a Tax by way of Poll, was
imposed on every head in England. The Soldiers had also a Donative bestowed
upon them, and many of the Officers were rewarded according to their merit.

Amidst the Joys wherewith the first three months of his Majesty's government
was blessed, The Duke of Gloucester dies, Sept. 13.
Henry Duke of Gloucester fell sick, and was fatally too soon snatched out of
this world by the Small Pox; so much the more lamented by the King his Brother,
and by the Kingdom, that at twenty years of age he had given such sublime
proofs of his Princely Accomplishments: And this alone may seem an Eclipse of
the Glory of Charles, that almost in his own triumph, he beheld the Funeral of
his dear Brother.

-- Manibus date Lilia plenis,
Purpureos spargam flores --
Bring plenty of white Lillies to his Hearse,
Whilst sad there the purple Rose disperse.
The affairs of England being settled, The King takes into consideration the
Government of England and Ireland.
Scotland and Ireland were to be taken care of: The King therefore appointed
Privy-Councils of the most Loyal Subjects of both Kingdoms, to manage the
Government, till he might advise about calling a Parliament in Scotland, and
sending over a Lord Lieutenant into Ireland.

After the dutiful Addresses of his Subjects at home, the neighboring Kings of
France, Sweden, Congratulatory Embassies from neighboring Princes to the King.
Denmark, and many Princes of Germany, by honorable Embassies congratulate the
Kings happy Restoration; all which were outdone by the pompous and splendid
train of the Prince Ligny, Ambassador from the Catholic King.

And now it was time to bring the Murderers of Charles the Martyr to their
Trials, The Kings Murderers brought to trial. October. 10.
many of whom were before clapped up in Prison; others fled away secretly, and
wandered in foraign and distant Countries; and some trusting to the hopes of a
Pardon, obeyed the Kings Proclamation, and freely surrendered themselves.

Therefore on the tenth of October, Harrison, Carew, Clements, Jones, Scot, and
Scroop, who had been of the number of the Judges that condemned the King, Cook
Attorney General, the famous infamous Peter's Chaplain to the Traitors, Axiell
and Hacker Commanders of the Guards, were brought to the Bar, not before an
accursed and new-made High Court of Justice, but according to the ancient Laws
of the Kingdom, before the chief Justices and the rest of the Kings Justices,
to be tried by a Jury of Twelve men, after the usual manner of England.

What they were accused of.
They were chiefly charged by the Attorney General and the Kings Council, That
they the aforesaid Traitors, and others guilty of High Treason, conspiring with
an accursed Army of Fanatics had carried away to Prison, King Charles,
securely treating a Peace with the two Houses of Parliament, which was almost
concluded in the Isle of Wight. So that the House of Lords being abrogated, and
the founder Members of the Commons, six and forty Villains that remained took
to themselves the name of a Parliament, invaded the Government, and decreed to
bring the King to a Trial.

By whose authority these Parricides (an High Court of Justice being impudently
constituted) had condemned and caused to be put to death the King of England,
who was above the Laws, contrary to the will, and to the great grief of the
People.

They make an idle base defense.
To their Indictment, rightly laid and fully proved, having made many false and
frivolous Answers concerning the supreme authority of the Parliament, which
indeed in this case had no authority at all, And are condemned.
they were by the Verdict of a Jury of Twelve men found guilty of and condemned
for High Treason. The same Verdict past also upon nineteen other of the Kings
Judges, but with a different event, as shall be mentioned in the proper place.

On the third of October a Gibbet was set up at Charing Cross near Whitehall,
whither in the morning Harrison being brought, Harrison hanged and quartered.
October. 3.
the first of the surviving Regicides both in guilt and punishment, with the
same madness and obstinacy as he had behaved himself at his trial, the cruel
Traitor affecting an undauntedness at his death, was hanged and quartered, as
he well deserved.

CAROLE, tuis jam Victima mittitur umbris,
Nec satis hoc fortuna putat, procul absit, ut ista
Vindictae sit summa tui --
Great CHARLES, a Victim to thy Ghost does fall,
And yet thy Fates are not appeased; no, all
That just Revenge is not yet paid that shall.
Harrison, rather of a base than low Birth, was the Son of a Butcher; bred at
first a Pettifogging Country-Attorney: but in the heat of the Civil Wars, when
the only way to get into Power, was Fanaticism and Treason, he fled to the
Rebellious Army; and there turning a furious Anabaptist, and advanced to be a
Colonel, he grew very intimate with Cromwell, and his Competitor in Villainy. But
being a proud and haughty fellow, and a most desperate Republican, he fell out,
and was highly displeased with Oliver when he was made Protector; not that he
hated the Tyrant Cromwell, but disdained to be outstripped, and to submit to one
who from a fellow-Souldier was become his Prince.

Carew came next and suffered the like death; Carew is hanged. October. 15.
but his Relations, who had served the King in the Wars, obtained, as a mark of
favor, the liberty of burying his body; which was the same night obscurely
performed.

The day following, Cook and Peter's, The death of Cook and Peter's. October. 16.
in the same place, suffered the same punishment; where Peter's by a drunken and
base death, disgraced his infamous life.

Cook was an obscure, ragged, beggarly Lawyer, and ambitious to get a Name by
any kind of Villainy. Peter's a Fanatical Tub-preacher, and the Jack-pudding of
the Ordinances. Sometimes he was Presbyterian, and sometimes Independent, as
the several Factions prevailed. He was the first of the Jugglers that from the
Pulpit sounded the Trumpet to Civil War, a fellow full of talk, and had a knack
of sporting the People into Sedition, with an insipid kind of Buffoonry and
Lying, which past with them for Eloquence, and became a Crony of Oliver's by a
flagitious compliance. October the seventh, Clements, Scot, Jones, and Scroop,
executed. October. 17.
Clements, Scot, Jones, and Scroop, suffered the same death upon the same
Gibbet, without any regard had to a decent end.

Clements was heretofore a Merchant in London; a lustful mercenary Traitor, who
abused his Parliamentarian Authority to Whoredom and Leachery.

Jones brought nothing with him out of Wales, his native Country, but Infamy
and an ignoble Extraction; he was first a Robber, and for his excessive
wickedness preferred to be a Colonel, he married Cromwell's Sister, who then
enriched his Relations with the Spoils of the Commonwealth: nor was he less
related to Oliver by Affinity than Villainy; and to many men prejudicial by his
ill nature.

Scot sprung out of a Brew House, and amongst other Calamities of the Civil
War, was admitted into the Parliament House; and of all the Traitors perhaps,
was the most inveterate Enemy to Charles the Martyr, of which Villainy he
bragged to the last: and so rejoiced in the Kings Murder, that he would have
Posterity remember him as an Author of so great a Crime; and besides the murder
of the King, was guilty of many other horrid Villainies.

Of all the Regicides that surrendered themselves, Scroop only was hanged: for
whether by indiscretion, or obstinacy, he drew upon himself this ill fortune;
or that a man's destiny is not to be avoided, I shall not determine: for after
that he had surrendered himself, he seemed so much to justify the Murder of the
King, that he chose rather to be looked upon as a Criminal than an humble
Supplicant.

Then Hacker and Axtell at Tyburn had the reward of their Treason. Hacker
formerly in London, Hacker and Axtell hanged at Tyburn. October. 19.
and Axtell in Bedford, had kept shops.

The Quarters of the Traitors, (their Bowels being burnt) and their Heads were
set up upon the Gates and public places of London.

The fugitive Regicides being summoned by Proclamation to appear, The
punishment of the fugitive Regicides.
were afterward by Act of Parliament declared guilty of High Treason, and
their Estates forfeited.

Nor did the just severity of the Parliament so punish the living, as to quite
forget the dead: for the like Sentence of High Treason was pronounced against
the deceased Ireton, Cromwell, Bradshaw, The bones of the deceased raised and
buried under Tyburn. Jan. 30. 1660, 61.
and Pride; who having, whilst alive, usurped the Government of the murdered
King, they with no less impudence, when dead, were pompously buried in Henry
the Seventh's Chapel, the burying-place of Kings of England.

The Parliament therefore ordered their Bones and stinking Carcasses to be
raised and buried under Tyburn; and in this posthumous disgrace being dragged
through the City, they had a Gibbet-interment.

I think it will not be amiss to give the Reader an account of the Original of
the last named Traitors, so famed for enormous Villainies; which here I shall
once for all subjoyn.

Ireton of a mean Extraction, Ireton 's Character.
was Cromwell's Son-in-law, and the Confident and Counselor of all his secret
Villainies; who, though to all others he was most hidden and reserved, yet to
this man he opened his heart; as he on the other hand was reported not only to
have kept his Counsels, but also to have advised him to act many of his worst
Villainies. He was esteemed the best Orator of all the Colonels, and had a
canting kind of preaching Rhetoric, more copious than eloquent.

Of Pride.
Pride descended of unknown Parents, and was Dray-man to a Brewer; but within a
short time, the affairs of England being in confusion, the rough-hewn Clown was
dignified and made proud by the Title and Authority of a Colonel: nor is it
certain whether he was the greater Knave or Fool.

And Bradshaw
Bradshaw was of the fatal High Court of Justice, the more fatal President, a
Lawyer of no account at the Bar, till being bribed by money, he got himself a
name by a most execrable Villainy. The Scarletrobed Brauler, and hardly more
innocent than Pilate, surpassed the wickedness of all the rest of the Kings
Murderers, by his boldness in condemning an innocent Prince, and adding
malicious scoffs to the impudence of the Fact, without any Reverence to Captive
Majesty.

The Original of Cromwell.
Cromwell indeed came of a better Race, but which he himself for ever disgraced.
The ancient dignity of his Family by the name of Williams, changed afterward by
his Ancestors, in the time of Henry the Eighth, to that of Cromwell, had its
original from a Blacksmith.

And his Manners.

Catalin luxuria primum, hinc conflata egestas, in nefaria concilia opprimendae
Patriae compulere. Flor. l. 4.


His Youth was loose, infamous and debauched; but having run out his Estate, and
from a prodigal Rogue turning Puritan, and then Fanatic, like another
Cataline, incited by Beggary, he ventured upon the overthrow of the State.

Bearing a mind above a private condition, he still appeared as a private
person, and had the art to set himself off undiscerned: He had a wonderful
dexterity amongst the Fanatic Rout, (in whose opprobrious friendship he
chiefly delighted) of winning upon the minds of the Rebels, shaking his bald
pate, and smiling with a deceitful Countenance; he was by Nature and Art
excellently disposed for alluring the affections of the Dissenters; nor do I
know whether amongst mortal men there was even a cunniner Artist in pretended
Piety, a wickeder or more crafty man, and bolder in attempting any Villainy.

But by what deceitful grinning Arts having overturned the Parliament, and
murdered the King, he raised himself to Supreme Power; many great Wits and able
Pens have already described: Much he did in War, but more by Perfidiousness,
Hypocrisy, Perjury, and Falsehood.

More cruel he was than the ancient Tyrants, whose Manners and Examples he
imitated: with Tiberius he was subtle and suspicacious, He had a crafty
disposition with a jealous head, Tacit. Annab. l. 1. p. 4.
and delighted in none of his Virtues so much as in Dissimulation; more easily
concealing Hatred than Fear. Nero he acted in the slaughter of his best
Countrymen, nor was he unlike him in driving a Coach. His Countenance carried
the bloody complexion of Domitian, In vita Agricolae.
and a redness that fortified him against Blushing.

But that he might not only appear famous through Crimes and Villainies, by
intervals he made a show of some great actions; not from a principle of
Goodness, but Ambition; nor out of love to Virtue, but Vanity, and future
Glory. This alone was wanting to his fortune and our slavery, that he had
neither a Son nor Successor able to match him.

Pity it was that that bold Orator, Milton.
or rather Bagpiper, was out of the way at the shameful Obsequies of the
Traitors, that the same hand which (reproaching all Kings in Latin) vindicated
the Party, and justified in writing the Crimes of the Parricides, now might,
though a surley looked Schoolmaster, have either made a Funeral-Oration for the
deceased, or sung their Praises in hanging Elegies; his Poetry surpassing his
Oratory, especially when he treated of such monstrous subjects.

Strangers may perhaps wonder, and no less our Posterity at home, that such
base and contemptible fellows, many of them Brewers, others who drank as they
had brewed, and spent their Estates; and some again whose ignominious Poverty
was a scandal to the Nation, should overturn the flourishing state of England,
and get to the top of Authority and Government.

Would we know the cause of it? These were the Spoils, and these the Trophies
of Heresy; which taking its rise from the Sermonizing Presbyterian Ministers,
increased by the Independants, hurried on by the Kennel of all the Sectarians,
and by a kind of flying Contagion spread over all the Forces, could not be
stopped till they had shed the Royal Blood, subverted the Parliament, and made
one ruinous heap of all good Subjects.

Mary Princess of Orange came into England Sept. 23. She died at London. Dec.
24.
Some time before, ( September the twenty third) the Princess of Orange was come
into her Native Country, more fatal to her than a foreign Land, to congratulate
his Majesty's return; but falling sick of the Small Pox at London, on
Christmas-Eve she died, being snatched away amidst the Triumphs and fresh
Laurels of her Brother Charles, she only shared in the adverse fortune of her
Family, and renewed the Mourning wherein the Court still was for the untimely
death of the Duke of Gloucester.

1661.
I shall begin the year with the Solemnities of the Coronation of King Charles.
On the two and twentieth of May, The Solemnities of the K.'s Coronation.
the King from the Tower of London, as the custom is at the Coronation of our
Kings, passed through the City; where in honor of so great a Solemnity, the
Citizens of London, in the more eminent places of the streets, erected four
Triumphal Arches of a vast height and bigness; elaborate Pieces of Art, and
exquisite Engines of Pomp, bearing Inscriptions and Devices, and adorned with
Painting and gilding.

The first Arch bore in its Frontispice the Triumph of Charles upon his return,
Triumphal Arches. The First.
To CHARLES the II.
By the grace of G. K. of G. Brit.
To the Best and Greatest,
And ever most Venerable,
Ever most August;
The most Happy and most Pious,
Who was born for our Good,
Who of his Native Britain,
And of Mankind in general,
Has deserved most:
To the Father of our Country,
The Extinguisher of Tyranny,
The Restorer of our Liberty,
The Founder of our Quiet,
In memory of his happy
And long-desired Restitution,
We Willingly and Joyfully
Have placed this.
S. P. Q. L.
CAROLO II.
D. G. Britanniarum Imp.
Optim. Maxim.
Vbique Venerando,
Semper Aug.
Beatissimo, and Piissimo.
Bono Reip. Nato,
De Avita Britan.
De omnium Hominum genere
Meritissimo
P. P.
Extinctori Tyrannidis,
Restitutori Libertatis,
Fundatori Quietis,
Ob Faelicem Reditum,
Ex voto L. M.
P.
S. P. Q. L.


The second being a Naval, bore this Inscription: The Second.
To the British Neptune,
CHARLES the II.
By whose Authority
The Sea
Is free or restrained.
NEPTVNO Britannico,
CAROLO II.
Cujus Arbitrio
Mare
Vel Liberum, vel Clausum.


The Third.
The third placed in the middle of the City, represented the Temple of Concord,
with this Inscription.

The Temple of CONCORD,
Erected in honor of the best of Princes,
By whose return
The British Sea and Land being appeased, and
By its ancient Laws reformed;
He has restored,
Enlarged and adorned it.
S. P. Q. L.
Aedem CONCORDIAE,
In Honorem Optimi Principis,
Cujus Adventu
Britannia Terra Marique Pacata,
Et
Priscis Legibus Reformata est,
Ampliorem Splendidioremque
Restituit.
S. P. Q. L.
The Fourth.
The last exhibited the Garden of Plenty and Cornucopia's with the Statues of
Bac^bus, Ceres, Flora, and Pomana, with this Inscription: To Plenty, and to
Augustus.
The fire of Civil War
Being Extinguished,
And the Temple of War shut,
This Lofty Altar
Was built by the S. A. P. O. L.
VBERTATI Aug.
Extincto Belli Civilis Incendio,
Clausoque Jani Templo,
Aram Celsiss.
Construxit S. P. Q. L.


Under all these, the King rode on horseback straight to his Palace in a
triumphant manner with Trumpets, Music, and the joyful Acclamations of the
People, being attended by the Nobility, his Majesty's Ministers and Servants,
the Heralds, Kings at Arms, the Kings Judges, and Knights of the Bath.

The solemnity of this day, The King crowned at Westminster. April 23.
though it was not so great in the number of Attendents, yet in richness and
splendor of Clothes and Arms, it surpassed the triumphant Entry of the King
upon his return.

Next morning the King was in great pomp conducted to Westminster-Abbey, where
in his Imperial Robes, the Prelates in their Myters, and the Nobles in their
Parliament-Robes, conducted him to his Throne, and the Archbishop of Canterbury
anointed him with the sacred Oil. Afterward all the ancient and usual
Ceremonies upon such occasions were performed.

The Author of this History designing the utmost brevity, has not mentioned
any of these Ceremonies; but Mr. Philips in his Continuation of Dr. Richard
Baker's Chronicle, has very exactly set forth all the Rituals then used, but
has omitted the Coronation Oath, and only given an Epitom of it; and there
having of late years been strange Pretenses raised upon the account of this
Oath, it is thought fit to insert the same here, from Mr. Sanderson's History
of Charles the First, with that variety of Circumstances which were used in the
Coronation here mentioned, expressed by Mr. Philips.

Coronation Oath.
SIR, (said the Bishop of London) will you grant and keep, and by your Oath
confirm to the People of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the
Kings of England, your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; and namely, the Laws,
Customs, and Franchises, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King St. Edward
your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the
Gospel established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient Customs of the Realm?


The King's Answer, I grant and promise to keep them.


Bishop. Sir, Will you keep Peace and goodly Agreement (according to your
power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?


King. I will keep it.


Bishop. Sir, Will you (to your power) cause Law, Justice, and Discretion, with
Mercy and Truth, to be executed, to your Judgment?


King. I will.


Bishop. Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs
which the Commonalty of this Kingdom have; and will you defend and uphold them
to the honor of God, so much as in you lies?


King. I grant and promise so to do.


Then the Bishop of Rochester read this Admonition to the King, before the
People with a loud voice. Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to
grant and to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to your charge,
all Canonical Privileges, and do Law and Justice, and that you would protect
and defend us, as every good King to his Kingdoms ought to be Protector and
Defender of the Bishops, and the Churches under their government?


The King answered, With a willing and devout heart, I promise and grant my
Pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches
committed to your charge, all Canonical Privileges and due Law and Justice,
and that I will be your Protector and Defender to my power by the assistance of
God, as every good King in his Kingdom in right ought to protect and defend the
Bishops and Churches under their government.

Then the King arose, and was led by the Bishops of Duresme and Bath and Wells,
to the Communion Table, where he made a solemn Oath in sight of all the People,
to observe the Premises; and laying his hand upon the Bible, said,
The OATH.
The things which I have here promised, I shall perform and keep: So help me
God, and the Contents of this Book.


On the eighth of May a new Parliament met, which continued many years. A new
Parl. May 8. The traitorous Solemn League and Covenant is condemned and burnt.
Since, the year before the Regicides had been brought to condign punishment,
the three Estates of Parliament, now condemned to the flames, the Solemn League
and Covenant, the Bond of the English and Scottish Conspiracy, and Sacrament of
the Presbyterian Villainy. The same was done by the Parliament of Scotland and
Ireland; and that which had raised a Civil Combustion, and propagated the same
all over Britain and Ireland, is now burnt by the hand of the Hangman, and by
its own ashes expiated at length the wickedness of three Nations.

The punishment of Mouson, Mildmay, and Wallop. Jan. 27. 1661, 62.
This year was concluded, or the new begun, by the further punishment of
Regicides: For by Order of Parliament, Mouson, an upstart Lord, Sir Henry
Mildmay, heretofore Keeper of the Jewels to the late King, and therefore the
more criminal, and Robert Wallop, on the seven and twentieth of January, the
day whereon the blessed King had been condemned; were in Hurdles, with Halters
about their necks, dragged to Tyburn and back again to Town, being sentenced to
perpetual imprisonment.

It was sufficiently made out that they had been Members of that execrable High
Court of Justice; but because they had not signed the Warrant for the Kings
execution, they were only punished by Bonds and Imprisonment.

Hazelrigg in the mean time, one of the bitterest of all the Traitors, being
sentenced to the same punishment, pined away with anger and grief, and unable
to bare his disgrace, prevented the dishonor and his captivity by a timely
death in the Tower of London.

The Traitors that came in:
The same punishment was inflicted upon the Traitors who (as we said before)
came in upon the Kings Proclamation: For being brought to the Bar, 1662.
because waving all defense, Hard. Waller, ^eveningham, Marten, Jam. Temple,
Wait, Tichburn, Lilburn, Downs, Penningt. Smith, Garland, Geo. Fleetwood, Roe,
Millingt. Meyn, Peter Temple, Harvey and Potter.
they humbly acknowledged their Crime, and that they were a Crew, most part of
them, of silly seduced Rascals, drawn in either by the arts or threatenings of
Cromwell: they redeemed their necks from the Gallows, which they had so often
deserved, by a perpetual imprisonment; to which being closely confined, they
lived to see their Villainy punished by Infamy.

But fortune was more favorable to the Traitors that came in at home, than to
those who fled abroad: for about that time Sir George Downing being Ambassador
in Holland, had intelligence that three of the Fugitive Regicides, Barkstead,
Okey, Barkstead, Okey, and Corbet taken.
and Corbet, being come back out of Germany, lurked in Delf. He therefore
having obtained a Warrant from the States General, seized them, and sent them
over to England; where being brought to a trial, Were hanged at Tyburn. April
19.
they were condemned for High Treason, and April the nineteenth executed at
Tyburn.

They went all to death with a fanatical ostentation of Piety. But Barkstead
and Corbet approaching to their end, after many ugly delays, and cups of
Strong Water, unwillingly put their trembling necks into the Halter, which
quickly put an end to the Wretches, half dead already for fear. But Okey being
a man of an undaunted mind, and making use of his courage to the last, went off
with the bravoury of a Soldier, and not undecently, had he so died for his
Country.

Corbet was heretofore an inspired prating Lawyer, more skilful in the
Principles of Fanatics, Corbet 's Character.
than in the Laws; he got to be a Member of that long and black Parliament, and
no man was more professedly an implacable Enemy to the King.

The low extraction of Okey is buried in obscurity. Being a Tallow-chandler in
London, Okey 's.
and weary of his poor condition, he followed the profitable Wars of the
Parliament; where his daringness advanced him to the place of a Colonel, and at
length to be one of the chief Judges in trying and sentencing the King.

And Barkstead 's.
Barkstead was heretofore a whifling Goldsmith in London, and had raised
himself upon the Ruins of his Country: But those who knew the cunning of
Oliver in choosing his Magistrates, wondered that he preferred so silly and idle
a fellow, even to be a Colonel, and Lieutenant of the Tower of London, besides
other Offices.

But that kind of stupid fierceness was more useful to Cromwell than the
cunninger knavery of others: for the Tyrant himself for the most part looked
another way, and commanded the Villainies which he would not behold; so that
this fellow, no doubt, was privy to the furious Councils of Cromwell, and a
trusty Minister of his Protectoral Cruelty: And so long as he was chief Jailer
to Oliver, the barbarous Villain was never startled at the sight of the Murders
and Imprisonments of so many Nobles and worthy Subjects. His head was set upon
a Gate of the Tower, whereof heretofore he had been Governor, that upon the
same Stage where he acted his greatest Crimes, he might suffer his greatest
Punishment.

The vanity of the Regicides even to the last.
The first Prodigy of the Regicides was their matchless impudence in putting to
death the King; and their next, their obstinacy to the last. For when they had
murdered the best of Kings, to the shame of Christianity, the infamy of the
Reformation, and the universal reproach and malediction of Fanatic Zeal; these
godly Regicides were ashamed, when Treason stuck in their breasts, to confess
their hypocritical pretending Religion, even at the last gasp. Nay, their
Godliness made them so impudent, as rather to know themselves guilty and deny
it, to save their reputation amongst their Brethren, than humbly and modestly
to acknowledge their Crimes.

The Authority of Parliament was the only thing that all of them alleged to
justify their Parricide, And the cause of it.
as if a Gang of fifty Robbers (who had so often violated that Authority) had
been worthy of that name, when there was neither the color nor resemblance of
a House of Commons left.

Nec color Imperii, nec frons fuit illa Senatus. But since they could live no
longer to do mischief, their whole care was at their death to harden the minds
of their Party by a fanatical assertation of dying good men: when it was rather
the highest Judgment of an offended God, to let them fill up the Cup of their
bold Indignities by a desperate end.

It was time now for the King, The K. Think^ of Marriage.
who was a Batchelour, to think of Marriage, that he might leave a Posterity
for the future security of his Kingdom; and therefore communicating his
intentions to the Parliament, he addressed himself to the most Illustrious
Catharine Daughter of Portugal, descended from the ancient Race of the Family
of Braganza; with the universal Applause and Congratulation of the Estates. And
a Fleet was sent to Portugal to bring over the Royal Bride; who having had a
favorable passage to the English Coast, was by his Royal Highness the Duke of
York met and saluted with Naval Solemnities at the Isle of Wight.

The King received his Bride at Portsmouth, and was with great Solemnity, in
presence of many Nobles, there married, the Office of Matrimony having been
performed by Gilbert Sheldon Bishop of London.

The King from thence conducted his Royal Consort to Whitehall, He marries
Catharine at Portsmouth. May 22.
where, after the reiterated festivity of the Royal Nuptials, the dutiful
Complements of the Great men, and the Presents of the Lord Mayor and chief
Citizens of London, slighting the wanton Pleasures of a Court, by the innocence
of her Manners, and an exemplary Piety of Life, she consecrated the trancient
Delights of a Palace to the severer Sanctity of a Monastery. A Queen that
wanted nothing to render her self and us happy, had she been as fruitful as
good.

Sir Hen. Vane brought to trial. June 2.
On the second of June, the last of the Traitors Sir Henry Vane, after a two
years imprisonment, is brought at length to the Bar: where, after he had
defended himself by shifts, and strained querks of Law, rather than by any
colorable Plea, he is found guilty of High Treason.

The first advance he made in the career of his Villainy, was in the death of
the Earl of Strafford; afterward being a great Incendiary in the Civil Wars,
His Character.
and equally ungrateful and perfidious to Charles the Martyr, he cherished and
strengthened the Party of the Traitors: and though more cautiously than
innocently, he was not present at the Condemnation of the King; yet after the
Murder of Charles, he was very active in changing the Monarchy into a
Commonwealth, and in abolishing for ever the Government of Kings.

But at length, when Cromwell got into the Supreme Power, being ill-affected and
envious against all Government by a single Person, he was neglected and laid
aside: But when the Rump came again into play, with the pretenses of a Brutus
or Cassius, he stepped again to the Helm of Government, and was one of the
Committee of Safety. He was, as to Religion, a man of an inconstant and
unsettled mind, who professedly hating the name of a King, was treacherous to
Charles the First, 1663.
and envious to Charles the Second.

January the fourteenth, Beheaded. Jan. 14. 1662, 63.
being brought to a Scaffold on Tower Hill, with a most affected show of a
composed and sedate mind, as the rest of the Traitors had already done, he
insisted upon the Supreme Authority of Parliament, and spoke much of the
Presbyterian Covenant, the Engine of all our Evils, which heretofore when he
was a far more refined Heretic, he had so often despised and laughed at.

And whilst he still persisted in asserting his own innocence, not without
reproaching his Judges, Sir John Robinson Lieutenant of the Tower, wanting
patience to hear any more, interrupted him. Being vexed at this, like a mad
man, he tore the written Speech that he had in his hand, and though he had
never showed great resolution amongst his Party, yet resolutely, or rather
ragingly, he submitted to the blow of the Executioner; and fell a Sacrifice to
the Ghost of the Great Strafford, and to the Subverted Monarchy.

But Lambert, who stood indicted with Vane, Lambert is condemned;
had better luck, and behaved himself with so much modesty in his looks and
words at his trial, that though he suffered the Sentence of Death, as deserving
the utmost Rigor, But obtains Mercy from the King. The Duke of Ormond goes
Lord Deputy into Ireland. July 9.
yet he tasted the Kings Mercy, and ransomed his Life by a perpetual
Imprisonment.

About the middle of Summer the Duke of Ormond went over to Ireland as Lord
Deputy of that Kingdom; there to give as great instances of Civil Prudence, as
heretofore he had erected Trophies of Military Glory during the Irish War.

The Parliament now sitting, The Ceremonies and Rites of the Church confirmed
by Parl. May 29.
the Convocation of the Clergy sat also; and the Licentiousness of Fanatical
Sects increasing, made the distressed Church look to the King and Parliament
for relief: It was therefore enacted by the King in Parliament, That the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and the public Prayers and
Liturgy of the Church, should be celebrated after the ancient manner of the
Reformed Church of England, the Fanatics on all hands crying out against it,
and refusing to conform.

The licentiousness of Fanatics.
For though they enjoyed Impunity with the rewards of their Crimes, yet no
gracious condescensions of the King could oblige them. The Clemency of the
Prince was maliciously interpreted by the Sects, and the Power of this
indulging Monarch was grievous to these Fanatics. Nor had the King granted so
much to Traitors, but that they still thought they might take to themselves
more; and the brazen-faced Sectarists demand of the Son, the same liberty of
Religion which had undone the Father.

And without any respect or reverence to Majesty and the Laws, frequent
Conventicles of seditious men were kept: Meetings were to be found everywere in
Towns and Villages, and the Insolence of the Rabble growing greater by the
boldness of their Preachers and the Lenity of the King, there was nothing but a
mustering of Parties, boasting of strength, and polling of heads amongst the
Factious; all which seemed to threaten imminent Dangers.

The attempt of Vennet the Cooper.
The year before, the Fifth-monarchy-men under Venner, raised the first Stirs
amongst the Preaching Rout; but their Fury, like the thundering Rage of Marius
of old, Flor.
was confined within the City, and there expired, the fiercest of the Traitors
being killed upon the spot, and others at length brought to the Gallows.

But this year a darker, and therefore more dangerous Conspiracy was hatched;
the same being the cause of this, as of all other Plots, to wit, a loose and
obstinate licentiousness in Religion.

Many of all Sects were concerned in it, several Officers of Cromwell's late
disbanded Army, Members of the late Rump-Parliament, and many who were turned
out of the Kings and Churches Lands, which they had heretofore sacrilegiously
purchased. And a secret Committee at London had the direction of all their
Councils and Actings.

The chief design of their Villainy, was to kill the King and Duke of York,
murder the Duke of Albemarle, set fire to the City, seize the Tower of London,
rifle the Exchequer; and through the Bowels of the Nation, drive on a new
Fanatical Government.

In the mean time, Infamous Libels are found.
to make way to the bold Attempts of these Rascals, it was resolved, that
impudent Libels should be scattered about; Twine the Printer hanged Feb. 24.
1663, 64.
but the Papers being seized at the Press, the Printer was hanged, and paid
dear for his officious meddling.

But the licentiousness and boldness of the Conventiclers growing greater and
greater daily, the Parl. made an Act to put a stop to the seditiousness of the
People, Conventicles forbidden by Act of Parl.
commanding the doors of the Meeting Houses to be shut, or guarded by
Soldiers, and imposing upon Delinquents, for the first fault a Fine; for the
second, Imprisonment; and for the third, Banishment: that punishment might at
length restrain those whom Clemency could not gain.

Nevertheless, a War with Holland breaking forth, and the Laws being silent
amongst the noise of Arms, the domestic Calamity grew so strong, that the
Authority of the Justices of the Peace not being able to prevail against the
obstinacy of the Rabble, the evil catched like Wildfire, and all future
Remedies seemed posthumous and unseasonable. 1664.


Complaints of the injuries of the Dutch.
The great injuries done by the Dutch to the English Merchants, having for a
long time past unrevenged, did now occasion great grievances, and complaining
at London. Though there was no Nation upon Earth whom the Dutch desired more
for Friends and less for Enemies than the English, who in the late War had
proved themselves as formidable Enemies to the Hollanders, as heretofore they
had been to their Enemies; yet they unjustly broke that Peace, which some years
before they had dishonourably begged of the Rump and Cromwell, (as being
necessary for their interest) by humble Addresses, sordid and base compliances
of their Ambassadors; and had since confirmed by a stricter League with King
Charles the Second.

For to that pitch of Arrogance and Perfidy was that State of Fishermen, and
crowd of crafty Merchants, who under the Title of a Commonwealth disliked all
Monarchy, raised, that (besides the detaining of the Island of Poloron, which
they were obliged to deliver up by the Articles of Peace) they took a great
many English Ships upon the Coast of India and Africa, What were the injuries
of the Dutch.
and making Prize of the Ships and Goods, made the Seamen Prisoners, and added
cruelty and scoffing to their Injustice.

They block up many Ports of the Indies which the English had long possessed
with Men of War; and having unjustly intercepted the English Trade, they sold
to other Nations at home, at the dear rates, the Commodities which they had for
a small matter bought in the Indies.

They injure,
Holmes, who was Admiral for the King upon the Coast of India and Africa,
behaving himself modestly in his Commission, was by those Dutch Pirates, by Sea
and Land, whom neither the East nor West could satisfy, contrary to the Law of
Nations, often fired upon. At which, Holmes, a man of a daring temper, and
unacquainted with affronts, And provoke Holmes.
being provoked, resolved to continue no longer on the defensive part, but to
turn Aggressour; and therefore bringing his Guns ashore, and planting them on
Batteries, he took some of the Dutch Garrisons, and revenged the injuries he
had received.

But with false Accusations they complain of Holmes, They falsely accuse him.
who had been so often and basely used by them, to the King, crying out against
him as a Robber, and the causer of a War; as if by making a clamor first, they
might ridiculously excuse their own Treachery.

These and many other Encroachments of the Dutch so incensed the Parliament,
The Parl. is moved at the injuries of the Dutch, and address to the King.
that they forthwith voted it necessary to revenge so many Injuries done to the
Merchants, and a considerable supply of money to be given to the King, to carry
on a War, which they judged safer than a doubtful and uncertain Peace.

Though the King was highly offended to hear of the Injuries done to his
Subjects, and concerned in honor to right them; yet he resolved to try other
ways of adjusting matters, before he came to force of Arms; having therefore
dispatched Letters to Sir George Downing, The King demands Reparation by his
Ambassador;
his Ambassador at the Hague, he demands a speedy reparation of the Injuries
done to his Subjects from the States. But though the Kings demands were just
and lawful, But in vain.
yet it was in vain to represent the Rapines of Dutch Merchants to trafficking
States, since they who were in Authority, and should have punished these
Abuses, reaped the profit of them.

But amongst these Clashings about Injuries, a new cause of quarrel, not heard
of till then, happened, through the treachery of the Dutch. For the year
before, the States General having been oppressed by the frequent Piracies of
the Algerines, by Ambassadors made earnest application to the King, that
joining his Fleet with theirs, he would help to revenge the Injuries of these
Infidels: Nor was the King wanting to contribute to the safety of his Subjects,
and of all Christendom; but sent Vice Admiral Lawson, an expert Sea-Commander,
with a well-appointed Fleet, to join and assist the Fleet commanded by de
Ruyter.

But whilst Lawson was wholly taken up in fighting and pursuing the Pirates
Ships (of which he had sunk and burnt many) upon the Coast of Barbary, De
Ruyter gave him the slip, De Ruyter 's action at Guiny.
and by orders from the States directed his course to Guiny; where falling upon
the English who were secure, and neither expected nor deserved any such thing,
he committed no less Robberies upon us, than he pretended to revenge on the
Algerines, but with far greater treachery.

The news of so base an action being freshly brought to London, so incensed all
People, that the King highly offended, commanded all Dutch Ships in the Ports
of England to be stopped, and all further Treaties of Pacification being laid
aside, both sides prepare for a War.

The contumelious sauciness of the Dutch.
But during the preludes of the approaching War, the Dutch, a more contumelious
than formidable Enemy, inflamed the rage and hatred of the English by
scurrilous Libels, Medals, and many base and satirical Pictures, according to
the innate insolency and barbarous vanity of that People.

De Wit the Dutch Dictator.
Holland more powerful both in Wealth and Cunning, led the rest of the United
Provinces by the nose; and Dewit Holland, a man of a crafty and subtle Wit,
malicious Eloquence, and of more reputation for cunning Policy than Honesty.
The greatness of the Family of the Prince of Orange, and the vast power of the
King of Great Britain by Sea, stood in the way of the Artifices of this
arrogant man, and of his own Holland.

To ruin therefore the Prince and Family of Nassau, he raised secret
jealousies against him; His Character and Arts.
and by lessening the authority of Orange with the States, he alone managed all
affairs, and under color of standing up for the liberty of the Commonwealth,
ruled absolutely at his pleasure; and so confident of himself grew this
Butter-box, that having trod upon the Dignity of the Prince at home, he
thought that by turns he might make fools of all the Kings of Europe. He hated
the King of Great Britain the more, because he feared him; and since, through
similitude of Manners, he had been a great friend to the Traitor Cromwell, he
was therefore the more implacable Enemy to King Charles. Certainly, next to the
insatiable Avarice of the Dutch Nation, all the hatred of that People to the
English, is to be attributed to Dewit and his Faction.

To so great an Arrogance were the Dutch raised, The confidence of the Dutch,
and why.
that it was given out amongst the People, That the affairs of England were not
in such a posture, that the Civil War of England being just ended, they had
money enough still to make War abroad; nor that the King was, as yet, so well
seated in the Government, that he could revenge the Injuries of the Dutch: that
it was not safe for him to trust Arms in the hands of his Subjects, which
afterward they might be unwilling to lay down.

That the English were not now the same Enemies as the Dutch had found them to
be under the Rump-Parliament; that the warlike fierceness of that Nation was
gone with the Sectarians, and that there remained amongst them none but a
company of silly Cowards: That there were a great many Fanatics in England,
who perhaps would fight for the Dutch against the King, or at least would not
fight for him against those who were for liberty of Conscience. Nor was there
wanting a great many of our fugitive Traitors amongst the Dutch, who made these
false reports to be believed.

The bloody War which broke out the year following, was ushered in by the
taking of Ships on both sides; Alan's action.
and Alan with a Fleet of English Ships, for securing the Merchantmen, and
anoying the Dutch in the Mediterranean, fell upon the Dutch Smirna-Fleet in the
Streights upon their return homewards; and having killed them many men, sunk
some Ships, Brakell the Admiral of the Fleet being slain; he took and brought
off four of the Enemies Ships, which was the first booty and glad Omen of the
War; but one of them richly laden, being much shattered and leaky, foundered in
the greedy Sea.

The K. visits the College of Physicians of London. April 15. 1665.
Nor was the King so wholly taken up with the thoughts of the approaching War,
but that he also minded other affairs, and his innocent diversions; he
therefore on the fifteenth of April visited the famous College of Physicians
of London, and was received very honorably by the Doctors.

There he saw the Marble Statue of Harvey the chief Pilot of the Bloods
Circulation; and heard the President Ent, with equal Eloquence and Art, reading
upon the mysteries of Anatomy, whom there he knighted: There he saw the chief
Physician Bates, renowned in the skill of Physic and of Latin; and Fraser his
chief Physician since; and Glisson, excellent in Medicine and Philosophy; and
successful Micklethwait; and much-esteemed Cox; and Scarborough, accomplished
in all Natural Philophy, and no less famous amongst the Muses; with Wharton the
Secretary of the Glandules; and acute Merret: 1665.
besides many others eminent in the Art of Curing; to whom at length were
associated, Willis the great Restorer of Medicine, but of too short a life,
with Lower and Needham, who have illustrated the Faculty by their Writings.

And now was the Royal Fleet ready to set sail, The Royal Fleet ready to put to
Sea about the end of April. The chief Commanders,
divided into three Squadrons, the first commanded by the Duke of York Lord
High Admiral of England; the second, by the most Illustrious Prince Rupert; and
the third, by the Earl of Sandwich, famous in Expeditions at Sea.

The other Flag-Officers of the Fleet were Lawson and Alan, And Flag-Officers.
lately returned from the Mediterranean; Jordan, Spragg, Smith, Meens, and
Tiddiman, all famous Sea-Commanders.

Many persons of great Quality went Volunteers to Sea; Volunteers.
and though they had no command in the Fleet, yet they thought it honorable in
so just a War to try their fortune with the Duke of York.

The Fleet consisted of about an hundred Men of War, The number of Ships and
men in the Royal Fleet. They set sai^ April 22.
having on board to the number of about thirty thousand Seamen and Soldiers;
and on the two and twentieth of April weighed, and with joyful Huzza's, full
Sails, and flying Streamers, sailed over to the Coast of Holland, and came to
an Anchor before the Texel; the Enemy in the mean while, for all their
bragging, not daring to come out.

His Royal Highness in the mean time, The Royal Fleet blocks up the Coast:
in the Royal Fleet, rode Master of the Seas; and many Dutch Ships returning
home in sight of the Shore, fell into the hands of the English, as Booties cast
into their way by Providence.

But his Royal Highness, And the Enemy delaying to come out, returns back to
the English Coast.
more desirous of Fighting than Prey, after he had expected almost a month the
coming out of the Enemy upon their own Coast, Victuals and Provisions growing
scarce, came back again to the English Coast, giving them opportunity, if they
had a mind to fight, to come out.

The Dutch Fleet comes out.
But now the Commanders of the Dutch Fleet, moved with the disgrace of being
blocked up, but more at the Reproaches and Execrations of the people, use all
diligence to bring out their Ships.

The number and Commanders of it.
The Fleet of the States General consisted of above an hundred sail of Men of
War, in seven divisions, which were commanded by Opdam, Trump, Cartener,
Schramp, Stillingwolfe, Cornelius and John Evertsons; Opdam in the mean time
being Admiral. But as the Dutch stood out to Sea, a Fleet of English
Merchantmen coming from Hamborough, They take the English Hamborough Fleet.
in the dark of the night, by mistake, fell in amongst the Enemies: nor were
they sensible of their Captivity, till it was too late to fly for it; and so
they paid dear for their unhappy and prohibited Voyage.

The taking of the English Merchantmen was to the Enemies so joyful a presage
of a future Engagement, that directing their course toward England, they
resolved not to expect the coming of the English; but, not doubting of success,
to attack them in their own Coast. His Royal Highness in the mean time was at
Anchor with his Fleet near Harwich; where so soon as he was advertised by his
Scouts that the Enemy approached, rejoicing at the long wished-for occasion of
an Engagement, on the first of June, setting his Fleet in order with all the
expedition he could, he steers directly against the Dutch.

Next day he came in sight of the Enemies Fleet: by night they were got near to
one another; and on the third of June, with the day, the Fight began. A
Sea Fight, June 3.


The Fleet being drawn up, undaunted Prince Rupert was in the Van; in the Body
of the Fleet was the Duke of York; and the Earl of Sandwich in the Rear, an
expert Commander at Sea; the Enemies Fleet being in order to engage them.

The first shot that was fired, was from Prince Rupert's Squadron: And both
Fleets, as yet, fought with their great Guns at a distance. The English had the
wind; which the Dutch on the other hand strove to gain, it being westerly: but
whilst both Fleets strive for the wind, the order of the Ships engaged
changing, the middle of the English Fleet came up with the front of the
Enemies; and Lawson, who commanded the next Ship to the Admiral, bearing in
amongst their Fleet, they came by a closer engagement to try the fate of both
Nations.

By and by the Admirals of both Fleets by chance engaged together. There was
great slaughter on both sides, and it was a bloody Victory to his Royal
Highness: for whether by carelessness or our shot, fire got into the
Powder-Room, Opdam's ship blown up.
and presently blew up Opdam's Ship. He flying up into the Air, prevented a
shameful flight with his Fleet; and falling again into the Sea, -- Animam morti
non redidit uni.
Resigned his life to several deaths.


The loss of the Admiral was attended with the overthrow of his Fleet; and the
English redoubling their courage, bore in more furiously amongst the Enemies.
But the Dutch Fleet wanted both strength and courage to continue the Engagement
longer, The Dutch put to flight.
and with full sail run for it. Now it was no more an Engagement, but a
Pursuit, accompanied with slaughter, and the usual calamities of Fugitives: for
four of the Enemies Ships, in the haste and consternation of the flight,
falling foul of one another, Dutch Ships burnt.
were by an English Fire-ship burnt all together. Three more of their Ships
being afterward in the same manner pestered together, were by the next
Fire-ship likewise set on fire and burnt.

Then were many of the Dutch Ships taken, and more sunk; nor was there any end
of destroying and pursuing, till it was dark night. The Pursuit continued next
day with the same vigor, and the Dutch fled with the less shame, that they had
the Duke of York to follow them.

This was a famous Victory, nothing short of the ancient Achievements of the
English; five thousand of the Enemies being killed or taken, The Commanders of
the Dutch Fleet killed.
and Opdam, Cartener, Stillingwolfe, and Stamp, the chief Commanders of the
Dutch Fleet, dying in the Engagement.

There were about eighteen Ships burnt, sunk, and taken. Many of the Enemies
swimming in the Sea after the Ships were burnt or sunk, his Royal Highness, who
is merciful in his anger, caused them to be taken up, having for that purpose
ordered out Boats. For why should they die, who hardly deserved to live?

Volunteers killed in the English F^eet.
It was a greater than joyful Victory to the English, the flower of the Honorary
Volunteers being slain: Just by the Duke fell the Earls of Portland and
Fulmouth, the Lord Mufcarrey, and a Warlike Youth the Son of the Earl of
Burlington, who joyfully sacrificed their lives to the Honor of their Country,
and to that Victory wherein they had the Duke of York for a Witness of their
Valor, and a Bewailer of their Destiny. The valiant Earl of Malborough, and
Rear-Admiral Sanson, died also in the Bed of Honor. Lawson dies.
Lawson being wounded in the thigh, six weeks after died with Honor and
Reputation: And though being in a dying condition, he could not make use of the
Triumphant Victory to which he had largely contributed, yet he tasted of the
pleasure of it. There were not many killed nor slain, and only one Ship lost.
And thus his Royal Highness brought home the Royal Fleet loaded with Triumph
and the Spoils of Victory.

And whilst the States of the United Provinces were taken up in punishing the
cowardice of Commanders, King Charles in the mean time conferred Honors upon
his deserving Officers; and knighted Alan, Smith, Jordan, Meens, Tiddeman, and
Spragg, for their brave and good services.

The Dutch Fleet, in the mean time fighting ill, De Ruyter is abroad at Piracy.
having been soundly-beaten, De Ruyter in his Piracies abroad had somewhat
better fortune. After the action at Guiny he attempted other English Islands in
America. From Barbados, Attempts Barbados. April 20.
an Island well fortified and defended, he was repulsed with disgrace. From
thence sailing to New Foundland, and having easily mastered it, he made prize
of all he found there; Spoils New Foundland.
and having cruelly used the Inhabitants, plundered them of all, and wasted the
Island, he returned home. Upon his return he was immediately from a Pirat
advanced to be Admiral, Is made Admiral.
being the only person judged worthy to succeed Opdam in the command of the
Navy.

But for this year the Dutch were sufficiently cowed, as no more to fight the
Victorious English by Sea. Wherefore the Duke of York, who liked better to
overcome than to spoil his Enemies, seeing there was no hopes of any farther
Engagement, spent the remaining part of the year on shore.

But Sandwich being made Admiral of the Royal Fleet, set sail again toward the
Coast of Holland, The Earl of Sandwich braves the Dutch.
and offered, though in vain, a second Engagement; but the Enemy could not be
overcome, till they were found.

The States in the mean time, after their Fleet of War was disabled and beaten
off of the Sea, were in no small fear and apprehension for their East India
Fleet, which was upon the way homeward richly laden; nor was the eagerness of
the English less, to catch the Booty: But that Fleet having intelligence that
Holland was blockt up by the English, and thinking it safer to shelter
themselves in another Dominion, put into Bergen, a famous Harbor in Norway.

The Royal Fleet attacks the Dutch East India Fleet in Bergen.
Part of the Royal Navy hastened thither; and sending five Frigates into the
Harbor, they attacked the Dutch Ships that lay secure under the protection of
the Castle and shore; nor did it seem difficult to have taken them, had not the
English, contrary to expectation, found another Army to deal with, the Danes
firing upon them from the Castle. The English, greedy of the Prey, were a
little too rash in running themselves into the danger of a double Enemy; but
their Valor made amends for their boldness.

A sharp Dispute continued for almost six hours, to the vast damage of the
Goods on board the shattered and torn Ships; and to no small loss on our side,
especially from the Castle: but at length, after a proof of great but
unseasonable courage, to prevent greater loss and slaughter, the Fleet
retrea^ed: and seeing they could not enjoy the spoils of the Enemy, they had
the satisfaction to embezile and sink them, as if they had got, when the Enemy
lost.

A Plague breaks out in London.
But amidst the Triumphs of War, the Joys of the Victorious English were short
and interrupted: for this was a doleful year, through the breaking out of a
raging Plague, not occasioned by an influx of the Stars, nor the French Pox
degenerating into a Contagion, as some idle men dreamt; but as it was more
credibly reported, by the infected Goods that were brought from Holland into
England: so that when the Dutch Arms could not beat us, their Contagion
overcame us.

After it had by the space of almost one whole year, And then rages over
England.
raged in London, and swept away infinite numbers of people, it spread over
many other and far distant Cities and Towns of England. Nor could the Contagion
be stopped by any humane arts or skill of Physicians, before it had carried away
above two hundred thousand Souls within less than two years time; neither were
the days and nights long enough for the dying to expire in, nor Churchyards
big enough to contain the bodies of the dead, though they were heaped together
into Graves.

The King and Court leaving the desolate City, The K. went to Oxford.
removed to Oxford, as yet clear from infection, and seated in a wholesome Air:
thither also went the Judges and Courts of Justice.

The Nobility, Gentry, and rich Citizens, in the mean time, avoiding all
confluence of people, lurked everywhere in Country-houses and Villages. The
only persons of great Quality that stayed in London, were the Duke of
Albemarle and Earl of Craven; which was both a comfort and safety to the City,
in so great a Desolation and Mortality of the Citizens.

The Plague at length ceasing in London, The K. returned to London. Feb. 1.
1665, 66.
the earnest desires of the Citizens invited back the King, who on the first of
February returned from Oxford to London; where the Bonfires during the night,
expressed the hearty Joys of the People, glad to see their Prince, and that he
saw the City now again in health.

Neighboring Nations as yet looked at a distance upon the bloody War betwixt
the English and Dutch. But Louis the French King, powerful in men and money,
after he had for some time stood neutral, thought and hoped that the Dutch and
we having mutually weakened and tired our selves out in War, he might have a
fair opportunity to raise his power at Sea, though the genius of that Nation
seems not to be cut out for that profession.

War proclaimed in London against the French. Feb. 10.
He therefore smoothed up the Dutch with promises of assisting them with his
Fleet, being willing that they should have the dominion over the Seas, whom he
intended to conquer by Land; and thereupon declared War against the English,
which was reciprocally proclaimed in London against the French. In the same
condition we stood with Denmark, that the triumphs of Charles might be the
larger.

Now besides the Dutch (our Rivals at Sea) the English Valor alone, as yet
unshaken, resisted the threatening French and Denmark then alied with Holland,
as was equal to them all.

The affairs of England never succeeded better at Sea, than under the
auspicious conduct of his Royal Highness James Duke of York, who always
prefered the welfare of his Country before his own life; yet he was dearer to
the King and Kingdom, being the second hopes of Britain, than that his Princely
person, born to the highest Honors, should be any more exposed to so mean and
base an Enemy.

1666.
Therefore in the year one thousand six hundred and sixty six, Prince Rupert and
the D. of Albemarle, Commanders of the Fleet. The Prince is sent against the
French Fleet. May 29.
Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle were pitched upon for the command of
the Royal Navy; who going on board equal in Power and Concord, they put to Sea
with a Fleet well appointed for War: but presently after, Prince Rupert, by
Letters from the Privy Council, has orders sent him in all haste, with twenty
good Frigates of the Fleet, and others lying at Portsmouth, to stand over for
the Coast of France, and hinder the French Fleet from joining the Dutch.

I would to God it had not been judged of such an importance to make so great
an effort to hinder the coming up of an Enemy, who would not have much injured
us, nor assisted their Friends; nor was there any thing to be feared from the
French Fleet, after the late overthrow of the Dutch.

But they laying hold of the opportunity of the English Fleet being divided, In
the mean time the Dutch Fleet offers Albemarle an Engagement:
and never fighting but by wiles, and upon the advantage of number, with
fourscore and five Men of War, attack the Royal Navy, now much diminished in
number. With Albemarle there were not above fifty Frigates; but he being a
General without fear, unacquainted with flight, and judging nothing too hard
for his fortune, despised the Enemy, which so far surpassed him, as if they had
been inferior to him in number, so confident a thing is Courage; And they
fight. June 1.
and preferring Glory before Safety, on the first of June, the day being pretty
far advanced, he drew up his Fleet and bravely engaged the Dutch. Here number
strove with Valor; but the Sea being rough, the English could not then use
their lower tire of Guns, which never failed to shatter and tear their Enemies.

Albemarle did great actions in this Engagement, and everywhere behaved himself
bravely, being fearless amidst the thickest dangers, and bold to admiration;
for bearing down with his own Ship upon the Enemies main Fleet, he broke quite
through them, furiously firing on both sides, till at length having given and
received great loss, and being disabled in his Masts, Sails and Rigging, he
bore off. Part of the Royal Fleet defended the Duke, whilst he refitted his
Ship; and the rest continued obstinate in the Engagement, till they were parted
by the night.

In this Engagement four Dutch Ships were burnt, and a Vice Admiral and another
of a less value, sunk. And the Dutch took three English Ships, who being
separated from the rest of the Fleet, were engaged at a distance.

The Royal Fleet in the mean time suffered most in their Rigging and Tackle;
but all things by the diligence of the Seamen being repaired in the
nightime, next morning, the second of June, Albemarle having called the
Commanders to a Council of War on board his own Ship, spoke to them to this
purpose: HAd we been afraid of the double number of the Enemy, we should have
ran for it yesterday; but though we be inferior to them in Ships, in all
things else we have the better on it. Number made the Dutch bold, and Courage
us; let us reflect upon that Fortune, upon that Valor which heretofore the
Dutch have felt to their woeful experience; we have the same Enemy to deal with,
whom we have so often beaten, and made it our custom so often to overcome. Let
our Adversaries find to day, that though our Fleet be divided, our Courage is
entire; and when we consider our own Glory and ancient Renown, how much more
honorable will it be to die not unrevenged upon the Seas, than to be carried
Prisoners in our own Ships, as a Spectacle of Triumph to the Dutch? It is less
disgrace to be overcome than to fly; and Death is to be preferred before Fear.

The Fight is renewed. June 2.
The Fleet thus encouraged, equally despising their own safety, and their too
numerous Enemy, and being eager to retrieve their Honor, all desire an
Engagement; and Albemarle, confident in his own Valor, and in the eagerness of
his Soldiers, declined not the Fight; so that both Fleets fell to it afresh,
and engaged Pell-mell.

The English, whose courage is redoubled by danger, put the Enemy hard to it,
though they had had a fresh supply of Ships, Men, and Ammunition from Holland.
The Royal Fleet being encompassed by so many Dutch Ships, had nothing else to
trust to but to fight stoutly, and make way for themselves in the best manner
they could, till at length many of the English Ships, being disabled in their
Sails and Rigging, stood away, and left the rest to deal with and maul the
Enemy. The Dutch sunk one Ship of the Royal Fleet, and we our selves destroyed
another that could not be brought off. The Dutch in the mean time had but one
Vice Admiral Ship burnt; and in this days Engagement with so numerous an Enemy,
it was a harder thing for us to keep our selves from being beaten, than it was
many times heretofore to have overcome them.

But after that with more than humane force and courage they had asserted their
own Honor and the Glory of Britain, The Royal Fleet thinks of retreating. June
3.
lest they might make that Engagement which the resolution of the English had
rendered famous, by an inconsiderate boldness, to be thought rash; it was next
day resolved in a Council of War, to send off first the disabled Ships, draw up
the rest that were in a condition of fighting, which were not above sixteen, to
make head against the Enemy, and so to make the safest retreat with the Fleet
they could.

Ashamed they were, and no less encouraged at the disgrace, that they who were
used to command the Seas, should now decline the Enemy whom they had so often
pursued; And Albemarle stood on the Quarter Deck, flying with threatening looks,
and terrible to the Enemy in his very retreat: the boldest of whom that durst
approach him, with his Stern-Guns he either beat off or sunk; nor did
overpowered Valor give over: and they who fled, had m^re courage to flight
than those that pursued.

But now Fortune seemed to repent that she had not seconded the Valor of the
English Nation. For during this sharp Engagement, the noise of the Guns had
reached the ears of Prince Rupert, who at a great distance was in search of the
French Fleet, though in vain; he therefore tacking about, made all the sail he
could to come into the assistance of his Friends, inflamed with the desire of
fighting. The sight of his Ships was as joyful to our men, as formidable to the
Enemy.

Prince Rupert opportunely rejoyns the Fleet.
But Albemarl's Fleet had the ill fortune to take the nearest course to join the
Prince, who was so luckily come: For the unskilful Pilates hastening too
rashly, steered upon Shelves and Banks, where many struck; but though the rest
got off again, yet the Prince, a Man of War that deserved better fate,
commanded by Sir George Askeugh, being so far got on as they could not bring
her off, was burnt by the Enemy; and Askeugh being taken, was afterward carried
in triumph into Holland.

The Royal Fleet being now rejoyned, on the fourth of June give chase to the
Dutch, daring them to another Engagement. Hopes of Victory incited the Prince
and Albemarle to revenge; but which of the two had greatest Courage, it is hard
to determine. The Fight is again renewed June 4.
And now a fourth time they fall to it, in as memorable and fierce an
Engagement, as perhaps ever happened upon the Ocean; though after three days
fighting, they now contended with greater fury than force.

The Prince with his fresh and entire Squadron had the Van, carrying in his
looks the resolution of his mind: Albemarle followed after, spurred on with new
desires, from the supplies of others, having received fresh Vigor to himself;
but the Enemies Fleet kept at a distance, not daring to come to a close
Engagement; until Prince Rupert, desirous to make an end of the matter, with
his usual undaunted Courage, fell in amongst the thick of the Dutch, and sunk
and put to flight many of them; and had not Albemarl's own Ship been extremely
disabled in the former Engagements, and had not an unlucky shot of the last of
the Enemies Ships, toward the evening brought the Mast of Prince Rupert's Ship
by the board, and so hindered the pursuit, The Dutch Fleet flies.
They had been able to have given a far better account of the Dutch in this
days Engagement, who now strove who could run fastest. But the Dutch found by
this days experience, that the English, equal or unequal in force, were
invincible, and that they must submit to the fortune of Charles.

The Enemy being now everywhere put to flight, The Royal Fleet puts into
Harbor. June 6.
the Royal Fleet seemed the more joyful that they had conquered the greater
dangers, and so stood over to their own Coast, and put into Harbor to have
their Ships refitted, which was done with all diligence.

In the mean time the Dutch gave it out, that they had got the Victory, because
they came off so well; and after that they had celebrated a Mock-triumph over
the English at home, with a more ridiculous silliness, they bragged of their
Victory abroad, to the scorn and derision of Foreign Nations.

And having speedily patched up a Fleet, The Dutch dare the Royal Fleet.
they come in sight of Harwich, and dared the English upon their own Coast; but
with no design of fighting, as appeared afterward, The Royal Fleet sets out to
engage them July 17.
but only out of a Dutch vanity, and a false persuasion of a Victory: for so
soon as upon the seventeenth of July the Royal Fleet had put out to Sea again,
the Enemy bore off, trusting more to their Banks, than their Courage.

And engages the Dutch. July 25.
On the twenty fifth of July, Prince Rupert and Albemarle engaged the Dutch on
their own Coast; nor did they decline the Engagement, not out of confidence,
but being compelled to be bold, and trusting to the neighborhood of the shore,
and the nature of the Coast.

There was a hot Dispute on both sides for almost four hours; but the Dutch
suffering more in their reputation than in other losses, tacked about, and made
all the sail they could to be gone, the report being, The Dutch fly.
that de Ruyter's Ship gave them the example of flying. The Royal Fleet pursued
after with continual thundering of Guns, until the Enemies having got behind
their Banks, the English were in greater danger from the Banks and Shelves of
their Coast, than from the flying Enemy.

A Squadron of Ships, under the command of Trump, stood it out still, and was
attacked by a part of the Royal Fleet that was in the rear; but after a bloody
Engagement, they were forced in the nightime to follow the fortune of the
rest, and shift for themselves upon the Coast of Zealand.

Jordan sunk de Ruyter's Fire-ship; and in the Fight were taken Banker the
Vice-Admirals Ship, and the stoutest Ship of Harlem, both which were burnt by
the English, who were more intent upon the Battle than the Booty. Everts
Admiral of the Zealand-Squadron, Tirich Hides of the Friesland, Vice Admiral
Conder, and six Captains of Ships were killed. The English lost only one Ship,
commanded by Captain Hannam, which after the Seamen had escaped, was burnt by
the Dutch.

The Royal Fleet was more troubled at this base flight of the Dutch, than they
were at the dangers of the former Engagement; and they were vexed that the
cowardly running of the Enemy should have cut them short of a more triumphant
Victory. But the Dutch always preferred a whole skin, though with a
dishonorable flight, before Honor with danger.

Now did the Royal Fleet again block up the Dutch Coast, that they might keep
the Seas, The Royal Fleet blocks up Holland.
and make them ashamed of their overthrow; who now being so often beaten, were
forced in their skulking holes, to acknowledge the prowess of the English; and
seeing no Enemy appeared, the Merchant-ships that were daily taken, suffered
what the Fleet better deserved.

But the English were unwilling to be idle upon the Dutch Coast, and therefore
Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle ordered out Sir Robert Holmes, a man of
great undertaking, to the Vly; Holmes sails to the Uly;
who sailing thither, and having left a guard of Ships at the entry into the
Harbor, he took with him five Fireships, and one Frigate, besides Pinnaces and
Boats manned with Soldiers and Seamen, and boldly entering in, he burnt all
the Ships in the Harbor to the number of one hundred and fifty Sail, many of
them East India Ships laden. And there burn 150 ships.
The Town of Schilling was afterward taken and burnt, and the Plunder given to
the Soldiers. And Holmes having shared the glory and danger with his men, came
safe off, leaving behind him a blazing Bonfire of Ships, and an amazement
amongst the Enemies.

The Enemy having now wholly abandoned the Sea, the Prince and Albemarle
steered their course back again to England, leaving the terror of their Names
behind them.

After a trial of Fortune both ways, The Dutch Fleet sails for France. Aug. 16.
the Dutch prevailing neither with equal nor greater force, they apply
themselves to the French for the assistance so often promised and so often
delayed, and turning their sails and desires toward France, they endeavored
in another Country to raise up an Enemy to the King of Great Britain.

Upon the news of the Enemies being out again at Sea, the Royal Fleet presently
set sail from England, and beyond Calis blockt up the Dutch on the French
Coast; but a strong East Wind blowing, and the Sea being very tempestuous it
was not safe for the English to keep out longer at Sea. They therefore bear
away to St. Helens Point, a very fit place to intercept the French Fleet, that
then was at the Rochell.

The Fire of London. Sept. 2.
But so many fortunate successes over conquered Enemies abroad, were quashed by
a sudden and most dismal Calamity at home; as if the beams of our shining
Fortune were always to be intermixed and set off by Adversities: For on the
second of September, a Lamentable Fire broke out in London; a sad Judgment of
an offended God against England. The Fire began in a Bakers house in the lower
part of the City near Thames Street, amongst old rotten houses apt to catch
fire, and full of combustible Goods. The darkness of the night putting all
things into terror and confusion, increased the horror of the Calamity. The
Citizens being frightened, delayed the use of timely Remedies; and which was no
small accession to the Evil, the people neglecting too much their houses, were
too fatally set upon the hasty removing of their Goods, which were yet at
length devoured by the nimble flames.

The raging East Wind that had much incommoded the English Fleet at Sea, did
far greater damage in the burning City, by carrying the force of the flames
through the greatest part of London. The Conflagration grew soon insuperable by
the blowing of the Wind; which raising in a moment the fire from the bottom to
the tops of the houses, and scattering flakes in all places, it grew too strong
for the endeavors of those that labored to quench it. Here the blazes of
ruddy flames were to be seen, and there the crashing of falling houses to be
heard; and which was the sadest Spectacle under the Sun, the doleful looks of
so many Citizens, the wailings of desolate women, and the cries of children and
decrepit aged people: And in the forsaken shops of the wealthy Inhabitants,
numbers of Thieves and Pilferers, greedier of Booty than the fire, villanously
skulked.

No man that had a sense of humane Miseries, could see, and not be affected
with the dismal spectacle of the Ruining City of London. Now were there to be
seen almost an hundred Churches consecrated to God, and many Hospitals, the
Monuments of ancient Piety; besides other public Buildings, raised at the vast
charges of our Ancestors; the famed Sion-Colledge, and Royal Exchange of
London, the Guild Hall, and stately Cathedral of St. Paul's, as sad Spectacles
of the Calamity, either buried under their own Rubbish, or standing Monuments
of the devouring flames.

Whilst all things else in the Exchange were consumed, without sparing the many
Statues of our Kings, only that of Gresham the Founder stood, to bewail the
Ruins of his own Fabric: so kind was Fate to the fame and memory of the
liberal Doner.

The King, whose highborn Soul was above the Vicissitudes of humane
Contingencies, could not but with grief and sorrow behold the lamentable
Calamity of his wretched Subjects, and native City, exhorting, comforting, and
advising them in their greatest difficulties: And therefore he ordered, that
the next houses to the fire should be blown up, that a void space being made
betwixt the Buildings, the remaining part of the City, that which still stood,
might be saved; this being the last Remedy that could be used.

The Duke of York also, and many of the Nobility, praised and encouraged the
forward, assisted the distressed, and gave a generous example to all by the
vigorous resistance they made against the devouring flames.

The fire is put out, Sept. 4.
After that the Conflagration had continued four days, to the inestimable losses
of the Citizens, and had burnt down thirteen thousand houses, it was at length
stopped more at the direction of Divine Providence, than by any humane Arts or
Means.

The more loyal part of the Citizens, affected with the Kings sorrow more than
their own, put an high value upon his Royal Compassion toward them. The
Fictions of Fanatics concerning the Fire.
But the Fanatical Clubs, who turned even the Calamities of their Country into
Reproaches, could scarcely forbear to miscal the Judgment a Command; or at
least did buz it about, that the Kings Guards were a hindrance to those who
labored to put out the fire; but the commoner surmise was, that some French
Agents had fired the City: And many reasons were by fear or envy suggested to
confirm the Treachery; nothing being more usual amongst the common People, than
to make all Casualties Designs.

But those who still remembered the insolent Rage of the Londoners, was the
first cause of the Misfortunes of Charles the Martyr, that the City was
polluted with sacred Blood, had beheld the sad fate of the King, and that some
of the Citizens had called for, and others permitted the murder of Charles,
humbly acknowledged the avenging hand of God in the Judgment.

This was the issue of that memorable fire of London; which for above two
thousand years had been rising to that greatness, which now it could hardly
bear. A City impregnable against all the Efforts of so many foreign Enemies,
and civil Broils; could no otherways be ruined but by the breaking out of a
Fire amongst old wooden Buildings that were but too apt fuel for the flames.

Yet after the City was destroyed, Live. l. 5.
the Londoners bore up with greater resolutions than the Romans did of old,
when after the Conflagration made by the Gauls, they removed to Veii: nor did
any man, despairing to see London again rebuilt, talk in the least of changing
his habitation; but the Citizens crowding themselves into Booths and new-made
Deal-board houses, or into Dwellings in the Suburbs, took their measures about
the building of a new City.

The approaching Winter now put an end to all Naval Engagements for this year;
The Fleets put into Harbor.
so that both Fleets, the Dutch and ours, put into Harbor and were laid up;
and left the Privateers on each side to molest and take Merchantmen at Sea.

The King having last year tried the shifting way of his Enemies managing the
War, 1667.
resolved upon other measures, that by intercepting the Dutch Trade, he might
force them either to put an end to the War by fairly fighting, or willingly
submitting.

So that without putting himself to the charge of a Fleet this Summer, The K.
keeps his Fleet at home;
he was advised to order some Frigates to cruise in the Scottish Seas, and
others in the West about Plymouth, thereby on all hands to shut up the British
Ocean.

And by fortifying Sherness and Vpnore-Castle, And secures the Coasts and
Harbors.
and drawing a Chain cross the River of Medway, to secure the Royal Fleet at
Chatham; which was better advised than executed.

And now the powerful Kings of France and Sweden, Neighboring Kings mediate a
Peace.
by their Ambassadors mediate a Peace betwixt the King and the States; so that
the heat of both Parties being somewhat allied by the mutual losses that two
trafficking Nations had sustained in their Trade, as well as otherwise, they
both condescend to send Ambassadors to Breda, to treat of a Peace.

The Dutch by surprise fall upon the Kings Fleet. June 10.
But the English trusting to a Truce or Cessation of Hostilities, in order to a
Pacification, laid aside all thoughts of War, and the Guard-ships were far off
at Sea: A part of the Dutch Fleet in the mean time entering Chatham-River, and
having forced the Garrisons on the shore, and broken the Iron-Chain that was
too weak to make a resistance, fell upon the Kings Fleet, which had often
chased them, lying mored in the River, unrigged, and unprovided of Seamen and
Soldiers.

Our Frigates were burnt by the Dutch Fireships, and others snatched, not
carried away in triumph, to the reproach no less of the Dutch Knavery, than of
our own vain Security; a loss so much the greater, by how much it cost the
Enemy the less.

The King in the mean time passing by the Treachery of that People, and
conquering his own Resentment, (for the present) performed his Promise; and
that he might not delay the Treaty of Peace, Ambassadors meet on both sides;
sent the Lord Hollis, one of his Majesty's Privy Council, and Henry Coventry,
on the Prudence of which two the King much relied, as his Ambassadors for
carrying on the Peace; which at length was concluded at Breda, And conclude a
Peace. July 9.
upon no less honorable Conditions, than what the King had demanded before the
War.

And now this Naval War, carried on by the successful Valor of York, the
Courage of Prince Rupert and Albemarle, is at length terminated in a most
specious Peace; but such as drew the fate of that perfidious People upon
themselves, the beginning of the fall of the United Provinces being to be
calculated from that War.

The King was not a little inclined to facilitate the profitable Peace, The
building of London is taken into consideration.
that the Citizens might have time to rebuild the City: And the War being now
over, he made it his care to erect to himself Trophies of Glory, upon the
Ruins and Rubbish of London; instead of a wooden City which he had lost,
laying the foundations of one of Brick that might more powerfully resist the
flames. Nor were the Citizens allowed to build at their pleasure, but the
streets being first staked out, and enlarged on each side, every one built
their houses in a strait and equal front; London rising again with so much
beauty and uniformity, that the loss of the old City was hardly regreted.

October the twenty third, The Royal Exchange founded. October. 23.
the King being honorably received in the City, laid the first Stone in the
foundation of the Royal Exchange: the next was laid by the Duke of York, an
auspicuous Presage of the splendor of the Structure.

The loss of a memorable and much-lamented person, must here have an honorable
mention in our Annals: For this year Abraham Couley, The death of Abraham
Couley.
a man of famed Wit both at home and abroad, and for his delightful Learning, a
Companion to the chief of the Nobility of England, departed this life. His
Poetical fancy seemed to be inspired with some divine breath; which in sweet
numbers, the Monuments of his own glory, after Maro and the delights of Rome,
equalled the Raptures of Pindar and the Gracefulness of Athens. No man was more
sublime, nor modest than he; and he lived with the same politeness and grace as
he wrote, in Verse and Manners being equally conspicuous.

1668.
The next year was taken up in building of the City, All hands are set to work
in the rebuilding of London.
with so great magnificence of modern Pomp, that it might be thought that the
Citizens in digging and clearing the Ground, had found Mines of Gold amongst
the Rubbish of the Ruins. Nor will it be more the wonder of this than of
future Ages, that during the calamity of a dangerous War, and amidst the many
losses of Merchants, there still remained in the hands of the Citizens such
vast stocks of Money to build new and stately houses; and in their minds so
much resolution, as in time of War to promote the works of Peace. For now in
less than the space of three years, a new City was raised; which being purged
by Fire, and having expiated its former Offenses, recovered more than its
ancient Vigor and Glory.

Live. l. 26.
The Fame of the Roman Virtue will hardly sound so loud in future Ages, in that
Lands were bought and sold at Rome, whilst Hannibal was at the Gates of the
City; when now it may be heard, that after a late and devouring Plague, after a
lamentable Fire that laid the City in Ashes, and whilst three most powerful
Nations were in War with us, The English still retained that confidence of
their own fortune and height of mind, as to resolve, and to be able to lay the
Foundations of a new and so magnificent a City; and that under so much
Affliction they dared to look beyond their Calamities.

The Monument of the dreadful Fire.
And that there might be a standing Monument of the sad Conflagration, or rather
a Trophy of the Cities Restoration, the Citizens of London growing greater in
their Misfortune, and magnificent in their Adversity, erected in the place
where the dreadful Fire began, a Lofty Pillar one hundred and seventy foot
high, all of Portland Stone, not much inferior to Marble.

And that we may not always have need to return to ancient Annals for Monuments
of magnificence, The Theater of Oxford founded in the year 1664. is finished.
this year Gilbert Sheldon, after the death of Juxon, Archbishop of Canterbury,
perfected the Theater of Oxford, a lasting Temple of the Muses, and a Capitol
consecrated to Apollo; which he dedicated as a Circle to the learned Exercises
and Acts of the Gown; and a new Ornament to the University, finished at his own
vast charges, and by the advice and contrivance of Sir Christopher Wren, a most
ingenious Architect and Mathematician.

On the outside the Beholder may admire the magnificence of the Structure; and
within be delighted with the comeliness and beauty of the Theater, being
encompassed around with lofty and regular Benches for the convenience of
Spectators.

Underneath is to be seen a most excellent and well-contrived Printing House:
All which, will be a lasting Monument of the Founders Fame, so long as men can
speak in his Theater, or Books be printed at his Press.

Last year the Duke of Ormond returned into England, after he had, 1669.
The Lord Roberts Deputy of Ireland. Sept. 20.
with the reputation of extraordinary Wisdom, governed Ireland as
Lord Lieutenant for the space of seven years; and this year the Lord Roberts, a
Person of great Integrity, Prudence, and Worth, succeeded in that Government.

In the mean time the Duke of Ormond, The D. of Ormond made Chancellor of the
University of Oxford.
with unanimous consent of the Heads, Fellows, and Students of Colleges, is
chosen Chancellor of the University of Oxford; and so being taken off from the
care and troubles of the Irish affairs, he had the direction of the softer and
more peaceful Muses.

About the beginning of September, Mary the Queen Mother of England having for
two and twenty years, in Banishment and Widowhood, lived without the enjoyment
of the King her Husband, and with the comfort of a flourishing Offspring,
having beheld her Son settled in the Throne, The Queen Mother dies in France.
died at Paris in France, full of years, and of glory in all the changes of
humane condition.

The death of the Duke of Albemarle. Jan. 2. 1669, 70.
About the end of this, and beginning of next year, the Duke of Albemarle also
finished his course. And being now to speak the last of a man born for the
public good, famous in a high, and famous in a lower degree, I shall take a
short review of his Birth, Manners, and Fortune.

His Birth and Extraction.
George Monk, the Son of a Knight, was born in Devonshire in the West of
England, in the year One thousand six hundred and eight: He had an elder
Brother who inherited his Fathers Estate and Honor; and a younger, who being
bred a Scholar, after the Restoration of the King, was made Bishop of Hereford.

He followed the Wars in his youth.
George the middlemost pushing his Fortune in the Camp, followed the Wars;
wherein he was first initiated in his youth at Cadis against the Spaniards, and
shortly after in an Expedition against the French at the Isle of Re, both
unfortunate in their issue; but with better success he served under the Earl of
Oxford in Holland. The Civil Wars afterward breaking out, Under Charles the
First he served in the Scottish War.
occasioned first by the accursed madness of the Scottish Presbyterians, he
returned into England, and listed himself under Charles the First, who then
marched against the Scots, In Ireland also
and next year after was made a Colonel in the Army against the Irish Rebels.

But the Civil War of England raging more furiously afterward, whilst the
Parliament called in the Scots, their Brethren in Iniquity, to their
assistance; the King on the other hand having made a Truce with the Irish
Rebels, called over his Forces from Ireland, for his own defense at home: and
Monk being one of the Commanders of that Army, 1669, 70.
with the rest joined the King at at Oxford; He joins the K. at Oxford. Is
taken by the Parliament, and made prisoner in the Tower of London.
but whilst by orders from the King he mustered the Irish Forces in the Camp,
he was unexpectedly surprised and taken by Fairfax, who served the Parliament;
and being carried to London, lay there almost four years Prisoner in the Tower.
Whilst he was there shut up and in distress, the King sent him secretly an
hundred Pieces of Gold; which considering the streights his Majesty was then
put to, was no small Argument of his Royal Affection toward him.

But being at length tired out with an irksome imprisonment, and, for the sake
of liberty, He takes on with the Parliament;
changing sides, he took in with the Parliament, and went again over into
Ireland; And goes to Ireland.
where he did many brave actions against the Irish Rebels, not without Presages
of becoming sometime a great General, as being the only person who seemed to
have carried with him Honesty and Civility to the Civil War.

Here it was that first of all he gained the good esteem of Cromwell, who then
commanded the Parliament-Forces in Ireland, having performed an action more
advantageous to his General, than honorable to himself. The Irish War being
ended, He marches with Cromwell into Scotland.
the Summer following he marched with Cromwell against the Scots, and did not a
little contribute to his fortunate Successes in Scotland.

Having been so often victorious at Land, He fights against the Dutch under the
Rump-Parliament.
and now an old Commander, he tried his fortune at Sea; and under the
Rump-Parliament was very successful against the Dutch, having in two
Engagements beaten them and put them to flight.

At length when Cromwell got into Supreme Power, he was made Governor of
Scotland; Is by Cromwell made Governor of Scotland.
which Trust, with equal reputation of Equity and Prudence, he discharged
during the space of almost five years: until Quarrels and Animosities happening
at London betwixt the Rumpers and Colonels of the Army, he laid hold on the
occasion for restoring of the King.

But at what time first he framed the design of restoring Charles to the
Throne, I shall hardly presume to determine: Cavillers, and those that make the
worst of things, gave it out, that his dutiful services to the King were but
fortuitous; but they who judge impartially, affirm that it was a design laid
many years before. Certainly the best of Kings, more mindful of the effects of
his Loyalty, than of its beginning, received the duty of Albemarle, as
extraordinary and kind services, and honorably and liberally rewarded them.

The year before his death, he fell into a Dropsy; and being weary of the
ordinary methods and advice of Physicians, he made use of a certain
Quack-Medicine, which in appearance recovered him; but his body being opened
after his death, a great deal of Water was found in his Bowels, and much
congealed Blood in both the Ventricles of his Heart, and other neighboring
Vessels: For the motion both of the Heart and Blood being weakened by an
inveterate Dropsy, gave occasion to the stagnating of the chylous juice about
the Heart; which stopping the Fountain of the circulating Blood, put at length
a stop to his last breathings for life.

The Marriage of his only Son was in a manner the last thing he minded in this
life; who a few days before his death was married to the Daughter of the Earl
of Ogle, and Granddaughter to the Duke of Newcastle; thereby to settle, as
well as honor, his Family by an Alliance with so Noble a House.

After he had seen Britain rejoicing in Triumphs, beheld Charles confirmed in
the Throne by ten years happy Reign, and after he had administered the greatest
Offices of Trust under the King, both in Peace and War, being upwards of sixty
years of age, he yielded to Destiny, which he willingly and undauntedly
submitted unto; that after the Trophies of a past Life, he might at length
triumph over Death.

He left but one only Son, the Illustrious Inheritour of his Fathers Fame,
hopeful to the State, and cherished by the King as his own. Charles who had
often visited and condoled with him in his sickness, was with him to the last,
and expressed the same affection for dying Albemarle, that he had testified to
him during his life.

From Somerset House, where he had lain in state, The Solemnity of his Funerals
he was with a splendid pomp of solemn Funerals at the Kings charges conveyed
to Westminster-Abbey, and there amidst the Tears and Condolings of all good
men, interred amongst the August Monuments of Kings, being the last Triumph due
to his memory.

They who are curious to have a description of the shapes and countenance of so
great a man, may know; that he was a person more graceful than beautiful; of a
middle stature, strong and well comparted, with a comely presence; and of a
composed, rather than severe or stern, aspect.

He may easily be reckoned a most valiant General in War, His Courage.
not only to be compared to the chief Commanders of his own age, but to the
most renowned Warriors of elder times; and of so great reputation he was in
Military affairs, that the modestest do acknowledge too great a Courage in
Albemarle. He spent almost his whole life in Arms, and at length growing old
amidst Victories, he became gray headed under a Helmet.

In Britain and Ireland, by Sea and by Land, so happy was Albemarle, that
Fortune traced out for him, His Prudence,
Honor, Renown, and Titles. He had indeed a hidden and a silent kind of
Sagacity in the management of affairs; and improved almost all the Arts of
Prudence by Silence.

And Modesty.
He had a Modesty that set off all the other Virtues of his Mind; nor was he
ever heard to brag of what he had done or deserved. The Fame of so great a man,
doubtless inferior to no other Mortal, will propagate it self to Posterity;
who, without Pride or Ostentation, gratified a banished Prince with so signal
Services, and only rejoiced in the conscientious performance of his Duty and
Obedience.

Tacit. Hist. l. 3.
Nor after the Restoration of Charles, did he behave himself as a Colleague in
the Government, as Mucianus was of old reported to have done to Vespasian, but
as a Servant; neither did he ever boast, that having the Power in his own
hands, he had bestowed it upon another; whereby he burned, to his glory, the
Arrogance of the Rump, and the Impudence of Cromwell: his Loyalty inclining him
more to give up, than his Ambition to retain the Government.

We may, moreover; reckon Albemarle happy, not only in the greatness of the
Action, but also in the seasonableness of the Service: That he brought back the
Government to a Prince of so just and good a temper, who put so true an
estimate upon his Loyalty, and under whom it would never be unsafe nor
dangerous to deserve the most: For good Offices are acceptable, Tacit. Annal.
lib. 4.
especially to Kings, so long as the obliged think they may be able to requite
them; but when they are too great to be rewarded, instead of Thanks they
procure Hatred: And it is rare, and almost unusual, for Princes to think
themselves obliged; or if they think so, to love their Benefactors. Plin.
Panegyr.


Peace being now established at home, and Janus his Temple shut, Albemarle
departed the more joyfully out of this life, that when he left no Troubles in
Britain, yet he left behind him a Love for himself in the hearts of all good
men: so much the more wanted, that he had taken care that nothing should be
wanting, having left nothing in the State but his own death to be bewailed; the
King flourishing in his Government, and the Loyalty of the Parliament as yet
vieing with the modesty of the Prince. Every one enjoyed the happiness they
desired at home, and Peace with all Nations abroad, till the League-breaking
Dutch again provoked the English Arms.

But the Actions of that War, the steady Fortune of the British Nation, and the
future Triumphs of CHARLES, I have set aside as a subject for my more advanced
years.

FINIS.
A Table to the Third Part.
A.
ALbemarle, vid. Monk, Army disbanded, 52
B.
Bishops restored, 51 Booth Sir George, his Insurrection, 8
C.
Committee of Safety, 13 Commissioners from the Parliament wait on the King at
Breda, 44 Conventicles suppressed, 73 Covenant burnt by the Hangman, 66 Cowley,
Abraham, 99
D.
De Wit, 76 Dutch War, beginning and occasion, 74. The first Engagement, 81.
The second, 87. The third, 88. the fourth, 90. The fifth, 92. Their Attempt at
Chatham, 98. Peace concluded, 98.
F.
Fanatics rise, but are suppressed, 72
G.
Gloucester Duke dies, 52
K.
King Charles, 2. Comes to Breda, 42. Lands at Dover, 46, Enters London, 47.
His Coronation, 61. Marries the Infanta of Portugal, 69.
L.
Lambert proclaimed a Traitor, 40. Committed to the Tower, 41. Condemned, but
obtains mercy, 71. Libels, 73 The Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church
confirmed and established by Act of Parliament, 71 London, the great Plague
there, 84. The great Fire there, 94. Rebuilt, 99, 100.
M.
Monk Sir George, 6, 13, and inf. His famous march into England, 25. Enters
London, 28. Admits the secluded Members, 36. Receives Letters from the King,
37. Created Duke of Albemarle, 51. A short account of his Life and Death, 102,
and inf. His Character, 105.
O.
Oblivion Act, 52 Great Officers upon the Kings Restoration, 51 Orange Princess
dies in England, 60 Oxford, the Court and Term there, 85. The new Theater there
built, 101.
P.
Parliament, the long one dissolved, 41. A new one meet, 42. A new one called
by the King, 66. Physicians College visited by the King, 78
Q.
Queen Mother dies, 101
R.
Recapitulation of things past, 1 Regicides brought to Trial, 53. Their several
Characters, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 67, 68, 70. Rump-Government, 5. and inf. Rump
and Army at variance, 10.
S.
Solemn League and Covenant burnt by the Hangman, 66
V.
Uly-Island, and Ships there burnt by the English, 93
Y.
York Duke made Lord High Admiral, 50. His great Victory at Sea, 81.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for and to be sold by Abel Swalle.
DR. Comber's Companion to the Temple, or Help to Devotion, in 4 parts. fol.
Dr. Allestry's Forty Sermons, whereof Twenty one now first published. The Works
of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Eighth Edition. The second part of the Works of Mr.
Abraham Cowley: being what was written in his younger years. The Fifth Edition.
The Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers, Stated and Resolved, by Dr.
Sherlock, in 8o Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the Rights of Ecclesiastical
Authority: being an Answer to the first part of the Protestant Reconciler, 8o
Pet. Dan. Huetii de Interpret. Lib. 2o quarum prior est de Optimo Genere
Interpret. Alter de Claris Interpret. etc. in 8o L. Coelii Lactantii Firmiani
Opera quae extant ad fidem MSS. recognita and Commenturiis Illustrata a Tho.
Spark. Oxon, e Theat. Sheld. The Case of Compelling Men to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper considered. By the Author of the Charge of Scandal. A Sermon
preached before the King at White Hall, Nov. 23. by Gilb. Ironfide, D.D. A
Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship: or, a Scripture Proof of
the unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any other Being beside the
one Supreme God. Part 1. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the
Reformed Church of England, made by the Papists asking of us this Question,
Where was our Religion before Luther? A Discourse about Tradition: showing what
is meant by it, and what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to
be Rejected. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to three
Questions, etc. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Matters of Faith. A Discourse
concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church maintained in the Church of
England. A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints. A Discourse concerning
Auricular Confession, as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent, and
practiced in the Church of Rome. There is now in the Press, and will speedily
be published- Philosophia Vetus and Nova ad usum Scholoe accommodata in Regia
Burgundia olim pertractata. 2 Vol. Duodecim. According to the Edition printed
at Paris, 1684. in 2 vol. 4o

