A CATALOGUE OF THE Common and Statute LAW BOOKS OF THIS REALM; And some others
relating thereunto.

Alphabetically digested under proper HEADS.

WITH An Account of the best Editions, Volumes, and common Prices they are now
sold at.

Collected by Tho. Bassett.

And are to be sold at his Shop, at the George near Cliffords-Inne in Fleet
street. 1671.

TO THE READER.
FOR several Years last past, having traded in Books, it has often happened
that I have been at a loss, when, by Gentlemen (either whose Profession
induced, or their Curiosity inclined them to buy Books on that Subject) an
Account has been demanded of me of all the Law Books extant. Now for avoiding
the trouble which for the future I and other Booksellers might undergo in such
case, but more especially for satisfaction of those who are desirous to be
informed therein, I have collected the ensuing Catalogue, whereby the Reader
will be informed of all the Law Books now Extant, which directly, or more
remotely concern the Common and Statute Law of this Realm, and of the best
Editions and Prices, etc. of the same; In doing of which, I had the kind
assistance of some Gentlemen of the Profession of Law. To do a thing first, and
to do it perfectly, is more than (perhaps) any has as yet pretended to; and
therefore this Printed Catalogue may well be capable of amendment, or additions
at least, and being conscious of it, I have left blanks at the end of each
Title, that what is omitted here by me, and occurs to others, may be added in
their proper Places. And to the end those into whose hands this Catalogue shall
come, may have it more and more perfect, if they please to have recourse to me,
I shall afford them my assistance therein; and in the mean time Collect and
Insert in a Catalogue I keep by me for that purpose, all Books (which upon
farther search, and others Information) I find omitted, and also those that
shall be hereafter Published.

Besides the encouragement I had from some, to whom I imparted my intentions
concerning this Catalogue, when it was only in design, and the inducements I
touched before, I apprehended, that by this Collection some advantage would
redound to such, as living remote from London, are by specious Titles trepanned
into the buying of some Law Books, before they are assured whither (in truth)
the Discourse tends, which how frequently it happens, experience sufficiently
convinces. The Method I have used, and the placing Books under the Titles I
have disposed them, may probably be disliked by some; however, the Catalogue
not being very long, the whole may be soon read over, which will cure that
Fault. And the ends I aim at, will (I hope) excuse the attempt, and my Errors
in the performance of it.

Tho. Bassett.

A TABLE of the Titles in the ensuing Catalogue.
ABridgments. Page 1 Arguments. Page 11 Constables. Page 15 Courts. Page 18
Crown. Page 27 Customs. Page 30 Interpreters of Law Terms. Page 33 Justice of
Peace. Page 37 Maxims and Grounds of the Law. Page 42 Parliament. Page 46
Presidents. Page 50 Readings. Page 61 Reports. Page 64 Sheriffs. Page 80
Statutes. Page 82 Tables. Page 85 Tithes, etc. Page 88 Wills and Testaments.
Page 90 Of Writs. Page 92 Miscellanies. Page 94. etc.
ADVERTISEMENT.
I Desire the Reader to take Notice, That all Books in this Catalogue, not said
to be in another Language, are in English. And also that I have mentioned none
but the best Editions, and that there is no difference in the Editions (though
some have been often Printed) but where this Mark * is prefixed.

Licensed,

October. 13. 1670. Roger L'Estrange.

ABRIDGMENTS.
AN Abridgment of the Book of Assizes, in Octavo, French. Price 1 s. 6 d.

* An Abridgment of the Common Law, contained in the Year Books, and other
Books of Law, Readings and Records; Collected and written by Sir Robert Brook
Knight, Chief Justice of the Common-Bench in the time of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. This Book has been printed in three several Volumes, but no
Addition to either of them, the least (esteemed best) is in Quarto, Price 45 s.
The next is in small Folio, Price 40 s. And the other in large Folio, Price 35
s. All three in French.

Some New Cases of the Years and Time of King Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Queen Mary;
Written out of the great Abridgment of Sir Robert Brook, in Octavo, French.
Price 1 s. 6 d. The same is also Translated into English by John Marsh, in
Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

An Exact Abridgment of the Records of the Tower of London, from the Reign of
King Edward the Second, unto King Richard the 3 of all the Parliaments holden
in each Kings Reign, and the several Acts in every Parliament: together with
the Names and Titles of all the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, summoned to every of the said Parliaments. Collected by Sir Robert
Cotton Knight and Baronet; Revised and Published by Will. Prynne Esquire in Folio,
Price 20 s.

* A brief Summary of the Laws and Statutes of England, to the Year 1663. So
far forth as the same do concern the Office of Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables, and Churchwardens, and other Officers and Ministers of
this Kingdom. Together with diverse other Matters necessary for such as bear
Office in this Kingdom, the Fourth Impression. Collected by Nicholas Collyn of
Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Twelves, Price 1 s.

A Perfect Abridgment of the Eleven Books of Reports of Sir Edward Coke Knight,
by Sir John Davis sometime Attorney General in Ireland, in Twelves, Price 2 s.

Synopsis; or an Exact Abridgment of the Lord Cokes Commentaries upon
Littleton: being a brief Explanation of the Grounds of the Law; Composed by Sir
Humphrey Davenport Knight, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

An Exact Abridgment of that excellent Treatise, called Doctor and Student, in
Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Office and Authority of Sheriffs: Abridged by the former Author Mich.
Dalton of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Octavo, Price 3 s.

An Abridgment of the Reports of Sir James Dyer, in Octavo, French. Price 2 s.
6 d. The same is Translated into English, in Octavo, Price 2 s.

* An Abridgment of the Common Law contained in the Year Books and other Books
of Law, Readings and Records. Collected and Written by Sir Anthony Fitzherbert
Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Hen. the
8th. in Quarto, French. Price 3 l. 5 s.

The Common Law Epitomized, with Directions how to prosecute and defend
Personal Actions. To which is Annexed the Nature of a Writ of Error, and the
general Proceedings thereupon; by W. G^isson and A. Gulston Esquires, in
Octavo, Price 3 s.

Gregory's Moot-Book, being an Abridgment of Cases concerning the Titles most
material for the Students and Practitioners of the Laws of the Realm, digested
in certain apt Divisions under the same Titles, in Octavo, French. Price 10 s.
The same is also Translated into English, and much enlarged by William Hughes
of Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Quarto, Price 10 s.

The Grand Abridgment of the Law continued, or a Collection of the Principal
Cases and Points of the Common Law of England, contained in all the Reports
Extant, from the first of Elizabeth to the year 1663. by way of Common Place,
by William Hughes of Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Three Volumes, in Quarto, Price 50
s.

An Abridgment of Acts and Ordinances made from the Year 1640. to the Year
1656. by William Hughes of Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Quarto, Price 8 s.

An Abridgment of the Three Volumes of Reports of Sir George Croke Knight, of
such select Cases as were adjudged in the Courts of King's Bench, and
Common-Bench, during the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles
the First; by William Hughes Esquire, in Octavo, Price 6 s.

An Abridgment of the Cases Reported by Sir Francis More Knight, with the
resolution of the Points in Law therein by the Judges; by William Hughes
Esquire, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

An Abridgment of all the Statutes in force and use, made in the 16. 17. and
18. Years of King Charles the First: and in the 12. 13. 14. and 15. Years of
King Charles the Second, digested under proper Heads by William Hughes of
Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

An Abridgment of all the Cases in the Year Book of Hen. the 7. in Octavo,
French. Price 5 s. 6 d.

An Exact Abridgment of the Eleven Books of Reports of Sir Edward Coke Knight;
Composed by Sir Thomas Ireland Knight, late of Grayes-Inne: wherein is briefly
contained the very Substance and Marrow of all those Reports; together with the
Resolutions on every Case, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

An Abridgment of the Two last Volumes of Reports of Sir Edw. Coke Knight,
Entitled the 12. and 13. Parts; being a Supplement, and observing the method
of Edward Trotman Esquire; by Thomas Manley of the Middle Temple, in Octavo,
Price 1 s. 6 d.

An Abstract of all the Penal Statutes which be generally in force and use; by
Ferdinando Pulton Esquire, in Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

* An Abridgment of all the Statutes that have been made and Printed from Magna
Charta, to the end of the Session of Parliament 4. Jacob. by Ferdinando Pulton
of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Folio, Price 12 s.

An Abridgment of the Commentaries or Reports of the learned Lawyer Edmond
Plowden, concerning diverse Cases and Matters in Law, and the Arguments
thereupon; in the times of the Reigns of K. Edward the 6th, Q. Mary, King
Philip and Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth; with the Exceptions to the
Pleadings, and Answers thereunto, the Resolutions of the Matters in Law, and
all other Matters arising upon the same, in Octavo, French. Price 2 s. 6 d. The
same is also Translated into English, by Fabian Hicks Esquire, in Octavo, Price
2 s.

An Abridgment of many Cases and Resolutions of Law, contained as well in Law
Books, Statutes and Records, as of the modern Judgments in the Courts at
Westminster, Alphabetically digested by Henry Roll Sergeant at Law. Published
by the Lord Chief Baron Hale, in Folio, French. Price 40 s.

A Collection in English of the Statutes now in force, continued from the
beginning of Magna Charta, made in the 9. Year of King Hen. 3. until the end of
the Parliament of the 7. King James, under Titles placed by order of Alphabet;
by William Rastall Sergeant at Law, in Folio, Price 14 s.

Stalhams Abridgment of the Ancient Law, first Published in the Reign of Hen.
the 6th. in Folio, French. Price 35 s.

A Summary of the Common Law of England, Extracted (for the most part) out of
Sir Hen. Finch Knight, his learned Treatise of the Law, in Octavo, Price 10 d.

An Epitome of all the Common and Statute Laws of this Nation: wherein 1500.
hardest terms are Explained with the most useful and profitable Heads or
Titles of the Law by way of Common place, methodically handled by W. Sheppard
Esquire, in Folio, Price 35 s.

* An Abridgment of the first Eleven Books of my Lord Cokes Reports, with a
Table lately added by Edward Trotman Esquire, in Octavo, French, Price 5 s.

* An Exact Abridgment of all Statutes in force and use, from the beginning of
Magna Charta, until 1641. by Edm. Wingate of Grayes-Inne Esquire: With a
Continuation under their Proper Titles, of all Acts in force and use until the
Year 1670. by T. M. in Octavo, Price 6 s.

* The Body of the Common Law of Engand, as it stood in force before it was
altered by Statute or Acts of Parliament: With a Collection of such Statutes as
have altered, or concern the same; by Edmund Wingate of Grayes-Inne Esquire, in
Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

ARGUMENTS.
ARguments at the Trial of Col. Eusebius Andrews, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

A Learned Argument to prove that each Subject has a Propriety in his Goods:
Showing also the Extent of the Kings Prerogative in Impositions upon Merchants
Goods, by a late Learned Judge of this Kingdom, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

The Arguments upon the Writ of Habeas Corpus, in the Court of King's Bench,
concerning Loans, wherein are discussed the several Branches of the said Writ,
and many Authorities of the Common and Statute Law: and many ancient Records
debated and cleared: With the Opinion of the Court thereupon. Whereunto is
annexed the Petition of Sir John Elliot, in behalf of the Liberty of the
Subject, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

Two Arguments in Parliament; The first concerning Canons; The second
concerning Praemunire upon the Canons, by Ed. Bagshaw Esquire, in Quarto, Price
6 d.

The Case and Argument against Sir Ignoramus of Cambridge, by Robert Callis of
Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The Arguments of Sir Richard Hutton Knight, and Sir George Croke Knight.
Together with the Certificate of Sir John Denham Knight, upon a Scire Facias
brought by the King in the Court of Exchequer against John Hampden Esquire: As
also the several Votes of the Commons and Peers in Parliament, and the Orders
of the Lords for the vacating of the Judgment given against Mr. Hampden, and
the vacating of the several Rolls in each Court, wherein the Judges
Extrajudicial Opinions in the Cases made touching Ship Money are entered, in
Quarto, Price 2 s.

An Argument upon a general Demurrer, joined and entered in an Action of false
Imprisonment in the King's Bench Court, Termino Trinitatis 1631. Rot. 1483 part
tertia, between George Huntley Clerk, Plaintiff; and William Kingsley Arch
Deacon of Canterbury, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

The Liberty of the Subject maintained by an Argument in Parliament, Anno 7.
Jacobi Regis, by William Hakewill of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Quarto, Price 1
s. 6 d.

An Argument in Law concerning the Militia, by I. M. in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The Rights of the People concerning Impositions, stated in a learned Argument,
with a Remonstrance presented to the King by the House of Commons in
Parliament, Anno. Dom. 1610. Annoque Regis Jac. 7. by a late eminent Judge of
this Nation, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

An Argument of Law, concerning the Bill of Attainder of High Treason of Thomas
Earl of Strafford, at a Conference in a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
by Mr. Saint John, his Majesty's Solicitor General, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

CONSTABLES.
THe Duties of Constables, Borsholders, Tythingmen, and such other low and Lay
Ministers of the Peace; by William Lambard of Lincolns-Inne Gent, in Octavo,
Price 6 d.

The Office and Duty of Constables, Churchwardens, and other the Overseers of
the Poor, by John Layer, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

* A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of
the Highways, Treasurers of the County Stock, Masters of the House of
Correction, Bailiffs of Mannours, Toll-takers in Fairs, etc. A Treatise briefly
showing the Extent and Latitude of the several Offices, with the Power of the
Officers therein, both by Common Law and Statute, according to the several
Additions and Alterations of the L w, till the 22th. Year of his Majesty's
Reign: The Second Edition. Collected by Gro. Mer^ton Gent. in Twelves, Price 1
s. 6 d.

* The Office of Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Supervisors
of Highways, Treasurers of the County Stock, and other Country Offices plainly
set forth, in Two Books, by William Sheppard Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* The Exact Constable with his Original, and Power in the Offices of
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the High ways, Treasurers of
the County Stock, and other inferior Officers, as they are established both by
the Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm; by E. W. of Grayes-Inne Esquire;
the Second Edition, with many useful Additions, in Twelves, Price 8 d.

COURTS.
* THe Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts; The Fourth Edition. To which is added a Table by Sir
Edward Coke Knight, in Folio, Price bound 8 s.

* The Authority and Jurisdiction of Courts: Collected and Composed by R.
Crompton of the Middle Temple Esquire, in Quarto, French, Price 6 s.

A Collection of such of the Orders heretofore used in Chancery; with such
Alterations and Additions thereunto, as the Right Honorable Edward Earl of
Clarendon, by and with the advice and assistance of the Honorable Sir Harbottle
Grimston Baronet, Master of the Rolls, have thought fit at present to Ordain
and Publish for reforming of several abuses in the said Court, preventing
multiplicity of Suits, Motions, and unnecessary charge to the Suitors, and for
their more expeditious and certain course for relief, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Orders of a Court Leet and Court Baron, with the Charges belonging
thereunto, in Octavo, Price 6 d.

The Clerk of Assize, Judge-Marshal and Crier; being the Manner and Form of the
Proceedings at the Assizes and General Jail-delivery, both in the Crown Court
and Nisi Prius Court, by T. W. To which is added an Ancient Tract of the Common
Laws of England, written in Latin, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Law of England; or a true Guide for all Persons concerned in
Ecclestastical Courts, by H. Carry, in Twelves, Price 10 d.

A Collection of such of the Orders heretofore used in Chancery, with such
Alterations and Additions thereunto, as the Commissioners for the Great Seal of
England, with the advice of the Master of the Rolls then thought fit to Ordain
and Publish, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Clark's ^r^xis; being the Manner of Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts, in
Quarto, Latin, Price 6 s.

The Practice of the Admiral Court of England, by Fra. Clarke, in Octavo, Lat.
Price 1 s.

Certain O servations concerning the Office of the Lord Chancellor, Composed
by the Right Honorable, and most Learned Thomas Lord Ellesmere late Lord
Chancellor of England, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Practice of the Exchequer Court, with its several Offices and Officers,
and the Power and Duty of each Person; by Sir T. F. in Octavo, Price 1 s.

* (...); Or a Practical Demonstration of County Iudicatures, wherein is amply
Explained the Judicial and Ministerial Authority of Sheriffs and Coroners:
together with the Original, Jurisdiction, and Method of keeping all Country
Courts, by Will. Greenwood, the Third Edition, in Octavo, Price 3 s. 6 d.

(...). A View of the Admiral Jurisdiction; wherein the most material Points
concerning that Jurisdiction, are fairly and submissively discussed, as also
diverse of the Laws, Customs, Rights and Privileges of the High Admiralty of
England, by ancient Records and other Arguments of Law asserted: Whereunto is
added an Extract of the Ancient Laws of Oleron, by Io. Godolphin LL. D. in
Octavo, Price 2 s.

Pacis Consultum; the Antiquity Extent, and Practice of several Country
Corporation Courts, especially the Court Leet: With an Abstract of the Penal
Statutes, by David Ienkins in Octavo, Price 1 s.

A Commission with Instructions and Directions, granted by his Majesty to the
Master and Counsel of the Court of Wards and Liveries, for compounding for
Wards, Idiots and Lunaticks, Quarto, Price 6 d.

* Jurisdictions; Or the lawful Authority of Courts Leet, Courts Baron, Court
of Marshalsey, Court of Pypowder or ancient Demesne: Together with the most
necessary learning of Tenures, and all their incidents of Essoyns, Imparlance,
View; of all manner of Pleadings, of Contracts, of the nature of all sorts of
Actions, of Maintenance; by John Kitchen of Grayes-Inne Esquire: in Octavo.
French, Price 4 s. The same is also Translated into English, in Octavo, Price 4
s.

A Learned Treatise concerning Wards and Liveries: wherein is set forth the
learning concerning them; Collected and well digested out of the Year Books and
other Authorities of the Law, by Sir James Ley Knight and Baronet, in Octavo,
Price 1 s.

* Archeion; Or a Discourse upon the High Courts of Justice in England.
Composed by William Lambard of Lincolns-Inne Gent. Corrected and Enlarged
according to the Authors Copy, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* The Ancient legal Course and fundamental Constitution of the Palace-Court or
Marshalsea: Together with the several Charges of all Proceedings there, and its
present establishment, particularly set forth and Explained, in Twelves, Price
8 d.

20. A Treatise of the Antiquity, Authority, Cases and Jurisdiction of the
Ancient Courts of Leet. etc. with an Explanation of the old Oath of Allegiance,
by Robert Powel of New-Inne. Gent. in Quarto, Price 2 s. 6. d.

The Practice of the High Court of Chancery unfolded: With the Nature of the
several Offices belonging to that Court; and the Reports of many Cases, wherein
Relief has been there had, and where denied in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Rules and Orders for the Courts of Upper Bench, Common Pleas and Chancery,
made and Published by the Judges of the said Courts, in the Term of St.
Michael, in the year 1654. in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

The ancient State Authority and Proceedings of the Court of Requests, in
Quarto, Price 2 s.

The Practice of the Sheriffs Court, London: Containing the Manner of entering
Actions, making Attachments and Sequestrations, with Fees, etc. in Twelves,
Price 8 d.

The Court-Keepers Guide: A useful Treatise for the help of keeping Law-daies
or Court Baron; showing the Jurisdiction of their Courts, with the learning of
Manors, Copy-holds, Rents, Harriots, etc. by W. Sheppard Esquire, in Octavo,
Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Survey of the County Iudicatures, commonly called the County Court, and
Court Baron: Wherein the Nature and Use of them, and the Way and Order of
keeping them is opened, by W. Sheppard Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Star Chamber Cases; showing what Causes properly belong to the Cognizance of
that Court: Collected for the most part out of Mr. Cromptons Book of the
Jurisdiction of Courts, in Quarto, Price 8 d.

Transactions of the High Court of Chancery both by Practice and President,
with Fees and special Orders in extraordinary Cases, by Will. Tothill Esquire:
and Revived by Sir Rob. Holborne late Bencher of Lincolns-Inne, in Octavo,
Price 2 s.

Considerations for regulating the Exchequer, in the more timely answering,
better husbanding, and more orderly and safe conduct of the Revenues of the
Crown into his Majesty's Coffers, as has been heretofore used by Sheriffs. And
for freeing the Subject from all unjust vexations concerning the same. With the
Causes and Remedies of the inconveniences which have been occasioned by the
breach of the Laws, and ancient course of the Exchequer, per C. Vernon, de
Saccario Dom. Regis. in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England asserted against Sir Edward
Coke's Articuli Admiralitatis in 22. Chapter of his Jurisdiction of Courts, by
Rich. Zouch Doctor of the Civil Laws, and late Judge of the High Court of
Admiralty, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

CROWN.
* PLeas of the Crown, divided into several Titles and Common-places; to which
is added an Exposition of the Kings Prerogative, collected out of the
Abridgement of Fitzherbert, and other old Writers of the Laws of England: by
the Reverend Judge Sir William Stamford Knight, in Quarto, French. Price 6 s.

* The Third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England concerning
High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown and criminal Causes: The Fourth
Edition. To which is added a Table, by Sir Edward Coke Knight, in Folio, Price
6 s.

De Pace Regis and Regni, viz. A Treatise declaring which be the great and
general Offenses of the Realm, and the chief Impediments of the Peace of the
King and Kingdom, as Treasons, Homicides, and Felonies, etc. and how many, and
what sorts of them there be, and by whom, and what means the said Offenses, and
the Offenders therein are to be restrained, repressed, or punished. Collected
out of the Common and Statute Law of the Realm, by Ferdinando Pulton of
Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Folio, Price 10 s.

The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is established by Law: by Edward
Bagshaw Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

CUSTOMS.
* REports of special Cases of the Liberties, ancient Customs, and Vsages of
the City of London, by Sir H. Calthrop sometimes Recorder thereof, etc. in
Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The City Law, showing the Customs, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges and
Immunities of the famous City of London: Together with the Name, Natures,
Kinds, Jurisdictions, Powers, and Proceedings of the several Courts within the
same, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Customs of Normandy, in Folio, Price 20 s.

* The Perambulation of Kent, containing the Description, History and Customs
of that County: Written by William Lambard of Lincolns-Inne. Corrected and
Enlarged. To which is added the Charters, Laws and Privileges of the Cinque
Ports, in Octavo, Price 6 s.

A Treatise of Gavelkind both Name and Thing, showing the true Etymology and
Derivation of the one, the Nature, Antiquity and Original of the other; with
sundry emergent Observations, by William Somner in Quarto, Price 2 s. 6 d.

The History of Gavelkind with the Etymology thereof, containing a Vindication
of the Laws of England: Together with a short History of William the
Conqueror, by Silas Tailor Gent. in Quarto, Price 3 s.

INTERPRETERS OF Law Terms.
(...): A Law Dictionary. Interpreting such difficult and obscure Words and
Terms, as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern Laws,
with References of the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds and Manuscripts wherein the words are used: and
Etymologies, where they properly occur, by Tho. Blount of the Inner Temple
Esquire, in Folio, Price 8 s.

The Interpreter: Containing the Signification of Words. Wherein is set forth
the true meaning of all, or the most part of such Words and Terms as are
mentioned in the Law-Writers and Statutes of this Kingdom, requiring any
Exposition or Interpretation. Collected by John Cowell Doctor, sometime the
Kings Professor of the Civil Law im Cambridge, in Folio, Price 6 s. This Book
is reprinting with Additions.

* A Philological Commentary: or An Illustration of the most obvious and useful
Words in the Law, with their Distinctions and diverse Acceptations, as they are
found as well in Reports Ancient and Modern, as in Records and Memorials never
printed; The Second Edition: Reviewed and Enlarged by Edward Leigh Gent.
sometimes of the Middle Temple, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary; containing Barbarous Latin, foreign, obsolete,
and adopted Terms; which (after Europe was overrun by the inundation of
Goths and Vandals) were introduced in Ecclesiastical and Profane Writers; and
also those which occur in the ancient Municipial Laws, Charters, and
Instruments of diverse Nations. Illustrated with Glosses and Commentaries, in
which are declared many ancient Rites, Magistracies, Dignities, Charges,
Offices, Manners, Laws themselves, and Customs, in Folio, Latin, Price 30 s.

De Verborum Significatione; the Exposition of the Terms and difficil words
contained in the four Books of Regiam Majestatem, and others, in the Acts of
Parliament, Infeftments, and used in practique of this Realm, and with diverse
Rules, and Common Places, or Principals of the Laws. Collected and Expounded by
Mr. John Skene Clerk of our Sovereign Lord's Register, Council and Rolls, in
Quarto, Price 2 s. 6 d.

* The Terms of the Law, or certain difficult and obscure Words and Terms of
the Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm now in use, Expounded and Explained,
newly Corrected and Enlarged: With an Addition of above one hundred Words, by
T. B. Esquire, in Octavo, French and English, Price 4 s.

Justice of Peace.
BOlton of the Office of a Justice of Peace in Ireland, in Folio, Price 20 s.

* The Complete Justice, being an exact and compendious Collection out of such
as have treated of the Office of Justices of the Peace; but principally out of
Mr. Lambert, Mr. Crompton, and Mr. Dalton: Now amplified and purged from sundry
Errors which were in the former Impressions: Whereunto are added the
Resolutions of the Judges of Assizes in the Year 1633. Together with a
Compendious charge to be given at the Quarter Sessions, not in print till 1661.
in Twelves, Price 2 s.

* The Country Justice; Containing the Practice of the Justices of the Peace,
as well in, as out of their Sessions, by Michael Dalton of Lincolns-Inne
Esquire, and one of the Masters of Chancery. Now again Enlarged with many
Presidents, and Resolutions of the Queries contained in the former Impressions:
and the Statutes of King Charles 1. and King Charles 2. added under their
several Titles, by T. M. one of the same Society, in Folio, Price 8 s.

The Office of a Justice of Peace: Together with Instructions how, and in what
manner Statutes shall be Expounded, by William Fleetwood sometime Recorder of
London, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Office and Authority of Justices of Peace, in part Collected by Sir
Anthony Fitzherbert Knight, late one of the Justices of the Common Bench:
Enlarged by Richard Crompton Esquire Whereunto is annexed the Office of Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Escheators, Constables, Coroners, etc. Collected by the said Sir
Anthony Fitzherbert, in Quarto, French. Price 6 s.

The Book called The Mirror of Justices, by Andrew Horn, in Octavo, French,
Price 2 s. The same is also Translated into English, with a Treatise added,
called The Diversity of Courts with their Jurisdiction, in Octavo, Price 2 s.

* Justice Restored: or a Guide for his Majesty's Justices of Peace, both in
Sessions and out of Sessions; according to the Ancient Laws of the Kingdom.
The Second Edition amended and enlarged, in Twelves, Price 1 s.

Justice Revived; being the whole Office of a Country Justice of the Peace,
briefly, and yet more methodically and fully then ever yet Extant, by E. W. of
Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* Eirenarcha; or The Office of the Justices of Peace, in four Books. To which
is added The Duty of Constables, etc. Revised, Corrected and Enlarged by
William Lambert of Lincolns-Inne Gent. in Octavo, Price 6 s.

* A Sure Guide for his Majesty's Justices of Peace; plainly showing their
Duty, and the Duties of the several Officers of the Counties, Hundreds and
Parishes, viz. Sheriffs, County-Treasurers, Bridewel-Masters, Constables,
Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highways, and Churchwardens, etc. with
the Heads of the Statutes concerning the Doctrine and Canons of the Church of
England. Methodically digested into 58 Chapters, by Will. Sheppard Esquire. The
Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged, in Octavo, Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Justice of Peace his Clerks Cabinet; or a Book of Presidents or Warrants,
fitted and made ready to his hand for every Case that may happen within the
Compass of his Masters Office, by Will. Sheppard Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

* A Vade Mecum, or Table containing the Substance of such Statutes wherein any
one or more Justices of the Peace are enabled to act, as well in the Sessions,
as out of the Sessions of the Peace: Together with an Epitome of Mr. Stamfords
Pleas of the Crown; The Seventh Edition: by Wa. Young Esquire, in Twelves,
Price 1 s.

Maxims and Grounds of the Law.
FAsciculus Florum; or a handful of Flowers gathered out of the several Books
of Sir Edward Coke Knight, by Tho. Ash in Octavo, English and Latin, Price 1
s. 6 d.

The Elements of the Common Laws of England in a double Tract; the one
containing some Rules and Maxims of the Common Law: the other the use of the
Common Law, according to the Laws and Customs of this Land, by Sir Francis
Bacon Knight, in Quarto, Price 2 s.

Institutions of the Laws of England, Composed and Digested according to the
Method and Order of the Imperial Institutions, by John Cowell Dr. of the Civil
Law, and Regius Professor in the University of Cambridge, in Octavo, Latin.
Price 2 s. The same is also Translated into English, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

Two Dialogues between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student in the Laws of
England, of the Grounds of the said Laws, and of Conscience, in Octavo, Latin.
Price 1 s. 6 d. The same is also rendered into English, and Revised, in Octavo,
Price 2 s.

The Grounds of the Laws of England, Extracted from the Fountains of all other
Learning: and digested Methodically into Cases; with a Commixtion of diverse
scattered grounds concerning the reasonable construction of the Law; by M.
Hawke of the Middle Temple, in Octavo, Price 3 s. 6 d.

Institutions, or principal Grounds of the Laws and Statutes of England;
Corrected and Amended, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Littleton's Tenures, in French, Price 1 s. 6 d. The same is also in English,
in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d. and newly printed together 1670. in French and
English, and exactly Corrected, in Twelves, Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Treatise of the principal Grounds and Maxims of the Laws of this Nation,
Written by W. Noy of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

* The Complete Lawyer; or a Treatise concerning Tenures and Estates in Lands
of Inheritance for Life, and other Hereditaments and Chattels real and
personal; and how any of them may be conveyed in a legal Form by Fine,
Recovery, Deed or Word, as the Case shall require; by William Noy late Attorney
General to King Charles 1. with Observations on the Authors Life, in Octavo,
Price 1 s.

The Principles of the Law reduced to Practice, by Will. Phillips, in Twelves,
Price 1 s.

A profitable Book of Mr. John Perkins Fellow of the Inner Temple, treating of
the Laws of England, in French, Price 2 s. The same is also Translated into
English, in Octavo, Price 2 s.

Maxims of Reason; or the Reason of the Common Law of England, by Edmund
Wingate late of Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Folio, Price 14 s.

PARLIAMENT.
THe opinions of sundry learned Antiquaries, viz. Mr. Justice D^de^ige, Mr.
Agar, etc. touching the Antiquity, etc. and Proceedings of the High Court of
Parliament in England, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

A Manual, or brief Treatise of some particular Rights and Privileges
belonging to the High Court of Parliament, by Robert Derham of Grayes-Inne
Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s

The ancient Method and Manner of holding of Parliaments in England: being the
Collections of Henry Elsynge Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

Ephemeris Parliamentaria; or a faithful Register of the Transactions in
Parliament, in the third and fourth years of the Reign of King Charles the
First; containing several Speeches, Cases, and Arguments of the Law transacted
between his Majesty and both Houses, in Folio, Price 6 s.

The Manner how Statutes are enacted in Parliament by Passing of Bills, by W.
Hakewill of Lincolns-Inne Esquire in Octavo, Price 1 s.

(...); or an Historical Discourse of Parliaments and their Original before the
Conquest, and continuance since: Together with the Original, growth, and
continuance of these Courts following, viz. High Court of Chancery, Upper
Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Duchy, and other inferior Courts, in Octavo,
price 1 s.

Modus tenendi Parliament. The manner of holding Parliaments, etc. by W.
Hakewill, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Manner and Method of Passing Bills in Parliament, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The Practice and Privileges of Parliament, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

Pleadings in Parliament, with the Judgments thereon, in the Reigns of Edw. 1.
and Edw. 2. with an Appendix containing a Collection of some Copies of
Statutes, Ordinances, Provisions, etc. As also of some other Records which
prove the homage anciently due to the Kings of England from Scotland; and the
establishment of Ireland under the Laws of England: With several Petitions in
Parliament, by William Ryley of the Inner Temple Gent. in Folio, Latin, Price
18 s.

The Privileges of the Baronage of England, when they sit in Parliament.
Collected (and of late revised) by John Seldom of the Inner Temple, Esquire,
out of the Parliament Rolls, etc. in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Grand Question concerning the Judicature of the House of Peers Stated and
Argued; and the Case of Thomas Skinner Merchant, complaining of the East India
Company, which gave occasion to that Question, faithfully related, by a true
well wisher to the Peace and good Government of the Kingdom, and to the Dignity
and Authority of Parliaments, in Octavo, Price 8 s.

PRESIDENTS.
PLacita Latin Rediviva; A Book of Entries; Containing perfect and approved
Precidents of Counts, Declarations, Bars, Avowries, Replications, Pleas in
abatement, Issues, Judgments, as well in Actions Real as Personal, and sundry
other Entries, not heretofore published in Print. Collected in the times, and
out of some of the Manuscripts of those famous and learned Prothonotaries
Richard Brownlow, John Gulston, Robert Moyl, and Tho. Cory, Esquires, and
digested into an exact Method, by R. Aston of Furnivals-Inne, in Quarto,
Latin. Price 6. s.

The Attorney's Guide for suing out of Fines, Concords, and Recoveries, etc.
being choice and exact Presidents for all sorts of Fines, Concords, and
Recoveries: Together with full Instructions in all Proceedings relating
thereunto, and the certain charges of the same. Perused and approved by G. T.
an able Practitioner and others, in Octavo, Price 2 s.

Brevia Iudicialia; or an exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of
Judicial Writs in the Common Bench, as well Measne Process before appearance,
as Execution after Judgment, with the several Entries thereof upon Record, with
farther Process awarded thereupon; with the Returns of the said Writs.
Collected out of the Manuscripts of Richard Brownlow Esquire, late chief
Prothonotary of the said Court, in Folio, Latin. Price 10 s.

Brevia Selecta; or choice Writs, being a Collection of diverse special Writs
not taken notice of in the Writ-Books lately put forth; many of them being
Extents directed to Bishops, Prohibitions, Consultations, Process upon appeal
of Murder; Writs directed to Counties Palatine, etc. taken out of the
Manuscripts of Mr. Richard Antrobus, and Mr. Tho. Impey, late Attorneys in the
Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas, in Octavo, Latin, Price 1 s. 6 d.

Declarations and Pleadings in English, Collected by Rich. Brownlow Esquire,
late chief Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas. Whereto are added choice
Presidents in the Upper Bench, by some others of good note, in two Parts, in
Quarto, Price 14 s.

Writs Judicial, showing the Forms, Nature and Entries of all manner of
Executions, in Real, Personal, and mixed Actions, as they are used in the Court
of Common Pleas, etc. Whereunto is added a Collection of the Forms both of
Judicial and other special Writs belonging to the practice of the Court of
King's Bench. Collected out of the Presidents of Richard Brownlow Esquire, in
Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

A Book of Entries, containing Presidents of Counts, Declarations,
Informations, Plaints, Inditements; Bars, Replications, etc. and all other
Matters and Proceedings (in effect) concerning the Practique part of the Laws
of England, in Actions, Real, Personal, and Mixed, and in Appeals; Collected by
Sir Edward Coke Knight, in Folio, Latin. Price 3 l.

The Clerks Vade Mecum; or a choice Collection of Modern Presidents according
to the best Forms extant, and such as have not formerly been printed:
Containing all sorts of Bargains and Sales, Leases, Mortgages, Grants,
Covenants, Surrenders, etc. Perused by T. P. Barrister, in Octavo, Price 3 s.

The Young Clerks Guide; or an exact Collection of choice English Presidents,
according to the best Forms now used, for all sorts of Indentures, Letters of
Attorney, Releases, Conditions, etc. in three Parts. Compiled by R. H.
Counselor, in Octavo, Price 4 s.

* The Young Clerks Tutor, being a Collection of the best Presidents of
Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale, Warrants
of Attorney, etc. As also all the Names of Men and Women in Latin, with the
day of the Date, the several sums of money, and the addition of the several
Trades or Employments in their proper Cases, as they stand in the Obligations:
Together with Directions of Writs of Habeas Corpus, Writs of Error, etc. to the
inferior Courts in Cities and Towns: Likewise the best Presidents of all
manner of Concords of Fines, and Directions how to sue out a Fine with many
judicious Observations therein, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Young Clerks Companion, or a Manual for his daily practice: wherein are
contained modern Presidents, fitted for all Occasions of present use, in
Twenty-fours, Price 1 s.

* The Complete Clerk, containing Forms of all sorts of Presidents for
Conveyances and Assurances; and other Instruments now in use and practice: with
the Forms of Bills, Pleadings and Answers in Chancery, as they have been
occasionally composed by the advice of many eminent Lawyers. The Second Edition
very much Enlarged, in Quarto, Price 12 s.

The Exact Clerk and Scriveners daily Exercise; being a Compendium of all
manner of Presidents and Draughts that are now in use: for all manner of Bills
obligatory, conditions Clauses and Proviso's; with all manner of Annuities,
Assignments, Letters of Attorney, Revocations, Grants, Releases, Trusts,
Warrants, Witnesses, and other things of great use, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Laymans Lawyer, Reviewed and Enlarged: being a Second Part of the Practice
of the Law, relating to the punishment of offenses committed against the
public Peace; containing the Forms of Process, Indictments, and proceeding to
Judgment, as well in all manner of Crimes deserving death, as others of
corporal and pecuniary punishments: also the several Causes and Cases wherein
such respective proceedings ought to be had; Collected into Heads out of the
Books of Law at large. Also a Discourse of pardons and remissions of
punishments: The Office and Duty of a Jailer, Constable, and other Assistants
for the preservation of the Peace, by Tho. Forster Gent. in Octavo, Price 2 s.

A perfect Guide for a Studious young Lawyer, being Presidents for Conveyances
and other business of the like kind: Gathered out of the learned Labors of the
learned Sages of the Law, the Lord Coke, the Lord Hobart, etc. by Tho. Fidell
of Furnivals-Inne Gent. in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Pleader, containing perfect Presidents and Forms of Declarations,
Pleadings, Issues, Judgments, and Proceedings in all kinds of Actions, real,
personal and mixed; together with the Terms and Rolls wherein they were entered;
and also diverse points of great learning, and various Notes and Cases to
illustrate the same, as they were drawn, entered, and taken in the Times of
those famous Prothonotaries of the Courts of Common Pleas, Rich. Brownlow, Rob.
Moyle, John Gulston, and Tho. Cory, Esquires. Collected and Published by John
Herne, in Folio, Price 16 s.

The Modern Assurancer; or the Clerks Directory, containing the Practick part
of the Law in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents, by I.
Herne, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

An exact Book of Entries of the most select Judicial Writs used in the
Common Law; Translated from the original Manuscript, which was Collected by
that Eminent Clerk Robert Moyle Esquire, late one of the Protonotaries of the
Court of King's Bench. A work of much Industry, as may appear by the Authors
great pains in quoting of Book-Cases, Opinions of Judges, Number Rolls, and
many other requisites, for the confirmation of every Entry, whereof none have
been ever published before, in Quarto, Price 3 s.

Novae Narrationes, first published about the beginning of the Reign of E. 3.
Containing the Forms of Counts, Declarations, Defenses, Pleas, etc. with the
Treatise called Articuli ad Novas Narrationes, being a Commentary and Rules
upon, and concerning the new Tales, in Octavo, Latin. Price 4 s.

The Perfect Conveyancer: or several select and choice Presidents, such as have
not formerly been printed. Collected by four several Sages of the Law, Edw.
Henden Knight, late one of the Barons of the Exchequer, William Noy, Attorney
General to his late Majesty; Robert Mason, sometime Recorder of London; and
Henry Fleetwood, formerly Reader of Grayes-Inne. Wherein are contained many
excellent Examples and Instructions touching the manner and method of
Conveyances, in Quarto, Price 5 s.

* Presidents of sundry sorts of Instruments, both in Latin and English, viz.
Advowsons, Presentations, Letters Missive, Letters Patents, Letters of
Significavit, etc. Indentures, Leases, etc. and diverse other useful
Instruments, also Supplicants, Bills and Answers in Chancery, and other
Petitions in Courts of Equity, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Old Book of Entries, containing the Forms of Declarations, Pleas, Writs,
etc. in Folio, Latin, Price 30 s.

* The Register of Writs, Original and Judicial, being a most ancient Book, and
of great Authority in Law, in Folio, Latin. Price 22 s.

* A Collection of Entries of Declarations, Bars, Replications, Rejoynders,
Issues, Verdicts, Judgments, Executions, Process, Continuances, Essoyns, and
diverse other matters. Newly Amended and much Enlarged with many good Presidents
of later times, whereof diverse are upon sundry Statutes, and noted in the end
of the Table, by William Rastell Esquire, in Folio, Latin, Price 3 l.

The President of Presidents, or one general President for Common Assurances by
Deeds: being an Extract of all the Readings and Presidents thereof extant, by
W. Sheppard Esquire, in Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

Declarations in the Upper Bench, with Pleas, Replications, Rejoynders,
Demurres, Assignments of Errors: and the Entries of Judgments thereupon
affirmed. Collected by W. S. one of the Clerks of the Upper Bench Office, in
Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

Thesaurus Brevium: or a Collection of approved Forms of Original and Judicial
Writs, with their special directions to all Cities and Boroughs. Collected and
published by I. C. in Folio, Latin. Price 5 s.

* Symboleographie: which may be termed The Art or Description of Instruments
and Presidents. In two Parts. First Collected by Will. West of the Inner Temple
Esquire: and since Augmented with diverse new Presidents not formerly printed,
in Quarto, Price 14 s.

READINGS.
THe Reading of Mr. Robert Brook Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of London; upon
the Statute of Magna Charta Chap. 16 in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The learned Reading of Sir Francis Bacon, one of her Majesty's Learned
Counsel at Law, upon the Statute of Uses; in Quarto Price, 1 s.

The Reading of that Famous Lawyer Sir Robert Brook Knight, upon the Statute
of Limitations. 32. H. 8. cap. 2. in Octavo, Price 1 s.

The Reading of that famous and Learned Gentleman Robert Callis Esquire,
Sergeant at Law, upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 5. Of Sewers, etc. as it was
delivered by him at Grayes-Inne in August 1622 in Quarto, Price 4 s.

The Relation between the Lord of a Manor and the Copyholder his Tenant;
delivered in the Learned Readings of the late Excellent and Famous Lawyer
Charles Calthrope of Lincoln's Inn Esquire, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

Lord Cokes Readings concerning Fines, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

A Complete Parson, or a Description of Advowsons, wherein is set forth the
Interest of the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, etc. as they were delivered at
several Readings at New Inn by Io. Doderidge, Anno 1602, 1603. in Quarto, Price
1 s. 6. d.

Denshalls Readings concerning Fines, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The Learned Reading of John Herne Esquire, upon the Statute of 23. H. 8. Chap.
3. concerning Commissions of Sewers, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The Reading upon the Statute of the 13. of Eliz. chap. 7. touching Bankrupts,
Learnedly and amply explained by John Stone of Grayes-Inn Esquire in Octavo,
Price 1 s.

Three Learned Readings made upon three useful Statutes; the first by Sir
James Dyer of the Middle Temple, upon the Statute of 32. H. 8. chap. 1. of
Wills, and 34, and 35. H. 8 chap. 5. for the Explanation of that Statute: the
second by Sir John Brograve of Grayes-Inn, sometime his Majesty's Attorney of
the Duchy of Lancaster; upon the Statute of 27. H. 8. chap. 10. concerning
Ioyntures: the third by Tho. Risden Esquire of the Inner Temple, upon the
Statute of 8. H. 6. chap. 9. of Forcible Entry; in Quarto, Price 1 s. 6 d.

REPORTS.
THe Reports of the learned Edmund Anderson Knight, late chief Justice of the
Common Bench, of many principal Cases argued and adjudged in the time of the
late Q. Elizabeth, as well in the Common Bench, as before all the Judges of
this Realm. Collected and written by himself, and printed by the Original. In
two parts, in Folio, French. Price 14 s.

The Reports of William Bendloes Sergeant at Law, of diverse Resolutions and
Judgments given by the Reverend Judges of the Law, of certain matters in the
Law in the time of the Reigns of H. 8. Ed. 6. Phil. and Mar. and Eliz. with
other select Cases in the Law, adjudged and resolved in the Reigns of the
renowned Kings James and Charles 1. in Folio, French. Price 6 s.

Cases adjudged in the time of King Richard the Second. Collected out of the
Abridgments of Statham, Fitzherbert, and Brook, by Rich. Bellewe of
Lincoln's Inn, in Octavo, French. Price 2 s.

The Reports of Edward Bulstrode, of the Inner Temple Esquire, of diverse
Resolutions and Judgments given with great advice and mature deliberation, by
the grave, reverend, and learned Judges and Sages of the Law; of Cases and
Matters in Law, with the reasons and causes of their said Resolutions and
Judgments, given in the Court of King's Bench, in the time of the late Reign of
King James, and the beginning of King Charles the First: In three Parts, in
Folio, Price 24 s.

Reports of diverse choice Cases in Law, taken by those late and judicious
Prothonotaries of the Common Pleas, Richard Brownlow and I. Goldsborough
Esquires, in the time of the late King James. With directions how to proceed in
many intricate Actions, both real and personal, showing the nature of those
Actions, and the practice in them. In two Parts, in Quarto, Price 10 s.

Reports of that grave and learned Judge Sir John Bridgman Knight Sergeant at
Law, sometime chief Justice of Chester, in the time of King James, in Folio,
Price 5 s.

The Repor s of Sir Edward Coke, heretofore chief Justice of England, of diverse
Resolutions and Judgments given with great deliberation, by the Reverend Judges
and Sages of the Law, of Cases and Matters in Law, which were never theretofore
resolved or adjudged, and the reasons and causes of the said Resolutions and
Judgments, during the Reign of Queen Eliz. and King James, In eleven Parts, in
Folio, French. Price 4 l. The same are also Translated into English, in Folio,
Price 2 l.

These Eleven Reports of Sir Edw. Coke in French, will be shortly reprinted and
Sold for about half the present Price by way of Subscription.

The Twelfth and Thirteenth Part of the Reports of Sir Edward Coke Knight, both
published since his death in English; of diverse Resolutions and Judgments given
upon solemn Arguments, and with great deliberation and conference with the
learned Judges in Cases of Law, in the Reign of King James; the most of them
very famous, as being of the Kings special reserence from the Council Table
concerning the Prerogative; as for the digging of Saltpeter, Forfeitures,
Forests, Proclamations, etc. And the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, Common
Pleas, Star Chamber, High Commission, Court of Wards, Chancery, etc. And
Expositions and Resolutions concerning Authorities both Ecclesiastical and
Civil within this Realm. Also the Forms and Proceedings of Parliaments, both in
England and Ireland: With an Exposition of Poynings Law, in Folio, Price 7 s.

Reports, or Causes in Chancery, Collected by Sir George Carry, one of the
Masters of the Chancery in Anno 1601. out of the Labors of Mr. William
Lambert. Whereunto is added the Kings Order and Decree in Chancery, for a Rule
to be observed by the Chancellor in that Court, Exemplified and Enrolled for a
perpetual Record there Anno 1616. in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* The Reports of Sir George Groke Knight, late one of the Justices of the
Court of Kings Bench, and formerly one of the Justices of the Court of Common
Bench, of such select Cases as were adjudged in the said Courts from the 24th
to the 44th of the late Queen Elizabeth, and during the whole Reign of the late
King James, and the first sixteen years Reign of K. Charles the I. Collected
and written in French by himself, Revised and Published in English, by Sir
Harebottle Grimstone Baronet, Master of the Rolls, and one of the Benchers of
the Honorable Society of Lincolns-Inne. The Second Edition, carefully Corrected
by the Original. In three Parts, in Folio, Price 45 s.

Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held before several Judges in that
Circuit, by Io. Clayton, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Reports of special Cases of the Liberties, ancient Customs and Usages of the
City of London, by Sir H. Calthrop, sometime Recorder thereof, etc. in Octavo,
Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Collection of Cases by the late Reverend Judge Sir James Dye^, chief Justice
of the Common-Bench, with diverse Resolutions and Judgments given upon solemn
Arguments, and with great deliberation, and the Reasons and Causes of the said
Resolutions and Judgments, in the Reigns of Hen. 8. Ed. 6. P. and Mary, and
Eliz. in Folio, French. Price 30 s.

The first Report of Cases and Matters in Law, resolved and adjudged in the
Kings Courts in Ireland. Collected and digested by Sir John Davis Knight, then
the Kings Attorney General in that Realm, in Folio, French. Price 10 s.

Reports of I. Goldsborough Esquire sometimes one of the Prothonotaries of the Court
of Common Pleas, or his Collection of Cases and Matters agitated in all the
Courts at Westminster, in the latter years of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth; with
learned Arguments at the Bar, and on the Bench, and the grave Resolutions and
Judgments thereupon of the chief Justices Anderson and Popham, and the rest of
the Judges of those times, in Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

Reports of certain Cases arising in the several Courts of Record at
Westminster, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, King James, and the late King
Charles: with the resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts, upon debate and
solemn Arguments, Collected by good hands, and approved by the late learned
Justice Go^^^lt. Published by W. Hughes Esquire, in Quarto, Price 6 s.

The Reports of that Reverend and Learned Judge Sir Richard Hutton Knight,
sometimes one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, containing many choice Cases,
Judgments and Resolutions, in Points of Law, in the several Reigns of King
James and King Charles, in Folio, Price 6 s.

Reports and Cases taken in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh years
of the late King Charles, as they were argued by most of the Kings Sergeants at
the Common Pleas Bar. Collected and Reported by Sir Tho. Herley Knight
Sergeant at Law, and appointed by the King and Judges for one of the Reporters
of the Law; in Folio, Price 5 s.

* The Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of
his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas; taken in the Reign of King James. The
third Edition, with an Exact-Table, in Folio, Price 10 s.

Judge Ienkin's Reports, in Folio French, Price 9 s.

* Reports of certain Select Cases out of the Books of Robert Kellewey Esquire
Which happened in the times of King Henry the 7th and of King Henry the 8th,
and which are not expressed in the former Impressions of Term-Reports of those
Kings Published 44. Eliz. Also Reports of certain Cases by the Reverend Judges
William Dallison, and William Bendloes Sergeant at Law, in the time of the said
Queen, containing the Construction of certain Statutes according to Equity with
a Table added not in the former Impressions, in Folio, French, Price 12 s.

Many Excellent Cases as they stand judged in the three first years of the late
King Charles the First, in the Court of King's Bench not Published by any other.
Collected by the late Knowing and Learned John Latch of the Middle Temple Esquire
in Folio, French, Price 7 s.

Reports in the Court of Exchequer, beginning in the third, and ending in the
ninth year of the Reign of the late King James by the Honorable Richard Lane
late of the Middle Temple: sometime Attorney General to the late Prince
Charles, being the first Collections in that Court hitherto Extant. Containing
several Cases of Informations upon Intrusion, touching the Kings Prerogative,
Revenue, and Government; with diverse Incident resolutions of Public
Concernment in Points of Law; in Folio, Price 4 s. 6 d.

Reports of diverse resolutions in Law, arising upon Cases in the Court of Wards
and other Courts at Westminster* in the Reigns of the late Kings, King James
and King Charles, Collected by the Right Honorable Sir James Ley Knight and
Baronet, Earl of Marleborough, etc. Whilst he was Attorney of the Court of
Wards and Liveries: in Folio, Price 4 s. 6 d.

Reports and Cases of Law, argued and adjudged in the Courts of Law at
Westminster, in the life of the late Queen Elizabeth. Collected by William
Leonard Esquire. And Published by W. Hughes of Grayes-Inn Esquire; in three
parts in Folio, Price 24 s.

Cases Collected and Reported by Sir Francis Moore Knight, Sergeant at Law,
Imprinted and Published by the Original then remaining in the hands of Sir
Ieffrey Palmer, Attorney General to his most Excellent Majesty King Charles the
second, in Folio, French, Price 28 s.

Reports or New Cases in the 15. 16. 17. and 18. Car. 1. with diverse
resolutions and judgments given upon solemn Argument and with great
deliberation, and the reason and causes of the said Resolutions and Judgments.
Collected by Io March of Grayes-Inn Barrister, in Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

* Reports and Cases taken in the time of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles. Collected and Reported by that Learned Lawyer William Noy, sometimes
Reader of the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn, since Attorney General to the
late King Charles: containing most Excellent matter of Exceptions to all manner
of Declarations, Pleadings and Demurrers, that there is scarce one Action in a
probability of being brought but here it is thoroughly examined and Exactly
laid. The Second Edition, Corrected and Amended; in Folio, Price 5 s.

The Reports of that late Reverend and Learned Judge, Thomas Owen Esquire, one
of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the time of Queen Elizabeth; wherein are
many choice Cases, most of them thoroughly argued by the Learned Sergeants, and
after argued and resolved by the Grave Judges of those times, with many Cases
wherein the differences in the Year-Books are reconciled and explained, in
Folio, Price 5 s.

* The Commentaries or Reports of Edmund Plowden, an Apprentice of the Common
Law, of diverse Cases being matters in Law, and of the Arguments thereupon: In
the times of the Reigns of King Edward. 6. Queen Mary Phil. and Mar. and Queen
Eliz. in two Parts, with three Tables of the remarkable things therein
contained, in Folio, French, Price 35 s.

Reports and Cases in the time of Queen Elizabeth, Collected by Sir Io. Popham,
with remarkable Cases and Reports, by other learned Pens since his death, in
Folio, Price 6 s.

Narrationes Modernae, or Modern Reports, begun in the now Upper Bench Court at
Westminster, in the beginning of Hillary Term 21 Caroli, and continued to the
end of Michaelmas Term 1655. as well on the Criminal as on the Pleas side. Most
of which time the late Lord Chief Justice Roll gave the rule there, by William
Style of the Inner Temple Esquire in Folio, Price 9 s.

Reports of that Reverend and Learned Judge Sir Humphrey Winch Knight,
sometimes one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas; Containing many
choice Cases, and Excellent matters touching Declarations, Pleadings,
Demurrers, Judgments, and resolutions in Points of Law, in the four last years
of the Reign of King James, in Folio, Price 5 s.

The Reports of Sir Henry Yelverton Knight and Baronet, late one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Bench of diverse special Cases in the Court of
Kings Bench, as well in the latter part of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, as in
the first ten years of King James. Collected by himself and Printed by the
Original under his own hand in French remaining with Sir Thomas Twisden Knight,
one of the Justices of the Kings Bench and Published by Sir William Wild Knight
and Baronet, then Sergeant at Law, and the Kings Sergeant and Recorder of the
City of London, and now one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, in Folio,
French, Price 7 s.

Year Books.
The first part of Edw. 3. containing the Reports of Cases in Law, in the first
ten years of that King, with notes in the Margent, referring to the Abridgement
of Fitzherbert.

* The second part of Edw. the 3 d. containing the Reports of Cases in Law,
argued in the time of that King; viz. beginning the 17th and ending the 39th
year of his Reign: with notations and references to Fitzherberts Abridgement,
with a large Table annexed.

*The Quadragesims, containing Reports of Cases in Law beginning the 40th, and
ending the 50th year of the Reign of King Edw. 3. with Notes in the Margent
referring to Brook and Fitzherberts Abridgements, with a Table annexed of the
matter therein contained.

* The Book of Assizes and Pleas of the Crown moved and depending before the
Justices as well in their Circuits as elsewhere; in the time of King Edward the
3d. with two Tables, composed by Justice Rastall, the one of them of the
Principal matters concerning Pleas of the Crown, and the other of all the
Principal Cases therein contained, and the Titles under which Sir Robert Brook
has Abridged the pleas collected and aptly described in the Margent of every
Plea.

* The Reports of Cases of Law in the Reign of Henry the 4th and Henry the 5th
with Notes in the Margent, referring to the Abridgements of Fitzherbert and
Brook, with a large Table added.

* The Annalls or Reports of the Reign of Edw. the 4th, with a Table of the
remarkable things therein contained, with references to Brooks Abridgment and
other Books of the Common Law.

* The Long Quinto, being the Report of Cases adjudged in the 5th year of the
Reign of Edw. the 4th, with a Table and references to the Abridgement of Brook
added in the Margent of every Case.

* The first part of the Annals of Hen. the 6th being the Reports of Cases of
Law in the first 20th. years of that Kings Reign, with the Marginal Notes and a
profitable Table thereunto annexed.

* The Second Part of Hen. the 6th being the Reports of Cases of Law in the
21th year of that King, and afterward with a Table, and references to the
Abridgements of Brook and Fitzherbert.

* A Collection of Cases adjudged in the Reigns of Edw. 5. Rich. 3. Hen. 7. and
Hen. 8. with references of the Cases to Brooks Abridgement and the year Books.

I have omitted the Particular Prises of the ten last mentioned Books called
Year-Books; many of them being difficult to be got singly, and their Prizes
uncertain: they are all in Folio, French, Price altogether 15 l.

These Ten Volumes of Year-Books are designed to be Reprinted and Sold for
about half the present Price by way of Subscription.

SHERIFFS.
* Officium Vicecomitum; The Office and Authority of Sheriffs, gathered out of
the Statutes and Books of the Common Laws of this Kingdom. Corrected and very
much Enlarged by Mich. Dalton late of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, and one of the
Masters of the Chancery. To which is added a Supplement, containing a
Collection of the Statutes touching Sheriffs, made since Mr. Daltons writing,
which are in force and use at this day; Several special returns of Writs, and
the Expositions, Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges in the several Courts
at Westminster; upon diverse Statutes, Cases, and Questions in Law relating to
Sheriffs, and several other new Matters, in Folio, Price 12 s.

* A Treatise collected out of the Statutes of this Commonwealth, and
according to common Experience of the Laws, concerning the Office and
Authorities of Coroners and Sheriffs: Together with an easy and plain Method
for the keeping of a Court Leet, Court Baron, and Hundred-Court, by John
Wilkinson of Bernards-Inne Gent. To which is added the return of Writs by Io.
Kitchen Esquire, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

STATUTES.
* A Collection of all the Statutes now in use, with Notes in the Margin, and
references to the Book Cases, and Books of Entries and Registers where they be
treated of together; with an Abridgment of the residue which are expired,
repealed, altered, and worn out of use, by Ferdinando Pulton of Lincolns-Inne
Esquire, with a Continuation of the Statutes made in the Reign of King Charles
the First, and his Majesty that now is, to the last adjournment of Parliament,
April 11. 1670. by Tho. Manby of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in Folio, Price 50 s.

* The Statutes at Large, containing all such Acts which at any time heretofore
have been extant in Print from Magna Charta, until the sixteenth year of the
Reign of King James, with Marginal Notes and Marks, whereby the Reader may know
which of the same Acts are wholly void, either by Expiration or Repeal.
Collected by W. Rastall Esquire, in two Volumes, in Folio, Price 30 s.

The Statutes of Ireland, beginning the third year of King Edward the Second,
and continuing until the end of the Parliament begun in the eleventh year of
King James, and ended in the thirteenth year of his Reign. To which is added
the Statutes made there in the tenth and eleventh years of King Charles the
First, in Folio, Price 18 s.

* Magna Charta, with other ancient and modern Statutes, in Octavo, Latin,
Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Collection of several Acts of Parliament published in the years 1648. 1649.
1650. and 1651. also several Acts of Parliament made in the 17. and 18. years
Reign of the late K. Charles, and Ordinances touching adventurers for Ireland,
by H. Scobell Esquire, in Folio, Price 16 s.

Regiam Majestatem: the old Laws and Constitutions of Scotland, faithfully
collected forth of the Register and other old Authentic Books, from the days
of King Malcolme the Second until the time of King James the First, by Sir John
Skene, in Folio, Latin, Price 12 s. The same is also Translated in Scottish
Language by Sir John Skene, in Folio, Price 12 s.

Tables never Printed with any BOOKS.
THE Promptuary, or Repertory General of the Year Books, and many other Books
of the Common Law of England: Composed by Thomas Ash of Grayes-Inne, Professor
of the said Law, referring to the Abridgments and Books at large, whereby all
the said Books and Cases therein contained, which concern any point coming in
question, either at the Common Law, or upon the Exposition of any Statute, and
the Presidents for Forms of Pleading, every several Matter may be easily found
published in the twelfth year of the Reign of King Janes, in two Volumes, in
Folio, French, Price 20 s.

A General Table to the eleven Books of the Reports of Sir Edward Coke Knight,
late chief Justice of the King's Bench, whereby all the Cases and Matters
therein contained may be easily found, with two Alphabetical Catalogues, the
one of the principal Cases, the other of all the general Titles naturally
arising out of the Matter of the said Reports, by Tho. Ash of Grayes-Inne, in
Octavo, French. Price 7 s. The same is also Translated into English, in Octavo,
Price 6 s.

Epieiceia, And a general Table to the Annal's (or Year Books) of Law; whereby
may be easily found all the Cases contained in the same, which concern the
Exposition of Statutes by Equity. Collected by Thomas Ash of Grayes-Inne, in
Octavo, French, Price 2 s.

A Table to the Reports of Sir James Dyer Knight, late chief Justice of the
Common Bench. Composed by Tho. Ash, in Octavo, French, Price 3 s.

A Table to the Annals (or Year Books) of Edw. 5. Rich. 3. H. 7. and H. 8. by
William Fleetwood Recorder of London, in Twelves, French. Price 2 s.

Ta^les to most of the printed Presidents of Pleadings, Writs, and Retorn of
Writs at the Common Law. Collected by George Townesend, a Clerk of the Court of
Common Pleas, in Folio, Latin and French. Price 12 s.

TITHES, etc.
A Complete Parson; or a Description of Advowsons, or Church living. Wherein is
set forth the interests of the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, etc. with many
other things concerning the matter, as they were delivered at several Readings
at New-Inne, by I. Doderidge Anno 1602. 1603. in Quarto, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* Parsons Law; or a View of Advowsons: Wherein is contained the rights of the
Patrons, Ordinaries and Incumbents, to Advowsons of Churches and Benefices,
with cure of Souls, and other Spiritual promotions. The Second Edition much
Enlarged by W. Hughes of Grayes-Inne Esquire, in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

* The Parsons Guide; or the Law of Tithes: Wherein is showed who must pay
Tithes, and to whom, and of what things, when, and how they must be paid, and
how they may be recovered at this day, and how a man may be discharged of
payment thereof. The Second Edition much Enlarged throughout the whole Book, by
W. Sheppard Esquire, in Twelves, Price 1 s.

Decimatum and Oblationum Tabula: A Tithing Table, or a Table of Tithes and
Oblations, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances established in
the Church of England. Compiled by W. C. Bach. of the Civil Law, in Quarto,
Price 6 d.

The History of Tithes; that is, the Practice of Payment of them. The Positive
Laws made for them. The Opinions touching the right of them. A Review of it is
also annexed, which both confirms it, and directs in the use of it; by I.
Seldom, in Quarto, Price 8 s.

Wills and Testaments.
THe Touchstone of Wills, Testaments and Administrations; being a Compendium
of Cases and Resolutions touching the same. Carefully collected out of the
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws, as also out of the Customs, Common Laws,
and Statutes of this Kingdom, by G. Meriton Gent. in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* The Office and Duty of Executors; or a Treatise of wills and Executors
directed to Testators, in the choice of their Executors, and contrivance of
their Wills, with directions for Executors in the execution of their Office
according to the Law; and for Creditors in the recovery of their Debts.
Compiled out of the body of the Common Law, by Thomas Wentworth late Bencher of
Lincolns-Inne, in Octavo, Price 2 s.

* A Brief Treatise of Testaments and last Wills; very profitable to be
understood of all the Subjects of this Realm desirous to know, whether,
whereof, and how, they may make their Testaments: and by what means the same
may be effected or hindered. Compiled of such Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, as
be not repugnant to the Laws, Customs, or Statutes of this Realm, nor
derogative to the Prerogative Royal, by Hen. Swinburne sometime Judge of the
Prerogative Court of York, Corrected and Augmented, with necessary Tables, in
Quarto, Price 8 s.

WRITS.
* THE N^w Natura Brevium of the most reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitzherbert,
Corrected and Revised, with a Table added by William Rastall, in Octavo,
French. Price 5 s. The same is also Translated into English, whereunto are
added the Authorities in Law, and some other Cases and Notes, collected by the
Translator out of the Year-Books and Abridgments, in Octavo, Price 5 s.

The Old Natura Brevium, in Octavo, French. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Commentaries upon Original Writs, where most of the Cases in Bracton Book
of Entries, the Year Books from King Edw. the Second, to these times, with the
Plaints, Counts, Pleadings, etc. are reduced to the original Writs under
several Heads. Collected, Abridged, and taken out of the Books themselves, by
W. Hughes of Grayes Inn Esquire, in Quarto, Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Attorney's Almanac: being the Manner for Direction of any Writ for the
removing of anybody or Cause, or certifying any Record, etc. to any of the
great Courts at Westminster, by Tho. Powel, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

A brief Register, Calendar, and Survey of the several Kinds, Forms of all
Parliamentary Writs, by William Pryn of Lincolns-Inne Esquire, in four Parts,
in Quarto, Price 20 s.

The Digest of Original Writs, and of things concerning them, by Simon Theloal,
in Octavo, French. Price 8 s.

For the several Forms of Writs, vide Title Presidents.

MISCELLANIES.
THE Assizes of Bread, with sundry good and needful Ordinances for Bakers,
Brewers, Inholders, etc. And other Assizes in Weights and Measures, which by
the Laws of this Realm are commanded to be observed and kept by all persons, in
Quarto, Price 6 d

The Attorney of the Common Pleas, or Directions and Instructions concerning
his practice therein: Together with the Fees due to the Judges and Officers
there, and in the King's Bench; and also Fees and Ordinances in Chancery, in
Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

B.
BRacton, a Treatise of the Laws and Customs of England; written in the Reign
of H. 2. in Quarto, Latin, Price 12 s.

Cases of Treason, written by Sir Francis Bacon Knight, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

A Charge given by the learned Sir Francis Bacon Knight, late Lord Chancellor
of England, at a Sessions holden for the Verge in the Reign of the late King
James, declaring the latitude of the Jurisdiction thereof, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

Ordinances in Chancery, by Sir Fra. Bacon Knight, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

The several Statutes concerning Bankrupts, methodically digested: Together
with the Resolutions of our learned Judges on them; as likewise the Statutes
13. Eliz. and 27. Eliz. touching fraudulent Conveyances, with the like
resolutions on them, by T. B. Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

Three Speeches of Sir Francis Bacon Knight, concerning the Post. Nati.
Naturalization of the Scotch in England, union of the Laws of the Kingdom of
England and Scotland, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

* Britton, an ancient Treatise of the Law: The Second Edition, faithfully
Corrected according to diverse ancient Manuscripts of the same Book, by Edm.
Wingate, in Octavo, French. Price 5 s.

The Book of Oaths, and the several Forms thereof both ancient and modern.
Collected out of sundry Authentic Books and Records, not heretofore extant,
compiled in one Volume, in Twelves, Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage, and other sums of money
payable upon Merchandise, Exported and Imported: Together with a Book of Rates
agreed upon by the Honorable the House of Commons, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

Examen Legum Angliae; or the Laws of England examined by Scripture-Antiquity
and Reason, by A. Boon, in Quarto, Price 3 s.

C.
* THe first Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England; or a Commentary
upon Littleton, by Sir Edward Coke Knight: the Seventh Edition, in Folio, Price
18 s.

* The Second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the
Exposition of many ancient and other Statutes; The Third Edition, by Edw. Coke
Knight, in Folio, Price 14 s.

* The Complete Copyholder; being a learned Discourse of the Antiquity and
Nature of Manors and Copy-holds, with all things thereto incident, by Sir Edw.
Coke Knight: Whereto is added a Supplement by way of addition; to, and
amplifications of the foregoing Treatise, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Treatise of Bail and Mainprise, by Sir Edw. Coke Knight, in Quarto, Price 6
d.

A Vindication of the Law, by W. Cook of Grayes-Inne, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

The necessary use and fruit of the Pleadings contained in the first Book of
the Reports of Sir Edward Coke. With a Collection of the remarkable by-Cases,
cited dispersedly in the Arguments of the same Reports, by Rich. Carry, in
Octavo, French. Price 1 s. 6 d.

* The Complete Solicitor performing his Duty, and teaching his Clyent to run
through and manage his own business, as well in his Majesty's superior Courts
at Westminster, as in the Mayor's Court, Court of Hustings, and other inferior
Courts, both in the City of London and elsewhere, in Octavo, Price 2. s. 6 d.

The Liberties, Vsages and Customs of the City of London; confirmed by especial
Acts of Parliament, with the time of their confirmation, also diverse ample and
beneficial Charters, granted by King Hen. the 6th. King Edw. the 4th. and King
Hen. the 7th. not confirmed by Parliament, as the other Charters were.
Collected by Sir Hen. Calthrop Knight, in Quarto, Price 8 d.

Topick's in the Laws of England containing Media, apt for Argument, and
resolution of Law Cases: Also an Exposition of several words, not touched by
former Glossaries, by I. Clapton, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

An Abstract out of the Records of the Tower, touching the Kings Revenue; and
how they have supported themselves, by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet,
in Quarto, Price 6 d.

* The Complete Attorney; The practick part of the Law: showing the Office of
an Attorney in the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Pleas in the
Exchequer, and the manner of their proceedings in any Action real, personal or
mixed (from the original to the Execution, in all Courts, with the exact Fees of
all the Officers and Ministers of the Courts. Together with special
Instructions for the solicitation of any Cause in Chancery, Exchequer-Chamber,
Dutchy-Chamber, etc. Carefully Revised and Enlarged, in Octavo, Price 3 s.

Englands Complete Law Judge and Lawyer, by G. Cook one of the Judges of the
Admiral Court, and Probate of Wills, Quarto.

A Collection of all the public Orders, Ordinances and Declarations of both
Houses of Parliament, from the 9th of March 1642. until December. 1646. together
with several of his Majesty's Proclamations and other papers printed at Oxford,
in Folio, price 16 s.

An Exact Collection of all remonstrances, Declarations, Votes, Orders,
Ordinances, Proclamations, Petitions, Messages, Answers, and other remarkable
passages between the Kings most Excellent Majesty and his High Court of
Parliament; beginning at his Majesty's return from Scotland, being in Dec.
1641. and continued until March 21. 1643. in Quarto, price 6 s.

The Charter of Rumny-Marsh, in Octavo, price 4 s.

D.
JVs imponendi Vectigalia, or the learning touching Customs, Tonnage, Poundage,
and Impositions on Merchandises asserted; as well from the Rules of the Common
and Civil Law, as of general Reason and Policy of State, by Sir John Davis
Knight, etc. in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The History of the Ancient and Modern Estate of the Principality of Wales
Dutcy of Cornwall and Earldom of Chester, Collected out of the Records of the
Tower of London and diverse Ancient Authors, by Sir Io. Doderidge Knight, in
Quarto, Price 1 s. 6 d.

Origines Iudiciales, or Historical Memorials of the English Laws, Courts of
Justice, Forms of Trial, Punishment in Cases Criminal, Law Writers, Law Books,
Grants and Settlements of Estates, degrees of Sergeants, Inns of Court and
Chancery, also a Chronology of the Lord Chancellor, etc. by William Dugdale
Esquire, Norroy King of Arms, in Folio, Price, 20 s.

The English Lawyer describing a Method for the managing of the Laws of this
Land, and expressing the best qualities requisite in the Student practicer,
Judges, and Fathers of the same: Written by the Reverend and Learned Sir John
Doderidge Knight, and one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, in Quarto, Price
2 s. 6 d.

E.
THe Exact Lawgiver Communicating to the skillful the firm Basis and Axioms of
their Profession; to the Ignorant, their Ancient and undoubted Birthrights and
Inheritances, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Speech of the Lord Chancellor Elesmore in the Exchequer Chamber, touching
the Post-Nati, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

Edgars Charge in Quarto.

F.
FLeta, or a Commentary upon the English Law, (so called) written by an
Anonymos Author in the time of E. 1. with the small Treatise called Fet
assavior annexed, and Mr. Seldens Historical Dissertations to Fleta, in Quarto,
Latin, Price 12 s.

* De laudibus Legum Angliae written by Sir John Fortescue Lord Chief Justice,
and after Lord Chancellor to King Hen. 6. to which are added the two Sums of
Sir Ralph de Hengham Lord Chief Justice to King Edw. 1. commonly called Hengham
Magna and Hengham Parva. Notes both on Fortescue and Hengham are added, in
Octavo, English and Latin, Price 3 s. 6 d.

Perfect and Exact Directions to all those that desire to know the true and
just Fees of these Courts following, viz. The Fees of all the Offices belonging
to the Court of Common Pleas. A Table of the Prothonotaries Fees. The Fees of
the Chancery according to the Table in the Office. The Ordinance of the
Chancery, by Thomas Lord Coventry, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Law, or a Discourse thereof, in four Books, written by Sir Hen. Finch, in
Folio, French, Price 8 s. and done into English by the same Author, in Octavo,
Price 3 s. 6 d.

* A Parallel or Conference of the Civil Law, the Canon Law, and the Common Law
of this Realm; wherein the Agreement and disagreement of these three Laws, and
the Causes and reasons of the said Agreement are opened and discussed in two
parts, to which is added the Pandects of the Law of Nations, containing several
discourses of the Questions, points, and Matters of the Law, wherein the
Nations of the World do consent and accord, by William Fulbeck, in Quarto,
Price 8 s.

The Lawyers Logic, exemplifying the Precepts of Logic by the Practice of the
Common Law, by Abraham France, in Quarto, Price 3 s.

The Freeholders Grand Inquest, in Quarto, Price 1 s.

The Filacers Office, or the Measne process Filacers make out before
appearance, the nature and forms of their several Writs, and the manner of
their Proceedings thereupon, together with a Table of their Fees, in Octavo,
Price 1 s.

A Direction or Preparative to the study of the Law, wherein is showed what
things ought to be observed and what ought to be eschewed and avoided, by Henry
Fulbeck, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6. d.

G.
A Treatise of the Laws and Customs of England, composed in the time of King
Henry the Second by R^. Glanvile, being then Chief Justice of England, in
Octavo, Latin, Price 6 s.

H.
* THe Law of Conveyances showing the natures, kinds, and effects, of all
manner of assurances, with the manner of their several Executions and
Operations, also directions to sue out and prosecute all manner of Writs, of
Extent, Elegit, and Judicial Writs, upon Statutes, Recognizances, judgments,
etc. A Warrant to Summon a Court of Survey; and the Articles to be given in
charge and Inquired of in that Court. With an Exposition of diverse obscure
words and terms of Law, used in Ancient Records, etc. and also plain Decimal
Tables, etc. with a Concordance of years, etc. the Second Edition Corrected and
Amended, by John Herne Gent. in Octavo, Price 2 s.

* The Law of Charitable uses, wherein the Statute of 43 Eliz. chap. 4. is set
forth and explained; with directions how to sue out and prosecute Commissions
grounded upon that Statute. Also Presidents, Inquisitions and Decrees; and
other proceedings upon the said Statute, by John Herne; The Second Edition much
Enlarged and Amended, in Octavo, Price 2 s.

The Idea of the Law, charactered from Moses to King Charles. Whereunto is
added the Idea of Government and Tyranny, by John Heydon Gent. in Octavo, Price
1 s. 6 d.

I.
JVdgments as they were upon solemn Arguments given in the Upper Bench and
Common Pleas, upon the most difficult points in all manner of Actions; together
with the Terms and Number Rolls, in which the same are Entered, in Octavo,
Price 2 s. 6 d.

Instructions for Iury-men on the Commission of Sewers; showing 1 What they are
to survey and view; 2. What to enquire and present; 3. How. Delivered in a
charge to three several Juries at a Session of Sewers holden at Spalding in the
County of Lincoln. To which is added two other Charges, the one concerning
Lovell's works; the other touching the river of Glean, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6
d.

The Works of Judge Ienkins, upon diverse Statutes concerning the Liberty and
Freedom of the Subject, in Twelves, Price 1 s.

K.
^

L.
* ARchalonomia, or Books of the ancient Laws of the English, heretofore in
ancient times compiled in English, and afterward (for the great profit of
Lawyers and Lovers of Antiquities) published by (the great Antiquary) Mr.
William Lambert, Corrected in 600 places by his own Book, with many other
additions. And in the last Edition are added the Laws of H. 1. then first
published, taken out of the Manuscript remaining in the Exchequer: Together
with an ancient Glossary thereof, out of M. S. Book, late belonging to St.
Augustine of Cant. in Folio, Latin, Price 10 s.

Legis Fluvius: or the Fountain of the Law opened: showing the Manner, Method
and Forms of Proceedings, and Pleas on all actions and Informations, grounded
on all the new and old Penal Statutes; with Presidents for the most usual
Indictments, by A. G. in Octavo, Price 1 s.

* The Provincial Constitutions of England, with the Notes of William Linwood,
in Folio, Price 20 s.

M.
* A Treatise of the Laws of the Forest, wherein is declared not only those
Laws, as they are now in force, but also the original and beginning of Forests,
and what a Forest is in its own proper nature, and wherein the same does differ
from a Chase, a Park, or a Warren, with all such things as are incident
thereunto, with the several proper terms of Art. Also a Treatise of the
P^urallee, Collected, as well out of the Common Laws and Statutes of this Land,
as also out of sundry learned ancient Authors, and out of the Assizes of
Pickering and Lancaster, by Io. Manwood, whereunto are added the Statutes of
the Forest, etc. never heretofore Printed for the public: The Third Edition
Corrected and much Enlarged, in Quarto, Price 6 s.

Actions for Slander, or a Methodicall Collection under certain Grounds and
Heads, of what words are actionable in the Law, and what not. To which is added
Awards, or Arbitraments. Collected out of the Year-Books, and other private and
authentic Authorities: Wherein is principally showed what Arbitraments are
good in Law, and what not, by Io. March of Grayes-Inne Barrister: in two Parts,
in Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d.

Amicus Reipublicae: or an Exact and Speedy way to Justice, for prevention of
Law suits, by Io. March, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

* Landlords Law; being a Collection of several Cases in the Law, concerning
Leases and the Covenants, Conditions, Grants, Provisoes, Exceptions,
Surrenders, etc. of the same. As also touching Distresses, Replevins, Rescous
and Waste, and several other Matters, which often come in debate between
Landlord and Tenant. The Third Edition, by Geo. Meriton Gent. in Twelves, Price
1 s. 6 d.

N.
A Declaration of Nuisance, concerning dwelling houses, with the resolutions of
the Judge of Assize, upon Questions touching Parishes: the power of Justices,
Constables, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

OLivers Ordinances, in Folio, Price 6 s.

Ordinances of Parliament, in Folio.

Orders for the Poor, in Quarto, Price 6 d.

P.
PLowdens Queries, in Octavo, French. Price 2 s. The same is also Translated
into English, Methodized and Enlarged, by H. B. of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire, in
Octavo, Price 2 s.

Brief Animadversions, on Amendments of, and additional Explanatory Records to
the Fourth part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. Compiled by the late famous Lawyer Sir Edward Coke
Knight, in his life time, but published and reprinted with some disadvantage
since his death: Wherein the misquotations, mistakes of Records, Antiquities
cited in them, are rectified, some doubtful passages explained; many defective
omissions of useful Records supplied, by W. Prynne Esquire, in Folio, Price 12
s.

Parsons Answer to the Lord Coke's Fifth part of Reports, concerning the
ancient and modern municipal Laws of England, which do appertain to spiritual
Power and Jurisdiction, in Quarto, Price 8 s.

* The Attorneys Academy, or the Manner and Form of proceeding practically upon
any Suit, Plaint or Action whatsoever, in any Court of Record whatsoever,
within this Kingdom, Reviewed and much Enlarged, by Tho. Powell, in Quarto,
Price 3 s.

The Repertory of Records, remaining in the four Treasuries on the receipt-side
at Westminster, the two Remembrancers of the Exchequer, by Tho. Powell, in
Quarto, Price 2 s.

Ius Fratrum, the Law of Brethren, touching the power of Parents, to dispose of
their Estates to their Children or to others. The Prerogative of the eldest,
and the rights and privileges of the younger Brothers, showing the variety of
Customs in several Counties, and the preservation of Families. Collected out of
the Common, Canon, and Statute Laws of England, by John Page, late Master in
Chancery, and Doctor of the Civil Law, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Directions for search of Records remaining in the Chancery, Tower, Exchequer,
with the accustomed Fees of search by T. Powell, in Quarto, Price 1 s. 6 d.

* Studii Legalis ratio, or Directions for the study of the Law. The Second
Edition, by W. Phillipps, in Twelves, Price 1 s.

R.
A View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law: and wherein the practice of them
is straightened, and may be relieved within this Land, by Sir Thomas Ridley
Knight, and Doctor of the Civil Law. The Third Edition: by I. G. Master of
Arts, in Octavo, Price 3 s.

The Rights of the Kingdom, according to the ancient Customs thereof, in
Quarto, Price 8 s.

S.
THe old Provincial of the Province of Canterbury, with the choicest of
Linwoods Notes, whereunto are Annexed the Constitutions of Otho and Othobon, by
Robert Sharrock, Doctor of Laws, in Twelves, Latin, Price 5 s.

A Treatise concerning Estates Tail, and Discents of Inheritance, written by
N. N. and Published by I. Sherman of Lincolns-Inne, Gent. in Quarto, Price 6. d.

The Case of Ship Money, briefly discoursed according to the grounds of the
Law, Policy, and Conscience, in Quarto, Price, 8 d.

* The Practical Register, or the Accomplished Attorney, consisting of Rules,
Orders, and the most principal observations concerning the practice of the
Common Law in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, but more particularly
applicable to the proceedings in the Kings Bench, as well in matters Criminal
as Civil, by William Style of the Inner Temple Esquire, the Second Edition very
much Enlarged, in Octavo, Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Practical Counselor in the Law touching Fines, Common Recoveries,
Judgments, and the Execution thereof, Statutes, Recognizances, and Bargain and
Sale. Collected out of the many great Volumes of the Law, by William Sheppard
Esquire, in Folio, Price 12 s.

The Law of Common Assurances, touching Deeds in General, viz. Feoffments,
Gifts, Grants, Leases, by William Sheppard Esquire, in Folio, Price 14 s.

Action upon the Case for slander, or a Methodical Collection under certain
heads of thousands of Cases, of what words are Actionable and what not. And of
a Conspiracy, and a Libel: by W. Sheppard Esquire, in Folio, Price 6 s.

Actions upon the Case for Deeds, viz. Contracts, Assumpsits, Deceipts,
Nusances, Trover and Conversion, Delivery of Goods, and for other Male-feasanze
and Mis-feazance. Collected out of the many great Volumes of the Law, by W.
Sheppard Esquire, in Folio, Price 8 s.

The faithful Counselor: or the Marrow of the Law in English, Methodically and
plainly showing how any Action may be warrantably laid in the Common Law, for
relief in most causes of wrongs done, and in what Cases relief is to be had in
the high Court of Chancery, by William Sheppard Esquire, in two parts, in
Quarto, Price 10 s.

The Touchstone of common Assurances, a Treatise opening the learning of the
Common Assurances or Conveyances of the Kingdom, by W. Sheppard Esquire, in
Quarto, Price 6 s.

Of the Office of the Clerk of the Market, of Weights and Measures, and of the
Laws of Provision for Man and Beast, for Bread, Wine, Beer, Meal, etc. by W.
Sheppard Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Proposals for the Regulation of the Law by W. Sheppard Esquire, in Octavo,
Price 1 s.

A view of all the Laws and Statutes of this Nation concerning the service of
God or Religion, by W. Sheppard Esquire, in Twelves, Price 8 d.

Of Corporations, Fraternities, and Guilds: or a Discourse wherein the learning
of the Law touching Bodies Politic is unfolded, showing the use and necessity
of that Invention, the Antiquity various kinds, Order and Government of the
same: with forms and Presidents of Charters of Corporations, by W. Sheppard
Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Special and Select Law-Cases concerning the Persons and Estates of all men
whatsoever; Collected out of the Reports and Year-Books of the Common Law of
England, in Quarto; Price 2 s. 6 d.

* The Commonwealth of England, and the manner and Government thereof, by Sir
Thomas Smith Knight Doctor of both Laws, etc. with new Additions of the Ancient
Courts in England, and the Offices thereof by the said Author, in Twelves,
Price 1 s. 6 d.

Mare Clausum, or the Right and Dominion of the Sea, in two Books, by the
Learned Antiquary John Seldom Esquire, in Folio, Latin, Price 8 s. The same is
also Translated into English, in Folio, Price 10 s.

T.
Sergeant Thorpe Judge of Assiize for the Northern Circuit his Charge, as it
was delivered to the Grand Jury at York Assizes the 20. March, 1648. clearly
Epitomizing the Statutes belonging to this Nation, which concerns the several
Estates and Conditions of men, in Quarto, Price 8 d.

Trials per Pais, or the Law concerning Juries by Nisi Prius, etc. methodically
composed by S. E. of the Inner Temple Esquire, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Treatise of the Nobility of the Realm, Collected out of the Body of the
Common Law, with mention of some Statutes incident thereunto, upon a debate of
the Barony of Aburgaveny, in Octavo, Price 1 s.

Tenants Law; a Treatise of great use for Tenants and Farmers of all kinds,
wherein the several natures, differences and kinds of Tenures and Tenants are
discussed, by R. T. Gent. in Twelves, Price 1 s.

The Tenures of Ireland, in Folio, Price 8 s,

FOr the Sacred Law of the Land, by Fr. White, in Octavo, Price 1 s 6 d.

The Laws Resolutions of Woman's Rights, or the Laws provision for Women. A
Collection of such Statutes and Customs, with the Cases, Opinions, Arguments
and points of Learning in the Law as do properly concern Women, in Quarto,
Price 3 s. 6 d.

An Abridgment of all Sea Laws, amongst any people or Nation, on the Coasts of
the great Ocean, by W. Welwood, in Octavo, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Law of Laws, or the excellency of the Civil Law, above all other humane
Laws whatsoever: by To. Wiseman, Dr. of the Civil Law, in Quarto, Price 2 s. 6
d.

Statuta Pacis, or a Table of all the Statutes which any way concerned the
Office of a Justice of Peace, the several duties of Sheriffs, head Officers of
Corporations, Stewards in Leets, Constables etc. by E. Wingate, in 12o. Price 2
s.

Fortescutus Illustratus, or a Commentary on that nervous Treatise, De Laudibus
Legum Angliae, written by Sir J. Fortescue Knight, by Edw. Waterhouse Esquire,
in Folio, Price 16 s.

FINIS.

