HEAVEN OPENED, OR, A Brief and plain DISCOVERY OF THE RICHES OF Gods Covenant
OF GRACE.

By R. A.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1665.

To The Reader.
Reader.
THe Providence of God has led me on to the publication of the ensuing
Treatise, much beyond my first intentions.

There came to my hands A Synopsis of the Covenant of Grace on Gods part, with
a Soliloquie annexed (both penned by the worthy Author of that form of Man's
Covenanting with God, inserted in my Vindiciae Pietatis) attended with the
Authors desires, and of diverse other Christians; that this also might be
incorporated into the same book.

These desires, neither being able to resist, nor willing to deny, I prepared
some meditations to be premised, with a purpose to have put forth another
Edition of that Book with this addition; but finding it to grow into too great
a bulk to be there incerted both this on Gods part, and the former on man's
part, come into thy hands in this distinct Treatise; followed with my Prayers,
that the good Land, whereof some Clusters are here presented to thee, may be
thine Inheritance, See and take.

Thine, because the Lords Covenant servant. R. A.
July 8. 1665.
The Contents.
THe Introduction page 1 Chap. 1 God himself granted in the Covenant, p. 3 To
be our Friend. Portion. Sun. Shield.


Chap. 2. Christ in the Covenant. 22 As The Light of life. The Lord our
righteousness. Our Lord and King. Our head and Husband.


Chap. 3. The Spirit in the Covenant. 35 As a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation.
Holiness and Sanctification. Truth and Direction. Comfort and Consolation.


Chap. 4 The earth in the Covenant. 51 The good things of the Earth. The evil
things of the Earth. 1. The Covenant has its Cross. 2. By virtue of the
Convenant, the Cross is a blessing. The Blessing of the Cross stands, 1. In its
being separated from the earth. 2. In its being sanctified to its ends. 3. In
its being proportioned to our needs and strength. 4. In the special comforts
annexed to it.






Chap. 5. The Angels of light in the Covenant. 74 Chap. 6. The powers of
darkness delivered over in the Covenant. 78 Chap. 7. Death in the Covenant p.
84 Chap. 8. The Kingdom in the Covenant. 87 Chap. 9. All the means of
salvation in the Covenant. 88 1. External means. 2. Internal means; In special,
a new heart,


Chap. 10. An heart to know the Lord. 96 Chap. 11. One heart. 114 Chap. 12. An
heart of flesh. 141 Chap. 13. An heart to love the Lord. 166 Chap. 14. An heart
to fear the Lord. 193 Chap. 15 An Obedient heart. 221 Chap. 16. Perseverance in
the Covenant. 249 Chap. 17. A Synopsis of the Covenant of Grace on Gods part,
by another hand 262 Chap 18. A Soliloquie representing the Believers Triumph in
Gods Covenant, and the various conflicts, and glorious conquests of faith over
unbelief. 316 Chap. 19. An exhortation to sinners, with directions for their
entering into Covenant. 342 Chap. 20. A form of words expressing man's
covenanting with God. 365 Chap. 21. An Exhortation to the Saints. 369
Heaven Opened, OR, A brief and plain discovery of the Riches of Gods Covenant
of GRACE.
The Introduction.
GOod news from Heaven, the dayspring from on high has visited this undone
world, after a Deluge of sin and misery, behold the bow in the Cloud, the Lord
God has made and established a new Covenant, and this is it that has cast the
first beam on the dark state of lost and fallen man; and has brought life and
immortality to light. This Covenant is the hope of Sinners; The riches of
Saints, the Magna Charta of the City of God. The forfeited Lease of eternity
renewed; Gods Deed of Gift, wherein he has on fair conditions, granted
sinners their lives, and settled upon his Saints an everlasting Inheritance.

Hear, O ye forlorn Captives; who have sold your selves to eternal bondage,
spoiled your selves of all your glory, sealed your selves up under everlasting
misery; you are dead in your sins, guilty before God, under wrath, under a
curse, bound over to eternal vengeance. But behold there is yet hope in Israel
concerning this thing; the Lord God has taken compassion upon you, has opened
a way for you to escape out of all this misery, and bondage; Lift up the hands
that hang down, comfort the trembling knees; An Ark, an Ark has God prepared,
in which is salvation from the Flood; A Covenant, a new Covenant has he made,
and established, which (if you lay hold on it) will recover all you have lost,
ransom you from death, redeem you from Hell, and advance you to a more sure
and blessed condition, than your original state, from which you have fallen.
This is the hope of sinners; This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord.

Glorious tidings, good news indeed! but what is this Covenant? or what is
there that is given and granted therein? Why, in sum there is all that Heaven
and earth can afford; all that can be needed, or desired, and this by a firm
and irrevokable Deed, made over, and made sure to all that will sincerely
embrace it.

Particularly God has in his Covenant, granted and made over, 1. Himself. 2.
His Son. 3. His Spirit. 4. The Earth. 5. The Angels of Light. 6. The Powers of
Darkness. 7. Death. 8. The Kingdom. 9. All the means of Salvation.


CHAP. I. God in the Covenant.
1. THe Lord God has made over himself in this Covenant. That Is the great and
comprehensive promise, Jer. 31.33. I will be their God. I am God, and what I
am, it is all theirs: my self, my glorious incomprehensible essence, all my
glorious attributes, my omnipotence, my omniscience, my wisdom, my
righteousness, my holiness, mine all sufficiency, my faithfulness, etc. I will
make over my self to them to be henceforth and for ever theirs:

Their Friend, Portion, Sun, Shield.


1. Their Friend. I was angry, but mine anger is turned away: I was an
adversary, I had a controversy with them, but I am reconciled, I have found a
ransom, the quarrel is composed, my wrath is appeased, I am friends with them;
I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more; I will
take away their iniquity, and receive them graciously; I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely; for mine anger is turned away from them.
Jer. 31.34. Hos. 14.4. Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will
toward men. Fury is not now in me: favor, and friendship, love, and good
will, is all they may henceforth expect from me. Sinners, what is there to be
feared? what is there dreadful, but an angry provoked God? Thence is sorrow and
anguish, thence is famine, and pestilence, and sword; thence is death and hell:
he does not know what the wrath of God means, that does not see in the bowels
of it, all the plagues above ground, and all the vengeance of eternal fire.
Whatever terrors, or torments have seized upon thee; upon thy body, upon thy
soul; whatever losses, crosses, vexations, afflictions, plague thee on this
earth; whatever horror, and anguish, whatever amazing, confounding torments
are like to meet thee, and feed upon thee in the lake beneath, thou may say
of all this, This is the wrath of God. That day the Lord says to thee, Fury is
not in me; he faith also, Fear shall be no more to thee. That hour the Lord
says I am thy friend, Death and Hell vanish. The day is broken, the shaddows
fly away. And this is one thing included in that promise [I am their God] I am
their friend.

2. Their Portion. Fury cease? Fears vanish? Friendship, favor, life granted?
But what shall he have to live upon? Man was never intended to be a
self-sufficient; he was created under a necessity of dependence on something
without him; not only for the continuation of his being, but of the comfort of
his being: he cannot live upon the air, though he has escaped the fire: the
soul of man is too big for all the world; like Noah's Dove, it can find no
rest below, and where shall it find it, or on what shall it subsist? Why God
will not starve his friends; he that has saved their lives, will find them a
livelihood; because there is no other to be found, he himself will be a
livelihood to them; their portion, their maintenance, and their heritage for
ever. As their deliverance is from him, so their dependence shall be on him; he
is their substance, and on him is their subsistence; Jer. 10.16. he writes
himself the portion of Jacob; and as such his Saints accept him, Psalm. 16.5.
The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance; he is their bread, and their
water, their stock, and their store. The Lord [Gives] portions to his enemies;
not only the young Ravens, but the old Lions, and Tigers, the worst of men do
seek their meat from God, Psalm. 17.14. they have their portion in this life,
whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they have their portion: some
of them have their portion in the City, others a portion in the Field: to some
he gives a portion of gold, to others a portion of worldly glory, to others a
portion of pleasures; by all these he deals, as the father of the prodigal, he
gives them their portion, and sends them away. But whilst he [gives] portions
to these, he [is] the portion of his Saints, he makes over and settles himself
upon them, as their inheritance for ever: they shall never be in want whilst
there is in him to supply them; they shall never be in straits whilst there is
in him to relieve them: all their wants be upon me.

The Lord is their Portion, and he is a sufficient portion. With thee is the
fountain of life, Psalm. 36. In thy presence is fullness, Psalm. 16. The Lord God
is all things to them, enough and to spare: In my Fathers house there is bread
enough, and to spare. He that has all things below God, but not God, has
nothing; he that has nothing besides God, but has God, has all things;
enough and to spare: filling up, and running over; there is still more to be
had, if more could be held: the soul has never enough, till it has more then
enough; is never full till it runs over: while it can contain and measure and
number all that it has, this is its judgment of all, Pauperis est numerare
pecus.

In God is enough for filling up and running over; enough there is in him to
fill up all their faculties; their understandings; there are infinitely
beautiful perfections, where we may gaze and glut our eyes with unspeakable
delight; but when we have looked the farthest into them, when the most
searching eye, the most greedy thoughts have searched and run their utmost,
they come not near the end: they shall look, and look, and see and see, and
when they can reach no farther, then they shall admire at those treasures of
light and beauty that are still beyond them. Admiration is the understanding
full, and running over: when its nonplust, and can reach no further, then it
wonders at what it perceives still beyond it. The Apostle tells us Ephesians. 3.18.
that the Gospel (which presents God in flesh) has in it, an height, and depth,
and length, and breadth; and I may tell you from him, it is an height without
top, a depth without bottom, a length without limits, a breadth without bounds;
in one word, immensity, unmeasurable, and therefore unspeakable, unsearchable
glory. Whilst the blind world deride and despise the portion of the Saints,
looking on God and all the things of God, as shallow things, that have no depth
in them; they will be found by those that search into them, to be deep things
that have no bottom in them, 1 Cor. 2. the deep things of God. All the
raptures, and ecstasies of glorious joys of the Saints in the other world, are
the running over of their eyes upon their hearts, and do break in upon them
from their vision of God.

There Is enough to fill up their wills and affections: there is infinite
goodness, incomprehensible love, mavelous loving kindness, unspeakable
delights, glorious joys, Psalm. 31.19. Oh! how great is the goodness which thou
have laid up for those that fear thee! Oh! how great is the goodness! It Is vox
admirantis, an admiring word; great beyond expression, great beyond
imagination; Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared for them that
love him: and it is vox exultantis, of an heart leaping for joy, rejoicing in
hope of the glory of God, which is laid up for his Saints. Laid up! where? Why
laid up in himself; that is the fountain, that is the treasury; there is love,
there is joy, there is satisfaction, our life is hid with Christ in God. Oh love
the Lord all ye his Saints. O bless the Lord all ye his Saints. He that is
mighty has done for you great things: since the beginning of the world men
have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, oh God
besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64.4. or
as it is in the margin, There has not been heard or seen a God besides thee,
which does so for him that waits for him.

There Is enough to fill up our time; there is admiring work, and praising work
for ever: there is matter for love, and joy to live, and feed upon for ever;
endless praises, eternal pleasures, everlasting rejoycings, Isa. 35.
Everlasting Joy, Psalm. 16. pleasures for evermore. There Is enough to reward all
our labors, and repay all our expenses: there is a full reward; Genesis 15.1. Fear
not Abram, I am thy shield, and exceeding great reward. Christian, thou shall
not serve the Lord for naught, he will reward thee, and it is little in his
eyes, that thou should serve him for corn, and for wine, for sheep and for
oxen; yea for the crowns and kingdoms of this world: these shall not be thine
hire; the everlasting God will be thy reward, thine exceeding great reward:
exceeding, not thy work only, but thy very thoughts also: A little is too much
for thy earnings, but the whole world is too little for his bounty: less than
nothing might satisfy for thy labors, but less than himself will not satisfy
for his love: the eternal God will be thy reward. Oh the unsearchable riches of
the poorest of Saints! Onimium foelices, -- bona si sua norint. Poor? what and
yet have a God! In want? what and yet have all things? Is he a God that is
thine, and art thou still in straits? Would a few sheep and oxen, vineyards,
and olive-yards, make thee a rich man, and can a God leave thee a beggar? Is
not a pearl more than pebbles? Milk and wine, than mud and water? Men use to
say, Money is all things: meat, and drink, and clothes, and friends, and lands;
virtually all things. And is not God more than money? Sure he has said to his
Gold [thou art my god] that cannot say, Let God be mine, and then go thou thy
way. Have thou a God, and yet poor? Nay farther, would the fatness of the
earth, and the fullness of heaven, if thou had both, be enough for thee? Would
corn, and wine, and houses, and lands, and pleasures here, and eternal life
hereafter suffice thee? And is not God alone as much as all this? Do thou
want Starlight when thou have the Sun? Is the Ocean more full for the Rivers
that run into it? Or, would there be any want there, if all these were stopped
and dry? Can they contribute to it, which have their rise from it? Has the
almighty God a self-sufficiency, and has he not enough to satisfy a poor
worm? Is he blessed in himself, and may not thou be blessed in him? He that
thinks any thing less then God will suffice, understands not a soul; and he
that wants any thing more, understands not God. God alone is as much as God and
all the world; and this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, God is
their portion.

If enough be not yet said, look a while, and consider whence thou art taken up
into this blessedness: What have thou left? What an exchange have thou made?
Thou were taken with the Prodigal from the trough, with the beggar from the
dunghill, yea as a brand out of the burning; there thy lot was fallen. Oh where
have thou left the rest of the world? Blessing themselves in vanity, pleasing
themselves with shaddows, and apparitions, feeding on ashes, warming themselves
at their painted fires, sporting themselves with the wind, rejoicing in a thing
of naught; their crackling thorns, their glozing pleasures, their drinkings,
and dancings, and riotings, their horses, and their dogs, and their hawks, and
their harlots; making a shift a while to make merry with these, whilst they are
hasting to the pit, To that fire and brimstone which is the portion of their
cup.

Consider man, what is the chafe to the wheat? What is a Comet to the Sun?
What is the night to the day? What are bubbles and childrens toys to ^e
durable riches? What are things that are no^, to him whose name is [I am?] But
oh what is death, and wrath, and the curse, which was once all thine heritage;
to that life, and love, and peace, and joy and glory, which thou now possessest
in that God that is thy portion? What a poor wretch were thou once, when thou
had nothing but sin, and shame, and misery, that thou could call thine own?
these thou might call thine; sin was thine, woe was thine, death, and the
grave, and the curse, and the pit were thine own; but that was all thou had;
thy good things thou livedst upon had they been of never so great value, were
none of thine; thine house, and thy lands are none of thine: thy gold, and thy
silver, and thy substance are none of thine; they are all but borrowed, or
committed to thee as a Steward, and all to be given up upon demand; and what
thou have spent of them, thou must be brought to a reckoning for; a poor wretch
thou were, and had just nothing, all that thou had was none of thine.

But now God is thine own, all that he is, all that he has is thine; never
could thou lay such a claim to any thing thou possessedst; to house, or
wife, or child, or body, or soul, as now thou may to thy God. God is as
surely thine as thou art thy self; as sure as thou art a man, thou have a God.

Come Christian, here is now thy po^tion, the light of thine eyes, the lifting
up of thinehead, the joy of thine heart, the strength of thy bones, thy stock,
thy treasure, thy life, thy health, thy peace, thy rest, thy all; Whom have I
in heaven but thee, and in the earth there is none that I desire besides thee.
My flesh and mine heart fails, but God is the strength of mine heart, and my
portion for ever. Psalm. 73.25,26. Here is thy portion, know it for thy good,
take it for thine own; live upon it, and live up to it.

1. Live upon thy portion. Here thou may feed, herein thou may rejoice,
herein thou may bless thy self for ever. Let him that blesses himself on
the earth, bless himself in the God of Truth. Let him that rejoices in the
earth, rejoice in the God of truth. Let the strong man live upon his strength,
let the wise man live upon his wits, let the rich man live upon his lands, come
thou live upon thy God; come enjoy God and thy soul; enjoy God in thy soul,
enjoy thy soul in God. Thou have possession, what should hinder thy fruition?
In fruition the Schools tells us there are three things, which go to the making
it up; Cognitio, Delectatio, Quietatio.


1. Knowledge; according to the clearness or cloudiness of our apprehensions of
any good, we more or less take the pleasure or comfort of it; and therefore the
full fruition of God is not till at last, when we shall know as we are known:
Here we see but as in a glass, and darkly; we know but in part, and while we
know but in part, we love but in part; and joy but in part; the dimness of our
sight makes an abatement upon our joy: When the vail shall be taken away, when
we shall come to see face to face, then we shall fully feel what it is to have
a God. Christian, know thou the God of thy Fathers; the more thou know the
more thou have.

The carnal world enjoy not God at all: God is not known in their Tabernacles:
In Jewry is God known, his Name is great in Israel: at Salem is his Tabernacle,
and his Dwelling in Zion. But what of God in Edom, or Ammon, or Amaleck, or
Egypt, those dark Regions wherein neither Sun nor Star appears? Leave them to
their dunghill gods, to the gardens which they have desired, and the Oaks which
they have chosen. The Lord is before thee, know it for thy good. Study thy God
Christian, roll over his sweetness in thy mind, as thou do the sweet morsel
in thy mouth; see what he is, and what thou have laid up in him: read over
daily his glorious names; walk through those chambers of his presence, his
glorious Attributes; look into the chamber of his power, and see what thou have
laid up for thee there; go into the chamber of his wisdom, and see what that
will afford thee; look into the chambers of his goodness, mercy, faithfulness,
holiness, and behold what treasures are laid up for thee in each of these:
enter into thy chambers, they are all thine; enter into the chambers, set thine
eye be there, let thy meditation be there, let thy soul be there every day;
there is thy portion, search it out, and know it for thy good. This is the first
thing contained in Fruition, Knowledge.

2. Delight. Fruition is the taking the pleasure of what we have; Frui est cum
gaudio uti: Augustine. We cannot enjoy what we do not love, and love has
delight. We cannot enjoy that wherein we do not joy. Delight thy self in the
Lord, Psalm. 37.4. I sat me down under his shadow with great delight, Cant.
2.3. If his shadow be so pleasant, what will his Sunbeams be? Psalm. 34.8. O
taste and see that the Lord is good. Our senses help our understandings; we
cannot by the most rational discourse perceive what the sweetness of honey is,
taste it and you shall perceive it. His fruit was sweet unto my taste. Dwell in
the light of the Lord, and let thy soul be always ravished with his love. Get
out the marrow and the fatness that thy portion yields thee. Let fools learn by
beholding thy face, how dim their blazes are to the brightness of thy day.

Let thy delights in God be pure and unmixed delights. Let thy spirit be so
filled with God, and so raised above carnal joys, and the matters of them,
that it be no damp upon thee to have nothing but God. Thy wine is the more
sprightful when not mixed with water: Live above in that serene Air which is
not incrassated with earthly exhalations. Sickly bodies, and so sickly souls
cannot live in too pure an Air. Be so wholly spiritual, that spiritual joys,
spiritual delights may be suited to thee, and sufficient for thee. Do not say I
want the joy of the Vintage, and of the Harvest; I want the joy of the
Bridegroom, and of the Bride; I want the sound of the Milstones, and the light
of the Candle, to make my comfort full. Let the joy of the Lord be thy
strength, and thy life: Say with the Prophet Habbak. 3.17,18. Although the
Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat, the Flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no Herd in the stalls; yet will I
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. This is the second
thing in Fruition, Delight.

3. Satisfaction. The quiet, or resting of the soul in its portion: Therefore
the Schools say, it is only the ultimus finis, the last end, that is the
proper object of fruition. The carnal world, whatever they possess, yet they
cannot be said properly to enjoy it; though they be their gods that they live
upon (their dragg is their god, their yarn is their god, their plough, and
their plenty, and their pleasure is their god, they burn incense to them)
though they be their gods that they live upon, yet they cannot enjoy them;
there is no rest for them in their god, Psalm. 25.12,13. What man is he that
fears the Lord, his soul shall dwell at ease: In the Original it is, shall
lodge in goodness. The soul is never in ease whilst it is in want, every want
wrings; it can never take up its lodging where it cannot take its rest. His
soul shall be at ease, shall lodge, that is, shall take up its rest in the
goodness of God: and when we find rest in our beds, then we enjoy them. Is thy
soul lodged in God? O enjoy thy lodging: Soul, take thine ease, thou have goods
laid up for many years. Return to thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee. As it was said [to] so let it be said [by] the Church
and every Saint, This is my rest, here will I dwell for ever. Here thou may
find rest, when thou have no other rock to lean upon: thou may be at rest in
thy God, in thy most restless state; in a weary land, in a barren wilderness,
in a tempestuous Ocean: how ever it was in the vision of the Prophet, yet thou
may say, if the wind rise, the Lord is in the wind; if after the wind an
earthquake, the Lord is in the earthquake; if after the earthquake a fire, the
Lord God is in the fire; and wherever thou find God, thou may find
rest. If thou find God in a wilderness, thou will find rest in the
wilderness; if thou find God in the earthquake, or the tempest, or the fire,
even there also thy soul shall find rest: when thou can not rest in thy bed,
nor in thine house, nor in thy land, thou may still rest in thy God. Say
Christian, say again, Return to thy rest, oh my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with me. Though my helps fail me, and my friends fail me, and my
flesh and my heart fails me, God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion
for ever; this is my rest, here will I dwell for ever.

To these I might add a fourth thing wherein Fruition stands; The making use of
our Portion. He enjoys that uses what he has; though the Schools distinguish
betwixt frui and uti: yet in a sense (especially with a respect to our present
estate) the latter may be comprehended under the former. We then enjoy our
portion, when we have a power and heart to make use of it on all occasions. I
am thine, soul, come and make use of me as thou will: Thou may freely, I
have nothing, but it is for thee; thou may freely come to my store, and the
oftener the better welcome; have thou not a God lying by thee to no purpose; let
not thy God be as others gods, serving only for a show: Have not a name only
that thou have a God; since he allows thee, having such a friend use him daily,
my God shall supply all your wants; never want whilst thou have a God, never
fear or faint whilst thou have a God; go to thy treasure and take whatever
thou need; there is bread, and clothes, and health, and life, and all that
thou need. O Christian, learn the divine skill to make God all things, to
make bread of thy God, and water, and health, and friends, and ease; he can
supply thee with all these; or, which is better, he can be instead of all
these: thy food, thy clothing, thy friend, thy life to thee. All this he has
said to thee in this one word, I am thy God; and hereupon thou may say, I
have no husband, and yet I am no widow, my maker is mine husband. I have no
father nor friend, and yet I am neither fatherless nor friendless; my God is
both my father and my friend. I have no child, but is not he better to me than
ten children? I have no house, but yet I have an home, I have made the most
high mine habitation. I am left alone, but yet I am not alone, my God is good
company for me; with him I can walk, with him I can take sweet counsel, find
sweet repose; at my lying down, at my rising up, whilst I am in the house, as
I walk by the way, my God is ever with me; with him I travel, I dwell, I lodge,
I live, and shall live for ever.

2. Live up to your privilege. Live according to your rank and quality,
according to your riches laid up for you in God. The rich men of this world
live like rich men, they sort themselves with persons of their own quality,
attend on the Courts of Princes, are employed about the magnalia regum: you may
read their estates in the whole way of their life; they wear them on their
backs, spread their Tables with them, fill their bellies with them; they live
sumptuously, and fare delicately. Christians, feed not on ashes or husks, you
have better meat; you have milk and honey, marrow and fatness, the hidden
manna, the bread that comes down from heaven, the water of life; you have
blessed privileges, precious promises, lively hopes, living comforts, glorious
joys, the fountain of life to feed your souls upon; come, eat, O friends;
drink, yea drink abundantly, O my beloved; out-fare the rich man, Luke 16. who
fared deliciously every day: you have enough to maintain it; let every day be a
gaudy day, a feast day with you.

Let your clothing be according to your feeding. Be clothed with the Sun; put
on the Lord Jesus. The King's Daughter is (and so let all the King's Sons be)
all glorious within, let their clothing be of wrought gold: Be clothed with
humility, put on love, bowels of compassion, gentleness, meekness; put on the
garments of salvation.

Let your company and converse be according to your clothing. Live amongst the
excellent, amongst the generation of the just: Get you up to the General
Assembly and Church of the firstborn, to that innumerable company of Angels,
and the Spirits of just men made perfect. Live in the Courts of the great King,
behold his face, wait at his Throne, bear his name, show forth his virtues, set
forth his praises, advance his honor, uphold his Interest; let vile persons,
and vile ways be contemned in your eyes, be of more raised spirits than to be
companions with them, Disce ex hac part, sanctam superbiam, scito te illis
esse meliorem. Regard not their societies, nor their scorns, their Euge's or
their Apage's, their flatteries or their frowns; rejoice not with their joys,
fear not their fear, care not their care, feed not on their dainties; get you
up from among them, to your Country, to your City, where no unclean thing can
enter or annoy. Live by faith, in the power of the Spirit, in the beauty of
holiness, in the hope of the Gospel, in the joy of your God, in the
magnificence, and yet the humility of the children of the great King.

3. Their Sun. He will discover and make manifest to them, the riches and glory
of their Portion: He has granted them himself for their portion, and he will
reveal and make manifest to them what a portion he is. He will make manifest
both their blessedness they shall enjoy in him, and the way to it, and also the
dangers that lie in the way; Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun. The Sun is the
light of the world, it discovers it self, and all things else: We cannot see
the glory of the Sun but by its own light; the Moon, the Stars, the Firmament,
and all this lower World, would all disappear, if the Sun withdrew its light;
beauty and deformity, safety and danger, the right way and the wrong, are all
brought to view by the light of the Sun; the Sun-light makes the day, night is
spread over the world when the Sun is set. God is glorious, but who would be
ever the wiser did not this glory shine? Psalm. 36.9. In thy light we shall see
light. Why is the glorious God apprehended, understood, admired by so few
amongst the sons of men? why, he is out of sight, the Sun is not risen upon
them, nor shines unto them: they have Moonlight, or Starlight, some dimmer
reflections of this glory at second hand from the creatures, but they see not
the Sun.

What Is the reason that truth and falsehood, good and evil, substances and
shaddows, things perishing, and things permanent, are no better distinguished?
What Is the reason that men are so mistaken, and misguided in their judgments,
in their choice, in their way? That they are at such a loss, such wanderers
from their bliss? what is the reason that men's own sparks, the light of their
own fires, their candlelight, or torch-light, their fleshly imaginations,
their carnal prosperity, their pleasures, their ease, their earthly glory, and
their carnal joys that hence flash up to them, are so adored and admired by
them? Oh, they see not the Sun. God is out of sight, and thence are all their
dotages, and foolish mistakes and miscarriages. God will be a Sun to his Saints
[their] Sun. [Thy Sun] shall no more go down. They shall have both the
propriety and the comfort of this glorious Sun; he will show them his face, he
will cause his glory to appear, he will lead them into himself by his own
beams; he will show them their end, and the means; the goal, and their way to
it; he will show them the good part, and the right path: good and evil, duties
and sins, realities and delusions, helps and hindrances, dangers and
advantages, their snares and their succors, will all be discovered to them by
the light of the Lord.

Hearken thou poor and dark soul, that have chosen, but thou know not what;
that art going, but thou know not whither; that art wandering and stumbling
on, but thou carest not how; that complainest thou can not see, thou can
not value, thou can not be affected with all the glory and joy of the
invisible world; that find thy husks, and thy trash, to be a greater
pleasure to thee, than all the riches of immortality; that would fain mind,
and choose, and love, and relish, and seek God, and things above, but thou can
not; thou see so little of the beauty of them, that they do not entice thine
heart after them; and when thou art seeking, thou art at a loss, and in the
dark, as to the way that thou should take. Hearken soul, thy God calls to
thee, Come unto me, look unto me, and I will be thy Sun. I Will show thee all that
glory, and the right way that will bring thee to it. I promise thee I will,
trust me, I will be a light unto thee.

4. Their Shield, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and a [Shield.] The gods
of the earth are so styled, Psalm. 47.9. The shields of the earth: much more the
God of glory. Ephesians. 6.16. Faith is called a shield: Above all taking the
shield of Faith, it signifies the same, as God is a shield. Faith is to the
soul whatever God is. This is the grace that entitles the soul to God, and
applies God to the soul, Genesis 15.1. Fear not Abraham, I am [thy] shield. What Is
promised to the Father of the faithful, stands sure to all the seed, Romans 4.16.
The state of Christians in this life is a militant state; a state full of
hardships and hazards. By reason whereof, as richly as they are provided for,
they are subject to fears of being undone, and spoiled of all. They are in
fears about things eternal: they have spiritual adversaries, that lie in wait
for their souls, that fight against their souls, that are tempting them and
enticing them from their God, that watch their opportunities to steal away
their God, by stealing away their hearts from him; and such dangerous attempts
of this kind they meet withal, that they often are in great doubt what the
issue may be. They are in fears about things temporal; their names are shot at;
their liberties are invaded; their estates, with all the comforts of their
lives, are in danger to be made a prey: to day they are a praise, to morrow a
scorn: to day they are full and abound, but to morrow they may have nothing
left: they dye daily; they are killed all the day long.

But whatever their dangers and their fears thereupon are, here is sufficient
provision made against all. God is their shield.

Christian, thou have enough, and all that thou have is in safety. Thou art
compassed about with a shield, secured on all hands, there is no coming at thee.
Whatever assaults are made, thy God is a wall of partition, betwixt thee and
harm. They are not shields of brass and iron thou are furnished with, the
strong God is thy defense. Wherefore do thou doubt, O thou of little faith? A
Christian and yet afraid? shifting for thy self? taking care for the Asses, and
Oxen, and Sheep? vexing, and loading, and losing thy self, in thy cares and
fears from day to day? Where is thy God man? Does not God take care for Oxen,
and Asses, and all that thou have?

But oh what meanest thou in this, to be shifting thy self from danger, by
shrinking back from thy God? securing thy self from affliction, by taking
sanctuary in Iniquity? What art thou doing, but throwing away thy shield, to
save thee from harm? making a breach in thy wall, to keep thee in safety? Genesis
17.1, etc. chap. 15.1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect: follow thou me,
stick to me, and then Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield. This now is the first
and great promise of the Covenant, [I am thy God] and the second is like unto
it.

CHAP. II. Christ in the Covenant.
2. GOd has put Christ into the Covenant, and made over him to his people,
Isa. 42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant. He who is promised, as the chief
matter, the Mediator, Surety, Scope of the Covenant, is by a metonymy, called
the Covenant. I will give thee for a Covenant; that is, I covenant to give thee
to the people. Whatever glory and blessedness there is in the fruition of God;
woe is me, there is a great gulf fixed between me and it, over which there is
no passing; there is a partition wall raised, over which there is no climbing;
there is an handwriting against me, whilst that stands, all that is in God is
nothing to me: Were this God mine, I had enough. Let me be put to labor, or
suffering, let me dig, or beg, or starve, and die; whether I be rich or poor,
have something or nothing, be a praise or a reproach, it matters not, so God
were mine.

But oh how may I obtain? Who shall bring me to God? why the Lord God has
given thee his Son, to undertake for thee; and to be thy way unto the Father,
Heb. 11.19,20.

Jesus Christ, who is the morning star, the Sun of righteousness; the Image of
the Invisible God; the firstborn of every creature; by whom are all things,
who is before all things, the head of the body the Church; who is the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead: In whom dwells all fullness, even the
fullness of the Godhead bodily; who has made peace by the blood of his Cross.
Col. 1. and chap. 2. Whose Name is Wonderful, Councellor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. This Jesus is granted thee
in the Covenant, to bring thee to God. To which blessed and glorious purpose he
is exhibited, 1. As the Light of Life. 2. As the Lord our Righteousness. 3. As
our Lord and King. 4. As our Head and Husband.


1. As the light of Life. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel. Luke 1.32. In him was life, and the life was the light of men,
John 1.4. He that follows me shall have the light of life, John 8.12. there
is a light that serves to kill, and destroy, to bring death and condemnation to
light: the light of the Law, that killing letter, concerning which the Apostle,
Romans 7.9,10. When the commandment came, sin revived, and I died; the
commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. But Christ
brings life and immortality to light; heaven, glory, the invisible God, which
are lost, out of reach, and out of ken, are all discovered in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. To give us the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. He is the Image of the Invisible God, the brightness of his
Fathers glory, the glass in which by reflection we see the Sun. John 14.8,9.
Show us the Father, and it suffices us. Why says he, Have thou known me,
Philip! and yet say, show us the Father? He that has seen me, has seen the
Father; and this is the light of life, John 17.3. this is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

2. As the Lord our righteousness. This is his Name Jer. 23.6. He shall be
called the Lord our righteousness. To this end he is given to us,

1. As our propitiatory Sacrifice, 1 John 2. The propitiation for our sins, 1
Cor. 5. Christ our Passover, Rev. 13.8. A lamb slain from the beginning of the
world. Our price, our ransom; to satisfy Justice, pacify wrath, discharge
from the Curse; to blot out the handwriting, break down the wall of partition;
to finish the transgression, to make an end of sins, to make reconciliation for
iniquity, to bring in everlasting righteousness, and so to bring us to God.
Whatever difficulties there appear in thy way, whatever doubts arise in thine
heart, from thy sins, from thy guilt, from thy poverty, from thy impotence;
whatever objections thy fears may hence put in, there is the blood of the Lamb,
that will answer all. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.

2. As a merciful and faithful high Priest. Heb. 2.17. who has made an
atonement for us in the earth, and appears for us in heaven; who has made
reconciliation for us, and makes intercession for us, Heb. 9.24. to appear in
the presence of God for us: we read Exodus 28.12.29. That Aaron as the type of
Christ, was to bear the names of the children of Israel, engraven in stones,
upon his shoulders, and upon his breast plate, when he went into the holy
place, for a memorial before the Lord continually. Our Lord is entered into the
Heavens, to appear in the presence of God, with our names upon his shoulders,
and upon his heart, for a memorial before the Lord; there is not the least of
Saints, but there his name is engraven. Here Is my ransom Lord, and behold my
ransomed ones. Here Is my price, and my purchase, my redemption and my redeemed.
Whatever accusers there be, whatever charge be laid against them, whatever
guilt lies upon them, here are the shoulders that have born all that was their
due, and paid all that they owe; and upon these shoulders, and in this heart
thou may read all their names; and when thou read, remember what I have
done for them; and acquit, absolve, and let them be accepted before thee for
ever. Remember the tears of these eyes, the stripes on this back, the shame of
this face, the groans of this body, the anguish of this soul, the blood of this
heart; and when thou remembrest, whatever name thou find engraven upon this
heart, and upon these shoulders; they are the persons whose all these are; and
whatever these are, whatever acceptance they have found with thee, whatever
satisfaction thou have found in them, put it upon their account: never let me
be accounted the accepted, if they be rejected; never let me be accounted
righteous, if they lie under the imputation of wicked. If they be not righteous
in my righteousness, I must be guilty under their guilt. Whatever I am,
whatever my satisfaction is, all is theirs: for them they plead, for them they
pray; my tears, stripes, wounds, groans, anguish, soul, blood, they all cry and
say, Father forgive them, Father accept them.

Of all cries, there are no such strong cries as the cry of blood, and that
whether it be against, or for the guilty; its voice shall be heard on high. Thy
brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. Genesis 4. and what followed? Woe to
those persons against whom blood cries: but where blood, such blood cries for
them, for pardon, for mercy, blessed are those souls.

Christian, this blood is for thee, it speaks better things than the blood of
Abel, Heb. 12. it pleads, sues, presses for thy discharge from all that is upon
thee. Thou have many cries against thee; Satan cries, thy sins cry, thine own
heart, thy conscience cries against thee; and thou art amazed at the dreadful
noise they make; but behold the blood of the Lamb, the blood of God cries for
thee. Thou have an accuser, but thou have an acquitter: thou have adversaries,
but thou have an advocate. An Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is the propitiation for thy sins: 1 John 2. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies: who is he that
condemns, it is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Romans
8.33,34.

Nay far^her, thou have not only a righteous, but a merciful high Priest; that
is provided of a Sacrifice, and has an heart to offer it for thee: thy name is
in his heart as well as on his shoulders; in his bowels as well as on his back.
He has blood for thee, precious blood; and he has bowels for thee, pitiful
bowels. He can have pity and compassion on the miserable, Heb. 5.2. if he can
find no other, he can find arguments enough from thy woe, and thy misery, to
draw forth his soul toward thee. He is merciful, and his mercies are tender
mercies; he is pitiful, and his compassions are tender compassions: thou art
not so tender, of the wife of thy bosom, of the child of thy bowels; thou art
not so tender of thine own flesh, of the apple of thine eye, of thine own soul,
as thy Lord is of thee: His spirit is moved for thee, his soul melts over thee,
he bleeds in thy wounds, he suffers in thy sorrows, his eye weeps, his heart
breaks over thy broken and undone state; fear not his forgetting thee, his
bowels will remember him of thee.

He is a merciful and a [faithful] high Priest. No dignity to which he is
exalted above thee, no distance to which he is removed from thee, can make him
forget his friends; He is gone into the heavens, and there exalted far above
all Principalities and Powers, and set down at the right hand of God. He is
gone, but he has carried thy name with him, as a perpetual memorial for thee.
Thou art unfaithful, shame to thee; thou forgettest thy Lord at every turn;
every business that comes, every trouble that comes, every pleasure that comes,
every companion that comes in, makes thee forget thy Lord; forget his love,
forget thy duty; Oh how small a matter will steal thy heart from him, yea stir
up tumults and rebellions against him. Thy comforts, thy hopes, thy needs thou
have daily of him, will not all prevail to hold him in remembrance with thee.
Thou forgettest thy Lord, but he will not forget thee, though thou have been
unfaithful in many things, yet he is in nothing; 2 Timothy 2.13. Yet he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself; he should not be true to himself, if he be
not faithful to thee; his interest lies in thee; thou art his, his possession,
a member of his body, fear not; if he should be unfaithful to thy soul, he is
therein unfaithful to his own body. If thy case be such that he can help thee,
if there be any thing wherein he can stead thee; if all that he has, his
blood, his righteousness, his interest with the Father, will be sufficient for
thy help, he has undertaken to procure it for thee, and secure it to thee.
Faithful is he that has called you, and will do it.

This now is that Jesus that is given unto us; as our propitiatory Sacrifice,
as our merciful and faithful high Priest, who suffered on the earth, and is
gone into the heavens for us; standing in his red robes, garments rolled in
blood, with those glorious whites upon the red; pardon, peace, absolution,
acceptance; with the names of his ransomed ones engraven upon his heart, and
upon his shoulders: This is that Jesus who is, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

3. As our Lord and King. A King shall reign in righteousness, in him shall
the Gentiles trust. Zach. 9.9. Shout O daughter of Zion, behold [thy] King
comes. Isa. 9.6. The Government shall be on his shoulder. God has more care
of his Saints, than to leave the government of them on their own shoulder. Is
not her King in her?

He is a King to gather them, a King to govern them, a King to defend and save
them; to save them from their temporal enemies, the sons of violence, the men
of this evil world; from their spiritual enemies, to save them from their sins.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins,
Matthew. 1.21. It Is a mercy to be under government; under government, and under
protection. What would become of us, were there no King in Israel? Where
there is no King, all are kings; more kings than men: Satan will be king, every
lust will be a lord, as many kings as there are devils and sins. Whither would
our unruly hearts carry us? How easily would our wily and potent enemies ruin
us? What tyranny would sin exercise within? What cruelty should we suffer from
without? Whither should we wander? where should we fix? What peace, what order,
what stability? Whence should counsel, and protection, and salvation come, were
there no Lord over us? It Is a mercy to be under government; but to be under
such a government, under a king, and such a King? such a wise and potent King,
such a meek and merciful King, such an holy and a righteous King? O what a
wonder of mercy! Rejoice greatly O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of
Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation;
lowly, and riding upon an asses colt, etc. Zach. 9.9. [He is just having
salvation] as a Priest he has purchased, as a King he bestows his salvation.
He comes not to get, but to give; not to give Laws only, but to give Gifts
unto men; and he gives like a King, Palms, Crowns, and Thrones; salvation to
his people by the remission of their sins. Oh how unthankful, oh how foolish is
this rebellious world? Impatient of subjection? shake off the yoke? groan under
duty? under discipline? We will not have this man to rule over us? Who then
shall save you? hard to be a Christian? strict laws, severe discipline, no
liberty? Is this thy complaint? that is, woe is me, I am so limited, and hedged
in on all hands, that there is no liberty left me to be miserable; if I will be
his, I must be happy.

Let fools inherit their own folly, but let Israel rejoice in him that made
him, let the children of Zion be joyful in their King; for the Lord takes
pleasure in his people, he will beautify the meek with salvation. Lift up your
heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of
glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? the Lord of hosts, yea the Lord
our righteousness, he is the King of glory. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. Praise ye the Lord. Come
all ye Nimrods, ye mighty hunters on the earth: come all ye sons of Anak, ye
seed of the Giants; come all ye sons of Belial, ye seed of the Adulterer and of
the whore; come all ye Ishmaelites and Ammonites, ye Moabites and Hagarenes;
associate, confederate, take counsel together; smite with the tongue, bite with
the teeth, push with the horn, kick with the heel; come all ye gates of hell,
and powers of darkness; thou dragon with all thy armies, with all thy fiery
darts, and instruments of death; come thou king of terrors, with thy fatal
dart: the Virgin, the Daughter of Zion has despised you all, she has laughed
you to scorn: the Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at you; her King
is in the midst of her; the Lord is her King, he will save her.

4. As our head and husband. He that is given to be head over all things [to]
the Church, is given to be the head [of] the Church, Ephesians. 1.22,23. and of every
member in particular, 1 Cor. 11.3. Believers are all joined to the Lord, 1 Cor.
6.17. United [in] Christ as fellow members; united [unto] Christ as their
common head. From which all the body, by joints, and bands, having nourishment
ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God. Coloss.
2.19. they are married to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one
husband.

From this Union follows: 1. A Communication of Influences. 2. A Complication
of Interests.


1. A Communication of Influences. [Having nourishment ministred] Christ our
head, is our fountain of life. Our head is our heart also, out of it are the
Issues of life; from him we live, and are nourished and maintained in life. He
is our Joseph, all the treasures of the holy Land are with him. In him are hid
all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Coloss. 2.3. It pleased the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell: Coloss. 1.19. He is the only begotten
Son of God, full of grace and truth.

Here note,

1. What grace there is in Christ. The Schools tell us, that in him there is a
threefold grace.

1. Gratia Unionis. The Grace of Union. The humane Nature of Christ, has
received the high grace or favor, to be personally united to the second person
in the Godhead; by virtue of which Union, the fullness of the Godhead is said
to dwell in him bodily: Bodily, that is personally, or substantially; in
opposition to the types and shaddows of the Old Testament, in which God (in a
figure) is said to dwell. God is said to dwell in the Tabernacle, in the Ark of
the Covenant, in the Temple; but in these he dwelt only as figures, and
shaddows of the humane nature of Christ: In Christ he dwells not in a figure,
but personally and substantially. As Christ Coloss. 2.17. is called the Body,
in opposition to the types of old, which were but the shadow; so bodily here
notes not a figurative, but a personal inhabitation. Christ is the body, not a
shadow; and God dwells in him bodily, that is substantially, and not in a
shadow.

2. Gratia Habitualis. Habitual Grace: All those moral perfections, wherein
stands the holiness of his nature. The love and fear of God; his humility,
meekness, patience; in sum, his perfect conformity to the Image and whole
Will of God. Such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners. Heb. 7.26.

3. Gratia Capitis; or that honor which is given to him to be head of the
Church.

2. How Christ is said to be full of grace; there is a twofold fullness of grace.

1. Ex part ipsius gratiae. In respect of grace it self; thus he is said to be
full of grace, that has all grace, and has it in the greatest excellency and
perfection of it; that does pertingere ad summum gratiae, Aquin.

2. Ex part habentis gratiam, in respect of the person that has it; and thus
a person is said to be full of grace, that has as much grace as he is capable
of. Christ is full of grace in both respects; that grace which is in him is
grace in the highest perfection of it, and as much as his vessel can hold.

3. That this fullness of Christ is ours, and for us; John 1.16. Of his fullness
do we receive grace for grace, Coloss. 3.3. Your life is hid with Christ in
God. Your life, that is both your spiritual life, grace; and your eternal life,
glory; 1 John 5.11. This is the record, that God has given to us eternal life,
and this life is in his Son. Our life is said to be in Christ, in three
respects.

1. Its hid in Christ, as the effect in the cause. As the life of the branches,
is hid in the root, so is the life of a Christian in Christ. He is our root.

2. It is deposited with Christ; it is laid up with him, committed to his trust
and custody; with him it is secured and put into safe hands.

3. The dispensation of it is committed to him. from him it is at his pleasure
to be derived to us. Of his fullness we receive. The Son has life in himself,
and he gives it to whom, when, and in what measure soever he pleases.

Christian, art thou nothing in thy self? Thou have enough in thy Jesus. Art
thou dark? He Is a Fountain of light? Art thou dead? He Is a fountain of life.
Art thou poor, and low; weak in knowledge, in faith, in love, in patience, etc?
He Is a treasure of all grace; and what he is, he is for thee. Is he wise? he is
wise for thee: Is he holy? He is holy for thee: Is he meek, merciful, humble,
patient? He is so for thee. Is he strong, is he rich, is he full? It Is for thy
sake: as he was empty for thee, weak for thee, poor for thee; so for thee he is
mighty, he is rich, and full. Whilst thou bewailest thine own poverty and
weakness, Oh bless thy self in thy Lord, in his riches, righteousness, and
strength.

2. A complication of interests. As the head and body, as the Husband and Wife,
so Christ and his Saints are mutually concerned; are rich or poor, must stand
and fall, live and die together. As the husband conveyes to the wife, a title
to what he has; as the wife holds of the husband; so is it betwixt Christ and
his Church; they have nothing but through him; their whole tenure is in capite:
they hold of the Head; they have nothing but through him; and whatsoever is
his, is theirs: His God is their God; his Father is their Father; his blood,
his bowels, his merits, his spirit, his victories, all the spoils he has
gotten, all the revenue and income of his life, and death, all is theirs. For
them he obeyed, suffered, lived, died, rose, ascended, is set down in glory, at
the right hand of God. He obeyed as their head, died as their head, rose,
ascended, reigns as their head; and has in their names, taken possession of
that inheritance, which he purchased for them. This is that Jesus which is
given to us, and thus is he granted and made over to all his Saints in this
Covenant of God.

CHAP. III. The Spirit in the Covenant.
3 GOd has put his Spirit into the Covenant; the Almighty, the Eternal Spirit;
the Holy Spirit, the spirit of Glory and of God.

This Holy and eternal Spirit is first poured forth on our head, the Lord
Jesus; to anoint him our Redeemer, to furnish and qualify him for that great
undertaking, Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he
has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, etc. Isa. 11.2,3,4. I
will put my Spirit into him, the spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and of
the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2.

And he is promised to each member, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within
you, To all these he is granted, 1. As a Spirit of VVisdome and Revelation. 2.
As a Spirit of Holiness and Sanctification. 3. As a Spirit of Truth and
Direction. 4. As a Spirit of Comfort and Consolation.


1. As a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17,18. To enlighten them,
to open their blind eyes, and to shine into their hearts; to give them the
knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, that they may know
what the hope of his calling is, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. To counterwork the spirit of this world, whose work
is to blind men's eyes, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto
them, 2 Cor. 4.4,5,6.

This is he by whom the Father has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9. the light that the spitit brings in, is a
mavelous light, and that in three respects:

1. It is a mavelous thing that ever light should come into such dark souls.
That those that were born blind, and upon whom the god of this world had for
many years together been trying his skill, to thicken their darkness, to
increase and seal them up under it; that ever such eyes should be opened, and
the light of life should shine in upon such hearts; this is a mavelous thing.
When our Lord Jesus in the days of his flesh, opened the eyes of those that
had been born blind, the people ran together, and wondered at the sight. If you
should see stones to live, if you should see dead stocks, or dry bones to walk
up and down the streers; if you should see Trees, or Houses, or Mountains full
of eyes; this were not more full of wonder, than to behold blind sinners
receiving their sight. Thou were once darkness, art thou now light in the Lord?
stand and wonder at thy cure.

2. They are marve^lous things, which this light discovers It Is a wonder that
such eyes should ever see, and they see wonders. The Gospel is a Mystery full
of wonders: There are heights and depths, and lengths, and breadths. We have
seen strange things to day. Strange love, strange grace, wonderful wisdom,
wonderful pity, patience, mercy; wonderful providence, wonderful
deliverances, incomprehensible excellencies, unspeakable joy and glory; it is a
wonder there should be such things every day before our eyes, and yet we
could not see them till now; and it is a wonder, that when we did not see them
before, we should ever see them now; that those things which we despised,
derided, mocked at, stumbled at, as mere foolishness, and fancy, we should now
see and admire, even to astonishment; that that Jesus, which was to the Jews a
stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness, should be to the same men, when
called, the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. O the deep things of God! O
the unsearchable Riches of Christ! that he that searches all things, reveals
unto the Saints! O the hidden treasures they now discover in this deep Mine! To
you that believe he is precious, a Praise, an Honor; all Fair, all Glorious;
and you have seen his Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God,
full of Grace and Truth.

Again, there are mavelous evils, as well as good things, that by this light
are brought to light. Sin with all the hidden things of darkness, that lay
below in those chambers of death; the secrets of the evil heart of man. Sin
appears a wonder to the savingly enlightened soul; Exceeding sinful, a world of
wickedness.

There Is Death, and Hell, and the Devil, in every sin; unkindness,
unthankfulness, folly, enmity, rebellion, spite, and the blackness of darkness.
What once appeared as a pleasure, a delight, a beauty; or at least, if an
evil, yet but a trifle, a matter of nothing; is become a plague, a terror, a
burden, a bondage, bitterness, shame, sorrow; and such an high provocation,
that whereas once he swelled, and murmured, and cried out of rigor, feverity,
cruelty in the least punishment of it; now he wonders at the clemency, and
patience, and forbearance of God; that such an affront and provocation, had not
long since turned the whole earth into an Hell.

Christian, thou complainest thou can not see, thou can not feel, thou
can not mourn, thou can not break, under all the guilt that lies upon thee;
thine heart is hard, thine eyes are dry, not a tear, not a groan, scarce a
sigh, will all this evil fetch out from thee. O this blind and sottish mind!
O this dead and senseless heart! what shall I do? what would I not do, to get
me a melting, mourning, broken spirit? but I cannot, I cannot; I cannot see, I
cannot bleed, nor break; O beg the light of this Holy Spirit! and if the sight
that that will present thee with, of this wonderful evil, do not rend thy
heart, and turn thy stomach, and open all thy sluices, and let out thy soul in
sighs and groans, in shame and sorrow, thou may then well be a wonder to thy
self. But be nor discouraged, be not dismayed; do not say, this Rock will
never break, this Iron will never melt; I may go sighing for sighs, mourning
after tears, groaning after groans, but all in vain, it will never be; past
feeling, past feeling, sorrow flies still from me, repentance is hid from mine
eyes; do not thus discourage thy self; wait for this spirit, open to it, and
thou shall see flowing in such streams of self-shaming, self-confounding
light, as shall flow forth in self-abasing, self-abhorring streams of tears.

3. These mavelous things, are revealed with mavelous clearness. That is,
in comparison of what they are to the purblinde world; and in comparison of
what they themselves once saw. They come to see the glory, and the beauty, and
the reality of the wonderful things of God. We have seen his glory, says the
Apostle Joh. 1. The kindness of God our Savior [appeared.] But we all (with
open face) behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. 2 Cor, 3.18. Out of
Zion has he appeared in perfect beauty.

It Is Prophesied Isa. 53. of the unbeleeving world, that when they should see
Christ; they should see no beauty in him.

Strange, though he were all beauty, yet they should see him, and yet see no
beauty. That is, they shall see him, and yet not see him. They see not wood for
trees. What is thy Beloved more than other beloveds? What is Christ more than
an ordinary man? What is the Gospel more than an ordinary Story? What is the
Spirit? What is Truth? What is there in this Faith, and Love; in this Holiness
and Righteousness, in this Peace of Conscience, and Joy of the Holy Ghost?
What substance is there in them? Where Is the Glory, and wherein is the
Excellency of them? Which way came the Spirit of the Lord from me to thee?
Thou shall know in that day, when thou shall call to the Mountains to fall on
thee, and the Rocks to hide thee, from the face of God and the Lamb. We know
whom we have believed. We know that we know him. We speak that which we
know, and testify what we have seen. We have an Unction from the Holy one,
we know all things. God has revealed them to us by his Spirit, for the spirit
searches all things even the deep things of God. Now we have received not the
spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God. We have a clear and certain sight.
We do not see men as Trees walking; with our eyes half open; we see men as
men, Christ as Christ, Truth as Truth, in its naked luster and evidence. This
we have seen, and do testify, neither deceiving, nor being deceived. We
thank thee. O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.

And as they see Truth, and Holiness, and Goodness, in their wonderful Glory,
and Beauty; so also Folly, and Falsehood, and Sin, in its wonderful ugl^ness,
and deformi^y. Sin appears to be sin, to them, Romans 7. Folly to be folly,
falsehood to be falsehood; they see men as men, Christ as Christ, Truth as
Truth, Holiness as Holiness; and they see beasts as beasts, fools as fools, sin
as sin, devils as devils, hell as hell: They see all things as they are,
temptations as they are, delusions as they are; they see what is under them, the
hook under the bait, the sting in the Locust's tail, the war in the Devils
heart, carried on under his fawning face; We are not ignorant of his Devices.

Sinners, cease your wondering at the Saints, let them be no longer for signs
and for wonders in Israel; cease your wondering at the Saints; come and wonder
with them. Wonder not that they say not as you, live not as you, run not with
you after the same follies and vanities; Oh! if ye once come to see what they
see, you will be a wonder to your selves. Mock not at their blessedness;
Blessed are their eyes, for they see. The blind envy, but do not disdain the
seeing. Say not, these men are in a dream, or drunken, or mad; take heed,
blaspheme not the Holy Spirit, call not his light darkne^s, put not your
darkness for light. Would you know, when these men testify what they have seen
and heard? whether they are sober, or beside themselves, Come and see; I say
not, stand and see, you cannot see at that distance you stand; come near, come
in and you shall see; see your blindness first, if ever you will see the light
Oh! bewail your darkness, and seek light, seek and you shall see it. Son of
David have Mercy on me; Why what will thou man? Lord that I may receive my
sight. Shall that be thy cry? O pity thy blind soul! O pray for eyes. They
that see pity the blind; We have a little Sister that has no breasts, we
have a poor Brother [yea a world of them] that have no eyes. What shall we do
for our poor brethren, in the day that they shall be spoken for? Oh! be eyes
to thy blind, be a light to thy dark souls; let them that dwell in darkness
see thy great light. Sinners, those whom you persecute, do thus pity, do thus
pray for you; Lord, that their eyes might be opened: will you say, Amen, to
their prayers? or will you say, Lord regard not their word, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways?

Christians, be marvels. You that have seen mavelous things, be mavelous
persons, set the world a wondering for some thing. Let your light shine, let the
light which has shined into your hearts, shine forth in all your paths: let
the Spirit of Light within you, be a Spirit of Glory, resting upon you. Once
you were darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; Walk as Children of the
light. Be ye holy, harmless, the Children of God, without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked Generation, amongst whom ye shine as lights in the World.

Beclouded Christian, thou go on bemoaning and bewailing thy self,
complaining that thou art still blind; the light has shined into thy
darkness, but thy darkness comprehends it not; thine eye is yet but tender,
at least, and thou can see but little; but little of Christ, the Sun is but
as a spark to thee; but little of sin, that Mountain, looks yet but as a Mole
hill; It is neither clear, nor dark, neither night nor perfect day: thou
hopeedst that long e're this, thy scales would have fallen off, the vail would
have been removed, but they abide upon thee; thou waitest for light, but behold
obscurity! for brightness, but thou walk in darkness; thou go on, adding
darkness to darkness, the darkness of sorrow, to the dimness of sight. Thou
fear that the Gospel is hid from thee, thou doubtest it is still night,
because it is not yet noon with thee. But hearken, as little as thou see of
Christ, do thou see so much, that thou prizest, and love, and cleavest to
him above all? as little as thou see of sin, do thou see so much, that
thou loathest, and shunnest it above all things? do thou walk in that
little light thou have? do thou love, long, wait, cry, for the light? Send
forth thy light and thy truth, lift up the light of thy countenance; Sun of
Righteousness shine upon me; why are the wheels of thy Chariots so long a
coming? when Lord? Make haste my Beloved, O might I once see thy face, as the
Sun, looking over the Mountains. Is this thy voice? are these the breathings of
thy soul? Be of good comfort, these are the glimmerings and groanings of that
Holy Spirit within thee, which has already delivered thee from darkness, and
will bring thee forth into his mavelous light; thou shall know, if thou
follow on to know the Lord. Arise, shine, thy light is come, the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee. Though yet (as to thy sense) it be neither clear nor
dark, neither night nor perfect day, in the evening there shall be light.

2 As a Spirit of Holiness and Sanctification; he is given as an Holy Spirit,
and as a Sanctifying Spirit: therefore Sanctification is called the
Sanctification of the Spirit; 2 These. 2.13. he comes to change us into his own
nature, to make us partakers of his holiness; he is a Refiner's fire, and
Fullers soap, Mal. 3.2. to purge, and work, and wash off the filth, and
corruption of our natures; What it is said he shall be to the Church, Isa.
4.4. A Spirit of Judgment, and a Spirit of Burning, to wash away the filth of
the Daughters of Zion, and to purge the blood of Jerusalem, from the midst
thereof. [a Spirit of Judgement] that is, in the Rulers of Israel; stirring
them up to do Justice, and execute Judgment, that so the guilt of blood may
be taken away, Isa. 32.15,16. and a [Spirit of Burning] that is, in the hearts
of the people of Israel, to consume and destroying the inward lusts of their
hearts, that no more such wickedness be committed amongst them. This he is to
every Saint; A Spirit of Judgment, to give Sentence against their Lusts, to
condemn them to the fire; these must be cast out, to the fire with them; away
with them, get ye hence ye Sons of the Bondwoman; you may not be Heirs with
the Sons of the Freewoman. The Spirit of the Lord first discovers and
convinces of sin; judges betwixt light and darkness, grace and sin, and then
gives sentence, away with these Lusts, they may not be suffered to live.

A Spirit of Burning, to execute the sentence, to consume them in the fire. The
Spirit of Sanctification is a spirit of Mortification. Romans 8.13. If ye
(through the Spirit) do mortify the deeds of the body. It is the Spirit that
kills, the Flesh profits nothing.

The Spirit implants the Soul into Christ; gives it an Interest in his death,
brings it under the influence of his death. Christus crucifixus est Christus
crucifigens. It Is the death of Christ, that is the death of sin; these Thieves
are Crucified with him. Romans 6.6. Our old man is Crucified with Christ, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should no longer serve
sin. Hell knew not what they did, when they Crucified Christ; Death with all
its Armies, were put to death with him.

The Spirit raises up another party in the soul, a party against a party, an
army against an army; brings Grace in to take up arms against sin; Grace does
not only fight against sin, but is in the very nature of it the death of
sin, as the Generation of a new, is the Corruption of the old form. Humility
is pride dead, meekness is sinful passion and frowardness dead, patience is
impatience slain.

The Spirit excites and stirs up the soul against sin, sets it a praying
against it; the Spirit of Grace is a Spirit of Supplication, fetches down
Hailstones and Thunder bolts from Heaven to destroy these Amorites; sets a
watch against it, presses the soul to deal wisely with it, to keep it low, by
cutting off all provision from the flesh, restraining, and keeping it short of
all those fleshly objects, which would keep it in heart, and so it is starved to
death. It is true, our greatest wisdom, watchfulness, abstinence, self-denial
and all external means alone, will fall short of killing one lust, it is the
Spirit that kills, without it, the flesh profits nothing: all external
attempts for the mortification of the flesh, are but a fleshly mortification;
but if ye [through the Spirit] do mortify; pray in the Spirit, watch in the
Spirit, curb and keep short, and keep under this body, still taking in the
assistance of the Spirit, then it shall dye.

Christian, thou live in a weary Land, and thou have but a weary life of it,
briars and thorns are with thee, the Canaanite is yet in the Land; thou
sojournest in Mesech and have thine habitation in the Tents of Kedar; and thou
have a Mesech and Kedar within thee; thou have Armies within thee of fleshly
lusts, which fight against thy soul, thou go mourning daily, because of the
oppressor, those spiritual wickednesses which lie in thine heart, and war in
thy members; thou often groanest, and cryest out to thy God, liberty liberty,
redemption redemption. Oh this proud heart, oh this vain heart! oh this
earthliness, oh this fleshliness, this sloathfulness, this enmity, and
rebellion against the law of my mind, and my God; when I would do good, evil
is present with me. I cannot, I cannot do the things that I would, I can with
no peace serve or enjoy my God and my soul; my duties are either prevented or
polluted, my comforts are either wasted or made quite to vanish and disappear;
when I would serve my God, I must away to serving my belly, or my back, or my
friends; when my soul is a little gotten upon the wing, and soaring in the
upper Region, it is presently checked, pulled down again to the earth. O my
pinioned imprisoned soul! woe is me, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Why, yet comfort thine heart, the enemy flies
upon thee as a flood, but the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard
against him, thou complainest thy Gold is become dross, thy wine is mixed with
water, yea with mudd and dirt, yet he will turn his hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. Though these briars
and thorns be set in battle against thee, yea, and against him also, yet he
will go through, go through them, he will burn them together, Isa. 27.4. Thou
complainest that thy garments are defiled, thy glory is stained, thy beauty is
marred, the Image of thy God is so defaced, that there is but here and there a
spot of it left upon thee, thou art black, but not comely, whilst thy Lord
says, thou art all fair O my Love, thou cryest out, I am all foul, O my Lord,
thou would be holiness to thy Lord, but thou art an offense to him, holiness
is still thy love, and thy desire, and thy longing, but it flies from thee; it
is rather thy wish then thy hope, thou can weep [over] but thou can not
weep [out] thy deformity, thine Iniquity is still marked before the Lord. If
there be a little Grace in thee, yet there is such a weakness in its sinews,
such a paleness in its face, that it is not like to live, or if it live, Oh!
how little hope that ever it should thrive or flourish; Thus thou complainest,
thus thou go mourning and sighing, and sinking, and fainting in thy mind,
and now and then venturest out a desponding Prayer. Lord pity, Lord look upon
my sorrow, and my sin, Lord wash me, Lord help me. Why, the Lord God has
sent thee his help out of his Sanctuary, and his strength out of Zion. The
eternal spirit is come down on purpose, to give battle to the flesh, to subdue
thine inquities, and bring all those that rise up within thee, under thy feet.
Thou mistakest thy self, and thine enemies, if thou think they will be
conquered, by one blow of thine arm, this kind goes not out so: not by might
nor by power, much less* by weakness and by flesh, by any weak attempts of
thine own; but by my spirit says the Lord. It Is work for a God to relieve and
cleanse such an heart, to turn such an Hell into an Heaven; what thou can not
do, being weak through the flesh, behold! he comes down to do it for thee;
thou have proved thine own weakness, now try everlasting strength; he stands at
the door and knocks, hear his voice at the door, will thou be made clean? will thou be made whole? will thou be delivered? open to him, and with him
deliverance comes in, he stands at the poole, stirring the wa^ers, for thee,
put in thy Cripple soul, and be healed of all thy diseases, say to him, Lord
if thou will, thou can make me clean; and thou shall soon have this answer:
I will, be thou clean.

3. As a Spirit of Truth and Direction. John 16.13. he shall guide them by his
Counsel, he shall lead them in the way that they shall go, Isa. 30.21. They
shall hear a word behind them saying: this is the way, walk ye in it, when
they are turning to the right hand or to the left. He shall lead them into all
truth, to prevent mistakes, and into all righteousness to prevent miscarriages:
nay more, he shall not be only their Star, but their Strength too; he
shall guide them on, and help them on, they shall be led by the Spirit, bound
in the Spirit, pressed in Spirit; they shall be excited, assisted, carried on
in the power of the Spirit, in the way that they should go: he will cause them
to walk in the Statutes of the Lord. Whatsoever thy way wardness and thy
wanderings have been; whatever thy feebleness and fickleness be; whatever false
lights, and false-waies are before thee; whatever temptations thou meetest
with, to turn thee aside out of the right way, whatever doubts hence arise in
thine heart; I shall one day or other perish from the way, and be a lost sheep
at last; yet his conduct shall be prosperous, and the event shall be sure,
he shall so guide thee by his Counsel, that he shall bring thee to Glory. He
shall gather his Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and gently
lead those that are with young.

4. As a Spirit of Comfort and Consolation, he is so called, John 16.7. The
Comforter. If I go not away, [the Comforter] will not come unto you, but if I
depart, I will send him unto you. He shall come unto them, and abide with them,
to supply the absence of their Redeemer, to support them under their
affliction, to witness their Adoption, to seal them up, unto the day of
Redemption, and to be the earnest of their Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13,14.

John 16.14. He shall take of mine, and show it unto you. [Hee shall take of
mine] that is, not only of the Truths, those treasures of Wisdom that are in
me, (though that be specially intended) but of my Love, my Righteousness, my
Holiness, and all those treasures of Grace and Mercy, that are laid up in me;
whatever there is in me, that may stand you in any stead, yield you any
relief, or support; the Comforter which I will send you, shall bring it down to
you: he shall take my Blood, and the Pardons it has purchased for you, my
Bowels, and the Compassions that are working in me toward you, my Prayers,
and Intercessions, I am offering up for you; he shall take of all those
treasures of Grace, and everlasting Consolations which are laid up for you with
me; he shall take of mine, and show it unto you. As much as you have in the
world to afflict and amaze you, as little as you have of your own, to comfort
you; either in your hearts, or in your houses, or among your friends, he shall
show what I have for you to refresh you.

O Christians, a sight of Christ in our sorrows, in our fears, in our thickest
darkness; what daylight would it bring in? When thou look into thine heart,
and art astonished and confounded at what thou find there; at the blindness
and the hardness, the poverty and the emptiness, the guilt and the guile, the
pride and the peevishness, the evil thoughts, the vile affections, the filthy
lusts, that are swarming and working in thee; when thou look into the world,
and tremblest at what thou beholdest there; the malice, the craft, the power,
that is engaged against thee; the furious spirits, the fiery tongues, the
fierce looks, the violent hands, that are flying upon thee; and the little
relief the earth will afford thee; when thy heart faints, and dies within thee,
at the sense of this thy woeful and forlorn state; A sight of what thou have in
thy Lord presented to thee by his Spirit; look thee here soul, what thy Jesus
has sent thee down, a glance from his eye, a drop from his heart, a mess from
his table; and all to tell thee, yet I do not forget thee; behold the care I
take of thee, the treasures I have for thee, to encourage thy love, and reward
thy faithfulness. Oh! how will this make all thy darkness to depart, and turn
the shadow of death into the morning.

Thus is the Holy Spirit given to the Saints, to be the light of their eyes,
the death of their sins, the guide of their ways, the stay of their hearts; to
up-hold their grace, and to maintain their peace; to subdue their enemies, or
their fears; to secure them from temptations, or succor them when tempted; to
wipe off their reproach, or make it their crown; to heal their diseases, or
make them their cure; to help their infirmities, to work their works, to make
their yoke easy, and their burdens light; to turn their sighs into songs, to
form their groans into prayers, to send them up to their Lord, and bring down
their returns; to comfort their hearts, to establish, strengthen, settle them,
that they be neither offended at the chain, nor moved from the hope of the
Gospel.

CHAP. IV. The Earth in the Covenant.
4. GOd has put the earth into the Covenant: Though the Saints have not their
reward in this life, their portion in this world, yet this world also is
theirs, Mat. 5.5. The meek shall inherit the earth, 1 Cor 3.22. Things present
and things to come, all are yours. 1. The good things present. 2. The evil
things present.


1. The good things present, Mark 10.30. Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and
Mothers, and Children, and Lands, now in this time, Prove. 3.16. Length of days
are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. Houses, and
Lands, and Riches, and Honors, where are they? who are the poor of this World,
the houseless, harbourless, and friendless? who have woe, and want, and shame,
and sorrow? who are Strangers and Pilgrims; dwelling in tents, driven into
corners; into dens, and caves; hunted up and down upon the mountains of the
earth? to whom is hunger and thirst? cold and nakedness, but to the meek of the
earth? Is this to inherit the earth? All theirs, when nothing theirs? yet they
do inherit the earth. For

1. They shall ever have as much as will suffice them; and that's as much as
all. They shall not want any thing, but what they [may] want. Your Father
knows that you have need of these things; and he knows how much they need.
More than needs, is more then enough, and more then enough, is a prejudice.
Many men have too much; too much money, too much esteem, too many friends; more
than they can bear; so much as to sink them, and drown them in perdition and
destruction.

Christians shall have enough; they shall never be in such a needy state, but
whatever is necessary for them in all the earth, they shall have it; The earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and he has said, That those that seek
him, shall not want any thing that is good, Psalm. 34.10. if the whole world can
supply them out of all its store, they shall be supplied.

2. What they have, they have a better and farther title to, then any others in
the world. Though the dominion be not founded in grace, yet by grace it is
established. What they have, descends upon them not barely by providence, but
by promise, Heb. 1.2. Christ is heir of all things; and they are fellow-heirs
with Christ. A little coming from the promise, has more in it, than the
greatest abundance that is only handed down by common providence; that which
comes in from the promise, comes in with a blessing; if thou have but an
handful, thou have a blessing in thy hand; if thou have but a corner, thou have
a blessing in thy corner. A little from love, is a great blessing. Thou have
God in every morsel thou eatest, and in every drop that thou drinkest; a drop
from heaven will turn thy bran into the finest flower, and thy Water into Wine.

O what serene and quiet lives, how void of care (distracting care) might the
Saints live in the world! what are the burdens that do gall our backs? what
are the briars that tear our flesh? what are the thorns that pierce through our
hearts ordinarily, but the cares of this life? what shall I eat? what shall I
drink? wherewith shall I be clothed? where shall I dwell? how little have I for
to day? what for to morrow? what for hereafter? how shall I secure what I have?
when this is gone, whence shall I be supplied? thus do we go on, piercing our
selves through with many sorrows. Our cares for supply eat up what we have; our
thoughts cut deeper than our wants; we cannot at so cheap a rate fear, as we
often bear the want of all things.

And why take ye thought? the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and
he has said, All this is yours, you shall want nothing. You have not only your
Deus providebit, providence to live upon; you have also your Deus promisit, the
promise before you, and this has all things in it; all is yours. What for to
morrow? what for hereafter? why, what says the promise? Thou shall want
nothing; neither thou nor thine: Never saw I the righteous forsaken, nor their
seed begging their bread.

Have thou two worlds made sure to thee, and can thou want? thou may as
well whine, and make a pitiful cry at a full table, Oh where shall I have my
next morsel? as under such a full promise, Oh where shall I have my next meal?
O how much beneath the spirit of Christianity, are the carking anxious lives of
too many Christians? you do not believe, you do not believe; you talk of your
Covenant-right, of your part in the promise, of living by faith; but where is
any such thing? can you trust God for your souls, and can you not trust him for
your bodies, for your children? believe, and you will make as much, and be
satisfied as well, with a penny in the promise, with a meal in the promise,
with an house in the promise, as with a penny in your purse, or a meal in your
cupboard.

What do thou get by all thy cares? Which of you by taking thought, can add
one cubit to his stature? one farthing to his store? If thou lose nothing by
them, thou may sure put all thy gains into thine eyes; tears and trouble are
all they will add to thee. Be quiet, and nothing will ail thee; let not any
straits sting thee before they are; want not before thou want; let not the
Winters frosts nip thee, whilst it is yet Summer.

Know when thou art well, and be content. All is thine; if thou inheritest thy
God, thou inheritest the earth; nothing of all its store shall be kept back
from thee, that is necessary for thee: only thou must not look to be thine own
carver; thy God will carve out what thou need. Let enough suffice thee, and
thou shall never have too little. Thou shall never have so little, but thou
may say, this little is enough.

What if what thou want in Water, be made up in Wine? if thou have but
little in bran, but the more in flower? a short meal with a smile from heaven,
thou may count no fast but a feast; a little oil in the cruse, how far will
it go with a smile the blessing of the Covenant? If the upper Springs run
freely, thou may abate a nether Spring.

Let my beloved comfort me with his apples, and stay me with his flagons; and
let the rest be as little and as course as it will. Let the promise be my
portion, let the pipes be kept open to my soul, and then the least pittance for
this carcass shall suffice me. O my Lord, let me feed with thee, and I will not
quarrel whatever my fare be. Let my portion be from thy table, and then be
it much or little. Let me hear thy voice, I am thine, and with me all things;
and I am content to be at thy allowance. Let thy deed of gift stand sure to me,
put in my childrens names there, and I ask no more for my self or them. Hold
thy peace, keep silence O my anxious soul, know when thou art well; be in
nothing careful, the Lord is at hand.

2. The evil things of this earth are theirs: the Cross is in the Covenant,
Psalm. 89.34. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if
they break my Statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their
transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes.

1. The Covenant has its cross. The Doctrine of the Gospel is the Doctrine of
the Cross, the preaching of the Gospel is the preaching of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.
The Mysteries of a crucified Jesus, and of his crucified Saints, do fill up the
whole New Testament. The Cross is not only imposed upon the Saints, as their
burden, but bequeathed unto them as a Legacy. It Is given unto them, as an
honor and privilege, Philip. 1.29. Unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Its joined
with the most glorious gift [the gift of faith.] Yea, and it is a greater gift
then this. To suffer in Faith, is more than barely to believe.

2. By virtue of the Covenant the Cross is a Blessing. The word is now changed;
it is no longer, Cursed, but Blessed is every one that hangs on this Tree,
Mat. 5.10,11. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake;
blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you, falsely for my sake. Why where is the blessedness?
or wherein stands it? It stands in these things. 1. In the separation of the
Cross from the Curse. 2. In the sanctification of the Cross to its ends. 3. In
the proportioning of the Cross to their needs and strength. 4. In the special
comforts of the Cross.


1. The Cross is separated from the Curse. There is something in this. To be
able to say under the forest of afflictions, This scourge is no scorpion; this
is no curse, it is but a cross. Our Lord bare both the cross and the curse
together, and that made his cup so bitter; but now he has divided them; the
curse he has left upon sinners, and laid only the naked cross on his Saints.
The crosses of reprobate sinners, are all curses. Every affliction is a curse;
there is wrath in all their sufferings, there is venom upon every arrow, there is
vengeance in every dart, every rod is a Serpent to them. Thou that art of the
number of Christ's implacable enemies, when he comes to fall upon thee, and to
grind thee under his hand, thou would have a word of comfort to be spoken to
thee in thy sorrow; no, no, there is no comfort can be spoken; thou may say
of every dart he smites thee with, This is sent of God, to revenge himself upon
me; The crosses of the impenitent are all curses: but the Saints curses are all
come to be but crosses. Though men curse, the Lord will not curse; whatever
troubles come upon thee, though there be vinegar in them, yet there is no venom
in them; though there be anguish in them, yet there is no wrath in them; though
they be ill looked, yet there is no ill will in them; they come upon no ill
intent, nor shall have any evil issue. The smitings of the wicked are to thee,
as the smitings of the righteous were to the Psalmist, A precious balm, Psalm.
14.5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; it shall be an
excellent oil; it shall not break mine head. And thou may say, Let the wicked
smite me; smite me with the tongue, with the fist of wickedness, or what they
will, it shall not break mine head, much less mine heart; it shall be a
kindness to me, an excellent oil.

2. The Cross is sanctified to its ends. It has many holy and excellent ends,
and it shall prosper; it shall accomplish its ends. The cross is laid on the
Saint, sometimes to prove them; sometimes to reprove them; to humble them, to
purge them, etc. and whatever its sent to them for, it shall not return in
vain. As the Word, so the rod, shall accomplish that for which he pleases that
sent it. By this the iniquity of Jacob (shall) be purged.

3. The Cross is proportioned to their needs and strength. Jer. 30.11. I will
correct thee in measure, but I will not leave thee altogether unpunished. Just
so much as will serve shall suffice; the wise Physician has respect both to
the need, and to the strength of the Patient. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend
for ever, neither will I be always wroth; lest the Spirit should fail before
me, and the souls which I have made. The Apostle tells the Saints, Heb. 10.
that they have need of patience; and their experience tells them, they have
need of something to exercise their patience. And their needs are different;
some are knotty pieces and need more; others are tender, and upon them less
will serve. The stubborn Child must have more stripes; the shaking of the rod
will do more on some spirits, then the smart of it on others; but all need
something. Let him only that is without sin, say, I have no need of shame and
sorrow. The Lord will neither over, nor under do; every one shall have his load
and no more. No more than they can bear, and no less than their need requires.
The Lord delights not in his childrens tears, he does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the children of men; but yet he had rather they cry then perish.
Wonder not Christians, that your tender Lord puts you to pain, and that your
pains are so sharp and so many; Your heavenly Father knows that you have need
of all these things. It Is a mercy that he will chastise; you may put your
corrections among your mercies. His breakings of you are his blessings, his
woundings are your cures; and by your own, as by your Lords stripes you are
healed. And when you shall review, and read over all his darker providence;
and behold the wisdom, tenderness, which is attempered with his severities,
evidenced in his laying on so much, and yet no more than was needful, you will
then write down with the Psalmist, Thou in very faithfulness have afflicted me.

O my Lord, let me not want thy staff nor thy rod; neither a friend nor an
enemy; neither a calm nor a storm; neither food nor medicine; if my disease be
too strong for my Physic, let me have yet a stronger potion; if my wanton
heart will not yet be tamed, put on more fetters, an heavier load; load upon
load, weight upon weight, and till thou see, let me never say, it is enough.
Let me never be sick of my remedy till I be cured of my disease. Let me rather
suffer by the hand of a Devil, than perish by the hand of a lust. Spare not
Lord, cease not Lord, to smite thy servant, till thou have thereby smitten down
all mine enemies. Peace? plenty? ease? what that I may have to spend upon my
lusts? to wax wanton against my God? hanc pacem nolo.

Pain, trouble, want, any thing rather than peace, upon such terms. Correct me
O Lord, yet in judgment, but not in thy fury, lest I be consumed and brought to
nothing.

4. The Cross has its special comforts, 2 Cor. 1.3,4,5,6,7.

Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort; who comfort us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ. And whether we be
afflicted it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the
enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer; or whether we be
comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation: and our hope of you is
steadfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be
also of the consolation.

The comforts of the Cross are often the sweetest and the fullest, that the
Saints ever taste on this side the crown. The first draught is often bitter;
the green cross is heavy, and it is necessary it should be so. As it is with some
medicinal waters, it works by its weight; it must be an heavy yoke that will
tame an unruly neck; if it gall not, it will not heal; it is the smart of the
rod that stills the Child. Think not your burdens will lie easy, when first
laid on, and think not much if they do not. The first conflict with
temptations, may put you to an harder brunt then you are aware. It must be so
that it may be for your good afterward. So my Physic will work, I am content
it make me sick. Tribulation works patience; that it cannot do, unless it
pains. It is observable, that it is not said, the cross works patience, but
the (...) the tribulation, the pinching of the cross, or the pain the cross
puts us to; this is patience, a quiet bearing that pain, which the flesh when
touched puts us to. When we [feel] the thorns and the nails, when the iron
enters into our [souls] when it pricks and smarts, then 'twill work. The green
cross is heavy; a prison, or a wilderness, will look uncouth at the first; but
when your Lord comes in, and visits you, then the sweet, the pleasure comes:
and the more frowns at the threshold, the more kisses you may expect
afterward; Christ does not always meet his Saints in the Porch; the Devils
Parlour, the inner prison is his banqueting house; the Dungeon his
Wine-cellar; there they drink and are satisfied. The Stocks, and the Rack, are
the organs that make them the sweetest Music. Many a Saint has been sadly
disappointed at the first, hoping to meet with Christ at the door; but behold a
dreadful fight; behold sin lies at the door; all his sins, all that ever he
did against Christ, all his unthankfulness, unfaithfulness, unkindness,
rebellion against his Lord, stand forth and stare him in the face. Christians,
beware of sin now: it will meet you in the day of adversity, the cross will
tell you all that ever you did. I remember my faults this day; now I remember
all my pleasant things; my Sabbaths, my Ordinances, my Liberty, the dear
society I once enjoyed; but trifled and wasted away; O my pride and my
wantonness, my idleness, my earthliness, my hypocrisy, wherefore are you come
thus to affright and torment me? Lord, whether am I come? O how dreadful is
this place? Is this my prison-entertainment? Are these my prison-consorts? O
what an hard lodging am I like to have with such companions? O the wormwood and
the gall! a dark habitation, a bitter cup indeed is now given unto me. Is this
the comfort of the cross? are these the sweets so much talked of? Yet be not
dismayed, as roughly as thou art handled at the door, it is better within; the
Devil is going out in this storm; thy sins meet thee now, but it is only to
shake hands and part; after this agony expect the Angels to come and minister
to thee. Complain not if thou yet find no sweet, thou have not drank deep
enough; the next draught, the sugar may come; in the next room thou may meet
thy Lord; and then tell me, if it be short of all that has been told thee.

But shall I give you a more particular view of some of the special comforts of
the Cross, or our sufferings for Christ! I shall only first premise a word, to
let you understand what I mean by the sufferings of Christ. We then suffer for
Christ, when we suffer for Christ's Cause; when we suffer because we will be
Christians, we will be holy and righteous; when we suffer because we will not
sin; and when we suffer upon Christ's Call, when he cuts out a cross for us, and
lays it on. Then Christ calls us to suffering, when he puts us to this choice,
Either to suffer or to sin; when our backs or our consciences must suffer; when
we must suffer, or he must suffer by us. If any man will be my Disciple, let
him take up [his] cross. Christ is not, and Christians must not be prodigal of
their blood; their blood is his; their estates, their names, their liberties,
are all his, and to him they must be accountable how they part with them. It Is
not every cross that thou can call [thy] cross; we must not leave our way to
seek a cross; when Christ has laid a cross athwart a Christians way that he
should go; and he must either make a stand, or turn aside, or submit his neck
to it; Then he says, There is [thy] cross, take it up and get thee on. Whatever
cross be before thee, if thou have a way open to avoid it without sin, that is
none of thy cross, thou may not take it up; or if thou do, thou will have
no thanks for thy pains.

Christians should be wary here. Though it be an argument of a gracious spirit,
to be always of a ready and forward mind to suffer for Christ; and when he
demands, Who will go with me? Who will bear my cross? cheerfully to answer, I
will go Lord, let me bear it; yet should we take heed, that as we hang not
back, when he says, Go, so that we run not before he send us. Though it be an
high honor to suffer for the Gospel, yet no man takes this honor upon
himself, but he that is called of God. I would not go to a Prison without a
Mittimus from heaven, lest if my suffering be of my self, I be there left to
shift for my self. If Christ should meet me in prison or in banishment, and
demand of me, What do thou here Elijah? Friend, how came thou in hither?
What should I say, if I could not say this, Thou Lord, have brought me hither;
my conscience, my duty has brought me in.

But understand me here with this caution; That when the Cause for the main is
Christ's, but the Call seems doubtful, yet when the sufferer has carefully
enquired the mind of God, truly follows the dictates of conscience, sincerely
designs the honor of Christ and his Gospel, although he should err in some
circumstances of his case, and for fear of iniquity should choose affliction,
when possibly he might have avoided both; God will surely wink at his mistakes,
own his sufferings, and greatly accept and reward his readiness of mind.

Yet still take heed of careless or wilful errors: take heed of preparing nails
for thy own cross; thorns, scourges, spears, for thine own head or heart. Take
heed both how thou shunnest, and how thou espousest a suffering state.

Go not in upon heedless mistakes; go not in for good company, much less upon
any carnal designs; let not thy pride, or ostentacion, or the bias of any
fleshly respects lead thee into the house of correction, lest thou find them
the rods to lash thee when thou art there.

Christians consider, if there be not sometimes some uncomfortable miscarriages
in this matter; and whether it has not been the lot of some of Christ's (with
how much justice or charity, let the Lord be Judge) to be censured and
reproached for unfaithful or for fearful, upon no other account but for walking
by this rule, not to go to Prison without a warrant, that is, not to cast
themselves into a suffering state, whilst God has left a way open to escape,
without sin. I confess the more dangerous, and the more ordinary error is on
the other hand; we are more apt (especially when afflictions are more sharp and
bite in earnest, and then will be the great trial) rather sinfully to shift our
selves of them, than unwarrantably to run our selves upon them; but yet let it
be considered, whether there be not an error on this hand also.

Its true where the cause is the same as to the main, different circumstances
may make that to be one man's sin, which is another man's duty; yea, that may be
a duty to the same man at one time, which (supposing him in differing
circumstances) might have been his sin at another. And it is not seldom
(through the unavoidable difference of our apprehensions, and the difficulty
of discerning our cases) that Christians equally careful to know and do the
Will of God, when the case, and the circumstances also are mostly the same, do
judge differently about their Call to suffering. Here let no man be so
tyrannical to others, as to expect that they should go cross to their own, to
comply with their brethrens, judgments, and consciences. Let us not put one
another on this unmerciful necessity, either to break our peace with God, or
our Friends. Let it be sufficient to us, faithfully to follow our own light,
without judging or quarrelling with those that are otherwise minded. Beware of
bitterness. Be not cruel to consciences; smite not with the tongue, nor let an
evil thought arise in thine heart, upon any such account as this. Thine arrows
will recoyl, and fly back in thine own face. Blemish not thine own sufferings
by blasting thy Brothers liberty. Let not the wariness of some be condemned for
cowardice, nor the forwardness of others for pride or hypocrisy; but let us
be clothed with humility, let us put on a spirit of self-suspition, and
charity to our Brethren; and let this Christian frame be the more studiously
maintained, by how much the more our differing practices according to the
variety of our apprehensions, seem to condemn each other, and so provoke to
uncomfortable schisms and contentions, and by how much the more pernicious such
schisms are like to prove in the issue.

These things premised, I shall now show you what the special comforts of the
cross are. You may expect your suffering state to be sweetened with

1. A more plentiful diffusion of special Grace. Grace is a comfort; it is never
better with the Saints; then when that flourishes. The joy of the harvest is
howling to the joy of grace; he is not a Christian, that cannot say, it is
Summer, when these flowers appear in their beauty. Flourishing Faith and Love,
have their glorious joys, 1 Pet. 1.8. The Springs of grace, are a resurrection
from the dead; and there is no such spring as after a shower. Oh how green do
the herbs then look; the withering flowers do then lift up the head; never so
many stars appear, nor with such luster, as in a frosty night; grind the
spices, and their fragrancy flows out. Saints are never more Saints, than in
the house of bondage, or the Land of their pilgrimage; our Winter-weather makes
us warm at heart. As our outward man perishes, our inward man is renewed day by
day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Persecution is the time of life. We are delivered to death
for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be manifest in our mortal
flesh, 2 Cor. 4.11. Decayed soul, comfort thine heart, the cross comes, now
thou shall live; now thou shall recover. This weakness will strengthen the
things that remain, and are ready to die. Now faith, and love, and patience,
and courage that have so long hung the wing, now lift up the head; the day of
your redemption draws nigh; this night is your day of hope.

2. A more clear revelation of special Love. Love thou me Lord? there is
enough. Let me hear thy voice, let me see thy face.

Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth. Thy loving kindness is better than life;
send forth thy light, and thy truth, let these tell me, thou love me. Thy
lovesick Spouse is sick for love; O when will thou say, Thou know that I
love thee? Why come up with me on the cross; that withered tree bears more
blossoms of love, than all the green trees of the field. The whole Gospel is
hung upon the cross. Where our Lord hung, there is sin nailed, the curse
vacated, death vanquished; pardon, peace, joy, glory, showed forth in open
sight. There Is love with all its tokens, go up and take. Fear not to be
baptized with thy Lords Baptism, nor to drink of his cup; this cup also is the
communion of the blood of Christ. Come with me into the wilderness, there will
I speak comfortably to thee. When thou most want it, where thou will most
value it, there will I show thee my loves.

Our Lord loves not to have love slighted; the full soul loathes the
honeycomb; thou have yet too many Lovers to bid thy Lord welcome; he keeps his
best Wine till all thine own be sowred; then it will relish, and then thou
shall have it. His oil is for thy wounds. The Child never knows so much of the
Parents heart, and bowels, as when it is sick, or in distress; then every look
is love; every word is pity and compassion. O the soundings of Christ's bowels
toward his swooning children; when thou know hatred, then look to know
love. When thou art persecuted, when thou art cast out, and trodden under foot
of men, then will he take thee in, and cherish thee.

3. A more full manifestation of glory, There Is not a prison into which the
Saints are cast, but has a window into the palace. Calvary becomes a Tabor,
where they have a sight of their Lord in his glory. Golgotha becomes a Pisgah,
where they may look over Jordan into the land of promise. Have thou known
little of heaven? thou have not yet been in the deep.

Of Stephen the first Gospel-Martyr its said Acts 7.55. He looked up steadfastly
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God. And Chap. 6.15. All that sat in the Council, saw his face, as the face of
an Angel. Such an admirable splendour and serenity in his countenance, as spoke
him rather an Angel then a man. O what an heaven was there within, that cast
out such a divine luster on his face. His joy was too big for his heart, his
face must have its share; yea, his very adversaries, at second hand, beheld the
glory of God.

He looked up and saw heaven opened. Looking down, he might see hell opened,
all his tormentors about him; the jaws of death ready to devour and swallow him
up; but looking up, he saw heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand
of God. O there he is, for whose sake is all this. My beloved, my beloved is
yonder. Behold the region of light, whither this dark tempest is wasting me;
his hell and his heaven meets, but the light swallows up the dark. Hell ceases
to be hell, where heaven appears to be heaven. This is the portion of
suffering Saints. When you read what is written of those armies of Martyrs that
have gone before; of their unspeakable joys, their undaunted courage, their
admirable boldness; of their chearing their friends, confounding their foes;
their rejoicing in their stripes, singing in their stocks, leaping in their
chains, boasting of their bonds, kissing their stakes, embracing the flames,
riding up in triumph in their chariots of fire, not repenting of their Faith,
nor accepting of deliverance; what does this speak, but that their eyes, as
well as their anchor, are within the vail, whither Christ their forerunner is
gone before them. Oh who would not be with them? who would fear sufferings?

Soul, what art afraid of? whither art thou running? from what art thou hiding
thy self? what is thine ease, or thy liberty, or thy quiet? why so loath to
loose from this shore? lanch forth into the deep. Fear not transportation into
thine house of bondage; when thou art once there, it is but look up, and thou
art in Paradise.

Such are the sufferings of Christ, This is the cross of the Covenant.

4. In sum; as that which comprehends all the rest, a more manifest
exhibition of Christ's special presence, Jer. 30.11. I am with thee to save
thee, Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
Through fire and water thou must go; we went through fire and water into a
wealthy place; but whither ever thou go, he will go with thee. When the bush
was on fire, the Lord was in the bush; when the three children were in the
furnace, the Son of God was there with them. Isa. 63.9. In all their
afflictions he was afflicted, he saved them by the Angel of his presence; in
his love, and his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all
the days of old. Though all men forsook me, the Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me, 2 Timothy 4.16,17. The Saints shall never have this to charge
upon the Lord, I was in prison, and thou visitedst me not.

He is ever with them; to bear their burdens, and ease their shoulders; to
plead their cause, and maintain their innocence; to wash their stripes, to wipe
off their tears, to heal their wounds, to bind up their broken bones, to revive
their weary spirits; to perfume their prisons, to lighten their dungeons, to
lead them in their wanderings, to converse with them in their solitudes; to give
down from above, in divine smiles, in illapses of spiritual joys, assurances of
dearest love, tenderest care, melting sympathy, gracious acceptance, to give
down from above whatever is wanting beneath. In fine, to preserve them from
falling by the presence of his Grace, till he present them faultless before the
presence of his Glory. O its good being with Christ any where.

Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, and causest thy
flocks to rest at noon. Where thou feedest? yea, where thou [art,] whether
feeding or fasting, whether rejoicing or mourning; where thou causest thy
flocks to [rest] at noon? yea and where thou suffer thy flocks to be
scattered in the night. Where thy flocks are, thou art not far away; tell me
where thou feedest, tell me where thou art. My beloved that feeds among the
lillies, feeds sometimes among the thorns. When his love is a lilly among
thorns, there he feeds. He feeds among the thorns; he feeds with his
sheep, he feeds with his Lambs where ever they feed; when darkness, and
desolation, and devils, and death feed upon them, even then he feeds them,
and takes his feeding with them.

O where ever my Lord is, there let my lot fall. Let me dwell amongst the
thorns, so my dwelling be with my Lord amongst the lillies. Let me wander
amongst the mountains, whilst he is with me telling all my wanderings. Let me
be scourged, so he will wash my stripes; let me weep, so he will wipe off my
tears; I would not want wounds, whilst I have such oil to pour in. Come all
ye thieves and robbers, I fear you not, my dear Samaritan comes by; come ye
bulls of Bashan, ye boars of the forest, let my beloved kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth, and I regard it not, though you kick me with the heel. O
my Lord, bring me where thou feedest let me live in thy face, let me feel thy
smiles upon my heart, let me love thee, tell me thou love me, remembrest,
pittiest, acceptest, take care for me, and then choose my condition, my
dwelling and entertainment for me.

Fainting Christian, lift up thine eyes, comfort thine heart; here is that thou
fear and tormentest thy self withal. Here is the inside of that formidable
cross, the light side of those dark clouds, the sunny side of that shady thorny
hedge that so wounds and afflicts thine heart. Fear not, be strong and of a
good courage. Thou still say, woe is me I can find no such thing; Ah, Lord
God, does he not speak parables? O that I were assured it might be thus with
me; why, art thou in Covenant? believe, and all is thine. I believe, and
therefore have I spoken; believe, and thou shall see the salvation of God; as
sure as the cross is thine, all the comforts of the cross are settled upon thee.
Read over all the gracious words thou have before thine eyes; view over all the
instances of suffering Saints that have gone before thee, on whom these good
words have been made good; in conspicuous increases of divine grace, in the
signal discoveries of divine love, in the clearest and fullest revelation of
divine glory, in the intimate sense of the divine presence; quickening,
enlarging, encouraging, supporting their spirits, in the darkest dens, in the
sharpest conflicts, with reproaches, mockings, bonds, banishments, torments,
and deaths; and know that all these things are written for thy learning, that
thou through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope.

Read over, Isa. 51. Hearken to me ye that follow after righteousness, ye
that seek the Lord, look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of
the pit, whence ye are dug, for the Lord shall comfort Zion, he will
comfort all her wast places; he will make her wilderness like Eden, and all
her deserts like the Garden of the Lord, joy and gladness shall be found
therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody, lift up your eyes to the
Heavens, etc. Verse 7, 8, 12, 13. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness,
the people in whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither
be ye afraid of their revilings, for the Moth shall eat them up like a
Garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool, but my Righteousness shall be
for ever, and my salvation from Generation to Generation. I even I, am he that
comfort you, who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall
dye, and of the Son of man which shall be made as grass? and forgettest the
Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations
of the earth; and have feared continually every day, because of the fury of the
oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of the
oppressor. I even I am he, etc. [and where is the fury of the oppressor.]
where is the fury of the oppressor? where is it not rather? is it not in the
house, and in the field? is it not in the City, and in the Villages? is it not
upon my Cattle, upon my Purse, upon my body, upon my Children, upon my friends,
where is not the fury of the oppressor? I, but when thou remembrest the Lord
thy maker, the Oath, the Promise, and Covenant of God; the Presence, Protection
and Comfort of thy God, when thou remembrest this, then where is the fury of
the Oppressor?

CHAP. V. The Angels of Light in the Covenant.
5. THe Angels of Light are in the Covenant, Heb. 1.14. are they not all
Ministering Spirits, sent forth for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation?
Whilst our Lord himself was sent down to Minister, behold his servants are to
be ministered unto, the Angels are made their Ministers, Psalm. 91.11. He shall
give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways: they have
received a charge, and they have great advantages for the keeping the charge of
the Lord.

1. They are mighty, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in
strength, an Angel is more than an Army, what slaughters have the Angels made
in the Armies of the Aliens; an hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians
are slain by one Angel of the Lord, when encamped against Judah, Isa. 37.36. It
is hard service indeed, that is too hard for an Angel.

2 They are numerous, there are great multitudes of them, Psalm. 68.17.
Thousands of Angels, a multitude of the Heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. An Angel is
more than an army, but what then are an Army of Angels?

3. They are faithful, They can do much for the Saints, but will they do it?
yes, they are faithful, They do the Commandments of God. Psalm. 103.20. God
bids them keep, and they are faithful, they will keep his sheep; we are taught
to pray, that the will of God may be done on earth, as it is in Heaven; that
men may be faithful as the Angels of God.

4. They are Favorites, they behold the face of God, they dwell in his
presence, they are admitted to stand before his Throne, they can be heard;
they have favor in Heaven, and therefore such power on earth, Mat. 18.10. Take
heed ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.

Touch not mine anointed, let alone my little ones, take heed, how you offend
them, their Angels are before my Father, and are mighty with him, to engage his
power, for their aid and deliverance.

O the great security of the least of Saints; These Mighty ones, these
Multitudes, these Faithful ones, these Favorites of Heaven, the Holy Angels of
God, have all received a charge from the Lord, to preserve and defend them;
Lord open their eyes that they may see. Behold the Mountains full of Chariots
and Horses of fire round about Elisha, 2 King. 6.17.

Should a mighty Prince commit any Subject of his to a potent and faithful
Lifeguard, with this charge: Look to this man, keep him in safety, see that
he come to no harm; whoever offends, do you defend him; wherever he goes,
go you with him; wherever he lodges stand you as a guard about the house,
while he sleeps do you watch; see that he want for nothing, nor hurt come to
him; If this were thy case, in what great security would thou count thy self;
But O! what is a lifeguard of men to a guard of mighty Angels. Fear not little
flock, in Heaven your Angels behold the face of God, and in Earth have they
pitched their Tents round about you.

CHAP. VI. The powers of darkness delivered over in the Covenant.
6. THe powers of darkness are delivered over in the Covenant; Satan and all
his Instruments. We are naturally in bondage to Satan, held captive by him at
his Will, 2 Timothy 2.26. His Prisoners, his Slaves, his Vassals. By the blood of
the Covenant, the Lord has brought forth his Prisoners, and redeemed his
Captives, Zach. 9.11. and also has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and led
Captivity Captive. In this Covenant there is deliverance of the Prisoners, and
a delivery over of them, by whom they were held; a Jail-deliver and a delivery
of the Jaylors too, into their hands; and they are delivered over bound, the
God of this world in Chains, limited, spoiled, banished, and cast out, Mat.
16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. The Gates of Cities were
anciently their special strength, and in them were their great Councels held,
for the contriving and managing of all their concernments; by Hell understand
the whole Infernal Corporation, all that belong to that dark Region, Satan and
all his Instruments; the dragon with his armies, the serpent and all his seed.
By the gates of hell understand, the power and policy, the combination and
councels of Satan and his whole party. These gates of hell shall not prevail
against it; that is against the Church; neither against head, nor any member of
it: they shall not prevail, that notes two things.

1. They shall fight against it; they are all combined and listed against the
Church, making a war upon it; Raze it, Raze it even to the foundation thereof.
Down with it root and branch, let it not have a being, let it not have so much
as a name under heaven: particular quarrels there may be betwixt devil and
devil; Herod against Pilate, and Pilate against Herod, yet the tails of these
smoking firebrarnds are united against the Lord and his anointed ones. Against
their profession, against their Religion, against the soul of every Saint.
Whatever vails or specious pretenses they varnish their quarrel with, this is
it that lies at the bottom of all their counsels and machinations, wherein all
their aims are concentred, to root out godliness and the professors of it out
of the earth; to deceive and destroy souls for ever.

2. Though they shall fight against them, yet they shall not overcome. They
shall not prevail against it, that is, not finally, in the end the victory
shall be the Saints. Zach. 12.3, Jerusalem shall be a burthensom stone to all
people. 1. Such a stone that they shall not be able to lift, or move it out of
its place; it shall stand as a rock, against which the impetuous waves may dash
themselves, but they cannot move it.

2. They shall not be able to bear it. It shall crush them that burden
themselves with it; those that shake the Church, they are pulling an house
about their ears; a rock upon their loins; it shall break the backs of all
those that contend against it; they shall be cut in pieces (says the Text)
that burden themselves with it; though all the earth, yea and hell too, be
gathered together against it. It is a vain design that Satan and his partakers
are driving on, Psalm. 2.1. Why do the heathens rage, and the people imagine [a
vain] thing? it is a vain design, and it is a fatal design to themselves; Thou
shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.

Genesis 3.15. In the first dawning of this glorious day light, it is promised,
that the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; It shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

John 12.31. Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this
world be cast out.

Cast out, whence? why cast out of his kingdom, out of his hold, cast down
from his throne and dominion. His prison is broken, and now the prey is taken
from the strong, the captives of the mighty are taken away.

But how was this now done, at the death of Christ, to which these words
refer? Does not Satan still reign? Is he not still the god of this world,
and the prince of the power of the air? Yea, what hold has he yet of the
Saints that are in the earth? what a tyrant is he to them? how does he
entangle and ensnare them? what havoc does he make in their consciences?
lording it over them, leading them captive by lusts and temptations; what a
strong party has he still within them, bearing arms against their Lord,
fighting against their souls? what sad spoil does he make upon their grace,
upon their peace? they cannot rest for him day nor night, abroad nor at home,
alone nor in company; he is ever following them; whither ever they go, the
Devil is at their backs; they cannot pray, nor read, nor spend a thought, nor
cast a look, nor dispatch a sigh toward the Lord, but Satan stands by to
resist, and hinder them; what a yoke has he still upon their necks! what clogs
and weights has he still upon their loins? how do they mourn in their souls,
whilst he vexes them from day to day? how do they groan, and travel in pain,
sighing in themselves, and waiting for their redemption? How is it then said,
now is he cast out? why now he has received his judgment; the prince of this
world is judged, Joh. 16. Now is the fatal blow given; now is the serpents head
broken, though he still may bruise, and hang in the Saints heel. The blow he
levelled at our Lord, has rebounded on his own head. Though he be as Gad, a
serpent in the way, yet you may now tread upon this serpent, and it shall not
hurt you. The strong man is now bound, if he be a god still, he is a God in
chains, a prince in fetters; he must ask leave of your father, ere he can touch
one hair of your heads. He cannot tempt you, nor cast a bank against you, nor
shoot an arrow at you, without a commission from heaven. The devils are subject
to you. He is cast out, and in your Lords name, you may cast him out. In my
name shall ye cast out devils; out of possessed bodies, out of possessed souls;
you may be instruments to bring many a soul to repentance; that they may
recover themselves out of the snares of the devil, who are held captive by him
at his will. Every sinner that is converted by you, you have cast out a devil
out of that soul.

Though he be an adversary still, yet such an adversary as may be resisted;
whom resist steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. And if you will resist, he
shall flee from you, James 4.17. Stand, and your enemy runs.

Nay more, he is not only a conquered enemy, but made your servant. This viper
shall yield you medicine against his own poison. His smitings shall be an
excellent oil; his messengers he sends to buffet you, his thorns he sticks in
your flesh, shall be a prevention of greater evils. The very destruction he
intends to bring upon you, shall promote your salvation, 1 Cor. 5.5. Deliver
such an one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Behold the devil is the Churches servant;
and such a servant as in their present state, they cannot well want. The
executioner of their censures. A Commonwealth may as well want a Jaylour or an
Hangman, as the Church a Devil. Behold Satan divided against Satan; the
devil without, against the devil within; the destroyer of souls, become the
destroyer of sin. Deliver such an one to Satan [for the destruction of the
flesh.] Though much against his mind, his hand is against his own party. He Is
made to kill his own friends, which otherwise would kill the soul. Whether he
will or no, the very tormentour is made a savior; that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus. Christians as much as you feel of the devils
malice, you could ill want his service; there is many a soul lost and undone by
a sleeping, that might have been recovered and rouzed by a raging devil. His
winds shall blow off your chaff, his floods shall wash away your filth, his
earthquakes shall open your prison-doors, his tempests shall drive you to
harbor. Some men want a tempest, to save them from a wrack.

Nay once more; he is not low enough yet; he shall be yet brought lower. You
have assurance of his total and final overthrow. Romans 16.20. The god of peace
shall tread Satan under your feet shortly, Rev. 20.10. The devil shall be cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone: It Is but a little while, and when he has
done his work, he shall be sent to his place, where he shall be shut up, and a
seal set upon him; whence he shall come out no more for ever. He shall tempt no
more; vex no more, deceive no more, destroy no more, torment you no more; he
shall be thrust out, he shall be chained up; the tormentour shall be tormented,
day and night for ever and ever.

Stand Christians, stand your ground a little while; follow your work, hold up
your holy profession, hold on your holy course; keep your hearts, keep your
garments, keep on your armor, keep under corruption, resist temptation, bear
your affliction; hold out faith and patience, fight against your adversaries,
watch with your Lord, this one hour, and behold he that shall come, will come;
he comes quickly, and he that is in the world, shall be consumed with the
breath of his mouth, and destroyed with the brightness of his appearing. He
shall be cast out, he shall be cast down, and rise no more for ever.

CHAP. VII. Death in the Covenant.
7. GOd has put Death into the Covenant, 1 Cor. 3.21. Whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or DEATH, all are yours. Death,
there is a great purchase you will say; what advantage is that? yes, death is
advantage: To dye is gain; For,

1. The Commission of Death is changed. 'Twas once, take him Jaylour; away with
him, carry him down, to Prison with him, there to be reserved to the
Judgment, of the great day; It is now, take him Janitour; take him Porter;
take him in, give him an entrance into his Master's joy: Death does but take
the Bride when she is ready, and lodges her in the Chamber of the Bridegroom;
this made death the Apostles desire, Philip. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to
be with Christ, which is far better.

2. Death is conquered. What does this mean, Your enemy is yours? other than
this, your enemy is conquered to you, a conquered enemy, is made a Tributary,
death is dis-armed; it has lost its sting; when a Serpent has lost its sting,
you may take it into your bosom.

He that can say: Death where is thy sting? may go on, and add, Thanks be to
God, which has given me the victory. A Signet sent from Heaven, with a Death's
head, is a precious token; Come Christians, be of good courage, set your feet
on the neck of this King of terrors.

3. Death is at once, The destruction of all their enemies, when once death
has done its office upon them, then farewell Edom, and Ammon, and Amaleck, and
Egypt; farewell the pricking bryer, and the grieving thorn; then farewell sin
and sorrow for ever; the Egyptians they have seen, and feared, and felt, to
day, they shall never see again for ever. It destroys it self, their last enemy
by destroying them, it has its welcome, and farewell the same moment; it is
but welcome death and farewell death for ever. Death dies with them; once dead,
they dye no more for ever; mortality is swallowed up of life, death is cast
into the lake of fire; that is its Region; there, there they die, and dye, and
dye again; over, and over, for ever, and ever; but for the Saints it does but
set them on the banks of that good Land, whether it cannot follow them; our
Lord by death [by ours as well as his own] has delivered those who for fear of
death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

Christians, you may now not only with patience, but with desire, expect the
assault of this King of terrors. What, shall tribulation, and persecution, and
famine, and nakedness, and peril, and sword? shall sorrows, and fears, and
mortality dye with me? yea, shall sin dye with me? then welcome death, Lord
strengthen me this once, let me dye with the Philistines. Would it be good
for thee to be with thy Father? in the bosom of thy bridegroom? the presence
chamber of thy Lord and Love? would it be a mercy to thee, to weep no more,
fear no more, suffer no more, be tempted no more, sin no more? to be
uncloathed of corruption, and be clothed upon with immortality and
incorruption, then bid death welcome.

Blessed souls, when you come a shore, and see the light, the love, the joy,
the rest, the glory, that is on the other side; you will then more fully
understand, what this means; Death is yours. He knew something, who said: I
cannot tell you what sweet pain, and delightsome torments, are in Christ's love;
I often challenge time, that holds us asunder, I have for the present a sick
life, much pain, and much love-sickness for Christ; O what would I give, to
have a bed made to my wearied soul, in his bosom! O when shall we meet! O how
long is it to the dawning of the Marriage-day, O sweet Lord Jesus take wide
steps; Come over the Mountains at one stride, O my Beloved, flee as a Roe, or a
young Heart upon the Mountains of separation! O if he would fold the Heavens
together like an old Cloak, and shovel time and days out of the way, and come
away.

CHAP. VIII. The Kingdom in the Covenant.
8. GOd has put the Kingdom into this Covenant Matthew. 5.3. Theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom; Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. I might here
enlarge in describing the glory of this Kingdom, but when I had said all, I
must at last leave it within the Vail; and therefore shall only tell you, from
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him, etc. Ephesians. 1.18. When by the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, the eyes
of your understandings are opened, ye shall know, what is the hope of his
calling, and what is the riches of the glory, of his Inheritance in the Saints.

CHAP. IX. All the means of salvation in the Covenant, both outward and inward,
in special, [the blessing of a new heart.]
LAstly, God has put into the Covenant all the means of salvation. And all
things on their parts necessary, to the obtaining the everlasting kingdom.

1. All the outward means of salvation. Ordinances, Word, Sacraments, and
Prayer; Officers; Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers,
Ephesians. 4.11,12. 1 Cor. 3.22.

2. All the inward means of salvation. Every grace, every duty; their obtaining
the one, and performing the other, and perseverance in both. These are all
comprehended in the second part of that great promise, They shall be my people.
Which though it be properly, the matter of their own stipulation, yet for this
also the Lord himself undertakes.

You shall be my people. Two things are hereby signified.

1. I will account you, and reckon you for mine. You shall have the privilege
and the blessing of my people. I will set you apart, and separate you to my
self, out of all the tribes and kindreds of the earth; and will avouch you for
my portion and peculiar possession. I will set you as the apple of mine eye, as
a seal upon mine heart, and upon mine arm.

I will mark you out for the people of my love; of you will I take care, for
you will I provide, with you are my delights, over you will I rejoice, with you
will I dwell, and you shall dwell with me for ever.

2. I will not only reckon you for my people, but I will undertake for you,
that you shall consent to me, accept of me, own me, follow me, and cleave to me
as my people. I will not only separate you to my self, but I will fashion you
for my self. I will sanctify you, and guide you, and teach you, and help you.
I will fulfill in you all the good pleasure of my will. I will work all your
works in you, I will avouch you for my people, and you shall avouch me for your
God. You shall love me, fear me, obey me; I will keep you from falling, and
preserve you to my heavenly kingdom.

Particularly, the Lord has promised to give them, 1. A new heart. 2. An heart
to know the Lord. 3. One heart. 4. An heart of flesh. 5. An heart to love the
Lord. 6. An heart to fear the Lord. 7. An heart to obey the Lord. 8. An heart
to persevere to the end.


1. A new heart. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit
will I put within you.

This new heart (I take it) is the genus of all the following graces; and
therefore the less shall suffice, to be spoken of it here. A new heart, that
is, not physically new in regard of substance, but morally only, in regard of
qualities.

This new heart signifies both another heart, and a more excellent heart. It Is
said of Caleb, Numb. 14.24. that he had another heart. And this other heart is
declared to be a more excellent heart, than was in the rest of the people.
Whilst they, either followed not the Lord, or but haltingly, he followed the
Lord fully, Prove. 17.27. A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.

There is another heart, that is not a new heart; Nebuchadnezzer had another,
but no new heart; the heart of a beast, for the heart of a man; an evil heart
grown worse, is not a new heart, but the old heart grown older.

We read 1 Samuel 10.9. that when Saul was anointed King, God gave [him] another
heart; this was a more excellent heart, than he had before, and yet not the
heart here promised. He gave to him another heart, that is, the spirit of
government; the heart of a King, for the heart of a private person; a more
public, raised, heroic heart; the heart of a King, fitted to the station and
office of a King.

The excellencies of this new heart are not natural, but spiritual
excellencies, as will appear more in the handling of the particular graces
promised; and are such as fit them for their new state work reward.


1. For their new state; Christians are made the children of God, vessels of
honor, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people; and God gives
them an heart, answering the dignity of their high calling.

2. For their new Work; a Christian has other work to do, than other men;
whilst their business lies all here below, in this earth; in their fields, and
vineyards, etc. Christians work lies above, with their God, and their Jesus;
and within, about their nobler, and immortal part; their work is spiritual, and
such is the heart that is given to them.

3. For their new reward. God intends better things to them; a better portion;
a better hope, better comforts, joys, delights here; and a better inheritance
hereafter; and he prepares them better hearts, to receive these better things;
he will not put his new wine into old bottles.

The excellencies of this new heart may be reduced to these three.

1. A new light; discovering the dignity of their state, the spirituality of
their work, the glory of their reward.

2. A new law, or frame, or bent of spirit; inclining; disposing, and fitting
them to all that which they are made for. And this is the meaning of Gods
writing his Law in the heart. The Law written in the heart, signifies, not only
the Law made known in the heart, but the heart made suitable to the Law; and
adapted to the obedience of it. There is a kind of connaturalness betwixt the
new heart, and all that the Law requires.

3. A new power, enabling them for their new work. We have all these mentioned
in one Scripture, 2 Timothy 1.7. God has not given us a spirit of fear, but of
power, and of love, and of a sound mind. [A sound mind] there is the new light;
[a spirit of love] there is the new law, or frame; and with these, [a spirit of
power.]

In sum, this new heart is the divine nature; the image of God renewed; the
life of God begotten, Christ formed in them. An heart after Gods own heart,
containing in it all those graces of the Spirit, wherein stands their likeness
to God, and their capacity of serving, and enjoying of him. This is the heart
the Lord will give. A new heart will I give unto you.

Against all those glorious things promised before, it would be objected; A
kingdom promised? glory, and honor, and everlasting blessedness, granted!
Alas, what is all this to me? to whom is it promised? or upon what terms? when I
consider what is required, it is all one to me, as if there had been nothing
promised. The way to this blessedness is too narrow, the gate is too strait for
me ever to hope to enter. Whatever the Price be, the strictness, and
severities of a Christian course, the very foresight of them does amaze, and
confound me. Live a new life? deny my self? take up my cross? follow Christ?
spend my days in fasting, and praying, and mourning? live by rule? look to
every step, to every word, to every thought? etc. all these things are against
me. A new life? a new course? if this be it, I shall never bear it. No man
having tasted of the old, will endure this new way; for he says, the old is
better. It Is all one to me, as if there had been no Christ, no Gospel, no
Kingdom promised, if it cannot be obtained upon other terms than these. I were
even as good sit down as I am, and run the venture of what follows, as to feed
my self with hopes, of that which I see, I can never obtain. If I do but move
heaven-wards, the stream carries me down; If I do but take up a thought, make
an essay, set a foot forwards toward this new course, I find mine old things
hang in my heels. My old customs, my old companions, mine old pleasures, and
ease, and liberties, quickly pull me back. Oh what shall I do? I must be
undone, I must be a lost and damned wretch. Fain I would be happy, but I
cannot be holy. I dread, I often tremble to think of losing Christ, and the
blessings of his Gospel; but this wretched heart is too hard for me, and will
not come on toward it. I am ashamed, I am plagued to think, what I am like to
lose, and for how little; but I cannot help it; the way is such, that this
foolish heart will never endure it.

Why hearken soul: The Lord that has called thee to this new course, will give
thee a new heart. And there is not any thing required in an holy life so
irksome, and so contrary to thee; but this new heart is so fitted, and suited
to it, that it will become easy to thee. Its pain will be pleasant, its
severity will be liberty, its very drudgery (as thou countest it) will be a
great delight. Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O God, thy Law is within
mine heart. And Psalm. 1,2. of the renewed soul its said, his delight is in the
Law of the Lord. In the original, his will, his heart, is in the law. The law
is in his heart, and his heart is in the law. Gods will and his are the same.
Whatever God bids him do, his heart bids him do; and his hand will never say
his heart nay. He that delights in the law, and as it is a law, commanding such
things, will never grudge to do what it commands. Where it is a pleasure to be
commanded, it is no pain to obey. Whatever work the law cuts him out, it is work
he loves. Bid him pray, bid him watch, bid him walk humbly with his God; it is
work he loves; it is in his heart to do it. Bid a Saint draw nigh to God in any
duty; it is as if you bid the hungry to eat, or the thirsty to drink, the naked
to be clothed, the beggar to come for an alms, or the poor labourer for a
days work. Bid a Christian to deny himself, to crucify his flesh; it is the
same as if you bid him, deny thine enemy, revenge thy self on thine enemy; such
revenge is sweet: but O how pleasant is it to him, to be called to a life of
praise? to live above in the light, in the love, in the joy of the Lord? to be
searching, and studying, and looking into, and admiring those everlasting
treasures of spiritual and heavenly delights laid up in God? to behold his
face, to live in his presence, and to dwell in the light of his countenance?
it is true, there is some remaining difficulty, and irksomness in the sweetest
works of religion, as far forth as the heart is unrenewed and is yet carnal;
deny my self? mortify lust? forsake my companions? withdraw from iniquity? Why
what is this but to cut off my hand? to pluck out mine eyes? to tear my flesh?
walk with God? seek his face? dwell in his presence? it is all one, as to bid me
feed on the air, wander on the mountains, dwell in the wilderness; and as much
pleasure can I find, in the one as in the other. It Is so indeed, as far as thou
remainest carnal; the Lord God and all his ways are a wilderness, a land of
darkness to thee; but as much as thou have of this new heart, so much ease and
pleasure, thou will find herein.

Desponding soul; thou say, thou art yet ignorant, and have little knowledge
of the way of the Lord; but behold a new light to lead thee. Thou art yet
carnal, and thy heart is contrary, and ever quarrelling at it; but the new
nature will end the old quarrel. Thou art weak and impotent, the work is too
hard for thee, if thou lovedst it never so well; but what will this be; when
thou art endued with power from on high?

O Friend would thou indeed live this new life, get this new heart. But oh
there lies the difficulty; how or where shall I get it? Why, have recourse to
the Covenant, there it lies for thee. But how shall I get it thence? why has
the Lord promised to give it thee? take the word from his mouth, and put it
into thine own; turn the word of promise, into a prayer? Does he say [I will
give]? let thy soul answer, [give Lord] give me this new heart. I am weary
Lord, and thou art weary also of this wicked heart, at once ease thy self and
me; Take away this, and give me a better heart. Turn the word of promise into a
prayer, and then turn the word of Prayer, into a word of Faith. He says [I will
give] let thy Faith say, [thou wilt give] I shall have it; since thou have
said, thy servant also may boldly say [Thou wilt do it.] Thou will give me a
better heart. Farewell my old sins, lusts, and companions; farewell mine old
pleasures, and ways; now for heaven in earnest, now welcome the strait gate,
the new and living way. Old things are past away, all things shall become new.
Turn the word of promise into a prayer, turn thy prayer into a word of Faith,
and God will turn the word of Faith into a word of Command. Be it according to
thy word. Let there be a new light, let there be a new law, let there be a
new power; let there no more be a spirit of fear in this heart, but a spirit
of power, of love, and of a sound mind. And as when he said in the creation of
the great world, Let there be light, let there be a Firmament, let there be
a Sun and Moon, It was so: so when he shall say, in the new creation of this
little world, let there be light, let there be love, let there be power; let
us again make man in our image, after our own likeness; It shall be so. The
Lord has said [I will,] let thy Prayer say [Do it Lord] let thy Faith say
[thou wilt do it] and God will say, Amen, so be it.

CHAP. X. An heart to know the Lord.
2. AN heart to know the Lord, Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know me.
The knowledge of God is the first excellency of the new heart. As in the old so
in the new creation (as was said before) the first word is, let there be
light. There is not so glorious a pre-eminence of day above night, as of the
knowledge, above the ignorance of God. As the Firmament without a Sun, as the
body without an eye, so is the soul without knowledge. What this knowledge of
God here promised is, will appear, if we consider.

Its Object. Act.


1. The Object of this Knowledge is, God, not only the Nature, or being of God,
manifested in his Essential Perfections, his Glorious Attributes, his
Infiniteness, Eternity, Omnipotency, etc. In his Personal Relations, the
Subsistences in the Godhead; but God in Christ, God in Covenant; yea, the whole
Mind and Will of God, all that which God has revealed to us, as our Duty, or
Happiness.

God known in the heart, is the whole Bible opened; The Law opened, the Gospel
opened; Duties, Comforts, Privileges made manifest. Christ opened in his
Sufferings, in his Satisfaction, in his Spirit, in all the Riches of his Glory;
the whole mystery of Godliness revealed; The Heart opened, man made known to
himself, all the depths of the heart, all the deceits of the heart, all the
faculties and powers of the heart; with their motions, operations,
inclinations, the rectitude, or obliquities of them. Heaven opened, the Crown,
the Kingdom known; everlasting rest, glory, honor, immortality, brought to
light. Hell opened, sin known, the devil known, wrath, temptations, the curse,
eternal fire known. All this, even all that God is, and all that he has
revealed in his Word and Works, are the object of this Knowledge of God.

2. The Act. To know, is to apprehend, or understand God, and the things of
God; Jer. 9.24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he (understands)
and knows me. Ephesians. 3.18,19. That ye may [comprehend] with all Saints,
what is the height and length, and breadth, and depth. that ye may [know] the
love of Christ: This apprehension of God, does not barely note our having
received some natural, or metaphysical Notions of God, and the Truths that are
in him; But farther, it notes:

1. An Approbation of him; an approving or liking the things that are
excellent, Phil. 1.9,10. That your love may abound more and more in [knowledge]
and in all Judgment, that ye may [approve] the things that are excellent.

2. Appropriation, The knowing of God as a reconciled God; a God, and a God to
me; good, and good to me; wise and wise for me: My Lord and my God: To know
God in Christ, reconciled through Christ; propitious through Christ, this is
saving knowledge. To know, and not possess, to see and not eat, to know an
angry God, a wrathful God, a God lost; to know goodness, mercy,
loving kindness, compassion, alsufficiency, and to have the heart recurre, what
is this to thee? this is none of thine; the damned thus know and dye.

3 Affection, As Psalm. 9.10. Those that know thy Name, shall trust in thee; So
those that know thy Name, will love thee, and fear thee, and rejoice in thee,
and bless thy Name; to know and hate God, to know and contemn God, to know and
fly from God, to know and Blaspheme and curse God, the Devils thus know and
tremble.

But especially that which distinguishes, this saving from common knowledge, is;

Its Power. Savor.


1. Its Power, the Knowledge of God is mighty; my preaching was not weak, but
mighty, in you, 2 Cor. 13. It has, A Transforming, A Fructifying,
Power.

1. A Transforming Power, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face, beholding as in
a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, Romans 12.2. Be
ye not conformed to this present world, but be ye transformed, by the
renewing of your minds, [by the renewing of your mindes] the renovation of the
mind, both is this change, and works it farther upon the whole soul, this new
light is the new creature; old things pass away, all things become new, where
the mind is savingly enlightened; God known in the soul, is God united to the
soul; Christ revealed in the heart, is Christ formed upon the heart; there is
life in this light, it is no other than the light of life. The Knowledge of God
comprehends in it, and is involved in, and Spirits, and animates every grace
and duty; as the same soul, in the eye sees, in the ear hears, in the palate
tastes; as the same juice which is in the Olive fatness, in the Fig Tree
sweetness, in the Oak strength, in the Rose fragrancy, in the Lilly beauty;
So the same grace, which in the mind, is light; in the heart, is love, holy
desire, holy fear, holy joy; and one says, that as feeling is inseparable to
all the Organs of sense; the eye feels and sees, the ear feels and hears, the
palate feels and tastes, the nostrils feel and smell; So knowledge is involved
in every grace; Faith knows and believes, Charity knows and loves, temperance
knows and abstains, patience knows and suffers, humility knows and stoops,
repentance knows and mourns, obedience knows and does, compassion knows and
pitties, hope knows and expects, confidence knows and rejoices; And therefore
we believe, and love, and obey, and hope, and rejoice, because we know. God
gives us this knowledge as the eye of our souls, and by that eye, he enters
with all his power and Glory, Ephesians. 3.19. That ye may know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness of God. Daylight
is not that light we receive by reflection from the Moon and Stars, at second
hand; when the Sun is risen, and come in among us, then it is day; When the Sun
of Righteousness is risen in the heart, there is the light of life; God is, and
God dwells in this light, and where God dwells, every unclean thing vanishes;
can Darkness dwell with the Sun? can Death dwell with Life? according to the
measure of the manifestation of God in us, so far forth is sin necessarily
vanished. Thou art but the carcass of a Christian, the light that is in thee,
is darkness, the life that is in thee, is death, if thou be not in the whole
man renewed, after the Image of him that Created thee. If Christ be not formed
in thy heart, if the Love, the humility, the meekness, the patience, the
compassion, the holiness of the Lord Jesus, be not begotten in thee; whatever
thou know, thou know nothing as thou ought to know; if thou have all
knowledge, and have not charity; and so, if thou have all knowledge and have
not humility, meekness, holiness, thou art nothing; thou art but as sounding
brass, or a tinkling Cimbal. Doubting Christian, that complainest of, and
bewailest thine ignorance, and fear that thou know not God, look upwards,
where his Glory dwells; lift up thine eyes and see, or if thou can not see,
lift up thy heart for eyes; Lord, where dwell thou? let me see thy Face,
show me thy Glory, pity thy blind, let the eyes of this blind be opened,
and the tongue of this dumb shall be loosed, and speak forth thy praise: Look
upward, and if yet thou see not thy God, look inward; can thou see his Face
in thy soul? can thou see his Image on thy heart? can thou behold in (this)
Glass the Glory of the Lord, and find thy self changed into his Image?
Comfort thine heart, how short sighted soever thou seem to be, how dim
soever thy Candle burns, how weak soever in the Knowledge of God thou
complainest thou art; thou have seen God, thou have seen his Face in peace; God
that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into thine
heart, and given thee the Knowledge of his Glory in the face of Jesus Christ.

2. A Fructifying Power, this Sunshine makes a fruitful soil, Colos. 1.9,10.
my desire for you, (says the Apostle) is, that you may be filled with the
Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom, and Spiritual understanding. That ye
might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful unto every
good work, and increasing in the Knowledge of God; Strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious Power, unto all Patience, and long suffering, with
joyfulness; and Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the Glory and praise of God. Full of Light, and
full of Love, of Faith, of Patience, of Humility, and fruitful in every good
work; Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, brings
forth good things; an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil
things. A good man has a good treasure within him; a treasure of Heavenly
Wisdom, of Divine Truth; a treasure of Light; God has shined into his heart;
He Is filled with all the fullness of God; And what is laid up within, he
brings forth without; An evil man has an evil treasure, Satan has been
filling his heart, Act. 5.3. Why has Satan filled thine heart? the treasures
of darkness are there; a treasure of lust and lies; Falsehood and folly are
found with him, these treasures of darkness within, bring forth darkness; dark
souls, lead dark lives, their way is dark, their deeds are darkness; O how
fruitful are sinners in their unfruitful works; filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity, etc. Romans 1.29,30. Their hearts are full,
and thereupon their mouths full, their eyes full, their hands full; mouths full
of cursing, eyes full of adultery, hands full of violence, filled with all
unrighteousness: O Generation of Vipers, how can ye being evil, (having such
hearts) speak good things? all is evil that comes from you, and how can it be
otherwise? Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: And in like
manner, O Generation of Believers! How can ye being good, but bring forth good
things? Or how can you say, or think, there is a treasure of Grace, a fountain
of light within, when no streams spring forth? Penury in the life, speaks no
great plenty in the heart; the Truths of God within you are the Seed of God,
the good seed that he sows in his fields; where there is good seed sown in good
ground, you will expect a fruitful Harvest; a barren crop, speaks a barren
soil, or no good seed sown there.

1 John 2.3. Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. We know God; but are you sure of it, are you not mistaken? No,
we are not mistaken, we know that we know him: But how do you know it? Why,
how are trees known? By their fruits ye shall know them. How do ye know that
this is indeed the Tree of Knowledge? Why, see what fruits are hanging upon it,
we keep the Commandments; Here Is Obedience growing, here is Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Mercy; Doubtless this is the right Tree, for behold all the
Commandments, the two Tables, hanging upon the boughs of it, and not broken,
but kept and observed: We may as well say, Obedience is no Obedience, Duty is
no Duty, Faith and Love and Humility, and Patience are not what they are, as
that the Tree that brings forth this fruit is not the Tree of Knowledge; We
know that we know him, because we keep his Commandments; Yea, and the Tree
of Life too, both in one; a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her, Prove.
3.18. Where these fruits are not found, where are nothing but shows, and
sounds, painted fruits; where are nothing but the fruits of unrighteousness,
contention, strife, covetousness, sensuality, and the like; he is very ignorant
indeed, that is not able to say, what ever I am ignorant of, this one thing I
know, that I know not God. Christian, boast not of what thou have, but consider
what thou do, try thy head, by thine heart, and thy heart, by thine hand;
Judge of thy light by thy love, and thy love by thy life; say not that God has
shined into thine heart, unless thy light shine; thy works shine before men;
The path of the just shines, Prove. 4. It Is but a form of Knowledge that
brings forth but a form of Godliness; he that holds the Truth in
unrighteousness, has not the Truth, in truth in him; thou say thou know
the Lord, but what say thy ways, do these speak the same things? Action is the
best Interpreter of the inner man, feel the pulses of thy heart, what
watchfulness, what holiness, has thy Knowledge brought forth? have thou
received the spirit, who yet walk in the flesh? what Heaven in thine heart,
and naught but Earth in thy hand? Truth in thine heart, and Lies in thy mouth?
Holiness in thy heart, Glory in thine heart, and in thy tongue nothing but
filth or froth? What an heart so full, and a life so empty? how can these
things be? Has the light in thine heart given laws only to thine heart? or
does thine heart submit, whilst thy tongue rebels, and thou kickest with the
heel?

Woe to us Christians, that sinners should be so full, and Saints to empty;
that they should speak what they have seen with their Father, and we should
speak no more what we have seen with our Father; that oaths, and lies, and
blasphemies, and scoffs, and cursing, should be so rife in theirs; and that
truth, and goodness, and holiness, blessings and praises should be no more in
our mouths; that there should be so much guile in theirs, and so little grace
in our lips; that the shade should be more fruitful than the Sun; that the
good, should be only the barren ground; that their habitations should be so
full of violence, and oppression, and wantonness; and no more mercy, and
righteousness, and sobriety in ours.

Woe to us, that we know so much to so little purpose; that we should be
bushels to hide, and not rather candlesticks to hold forth the candle of the
Lord, he has lighted up in us! Oh how many dark souls, might our candle lead
on to the Sun. The light that is in Israel, might do much to the turning Egypt
into a Goshen; speak, Christians, speak what you have seen, and testify what
you have believed; bring forth out of your treasure; pity the blind world; or
at least be more helpful one to another. Instruct as you have been instructed;
convince as you have been convinced; comfort as you have been comforted of God.
Outvie sinners, let not their mouths be so full of cursing, as yours of
blessing; whilst theirs are so full of blasphemies, let it be said of you as
of your Lord, full of grace are their lips. Good words are not wind, you may
reckon them not amongst the leaves, but the fruit. Whilst you are speaking of
the things of God, you are therein doing the will of God. I confess the Proverb
is true, The greatest talkers are not always the greatest doers. But it is true
also, he is seldom a great doer, that has nothing to say. There is a speaking
which is our doing. There is a speaking in a way of boasting, to magnify and
set up our selves; beware of that; and there is a speaking to the use of
edifying, to build up our brethren. When we are thus speaking to instruct, to
convince, to awaken, and whet on our own, and others spirits to our work; we
are then in doing our work. Speak Christians, and speak often the things that
you know; only let me add, let your lives speak also, and not only your
lips. If you would not be vain-talkers, be all tongue, let your lips speak,
and your hands speak, and your feet speak, let your works and your ways speak,
the wonderful things of God. Bring forth what you have received; he that is all
inside, and he that is all outside, are equally nothing. The one is a shadow
without substance; the others substance is but a shadow. The one is a deceiver,
the other a deceived soul. The one boasts himself, the other thinks himself
something, but neither is any thing.

Christians, be full of good fruits, and you will make full proof that your
wisdom is from above. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Weakling Christian, that know but little of God, and call that little
nothing; whilst thou doubtest the light has not shined into thee, do thou
walk in that little light thou have? do thou shine as a light in the world?
do thou know how to be holy, and humble, and harmless, and honest? do thou
live under the power of those truths thou know? do thou fear the Lord, and
obey the voice of his servants? trust in the Lord, and stay thy self on thy
God; thou art a child of light, though through thy trembling heart, thou
walk in darkness. Having not seen thou love, and believing thou shall
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

2. Its favor. 2 Cor. 2.14. And makes manifest the savor of his knowledge,
by us in every place. The Knowledge of God is sweet-sented; it casts forth a
fragrancy, where it comes. It has a gratefulness to the heart, leaves sweet
impressious on the senses of the Saints. They taste that the Lord is gracious.
As their breathings go up as sweet incense, so his beams come down with like
sweetness to them. As 'twas said of Christ, so of God: Cant. 1.3. The Name of
the Lord is an ointment poured forth. Why what is his Name? Exodus 34.6. This is
his Name. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin. Oh what a bundle of myrrh, what a garden of
spices, is here enclosed? what a sweet smelling savor does it send forth to
them who have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil?

The Name of the Lord is a precious ointment, and the knowledge of God, is this
ointment poured forth. Where God is known in the soul, there his sweet savor
is shed abroad. The thoughts of God are precious, the ways of God are pleasant
to them, that understand them. His fruit was sweet unto my taste. O the
ineffable pleasures of Religion! the carnal world count it a jejune and insipid
thing; they cannot taste; and no wonder, for they do not see the things of God,
nor can they, because they are spiritually discerned. Let God be savingly
known, and then you will find what the savor of his Knowledge is. This light
is sweet, it is a pleasant thing to behold this Sun. O my soul, let thy walks,
let thy dwellings be in this garden of the Lord; let the Sun shine, and the
smell of his spices shall flow forth unto thee. O my Lord, shed abroad thy
sweet ointments, let the smell of thy garments refresh my soul. Let me taste
and see, let me see, and I shall taste, that the Lord is gracious.

Vanish all ye carnal pleasures, and sensual delights; these rose-buds rot,
the flowers of your gardens wither, dead Flies are in all your ointments; the
light of the Lord has shined all your glories into darkness. The waters of the
Sanctuary have made all your waters brackish; there remains no pleasure in them.

He that has known the Lord, has more or less according to the measure of
his knowledge, received in the relish and sweetness of it; and what he has
received in, he sends forth before men; he has received, and he is a sweet
savor. As the Preachers, so the Practitioners of piety, are a sweet savor of
Christ unto God, and hand down the sweetness of God unto men. They are of
savoury lips, and of savoury lives; the savor of their graces is shed abroad
in the Churches of Christ. Carnal hearts send forth a stench, instead of a
sweet smell; they are all rottenness, the savor of a sepulcher is all they
have. Their ways stink, their words stink, their very breath smells of a
rotten heart. Yea, the very best they have, their pleasures stink, their
garments, their gallantry, their powders, and perfumes, and sweet odours stink,
of their proud, and vain, and sensual hearts. But O what a sent do their
ulcers, and their excrements, their oaths, and their curses, and their scoffs,
and their lies send forth? Sinners, learn to know the Lord, and this will
quickly change your savor. And you that know any thing of God, think not that
your knowledge is saving till your souls have received in, and your ways do
send forth the savor of his Knowledge.

The last of these, the savor of this Knowledge, the pleasure that it brings
in to the soul, though taken alone, it is but of uncertain signification; there
may be some pleasure and joy arise from the common Knowledge of God; and
sometimes but little taste, where there is the truth of Religion. But taken in
conjunction with the former, where is found both the power, and the savor, the
evidence of its soundness will be more full. Find all together, this
transforming, this fructifying, this savoury Knowledge, and you may rest
satisfied, that this is the saving Knowledge of God. And of this is the
promise, I will give them an heart to know me.

Oh! how much need have we, still to wait, and beg, for the accomplishment of
this Promise, how little sound Knowledge is there found among us? Some are weak
in Knowledge; who have been long taught of God, and yet are not taught of God;
God has been teaching them, but they have not learned of him; They have had a
good Master, but have been ill Scholars; weak men, so we call a man of low
understanding, a weak man. Oh! how many weak Souls are there, even among
professing Christians? who, though for their time, they might have been
teachers of others, had yet need be taught, the first Principles of the
Oracles of God. Some men have not knowledge of God, I speak this to their
shame, 1 Cor. 15.

Others are men of Knowledge, but of weak Knowledge; who know much, but to
little purpose, their great Knowledge has little power in them; their Lusts
are too strong for their Light, Isa. 8.11. I spoke unto thee with a strong
hand, and instructed thee; If God have spoken to these men, yet his hand has
not instructed them; the nail has not been struck deep enough, it dwells in
the head only, it has not reached their heart, they have an eye, but far
enough from having an heart to know the Lord: their Knowledge does not lead
them on to Religion, but must serve them instead of Religion, it is all the
Religion they have, to know what it is; it is made to serve, and not suffered to
guide, and govern; to serve their turns, to serve their interest, to serve
their pride and their covetousness; Their Knowledge of God makes them Devils,
it helps them to play the Hypocrites, to be Deceivers of others, yea and of
their own souls: It will seek them out acceptable words, put prayers into their
mouths, praises into their lips, spirituallize their language, furnish them
with savoury discourses; carry them plausibly through Duties; wherein, though
God has the Name, though Souls have the Name, yet are they all but sacrifices
to their Lusts; The Knowledge of God humbles, but this Knowledge puffs up,
and lifts up; puffs them ^p in their own, and lifts them up in others
thoughts; and when it has done this, it has done them all the service they
have for it to do, unless it may be, they have some worse work for it; To
make rents and divisions in the Church of Christ, to maintain disputes, to
cavel, and quarrel, to divide, and make parties, to make twenty Religions out
of one, till at length they make that one to be none. Whilst the Apostle
says, some men have not the Knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame; I
may say also, some men have the Knowledge of God, I speak this to their shame.
What, the Knowledge of God, and no more Humility? the Knowledge of God and no
more Charity? I speak this to your shame. Have the Faith of Christ in respect
of persons? have the Knowledge of God in respect of Parties? Know God and yet
divide and scatter, and confound them that are of God? yea, and contend, and
quarrel about such small differences, as sometimes is seen; here is God and not
there; with us and not with you; when it may be a little Charity would tell
you, for the main, he may be with both; and so much uncharitableness makes it
a question, whether with either? The more such men pretend to the Knowledge of
God, the greater their shame.

Friends, beware you be not undone, either by your Ignorance, or your
Knowledge. Love not darkness, and call not darkness light; call not that the
Knowledge of God which is not; mis-use not that which is; have thou no
Knowledge? What, and such a Promise before thee? I will give them an heart to
know me; they shall all know me! What, and such a Gospel before thee, the work
whereof, is to open blind eyes, and to turn from darkness to light? open thy
mouth sinner, and God will open thine eyes; ask, and thou shall have, seek, and
thou shall find; See, wink not at the light, that shines round about thee;
Love not darkness, if thou love not death; This is Eternal Life to know thee.
What then is ignorance? there is death in thine heart, if there be no light in
thine eye.

Have thou Knowledge? be thankful, and be humble; be not high minded, but
fear; prize it, but do not abuse it. Have thou received the Knowledge of the
Truth? Live under the Power of the Truth, thou Know; resign up thy self to
it, to its transforming Power; give it leave to work, and to change thee into
its own Image. Let this new light make thee a new man, to its governing Power;
let it teach thee, and rule thee; let it teach as one that has Authority, let
it Rule, till it has put all thine Enemies under thy feet; till every thought,
imagination, every high thing be made low, and brought into captivity to
Christ. Let not the light of the Lord, help thee to do the Devil's Work; Let it
not be fodder for thy flesh, lest it be fuel for thy flames; Let it not
repent thy God nor thee, that ever thou had such a talent committed to thee;
Let it neither be loss to God, nor the eternal loss of thine own soul: He that
has appeared on earth in beams of light, will be revealed from Heaven in
flames of fire, rendering vengeance to all that [Know God] and obey not the
Gospel of Christ: Woe to those that neither know nor obey, but Oh! what to
those that obey not, though they Know?

Christians, know the Lord, but know and fear, know and serve, know and honor
thy God; Know God, and know thy self, thy sin, and thy misery, thy dangers,
and thy temptations; Know and mourn, know and be ashamed, know and fear, and
watch, and fight, and overcome. Know God, and know his Will, thy duty, and thy
way, thy privileges and opportunities, thy Race, and thy Crown. Know and do,
and run, and suffer, and wait, and hope, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of
God. Know God, but God in Christ; God reconciled; pardoning, absolving,
accepting, through him. Know, and believe, accept, adventure upon, resign,
commit thy self to him. Know thy God, and behold him, look upon thy God; in his
power, in his wisdom, in his holiness, in his goodness, in his
loving kindness, in his mercy. Behold him in his Word, in his Works, in his
Providence, in his Saints, in thy Soul, in his Son; Set him before thine eyes,
look upon thy God, and never leave looking, till thou art changed into his
Image, and satisfied with his Visage; and when thou art brought up to this,
then he has done for thee, what he has said: I will give them an heart to
know me.

CHAP. XI. One Heart.
3. ONe Heart, Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one Heart; We read, Hos. 14.11.
Ephraim is like a silly Dove; without an Heart, Has no heart at all; none for
his God, that is as good as none; and Psalm. 12.2. We read that Israel had a
double Heart, an Heart, and an Heart; more hearts than one, but says the Lord,
I will give them an Heart, and it shall be but one, and no more.

For the opening of this (to let pass the signification it has, as it
respects Christians collectively) as it respects each particular Christian:
This one Heart may be taken as opposed.

To A wavering A divided A double
Heart.

1. As opposed to a wavering, unstable Heart, Jam. 1.6.8. VVavering minded men
have almost as many hearts as they live days, or meet with cases; An heart
that changes with the weather, and tacks about with every wind; that resolves
and repents, that chooses and changes; that like a wave of the Sea, is tossed
about with every VVinde: This you may call, either many hearts, or no heart, as
you will; Thus this one heart is a fixed, established, resolved heart, Heb.
13.9. It is good that the heart be [established] with grace. Grace fixes, and
establishes the heart, brings it to a consistency in it self, which before was
any thing or nothing.

2. As opposed to a divided Heart, Hos. 10.2. An Heart cut in two as it were;
some talk, that the Devil has a cloven foot, but whatever the Devils foot
be, to be sure, his Sons have a cloven heart, one half for God, the other for
sin; one half for Christ, the other for this present World; God has a corner
in it, and the rest is for sin and the Devil: Thus this one heart, is an entire
heart; all the powers of it are united within it self, and go the same way; God
has the whole heart. Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me, bless his holy name. All its springs are in him, and thither do all
its streams bend their course.

3. As opposed to a double heart, or an hypocritical heart, properly so called.
Psalm. 12.2,3. that is it which is called an heart, and an heart; an heart in the
breast, and another in the tongue. Our outside is presumed to be an expression
of our inside; what we speak, we pretend to be our very hearts. It Is the
heart in the tongue that speaks; the heart in the eye that weeps; the heart in
the hand that works; the heart in the foot, that walks; no, it is not so with
the Hypocrite, he shows another heart in his tongue, in his ways, than that
which is within him. He has an heart, and an heart, one in his tongue or life,
and quite another in his breast. His course speaks him another man, than he
is: and thus one heart signifies a single or a plain heart.

To sum up all together; this one heart is such as 1. Pitches on one end. 2.
Has but one thing to do. 3. Does what it does.


1. Pitches on one end. God is its end. There it wholly bestows it self: I am
thine. Psalm. 119. And there only it takes up its rest. Psalm. 39.7. And now Lord
what wait I for? my hope is in thee. God is both its work and its wages. To
please God, this is its whole business, and to enjoy God, this is its
happiness. This is the mark it has in its eye, this is the scope of all its
motions, to honor and enjoy God. This it wills, this it loves, this it
desires, designs, hopes, labors for, that the Lord may possess, and be the
possession of it. Particularly, it gives God, the place the power
of the end.

1. The place of the end. God is its first and last. He Is first in the eye,
and it looks no farther. It makes him not only the chief, but in a sense its
only aim. It will have no other God, and therefore no other end, but the Lord.
It makes all things else, not only to stoop and stand by, but to serve to him.
Get you hence, stand off, is its language, to all that stands up in his room,
or stands in his way. Evil men, whatever honor they pretend to have for the
Lord, they do but make him a servant to their other Gods. Religion they will
take up, but it is only to serve their own turns; to bring about their carnal
ends; they serve not the Lord, but their own bellies; says the Apostle, Romans
16.18. Phil. 3.19. Nay, they make the Lord their fellow servants. They serve,
and their Religion must serve their sensual appetites. He that will have so
much religion only, as he may live upon, (which is the measure of the most)
makes the Lord no longer his God, but his servant. A sincere Christian will set
God upon the throne, and makes all things else, his servants, or his
footstool. Whatever will not be serviceable must be trodden in the dirt.
Nothing will be loved, and embraced, but what will set God higher, or bring
God nearer to his heart.

2. The power of the end; the end has a fourfold power; it draws. directs.
governs. rewards.


1. It draws the heart to it; God who is a Christians end, is also his
beginning. Our first step heavenward, we owe to the influence of heaven upon
us. Draw me, we will run after thee. Cant. 1. No man can come unto me,
unless the Father which has sent me, draw him. Nothing but God will do it; as
nothing will draw the soul another way; the pleasures of sin, the wages of
unrighteousness, are poor and low baits to entice a soul away from God; that
is, so far as it is renewed; so it is nothing but God that draws the soul on its
way, and he will do it. God draws the soul not by an act of power only, but by
moral swasion, that is the proper casuality of the end. Not by efficiency only,
but by sympathy; as by the water, the thirsty soul is drawn to the waterbrooks.

It is God that draws hearts after him; there are instruments, as his Word, and
Ministers; and and there are arguments by which God draws; but whatever the
instruments or arguments are, it is God that does it. What is the work of either
Word, or Ministers, but to set God before them, and this draws. Instruments can
do nothing, unless God be the Preacher by them; arguments can do nothing,
unless he be the medium of them; as 'twas said concerning the peoples
following Saul, so much more concerning those that follow the Lord.

Those only follow him, whose hearts God has touched. It Is not man's teaching,
but Gods touching the heart that draws it heavenward. The tongue of man may
touch the ear, it is God only that touches the heart. And when he touches, then
the heart will follow. As you know the needle, when its touched with a
Loadstone, then it turns after it. The Loadstone is not more natural
attractive of the needle, than God is of that heart which he has touched.
Cant. 5.4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
were moved in me. He did but touch the door, and her heart felt him, and moved
toward him.

O Christians, when you have been waiting upon God, in prayer, hearing or any
other spiritual duty, or ordinance; consider, has mine heart been touched this
day? my tongue has been touched, mine ear has been touched, mine heart has
been treated with, but has the Lord touched it? has there virtue come forth
from him, which has enticed and drawn my soul after him? Sometimes by a
message, or visit from heaven, the Lord has drawn a good word from the lip, a
tear from the eye; but O for touches upon souls, for turning of bowels, for the
flowings out of hearts after the Lord; He is the only lodestone that prevails
on gracious souls.

Others that have many hearts, have many attractives; every heart has its
peculiar god; twenty gods it may be, in one man; because so many hearts. Their
pleasures are their Gods, their profits, their gods, their belly their god;
their wives, or their children, their gods; and so many gods, so many ends. And
every end is a loadstone to draw them after them. Every heart will after its
God. A Christian, that has but one heart, has but one God, and this is he
that draws it on its way. Thou say, the Lord is thy God, thou acknowledgest,
thou ownest, thou have chosen him for thine; but what does thy God whom thou
have chosen do upon thine heart? what will the sight of God, or thy love to
God, or thy hope in God, do upon thee? how far will it carry thee? which way
runs thy heart? which way do bend thy course? do feel thy God drawing thee?
and is thy heart running after him? running, notes motion, and a swift or
violent motion.

I shall lay before you these six or seven expressions, the Scripture uses, to
note the running of those hearts after God, whom he has drawn.

1. The desiring of the soul after God. Isa. 26.8.9. The desire of our soul is
to thy name -- with my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my
spirit within me will I seek theee early. Desire is the soul in motion
God-wards. Toward him are their desires, and they come deep, ab intimis, ab
imo pectore, from their inwards, from the bottom of the heart. With my soul
have I desired thee, with my spirit within me will I seek thee. Psalm. 38.9.
Lord, all my desire is before thee; it is not all my desires, but my desire;
thou see all, and it is all but one desire. He desires pardon, he desires
peace, he desires help, and the heealing of his wounds; but all this is but
one desire. God is all. One thing have I desired, Psalm. 27.4.

2. The thirsting of the sout. Psalm. 42.2. My soul thirsts for God, for the
living God. Thirsting is the extremity of desire; hunger and thirst are the
appetite or desire heightened; violent and painful appetites; my soul
thirsts, and is in pain till it be satisfied.

3. The longing of the soul. Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I
seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and
thirsty land, where no water is. Longing causes languishing, and abortions, if
it be not satisfied. Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing desire it
has to thy judgments. My heart pants, my flesh fails, the light of mine
eyes is gone from me, Psalm. 38.10.

4. Calling after God, Psalm. 4.1. Hear me (when I call,) O God of my
righteousness. Calling upon God, is the voice of desires. The desiring soul
will not keep silence; the tongue, the eye, the ears, the hands, the knees,
must all be orators, when the flame is once kindled within.

5* Crying after the Lord. This is an expression answering the thirsting of the
soul. Crying is a passionate, and importunate praying. I cried unto the Lord
with my whole heart, Psalm. 119.145.

6. Crying out after God. This is the manner of the longing soul. Crying out,
notes more than bare crying; loud cries, strong cries, forced out by a
paroxisme of love, or an agony the soul is in. Psalm. 84.2. My soul longs, yea
even faints for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh [cryeth out]
for the living Lord.

7. Following hard after the Lord, Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after
thee. This expression is more comprehensive, it notes, both all the workings,
and breakings, and breathings of the soul within, and its diligent pursuing in
the use of all outward means, and pressing on after the Lord. All those
labourings, and watchings, and runnings, all that holy violence, wherewith a
Saint presses into the Kingdom of God.

Put all this together, and you will see the power and influence the Lord has
on holy Souls, to the drawing of them after him, they are in motion
Heaven-vvard; desiring, thirsting, longing, calling, crying, crying out,
follovving hard after him. What aileth these souls? what is the matter with
them? what would they have? Judge. 19.23. What aileth thee said the Danites
once to Micah, that thou come thus after us? what aileth thee? Why, you have
taken away my Gods, and what have I more? What aileth these crying, longing,
running Souls? why, it is after their God they cry, it is after their God they
run, 1 King. 19.20. Go back Elisha, said once the Prophet to him, when he had
cast his Mantle on him; Go back, for what have I done unto thee? What have
thou done? enough to hold me from going back, there went virtue with the
Mantle; the Mantle fell on his heart, as well as his back, and drevv it after
the Prophet. Should you say thus to these, go back soul, go back from
follovving thy God, for what has he done unto thee? Oh he has gotten mine
heart; no, no; I cannot go back, he is my God, and what have I more.

2. The end guides and directs to means: Whither shall I go from thee? thou
have the words of eternal life.

3. The end governs; I shall put these both together, what is it that Governs
sinners but their ends, this points them out their work, and their way, this
holds them to their work, and keeps them in their way; what ever fetters, and
chains, their lusts are to them it is their carnal ends, to which they are in
bondage; these are they that Lord it over them, and hereupon it is impossible to
persuade a sinner to make a through change of his way, till he has changed
his ends; herein stands the conversion of a sinner, in the changing of his
ends; when he ceases to be any longer to himself, to his flesh, to the world,
and for a worldly happiness, and is brought about to pitch on God as his
portion, and happiness, to whom he devotes, and dedicates himself; there is
conversion; Sin is our turning away, and conversion is turning back to our God.
Beloved, consider not barely how, but to what you live; not only what you do,
but what you would have; and never count your selves truly Godly, whatever of
God be in your way; till God be in your heart, and eye; He that has first
chosen God, and therefore a Godly life; whose Godliness of life, springs forth
as the fruit of his choice of the Lord, that is a Godly man.

God Governs as our King, and as our End, as our King by his Sovereignty, as
our End by his Excellency; by his worthiness and goodness, as our King by Laws,
as our end by love; Love will find out our way, will tell all our wanderings,
will check us for our sins, sweeten our labors, quicken us on our course, cut
out our way through dangers and difficulties, and keep us in our way till we
come to the fruition of our end; Therefore it is said by the Apostle, 1 Timothy
1.9. The Law is not for a Righteous man; Love will save the law a labor, the
Law is not for a Righteous man, not so much at least as for sinners; not as to
the coertion of it, though still as to its obligation, the constraint of Love
will much supersede the coertion of Laws.

4. The end, Rewards, they have their Reward. Mat. 6. that is, they have their
end, the reputation for devout and charitable men, was the end of their
Devotion and Charity: They prayed, and fasted, and gave alms, for no other
end; and the obtaining that reputation, was their reward. Verily, I say unto
you, they have their reward.

God is the reward of his Saints, Genesis 15.1. I am thy exceeding great reward,
Isa. 46.4. My judgment is with the Lord, and my reward with my God. God is the
reward they [shall] receive, and the reward they look to receive, Heb. 11.29.
Moses had [respect] to the recompense of reward.

And therefore the Argument is weighty, which Christ used to dissuade his
Disciples from being in their Devotions, in their Alms-deeds, as the Pharisees
and Hypocrites are; who disfigured their countenances in their fasts; who
sounded a Trumpet to proclaim their Alms, Be ye not like them, for they have
their reward. The Argument was strong to the Disciples, who being men of
another Spirit, could not be satisfied with such a reward.

In these two things Saints greatly differ from the men of this world; 1. They
are not willing to defer their Duties till hereafter, and

2. They dread it to have their reward here, they would dispatch their work,
and are willing to go upon trust for their wages: Sinners would have their
wages in hand, and be trusted for their work till hereafter; they would be
happy here, and can be content to stay for holiness till hereafter; it is soon
enough to be Saints in Heaven. But Oh! it would be a dreadful word to Saints,
there are thy good things; take them, these are thy reward, these are not their
end; and therefore they cannot take them for their reward.

Poor foolish worldlings, how are you dis-joynted? how are your weary hearts
scattered through the ends of the earth? how many masters do you serve? how
many matters have you to mind? you weary your selves in the greatness of your
way, and what is your reward? What the fields can give, you have; what your
sheep, or your oxen can give you have; what your beds, or your tables, or your
houses, or your clothes can give you have; here a little, and there a little,
you get up, your beds give you ease, your houses shelter, your sports and
companions pleasure, your parasites honor; and that little you can pick up
here and there, this is your reward. Verily I say unto you, you have your
revvard; unhappy souls* you are troubled and careful about many things, for
nothing; one thing is needful; and if yet ye will be wise, choose that good
part, which shall not be taken from you.

2. This one heart has but one thing to do, Philip. 3.13. This one thing I do.
There are all things in that one thing; all things needful. How many things
soever his hand finds to do, all is but one. He intends in all, God. A
renewed heart designs God, and is making God-wards in all he does. Whatever
journey he goes, it is God is his home; whatever race he runs, it is God is his
mark, and prize. Whatever battle he fights, against flesh and blood, against
principalities and powers, it is that he may cut his way through all to his
God. Whatever he does, he does it for God; whatever he suffers, he suffers
for God. When he hears, or fasts, or prays, it is all for God. When ye
fasted, did ye at all fast to me? Yes to thee, a Christian is able to say; he
has many things to pray for, and fast for; he has bread, and clothes, and
friends, and health, and safety, and liberty, to pray for; but in all, he
prays for God. He entitles God to all he has, and marks it up for him, and
he sees and enjoyes God in all he has; he will not own that for a mercy, that
has not God in it, and is not a foot or wing, to carry him on toward him. And
therefore whatever he begs to himself, it is that he may have it for God. What
he gives, he gives to God; whom he forgives, it is for the Lords sake; whether
he eats, or drinks, or works, or buys, or sells, or whatever else he does,
he does it all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. For him he prays, for him
he waits, for him he labors, for him he suffers, for him he lives, to him
he dies. To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1.21. according to my earnest
expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all
boldness, as always, so now also Christ may be magnified in my body, whether
it be by life or by death. This is the one thing he intends, this is the one
thing he seeks, in all, take his whole course together, he can say with the
Apostle. This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things that are before, I press toward the mark, for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

3. He does what he does. And that 1. Not feignedly, but really. 2. Not
faintly, but heartily.


1. Really. He pursues this end, in a plain and honest way. He that has this
one heart, has but one way. Heart and life go hand in hand; he makes strait
steps to his heart, and his heart makes strait steps to his feet, he does
(...), and he does also (...). As he looks strait on, so he walks strait on
to his mark. He does not look one way, and row another. He is a Jacob; a
plain man, a plain-dealing man; a Nathanael, in whom is no guile. He turns his
inside outward; his life is not a Cloak, but a Commentary on his heart. The
expositours of his inward man. His end is in his heart, and his heart is in his
face, in his tongue, in his duties, and all his ways. He is no Politician. 2
Cor. 1.12. Not in fleshly wisdom; his Religion is not a blind, or a device to
delude the simple, he is downright, and in earnest in all he does. He does
the same thing he seems to do; his praying is praying indeed; his fasting, and
alms are such indeed; his very profession is practice; he would not believe,
nor make others believe, but that he is what he is. He seeks not
commendation from men, but approbation with God. His design is not inordinately
to commend himself to the good opinion, though he would be made manifest in
the consciences of others. He would not be a lie or a cheat. He abhorres all
lying, but most of all a religious lie. He would not lie for God, much less
against him; such a lie is as blasphemy to him. He loves not Images; he would
have a soul in all his practices. A prayer without a soul, a sacrifice without
an heart, a religious carcass is an abomination to him. He would not make such
a noble medium as Religion, to serve to so base an end, as the serving the
flesh.

He has other work to do than to serve times or tables; then to please
himself or men; than to serve wills, or humors, or lusts; he has a soul, a
conscience, a God to look after; he has but one business to do, but one Master
to serve; if he be a Magistrate, he rules for God; if he be a Minister, he
preaches for God; if he be a Parent, he educates for God; if he be a Master
he governs for God; to him he dedicates himself and his house; he writes on
his doors, this is Bethel, this is none other but the house of God. If he be a
child or a servant, he obeyes in the Lord and for the Lord; he knows he has
to do with God in all he does; when he is dealing with men, with his friends,
with his family, in his calling, in his recreations, in all he has to do with
God: and he can take comfort in nothing, but what God will take pleasure in.
Thou have no pleasure in iniquity. Thou love truth in the inward parts. And
there is no truth in the inward parts, but when there is truth also in the
outward parts: when the heart, and tongue, and ways agree. It Is vain to say,
mine heart is good, when the ways are naught. A false tongue, deceitful ways:
will give the lie to the heart. He cannot subsist, longer than he has smiles
from heaven. Communion with God is his life, his all is in God. His heart dies,
when that fountain is stopped. If he cannot have clearness, and boldness in
the presence of God, he can no longer look himself in the face, but blushes
and hangs downs his head with shame. He values not either the applause, or the
scorns of men, so he may have a witness of his acceptance with God. O Lord,
do thou regard? will thou accept of me? it is enough. Let all the world call
me, Thou Fool, Thou Pharisee, Thou Hypocrite, so the Lord will say, my child,
it is well. It Is falsely spoken, it is foolishly, it is weakly done; it is pride,
it is singularity, it is scrupulosity; thus the world cry; let them alone oh my
soul, I will hearken what the Lord God will say; if he says, Thou have been
faithful; I will hearken what conscience will say, if it says well done, let
all else say what they please; this is my rejoicing, mine only rejoicing, the
testimony of my conscience, that in all simplicity and godly sincerity, not in
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God I had my conversation in the world.

2. Heartily. Whatever he does for God, he does it with a good will. He has
cast up all his business into one, and he is intent upon it. He works
righteousness, as sinners work wickedness; with both hands, earnestly, Micah
7.3. He is religious in good earnest, he prays in good earnest, he hears in
good earnest, he runs in good earnest; the powers of his soul being all united
in one chanel, run more strongly, his many springs falling all into one stream,
make a river, that bears down all bays before it. The Psalmist prays, Psalm.
86.11. Unite mine heart to fear thy Name. Unite my heart to thee, and unite
mine heart in it self, that it may all run toward thee. Unite my heart to fear,
and so unite my heart to love thy name, unite mine heart to serve, and follow,
and live to thee. As if he should have said, O my God, mine heart is divided,
and discomposed, scattered up and down, I know not where; my pleasures have a
part, my estate has a part, my friends have a part, my family has a part,
there is little or none left for God; I have too many things to fear, too many
things to love, and care for, too many things to serve and follow, to follow
the Lord with any strength or intention of mind. Call in all Lord, all my
parts, all my powers, command their joint and united attendance upon thee. 1
Pet. 1.13,14,15. Gird up the loins of your mind, and be sober, and hope to the
end (in the original it is hope perfectly) for the grace that is to be brought
unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. As obedient children not fashioning
your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance, but as he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Gird up
the loins of your minds. Gird and be sober, gird and hope perfectly, gird and
be obedient, gird and be holy. Here it is true ungirt and unblest, ungirt and
unholy: the girding is the gathering in the strength of the heart to its work.
Ephesians. 6.14. Stand with your loins girt. [Stand] do not gird and ungird, stand
always girt; call in your hearts, and hold them in; be always in a readiness
to every duty, in a readiness against every temptation. Oh how loose are we!
what loose praying, and loose hearing, and loose meditation, and loose
walkings, do we satisfy our selves with! our hearts are to seek, our thoughts
and affections are gadding abroad, we know not where to find them, and our
work is done thereafter. We excuse our non-proficiency in Religion, by our
many hindrances; by the difficulties of our work; but the great hindrance lies
here, our loins are ungirded, our hearts are not united in our work, nor intent
upon it. When God and the things of eternity are gotten so deep into the heart,
when there is such a deep sense, of the weight and importance, of the things
that are eternal, abiding upon us, as over-powers; carnal objects, and loosens
the heart from them; when we feel the evidence, and the consequence of these
things commanding our whole souls after them, then there is Religion in
earnest; then we go on and prosper. And thus it is with this one heart, there
are not some light touches only upon it; God is gotten deep into it, eternity
is gotten deep into it, this is all; this is all I have to mind or do. My
hope, my comforts, my life, my soul, all hang upon this one thing; if I speed
well here, I am made for ever. What have I to do in the way of Egypt, or to
drink of the waters of Sihor? what have I to do in the way of Assyria? what
have I to do in the way of pleasure? What have I to do in the way of the World?
To build Tabernacles for my self here below, or to drink the waters of mine own
Cisteron? How little am I concerned in the interest of this flesh? What
matter's it, what becomes of it, or which way it goes? My God, my God, my soul,
my soul, there lies my concernment; of these let my care only be. Get thee
behind me Satan, hold thy peace sinful flesh, keep silence worldly cares;
hinder me not, speak no more to me of hearkening to you, away from me ye
evildoers, I will keep the Commandments of my God; Let others do what they
will, run whither they please, choose whom they will serve, what they will
follow after; come my soul, follow thou the Lord, gird up thy loins and come
away; for the other world, for the other world; make haste, linger not, let
others loyter as they will, escape for thy life, look not behind thee, get
thee up to the Mountain and live.

Object. One Heart, why it is never more two; Two men, a new man and an old, two
Nations, two selfs, there are twins in the womb of every Saint; the ungodly
seem more one than they, all for sin, and for Hell; all dark, all hard, all but
one stone.

Sol. Yet it is true, the Saints, and they only have but this one heat; For,

1. The old heart is not an heart, the old self is not the self; this old man
is not the man, this is not he, that is the heart, that has gotten the
dominion, and the rule in the man. The new heart has the dominion; though Sin
as Esau, be the first born, yet the elder must now serve the younger; the old
man is but a dead man, Col. 3.3. Ye are dead, that is, your old man is dead,
your sin is slain and Crucified with Christ, and when it is dead, you may say
it is not.

2. The meaning plainly is, I will give them one heart; that is, a single,
sincere upright heart; they shall be no longer an Hypocritical people. If
there be something of Hypocrisy in them, yet Hypocrites they shall no longer
be; their hearts shall be upright before me; sincerity stands in pitching
upon choosing, and giving up our hearts to God, as our chief good, and last end.
When God is our all, there is perfection, and when God is our chief, there is
sincerity. I say, when God is our all, when the world has nothing left in us,
to entice or draw out our souls after it, but God carries them wholly without
any the least liking, or lusting after sinful objects, there is perfection; This
is not attainable here; the heart cannot be thus perfectly one, till
corruption has put on incorruption; But though it be not perfectly, yet it
may be sincerely one, and then it is so, when however, the flesh has too great
an interest in it, and influence upon it, and often pulls it aside, and puts it
back; yet it still bends its course Heaven wards, and that way the stream, and
strength of the soul is running, the flesh will be putting in for a part; it
would have all, it would not take its turns with God; God will not take his
turns with the flesh, he will have all or none; and the flesh would not take
its turns with him; it is not contented with now and then, it would not be
served in the fields, or in the shop, or at the Table, or in the bed only, but
in the Church, in the Chamber, in the Closet; 'twould carry away all from God,
but if it cannot have all, 'twill divide with God; wherever God is served,
the flesh will be putting in for its share. The best of Christians feel too
great a truth in this; their frequent humblings, and mournings, and breakings,
and self-shamings before the Lord, are mostly upon this account; This is the
voice of their deepest groanings, and bitterest tears; the burdens of their
mournful groans. I cannot do the things that I would; when I would do good evil
is present with me; with my mind I serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the
Law of sin; Woe is me my soul, how am I straightened? how am I divided Whither am
I hurried? wherewithal do I come before thee Lord? Oh! what halting, and
heartless, and distracted duties, do I serve my God withal? This flesh eats up
the fat, and the best; and only the lame, and the lean, and the sick, are left
for a Sacrifice to the Lord. Woe is me, my leanness, my leanness: my God, my
God, how art thou served? how art thou robbed of thy due? these strangers are
gotten into thy Sanctuary, and eat up all thy pleasant things, and what have
they left thee?

Such are their complaints, and their very complaints are their comfort, and
the witness of their sincerity, whilst they can with openness of heart make
their approach and appeal to God; yet thou art my Lord, thou art my God, and I
will serve thee. I have chosen thee as mine heritage for ever, and I will wait
for thy salvation. Hear the sighing of thy prisoner, deliver thy captive; mine
heart is with thee, let not this flesh entrench upon thy light, let sin no
longer reign in my mortal body; let me have no more to do with the Throne of
iniquity, unty the cords, loose the fetters, bring my soul out of prison,
search me, O Lord, and know mine heart, prove me, and know my thoughts; Is
there any [way] of wickedness in me? do I willingly go after the Commandments?
Do I [regard] iniquity in mine heart? Here it lies, it is true, it wars, and
raises tumults, and insurrections against thee; but do I resign up my self to
it? is it a pleasure to me? am I at peace with it? O Lord, thou know. I
cannot get rid of it, I cannot do the things that I would, I cannot pray as I
would, nor hear as I would, nor think, nor speak, nor live as I would; whither
I go, sin goes with me; where I lodge, it lodges; If I sit still, it abides
with me; If I run from it, it follows me; I can neither rest nor work, I can do
nothing for it. I can do nothing for it, and yet blessed be thy name, this one
thing I do; what I cannot attain, I follow after; I cannot conquer, yet I fight
against it; I wrestle with it, though it so often give me the fall. I trust it
not, though it flatter me; I love it not, though it feed me; I prostitute not
my self unto it, though it commits so many a rape upon me; my heart is with
thee Lord, my foot is making after thee; I groan, I travel in pain, waiting for
thy redemption; till I die I will not give over. I will die fighting, I will
die hoping, I will die praying, Save me, O Lord, make no long tarrying, O my
God.

And thus you have the description of this one heart. It pitches on one end,
and God is that end. It gives him the place of the end, he is its first and
last. It gives him the power of the end; this one thing the obtaining of God to
be theirs, draws them on, guides, governs them, in their whole course, and is
accepted by them as their only and exceeding great reward. This instructs
them, this rules, and encourages them, calls them off from sin, calls them on
to duty, carries them out in suffering; all their powers are united in this one
business; all their arguments are resolved into this one argument; all their
rewards are summed up in this one reward. God shall be glorified, and therein
my soul shall be satisfied; God shall be mine, and glory shall be his.

In all this we see what this one heart means, but oh how little of this Grace
have we received? how many hearts have we! how many gods have we, to divide
these hearts betwixt them? how small a corner.

How low a place, must the Lord take up with us if he will have any at all?
how often is he made to stand aside, or to stoop to a lust, God made to give
place to the devil? Is God our All indeed, have we none else to please, have
we none else to serve? have we no portion, no inheritance, no other God but
the Lord? Is he out Alpha and Omega, our first and our last? our spring and
our ocean, our sum and our scope? the rise and the rest of all our motions?
whatever our tongues speak, do our hearts also and our lives say, To me to
live is Christ? none but God? none but Christ? nothing but heaven, and glory?
when we are driving so hard for our flesh, for our pride, for our ease, for
our gain, when we are so busy this way, and so hearty and so zealous this
way; when these must have so great a share in our Religion, Is this still the
voice, To me to live is Christ? Oh how little power has the Lord with us!
how far is it that the single interest of God will carry our souls? how
little is done purely for God? we have often many strings to our bow: there
are some services, wherein there is something coming to the flesh, as well as
to the name of God. Some credit, or honor, some outward advantage to be
gotten by Religion; but when all the other strings crack, but this one; when
there is nothing to move us but God, oh how weak do our motions grow? The flesh
often goes partner with God; there is a double trade driving in the same
actions; a trade for heaven, and a trade earth together; there is something to
be gotten by our religion, besides what is coming to God; there are fields, and
vineyards, and olive-yards, friends, and honors, and preferments; as it
sometimes falls out, when godliness is in the rising side; and when it is thus,
we go smoothly and vigorously on. Come see the zeal that I have for the Lord of
Hosts. But when the interest of God, and the flesh divide, and part asunder;
when the flesh is like to be a loser by our Religion; when God puts us on such
duty, as will spend upon the flesh, and eat out, and devour its interest; when
our hearts tell us as Deborah did Barak, Judge. 4. This will not be for thine
honor, or this will not be for thine ease, or thy safety; then what becomes
of our zeal? oh how heavily do we then drive on? how seldom is it that this
word (yet God shall be glorified) will balance all the prejudices, and
confute all the cross reasonings of the flesh, and carry us on our way, without
and against it.

How little has the Lord of the government of us? if he does govern as a
King, yet how little, as our end? how little does goodness govern? how little
will love do with us? we must have rigor, and severity; we must have
spurs, and goads, and rods, and stripes, and scorpions too, and all little
enough, to drive us back from those other gods which we have chosen, and to
bring us on after the Lord. If the Law be not made for the righteous; if they
need not a Law, then what are we, whom a Law will not suffice? if commands,
threatenings, terrors, penalties, judgments, can do no more upon us; if we are
yet so loose, and so carnal, and so earthly, and so froward, and so false, and
so formal, under severest discipline; if we will not be whipped into more
humility, spirituallity, self-denial, watchfulness, care, activity, zeal; but
are such drones, and such sleepers, such earthworms, and such sensuallists
still, under all the corrections and compulsions of the law; oh what should we
be, did we want a law? were there nothing but love, to restrain us from sin,
and constrain and quicken us to duty?

Christians, have we but one thing to do, in all we do? sometimes we are
busy in doing nothing. Though there be a Prayer in our mouths, the praises of
God in our mouths; Christ, heaven, holiness, glory, a new heart, a new life
upon our tongues; there is nothing within; no prayer, no praise, no Christ, nor
heaven; what have we been often doing, in the closet, in the family, in the
congregation, when we seemed to have been praying? nothing, nothing, but
sowing wind and good words. Sometimes we have too many things in our hearts;
what a world of carnal devices, and fleshly projects have we wrapped up in the
garment of our Religion? Peter's sheet had not a more heterogeneous miscellany
of creatures; four-footed beasts, wild beasts, creeping things, and fowls of
the air; than our religious duties have of designs and ends. We have men to
please, our pride, our bellies, to offer sacrifice to; we bring our farms, and
our oxen, and our trades before the Lord; are not our hearts, which should be
the houses of prayer, the houses of merchandise? are we not talking, or
pursuing, or in a journey, or a sleep, or driving bargains? O Christians, if
we were privy to one another hearts, as God is privy to them; what
abominations should we see, brought into the holy places? What monsters would
our most sacred services appear? Which whilst the outside is only viewed,
are applauded and admired. Is this our singleness of heart? Oh! for shame, and
blushing, and confusion of face; Oh! for a Vail to hide such hearts from the
jealous eyes of the holy God, a varnish a fair outside, hides all from men;
but nothing but a dark Vail, of shame and sorrow, and tears, and repentance; a
Vail dipped in Blood, in the blood of Christ; will hide them from the eyes of the
Lord.

Oh how little plainness and singleness of heart is there, in our ordinary
course; in our dealings and conversings in the World? how little faith, or
truth is there in us? how little trust is there to us? what doubling, what
deceitful dealing, defrauding, overreaching, undermining, are we guilty of?
how false are we in our promises? how insignificant are our words? what an
uncertain sound do they give? our yea may often stand for nay, and our nay for
yea, Psalm. 12.2. They speak vanity, every one with his neighbor, with
flattering lips and a double heart do they speak; trust ye not in a friend,
put not confidence in a guide.

Blessed be God, the Lord has a Generation, on whom this cannot be charged.
Children that will not lie, nor deceive; though Satan and this evil world,
bind up all in a bundle; they are all naught, they are all false, vain
boasters, and deceitful workers, there is none up-right, no not one; but thanks
be to God, Satan is a liar; the accuser of the Brethren, is a false accuser.
God has his children that will not lie. But woe be to those professors by
reason of whom the offense comes.

Christians, has God promised to give you one heart? Let it be once said,
this day is this Scripture fulfilled; O may you be the accomplishment of this
good word. Has God promised to give you one heart? Do not you say, but I will
not take it; two are better than one: I have found so much the sweet of deceit,
that there is no life like it; Has God said, I will give one heart? let not any
one among you say, But I fear he will not. Make not the promise of God of none
effect, either by your impiety or unbelief: Does God promise to give this one
heart? he that promised it, does also require it. Be thy self Christian: Let
it be said thou art what thou art, be true, be but one; have but one heart,
and let thy one heart have but one tongue, but one face; and but one thing to
do. Beware of hypocrisy, beware of carnal policy; make not thy God to serve
thy flesh; call not the serving of thy flesh, a serving of God, and make not
thy serving of God to be a serving of the flesh. Be not divided betwixt God
and the World: O how easy would our lives be, did we find our whole souls
running one way? taking up w th God as the adequate object of all our powers?
the mark of all our motions, and the reward of all our labors? did all our
streams empty themselves into this Ocean, and all our lines meet in this one
center? Did God only draw and allure our hearts, and the sincerity of our
hearts, give motion to all our wheels? Guide our eyes, govern our tongues,
order our steps, animate our duties, direct and quicken us in all our goings?
Oh how sweet, oh how beautiful, were such a life? the Sympathy betwixt our
hearts and end, there is sweetness; the harmony of our hearts and ways, there is
beauty. O how sweet are the drawings of love, the free and full closure of our
Spirits with God, dissolving themselves into his Will acquiessing, resting
satisfied in his goodness, is a sweetness which no man knows, but he that
tastes it; the harmony of the power of the soul within its self of its motions
and actions in the life, there is the beauty, which will eclipse the glory of
the world. Christian be it thus with thee, and thou have the blessing, that
covenant blessing, which the Lord has promised, in saying, I will give them
one heart.

CHAP. XII. An Heart of Flesh.
4. AN Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. The old heart is a stone;
cold as a stone, dead as a stone, hard as a stone; but I will take away the
stone, and give an heart of flesh.

An heart of flesh, is a soft and tender heart; Flesh can feel any thing that's
contrary to it, puts it to pain; Sin makes it smart; it cannot kick, but it is
against the pricks, by its rebellion, and resistance against the Lord, it
receives a wound; it cannot hit, but it hurts it self. A soft hand gets nothing
by laying on, on an hedge of thorns. A soft heart when it has been meddling
with sin, is sure to smart for it. It can neither escape the pain, nor yet
endure it: and what it cannot bear, 'twill take warning to avoid it.

Flesh will bleed. A soft heart will mourn, and melt, and grieve, when hard
hearts are moved at nothing. Flesh will yield. Its apt to receive impressions.
The power of God will awe it; his justice fear it; his mercy melt it; his
holiness humble it, and leave the stamp, and image of it upon it. And as the
Attributes, so the Word and Works of God, will make sign upon it. Who sets a
seal upon a stone? or what print will it receive? upon the wax, the print will
abide. God speaks once and twice, but man, hardened man will not regard it.
Neither his Word, nor his rod, neither his speaking, nor his smiting will make
any sign on such hearts. It Is the heart of flesh that hears and yields. And
with such hearts the Lord delights to be dealing. Acts 28. The heart of this
people is waxed gross; they will not hear, they will not understand; and the
next word is, away to the Gentiles, they will hear. He will no more write his
Law on tables of stone: he will write in flesh; there the impression will take,
and go the deeper: and therefore, wherever he intends to write, he prepares
his table: makes this stone flesh, and then engraves upon it. Particularly this
tenderness admits of a double distinction.

1. Respecting the object of it: so there is a tenderness, 1. Of Sin. 2. Of
Duty. 3. Of Suffering.


1. Of Sin; and tha'ts twofold, such as discovers it self, ante factum. post
factum.


1. Ante factum. Or before the commissiion. Whilst it is under a temptation,
or feels the first motion to sin. A tender heart startles, starts back at the
sight of a sin, as at the sight of a devil, Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God? the manner of the speech, presents
Joseph as a man in a fright, startled at the ugliness of the motion. So David,
when he had an opportunity, and a temptation to slay Saul, 1 Samuel 26.11.
rejects it with an absit. God forbid. The Lord forbid that I should stretch
forth my hand against the Lords anointed. And that not only at the higher and
greater, but it resists the little ones, the smallest of sins. Is it not a
little one? is no plea with it. Little or great, it is a sin, and that is enough.

2. Post factum. After the Commission; if it has been brought on upon sin, yet
it cannot go out with it. The skirt of Readiness garment, was too heavy for
David's heart to bear. His heart smote him ptesently, 1 Samuel 24.5. Sin in the
review, looks dreadfully. Its pleasant flowers quickly turn to thorns; it
pricks the heart how much soever it pleased the eye. It ordinarily enters by
the eye; and often runs out the same way it came in; runs out in tears. When
he thought thereon, he wept. At least, it warns, and makes more watchful
after. Thou see what it is, take heed; take it for a warning, and do no more.
The pain of sin, if it do not force a tear, 'twill set a watch.

2. Of duty. A tender heart will neither slight a sin, nor neglect a duty. It Is
loath to grieve and offend, and careful to serve and please the Lord. It would
not that he should suffer by it, nor so much as lose his due. It watches
against sin, and unto duty. It cares how to please the Lord, and its care is
tender. It would not displease by its neglects or performances; all must be
done that ought, and as it ought to be done. It will neither stand out with its
offering, nor will it offer an unclean thing. It considers not only what, but
how. Both matter and manner, substance and circumstance, all must be right, or
it is not at ease. It will keep time, and as much as may be, keep touch with
the Lord in every point. It is not satisfied that it prays sometimes, it would
not lose a praying time. God will not, and it cannot lose a duty. It would
neither lose by nonperformance, nor lose what is performed. It would neither
leave undone, nor do amiss; any failing, not only in the matter, but in the
principle, end, affection, intention; any failing pains.

3. In point of suffering. A soft heart will not be careful what, or how much,
but why, and upon what account, he suffers. Will neither sinfully shun the
cross, nor run upon it unwarrantably. He waits for a call, and then follows.
He is patient under the hand of the Lord, but not insensible; can be touched
with an affliction, though not offended at it. The hand of the Lord has
touched me. He suffers more than his own, his brethrens sufferings. His
brethrens burdens, all lie on his shoulders. He weeps in their sorrows,
bleeds in their wounds, his heart is bound in their chains. As the care, so the
trouble of all the Churches, come daily upon him. Who is weak, and I am not
weak? who is offended, and I burn not? he espouses all the sufferings of
Christ as his own. In all his afflictions he is afflicted.

2. Tenderness may be distinguished in respect of the subject of it; and so
there is a tenderness of the conscience. the will. the affections.


1. Tenderness of conscience stands in these three things. 1. Clearness of
Judgment. 2. Quickness of sight. 3. Uprightness or faithfulness.


1. Clearness of judgment. When its well instructed, and understands the rule;
and can thence discern betwixt good and evil. Heb. 5.14. There is a tenderness
that proceeds from cloudiness; scrupulosity; that fears every thing, stumbles
at straws, starts at shaddows; makes sins; picks quarrels at duties; and so
sometimes dare not please, for fear of offending God. This is the sickness, or
soreness of conscience; not its soundness. It Is the sound conscience that is
truly tender.

2. Quickness of sight, and watchfulness. I sleep, but my heart waketh. It can
epsy the least sins, and smallest duties. It can see sin in the very
temptation; it can discover the least sin under the fairest face, and the least
duty, under the foulest vizor. Call it singularity, nicety, cloud it with
reproaches; yet conscience can discover light shining through all the clouds;
duty within, whatsoever unhandsom face it be presented in, the former stands
in consciences understanding the rule, as was said, this in strait applying the
rule to cases; and distinguishing of them by it. The truly tender has his eyes
in his head; and his eyes open, to discover and discern all that comes, be it
good or evil, little or great. If but a thought comes in, what comes there,
says conscience? what art thou? a friend or an enemy? whence art thou? from
God, or from beneath? 'twill examine whatever knocks, before any free
admission. O what a crowd of evils do thrust into loose and careless hearts;
the devil comes in in the crowd, and is never discovered. If the eye be either
dim, or asleep, there is entrance for any thing. Little do we think oft-times,
who has been with us, what losses and mischiefs we have sustained, while our
hearts have been asleep; which had they been wakeful, and watchful, might have
been prevented.

3. Uprightness, and faithfulness. Which discovers it self, 1. In giving charge
concerning duty. 2. In giving warning of sin. 3. In giving check for sin when
committed.


1. In giving charge concerning duty, look to it soul, there is a duty before
thee, which God calls thee to; do not say, it is no great hurt to let it alone,
it is no great hurt to do it, it is questionable, whether it be a duty or no?
Many wiser than I think otherwise; do not say, it is a nicety, it is but a
punctilio, it is mere folly, and preciseness; and there will be no end of
standing upon such small matters; see to it, it is thy duty, beware thou neglect
it not, the baulking of the least duty, is the neglecting of the great God of
Glory.

2. In giving warning of Sin; Take heed to thy self, sin lies at the door, thou
art under a temptation, the Devil is entering upon thee; do not say, it is but a
little sin; as little as it is, there is Death and Hell in the bowels of it, look
to it, it is sin, have thou nothing to do with it, keep thy self pure, and
though it run upon thee, shake it off.

3. After commission, it gives check for it; reproving, judging, and lashing
the soul for it, where have thou been Gehazi? say not thou have been no where;
went not this heart with thee and saw thee, running out after thy
covetousness, gadding after thy pleasures, feeding thy pride, dandling thy
lusts, playing the Hypocrite, playing the Harlot from thy God, pampring thy
flesh, pleasing thine appetite; and where have thou been? What have thou done
soul? think not to excuse or mince the matter, it cannot be excused; thou have
sinned against thy God, and now bear thy shame. This is our heart smiting of
us, 2 Samuel 24. Our hearts condemning of us, 1 John 3.20. If our hearts condemn
us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things.

2. Tenderness of the Will, that stands in its flexiblenesse, and pliableness
unto the Will of God. And this is that tenderness wherein chiefly stands the
blessing of a soft heart; an hard heart is stubborn and obstinate; thy neck is
as an Iron sinew, and thy brow Brass. Thou will not be ruled, there is no
bending thee, or turning thee out of thy course, thy Iron is too hard for the
fire, it will not be melted, and for the Hammer, it will not be broken;
there is no dealing with thee, thou art an untractable piece, thou will go
neither led nor driven; thine heart is set in thee to do evil, thy will is set
upon sin, and thou art set upon thine own will. The word which thou have spoken
to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not do, but we will do, whatever
proceeds out of our own mouth; Jer. 44.16,17. We will do what we will do; who
is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. and Jer. 2.25. Thou said there is no hope: no, for
we have loved strangers, and after them we [will] go, come what will of it,
say what thou will against it; Be silent Scriptures, hold thy peace,
Conscience, it is to no purpose to speak more, there is no hope of prevailing;
we are at a point, we will take our own course. These are hard hearts,
stubborn, obstinate hearts.

When the Iron sinew is broken, when the rebellion and stubbornness of the
Spirit is subdued, and tamed, and made gentle, and pliable, then it becomes a
tender heart.

There may be some tenderness in the Conscience, and yet the will be a very
stone; and as long as the will stands out, there is no broken heart. Conscience
may be scared and frighted, Conscience may fly upon the Sinner; what do thou
mean soul? whither are thy rebellions carrying thee? look to thy self, hearken
or thou will be lost e're thou art aware. But however, God has gotten
conscience on his side, yet the Devil still rides the Will; and there sin takes
up its rest. There Is a double resting of sin in the soul, In Peace. In Power.


1. In Peace, when it dwells and rules in the soul without disturbance, or
contradiction; when it carries all smoothly before it; when God lets it alone,
and conscience speaks not a word against it; When notwithstanding those Armies
of lusts, fighting against the soul, there is not so much as one weapon lift up
against them; not a prayer, nor a tear, nor a wish for freedom; nor the least
fear concerning the issue; this is the most dreadful hardness.

2. In Power, When though it can have no Peace, yet it has still a Place in
the heart. Though it can have no quiet, but conscience is still quarrelling
with it, and warning it away; yet it still holds its power over the Will, the
Master of the house, is content to be its Servant, O how many persons are
there, even amongst the Professors of Religion, who cannot sin in quiet, they
are proud, or passionate, or intemperate, or covetous or false in their words,
in their dealings; they are formal, and hypocritical, and slight, in their
duties; but they cannot go out with it with any quiet. Conscience smites them
for it, they feel many a pang, and deadly twinge in their heart; insomuch that
sometimes they cry, and groan, and roar in their spirits; O for redemption, O
for deliverance from this false, this proud, this covetous and wicked heart;
and yet after all this, the Will remains a captive still; Sin holds its power
there; though it cannot carry it on in peace, though it cannot be proud, or
play the Hypocrite, or be covetous, or an oppressor, without some galls, and
gripes in the soul; yet on it goes, the same trade is kept up, the same course
is held on. God commands, cast ye out, cast ye out, come off from all your
wickedness, and evil ways, and I will receive you; No, though Conscience
would, the Will cannot come, whatever rendings, and tearings; whatever terrors
and torments, and worryings, such souls are at any time under, whatever stings,
and plagues, and fires, they find their sins to be in their souls and bones;
whatever wishings and wouldings they wring forth, that they were well rid of
these plagues; whilst the will is still for them, there is an hard heart;
damnably hard; there is none of this heart of flesh. When the will is once
broken loose from sin; when it will be content to let all go, and give up its
self to the dominion of the Lord, there is a broken heart. Now speak Lord, and I
will hear. Now call Lord, and I will answer. Now command me, impose on me what
thou will, I will submit. None but the Lord; none but Christ; no other Lord,
nor lover. I am thine Lord, thine own, do with thine own, demand of thine own,
whatever thou please. What God will have me be, what God will have me
do, that will I do, and be. No longer what I will, but the Will of the Lord
be done, When it is come to this, there is a tender heart; there is the blessing
of a broken spirit; the stone he has taken away, he has given an heart of
flesh.

Christians, never trust to tears; never talk of terrors, trouble of
conscience; of the passionate workings, and meltings, which at any time you
feel upon your spirits; though there be something in these, as you shall see
more by and by; yet these are not the things you are to look at. A subdued,
tractable, willing, obedient heart, that is the tender heart. Isa. 1.19. If ye
be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if ye refuse
and rebel, ye shall be slain with the sword; the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

3. Tenderness of the affections. I shall instance only in three, viz. Love.
Fear. Sorrow.


The tenderness of love is seen in its Benevolence. Jealousy.


1. In its benevolence. Our goodness extends not to the Lord, but our good will
does. Our love can add nothing to him; can a man be profitable to God? Job 22.
If thou be righteous what give thou to him? chap. 35.7. Yet though it can
add nothing, it would not that any thing be detracted from him; whilst he
can have no more, it would that he should have his own; all that is due; his
due praise, his due honor, and homage, and worship, and subjection, from every
creature; it would have no abatement, not the least spot or stain upon all his
glory. What Is an affront to God, is an offense to love. Love bears all
things, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. all things from God, all things from men.
And yet there are two things, the love of God cannot bear; his dishonor. his
displeasure.


1. His dishonor. Love would have God to be God; to live in the glory of his
Majesty, in the hearts and eyes of all the world. His reproach is grievous to
him that loves, for this is the cloud that takes God out of sight. He loves
and honors, and would that God should be loved and honored of all; he
fears, and would that the whole world should fear him. He would receive in his
own breast, every arrow that is shot against his maker; he would that his own
name, and soul might stand betwixt his God, and all reproach, and dishonor.
He would be vile, so the Lord may be glorious; so God may increase, he is
content to decrease. He Is not so tender of his own heart, and bowels, as of
the holiness of his God. He would suffer, and die, and be nothing, rather
than that God should not be all in all. He would rather never think, nor
speak, nor be, rather, then not be, in word, and thought, and life, holiness
to the Lord. But O what, or where would he be, rather than his own hand
should be lift up against him?

To see the Lord robbed of his holiness, wronged in his wisdom, or his truth,
or his sovereignty; to see sin, that devil; to see the world, that Idol, set up
in the throne, and the God of glory made to stand aside as insignificant; to
hear that blasphemy, God is not worth this lust, or not worthy this labor,
(and what is said less in every sin) is a sword in his breast. The reproaches
of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me. Love has tasted of God, it
has fed on his fullness, it has its nourishment from his sweetness, it has
been warmed in his bosom, all his goodness has passed before it; upon this it
lives and feeds; and having found and felt what the Lord is, its impatient that
all this goodness should be clouded or belyed. Love kindled from heaven, is
keen; and the keen is a tender edge; the least touch of what offends, will turn
it. Lam. 1.20. I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, mine heart is [turned]
within me, for I have grievously rebelled, Psalm. 42.3. My tears have been my
meat, continually, while they daily say unto me, where is thy God! Where is
that care, and help, and that salvation of thy God, thou trustedst in! thy God
is not such an one, as thou boastedst him to be: when I remember, when I hear
such things, my soul is poured out within me. Love is large; he that loves
has a large heart, he can never receive, or do too much; he would have all
he can, and he would give all he has to the Lord. He Is tender how any thing
be withheld that is due, how any thing be wasted elsewhere, that might be
useful to the Lord.

2. His displeasure. The displeasure of men it bears and rejoices; the wrath
and rage of Satan, it bears and triumphs? though all the world, and hell to
boot, be displeased, and provoked, so God smiles, it is well enough. Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and mine heart is glad, Psalm. 4.
Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30.7.

Let him correct me, but O not in fury; let him smite, but not frown; let him
kill me, so he will but love me. And though he smite, though he kill me,
yet will I love and trust in him. O my God, let me rather die in thy love,
then live in thy displeasure; there is life in that death, this life is death to
me. Let me not be dead whilst alive; turn away thine anger which kills my
heart.

It is impatient of divine displeasure, and thence it is grievous to it that it
does displease; thence it quarrels with sin, and falls so foul with it self for
it. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? love thou God, soul? what and yet
provokest him thus daily? love, and yet neglect to seek, and follow thy God?
love, and yet so lame, and so slow, and so heavy, and so sparing in thy
services to him? Is this all thy love will do? not deny thine ease, or thy
pleasure, or thy liberty, or thine appetite, or thy companion, for the sake of
the Lord? choose rather to pleasure thy friend, or thy flesh, than to please
God? Is this thy love? Is this thy kindness to thy friend? O false heart, O
unworthy, unworthy spirit; how can thou look thy God in the face? how can
thou say I love thee, when thine heart is no more with him?

2. In its Jealousy. He that loves the Lord is jealous; and Jealousy has a
tender edge; he is Jealous, not of, but for the Lord, not of his God, but of
himself; least any thing should steal away his heart from God. Love would be
chaste, would not bestow it self elsewhere: and yet is in great Jealousy it
may be enticed and drawn away. He that loves the Lord, there is not any
thing, whether Wife, or Child, or Friend, or Estate, or Esteem, that gets near
his heart, but he is jealous of them, least they steal it away: Get you down,
keep you lower, this heart is neither yours, nor mine; O my God, it is thine,
it is thine Lord, take it wholly to thee, keep it to thy self, let no other
Lovers be sharers with thee.

2. There Is a tenderness of fear; The tender heart is a trembling heart, the
tenderness of fear is manifested in its Suspicion. Caution.


1. In its Suspicion, the fearful are suspicious; they look farther then they
see, he that is in dread, will be in doubt, what may befall him, he suspects
a surprizal; every bush is a thief, every bait, he doubts may have an hook
under. There is a foolish, and a causeless fear; and there is a prudent, and an
holy fear; this fear is a principle of wisdom, Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 22.3. The
prudent man fore-seeth the evil, but fools go on; the snare is never nearer,
than to the secure; bold venturous sinners never want woe, the Devil may spare
his cunning, when he has to do with such; nothing that looks like sin, offers
it self to a tender heart, but he presently suspects it; every pleasant
morsel, every pleasant cup, every pleasant companion that comes; any thing that
tickles, and gratifies the flesh, he looks through it e're he will touch with
it, least it betray his soul from God; there may be a snare in the dish, a
snare in my cup, a snare in my company; and what if there should? he feeds
himself with fear, dwells, walks, converses, works, recreates himself, with a
trembling heart, and jealous eye.

2. In its Caution; Fear is wary; some Commanders have set their scout watches
unarmed, that fear might make them watchful, a fearful Christian, will take
heed what, and whom he trusts; he dares not trust himself in such company, as
may be a snare unto him, he dares not trust his heart among temptations,
he will keep the Devil at a distance, he will not come near where his Nets do
lie. Blessed is he that thus fears always? O the unspeakable mischief! O
the multitudes of sins that we run upon, through our secure hearts; I never
thought of it, I never dreamed of any such danger; Oh I am undermined, I am
over-reached, I am surprised; my foot is in the Snare, the grin has taken me
by the heel, my soul is among Lions; Sin has gotten hold on me; mine heart is
gone e're I was aware, the enemy has come in and carried it away; has given
it to lust, to the world, to pleasure, to divide it amongst themselves, my
faith has failed, my conscience is defiled, my love is grown cold, my grace
withered, my comforts wasted, my peace broken; and my God, O! where is he
become? Woe is me, the evil that I feared [not] is come upon me, had I
feared, I had not fallen: O that I had been wise, had kept my watch, had stood
upon my guard; had I thought, had I thought, I had escaped all this danger: O
Christians, be wise in season, and take heed of the fools, too late [had I
wist]

3. There Is a tenderness of sorrow; Sorrow is the melting of the heart, the
stone dissolved, sorrow is the wound of the heart, a wound is tender, love is
tender, and therefore Godly sorrow, which is the sorrow of love; you may call
it a love sickness, love is both the pain and pleasure of a mourning heart,
it is love that wounds, and love that heals; it is both the weapon and the oil;
this sorrow has its joy, the melted is the most joyful heart; it is love that
makes it sad, it therefore weeps because it loves, and it is love that makes it
glad too; It therefore joys because in its sorrows, it sees it loves. It Is
love that makes the wound, the matter of this sorrow being love abused, what
have thou done Soul? who have thou despised? against whom have thou lift up thy
self? thou have sinned, thou have sinned, and have thereby smitten and grieved
thy God that loves thee, and whom thou love; Thou have but one friend in
Heaven, and earth, and him thou have abused; to pleasure thy lust, thou have
pierced thy Lord, thou have transgressed his Commandments, and trampled upon
his Compassions; have broken his Bonds, and kicked at his Bowels; his
greatness, and his goodness; his Law and his very Love has been despised by
thee; him who loved thee have thou smitten. Is this thy kindness to thy Friend?
O vile ungratious, unkind, unthankful, unnatural heart; what have thou done?

Put all this now together, and you have the heart of flesh which the Covenant
promises, a Tender Heart; an heart that is tender of sin and duty, that
carefully shuns sin, or is sure to smart for it; that neither slights sin, nor
duty; that says not of the one or the other; it is but a little one; that can
feel sufferings, but not fret at them, a Tender Conscience; that will neither
winck at sin, nor excuse the sinner, that will not hold the sinner guiltless;
nor say unto the wicked, thou art righteous; that will not be smitten, but it
will smite again, that will give due warning, and due correction, a flexible
tractable heart; that will not resist and rebel; that says unto the Lord, what
will thou have me to do? and will not say of any thing, he will have; any
thing but this. A willing, ductile heart, stiff against nothing but sin, that
a word from Heaven, will lead to any thing. An Heart of Love; that bears good
will to the Lord, and all that he does or requires; in which good will lies,
radically every good work; that says not of any duties or sufferings, this is
too great, or of any sin, this is nothing; that would be any thing, or
nothing; So God may be all. That would rather be displeased, than displease;
that is not displeased, where God is pleased. A trembling Heart, that fears
more than it sees, and flies from what it fears, whom fear makes to beware. A
melting Heart, a mourning heart, that wounds it self in the wounds it has
given to the Lord, and his Name; that can grieve in love, and can love and
grieve, where it cannot weep. In sum, it is an heart that can feel, that can
bleed, that can weep; or at least that can yield and stoop, where it cannot
weep, nor feel but little, that will easily be commanded, where it is not
sensibly melted, this is a soft heart, this is the heart of flesh; I will take
away the stone, and give them an heart of flesh.

Oh what a blessing is such an heart! what a plague is an hard heart! oh what
prisoners are the men of this evil world: in prison under Satan, in prison
under sin, bound under a curse, shut up under unbelief, and impenitence: the
hard heart, is the iron-gate, that shuts them in that they cannot get out. Romans
2. Oh what an hospital is this world become: of blind, and lame, and sick, and
creeples, and wounded creatures! whence are all the calamities and distresses
that befall them, but from the hardness of their hearts? the stone in their
hearts breeds all their diseases, brings all their calamities: has blinded
their eyes, and broken their bones, and wasted their estates: there is not one
misery that befalls them, but they may write up over it, this is the hardness
of my heart. Oh what a Sodom is this world become, for wickedness as well as
for wrath: what drunkenness, what adulteries, what oaths, what blasphemies, and
all sorts of monstrous sins do every where abound! whence is all this, but from
the hardness of men's hearts! if you say it is from other causes: it is from
unbelief, from ignorance, from impotence, from temptations; let it be granted:
yet still it is from hardness of heart. They are wilfully ignorant, wilfully
weak, vvilfully run into temptations; they shut their eyes, and stop their
ears, they will not see, they will not believe. Oh what losses do they sustain!
how many Sabbaths are lost? how many Sermons are lost? how many reproofs,
counsels, corrections are lost? a Gospel lost, and souls thereby like to be
lost for ever! oh what prodigies are they become? under all this sin and
misery? and yet merry, jolly, laughing, and singing, and sporting, and
feasting, and braving it out, as if nothing ailed them. Feeling nothing of all
that is come upon them, and fearing nothing of all that is coming. Warn them,
reprove them, beseech them, it is all but preaching to a stone. It may be you
have sometimes wondered, to see a company of thieves in prison, to be drinking,
and carousing, and milking merry, when they know that in a few days they must
be brought out, and hanged. When thou wondrest at these, wonder at thy self.
What bitter complaints do we sometimes hear, even from the best of Saints! oh
this hard heart, oh this stubborn spirit; I cannot mourn, I cannot stoop, I
cannot submit. Isa. 63.17. Why have thou hardened our heart from thy fear? Or
why have thou left us, or given us up to an hard heart? why have thou not
softened, and humbled, and broken us? thou have humbled us, and we are not
humbled; broken us, and we are not broken; thou have broken our land, broken
our peace, broken our backs, but the stone is not yet broken; oh for one breach
more Lord; our hearts, our hearts, let these be once broken; our streets
mourn, the Cities of our solemnities mourn, the ways of Sion mourn, oh when
will thou give us a mourning spirit?

Oh what sorrow-bitten souls are the Saints, for want of sorrow! I mourn Lord,
I lament, I weep, but it is because I cannot mourn, or lament as I should; If I
could mourn as I ought, I could be comforted; if I could weep, I could
rejoice; if I could sigh, I could sing; if I could lament I could live; I die,
I dye, mine heart dies within me, because I cannot cry: I cry Lord, but not
for sin, but for tears for sin; I cry Lord, my calamities cry, my bowels cry,
my bones cry, my soul cries, my sins cry, Lord, for a broken heart; and behold,
yet I am not broken.

The Rocks rent, the Earth quakes, the Heavens drop, the Clouds weep, the Sun
will blush, the Moon be ashamed, the foundations of the earth will tremble at
the presence of the Lord, but this heart will neither break nor tremble; O for
a broken heart! If this were once done, might my soul have this wish,
thenceforth my God might have his Will; what would be hard, if my heart were
tender? Labor would be easy, pains would be a pleasure, burdens would be
light; Neither the Command nor the Cross would be any longer grievous, nothing
would be hard but sin. Fear, where art thou? come and plough upon this Rock;
Love where art thou? come and thaw this Ice, come and warm this dead lump; come
and enlarge this straightened spirit, then shall I run the way of his
Commandments.

Oh Brethren, how little, how very little of this tenderness is there to be
found amongst the most of Christians? The sacrifice of God, is a broken heart;
Oh how far must the Lord go to find himself such a Sacrifice? we do but cast
stones up to Heaven, when we lift up our hearts; It Is a wonder, that such
hearts as we carry do not break themselves; that our marble weeps not; that if
nothing else will do it, our hardness does not make us relent; that we should
so labor under, and complain of, and yet not be sick of the Stone.

Broken hearts, yiedling and relenting spirits, tender consciences, Oh where
are they? afraid of sin? tender of transgressing? or mourning under it? when
shall it once be? our lusts no more broken? our pride, our passion, our envy,
our earthliness no more broken? So venturous on temptation, so bold on sin,
such liberty taken to transgress, such mincing, and palliating, and excusing of
sin, as we find: Is this our brokenness? we are tender, it is true; but of
what? of dishonouring God, of abusing Grace, of neglecting Duty; of defiling
Conscience, of wounding of our Souls? No, it is of our flesh, that we are so
tender; tender of labor, tender of trouble, tender of our carcasses, of our
credits, of our Names and reputations, a tender shoulder, a tender hand, a
tender foot; they can bear nothing, nor do nothing; nothing can touch our
flesh, nothing can touch our Idols; our ease, or our estates, but we shrink,
and smart, and are put to pain. God may be smitten and we feel it not; the
Gospel may be smitten, the Church may be smitten, conscience may be smitten,
and it moves us not; We can fear an affliction, fear a reproach, Oh did we so
much fear a temptation, or a sin! we cannot want bread but we feel it, we
cannot want clothes, or an house, or a friend, but we feel it; We cannot
want our sleep, our quiet, our pleasure, our respects from men, but we feel
it, any thing that pinches upon our flesh pierces our hearts. We cannot pine,
or languish in our bodies, but we feel it; a fever; or an ague, or a
consumption, or a dropsy, or any bodily sickness; Oh it makes us sick at
heart; a froward yoak-fellow, an unthrifty servant, an ill neighbor, a scoff,
a slight cannot be born; but Oh! how much sin can be born, while our flesh
will bear nothing? Oh! how can conscience bear, and never complain?

Christians consider, when our flesh must be thus tendered, what ever come of
it; must be tenderly fed, must have soft raiment, soft lodging, soft usage,
deal gently with it, though to maintain it, Conscience must be racked, and
wracked and wasted.

When our Wills cannot be crossed, our appetites cannot be denied, but a
tumult follows, the soul is in an uproar; and conscience mean while, must be
denied, rated, and must go away in silence.

When the Word works no more, when the prints of it are not received; the power
of it is resisted; when the rod works no more; when our stripes make no sign,
when the lashes on our backs fall all besides our hearts; when we remain so
vain, and so wanton, so wilful, and so carnal, and so earthly; after the Lord
has been preaching, and whipping of us into a better frame, when we stand
upon our terms, keep our distances, our animosities, our heats, and heighths of
spirit, our censurings, our quarrellings one with another, Christian with
Christian, Professor with Professor, after the Lord has been beating us
together, to make us friends, and all to learn us more humility, and charity;
Is this our brokenness? is this our tenderness? when upon any the Lords rougher
dealing with us, spitting in our faces, throwing us on our backs, trampling us
in the dirt, we are yet no more brought on our knees; Is this our brokenness?
when the Lord has been awakening us out of sleep, putting his spurs and
goads in our sides, to quicken us on our way; calling to us, arise sleepers,
put on sluggards, stir up your spirits, mend your pace, I will not be put
off as I have been; no more, such loitering, and idling, and trifling, and
halting, as has been; I must have other manner of service, other manner of
praying, and hearing, and walking, and working, than has been; be zealous, and
amend, more labor, more care, more watchfulness, more activity, more of the
Spirit, and Soul of what you profess: When the Lord has been thus goading,
and spurring us on, and though our flesh feels, yet our hearts will not feel,
nor answer the Goad or Spur; Is this an argument of tenderness?

When great duties are little, and lesser are none; when great sins are
infirmities, and little ones are nothing; when lying and defrauding, when false
weights, and false wares, and false dealings; when defaming, backbiting,
tale-bearing, railing, reviling, do stand for little more than ciphers; when
fellowship, and familiarity, with evil men in their sins; when compliance with,
or connivance at their wickedness; when sinful courtings, and complementings of
such, to the fleshing them, and hardening them in their ways, do pass for
virtues, and civilities; when frothy, vvanton discourse, and communication;
when scoffing and making a sport at the sins, or infirmities of others; when
sinful vain jesting, wherein rather Conscience than wit must be denied; when
all these pass for our ornaments, rather than our evils. Where Is our tenderness?

When upon the auditing of our accounts, the examining our books, and reckoning
up our scores; where a talent is owing, we bid conscience take thy bill, and
write down a shekel; where twenty or an hundred sins to be reckoned for, take
thy bill, and write down ten or but one, and that a little one, when we are so
free in multiplying, and so false, in numbering our iniquities; where is our
tenderness?

Well Christians, the Lord has promised a tender heart, to make these stones
flesh; and something possibly is done already upon you, toward it; O let this
sad sight now laid before you, this view of what is wanting, have some influence
upon the making it up; let the sense of no more done, work what is yet undone;
as is said before, let your unbrokenness break your hearts; let the stone that
yet remains, make your flesh to bleed. If you yet feel no more, may you at
least feel this, that you feel not.

CHAP. XIII. An Heart to love the Lord.
4. AN heart to love the Lord. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise
thine heart, and the heart of thy seed: to love the Lord thy God, with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul. Love is the soul of the new creature; the
closure of the soul with God. He that has most of God is most a Christian, and
he that has most of love, has most of God. God is love.

In the opening of this love to God, we shall consider its Object. Act.


1. Its Object. The Object of divine love is God. God is good, and good is
amiable. God is all good, There is none good but one, that is God. God is
essentially good, goodness in the abstract; he is infinitely excellent, he is
all perfection. In this one Attribute, all the rest of the Attributes of God
are included, and this in each of them. However the Scriptures, speaking to our
capacities, describe God and his glorious Attributes, in several and distinct
notions; yet in each one all are included; each one is infinite, and infinite
perfection is essentially all perfection. God is originally good; the fountain
and pattern, of all that moral good that is in the creatures; he is
bountiful, and gracious, ready to do them good; and he is the felicitating
end, or the blessedness of the soul. The goodness of God to his creatures,
according to its different respects to them, has its different and various
appellations. As it is freely bestowed, it is Grace: As it respect them as
needy, so it is Bounty: as in misery, so it is mercy and compassion; as
Provoking, so it is Patience: as it intends their good, so it is love: as it
answers both their necessities and capacities, so it is Al-sufficiency. All
these, his bounty, mercy, compassion, patience, love, al-sufficiency: all these
are in one word, his goodness, and goodness calls for love. The Object of this
love is God. Particularly, 1. God in himself. 2. God in Christ. 3. God in all
the things of God.


1. God in himself, as he is infinitely excellent, (as before) and so worthy
of all love. God is to be loved in himself, and for himself, for his own
worthiness. God is good in himself, and therefore to be loved for himself.

2. God in Christ. In whom alone, considering us as sinners, he can be said
to be good to us.

There is a fourfold incentive of love. Perception. Proportion. Propriety.
Possession.


1. Perception; or the apprehension or understanding of the Object to be
loved; we must know before we can love; now God cannot immediately be seen by
mortals; he dwells in light, but that light is to us invisible. Christ is
the glass, in which this glory may be seen. We cannot see God but through a
vail of flesh, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4. No man has seen God at
any time, but the only begotten of the Father, who is in the bosom of the
Father, he has revealed him.

2. Proportion. And there is a double proportion requisite. 1. In respect of
quantity, there must be sufficiency. 2. In respect of quality, there must be
suitableness.


God himself is proportioned to us, consider us as rational creatures, and in
our state of innocence; is both a sufficient and a suitable good; but God in
Christ only, being considered as lapsed creatures, in a state of sin.

God in Christ, is a God of pity, and compassion to us; a God of patience, a
God of mercy, with whom is plentious redemption. A God, pardoning iniquity, and
passing by transgression; loving us in our low estate, loving us and pitying
us, loving us and pardoning us; loving us and washing us, loving us and saving
us from our sins, and from the wrath to come. And such love is the great flame
that kindles love; love breaking forth out of a cloud of wrath, and fury, and
displeasure; abused love provoked love, and yet forgiving love; to whom much is
forgiven, they will love much.

3. Propriety. What Is good, good for us, and [our own] good, that carries our
hearts. We most love our own good, because we most love our selves. Our love
to God is heightened from our due self-love; there is a sinful self-love; when
either we love that for a self, which is not our self; when we love our flesh
and fleshly interest; or when we love our selves inordinately, more than God,
and God only for our selves; and there is a lawful self-love; when we love our
selves, in the Lord, and for the Lord. And the more we thus love our selves,
the more is the Lord loved by us; and the more he is our own, the more love
he has. Now in Christ the Lord is [our] God. Our own God; even our own God.
Psalm. 67.6. O God thou art [my] God, and I will praise thee. Thou art my God
and I will love thee.

The Lord is God, and we therefore love him; the Lord is good, gracious,
merciful, and we therefore love him, yea, and ought to love him, whether he
be ours or no; but when both mere, he is God and our God; he is good and our
good; gracious, merciful, all-sufficient, and all this to us; hence is our love
made perfect in us.

4 Possession; we can love a distant, an absent good. A good that is only
possible; there is love in hope; but by how much the nearer good is to us, (that
is really so) by so much the more attractive and acceptable it is. It Is then
most in our hearts, when it is most in our hands. Indeed those things which have
only speciem boni, that are fancied good; or those things that are finite good;
and good over-rated; that are judged better than they are, are loved most at a
distance; because when they come to hand, we see our mistake. But that which
is what it seemed; much more, that which is above our thoughts, beyond our
expectations, infinite good; by how much the nearer, it is ever the dearer to
us. All worldly good is most valued, (at least by carnal hearts) at a distance;
they promise themselves more contentment in it, than it has to pay them; their
possession is their disappointment. Whilst they lusted, they idolized, they
adored; but when they have tasted, and eaten, it comes out at their nostrils.
Or else they sit down, with the shame of the disappointed; they are either
surfeited, or hungry still. Is this all? all you can do for me? all the
pleasure, and comfort, I shall have of you? is all my expectation of delight,
and satisfaction, come to no more but this? Miserable comforters are you all!
possession and fruition is the proof of all things. And vanity proved, is the
less loved. But God being an all-sufficient, incomprehensible good; by how much
the nearer to us, by how much the more he is ours by so much the more we
prize and love, because now we find (when we have him, we enjoy him) that
before, the one half was not told us.

Now in Christ, we have not only a propriety in God, but in some degree, a
present possession. He that has the Son, [hath] the Father also. We see his
light, we feel his love, we taste of his goodness, we enjoy his presence,
we have God with us, we have God in us, we have fellowship with him, he
dwells in us, and we in him, and hence we love, and herein we rejoice.

3. God in all the things of God, in his Word, Ordinances, Sabbaths, Saints, in
graces, duties, in all his ways, the Saints love God, and love his word, it is
God in the word they love; they love God, and they love Ordinances, and
Sabbaths, and Saints; it is God in all these they love; They love the ways, and
works, and all the dispensations of God, and it is God in them all they love,
they see God in every thing, and they love God where ever they see him. They
look on all these things with another eye, and therefore embrace them with
another heart then other men.

The Saints love to the things of God, is their love to God; for it is God in
them (as was said) that they love, their love to them is founded either on,
their participation of God, or, relation to God.


Or else you may say they love the things of God, because they are, the
Offspring the Images the Chariots
of God.

1. The things of God, are the Offspring of God, as the Saints are born from
above, so all the things of God, are (...), they come down from above, and
therefore may also be called as the Apostle styles them, (...), things above,
Phil. 3.1,2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above,
set your affections on things above; things above, and the things of God, come
all to one, whatsoever is from God, and belongs to his Heavenly Kingdom, is
divine, and heavenly; and he that loves him that begets, therefore loves
those which are begotten, and whatsoever proceeds from him.

2. The Word and the Saints are the Images of God, the character, and impresse
of God are upon them; the Grace in the Saints, and the holy truths in the Word,
are the very face of Christ; who is full of Grace and Truth, and this is their
Rule, love God, and love his Image.

3. The things of God are the Chariots of God. He that makes the Clouds his
Chariots, makes also his Word, and his Ordinances, and his Ministers, his
Chariots, wherein he rides down into these lower parts, to give the World a
meeting. When Ministers come, and the Word comes down, God comes down in them
to visit his people; as 'twas said of Paul, So it is true of Apollos, and
Cephas, and all the dispensers of the Gospel, they are chosen Vessels to bear
his Name, before the Sons of men; and as they are the Chariots in which God
comes down, so are they also the Wagons which he has sent them, to fetch them
up to himself; The Saints send up their hearts in their duties, their hearts in
their prayers, in their praises unto God. Old Israel's heart leaped, when he
saw the Wagons which Joseph had sent. Oh what love does the Psalmist express,
to the House and Courts of the Lord! O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, I was
glad when they said unto me, let us go up into the House of the Lord. He was
glad to go thither, because thence he hoped to be carried higher, from the
Mountain to the Mansion; from Mount Zion here below, to Jerusalem, which is
above.

It Is the duty, and the delight of the Saints to be ascending Heaven-wards,
they are dead with Christ, they are risen with Christ; and it is not as they
would with them, but when they are ascending up with Christ, they are dead with
Christ, by repentance and humiliation, they are risen with Christ, by faith and
sanctification, and they ascend with Christ, by love and holy affection, this
is their Chariot of fire, a Chariot, within a Chariot, that through Duties and
Ordinances rides up in its own flames to the God of Love.

Or if you will, the Ordinances of God, are our Jacobs Ladder reaching from
Heaven to Earth; by which, Angels descend, and souls ascend, God comes down,
and hearts go up, praises go up, and blessings come down; thou have not proved
what an Ordinance is, what Prayer means, or Preaching means, or Sacraments
mean, that have not seen God coming down, nor felt thine heart ascending by
them; he that has felt this, will say, here let me dwell; let others be
where they will, amongst their flocks, amongst their herds, upon their beds, or
at their cups, amongst their Harlots, or in their houses; It is good for me to
be here.

No wonder Christians, that carnal hearts are such strangers to the Word, can
so well fit out at Duties, and can want Ordinances; Preaching and Praying, and
Sabbaths, they can spare, and not feel their want, what wonder? What is Heaven
to Earth? what is God to flesh? these Chariots would carry them away from their
Gods, carry them out of their own Country, into a strange Land, where they have
neither possession nor acquaintance; But oh! what a sad wonder is it, that
Saints should go up so often into the Chariots, and yet be gotten no nearer
home, that they should be still so much on the Earth, that have been so often
mounted for Heaven; that those hearts should still be on the dunghils, whose
feet are so often on the mountain of the Lord; that the Wagons should be so
often sent down, and go up empty; scarce an heart sent up in them; yea, that
they should be so far from God, when God is among them. Where Is your love,
Christians? how is it that it is still below? what have you here? your City is
above; your home is above; your God, your Jesus, your treasure is above: oh how
is it, that where your treasure is, your hearts be not also? hear from God,
and not God with the messenger? send up to heaven, your eyes, your hands, your
prayers, your complaints, your promises, and still leave your hearts below?
send up hearts to heaven, and let them return again down to this earth? remain
earth, and flesh, and filth, and vanity, after so much converse or pretense to
it, with the holy God of spirits? love thou God? when thou can so often go
where he is, and not care to see him? or if thou meet him, can let him go
without a blessing? or if he bless thee, can go presently and exchange thy
Fathers blessing for a mess of pottage? can lose a duty in a dinner, the
comforts and revivings of a Sermon, of a Sacrament, of a Sabbath, in an hours
carnal converse in the world? did we love our God more, certainly we should
be more with him, and to better purpose. His meetings would be more precious,
and the fruits of them more lasting. We should neither go away without his
blessing, nor throw it away when we had gotten it.

Thus much for the object of love.

2. Its Act. Love is a natural Affection. The love of God is the souls clasping
or closing with the Lord. It is the expansion, or going out of the heart, in
its strength, after God, the uniting or knitting of the soul with God, with a
complacency and acquiescence in him.

There are three things included in this love.

1. The strength of the heart making out after God. This is that which is
commonly called our amor desiderii, or our love of desire, the breathing, or
thirsting, or panting of the heart, after God, Psalm. 42.1. The hearts vvorking
God-vvards with its might; loving him above all things, desiring him above all
things; and that both Intensive with the greatest vigor and intention: and
adaequate as its complete, and adequate object. God is its All. Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

2. The uniting of the soul with God. Our cleaving to him. By love heart
cleaves to heart, soul cleaves to soul. Its said of Shechem, Genesis 34.3. that
his heart clave unto Dinah. He loved her with his heart, she was gotten
into his heart, and there his heart holds her. Acts 11.23. Barnabas exhorts the
Church, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. It is the
knitting of the soul with God. Its said, 1 Samuel 1.18. That the soul of
Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own
soul. And of Jacob, Genesis 44.30. to express his tender love to Benjamin, it is
said, his life was bound up in the lads life. Of the multitude of believers we
read Act. 4.32. that they were all of one heart and of one soul. Their love had
knit them up all into one. By love we are one with God, and he with us. It is
the souls willing of God, as I may so speak. Willing of God to it self, and
willing it self, and all to God. All praises, all honor, all blessedness to
him. Be thou mine Lord, nothing less, nothing else. Be thou mine, I need no
less, I desire no more. Let me be thine, be to thee, be for thee, thy
servant, thy sacrifice, or what thou will, and let all mine be thine; mine
heart, and my hand, and my tongue, and my time, and mine interest. Let all
thine be to thee; thy heavens and thy earth, with every person, with every
creature in them. Let every heart, every mouth, every limb, every creature, be
a praise to the Lord. Let the Lord live, and blessed be my rock, let the God
of my salvation be exalted. Let every knee bow, let every tongue confess unto
God. This is the amor unionis, our love of union, as it is called. And it is the
heart, the very essence of saving love; wherein are included both our accepting
of God, and our surrender or resignation of our selves unto God. Amor non est
nisi donum amantis in amaetum. And our wishing and willing all glory, dominion,
and blessedness to him. And so here also is our amor benevolentiae, our love of
benevolence. All these may be included in that opening of the heart,
mentioned, Acts 16.14. Its there said, that the Lord opened Lydia's heart. The
heart is then savingly opened, when it freely lets out it self upon God; all
its streams run in to the Lord; and when it takes in, and takes down, God into
the depth of the soul. The heart thus opened to the Lord, when God is come in,
will close upon him. Abide with me; thou have entered upon thine habitation, oh
let this be thy dwelling for ever. Only this must be farther added, that
with God it takes in all the things of God; his Word, his Ordinances, his
ways, and all his dispensations. With his love his laws; with his comforts his
counsels; with his counsels his corrections; with thee, I accept of all that is
thine; both thy staff and thy rod; both thy yoke and thy cross; thy self Lord,
thy love Lord, and what thou will with thee.

3. The souls talking pleasure, and taking up its rest in him. This is called
our Amor complacentiae. Where we love there will be a delightful stay or
immoration of the mind upon God. Ubi amor, ibi oculus. The object dwells in the
eye; we are still looking where we love. Anima est ubi amat. When I awake, I am
still with thee; there his thoughts are, of him is his meditation all the day
long.

My meditation of him shall be sweet. He that loves dwells in God. I will
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. And why there? why there his God
dwells, and therefore there his soul takes up its dwelling. There is also an
acquiescence of the heart in him. Return unto thy rest, O my soul. But this is
not felt, till love has obtained. Till the soul feels it self to love and to
have what it loves; to love and to be beloved; to accept and to be accepted
of God. When it comes to this, then I have enough. I am my beloveds, and my
beloved is mine. And here is the sweetness of Religion; the marrow and fatness
of godliness, the pleasure of love. When I love I can rest; when I can rest I
can rejoice; when I feel my self to love, I know I am beloved, and then what is
there wanting? where love is a stranger joy is not known; we can never take
comfort in any thing, but in that which we love. When take we pleasure in
eating, but when we have meat that we love? what is a friend, or a wife, or a
child, when we love them not? what is society or communion, where love has
not first made an union? can two walk together except they be agreed? with
little comfort sure; they would be better pleased, were they parted asunder.
It Is love that is the pleasure of our lives. It Is love that makes heaven sweet;
there we shall have our fill of joy, because there we have our fill of love.
Heaven would be no heaven, God himself could not be the joy, if he were not
the love of his Saints. What bitter draughts will love sugar? sin, and lusts,
and all the filth of the flesh, are sweet morsels to carnal hearts; it is meat
they love. God is nothing, Christ is nothing to them; What is thy beloved more
than other beloveds? Religion is a bondage to them, holiness a weariness; not
the labors only, but the joys of the Saints, are empty and unsavory things;
there are no feasts, but love feasts. Love is both the best dish, and the only
sauce to every dish; it is the best dish, he that feeds on divine love, will
never complain of a short meal; and it is the only sauce for every dish, it is
but unsavory meat that is not seasoned with love; we may a little change the
proverb, love is the best sauce. Be the meat never so excellent, it will not
relish if it be not loved. Love will make any thing down. When it puts such a
sweetness into sin, that even death, and hell will down with carnal hearts for
its sake, oh what a feast will love make of holiness and glory? get love to
Christ, love to Religion, and you will never demand, where is the blessedness?
where is the sweetness?

Love will sweeten, both the comforts, and the exercises of Religion; 'twill
make duties sweet, yea, and sufferings sweet. There are two things that are
naturally sweet to love. To please. To praise.


1. He that loves will please, and observe whom he loves. How careful are such
to watch themselves, that they grieve not their friend; what study does love
put them upon, to find out what is grateful and acceptable. Acceptable looks,
acceptable language, acceptable entertainment; what will thou Lord? what will thou have me to be? a servant? a doorkeeper? a servant of servants for thee?
I will be nothing but what thou will; any thing that thou will have me. What
will thou have me to do, Lord! let me know thy will, appoint me my work. O
that my ways were so directed, that I might keep thy statutes. What vvilt thou
have of me? vvilt thou have mine Idols! mine ease, or mine honor, or my
pleasure, or my house, or mine estate? vvilt thou have mine Isaacks? is there
any thing dearer to me than other, that might be an offering to the Lord? will thou have my liberty, or my life! behold all is at thy feet; I can keep back
nothing thou call for.

Hence love is said to be the fulfilling of the Law. There is in this good
will, radically every good work. It would walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. Love is generous; it would do
great things, noble things; what shall I do for him, whom my soul honors! oh
for a gift, that might be worthy of him! but I have nothing; my goodness
extends not to thee; it would give more than it owes; but where it cannot do
so, where it cannot be generous, yet it would be just; it would level all
accounts, and pay all debts; love would have nothing but love owing. It would
give to all their due; it would not die in the debt of a servant, of a
stranger, much less (could it help it) would it defaulk from the God of glory.
That Is the daily charge of love, pay what thou owe. Its receipts and returns,
are a pleasure to it; any thing that comes down from heaven, and every present
it has to send thither, is a joy to love. This is the message that both speak,
happy soul, thou love and art beloved. It catches at all opportunities, to
send up messages of love, and knows no fitter messenger to send by, than by
the hand of duty. Every duty is dispatched with this superscription, the
tribute of love.

Love is the spring, that sets all our wheels a going; the womb, in which all
our works are formed; the fire in the heart, that vents it self in our words
and ways. The fire kindled, then spoke I with my tongue. Love is to a Saint,
what malice is to Satan; that which gives force to all his actings. Satan's
temptations are called fiery darts; and this, not only because they are
headed, and barbed with fire; as poisoned arrows, they burn where they hit;
they set sin on fire, they set the soul on fire; burning with lust, and
wickedness. but because they are winged with fire, and forced with fire; the
bullet is fired out of the Gun, and thence it flies so fiercely. It Is the
malice of Satan's heart that fires out all his darts. What malice does with
Satan, that does love with Saints. It sets the heart in a flame, of holy zeal,
and activity for God. Jer. 20.9. Thy word was in me as fire, (it has kindled
a fire there) I was weary with forbearing. An heart of love is weary, but not
of action, but of idleness. Weary with forbearing, not with doing; never weary
of doing much, ever weary of doing nothing. O God my heart is fixed, my heart
is fixed; says the Psalmist, I will sing and give thanks. Love will add, O
God, mine heart is fiered, my heart is fiered; there is a flame kindled; mine
heart burns, in holy desires, and zeal for thee; and where love has set the
heart a burning, the heart will set the hand a working, and the feet a running.

2. He that loves will praise whom he loves. Praise is comely, and praise is a
pleasure to the upright in heart. It Is the delight of love to be speaking of
the perfections, of the virtues, of the beauties, of the excellencies of her
beloved. The Spouse in the book of Canticles whose whole language is all love,
her heart is so full, that her lips overflow with the mention of the
excellencies of Christ. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest amongst ten
thousand. His head fine gold, his eyes Dove's eyes, his cheeks a bed of spices,
his lips are lillies, his hands are gold-rings, his legs pillars of marble, his
countenance excellent, his mouth sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely; this is
my beloved, and this is my friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. Cant. 5. Who is a
God like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the City of our God. Thy mercy
O Lord, is in the heavens, thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds. Thy
righteousness is like the great mountains, thy judgments are a great deep. How
excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord, therefore the sons of men put their
trust under the shadow of thy wings. I will speak of the glorious honor of thy
Majesty, and of thy wondrous works; the Lord is gracious and full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. Let all thy works praise thee, O Lord
let thy Saints bless thee; let them speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and
talk of thy power. Let them abundantly utter the memory of thy goodness, and
sing of thy righteousness. O my God, thou art all love, all goodness, all
grace, all glory; O let thy servant be all praise. Let this heart be an
altar, and every service a sacrifice; let this mouth be a trumpet, and every
word a Psalm; let my breath be as incense, and every member a censer. Let all
that is within me, my soul with all its powers; let all that is without me, my
body with all its members, shout for joy, and sing forth the high praises of
God. This is the voice of Love.

And now you have another excellency of the new heart, laid open to your view:
Love; An heart to love.

Christians, prize this precious grace; prize it, and you will write down, this
word also, among the great and precious Promises; and if you would prize it
aright, take your estimate of it, from its worth, and its want; as we use to
prize Jewels, from their excellency, rarity.


1. Prize it, according to its worth, and excellency. Why, what is the worth?
Cant. 8.7. If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it
would be contemned. The whole world is not of that value, to be a price for
love; no it must come by gift, it is not to be bought for money, love is worth
as much as a soul, and that is more than all the world. What shall it profit a
man, to win the whole World, and lose his own Soul? love is as much worth as
all Religion; it is the soul and the substance of all Religion; all the Graces,
the Duties and Exercises of it, are only valued, according to the love that is
in them; what is knowledge, faith, hope, patience without love? what is prayer,
fasting, alms, without charity? They are worth nothing, shall I say? nay they
are nothing; If I had all knowledge, and all faith, and were all prayer, and
all labor, and all suffering; and had not charity, I were nothing. Love is
worth as much as Heaven is worth, as Christ, as God is worth to us. God is
love, and God is not, if love be not in us. Do thou prize thy substance? Is
thy house, or thy money, or thy lands, any thing to thee? Do thou value thy
soul? Is Religion, is Heaven, is Christ, is God himself of any account with
thee? Then prize the love of God; Without love, God is no God to thee, Christ
is no Christ to thee, Heaven is no Heaven for thee; better thou had no soul,
no being than no love. O prize the Love of God; prize and seek, prize and pray,
pray as for thy life, as for thy soul, as for thy everlasting Kingdom; Lord
let me love thee; Get love, and get all, love and thou will be holy, love and
thou will be humble, love and thou will be fruitful, love, and thou will
please, praise, and enjoy thy God, love and thou will fear, serve, suffer, and
die for him, love, and thou shall live; prize love, prize it according to its
worth. And

2. Prize it according to its rarity. Things excellent are rated something the
more for their scarcity; scarcity raises the Market, the Word of God was
precious in those days, 1 Samuel 3.1. that is, when there was a Famine of the
Word, when there was no open Vision: O were the love of God, as precious as
it is rare! what a spiritless carcass is the Religion of many Professors?
what is become of the soul of it? Oh! we freeze in our Duties, we freeze in our
Devotions, we are almost frozen out of them all; if we have a Sacrifice
left, what fire is there to offer it up? The God that answers by fire, let
him be God, said Elijah: the heart that asks by fire, that ascends in
fire, let that be the heart for God: Behold the wood, and the fire, but where
is the Lamb for the Sacrifice? We may say behold the wood and the sacrifice,
but where is the Fire to offer it up? our Spirits have taken a cold, the chill
of them appears in all our duties. Rabbi where dwell thou? Love where
dwell thou? Zeal of God, where is thy abode? how many houses must we
search? how many hearts must we walk through, e're we find thine Habitation?
The Apostle tells the Romans, Romans 10.2. that they have a Zeal of God, but not
according to Knowledge; we have the Knowledge of God, but oh! where is the
Zeal? the Zeal of thine house, says the Psalmist, has eaten me up; but is
not that eater eaten? The house has burnt up the fire, or if there be any fire
left, is it not strange fire? not the fire of Love, but of Lust, of Pride, or
Covetousness; or that wild fire of envy, and contention, that heats our
spirits? Jehu was all on fire against the house of Ahab; Come see my zeal for
the Lord of Hosts. That fire was fury, not love; or if 'twas love, 'twas
self-love, not the love of God, that made all that flame; such hearts are like
the evil tongue, James 3. set on fire of Hell. Such heats are not from above,
but are earthly, sensual, devilish; we freeze still, while we thus fry; our
praeter-natural heats have extinguished the supernatural.

O! how little kindly warmth do we find in our spirits? do we feel our hearts
working upwards, ascending in our flames? we all pretend to love, but
consider, are our hearts making out in their strength after God? We wish well
to his Name and Interest, we wish he were ours, we wish our selves his; O if
wishing were loving! what Christians should we be? But does the Kingdom of God
suffer violence? who are they that so run, as if they would take God by force,
take Heaven by force? The Kingdom of Heaven may offer violence if it will, and
take us by force; but how little violence does it suffer? We say we love God,
but is there not something else we love more? we desire to be holy, but is
there not something else we desire more?

Oh how few hearty friends has Christ in the world? and how little love from
these few? so little, that we cannot tell our selves, whether it be any thing
or nothing; how hard are we put to it? what a narrow search must we make? how
many arguments must we consult? how many marks must we consider, e're we can
prove we love him? and yet at last, are still in doubt, whether we love him or
not.

When we love our carnal Friends, our Wives, our Children, we can feel that we
love them; when we love our Ease, or our Estates, or our Liberties, we can feel
that we love them; but our God we cannot tell whether we love him or no; How
few of us can boldly make our appeal to him, Lord, thou know that I love
thee.

Oh! how many wounds does Christ receive in the house of his Friends? how many
sleights must he put up? how often when he has sat down, in his own, (in
the highest) room, have we said, to him give this man place, give this friend
or this business place; and so made him take the lower room. How has he when
he has come to our doors (his love has often brought him thither) how often
has he stood, and knocked and called, open to me my Love, my Sister; and
there been made to stand, and wait, when strangers have been gotten in, and
taken up all the rooms? The world can never come out of season, but Christ is
fain to wait his seasons, when he can find us at leisure; if there be any
other guest with us, our Lord must wait; Go thy way for this time, when I have
a convenient season, I will send for thee; how often have we agreed, and
appointed to meet the Lord, at such an hour; in our Chamber, in our Closet, to
have converse and communion with him in Duty; and if any thing come in, ^o
carry us another way, then presently, I pray thee have me excused; or if we do
keep our time, and shut in our selves with the Lord, and sit down to Duty; what
a multitude of thoughts presently fall a knocking at our doors? and away our
hearts go presently with them, to the ends of the earth, and leaves nothing but
our carcasses behind with the Lord; O were our love stronger, our cries would
be louder, and would drown the noise of these knockings, that they would not
be heard nor heeded, it would command silence to every impertinent thought. I
charge you, O Daughters, that you stir not, that you disturb not my Beloved,
and my Soul; more love would command their attendance, upon the work of the
Lord, would gird up the loins of the mind, and gather in all its scattered
Messengers; come all ye powers of my soul, come and do your homage, come and
help in the service of my God.

Oh! at what distance are we content to live from the Lord, sometimes for many
days together? Our souls and our God are grown strange, and yet we can be
merry, and quiet; we can be without the presence of God, and yet never miss
it: not a smile from his face, nor a look of love from us to him, and yet no
trouble follows; the Sun may be Ecclipsed, or under a Cloud, and yet no
darkness upon our Spirits: we do not walk in darkness, when we have no light,
sorrow and sadness is as far from us, as God is from us; we can warm our selves
at our own fires, and rejoice in the light of our own sparks, as if these were
the Sun; we can do as well in a Mist, as in the Sunshine, day and night are
both alike to us; The Children of the Bride-chamber do not Fast, but can Feast,
and make merry, when the Bridegroom is taken from them; their carnal
contentments, they can make a shift with, to supply the room of their Lord. Can
we not sometimes go where our Lord feeds, and never find him; go to pray, or
go to hear, or go to a Sacrament, and the Lord never meet us there, and yet can
return well enough satisfied? When we thus want communion with God, and [can]
want it; where is our love, what love is that? which can so well bear the
absence of her Beloved? Call me no more Naomi, pleasant; but call me Marah,
bitter; I went out full, but I return empty; Full of Grace, full of Joy,
because full of the Lord; but behold all is gone, my Husband is lost, my God is
departed from me: Call me no more Naomi, but call me Marah, for the Almighty
has dealt bitterly with me, has hid his face from me, for these things I
weep, mine eyes, mine eyes run down with tears, because the Comforter that
should relieve my soul, is far from me; such are the tears of Love, for her
absent Lord.

Oh! how little Conscience is there made of bestowing that on the Lord, which
we have bestowed on him; we give and take, we pretend to have given all to
God; but are we not often taking away, what we have given, and bestowing it
elsewhere? Love would have all we have running into God, and would have nothing
run besides; but Oh! what waste is there made? of our time, of our parts, and
other Talents, which were they well husbanded, would come to much, and be
given to the Lord? when so many days, and hours run out, and no account taken
of them, on what, or on whom, they are consumed; when our eyes, and our ears,
and hands, and tongues, which were made for God; the Devil, and Lust, must so
often have the using of them; when back and belly, and friends and companions,
must carry away, what should be spent on God and Souls; when what should be
allowed for Religion, and Charity to have the spending of, must be at the
disposure of Pride, Prodigality, and Gluttony; when our Prayers, our Fasting,
our Preaching, and hearing; all our Duties must become sacrifices to our Lust,
our Idols are suffered to devour the Sacrifices of the Lord; when our pride and
fleshly ends, must have the offering, and the eating of our Sacrifices; this
must make our Prayers, and preach our Sermons, and keep our Fasts, and give our
Alms, and wear the credit, and honor of them, as its own Crown; when God is
thus robbed, and we let the thief run away with all, and is never pursued, or
questioned, Oh! where is our love?

Oh! how little pleasure do we take in the Lord? what a weariness is it to us,
to wait upon him? how glad are we, when we come [back] from the House of the
Lord? when we come off our Knees, come out of our Closets, when the Sabbaths
are gone, and the New Mons are over, and we make our returns from Heaven to
Earth? How much work have we, to keep our hearts by the Lord? how do they
slink away e're we are aware? and whilst we are in his Presence, how seldom
do we rejoice in his Presence? What hungry meals, what jejune feasts do we
make before the Lord? We relish not his Daintys, his Wine is but lees, his
Marrow and his fat things, are but leanness to our Souls; a little love would
sweeten every drop, would season every morsel, that comes from his Table; would
make our very Fasts to be pleasant bread: We feed upon the dish, or the
trencher, and not the meat; on the bone, and not the marrow; Ordinances, and
the external Exercises of Religion, are but the bone, or the shell, or the
dish, it is God that is the Kernel, the Marrow and Fatness. How little
Communion have we with the Lord, in our approaches to him, and how little
sweetness do we find in the little we have? Communion is the pleasure of
Love, and Love is the sweetness of Communion; Now I am where I would be; O!
how amiable are thy Tabernacles? very pleasant art thou to me O Lord; that is
the voice of Love. Had we more love, we should be more spiritual; and
spiritual things, would be more grateful to spiritual hearts; Divine Love, is
like the fire, it rarifies, and changes hearts into its own likeness, and then
there is sweetness; O we are carnal, and that is enough to evidence, that there is
little of the love of God abiding in us.

Consider these things, and you will see that love is a rarity; there is but
little true love in the world; O prize the love of God; let its want make it
prized; shall it be so rare, and yet so cheap? prize it, and press on after it.

What do these hearts below? are they not still below? so cold, such clods of
clay, and yet above? so carnal, so sensual and yet in Heaven? so hungry, and so
greedy in sucking the juice of this earth, in taking in its pleasures; so busy
in digging out the Wealth of the earth, and searching for its treasures;
[hearts] so busy this way, and yet not here? how can thou say, I am walking
with the God of Glory, when thou art still worshipping the Gods of the Earth?
how can thou say, this heart is risen, it is not here; when it may be said
to thee, behold the place where it lies; it is still in the field, in the
ridges and furrows thereof; it is still in the Mines, in the heart of the
earth, see the place where it lies; we sow our hearts with our seed, we send
them down to dig in the heart of the Earth.

But what do these hearts below? sursum corda, get you up, get you up; leave
nothing but the Mantle here, your carcasses; Earth to Earth, Dust to Dust. Come
heave these souls Heavenward; let them take the wing and be gone; O that I had
the wings of a Dove, that I might fly up, and be at rest; Be lower than ever by
humility, but let love be on high.

Behold those cords of love, that are let down in every Ordinance, in every
Providence; there is a cord let down to gather up hearts; hearken to those calls
of love, come up hither, come up hither; we come Lord; thou bid'st us come, O
lend us thy hand, and lift us up.

Come on Christians, come let us be happy, if we love we are happy; Come let us
rejoice, if we love we joy; come let us live, we dye, we dye; while we
linger on this earth, if we love, we live; let us live, and let our life be
love; let our works be, labors of love, our sufferings seals of love, our
sorrows, the sorrows of love, our wounds, loves scars, our prayers the cries of
love, our praises, love songs, to our Lord and God. Let every duty, every
exercise, let every member, every power, let our bodies, let our souls, be
loves Sacrifices; as we see in all his, so let the Lord see love in all our
ways.

Can thou not love? look till thou can, look up to thy God, send up thy
thoughts thither; let thy Meditations be of him, these will not be long
before the Throne, e're they fetch up thy heart; Look on thy Jesus, behold his
hands and his feet; come and put thy finger into the print of the Nails, and
thrust thine heart into his side; and there let it lie, till thou feel it warm;
Look up to thy Jesus, lift up a prayer, Lord let me love thee; if thou love
let me love thee; I will seek till I can see, let me see till I can love.
What have I here Lord? my all is with thee, my help, my hope, my treasure, my
life is hid with Christ in God. And yet behold this all is nothing to me,
while mine heart is no more with thee, take it Lord, take it up; where my
treasure is, there let mine heart be also.

Doubting Christian, who because thou love so little, fear thou love not
at all; cry for more, but be thankful for what thou have; be ashamed thou
love no more, but be not dismayed, thou complainest thou can not love God;
but do thou love his Image? his Saints, his Word, his Works, his Ways?
Whilst thou say thou love not God, do thou love Godliness; if thou can
not love, can grieve, can lament after him? have thou chosen, do thou
hang upon, trust in the Lord? If thou can not love, can fear and follow
the Lord? If he be not sensibly in thy affection, is he in thy thoughts, in thy
mouth, in thine eye? Is he thy aim, and thy scope? does thy course bend
toward him? Comfort thine heart in these things, thou may see, though thou
can not feel thou love.

CHAP. XIV. An heart to fear the Lord.
AN heart to fear the Lord, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me, I shall proceed to the opening of this by
these steps; I shall show 1. That the Lord God is a dreadful God. 2. That the
Lord has put the dread of himself upon the hearts of all the earth. 3. That
yet by sin the heart of man is much hardened from the fear of the Lord. 4. That
God will recover his Honor, and again put his fear into the hearts of his
people. 5. What this fear of the Lord is, that he will put into them.

1. The Lord God, is a dreadful God; he is dreadful in the Excellency and
Glory of his Majesty, Job 13.11. Shall not his Excellency make you afraid, and
his dread fall upon you? His Power is dreadful. Fear ye not me, says the
Lord? Will ye not tremble at my presence? Which have placed the sand for the
bound of the Sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the
Waves thereof toss themselves, yet they cannot prevail; though they roar, yet
can they not pass over it. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? He that did this,
what can he not do? His wrath is a dread, Jer. 10.10. At his wrath, the earth
shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation. Yea,
his Holiness, his Truth, his Righteousness, and all his Name, Deuteronomy, 28.58. That
thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name (the Lord thy God.) The Lord
God is a dreadful God.

2. The Lord God has put the dread of himself upon the hearts of all the
earth. Not the best only, but the worst of the sons of men. I am a great King,
says the Lord, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. This dread of the
Lord breaks forth upon them,

1. From the impress of God upon the natures of all men. As the Law, so the
being of God is written in their hearts, he has his witness in their
Consciences. If the Atheists of the Earth could answer all the Arguments from
without, proving that there is a God, yet they can never confute their own
Consciences. If the works of God do not, their Reins shall instruct them; If
they will not see, whether they will or no they shall feel that there is a God;
and where ever God is felt, he is feared: Even when their mouth speaks proud
things, their heart shall meditate terror; and when nothing else is, they shall
be a terror to themselves.

2. It is increased by the great works of God, his Wonders that he does in the
world; his Thunder, and his Hail, his Wind, and his Waves, and his
Earthquakes, make an Earthquake in hearts.

3. Its further heightened, by his Judgments which he executes on the Earth.
The Judgments of God, are God revealing himself from Heaven, against the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; and do then strike most terror, 1. When
he smites suddenly, and makes quick work with sinners: as when Herod was smote
by an Angel of God, Nadab and Abihu consumed by fire from God, immediately upon
their sin. Sudden strokes shake secure hearts. 2. When he executes strange
judgments, makes a new thing, as in the case of Korah and his company, he made
the Earth to open her mouth upon them and swallow them up; so he made the
flies, and the froggs, and the lice, etc. to be the Executioners of his Wrath
on Pharaoh. 3. When he executes great Wrath for little Sins, as men account
them; as in the case of Uzzah, whom he struck dead, for but touching the Ark
when it shook. 4. When he exercises great severity on his own; on those that
are near him. If he spares not his Sons, what will he do with his Enemies? If
these things be done on the green Tree, what shall be done on the dry?

4. Yet further, By their Conscience of guilt, and their binding over to the
judgment to come. The sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, with the
point of a Diamond, it is graven upon the tables of their heart. The sin of
[Judah] is written; yea, and the sin of the Gentile also, Romans 2.15. Their
Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing.
And where their sin is written, there their judgment is written; which even
nature it self will teach, does inevitably follow upon sin: and this is the
great dread that is upon them. The very mention of judgment to come, made a
Felix tremble, at the face of a poor Prisoner. This is the terror of the Lord,
mentioned by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10,11. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat. -- Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.
Death is said to be the King of terrors; and this is the terror of death, after
that the judgment. All these, the impress of God upon their hearts; the wonders
of God in the world; the vengeance of God executed on sin; the sense of gui^t,
and of a judgment to come, do preach to the Consciences of sinners, that It is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

3. Yet by sin the heart of man is much hardened from the fear of the Lord. Sin
blinds the eye, and hardens the heart; brings into danger, and puts out of
fear. Who in such danger, and yet who so bold as the blind sinner? When the
understanding is darkened, the next word we read is, Past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
There is included in the very nature of sin, a slighting of God; and by once
slighting, we learn to slight him more. Slight the Command, and you will
quickly slight the Curse: Laugh at duty, and 't will not be long ere you laugh
at tear: And when sin has thus hardened, God will also harden; lets the sinner
alone, suspends his judgments, smites the sinner with judicial blindness, and
gives him up to a Reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. And when once they come to this,
then Hell is broke loose: For what follows? ver. 29. Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, malitiousness, and what
not? Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, there
is no fear of God before his eyes. Gen, 20 When Abraham had such a thought,
Surely the fear of God is not in this place, what thought he was there then?
Murder, Adultery, Rapes, all manner of villainy. What saw thou amongst us,
that thou have done this thing? What hurt, what evil did thou see among us?
What evil? Evil enough, to make me afraid; I thought the fear of God was not
here, and there needs no more to make me afraid. Say of any Person, The fear of
God is not in this man, and you therein say, The Devil is in him, here dwells
sin, and all manner of wickedness.

Say of any place, The fear of God is not in this place, and if you find it an
Egypt, or Sodom for abominations, you will not wonder. Psalm. 19.9. The fear of
the Lord is clean. That is, not only Formaliter, but Effective, it cleanses.
Where this is not, every unclean thing may dwell. The reason why this world is
such a world as it is, such a wicked world, such a treacherous, deceitful,
ungodly world; why there is so little Faith, or Truth, or Mercy, or Charity, or
Sobriety, is, because there is so little of the fear of God. Sin has cast out
fear, and this has brought forth sin in abundance. The Law is nothing,
Threatenings are nothing, Conscience is nothing, God is nothing to men, because
he is not their fear. Wickedness is as righteousness, villainy as honesty;
prodigality, debauchery, as temperance and sobriety; yea, and has gotten the
start of it; it faceth the Sun, it lifts up the head, it wears the Garland; it
paints it self Virtue, Generosity, Gallantry, the beauty and ornament of the
World, where the fear of God is departed.

God may promise, threaten, command; Hearken to my voice, turn at my reproofs,
cast away your transgressions: Awake from your wine, be chaste, sober, be
humble; let your merriment be turned into mourning, your jollity into
heaviness. Remember your Creator, remember your souls, why will you die? Turn
and live: God may speak thus, once, and twice, and ten times, but is not
regarded; his words have no weight, his counsels have no credit, his warnings
are of no value with hardened fearless hearts. If the Devil speak but on^e, he
is heard; if Lust speak but on^e, it is obeyed; if a proud companion speak but
once, he is followed; whilst the word of the God of glory is made a reproach
and a scorn. Oh the intolerable contempt that is poured out upon the most High,
by men that fear not God! Make thy promises, and give thy gifts to whom thou will; give Grace, and give Glory where thou please; the World for me, my
Pleasures, mine Honors, my Liberty for me; this world for me, look after the
other who will. Let the Lord threaten, let the day of the Lord come, let it
hasten that we may see it, let the Almighty do his worst, I will not hearken
nor turn: This is the blasphemy of hardened fearless hearts.

4. God will recover his Honor in the hearts of his people. He will put his
fear in their hearts, whilst others are hardened, they shall tremble; whilst
others kick, they shall stoop; who ever despise me, of these will I be had in
honor.

5. What this fear of the Lord is, that he will put into their hearts. The fear
of God is taken in Scripture,

1. Sometimes more largely, as it comprehends all Religion. Job was said, Chap.
1. to be a man fearing God, that is, a godly man; but in this ^nse I shall not
here speak of it.

2. Sometimes more Strictly, as a distinct grace, as distinguished from Faith,
Love, Hope, and other graces of the Spirit. And being taken in this sense,
there are these two things included in it. 1. A Reverence of God. 2. An
Abhorrence of evil for Gods sake.


1. A Reverence of God. To fear God, is to have the awe of God abiding upon the
heart, to be under a sense of the Majesty and Glory of the Lord, shining forth
in all his Attributes, especially in his Holiness and Omniscience; the glory of
his Holiness, and the sense of such an holy eye upon the soul, strikes it with
dread and consternation. This is expressed in Scripture by Sanctifying the Lord
in the heart, Levit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me. Isa.
8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let
him be your dread. There is mention in Scripture of a sanctifying of God, and a
justifying of God: As God does justify, and sanctify his people, so they are
to justify and sanctify God. These two, the justifying and sanctifying of
God, though they be much the same, yet there is some difference betwixt them:
To sanctify God, is to reverence him in our hearts, and to represent him in
the glory of his Holiness before men. To justify God, supposes a sinful
judging, and foolish charging of God, in the hearts of men, and is our
vindicating of him from such charges. Is God righteous! How is it then that he
is so partial in his dealings with the righteous and unrighteous? that he deals
worse with those that fear him, then with those that fear him not? Is God good?
How is it then that he is so hard, not only in imposing, but inflicting such
hard things upon his own? Is God true? How is it then that he fails his people
so often, when he has said, I will never fail them nor forsake them? Our flesh
has failed, and our heart has failed, yea and our God has often failed us
too; we have often called, and have had no answer; we have often trusted, and
have had no deliverer. Yet God is righteous, yet God is good, yet God is true;
he has not been unrighteous, he has not been an hard Master, he has not
failed nor forsaken; this is to justify God.

Our justifying of God, has some kinds of resemblance with Gods justifying of
us. Gods justification of us, stands in his not imputing sin to us, and
accepting us as righteous; and our justifying of God, stands in our not
imputing evil to him, and our acknowledging him to be true, just, and good.
God has justified me from my sins, and that's enough to proclaim him good and
faithful, whatever his other dealings be: Let him afflict me, let him chastise
me, since he will not judge me nor condemn me with the world. God has
justified himself in my Conscience. I have found that the Lord is gracious, I
have found that God is faithful; he has said he will not, and I must say, he
has not forsaken! He has not failed, when he has most failed me; when he
has been farthest off from my help, he has even then been a present help in
trouble: He has answered, when he has been most silent; he has been most
good, when he has been most hard; I have never found more sweet, then in his
bitter Cup; I must judge my self, not my God: I have sinned, I have sinned
against him, and therefore I must justify him when he speaks, and clear him
when he judges. Hold thy peace querulous heart, be silent all the Earth before
the Lord, for truly God is good to Israel, and to them that are of a clean
heart. There be few among the worst of sinners, but if Conscience might be
suffered to speak, it would justify God. It Is Lust that quarrels, not
Conscience: It Is vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there to keep his
Ordinances* His ways are unequal and hard, his promise fails, take one time
with another, oftener then it is made good. Who is it that plagues and
disappoints, and crosses and vexes us? This evil is of the Lord, why should
I wait on the Lord any longer? Nay whom does he punish mo^e then those that are
nearest him? Who have sorrow, who have trouble in the flesh? Who are
reproached, scorned, hunted up and down the world but these? This they may
thank God for, and their following of him. It Is better being the servant of
sin, then the servant of Christ. Thus Lust blasphemes; but speak Conscience; Is
God unrighteous? Is God false of his word? Are the pleasures of sin better then
the gain of godliness? Have the children of this world made a wiser choice then
the children of light? Speak sinner, let thy Conscience speak whether it be
thus or no. God has not left himself without witness in the hearts of sinners;
much more will his Saints, when they do speak their hearts, speak good of his
name. But this by the way.

To return to the matter in hand. To sanctify God, is especially to reverence
him in the heart; to have such an high, an holy, and honorable esteem of him,
as commands an awe upon the heart; and that

1. At all times: My son, be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. [My
son] It Is not only for Slaves, but for Sons to fear. [Be thou in the fear of
the Lord.] It Is not only, Let the fear of the Lord be in thee, habitually in
thy heart, but actuate and stir up this holy fear, keep up an holy awe, a deep
sense of God always upon thee; let the fear of the Lord be before thine eyes;
be possessed and swallowed up of this fear [all the day long] where ever thou
art, with whomsoever thou have to do, remember thou have still to do with God.
A Christian should stand always pro tribunali; every day should be as the last
day, the day of judgment to him. So speak ye, and so do, as those that shall be
judged, Jam. 2.12. The Judge stands at the door, yea, and thou may see him
through every window, yea through every wall; every wall is a window, through
which God may see and be seen. A Christian (when he is as he should be) cannot
wink God out of sight; can look no where, but he beholds that eye that strikes
an awe upon his spirit.

This abiding reverence of God, what an influence will it have upon the whole
course; we shall then serve God acceptably; when we fear, we shall please God;
That we may serve God (acceptably) with reverence and godly fear. We shall then
serve God universally in every thing. When we fear, we shall watch, unto every
duty, against every sin, Genesis 42,18. This do and live, for I fear God, said
Joseph to his brethren; as if he should have said, Do not you fear to find
falsehood or any evil dealing from me, for I fear God; I dare not be false to
you, you may trust me, you may take my word, for I fear God. We shall then walk
before the Lord steadily; When we fear, we shall fix, and hold in an even frame
and course. Fear will be our Ballast, whilst Love fills our Sails, Fear will
Ballast our Vessel. How are slight and frothy spirits tossed up and down?
Whither do they wander? How many hearts, and faces, and frames have they every
day? What contradictions are they to themselves? The reverence of God upon
them, would fix them, and hold them in a more even and equal poise. We should
then serve the Lord more Honorably; When we fear, we shall show forth the
virtues of God before the world; so much of the reverence, so much of the
holiness of God upon us, The presence of a Christian walking in the fear of the
Lord, is as the presence of God; the reverence of God upon his heart, casts a
beam of Divine Majesty into his face, and oftentimes begets an awe and
reverence of him in the hearts of the worst of sinners; they reverence, even
whilst they revile and persecute him,

John Baptist, who was a man of a just and holy and austere life, it is said of
him, Mark 6,20. That Herod feared him, and observed him. The austerity and
holiness of his life, commanded a respect from an Herod's heart. Such
Christians, their ways are a conviction, and their very countenances are a
rebuke to the wanton world; they speak with authority, they exhort with
authority, they reprove with authority, and sin often hides it self from them,
even as from the face of God.

2 Especially in our drawing nigh to God, Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be
feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him. I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me. He that
fears God, trembles at the word of God: And God loves he should, Isa. 26.2. To
this man will I look -- that trembles at my word. That which makes him tremble
is, that he sees the Word carrying upon it. The Holiness. The Authority of God.


He reads the word, as the Epistle of God sent down to the world; his Epistle
Commendatory, that sets forth the Excellency and the Glory of God, and his
Letters Mandatory, that charge subjection and obedience upon him; he takes
every word as coming from the mouth of the holy One of Israel; he lies
prostrate before the Lord, his soul bows the knee, his heart falls down at the
feet of the Almighty. The word, by how much the more it is considered as the
word of God, by so much the more awe it works upon him. Every look he casts
upon his Bible, is a looking into Heaven. He that fears God, fears when he
comes to worship, reverences his Sanctuary: In thy fear will I worship, Psalm.
5.7. That which works this fear, is that he looks upon the Duties, and
Ordinances of worship, as The Institutions of God. His Application unto God.


This is that which the Lord has sanctified; behold his Image and
Superscription; here he has appointed me to wait for him; here he has
appointed to meet my soul; now I am going up to the Mount of God (the Mount of
God is every where, where the worship of God is.) My soul where art thou? I am
before the Lord of the whole Earth. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet; the
place where thou stand is holy ground. I am before the High and holy One,
the God of all the Earth; and upon transactions of Eternal consequence; to do
my homage to the everlasting King; to kneel before the Lord my maker; to kiss
the golden Scepter; to beg my life at his hands, to behold his goings in his
Sanctuary; his wisdom, and his mercy, and his goodness, are all passing before
me. How dreadful is this place? This is none other but the House of God, and
the gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.17. How dreadful is this word! This is none other
but the word of God. How dreadful is this Ordinance? This is no other but the
door of glory. Tremble thou heart at the presence of the Lord, at the presence
of the God of Jacob.

2. Abhorrence of evil for the Lords sake. Here we shall consider its Object.
Ground.


1. The Object of this abhorrence, in general is evil, Romans 12.9. Abhor that
which is evil, cleave to that which is good. Good is the Object of Love, evil
of Fear. Evil is twofold, Present, or to come. The former is the Object of
Grief, the latter of Fear. Particularly, the Object of this abhorrence is The
wrong of God. The loss of God.


1. The wrong of God. The great and only wrong of God is sin. Sin is the
turning away of the heart from God. The great thing in all the world which God
respects, and requires as his own, is Hearts. My son give me thi^e heart. Keep
thine heart with all diligence, Prove. 4.23. Keep thine heart, that is, Keep it
for me; keep it clean for God, and keep it safe for God; see that it be not
defiled, nor carried away. When the heart's gone, all is gone with it. If the
World has gotten hearts, if Satan has gotten hearts, let them take all,
says God; let me have either an heart or nothing; and all they are like to
have that have the heart. The heart wherever it goes, carries all with it.
Where we bestow our hearts, we bestow all that we have. Sin is the turning
away of the heart. This is the very nature of sin, The hearts departing from
the living God, Heb. 3.12. And therefore this is the great wrong of God. There
is but one thing in the world that God respects, and this sin steals away.

Sin is the insurrection and rebellion of the heart against God; it turns from
him, and turns against him, it runs over to the camp of the enemy, and there
takes up arms against God. Sin is a running from God, and a fighting against
God: it would spoil the Lord of all the Jewels of his Crown. It opposes the
Sovereignty of God: A sinful heart would set up it self in Gods Throne, it
would be King in his stead, and have the command of all. Sinners would be their
own Gods: Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? God shall not be God,
where sin is gotten up as Lord. It assaulteth the wisdom of God. Vain man would
be wise, wiser then his Maker. It charges the Lord with folly, and proclaims it
self the only wise. Sinners pretend to know how to choose for themselves, and
order themselves to their advantage, better then God. If God would let me alone
to my self, to be at mine own finding, at mine own ordering, it should quickly
be better with me. If every thing might be with me as I would have it, my case
would be well mended from what it is now that every thing must go as God will
have it. All our quarrellings at Providence, all our murmurings and discontents
at our Lot, are our hearts charging the Lord with folly. It casts dirt on the
holiness of God, it disparages the goodness of God; it abuses mercy, violates
his Justice, despises his Power: In sum, it disgraceth the Throne of his
glory, and lays his honor in the dust, sets the Almighty below the lowest of
his creatures.

Every companion shall be respected more then God, every pleasure shall be
loved more then God, the Devil shall be feared more then God. Where is his
love? Where is his fear? Where is his Honor? Nay where were the Lord, might
sin carry it? Sin is the wrong of God, and this wrong is the especial Object of
this abhorrence. A gracious heart would do no wrong, he would not wrong his
Neighbor, he would not wrong his Servant, his Enemy, no not his Beast that he
possesses. But Oh should I wrong my God? Has he ever done me any wrong? Has
he not been just to me? Yea has he not been ever good to me? Kind, pityful,
patient, bountiful? Who has fed me, clothed me, kept me, succored me
comforted me? What friend have I in all the world? What Father what Portion,
what Hope but the Lord? What were I? What had I, but vanity, but woe, and
misery, had I not a God? I cannot wrong my God, but I wrong my self, Prove.
8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul. But if I did not, if
my Arrows would not recoil, could I go out with all this injury, and suffer
nothing by it: Yet he is God, whom I wrong; he is holy, he is righteous, he is
good, he is glorious, he is excellent; he only is God, and shall I be
injurious to him? He is worthy, he is worthy of all that I have, of all the
service I can do, of all the respect I can give, of all the Praise I can offer
up; if I had a thousand tongues, if I had a thousand hands, if I had a thousand
lives, if I had a thousand souls, if I had all the Earth for an offering to the
Lord, all would be nothing to show forth the praise that is due to his Name as
he is God, and I his creature: and when I owe so much, and have nothing to pay,
shall I steal from him? Shall I rise up against him? Wast thou not afraid to
lift up thy hand against the Lords Anointedi 2 Samuel 1. Shall I not be afraid to
lift up mine hand against the Lord himself? To kick against God, to fight
against God, Oh the Lord forbid. What art thou O my soul? What servest thou
for? If thou can not tremble, if thou do not turn within me, if thou do
not start back, at the very thought of so great wickedness.

2. The loss of God. As was said before, He that finneth against God, wrongeth
his own soul: His loss is thy loss, and more thine then his; though no thanks
to thee, the Lord will be no loser at last, when sinners have done their worst;
he can get up his Honor out of Dishonor; he can recover his spoils out of the
ashes; if he had lost all the world, he had lost nothing, he is all things in
himself. When Earth and Hell have spent all their malice, God will be God; Holy
Wise, Glorious, blessed for ever. Though such be the malignity of sin, that it
would not give over, till God cease to be God, yet God is above, too high for
sin to reach; its Darts fall short of its Mark, God cannot, God will not sit
down a loser by all that sin can do.

But what do thou suffer, what do thou lose that sinnest against God? The
carnal world understand not what, nor would make much reckoning of it, did they
understand it. The loss of two pence goes often nearer them, then the loss of
God. But now a Christian knows no other fear, fears no other loss; let God be
secure and all is well. Sin will be the wrong of God, and the loss of God; it
may be a total and eternal loss for ought he knows, at least if not assured:
God lost, is the soul lost, the Kingdom lost; this is Hell, the loss of God.
Better have no being, better be a Dog, or Toad, then a man without a God: or if
he be not utterly lost, yet to his present sense 'twill be all one as if he had
no God: his peace is lost, his comfort is lost, and his soul is often given for
lost, from whom God is departed, though but for a season; he can take pleasure
in nothing, he can find rest no where, whose God is out of fight. He knows not
what a God means, who can spare him till Death or Judgment. A Christian cannot
live a day without him; it is night, it is all dark, he knows no day while the
Sun is set upon him. How grievous do they find this loss, who have proved what
it is? What will thou do for me, whilst I go childless? What can be done for
me, whilst I go Fatherless? Here is my house, here are my friends, and my
lands, but where is my God? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Now I
see what this Earth is without an Heaven; now I see what ease, and pleasure,
and carnal friends are, and how little they can do for me: Yea what is prayer?
What are Sabbaths? What are Sermons, Sacraments, Promises, whilst God looks
not down? Oh I was wont to meet with God here, these glasses were my Windows
into Heaven; and then how pleasant were they to me? Sabbaths were a delight,
the Word was a Treasure, Sacraments were the clusters of Canaan. But now, now
all 's dark and dry; Ordinances are Wells without water; Promises are Breasts
without Milk; Ministers are Stars without Light: Oh the Stars are but Clods,
whilst the Sun is a Cloud to me; woe is me, I had a God.

I am pained, I am pained, my head is sick, my heart is faint, my bowels are
turned, my liver is poured out, the light of mine eyes is gone from me. I am
weary of my groaning, I am full of tossings and turnings, there is no soundness
in my flesh, no rest in my bones, while my soul says daily to me, Where is thy
God? And if the sense of this loss works such grief, what wonder if the
hazard of it works fear. Now sin divides, breaks the peace, makes God and the
soul two; sin alienates, breeds a distance and estrangement betwixt God and the
soul. That soul can either not see him at all, or not as a friend, whom sin
has drawn away. Sin will either clo^d the face of God, or clothe him with
fury; will cause him either to turn his back upon the soul, or set his face
against it. He that knows what it is to enjoy God, will dread his loss; he that
has seen his face, will fear to see his back; he loves, and therefore would
not lose.

2. The ground and reason of this abhorrence, that is Twofold: Gods Jealousy.
His Peoples Ingenuity.


1. Gods Jealousy. The Lord thy God is a jealous God, Exodus 20. The same
Arguments which the Lord uses to keep up, and enforce his Authority upon the
Consciences of his people, the same Arguments they do, and ought to make use
of, to press it upon themselves. I am a jealous God, says the Lord; it is true
says Conscience, the Lord is jealous; and therefore take heed to thy self
soul, how thou fallest into his hands. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

The Jealousy of the Lord includes in it, His Tenderness of his Honor.
Terribleness in case of Dishonor.


1. His tenderness of his Honor. The Honor of God is very tender to him, he
will not lose a tittle of it; Jer. 48.8. My glory will I not give to another,
nor my praise to graven Images. I will not, and look you to it, that you do not
give away my glory. What was the reason that God dealt so severely with Eli and
with Herod? What was Elies sin? Why that he gave away the Honor of God to his
sons, 1 Samuel 2.29. Thou Honor thy sons above me. He was so tender to his
sons, that though they were become sons of Belial, and dealt so wickedly before
the Lord, yet they must be dealt gently with; Nay my sons, it is no good thing
that I hear of you. Such a slight reproof must serve in so dreadful a case; he
was afraid to displease his sons by a sharper reproof; this the Lord
interprets, an honoring of his sons above him. Indulgent Parents, stand and
tremble, you that can see your children sin, and let them go out with a Nay my
sons, it is not good; a slight or cold reproof, this is no other but your
honoring your sons above your God. What was Herod's sin? Acts 12.22,23. that he
gave not God the glory. He made an Eloquent Oration, and the people thereupon
made him a God; The voice of God, and not of man, and he accepted of the
applause; and thereupon the Angel of the Lord smote him, that he dyed. Eli
sinned, in giving the Honor of God to his sons, and Herod in taking it to
himself; but God taught them both, how dear his glory is to him.

2. His Terribleness in case of his Dishonor. The mentioned instances speak
him both Tender, and Terrible. Deuteronomy. 4.24. The Lord thy God is a consuming
fire, even a jealous God. The jealousy of a man, is the rage of a man; Prove.
6.34. and the jealousy of God, is the rage and fury of a God. Our God is a
consuming fire; that is the fire of his jealousy. The wrath of a King, is as
the roaring of a Lion; when the Lion roareth, the Beasts of the field tremble;
what then are the Terrors of the Lord? The threatenings of the Lord are
terrible, Psalm. 50.22. Consider this ye that forget God, lest he [tear you in
pieces,] and there be none to deliver. Hos. 5.14. I even I will tear and go
away. Tearing, and tearing in pieces, the very expectation of it is enough to
tear the heart in pieces. I will tear them says God. I my self will do it, [I
even I] will tear. Its terrible to be torn of men, or of wild Beasts; but take
heed of Gods tearing. I will tear [in pieces:] I will not tear off their Hair,
or their Garments, or their Ornaments; I Will tear their flesh from their bones,
Limb from limb, yea soul from body; I Will tear them in pieces. I will tear them
[and go away,] tear them and leave them; wound and not heal; I will tear them,
and deliver them who can: yea I will tear them and trample upon them, Isa.
62.3. I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury.. Trampling
notes contempt and indignation. I will make them as the dirt in the streets;
the mark of my scorn and fury.

His Judgments are terrible, he does terrible things in righteousness. Go to
Jerusalem and Mount Sion, and behold the Monuments of his fury there. Go to
Shiloh (says God) and see what I did to it, Ier. 7.12. But if you go down to
Sod^m, or look down to Tophet, and behold the terrors of the Lord there; or if
you look on particular Persons, let Nadab and Abihu, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
Uzz^h Uzziah, Ananias and Sapphira, Herod, etc. be for instances of his
dreadfulness and severity. This jealous God, this terrible God, is the God that
his people fear; and they therefore fear him, because he is such a jealous God.
Who would not fear thee, thou King of Nations? Who can stand before thee when
thou art angry? My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments.

Christians, Let none say, this fear is not the fear of his Children; this be
to his Enemies and Slaves, not his Children; Fear ye not their fear. But are
not all these things written for our learning? Is this written only for their
sakes? Or says he not also for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is
written says the Apostle in another case. Consider that full Scripture to this
purpose, 1 Cor. 10.6. to the end of v. 12. Now these things were our examples,
to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted;
Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them; as it is written, The people safe
down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication,
as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
Serpents. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed
of the Destroyer. Now all these things happened unto them for exsamples; and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Mark, these things are our examples. Are they examples to us, and not warnings
too? Are they warnings to us, and must we not by them learn to fear and beware?
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. My soul stands in a
sure place, my mountain is so strong, that I shall never be moved. I am safe
enough, I am in Christ, and shall not come into condemnation. But whatever thou
think, as sure as thou think thou stand, take heed; take heed lest
thou fall: That is, not only into the same sins, but into the same
condemnation; that is the sense of the place. Romans 11.20. Because of unbelief
they were broken off, thou stand by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear.

No need of fear? No need of threatenings? What may we burn half our Bibles? Can
we spare so great a part of what is written? Have we out-grown the use of
judgments, as soon as ever we are partakers of mercy? Have we out-grown the use
of the Scourge, as soon as ever we are entered into Christ's School? Do we find
all too little, Mercies, Threatenings, Judgments, to keep our hearts in order?
And yet is it more then needs? There are two Parties in us; we are flesh as
well as spirit, and must not the flesh be frighted? Will Love prevail with
Lust? This Slave sure, this son of the Bondwoman must be kept in awe. Has God
no wanton children? No rebellious children? And must these have no other
Discipline, but stroakings and dandlings?

Believe it Christians, God will not have his terrors lost, nor lost to you;
God will sometimes make his children feel, that he is a terrible God. He is
Terrible out of his holy place. Beware you be not presumptuous children. There
is a threefold Presumption. There is a Presumption Upon Temptation in
confidence of strength. Upon sin in confidence of Mercy. Upon sin in contempt
of Mercy and Justice.


1. A Presumption upon Temptation, in confidence of strength. Some unwary
souls, not knowing what spirit they are of, supposing themselves too hard for
the Devil, will be venturing within his reach; as if they would dare him to try
his skill and power: who having forgotten this Prayer [Lead us not into
temptation,] put themselves into the Tempters hand; the falls of such will
teach them to understand their folly.

2. Presumption on sin, in confidence of Mercy. And that either in confidence
of mercy already obtained, I am in Christ, and my sin shall not separate me
from him; whatever I do, I have a Pardon in my hand. Or in hope of mercy at
last, I have to do with a merciful God, and therefore may venture on a little
farther; hereafter I will repent, and then I need not doubt of remission.

3. Presumption on sin in contempt of Mercy and Justice. I will have my sin,
though I never find mercy. I will have my will, and my way, and run the hazard
of what follows; I will take my course, and come on me what will.

This last sort, who presume to sin in contempt of Mercy and Judgment; who are
so drunken with their sensual delights, and given over to the hardness of their
hearts, that they neither value Mercy, nor fear wrath: What do you talk to me
of Mercy, and Judgment to come? Give me my pleasures, and my liberties, and my
mirth, and my money: think not to make me such a fool, to let go the pleasure
and comfort of my life for I know not what uncertain fears or hopes: Such as
these, have one foot already in Hell. If it be not yet thus with thee, thou
dare not contemn either Mercy or Judgment: Beware thou be not Presumptuous
neither in the former senses. Be not bold upon Temptations; think not that thou
art strong to overcome a Temptation, when thou art so weak as not to fear it;
he that fears not a Temptation, understands not it or himself. But especially
beware thou presume not upon sin, in confidence of Mercy. Grow not over bold
upon love or patience; Laesa patientia fit furor. God loves me, therefore I may
be bold to take the more liberty? the less care, the less watchfulness, the
less fear, because so much Love! Spit in thy Fathers face, because he weeps
over thy neck? Smite him on the face, because thou hopest he will not strike
again? Tear his Bowels, because they are so tender toward thee? Be froward,
stubborn, wanton, and idle, because thou have found him so indulgent?

Christians consider, whether such wickedness has not sometimes been found in
some of our hearts. But take heed, you will find, though he be a tender, yet
he will not be a fond Father; where he loves, he will be feared. Some as bold
and as confident as you, have felt to their cost, what it is to abuse patience
and kindness; his Arrows in their hearts, his Terrors in their souls, has
made them to know, that the God of love is a terrible God. And look to it, if
thou yet wilt adventure, wilt be a wanton still, froward, or idle, or heedless
still, he will either lash thee into better manners, or cast thee out as no
child of his, but a Bastard, and Rebel. If thou will not take warning by
others, take heed lest he make thee a warning to them which shall come after.

Christians know, that though God be tender of his Saints, yet he is jealous
for his Name; he tenders them as the Apple of his Eye, but not above the least
title of his Honor. As God will have us love our Neighbor, so he will love
his child; but as himself: First himself, and then his child. He will not
bate an Iota of his glory, to save a world. As little offenses done to his
little ones, so little sins allowed by them, are as Mill stones about the neck.
If they allow it in themselves, yet Heaven and Earth shall pass away, and fall
to nothing, ere he allow it in them. God will not, and therefore his children
dare not indulge themselves in little sins. They therefore fear, because he
whom they serve is a jealous God.

2. Their own ingenuity. This fear is from Love and good Nature, and is most
properly the fear of children. Children fear, because God is jealous, and so do
Slaves; but only Children because God is good. Children fear, because they
love; Slaves fear, although they hate: Children fear to be unworthy, Slaves
only to be unhappy and miserable. There Is nothing more contrary to an
ingenuous nature, then to abuse goodness and kindness; to abuse goodness, has
as black an aspect with him, as to provoke Wrath. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the
Lord and his [goodness] in the latter days. But how can goodness be the Object
of fear? We fear evil and not good. The meaning is, they shall fear to wrong
or abuse goodness: They shall fear to wrong the Lord, because he is good. [in
the latter dayes] These latter days that this Promise refers to, shall be
days of more grace; wherein there shall be, not only a more clear revelation
of the goodness of God; they shall know the Lord and his goodness: But a more
plentiful communication, and diffusion of the goodness of God; they shall love
the Lord and his goodness: They shall see themselves both more obliged by
goodness, and shall feel themselves more seasoned with goodness. By grace they
shall be better natured. Religion does not make morose, but more generous,
free, and ingenuous. There Is nothing more abhorrent to an ingenuous spirit,
then to be base and unworthy. Abuse of goodness is an unworthiness, which an
ingenuous nature abhors as death to be guilty of; it is its destruction, it is
disingenuity. The abuse of the goodness of God, is great unthankfulness, and
unthankfulness is great disingenuity.

Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixeris. Call me unthankful, and you call me all
that is naught. Call me any thing else but unthankful. Indeed were I all
thanks, I should still be unthankful; I should still be behind-hand with the
goodness of the Lord; my debt is greater then I can pay, yea greater then I can
acknowledge; but shall I return evil for his good? If I cannot pay, should I
deny my Debt? He that is unthankful, whatever God requires of him, says
wickedly, this is more then I owe thee. God I owe thee nothing, I care not for
thee; Oh this is dreadful to a gracious heart.

If this be in sin, (for all sin is unthankfulness) if this be in sin, if this
be the signification of all my neglects of God, and my duty to him; then the
Lord forbid, what ever I suffer, that I should yield to sin. How shall I do
this wickedness? How shall I neglect this duty and sin against God? How should
I look my God or my own soul in the face, should I be so unworthy? For thy sake
Lord let me not sin against thee; thou art good, thou art kind, thou art
gracious, thou art holy, O let me not be a Devil; what heart, where a Devil is
not, but such goodness will charm it into love? Shall I sin? Shall I rebel?
For thy sake Lord I will not do it. I will not for mine own sake, for where
then shall I appear? In sinning against God, I sin against mine own soul; I
dare not for my life; sin and Death, sin and Hell, are linked together; but
were it not so, might I sin and escape, sin and not die, yet for thy sake Lord,
I will not do it: Thou art good, good in thy self, good to me; thou at my God,
thou art my Father; love, care, tenderness, compassion, kindness is all that is
in thine heart toward me; what I am, what I have, what I hope for; that I
breathe, that I live, all is thy goodness, thy bounty to me. Oh let me not rise
up against the Womb that bare me, and the Paps that give me suck. I would not
to my child, to my servant, to my friend; but Oh let me never to my Father, to
my God, return evil for good, and hatred for his good will. Let not this evil
which I fear, ever come upon me; put thy fear into mine heart O Lord, that I
may not sin against thee.

CHAP. XV. Obedience in the Covenant.
7. OBedience, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them, Obedience is
either of the Heart, or of the Life. In this Scripture, God undertakes for both.

1. For the obedience of the Heart, he undertakes in the former words, [I will
put my Spirit in your heart;] where the Spirit dwells, be rules. Where Satan
dwells, he rules, and where the Spirit of the Lord dwells, there God rules; the
Spirit in the heart, is the Law in the heart. Those two Promises, I will put my
Spirit in your hearts, and I will write my Law in your hearts, signify the
same thing. The Law in the heart, is the will of man melted into the will of
God. The Law of God may be in the mouth, and the heart a Rebel; its reception
into the heart, notes the hearts subjection to it.

The Obedience of the heart includes two things: 1. The opening of the heart to
the Word. 2. The resolution of the heart for the Work of the Lord.


1. The opening of the heart to the Word. What will thou have me to do Lord!
That Is the voice of an obedient heart. Veniat verbum and submittemus. Speak
Lord, command Lord, what will thou? And when he speaks, whatever it be, the
word is embraced and accepted of the heart, Dan. 4.27. Let my counsel be
acceptable to thee. The acceptance of the word in the heart, is signified by
its hearkening to it. To hearken, is more then to hear; though they sometimes
note the same thing, yet ordinarily, hearing is of the ear, hearkening of the
heart, Psalm. 81.11. Israel would not hearken, my people would none of me. They
heard what the Lord spoke, but they would not hearken; that is, as it is there
interpreted, they would none of the Lord. They rejected the word of the Lord
which he spoke unto them. When the word is let come in with Authority, suffered
to rule in the soul, when the heart gives up it self unto it, then it is
accepted; there is its hearkening to it.

2 The resolution of the heart for the work of the Lord, Psalm. 110.106. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have
vowed, and I will perform. I have covenanted, and I am determined to keep thy
statutes. The word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we
will not do, that is the rebellious; Whatsoever the Lord shall speak, we will
do, that is the obedient heart.

Where the heart is thus resolved to obey, this is that obedience, which shall
be accepted unto salvation. Where this resolution is, as there is opportunity
there will be practice; and where there is not opportunity, in Gods account,
this is it. This is Praying, this is Hearing, this is giving, and feeding, and
clothing, and visiting; this is walking circumspectly, working righteousness,
showing mercy, exercising Faith, and Patience, and Repentance; this is our
keeping the Commandments of God, and walking in his Statutes; an heart to obey,
is our obeying; an heart to do, is our doing; an heart to suffer in Gods
account, is our suffering for his Name.

But here it must be carefully noted, that though sincere resolution for
Obedience, be Obedience, yet every resolution, is not that resolution.
Resolution for Obedience is then sincere, where 1. It flows from an inward and
rooted inclination. 2. It Is bottomed on a firm belief of Scripture Revelation.
3. It Is built on the highest and weightiest Reasons. 4. It Is the result of the
most mature and deep deliberation.


1. A sincere resolution flows from an inward rooted inclination, Psalm.
119.112. I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes. Our new purpose,
is from our new nature: It is not produced by some sudden fright, or sense of
danger; or merely by a present force of Argument: but by a Divine power,
working the heart to a suitableness to the will and ways of God, and an
habitual propension and inclination thereto. Resolution for holiness, without
an holy inclination, is a Blade without a Root; as fresh and as green as it
looks, 't will wither and come to nothing; no Ropt, no Fruit, nor lasting. The
heart is the root of action, and grace is the life of the root: When our
Resolutions are the Blade, sprouting forth of this living Root, then they will
abide, and bring forth the Ear, and an Harvest.

2. A sincere resolution is bottomed on a firm Assent, to the truth of
Scripture Revelation. A Christian resolves for godliness, because he believes
God, that he is as he has said, the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
He is built on the Scriptures; as his hopes, so his purposes have the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, on which they stand. Whatever
Resolution has not this Foundation, is but as an house upon the Sands.

3. A sincere Resolution is founded on the highest Reason. Where we resolve
without Reason, we will quickly find a Reason to change. Where we resolve we
know not why, we shall change we know not how soon. To resolve we know not why,
and to resolve on we know not what, will be alike unstable. Though there be
Reason for Religion, yet Religion may be taken up without Reason. Whatever
Reason there be for it, yet if it be not understood, or considered, it is all
one as if there were no Reason at all. And if there seem some Reason for it,
yet if it be not the highest Reason, when a stronger then it comes, we quickly
change our purpose.

The Reasons we have for our serving and following God, are the highest of all
Reasons; and that whether we respect it as our duty, or our happiness. For,

1. There Is none can lay such claim to us as God. Whose am I? Who has made me?
Who has bought me? 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your bodies and in your
spirits, which are his. Psalm. 100.2,3. Serve the Lord with gladness. For the
Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, not we our selves, we are his
people, and the sheep of his Pasture. What reason have you to serve men, or to
serve sin or the world? Men think they have reason for it, but what reason? Are
any of these Gods? Are men your Gods? Is sin or the world God? Do you owe your
selves to them? It is he that has made us, and his we are: As the Apostle
concerning obedience to Parents, much more may it be said here; Children obey
your God, for this is right. This is his due, and your duty; if any one can lay
as good a claim to you, let him carry you away for servants.

2. There Is none can be better to us then God. None can require, and none can
reward our obedience as he. Where can you be better then with God? Heel require
no more, then that you serve him till you can find a better Master. He that
says it is best to serve sin, and the world, is a fool, and has said in his
heart, there is no God. If God be God, he is the chief, yea the only good. If
any thing in the world, upon what account soever, be thought better then the
Lord, that is set up for a God in his room.

3. Whomsoever we serve, it is God must pay us our Wages at last. God is Judge,
he is the Rewarder both of the evil and the good, both of those that serve
him, and those that serve him not. If you receive the Lord, he will be your
reward; if you serve him not, he will reward you; but what reward have you?
Those mine Enemies which will not have me to reign over them, bring them and
slay them before me; There Is their reward. Sin has its rewards, but what are
they but vanity and vexation? Or if they were better, how long will they last?
But when sin has paid the most it can, Oh what a reward is there behind that
God has to pay you! This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in
sorrow.

4. The Wages which God will give, shall certainly be blessed or dreadful,
according to our Obedience or Disobedience. The reward that God has to give,
is an eternal reward: Eternal salvation to them that obey him, everlasting
destruction to him that serves him not.

I have a soul, this carcass is the least part of me; there is another world, a
world to come; a few years is the most I have to spend in this; I must abide
eternally, eternally in the other world.

How inconsiderable is it what I have here, whether little or more, better or
worse; in a short time that will come all to one. But oh my eternity what is
that like to be? Why it is God that must determine it, and he will certainly
reward every man according to his works, Romans 2.6,7,8,9,10. Who will render to
every man according to his deeds. To them which by patient continuance in well
doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality, eternal life. But to them that
are contentious and obey not the truth, tribulation and anguish, etc. There Is
glory and shame, mercy and wrath, life and death set before me; there is no
third state, one of the two must be my lot, and this is it that does determine
which; If I obey I live, if I disobey I die for ever.

Now when my resolution is founded on such Reasons as these, then which none
can be imagined higher and more weighty; (till eternity become of less regard
then time, and an immortal soul be set below a perishing body) and when the
question being put, Shall I follow God or not? God or the world? God or my
lust? Speak soul, give in thy Answer; when this is the Answer it gives, Why
there is none can lay such claim to me as God; there is none can be as good to me
as God; whomsoever I serve, its God must be my Rewarder; my everlasting
blessedness, or eternal ruin depends on him, and must be infallibly
determined, according to my obedience or disobedience: This is the plain case,
Obey, and Live: Obey, or die for ever. And therefore what can I say less or
more, but that I am the Lords, and will be his Servant. Let others choose whom
they will serve, as for me, O my soul, serve thou the Lord. This resolution
thus founded, is like to stand.

4. A sincere Resolution, is the fruit of mature deliberation. Deliberation
gives Reason its full weight; makes the strength of it appear; it lays all
things in the Balance; its the comparing of Reasons for, and against; the
weighing of Arguments and Objections; encouragements, and discouragements;
casting the cost, as well as the gain: particularly, In this deliberation there
must be a considering,

1. What there is in this Obedience.

2. What it is attended with that may discourage.

1. There must be a considering, What there is in this Obedience: Or otherwise
we resolve upon we know not what. Now there are five things in this Obedience:
Subjection. Activity and Industry. Integrity. Circumspection. Spirituality.


1. Subjection. Servants must be subject, must not be at their own wills, but
at the will of another: The heart of man naturally affects Dominion; that is the
great controversy of sinners with God, Who shall be Lord? We are Lords, (we
would be at least) we will come no more unto thee, Jer. 2.31. Obedience yields
that God should be Lord; yea and all others also, whom he has made Lords over
us. The servants of Christ must not be, and yet must be the servants of men;
they must not serve the lusts, but must be subject to their righteous Laws and
Commands. God must be obeyed; and Magistrates, Ministers, Masters, Parents must
be obeyed in the Lord, and for the Lord; yea and they must be, when God will
have it so the Servants of servants.

While they must not serve the humors of the greatest, they must serve the
necessities of the meanest; must stoop to the lowest of Offices, even to the
washing of the feet of the least Disciple: All this the Lord expects of them,
and they must be subject. They must not dispute, but do his will; only it must
be considered, that there is a double disputing the will of God: There is a
disputing whether that which is pretended to be the will of God, be so or no;
this ought to be done. And there is a disputing or questioning that, which is
granted to be the will of God, whether it be fit to be done or safe to be done:
Is it not better to let it alone? What advantage is there in it? What reason is
there for it? No, they must not thus dispute; this is Reason enough, God will
have it so. Gods will is ever Reason, and it must be our Reason. It Is enough
for thee to say, This is that which the Lord has commanded, and I must be
subject. This is one thing that must be considered, I will Obey, but can I be
Subject?

2. Activity and Industry. The servant of the Lord must be Active, and
Industrious. Whom he sends into the Vineyard, he sends to work, and not to
sleep. The life of a Christian is laborious; whilst others are in their beds,
he must be on his knees: whilst others take their Pleasure, he must take
Pains: whilst others take their times, now a little, and then a little, he
must sit at it, be ever about his Masters business. An active spirit, is an
excellent spirit and it is necessary in a Christian.

1. An Active spirit, is an Excellent spirit; Sluggards are the refuse of the
Earth.

But here it must be considered, that there is a double Activity, Natural, and
Gracious.

1. Natural, which arises from an innate vigor and vivacity of some men's
spirits: There needs not industry in such, to bring forth action, it is but
leaving nature to its course, and that will fly high enough of it self. It
requires more Industry to regulate and sometimes to restrain, then to put forth
into Action. Its more labor for them to rest, then to be doing.

2. Gracious: Which is either Natural Activity, managed and improved for God,
turned into a right course, running in a right Channel; or a Naturally Unactive
spirit, raised and quickened by grace, and Religious Industry. This gracious,
this holy Activity, this is the Excellency; it is the extract of the spirits
and life of all our Parts and graces; and will go further, and do more high
Honor, and more abundant service to God and his Gospel then is done by a
thousand others.

An Active Sinner, is by accident the worst of men: How much service for the
Devil will he dispatch in a little time?

An Active sinner is life and death met together. He is all life, and yet dead,
and the more he has of death, because so much of life; like poison in Wine, he
destroys the more effectually: Yet the evil is not in his Activity, but in
the matters wherein he is employed; the good metal, or keenes of a Weapon, is
its Excellency; but in a mad man's hand better a wooden then an iron sword. An
Active Spirit is so Excellent, that its pity that ever sin should have the
using of it; 't were well for Religion, if the Devil were a Drone, and had no
other servants but the Sluggards of the Earth. But Activity when set right is
of great price in the sight of God: It is of great price in the sight of God,
because it sets a great price upon God. Slothfulness puts a slight upon God;
when the Scriptures have set forth the Magnalia Dei, the great things, and the
deep things of God, when the Lord Jesus is evidently set forth as crucified
before our eyes, as the Propitiation for sin; when the preciousness of his
blood, the tenderness of his bowels, the riches of his grace, the sufficiency
of his righteousness, his satisfaction and pardons, are all held forth in open
sight; when the beauties of holiness, the joys of the spirit, that peace which
passes all understanding, are laid forth to view; when the most glorious
things are spoken of the City of God, Jerusalem which is above; when God in his
word calls to us, Awake sleepers, arise sluggards, see what is before you; all
this may be yours, if you will; Sloathfulness puts this slight upon all, Tush,
all this is not worth the breaking my sleep for; it is not all worth my labor
to seek after; my ease and my quiet is better to me, then God and all his glory.

We may best understand the value we put on things, by the pains and the cost
we are content to be at to purchase them. When sinners bestow themselves so
upon the world, will bear such labor and travel, are so constantly so,
indefatigably industrious in the pursuance of it; and withal, run such hazards
and dangers for it, they make it evident enough what rate they put upon it; he
whose time, and his strength, whose days and his nights, yea whose soul, and
his hopes, must all be laid out in a purchase, must all go for a piece of Land,
or a little money, or pleasure; we need no other proof, what a bargain he
thinks this world to be. I care not much for this world, it is a vanity, a
shadow, the fashion of it passes away; I hope it is far enough off my heart, how
ever I am charged with greediness after it: But what then mean all the expenses
of thy time, of thy strength, of thy spirits, that thou daily layest out upon
it? What means so much hunting after, and heaping it up for thy self? What,
have thou been hunting all this while after shadows? Heaping up vanities? No,
no, thou mistakest thy self, these shadows are thy substance; these vanities
are the God whom thou adorest: If thou did not prize, thou would not
venture so deeply for them.

And so on the other side, when so little is done for God: When any thing must
suffice to be spent on souls, or eternity; what cheap things do we count them!
I love God above all; with all my heart, with all my soul; he is all my hope,
and all my desire; what a miserable creature were I, if it were not for my hope
in God? What would all the world be to me, should I lose my soul? But do thou
speak in earnest? Do thou think what thou speak? What, and so very a Drone
in seeking of God? What, and so indifferent, so cold, and so spiritless in thy
enquiries after him, in thy motions toward him? So sparing of thy labor, so
negligent of duty, so seldom at it, so soon weary, so many delays, so many
excuses? How many times has God called thee after him, and all thine answer
has been an excuse? An excuse instead of an Ordinance, an excuse instead of a
Prayer, an excuse instead of Action, an excuse instead of an Alms, an excuse
instead of an Admonition, or a Reproof; if he will be served with excuses, he
shall have service enough, but little besides. I am weary, or it is too late, or
it is cold, and and so a short, and hasty Prayer must serve, or none at all. I
have much business upon me, a Family, a Farm, and the cares and trouble of it,
that I cannot have so much time nor freedom to attend upon God as others have;
and so a Sermon lost, a Sacrament lost. I live amongst ill neighbors, if I
should be so forward, and so active for God, so zealous, and so spiritual in my
Discourse, in my way, I should be but a scoff and a reproach, and it may be a
prey to evil men. I want ability to speak to the edification of others, I have
not the boldness as others have, to reprove or admonish; I pray thee have me
excused. Wise men indeed, an Excuse instead of a Duty! It Is all one, as if when
the Lord calls to thee, Come to me and be saved, thy Answer should be, I pray
thee excuse me, I must to the Devil and be damned.

But is this thy love? Is this thy zeal? Is this thy valuing of God above all?

Tremble Sluggard, whatever excuses thou find out, to substitute in the room
of duty, this is that thou can never excuse, nor acquit thy self of a
slighting of God. Thy very excuses will accuse thee for a sloathful servant,
and this for a slighter of God: Whilst the Apostle says, I reckon that the
sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall
be revealed: But I reckon say thou, that all that glory to come, is not
worthy to be compared with the present labor.

But now Activity and Industry puts a great price upon God, this is written
upon all our labors, He is worthy for whom I do all this. some of the most
humble watchful laborious Christians, do sometimes complain, Oh I fear, I love
not God; his Favor, his Honor is little set by me; but whence then is thy
care to please God? Whence are all thy labors of love? Do watch, and pray,
and work, and run? Can spend and be spent for God, and yet not love him?
Do live to God, can dye for God, and yet not prize him? What greater
proof can give of love, then such labor.

2. Activity is necessary. It is a vain thing to think of making any thing of
Religion without it; the work of it is too great, to be done by lying still;
the comforts of it lie too deep, to be gotten out by a wish. There Is many a
poor man in this world, that would be the richest man in the Country, if
riches may be gotten by a wish; he may as soon with himself into wealth, as thou
into grace and comfort. This one thing, men's not being able to bear the labor
of Religion, is a Rock, at which many a soul has split, and suffered an
eternal wrack.

He that has some love to holiness, and yet not so much as to carry him
through the work of holiness, is short of sincerity; and short of sincerity,
short of salvation. He that sticks not at labor, will not stick at suffering:
He that sluggs at doing, will shrink back from suffering. Say not, There Is a
Lion in the streets; overcome the Lion, and you will not fear the Bear: Get
over (Difficulties) and there is but one still more. (Distress) betwixt thee and
glory. Pass the first, and thou will be the more bold to venture the latter.
Holy Activity will be a witness of thy sincerity; carry this witness in thine
heart, and then, which way ever the world does go, and what storms soever may
fall, thou will have this to uphold thee, Integrity and uprightness shall
preserve me, and eternity reward me. Where Sincerity is the root, and holy
Activity the blossom, an eternal weight of glory shall be the fruit. Lie idle,
and all will be lost. Take heed of (Soul take thine easy,) lest the next word
thou hear be [This night shall thy soul be required of thee.]

Well, this is a second thing included in Obedience, Activity; and this also
must be considered ere thou resolvest; I will Obey, but can I Labor?

3. Integrity. The Obedience which God expects, must be entire Obedience; not
only the Obedience of the whole man, but to the whole will of God. Psalm.
119.8. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
Commandments. 1 Pet. 1.14,15. As obedient children, be ye holy in (al^ manner)
conversation. Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you. But of this having spoken more largely elsewhere, it shall
suffice to give some short hints,

1. Of one comprehensive duty, wherein all the rest are included, and on which
they depend; and that is, The holding up, and maintaining Gods Authority in the
soul. As God has set up his Authority over the soul; his word which is to have
the government of it, so has he set up an Authority in the soul; the
Understanding and the Conscience. These Powers, as they are under Authority,
under the Authority of the word; so they are set in Authority, over the
subordinate and inferior faculties, the Will, and the Passions, or Affections.
But sin now has made a mutiny, and Insurrection; the Will rises against
Reason, and will not be guided; the Passions rebel against Conscience, and
will not be governed; nay they do not only resist, but take upon them to
command, and impose upon Conscience: What the Will would have, Conscience must
say it is Reason it should have; must be put upon it, to find out Arguments, to
prove Will to be Reason; and to determine, that what the Will would have done,
ought to be done, facile credimus quod nimis volumus: We easily bring our
Opinion to our Affection; bring our selves to believe that to be right, which
we are unreasonably willing to have to be tight: But if it cannot prevail thus
far, to gain Conscience to say that is right, which it would have to be right,
then it will put hard for it, to carry it whether it be right or wrong. And
this rebellion of the Will, and so of the Passions against the Reason, is the
great reason of the souls rebellion against God.

When Conscience has lost its Authority, Gods Authority is gone. Whilst the
Understanding and the Conscience are maintained in their due Authority, where
the Will and Affections are held in their due subjection, there the Lord
reigns. While Conscience rightly informed has its due, God shall have his
due: Where the Will and the Passions have no more then their due, he shall have
his own. God shall be willed the more, where nothing else is willed too much.
God shall be loved the more, and feared the more, where nothing else is loved
and feared too much. The more Anger, the more Hatred, the more Grief will be
spent upon sin, if it be not inordinately spent elsewhere. Oh how much service
might be done, and how much quiet would be enjoyed in the heart, were this
Authority and Subjection maintained and held up.

We may say of our Affections, as men say of Fire and Water, They are the worst
Masters, but the best Servants. How much should the Lord have of us, were these
only the Executioners of his will. If Conscience be commanded by the word, and
the Will and Affections would be commanded by Conscience, what would there then
be wanting? We should then not only be abundantly serviceable, but all would
be serene, and sweet, and comfortable within us. If nothing were willed, but
what should be willed, we should ever have our will. If nothing were desired,
but what should be desired, and no more then it should be loved or desired, we
should ever have what we love. If we were not angry, or grieved, or afraid, but
where we ought, and no more then we ought; what a calm would there be upon our
spirits, even in such cases, wherein the spirits of others are like a troubled
Sea, that cannot be at rest, whose waters cast forth mire and dirt: But where
there is such disorder, such rebellion of the Inferior against the Superior
Faculties, there we are at a perpetual loss, both in point of duty and comfort.
This therefore is necessary, if we will be obedient: And those that have proved
what there is in it, do understand that this is hard work.

2. I shall instance in some few particular duties that are harder then others.
He that will be entirely obedient, must stick at nothing that God will have.
There Is scarce any thing that God requires, but Lust will be quarrelling at, as
too hard; but there are some duties harder then others. It shall suffice only
to name them: The denial of our selves. The disobliging our nearest friends.
The loving our Enemies. The disobeying all the world, in their unrighteous
commands. Obeying God, rather then men; returning good for evil. Reproving men
for sin, especially if they be S^periours, or such on whom we have dependency.
The sacrificing our Isaacs, yea parting with all that we have.

Well, this also must be considered ere you resolve; you will obey, But are you
for any thing, for every thing the Lord requires?

4. Circumspection and care, Ephesians. 5.15. See that ye walk circumspectly. A
little labor will go far with care, but will be nothing without it. It Is not
he that is hot, and busy, and active at all adventures; he that keeps to his
Line and his Rule, he is the obedient Christian. It Is not so much Action, as
regular Action, wherein the life of Christianity lies. He that lives by rule,
peace be on him, and mercy. Activity without care, is Extravagancie: It Is care
that keeps within compass. He that is all Action, has the more need of caution.
A Christian must have his eyes in his head, as well as a soul in his body. He
that resolves well in Generals, and comes not off in Particulars, does but
build Castles in the Air. What we ordinarily are, pro hic and nunc, in
Particulars, will best prove what we are. He that is for any thing but this,
any time but now, is for nothing.

Circumspection notes two things: Taking notice. Taking heed.


He that will be circumspect, must eye and observe what is before him; must have
his eye upon his End, his Rule, and his Goings; must eye duty and sin,
opportunities and temptations, his times and seasons; he must take heed, as
well as take notice; must keep a strict eye on himself, and hold a strict hand
on himself, that he leap not over a duty, nor turn aside to iniquity; must set
a guard upon himself, upon his tongue, upon his eyes, upon his appetite, upon
his company, upon his habit, upon his thoughts, upon his passions, upon all the
motions of his soul, and the actions of his body.

This will require something. What not a word but must be weighed? Not a look
but must be looked to? Not a thought but must be examined? Not a sin to be
allowed? Not a duty to be abated? Not a circumstance to be neglected? Must all
be in Weight and in Measure, by Line, and by Rule, and this alwais too? If
something might serve, if sometimes might suffice, it might be borne; but to
keep touch in every point, and that every day, this is an hard saying indeed.
But thus it must be, to live as a Christian, and to walk exactly, accurately,
precisely, is the same thing. Duty and sin, though they be as far distant as
Heaven and Hell, yet there is but an hair betwixt them. The least latitude is a
transgression, either all this, (that is as to the purpose of the heart;)
either all this, or nothing.

Well, all this must be considered; You will be Obedient, but will you be
circumspect?

5. Spirituality. This Obedience must be the Obedience of faith, Romans 16.26..
It is the very life of Jesus made manifest in our mortal flesh. I live yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the Son of God. Christians Obedience is their walking in
Christ, Coloss. 2.6. All the Acts of it are exerted and performed in the
strength of Christ. I will go in the strength of the Lord, without him they can
do nothing, but can do all things through Christ which strengthens them. I
live, yet not I, bur Christ lives in me. I work, I wrestle, I run, yet not I,
but Christ in me; as the Apostle speaks of his sins, It is no more I that do
it, but sin that dwells in me. It Is sin that sins, so may it be said of duty,
It is no more I that do it, but Christ that dwells in me. Though both be the
act of the Person, both the sin and the duty; yet the Principle of the one, is
Lust, the Power of the other is of Christ. Christians cannot go through, and
they dare not set upon a duty, without looking up to Christ, and leaning upon
him for assistance. They cannot go through, and therefore they will not set
forth, but it the strength of the Lord. All t^eir Acts of Obedience are
exhibited, and offered up in the name of Christ. Their services are their
sacrifices to God, and Christ is their Altar. What is a sacrifice without an
Altar? Christ is our Altar, which sanctifies our gift. God looks on all, and so
do they, as nothing worth without Christ; God will not accept, and therefore
they will not offer other then the Lamb for their sacrifice. All their acts of
Obedience are acknowledged to the praise of Christ, It is no more I that do it,
but the grace of God which was with me. Grace does the work, and Grace shall
carry away the praise. Christ is all in the race, and therefore on his head the
Crown is set. Not unto us Lord, not unto us but to thy Name be the pra se. Not
of us, and therefore not unto us; of him, and therefore unto him. If I am any
thing, what others are not, if I have done any thing more then others, no thank
to me, and therefore no praise. To him be all, who is All in all to me.
Christians Obedience, is their walking in Christ.

Christians Obedience is their walking in the Spirit. They have received the
Spirit, and they walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16. they have not received the
spirit of this world, (their spirit is not flesh) but the Spirit which is of
God, 1 Cor. 2.12. They are dead to things carnal, the spirit of the world is
departed, they have given up this ghost: It Is the Spirit of the living God that
lives in them, and in this they live and walk. They walk in the Light of the
Spirit, in the Power of the Spirit; the Spirit of the Lord steets their Course,
and fills their Sails; is their Pilot, and their Star, and their Wind that
carries them on. When they pray, they pray in the Spirit; when they hear, they
hear in the Spirit; through the Spirit, they mortify the flesh, are crucified
to the world; they obey, they suffer, they fight, they overcome, through the
Spirit of the living God that is in them: They live in fellowship with the
Spirit, and by him with the Father and the Son. They dwell in the invisible
world, their acquaintance and converse is in Heaven, thither they have access,
and there they have acceptance; thither they have their recourse, and thence
they have their returns. Duties and comforts, are the tokens that are passing
betwixt Heaven and Earth. Their life is Love, and Joy, and Praise; these are
the most noble acts of their Obedience, and these give Wings to their hearts,
carry them on more swiftly, and more sweetly through all their course.

Oh how heavily do we drive on, how slowly do our Wheels move, when the Spirit
of the living God is not in the Wheels. Oh how dead are our Duties, how lame
are our walkings, what low and poor spirited creatures are we: How weak are our
hearts, how unripe our fruits; we do but half do what we do, there is no heart
in our life, we are as bodies without souls, whilst our soul is without a
Spirit. Oh how sad is it with many of us, upon this account! By our
estrangement from God, we have even lost our selves; we are not what we are,
because we are no more where he is. By our distances from Heaven, we are even
choked with the damps of the Earth. We are fit for little, we prosper in
nothing, God takes no pleasure, and we take no comfort in any thing we do, our
spirits are so chil'd and benumbed within, as that we neither make sign in our
work, not ridance of our way And what are we in our Societies? To how little
profit do we meet? How little heat do we get yea how much do we lose at our
brethrens fires? We serve often, but to damp and cool each others spirits; as
if it might be no longer said, Woe to him that is alone, but woe be to him that
is in company; alone he is more warm.

Christians, I solemnly profess, I am ashamed of my self, and my heart is
pained within me, to observe how insipid, how spiritless, how carnal our
converses are; how often may we meet? How long may we sit, Christian with
Christian, ere any thing that savours of the spirit of a Christian comes from
us? Oh how hard must we strain for a few gracious words! How little does come?
How heartless when it comes? How very few of us are there, whose ordinary
converse speaks us to be men of another world, whose business, and whose
delight lies above, and are in good earnest pressing on toward Heaven? How
seldom, and how short-breathed are our spiritual discourses? How little must
suffice? How quickly are we diverted to things carnal and sensual? Sure it is
our little communion with God, that has thus incarnated and communion of
Saints.

Oh let us live more in the fellowship of the Spirit, and we shall have
fellowship one with another, to better purpose. Lets warm our selves at the
Sun, lets dwell more in his Beams, and we shall get and give more Light and
Heat. Thus must it be considered ere we resolve, what there is in this
Obedience.

2. It must be considered, What it is like to be attended withal from without.
What suffering it may cost us, what scorn, and contempt, and reproaches, and
persecutions of all sorts; it is like to set Earth and Hell upon our backs; if
carnal counsels, and fleshly policies, if all the powers of darkness, if might
and malice can do it, this way will be made too hot, and too hard for thee:
Tribulation, great tribulation thou must expect, and can not escape; and the
more strict and circumspect, the hotter must thou look thine Assaults will be.

Professors of Religion that are of the largest size, that are not so strict to
their Rule, but they can dispense with Duty: nor so forward in point of Zeal
and Activity, but they can remit and abate as occasion serves, may escape this
persecuting world the better; but he that will be faithful, who ever escape, is
sure to be made a Prey. This also must be well considered, I will follow
Christ, but can I drink of the Cup that he drank of? Can I be baptized with the
Baptism, the Baptism of Blood that he was baptized with?

There are persons, who sometimes take up the profession of Religion, and
resolve all on a sudden they will follow Christ; not understanding what there
is in it, or what Christianity may stand them in; who by that they have looked
a little farther, and find it another manner of difficulty, then at first they
imagined; and withal find the Armies of the Aliens to fall on, the Dogs to
tear, the Wolves to worry, the Eagles, and the Vultures, and all the Birds of
Prey, to pitch upon them; and begin in earnest to feel the smart of Religion,
in those persecutions that are raised upon them for it, presently make their
retreat, and go back. Where am I? What have I chosen? Is this to be a
Christian? Does Christ look for all this from his followers, and will he leave
them to such violence and rapine, as the reward of their faithfulness to his
name? I never thought it had been such hot service, and if I cannot be a Saint
at a cheaper rate then this, follow Christ who will for me; let those that have
nothing to lose, or can bear so much labor, and pains, and violence, take it
up if they please; for my part, I must look to my self, I must not be undone.

Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou go, said that Scribe, Matthew.
20.7. Man thou understandest not what thou say. Do know whither I am
going, where my dwelling, what my lodging is? The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head: And behold there is an end of the Scribes Christianity, we hear not one
word more of it.

But now, he that both knows what it is to be a Disciple, that has looked
through Religion, through the length and breadth of it; has duly weighed all
that can be said for, or against his taking it up; has examined the grounds
and reasons he has for it, what weight there is in them; has considered the
Objections, has cast up the cost and charges of it, and as the issue and
result of the most serious debate, stands settled in his judgment, that all
things considered, it is indisputably the best, and wisest, and safest course
he can take; its beyond all controversy, without all dispute incomparably
better for me, to hearken to the Lord in all that he shall require, and to run
all hazards with him and that presently, from this day forward, to the end of
my life: He that stands thus settled in his judgment and thereupon feels his
soul fixing it self in this peremtory resolution; well, through the grace of
God, I will be his servant; I give up my self to the government of his will; to
follow him in righteousness and holiness all my days. I am sensible its no
light thing to be a Christian, I see I must be subject, I see I must be
circumspect I see I must be active, I must stick at nothing that God will have;
I see this flesh will be pained and put hard to it will fling and groan under so
severe a yoke: I see the Devil and this evil world will be upon me, laying on
more lord, to make my bargain as dear as they can: But be there in it what
there will, let it cost me never so dear, I am at a point; I will venture all
upon it, the Lord is my God, and him will I follow in all things that he shall
speak; I put my self into the everlasting Arms; I trust upon everlasting
strength; I will go forth in the Name of the Lord, and now speak Lord, for I
will hear.

This sincere resolution, this will hold out; when our holy inclinations are so
rooted and strong, that they hear down all fleshly inclinations; when our
assent to Scripture is so firm, that it over balances all Objections against
it; when our Reasons for Religion are so high and weighty, that they weigh down
the highest pretenses against it; when we have thoroughly considered what there
is in it, and compared all that can be said, for or against our following the
Lord, and upon the whole matter we judge it our best course, and accordingly
resolve for it, this is sincere resolution, this is the Obedience of the heart.

2. Obedience of the Life, This is the Decree bringing forth, or holy
inclination and resolution springing up into action, and is a necessary proof
of the soundness of the resolution.

Though sincere resolution be Obedience in Gods account, yet that resolution
which (supposing there be time and opportunity) does not break forth into act,
is undoubtedly unsound and deceitful. There are two things infallibly included
in Spiritual life; a Will, and a Power. Grace is the disposing, and the
enabling the heart for an holy life, and where there is both a Will, and a
Power, performance will certainly follow. This sincerity of actual Obedience,
is that which the Prayer of the Psalmist looks to, Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart
be sound [in thy statutes] that I be not ashamed.

There is a soundness in the Faith, and a soundness in the Statutes of the
Lord. Faith notes in Scripture, either the Doctrine of faith, or the Grace of
faith. And accordingly, soundness in the faith, signifies both the receiving
and entertaining sound Doctrine, and the sound or sincere embracing that
Doctrine. Soundness in the Statutes of the Lord, notes especially the Practice,
the living or walking uprightly, under the Power of that Doctrine, under the
Government and Obedience of the Statutes of the Lord. What this Obedience of
life is, its easy to gather out of what has been spoken touching the
Obedience of the heart; I shall only add, that this Obedience is then sound
and sincere, when

1. In General, the whole course of life is the issue of the mentioned sincere
resolution; when the life is the birth of the purpose, the fruit growing up out
of the holy Root. There may be actions Materially good and holy, that yet are
not gracious actions; because they arise not from a right spring. When the soul
has devoted it self to God in Christ, and believingly, understandingly, and
deliberately decreed and determined in his strength to keep his word; and this
decree or determination, goes into the performances of the life, and is the
root and soul of that holy course we walk in, there is sin^erity.

Some persons may be found, who have taken up the Profession, and go far in
the practice of godliness; abstaining from gross sins, yea and making attempts
upon the mortification of inward Lusts; applying themselves to the duties of
Religion; Praying, Hearing, Reading, Meditating, Discoursing of God, and the
things of God; exercising themselves in the works of righteousness and mercy;
being Meek, Temperate, Patient; and yet if all this do arise only from the
advantages of a good Nature, good Education, good Society and Acquaintance, a
powerful Ministry, or the workings of natural Conscience; as possibly it may,
and does not spring forth from such a fixed, well bottomed resolution, it is
short of sincerity. Whatever the Blades be, they have no Root, and will
certainly wither away.

2. In Particular actions, when they are done in simplicity; and singleness of
heart unto the Lord; when whatever sinful mixtures there may sometimes be of
carnal respects, that may have an influence upon the exerting and bringing them
forth; yet the great poise that moves the Wheels, the swaying motive that
brings us on, is God, and our respects to his will and Honor.

Now for this also the Lord undertakes, promising not only assistance, but
success, sufficient grace, and efficacious grace; I will cause them to walk in
my Statutes, and they (shall) keep my judgments, and do them. I will not only
teach them my Statutes; I will not only incline their hearts to my
testimonies; I will not only strengthen them for my work, but I will cause
them to walk in my Statutes. The even shall be sure, they (shall) keep my
judgments, and do them; my word shall fail, my promises shall be of none
effect; let me be accounted unfaithful, if I do not make them faithful to me.

CHAP. XVI. Perseverance in the Covenant.
8. PErseverance. Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

The Perseverance of the Saints, is founded on the Election of God, and the
immutability of his Counsel; The foundation of the Lord stands sure, Romans
8.38. Whom he did Predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them
he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified. This golden
Chain will hold, not a link of it shall be broken: on whomsoever the first link
Election has taken hold, it will infallibly bring him up to the last, Glory.
God is not as man, that he should repent. But not to wade farther into this
deep, our business lies in the Promise of God.

There are two sorts of Promises concerning Perseverance. There are Promises --
To Perseverance. Of Perseverance.


1. The Promise of eternal life is made to Perseverance. Hold out to the end,
and be saved. Overcome and reign. Be faithful to the death, and I will give
thee a Crown of life. Rev. 2,10. If thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for
ever. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him. Christians, beware of Apostasy, beware of Presumption; Pass the time of
your sojourning here in fear. Let it not be said of you, ye (did) run well: He
runs well, that gives not off, that sits not down on this side the goal. So run
that ye may obtain.

2. There are Promises of Perseverance. The Covenant of God, is an everlasting
Covenant. He has commanded his Covenant for ever, Psalm. 111.5.

There are two things in the forementioned Scripture, Jer. 32.40. secured to
Believers, which secure their Perseverance. 1. God will not depart from them.
2. They shall not depart from him.


1. God will not depart from them. I will not turn aw^ from them. God is with
me, but I fear I shall provoke him away; I shall weary him out by my sins, and
drive him from me. No says the Lord, I will not turn away from them, to do
them good. I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee.

2. They shall not depart from him. It Is true, the Lord will be with me, but
it is only while I am with him; if I depart, he will depart: if I forsake him, he
will ca^ me off for ever. Here Is my great fear, that I shall turn away from
him; there is in me an evil heart of unbelief, that is ever departing from the
living God. Oh this false and fickle heart, I dare not trust it for a day, I
dare not undertake for it for an hour; I doubt it will be gone ere I am aware;
my corruptions are strong, my temptations are many, every day brings its
temptations; and I am in great fear that by one means or other, one day or
other, I shall fall before them, and depart from the living God! No says God,
fear not, thou shall not depart; I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. They shall be kept by my Almighty Power, through
faith unto salvation. My grace shall be with them, and my grace shall be
sufficient for them; and shall preserve them to my Heavenly Kingdom.

And here is the Saints security: The Lord God will not turn away from them,
nor ever suffer them to run away from him. If the Promise fail, then may their
faith also fail. Its true, there may be gradual declinings, and departures of
the Saints from Christ for a season, but total or final there shall not be:
They shall not be of them that draw back unto perdition, but of them that
believe to the saving of the soul. Though they fall, they shall rise again;
they may turn, but they shall return. As Hypocrites will not stay (with) Christ
always, so neither will Saints alwais stay from him. And there is a like reason
of both: Sinners sometimes will step aside, and salute Religion, and take some
turns with Christ; but after a while, away they must again: And there is a
double Reason of it, 1. There Is that within them 2. There Is one without them
That will fetch them back.

1. There Is that within them that will fetch them back. Corrupt nature, the
power of unmortified Lust, this it that bears the sway in their hearts; and
however for the time, the stream may be somewhat turned out of its course, or
bayd up; however by the impetus of some external Motives or Arguments, or the
impulses of an awakened Conscience, or some sudden heat of affection, they are
carried on after, and in some fair compliance with the Lord Jesus; yet when the
Bay is removed, when the external force is spent, Conscience laid to sleep, the
heat of affection allaid, which is often almost as soon out as in; thou very
natures will reduce, and bring them back to their old course. What is it that
pulls a Stone, or a lump of Clay down again, that is thrown into the Air? Why
when the vis impressa by which they were forced up, is spent, their natures,
their innate gravities will bring them down to their place. Sinners need no
other weights to pull them down to this Earth, then their earthly hearts.

2. There Is one without them that will fetch them off. Satan the god of this
world, whose they are, and whom they serve; who though he indulge them so much
liberty for their Religion, as is consistent with their captive state, and may
possibly secure them the more under his Dominion, (Hypocrites are often the
faster to Satan, for being so near to Christ) the very Religion they have, is
but the Devils snare, by which he holds them back from Religion; yet lest by
venturing them too far, they should be lost to him at last, he that first
tempted them so near to Christ, (Hypocrites are often beholding to the Devil
for their Religion they have) will quickly tempt them back again.

And so on the other side, there are the like Reasons why Saints cannot always
wander, or stay sway from Christ.

1. There Is that within them, which will bring them back. the grace of God
within them, will bring them home. The grace of God, is now their nature.
Sinners whilst walking with Christ, and Saints whilst wandering from Christ,
are both under a force; they are carried against the stream, when the winds are
down that carried them on, they will return to their course. The grace of God
is the seed of God, He that is born of God, sins not; (that is, not unto
death) the seed of God remains in him. Thy seed of God is immortal seed; it
may languish, and be ready to dye, but it shall not dye, it shall recover.

2. There Is one above them which will bring them back. Though he suffer them
for a time, to wander from the way; yet he will not suffer them to perish from
the way. Of those whom thou have given me, I have lost none. He has lost none,
and he will lose none. He sends a word of command after them, Jer. 3.14. Return
O lack sliding children, for I am married to you. Whither are you running? Whom
are you following after? Come back from your Lovers, return to your Husband; I
am married to you, and we may not part;

After the word of Command, he sends a word of Promise, ver. 22. I will heal
your backslidings. Return from your backslidings, and I will heal them. I
will forgive your backslidings, and I will cure you of your back sliding heart.
All the Breaches they have made, shall be made up; I will pass by all that you
have done, and be reconciled to you. If you will return, return and I will
receive you. And this word of Promise, is a word of Power. I will bring you to
Zion: then shall she say, I will go and return to my first Husband, Hos. 2.
Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Jer. 3.22. He that
will not leave his Israel after the flesh, with their Idols much less will he
leave his Israel after the Spirit. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very
thing, that he that has begun a good work, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ.

A good work may be said to be begun in double sense.

1. When there is some good think a doing: Or when something is done toward
it; when it is in fieri. When the Lord has been ploughing up the fallow
ground, making his Batteries against the strong Hold, shaking secure hearts,
breaking false hopes, awakening Consciences, convincing sinners, spreading sin,
and death, and hell, before them entering upon a Treaty with them, and
persuading them over to Christ, to make an escape: There may be hopes in this,
The pains of Travel gives hopes of a Birth. But this may go back, and after the
highest hopes, prove an abortion. Sinners, awakened sinners, beware you make
not a stand at the Threshold; beware that your Plough'd ground be not left to
lie fallow. Beware that the Womb prove not the Grave of all your hopes. Mistake
not Conviction for Conversion; make on, let not your God, nor your souls lose
the things which here been wrought.

2. When there is some good thing done. When it is in facto esse. When the
Rubbish is removed, and the first stone is laid; when the Plough has been
going, and the good Seed is sown; when the New Creature has passed the Birth;
when Christ is formed, and the light of life is newly sprung up in the soul; it
there be but a grain of Mustard Seed, the least and the lowest degree of saving
Grace, broken forth in the heart, the question is not, whether it be much or
little, if it be grace, there is the immortal seed, there is the good work begun,
which shall be carried on till the day of Jesus Christ. Grace is a security for
Glory: Yet beware Christians, let not this security make you secure; though
there be an Harvest in the seed, yet the seed must be cherished, watched, and
well looked to, that it may grow up to the Harvest: He that lets it dye for
want of looking to, proves that it was dead whilst alive. Let not your falling
short of Glory, prove that your Grace was not Grace.

Christians lay hold on the Promise, and lift up your heads; you are under
fears, however it be with you for the present, you are in doubt how it may be;
your way is long, and dangerous; yet your hearts are deceitful and unstable;
you are going on at present, but doubt how you shall hold out: I may meet with
Lions in the way, which may fright me back; I may lose my way, and never
recover: I may be weary, and faint in the way, and lie down and give off. My
Lord and my soul, have been often upon the parting point; I have been almost
gone, and I tremble to think what may yet become of me: Yet remember who it is
that has said, I will not turn from you to do you good, I will put my fear in
your hearts, and you shall not depart from me. Rise soul, take care for to day,
and take no thought for to morrow. Mind the present duty, go on thy way, though
weeping and trembling, and hard bestead; go on thy way, and then commit thy
way, and thy self to him, by whose mighty Power thou shall be kept through
faith unto salvation. Faithful is he that has called you, and will do it

And now you have all. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter. God has
made a Covenant with his people, has given himself for their Portion, his Son
for their price, his Spirit for their guide in the way, his Earth for their
accommodation by the way, his Angels for their Guard, the Powers of darkness
and death for their Spoils, everlasting Glory for their Crown. And because
their way is difficult, and their work is contrary to them, he has given them
all that grace that is necessary to bring them to Glory. In General, a new
heart, in all things suited to their way, and thoroughly furnished for every
good work. In Particular, Knowledge to guide, oneness to fix and intend,
tenderness to submit to and yield, love to constrain and bring on, fear to
fence and hold in, obedience to perform and bring forth, and perseverance to go
through, and hold out to the end; and there grace and glory meet. This is the
Covenant of grace, this is the word, which by the Gospel is preached unto you.

It will be said, But if God has undertaken all this for us, what is there
then left on us to do? Here Is a Doctrine according to sinners hearts; if this
be Gospel, then soul take thine ease, take thy liberty, cast away care, make
much of thy body, God will take care of the rest.

But is there nothing required of us? Let the Scriptures speak, Ezekiel. 36.37.
Yet for all this will I be enquired of, or sought unto by the house of Israel;
otherwise let them look for no such things. He that will not ask in faith, let
not that man think he shall receive any thing of the Lord, Jam. 1.7. And can he
think to receive any thing, that neither believes nor prays? That neither
prays in faith, nor prays at all? Phil. 2.12,13. It Is God works in you, both
to will and to do. What then? Therefore sit you still and do nothing? No such
matter; therefore work out your salvation, with fear and trembling says the
Apostle. The promise of God was never intended, to make the command of God of
none effect. God in promising grace, promises a power for duty; and as he does
not give, so we must not receive that power or grace of God in vain. Whilst he
gives what he requires, he still requires what he gives. That promise of God
(ye shall be my people) though he undertake to make it good, yet it is also the
matter of our stipulation. And in this promise wherein the Lord assures us,
what de facto we (shall) be, is included a Precept, wherein we may understand
what de jure we (ought) to be.

In undertaking to give us a new heart, a tender and obedient, a persevering
heart, the Lord does promise, both to make us what we should be, and to help us
in what we are bound to do; and gives us at once a clear hint, both of our
mercy and our duty. This is the sense and sum of that Promise, The Lord will
work all that in us, and will help and cause us to perform all that which (is
required) unto salvation; and so the Promissum on Gods part, does not make
void, but establish the Debitum on ours. Do we then make void the Law through
Faith? Nay we establish the Law.

Though, it be certain as to the event, that all that is necessary to salvation,
shall be accomplished in us, God has undertaken that, yet it is altogether as
certain that God has made our loving him, fearing him, obeying his whole will,
and our sincerity, and perseverance herein, so necessary, that we cannot
otherwise be saved.

Christians, mistake not, nor abuse the grace of the Gospel. The Lord never
meant your mercy should make void your Obligation to duty. Redemption from sin,
was never intended as a toleration of sin. He gives not his Spirit, in favor
of the flesh. What he undetakes to work for you, was never with a mind to
maintain you in idleness, Tit. 2.11,12. The grace of God that brings
salvation, teaches us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Though you are saved by grace, yet you are still (in a sense) debtors to do
the whole Law. Perfect Obedience to the whole Law, even to the utmost Iota, is
still due from you; and if it be not in your hearts, to pay all that you owe,
that is, if there be any duty commanded, in the whole book of God, that you
must be dispensed with, that you will not set your hearts to observe and obey;
if there be any one sin that you must be excused in, and will not part with; if
there be any, the highest pitch of holy Care, Activity, Industry, Zeal for God
and Holiness, that you will not be persuaded to press hard after; this is an
evidence of such an unsound heart, as has no part in the Gospel, or the
salvation thereof. Perfection is still due, though sincerity will be accepted.
Sincerity shall be accepted, but what is sincerity less, then an hearty
willingness to be perfect, attested by a striving and pressing on to that mark
which is set before us.

O admire and bless the Lord, the Lord for grace, but do not turn the grace of
God into licentiousness. Shall we continue in sin, because grace that abounded?
Will ye thus requite the Lord? Will ye thus deceive your selves, O foolish
people and unwise? Will you slight him because he has loved you? Kick at him
because he has cared for you? Shake off his Yoke, because he has secured you
the Crown! Will you serve his enemies, because he has saved you from them?
Will you nourish your diseases, because he has said he will cure you? Will you
live and not eat? Reap and not Plough? Will you not eat, because he has given
you meat? Will you not run, because he has given you Legs? Nor work, because
he has given you hands? Nor watch, because he has given you eyes? Or will you
tempt the Lord, and call that your trust in him? Awake from such madness.

Christians, say not (If God will I shall) whether I take care or no, believe
or no, repent or no, be obedient, or rebellious, whether I wake or sleep, work
or be idle; my unbelief, my disobedience, my negligence, shall not make the
faith of God of none effect. But rather, since God has said, (you shall) let
thine heart answer (I will) walk in his statutes. Arise O my soul, up and be
doing; work out thy salvation, because its God that works in thee to will and
to do: Shake off thy sloth, set to thy work, run out thy race, since God has
said, thou shall not run, nor labor in vain. And look to it, for however thy
Idleness, or greatest Unfaithfulness, will not make void the Covenant of God,
yet will it make manifest, that thou have no part nor lot in it.

But to all these glorious things that have been spoken, possibly some will
reply; O if all this be so, then happy Saints indeed; Happy are the people that
are in such a case, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. But will
the Lord indeed do all these things for Mortals? Will he take notice of Worms?
Shall such dry bones live? Will he set such vile dust as the Apple of his eye?
Is not this too good to be true? Too great to be believed? Are we not all this
while but in a Dream, or a fools Paradise? Oh that I were sure the one half
were as it has been told me. Too great to be believed? As if it must be
questioned whether the Sun light, because it dazles our eyes. But what
certainty would you have? Is all this too great for the great and Almighty God
to do, who has said, Isa. 55.9. As the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so
are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts, then your thoughts. Can
he not do it, who can do all things? Will he not do it, when he has said he
will? Will the Lord mock? Can God deceive? Shall his Word, yea and his Oath
too, those two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, can
these fail? If you should hear the Lord himself speaking to you from Heaven,
with audible voice, My Covenant I make with thee, and it is my intent and
purpose to perform every word that is written in it, according to the plain
import and meaning thereof; there shall not a tittle fail, neither will I alter
the thing that is gone forth of my lips. Heaven and Earth shall fail, but my
word shall not fail; trust to it, trust everlasting truth, trust to everlasting
strength. Fear not, for there shall not fail one word, of all that I have
spoken by all my servants the Prophets.

If you should hear the Lord speaking thus to you from Heaven, what would you
say? Would not this satisfy you? Why search the Scriptures, that more sure
word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19. Read them diligently, understond what thou
read, and then say, if thou do not there find the Lord speaking fully to
thee the following words,

CHAP. XVII. God speaking from Mount Gerizim. Or, the Gospel in a Map; being a
short view of the exceeding great and precious Promises Mr. I. A.
by another hand.
The voice of the Herald.
O All ye Inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the Earth; Come see, and
hear; gather your selves together, unto the Proclamation of the great King.
Hear, you that are far off, and you that are near: He that has an ear to
hear, let him hear. I am the voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye
the way of the Lord. Let every Valley be exalted, and every Mountain made low,
for the glory of the Lord is to be revealed. Go through, go through the Gates;
prepare the way: Cast up, cast up the Highway; gather out the Stones, lift up
the Standard for the people; for the Lord proclaims salvation to the ends of
the Earth. Tidings, tidings, O ye Captives! Hear all ye that look for salvation
in Israel; behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be unto
all people. Blessed news! Prepare your ears, and hearts; the Lord has
commanded me, saying; Go unto the people, and sanctify them, let them wa^h and
be ready, for the Lord is coming down upon Mount Sion, in the sight of all the
Nations: Not in Earthquakes and Fire; not in Clouds, and Darkness; not in
Thundrings and Burnings, rending the Mountains, and breaking the Rock in
pieces: He speaks not to you out of the Blackness, and Darkness, and T^mpest;
you shall say no more, Let not God speak to us lest we dye; He comes
peaceably, he Law of kindness is in his mouth, he preaches Peace, peace, to
him that is far off, and to him that is near.

Behold how he comes, leaping upon the Mountains, he has passed Mouth Ebal,
no more wrath or cursing; he is come to Mount Gerizim, where he stands to
bless the people: As Mordecai to his Nation, he writes the words of truth and
peace, seeking the wel^are of his people, and speaking peace to all his Seed.

Behold how he comes, clothed with flames of Love, with bowels of Compassion,
plenteous Redemption, and multiplied Pardons. O how pregnant is his Love! O the
rollings of his Bowels! Oh how full are his Breasts, even aching till they are
eased by the sucking of his hungry Children!

Hearken therefore O ye Children, hearken to me. To you it is commanded, O
People, Nations, and Languages, that at what time you hear the joyful sound,
the Trump of Jubilee, the tidings of peace in the voice of the everlasting
Gospel, that you fall down before the Throne, and worship him that lives for
ever and ever.

Arise, and come away; Prepare, prepare you; Hear not with an uncircumcised
ear; you are not upon a common thing. Behold the Throne is set, the Throne of
grace, where Majesty and Mercy dwell together: from thence will the Lord meet
you, from thence will he commune with you, from the Mercy-seat, from between
the Cherubims, upon the Ark of the Testimony. Lo, the Lord comes out of his
Pavilion, the mighty God from Sion. Selah. His glory covers the Heavens, the
Earth is full of his praise. A fire (of love) goes before him, mercy and truth
are round about him, righteousness, and peace are the habitation of his Throne;
he rides on his Horses and Chariots of Salvation, the Covenant of life, and
peace is in his mouth.

Rejoice ye Heavens, make a joyful noise to the Lord all the Earth. Let the Sea
roar, the Floods clap their hands, and the multitudes of the Isles rejoice.
Stand forth the Host of Heaven, prepare your Harps, cast down your Crowns, be
ready with your Trumps; bring forth your golden Vials full of Odours, for our
voices will jarr, our strings will break, we cannot, we cannot reach the note
of our Makers praise.

Yet let them that dwell in the dust arise and sing. Bear your part in this
glorious service, but consider and attend. Call out your souls, and all that is
within you. Lift up your voices, fix your eyes, enlarge your hearts, intend all
their Powers; here is work for them all. Be intent, and serious, you cannot
strein too high.

Come forth ye graces, beset the way, be all in readiness. Stand forth Faith,
and Hope: flame O Love, come ye warm desires, and break with longing: Let fear
with all veneration do its Obeisance. Joy prepare thy songs, call up all the
Daughters of Music, to salute the Lord as he passes by. Let the generations
of the Saints appear, and spread the way with Boughs and Garments of Salvation,
and songs of Deliverance, Deuteronomy. 29.10. to the 13. Ye stand this day all of you
before the Lord your God, your Captains, your Elders, your Officers, with all
the men of Israel; your little Ones, your Wives, and the stranger that is
within thy Camp, from the hewer of Wood, to the drawer of Water: That thou
should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, which
the Lord thy God makes with thee this day: That he may establish thee to day
for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said
unto thee, and as he has sworn.

I have done my errand. The Messenger of the morning disappeareth, when the
Orient Sun comes forth, out of his Chamb^rs. I vanish: I put my mouth in the
dust. The voice of the Lord! The soft and still voice! O my soul, wrap thy face
in the mantle, and bow thy self to the ground, and put thee in the clif of the
Rock, while Jehovah proclaims his Name, and makes all his goodness to pass
before thee.

The voice of the LORD.
HEar, O ye ends of the Earth. The mighty God, the Lord has spoken: Gather my
Saints unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice. Psalm.
50.1,5.
Behold I establish my Covenant between me, and you. Genesis 17.7.
By my holiness have I sworn, that I will be your Covenant-friend. I lift up my
hands to heaven, I swear I live for ever; and because I live, you shall live
also. Ioh. 14.19.
I will be yours: Jer. 32.38,40.
Yours to all intents and purposes: Your refuge and your rest, Jer. 50.6. Psalm.
90.1. Psalm. 46.1.
your Patron and your Portion; Psalm 73.26. Esaias 25.4,5.
your Heritage and your Hope; your God, and your Guide. Psalm. 48.14.
While I have, you shall never want; and what I am to my self, I will be to
you. Psalm. 34.9,10.
And you shall be my People, a chosen generation, a Kingdom of Priest, an holy
Nation, a peculiar Treasure unto me above all people. Exodus 19.5.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.
I call Heaven and Earth to witness this day, that I take you for mine for
ever. My Name shall be upon you, and you shall be Pillars in the Temple of your
God, and shall go no more out. Rev. 3.12.


My Livery shall you wear, and the stamp of my own Face shall you carry; Ezekiel.
36.25,26. with Ephesians. 4.24.
and I will make you my Witnesses, and the Epistles of Christ unto the world,
Esaias 24 8. 2 Cor. 3.3.
and you shall be chosen Vessels, to bear my Name before the sons of men. And
that you may see I am in earnest with you, lo I make with you an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; 2 Samuel 23 5.
and do here solemnly deliver it to you, as my act and deed, sealed with sacred
blood, 1 Cor. 11.25.
and ratified with the Oath of a God; Heb. 6.17.
a God that cannot lie, that knows no place for repentance. Tit. 1,2. 1 Lam.
15.29.
Come ye blessed, receive the Instrument of your salvation: take the writings,
behold the s^als; here are the conveyances of the Kingdom. Fear not, the
do^ation is free, and full. See, it is written in blood, founded on the
All-sufficient merits of your Surety, Heb. 9.16,17,18.
in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17.
whose death makes this Testament unchangeable for ever; so that your names can
never be put out, not your Inheritance alienated, nor your Legacies diminished;
nothing may be altered, nothing added, nothing subtracted, no not for ever.
Gal. 3.15,16,17.
Happy art thou O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O People! The blessings of the
Covenant, are either its glorious Liberties, and Immunities, or its Royal
Privileges and Prerogatives.
Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Only believe, and know your own blessedness. Attend O my Children, unto the
blessings of your Father, and hear, and know the glorious immunities, and the
Royal Prerogatives that I here confirm upon you.

The Immunities and Liberties of the Covenant consisting in 1. Our general
discharge from all our debts.
Here I seal you your Pardons. Though your sins be as many as the sands, and as
mighty as the Mountains, I will drown them in the deeps of my bottomless
mercies. Micah 7.19.
I will be merciful to your unrighteousness: I will multiply to pardon Heb.
8.12.
where your sins have abounded, my grace shall super-abound; though they be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though red like crimson, they shall be as
wool. Esaias 1.18.
Behold I declare my self satisfied, and pronounce you absolved: Job 33.24.
The price is paid, your debts are cleared, your Bonds are cancelled. Esaias
43.25.
Coll. 2.13,14.

Whatever the Law, or Conscience, or the Accuser has to charge upon you, here
I exonerate you, I discharge you. I, even I am he, that blotteth out your
transgressions, for my Names sake. Who shall lay any thing to your charge, when
I acquit you? Who shall impeach, or implead you, when I proclaim you guiltless?
Romans 8.33,34.
Sons, Daughters, be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you. 1 Ioh. 2.12.
Mat. 9.2.
I will sprinkle your consciences, and put the voice of peace into their
mouths, Ezekiel. 36.25. Heb. 9.14. Esaias 57.19.
and they shall be your Registers, in which I will record your Pardon, and the
voice of Guilt, and Wrath, and Terror shall cease. Heb. 10.22. Esaias 27.4,5.


2. Our release from the house of bondage; particularly,
Here I sign your release from the house of Bondage; Romans 6.17,18. 1 Cor. 7.22.
Come forth ye captives, come forth ye prisoners of hope; for I have found a
ransom Job 33.24.
: I proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound. Esaias 61.1. and 42.7.
Behold, I have broken your bonds, and shook the foundations of your prisons,
and opened the iron gates Luke 4.18.
. By the blood of the Covenant have I sent forth the prisoners out of the pit
wherein there is no water. Zech. 19.11.
Arise, O redeemed of the Lord, put off the raiment of your captivities, arise
and come away.

From the dark and noisome prison of sin.
The dark and noisome prison of sin shall no longer detain you. John 8.34,35,36.
I will loose your fetters, and knock off your bolts. Sin shall not have
dominion over you. Romans 6.14.
.

I will heal your backslidings, I will subdue your iniquities, Mic. 7.19. Jer.
3.12.
I will sanctify you wholly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23,24.
and will put my fear in your hearts, that you shall not depart from me. Jet.
32.40.
Though your corruptions be strong and many; yet the aids of my Spirit, and
cleansing virtue of my word, and physic of my corrections shall so work
together with your prayers and endeavors, as that they shall not finally
prevail against you, but shall surely fall before you. Ezekiel. 36.27. Ephesians, 5.26.
Esan 27.9.


From the strong and stinking goal of the grave.
From the strong and stinking goal of the grave do I deliver you. O death I will
be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13.14.
my Beloved shall not ever see corruption. Psalm. 16.10.


I will change your rottenness into glory, and make your dust arise, and praise
me. Dan. 12.2,3. Esaias 26.19.
What is sown in weakness I will raise in power: what is sown in corruption I
will raise in incorruption: what is sown a natural body, I will raise a
spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15.42,43,44.
This very flesh of yours, this corruptible flesh shall put on incorruption;
and this mortal shall put on immortality. 1 Cor. 15.53.
Death shall be swallowed up in victory, and mortality of life. 2 Cor. 5.4. 1
Cor. 15.54.
Fear not, O my children; Come, and I will show you the enemy that you dreaded.
See, here lies the King of terrors, like Sisera in the tent, fastened to the
ground, with the nail struck through his temples. Behold the grateful present,
the head of your enemy in a Charger: I bequeath you your conquered adversary,
and make over death as your Legacy. 1 Cor. 3.22.
O death where is thy sting? where now is thine armor wherein thou trustedst?
1 Cor. 15.55.
Come my people, enter into your chambers: Esaias 26.20.
Come to your beds of dust, Esaias 26.20.
and lay you down in peace, and let your flesh rest in hope; Esa. 57.2.
for even in this flesh shall you see God. Psalm. 16.91. Job 19.25,26,27.
O ye slain of death, your carcases, now as loathsome as the carrion in the
ditch, will I redeem from the power of the grave, Psalm. 49.15.
and fashion those vile bodies like unto the glorious body of your exalted
Redeemer. Phil. 3.21.
Look, if you can on the Sun, when shining in his strength, with such dazzling
glory will I cloth you, O ye of little faith. Mat. 13.43.


From the dungeon of eternal darkness.
From the terrible dungeon of eternal darkness do I hereby free you. Fear not,
you shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2.11. Romans 8.1.
you are delivered from the wrath to come, and shall never come into
condemnation 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Joh. 5.24.
. The flames of Tophet shall not be able to singe the hairs of your heads, no
nor the smell of the fire pass upon you. Stand upon the brink, and look down
into the horrible pit, the infernal prison, from whence I have freed you.

See you how the smoke of their torments ascends for ever and ever Rev. 14.11.
? Hea^ you the cursings and ravings, the roarings and blasphemies Mat. 25.30.
? What think you of those hellish fiends? would you have been willing to have
had them for your companions and tormentors Mat. 25.41.
? wha^ think you of those chains of darkness of the river of brimstone, of the
instruments of torment for soul and body, of those weepings, and wailings, and
gnashing of teeth. Can you think of an everlasting banishment of a go ye
cursed? could you dwell with everlasting? could you abide with devouring fire
Esaias 33.14.
? This is the inheritance you were born to. Ephesians. 2.3.
But I have cut off the entail, and wrought for you a great salvation. I have
not ordained you to wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
but my thoughts toward you are thoughts of peace. Jer. 29.11.


3. Our pretection from all our enemies.
Here I deliver you your protection. From all your enemies will I save you. 2
King. 17.39.
From the arrests of the Law.
I grant you a protection from the arrests of the Law: your surety has fully
answered it; Gal. 3.13 Romans 4.10.
my Justice is satisfied, my wrath is pacified, my honor is repaired. Dan.
2.24. 2 Cor. 5.19.20.
Behold, I am near that justify you, who is he that shall condemn you? Es.
50.8.


From the powers of darkness.
From the usurped dominion of the powers of darkness. Col. 1.13.
I will tread Satan shortly under you, and will set your feet in triumph upon
the necks of your enemies. Romans 16.20.
Let not your hearts be troubled; though you be to wrestle with principa^ities
and powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this world: Ephesians. 6.12.
for stronger ^s he that is in you, then he that is in the world. 1 John 4.4.
He may bruise your heel, but you shall bruise his head. Genesis 3.15.
Behold your Redeemer leading captivity captive, spoiling principalities and
powers, and triumphing over them openly in his Cross. Col. 2.15.
See how Satan falls like lightning from Heaven, Luke 10.18.
and the Sampson of your salvation bears away the gates of Hell posts, and
all upon his shoulders, and sets them up as Trophies of his Victory: how he
pulls out the throat of the Lion, and lifts up the heart of the Traitor
upon the top of his spear, and washes his hands, and dies his robes in the
blood of those your enemies. Isa. 63.1,2,3.


From the victory of the world.
From the victory of the world, 1 John 5.4. Gal. 1.4.
neither its frowns nor its flatteries shall be too hard for your victorious
faith. Though it raise up Egypt, and Amalek, and Moab, and all its whole
Militia against you: yet it shall never keep you out of Canaan. Be of good
comfort, your Lord has overcome the world. Joh. 16.33.
Though its temptations be very powerful, yet this upon my faithfulness will I
promise you, that no such shall come upon you, but what you shall be able to
bear: But if I see such trials (which you fear) would be too hard for your
graces, and overthrow your souls, I will never suffer them to come upon you;
nay, I will make your enemy to serve you, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and do bequeath the world as part of your Dowry to you. 1 Cor. 3.22.


From the cusre of the Cross.
From the curse of the Cross. Psalm. 119.71.
Affliction shall prove a wholesome Cup to you; your Lord has drunk the Venom
into his own body, and what remains for you is but a healthful Potion, which I
will promise you, shall work for your good. Romans 8.28.
Be not afraid to drink, nor desire the cup should pass from you: I bless the
cup before I give it unto you. Job 5.17, etc.
Drink you all of it, and be thankful; you shall find my blessing at the
bottom of the cup, to sweeten the sharpest afflictions to you. Jam. 5.1.12.
Psalm. 94.12.
I will stand by you in all conditions, and be a fast friend to you in every
change. Esaias 43.2.
In the Wilderness I will speak comfortably to you, and in the fire, and in the
water, I will be with you. Hos. 2.14.
I will be a strength to the poor, and a strength to the needy in his distress;
a Refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat, when the blast of terrible
ones is as a storm against the Wall. Esaias 25.4.
Your sufferings shall not be a cup of Wrath, but a Grace cup; not a Curse, but
a Cure; not a cure of trembling, but a cup of blessing to you. Heb. 12.6,7,8.
They shall not hurt you, but heal you. Psalm. 119 67.
My blessing shall attend you in every condition. Genesis 26.3.
I say not only, Blessed shall you be in your Basket, and blessed in your
store; but blessed shall you be in your Poverty, Genesis 28.15.
and blessed shall you be in your streights: not only blessed shall you be in
your cities, and blessed shall you be in your fields,; but blessed shall you be
in your bonds, and blessed shall you be in your banishment. Mark 9.29 30. 1
Pet. 3.14.
Blessed shall you be when you are persecuted, and when you are reviled, and
your name is cast out as evil: Yea then doubly blessed. Mat. 5.10,11,12.
My choicest blessings, greatest good, and richest sweets will I put into your
evil things. 1 Pet. 4.13,14. Luke 6.20,21,22.
These happy Immunities, these glorious Liberties of the sons of God, by this
immutable Charter I do for ever settle upon you; and do in, and with my
Covenant unalterably, irrevocably, everlastingly convey unto you, and confirm
upon you.

The Privileges, and Prerogatives of ^he Covenant.
Yea, I will not only free you from your miseries; but will confer upon you
Royal Privileges, and Prerogatives, and in state you into higher, and greater
happiness then ever you have fallen from. Lo I give my self to you, and all
things with my self.

He gives himself to us for our God.
Behold O ye sons of men! Behold and wonder. Be astonished O Heavens! Be moved,
ye strong foundations of the Earth! For you shall be my witnesses. This day do
I by Covenant bestow my self upon my servants. Genesis 17.7.
I will be your God, for ever and ever; Psalm. 48.14. Jer. 32.38. Rev. 21.3.
Your Own God: Psalm. 67.6. Psalm. 16.2.
Nothing in the world is so much your own as I. The Houses that you have built,
that you have bought, are not so much yours as I am. Here you are Tenants at
will; but I am your eternal Inheritance. Psalm. 16.5. with 73.26.
These are loans for a season, but I am your dwelling place in all generations.
Psalm. 90.1.
You have no where so great a Propriety, so sure and unalterable claim, as you
have here. What do you count your own? Do you count your bodies your own, your
souls your own? Nay these are not your own; they are bought with a Price. 1 Cor
6.19,20.
But you may boldly make your claim to me; you may freely challenge an Interest
in me. Jer. 3.19. Esaias 63.16.
Come near, and fear not; where should you be free, if not with your own? where
should you be bold, if not at home? You are never in all the world so much at
home, as when you are with me. You may freely make use of me, or of any of my
Attributes, when ever you have need. Psalm. 50.15. Jer. 49.11. Psalm. 145.18.
I will be all to you, that you can wish. To be to us instead of all Relations.
Our friend.
Esaias 41.8. Jam. 2.2,3.
I will be a friend to you. Psalm. 25.14 Ioh. 15.15.
My secrets shall be with you, and you shall have all freedom of access to me,
and liberty to pour out all your hearts into my bosom. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 4.16.


Our Physician.
I will be a Physician to you. I will heal your backslidings, and cure all your
diseases, Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 103.3.
Fear not, never did soul miscarry, that left it self in my hands, and would
but follow my prescriptions.

Our Shepherd.
I will be a Shepherd to you. Psalm. 23.1. and 80,1.
Be not afraid of evil tidings, for I am with you; my rod, and my staff shall
comfort you. You shall not want, for I will feed you; you shall not wander (to
be lost,) for I will restore you. I will cause you to lie down in green
Pastures, and lead you beside the still waters. Psalm. 23.
I will gather you with mine arms, and carry you in my bosom, and will lead on
softly, as the flock and the children be able to endure. Esaias 43.11. Genesis
33.31,14.
If Officers be careless, I will do the work my self. I will judge between
cattle, and cattle. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which
was driven away, and bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which
was sick; but I will destroy the fat, and the strong, and will feed them with
judgment. Ezekiel. 34.16,17. with verse 2, 3, 4.
I will watch over my flock by night. Esaias 27.3.
Behold, I have appointed my Ministers as your Watchmen, and Overseers that
watch for your souls. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28.
Yea, mine Angels shall be your Watchers, and shall keep a constant Guard upon
my Flock. Dan. 3.17,23. Psalm. 34.7.
And if peradventure the servants should sleep, Mat. 13.25,27.
mine own eyes shall keep a perpetual watch over you, by night, and by day.
Psalm. 34.15. and 33 18. 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
The Keeper of Israel never slumbreth, nor sleeps, Psalm. 122.3,4,5.
nor withdraws his eyes from the righteous. Job 36.7.
I will guide you with mine eye; I will never trust you out of mine own sight.
Psalm 32.8.


Our Sovereign.
I will be a Sovereign to you. The Lord is your Judge, the Lord is your
Lawgiver, the Lord is your King. Esa. 33.22.
Fear not the unrighteousness of men. I will judge your cause, I will defend
your rights. Deu. 32 36. Psalm. 140.12. and 9,4.
You shall not stand at man's Bar; you shall not be cast at their Vote; 1 Cor.
4.3,5. 2 Cor. 10.18.
let them curse, I will bless; let them condemn, I will justify. Esaias 50.9.
Genesis 12.3.
When you come upon trial for your lives, to have your eternal state decided,
you shall see your friend, your father, upon the Bench. Psalm. 88.9. Eccles.
3.16,17.
Into my hands shall your cause be cast, and you shall surely stand in
judgment, and be found at the right hand among the sheep, and hear the King
say, Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom. Matt. 25.33,34. Matt 10.32.


Our Husband.
I will be an Husband to you. Esaias 54.5.
In loving kindness, and in mercies will I betroth you unto me for ever. Hos.
2.19,20.
I will espouse your Interest, and will be as o^e with you, and you with me.
Matt 25.40,45. Acts 9.4,5. Zach, 2.8.
You shall be for me, and not for another; and I also will be for you. Hos. 3.3.
Though I found you as an helpless Infant, exposed in its blood, all your
unworthiness does not discourage me. Lo I have looked upon you, and spread my
skirt over you, and washed you, and put my comeliness upon you. Moreover, I
swear unto you, and enter into Covenant with you, and you shall be mine. Ezekiel.
16.4, to the 10
Behold I do (as it were) put my self out of my own power, and do here
solemnly, in this my Marriage-Covenant, make away my self to you, Jer. 24.7,
and 30.21,22, and 31.^3.34.
and with my self all things. Rev. 21.7.
I will be an everlasting Portion to you. Ezekiel. 44.28. Jer. 51.19 Psalm. 119.57.
Lift up now your eyes Eastward, and Westward, and Northward, and Southward.
Have you not a worthy Portion, a goodly heritage? Can you cast up your riches,
or count your own happiness? Can you fathom Immensitie, or reach Omnipotency,
or comprehend Eternity? All this is yours. I will set open all my treasures to
you; I will keep back nothing from you.

He makes over himself to us, in all his Essential Perfections, and Personal
Relations.
All the Attributes in the Godhead, and all the Persons in the Godhead, do I
hereby make over to you. In all his Essential Perfections
I will be yours in all my Essential Perfections, and in all my Personal
Relations.

In all mine Essential Perfections.

Mine Eternity, shall be the date of your happiness.

His Eternity, as the date of our happiness.
I am the Eternal God; and while I am, I will be life, and blessedness to you.
Psalm. 90.1,2. with Psalm. 48.14. 1 Timothy 1.17. with 1 Pet. 5.10.
I will be a never failing Fountain of Joy, and Peace, and Bliss unto you.
Psalm. 36.7,8,9. and 16.11. Esaias 35.10.
I am the first, and last, that was, and is, and is to come, and mine eternal
Power, and Godhead, shall be bound to you. Jer. 32.40.


I will be your God, your Father, your Friend, while I have any being. Esaias 9.
Jer. 10.10.
I have made mine everlasting choice in pitching upon you. Psalm. 132.13,14.
Hos. 2.19.
Fear not, for the Eternal God is your Refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting Arms. Deuteronomy. 33.27.
My durable riches, and righteousness shall be yours. Prove. 8.18.
Though all should forsake you, yet will not I forsake you. Heb. 13.5. Psalm. 27
10.
When the world, and all that is therein shall be burnt up, I will be a
standing Portion for you. When you are forgotten among the dead, with
everlasting loving kindness will I remember you. Esaias 54.10.


His unchangeableness as the rock of our rest.
Mine unchangeableness shall be the Rock of your rest. Mal. 3.6. Psalm. 62.6,7.
and 92.15.
When all the world is like the tumbling Ocean, round about you, here you may
fix and settle. I am your resting place. Jer. 50.6; 2 Chr. 14.11.


The immutability of my Nature, and of my Counsel, and of my Covenant, are sure
footing for your faith, and a firm Foundation, for your strong and everlasting
consolation. 2 Timothy 2.19. Heb. 6.17,18.
When you are afflicted, tossed with Tempests, Esaias 54.11.
and not comforted; put into me: I am an Haven of Hope, I am an Harbor of rest
for you; here cast your Anchors, and you shall never be moved. Jer. 17.13.17.
Psalm. 46.1,2,5. and 125.1.


His Omnipotency for our guard.
Mine Omnipotency shall be your Guard. I am God Almighty, your Almighty
Protector, your Almighty Benefactor. Genesis 15.1. and 17.1.


What though your enemies are many? more are they that are with you, then they
that are against you; for I am with you 2 Chr. 32.78. 2 King. 6.16.
. What though they are mighty? they are not Almighty. Your Father is greater
then all, and none shall pluck you, (pluck while they will) out of my hands.
Ioh. 10.29.
Who can hinder my power, or obstruct my salvation Esaias 43.13. Dan. 4.35. 2 Pe.
2.9.
? Who is like unto the God of Ieshurun, who rides on the Heaven for your help,
and in his excellency on the sky? I am the sword of your strength, and the
shield of your excellency. Deu. 33 26,29.
I am your rock and your fortress, your deliverer, your strength, the horn of
your salvation, your buckler, and your high tower. Psalm. 18.2.
I will maintain you against all the power of the enemy. You shall never sink,
if Omnipotency can support you. 1 Pe. 1.5 Ex. 28.12.
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against you. Mat. 16.18.
Your enemies shall find hard work of it. They shall overcome victory, or
enervate Omnipotency, or corrupt fidelity, or change immutabilitie, or else
they cannot finally prevail against you, either they shall bow or break Rev.
3.9 Es. 66.24
Though they should exalt themselves as the Eagle, though they should set their
nest among the stars, even there will I bring them down, says the Lord. Oba.
4. Ier. 49.16.


His faithfulness for our security
My faithfulness shall be your security, Ps. 89.33,34,35.
my truth, yea my oath shall fail if ever you come off losers by me. Es.
54.9,10. with Mark 10.29,30.
I will make you to confess, when you see the issue and upshot of all my
providence, that I was a God worthy to be trusted, worthy to be believed,
worthy to be rested in, and relied upon. Psa. 34.4,5,6,8, and 84.12. and 146.5.
Ier. 17.7,8. Psa. 22.4,5.
If you walk not in my judgments, you must look for my threats and frowns, yea
and blows too, and you shall see that I am not in j^st with you, nor will
indulge you in your sins. Psa, 89.30,31,32, etc. Am. 3.2. and 2 Samuel 12. to 15.
1 Pe. 4.17.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I never take from you, nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my lips.

His mercies as our store.
My mercies shall be your store. Es. 54.7 and 63 7. Ps. 119.41.
I am the Father of mercies, and such a Father I will be to you. 2 Co. 1.3.
I am the fountain of mercies, and this fountain shall be ever open to you. Ps.
36.9 with Rev. 21 6.
My mercies are very many, and they shall be multiplied toward you; Neh. 9.7.
with Es. 55.7.
very great, and they shall be magnified upon you; 1 Chapter 21.13. with Genesis 19.19.
very sure, and they shall be for ever sure to you; Es. 55.3.
very tender, and they shall be infinitely tender of you. Ps. 119.156. with
103.4.
Though the fig tree do not blossom, nor the vine bear, nor the flock bring
forth; fear not, for my compassions fail not. Hab. 3.17. Lam. 3.22.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow you all the days of your lives. Ps.
23.6.
Even to your old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have
made, and I will bear, even I will carry and deliver you. Es. 46.4.
I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, that I will not turn away from
you to do you good. Ier. 32.40.
I swear that I will show you the kindness of God. 1 Samuel 20.14,15,17. with
Esaias 54,9,10.
I can as soon forget to be God, as forget to be gracious. Psa. 77.9.
While my name is Jehovah, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in
goodness and truth, I will never forget to show mercy to you. Ps. 103.17. with
Ex. 34.6,7.
All my ways toward you shall be mercy and truth. Psa. 25.10.
I have sworn that I would not be wroth with you, nor rebuke you, for the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from you, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on you.

His omnisciency as our Overseer.
Mine Omnisciencie shall be your overseer, mine eyes shall be ever open,
observing your wants to relieve them, and your wrongs to avenge them. 1 Pet.
3.12. Ex. 3.7.
Mine ears shall be ever open to hear the prayers of my poor, the cries of mine
oppressed, the clamours, calumnies, and reproaches of your enemies. Psalm.
34.15. Exodus 2.24,25. Zeph. 2.8,9,10.
Surely I have seen your affliction, and know your sorrows. And shall not God
avenge his own Elect? I will avenge them speedily. Luke 18.7,8.
I see the secret Plots, and Designs of your enemies against you, Jer. 18.23.
and will disannul their Counsels. Esaias 8.10. with 29.14,15. Psalm. 33.10.
I see your secret integrity, and the uprightness of your hearts toward me,
while the carnal and censorious world condemn you as Hypocrites. Job
1.8,9,10,11. 2 Chronicles. 15.17.
Your secret Prayers, Fasts, and Tears, which the world knows not of, I
observe them, and record them. Matt. 4.6,18. Act. 10.4.
Your secret care to please me, your secret pains with your own hearts, Mat.
25.34,35,36. 2 Chronicles. 34.27.
your secret self-searchings, and self denial; I see them all, and your Father
which sees in secret, shall reward them openly.

His wisdom as our Counselor-
My wisdom shall be your Councellor. If any want wisdom, Jam. 1.5.
let him ask of me, and it shall be given him. I will be your Deliverer. When
you are in darkness, I will be a light to you. Mic. 7.8.
I will make your way plain before you. Esaias 43.19. and 57.14.
You are but short sighted, but I will be eyes to you. Esaias 42.6,7. and 49.6.
I will watch over you, to bring upon you all the good I have promised Jer.
31.28. with 32.24.
and to keep off the evil you fear, or to turn it into good. Psalm. 91.10,14.
Jer. 24.5.
You shall have your food in its season, and your Physic in its season:
Mercies, Afflictions, all suitable, and in their season. Psalm. 23.2,3. 1 Pet.
1.6. Esaias 27.7,8,9.


I will outwit your Enemies, and make their Oracles to speak but folly. Esaias
19.11,12,13,14.
The old Serpent shall not deceive you. I will acquaint you with his devices. 2
Cor. 2.11.
The deceitful hearts you fear, shall not undo you, I will discover their wiles.

I know how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust
to the day of judgment to be punished. 2 Pet 2.9.
Trust in me with all your hearts, and lean not to your own understanding.
Prove. 3.5,9.
I am God that performs all things for you. Psalm. 57.2.
I will forfeit the reputation of my wisdom, if I make you not to acknowledge,
when you see the end of the Lord, Jam. 5.11.
(though at present you wonder, and reach not the meaning of my proceedings)
Jer. 12.1.
that all my works are in Weight, and in Number, and in Time, and in Order:
Ecc. 3.14
If I force you not to cry out, Manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou
made them all. Psalm. 33.4, and 145.10. Psalm. 104.24.


His Justice as our Avenger and Rewarder.
My Justice shall be your Revenger and Rewarder. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. 2 Timothy 4.8
Fear not to approach; fury is not in me. Esaias 27.4.
My Justice is not only appeased toward you, but engaged for you. I am so
fully satisfied in the sacrifice of my Beloved, that Justice it self, that was
as a flaming sword, drawn against you, shall now greatly befriend you; and that
which was an amazing, confounding Terror, shall now become your relief, and
consolation. Eccles. 3 16,17. and 5.8. Psalm. 96.10,11,12,13. Psalm 97.1. with
99.1.
Under all your Oppressions, here shall your refuge be. Psalm. 6.9. and 103.6.
Let me know your grievances, my Justice shall right your wrongs, and reward
your services. Psalm. 146.7, Heb. 6.10.
You may conclude upon your Pardons, conclude upon your Crowns, conclude upon
Reparations for all your injuries, and all from the sweet consideration of my
Justice, 1 John 1.9. 2 Timothy 4.8. 2 Thessalonians. 14.5. 1 Pet. 2.23.
the thought of which, to others, is as the horror of the shadow of death. If
you sin, despair not; remember, I am just to forgive you. If you are at any
pains or cost for me, do not count it lost; for I am not unrighteous to forget
you. I am the righteous Judge, that have laid up for you, and will set on you
the Crown of righteousness. Are you reviled, persecuted, defamed? Forget not
that I am righteous, to render tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
that are troubled, rest with me. Though all your services and sufferings,
deserve not the least good at my hands, yet as I have freely passed my promise
to reward them, so I will as justly keep it.

His Omnipresence, as company for us.
Mine Omnipresence shall be company for you. 1 Chro. 22.18. Josh. 1.5.9. Esaias
41.10.
Surely I will be with you, to bless you. Genesis 26 24.
. I will never leave you nor forsake you. No Bolts, nor Bars, nor Bonds, nor
Banishment, shall remove you from me, nor keep my presence, and the influences
of Heaven from you. Genesis 3^.21.23.
I am always with you: Matt. 28 20.
In your darkest nights, in your deepest dangers, I am at hand with you, a very
present help in the time of trouble Psalm. 46.1. and 34.18.
I am not a God afar off, or asleep, or in a journey, when you need my counsel,
mine ear, or mine aid: I am always nigh unto them that fear me. Psalm. 145 18.


No Patmos, no Prison shall hinder the presence of my grace from you. Rev.
1.9,10. Act. 16 25,26.
My presence shall perfume the noysomest Wards, and lighten the darkest
Dungeons where you can be thrust. Act. 12.7 Esaias 58.10.


His Holiness as a Fountain of grace to us.
My holiness shall be a fountain of grace to you. Ioh. 1.16 2 Pet. 1.4.
I am the God of hope, Romans 15.13.
the God of love, 2 Cor. 13.11.
the God of patience, To. 15.5.
the Author and finisher of faith, Heb. 12.2.
the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.
and I will give grace to you. Psalm. 84 11.
My design is to make you partakers of my Holiness. Heb. 12.10.
I will be a constant spring of spiritual life to you. Gal. 2.20. Ioh. 14. and
8.12. and 10.10 and 14.6.
The water that I shall give you, shall be in you as a Well of water, springing
up into everlasting life. The seed of life, that I shall put into you, shall be
so f^d, and cherished, and maintained by my power, Ioh. 4.14.
that it shall be immortal. 1 Ioh. 3.9. 1 Pet, 1.23. Col. 2.19.
The Unction that you shall receive from the holy One, shall abide in you, and
teach you all things (necessary for you:) and as it has taught you, you shall
abide in him. Ioh. 14.16,17 and 1 Ioh. 2.20,27.


Keep but the Pipes open, and ply the means which I have prescribed, and you
shall flourish in the Courts of your God. Prove. 8.34. Psalm. 92 13.
Yea I will satisfy your souls in drought, and make fat your bones, and you
shall be like a watered Garden, Esaias 58.11.
Lo I will be as the dew unto you, and you shall grow as the Lilly, and cast
forth your roots as Lebanon; and your branches shall spread, and your beauty
shall be as the Olive Tree. Hos. 14.5,6.
You shall still bring forth fruit in old age, you shall be fat, and flourishing.
Psalm. 92.14.


His Sovereignty to be (as it were) commanded by us.
My Sovereignty shall be commanded by you. Genesis 32.26,28. Deuteronomy. 9.14.
You shall be my Favorites, men of Power, to prevail with me. Hos. 12.4. Jam.
5.17,18,
All mine Attributes, shall be at the command of your Prayers. Esaias 45.11.


His Allsufficiency to be the lot of our Inheritance
In sum, mine Allsufficiency shall be the lot of your Inheritance. Genesis 17.1.
Lam. 3.14. Psalm. 16.5,6.
My fullness is your treasure. Numb. 18.20. Deuteronomy, 10.9. Psalm. 16 5,6.
My house is your home. Psalm. 91.1,9.
You may come as freely to my store, as to your own Cupboard. Ephesians. 3.12.
You may have your hand as freely in my Treasures, as in your own Purses. You
cannot ask too much, you cannot look for too much from me. Ephesians. 3.20. Mat. 7.8.
I will give you, or be my self to you instead of all comforts. Genesis 15.1.
Psalm. 84.11.
You shall have children, or I will be better to you, then ten children. Esaias
56.3,4.
You shall have riches, or I will be more to you then all riches. 2 Cor. 6.10.


You shall have friends, if best for you, or else I will be your Comforter in
your solitude, Esaias 51.3. Ioh. 14.26. 2 Cor. 1.3,4.
your Counselor in your distress, Psalm. 73.24.
If you leave Father, or Mother, or Houses, or Lands for my sake, you shall
have an hundred fold in me, even in this time. Mark 10 30.
When your enemies shall remove your comforts, it shall be but as the letting
the Cistern run, and opening the fountain, or putting out the candles, and
letting in the sun. The swelling of the waters shall raise higher the Ark of
your comfort. To. 5.3. Heb. 10.34. Act. 5.41.
I will be the staff of bread to you, your life, and the strength of your
days. Deuteronomy. 30.20. Esaias 33.16.
I will be the house and home to you, you shall dwell with me, yea, dwell in
me, and I in you. Deuteronomy. 33.12. John 14.23. 1 John 3.24.
I will stand and fall with you. Psa. 37.17,24. and 54.4. Esaias 41.10.
I will repair your losses, and relieve your needs. Phil. 4.19. Mark 8.35. Mat.
19.27,28,29.
Can you burn out the Lamp of Heaven, or lave out the boundless Ocean with your
hands? why the Sun shall be dark, and the Sea be dry, before the Father of
Lights, the Fountain of Mercies shall be exhausted. Behold, though the world
has been spending upon the stock of my mercy, ever since I created man upon
earth, yet it runs with full stream still. My Sun does diffuse its Rays, and
disburse its light, and yet shines as bright as ever, Much more can I dispense
of my goodness, and fill my creatures brim-ful, and running over, and yet have
never the less in my self: and till this all sufficiency be spent, you shall
never be undone. I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, and
whatever I was to them, I will be to you.

Are you in want, you know whither to go. I am ever at home, you shall not go
away empty from my door. Never distract your selves with cares and fears, but
make known your requests by prayer and supplication unto me. Phi. 4.6.
I will help, when all do fail. Psa. 73.26. Esa. 63,5. Psalm. 102.17.
When friends fail, and heart fails; when your eye strings crack, and your
heart strings crack; when your acquaintance leave you, and your souls leave
you, my bosom shall be open to you. Psa 49.15. 2 Cor. 5 1. Luke 16.9,22.
I will lock up your dust, I will receive your souls.

His infiniteness to be the extent of our inheritance.
And mine infiniteness shall be the extent of your inheritance. Can you by
searching find out God? can you find out the Almighty to perfection? It is as
high as Heaven, what can you do? deeper then Hell, what can you know? Job
11.7,8,9. with Psa. 50.7.
This height incomprehensible, this deep unfathomable shall be all yours, for
ever yours.

I am your inheritance, which no lines can measure, no Arithmetic can value,
no Surveyor can describe. Ezekiel. 44.28. Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Timothy 6.16. Psa. 145.3.


Lift up now your eyes to the ancient mountains, and to the utmost bounds of
the everlasting hills, all that you can see is yours: but your short sight
cannot ken the moietie of what I give you; and when you see and know most, you
are no less then infinitely short of the discovery of your own riches. Job
26.14.


Yea further, I will be yours in all my personal relations.

In all his personal relations. God the Father to be a Father to us.
I am the everlasting Father, and I will be a Father to you. John 20.17.
I take you for my sons and daughters. Cor. 6.18.
Behold, I receive you not as servants, but as sons, to abide in my house for
ever. Ioh. 8.35,36.
Whatever love, or care children may look for from their father, that may you
expect from me; Mat. 6.31,32.
and so much more as I am wiser, and greater, and better then any earthly
parents. If earthly fathers will give good things to their children, much more
will I give to you. Luke 11.13.
If such cannot forget their children, much less will I forget you. Esaias 49 15.
What would my children have? your Fathers heart, and your Fathers house: ^ob.
7.17. Ioh. 14 2
your Fathers care, and your Fathers ear: 1 Pet. 5.7. Mat. 7,9.
your Fathers bread, and your Fathers rod, Luke 12.30,31,32. Heb. 12.7.
these shall be all yours.

He promises his fatherly affection.
You shall have my fatherly affection, my heart I share among you; my tenderest
loves I bestow upon you. 1 John 3.1. Ier. 31.3. Esa. 54.8.


His fatherly compassion.
My fatherly compassion. As a Father pittieth his children, so will I pity
you. Psa. 103.13,14.
I will consider your frame, and not be extreme to mark what is done amiss by
you, but cover all with the mantle of my excusing love. Psalm. 78.39.


His fatherly instruction.
My fatherly instruction. I will cause you to hear the sweet voice behind you,
saying, This is the way, Esaias 30.21.
I will tender your weakness, and inculcate mine admonitions, line upon line,
and seed you with milk when you cannot digest stronger meat. Esaias 28,13. 1 Cor.
3.2.
I will instruct you, and guide you with mine eye. Ps. 32.8


His fatherly protection.
My fatherly protection. In my fear is strong confidence, and my children shall
have a place of refuge. Prove. 14.26.
My Name shall be your strong Tower, to which you may at all times fly, and be
safe. Prove. 18.10.
To your strong hold ye prisoners of hope. Zec. 9.12
I am an open refuge, a near and inviolable refuge for you. Ps. 48.3 Deuteronomy. 4.7.
Ioh. 10.29


His fatherly provision.
My fatherly Provision. Be not afraid of want, in your Fathers house there is
bread enough. Ps. 34.9 Luke 15.17
I will care for your bodies. Cark not for what you shall eat, drink, or put on.
Let it suffice you, that your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of all
things. Mat. 6.25. to the end. Luke 12.22. to the 34.
I will provide for your souls, Meat for them and Mansions for them, and
Portions for them. Ioh. 6.32. to 59. Ps. 15.12. Lam. 3.24.


Behold I have spread the Table of my Gospel for you, with privileges and
comforts that no man takes from you. Esaias 25.6. Mat. 22 4. Prove. 9.2.
I have set before you the bread of life, and the tree of life, and the water
of life: Joh. 6.48. Rev. 2.7. and 22.17.
Eat, O friends, drink abundantly, O Beloved.

But all this is but a taste of what I have prepared. You must have but smiles
and hints now, and be contented with glimpses, and glanses here; but you shall
be shortly taken up into your Fathers bosom, and live for ever, in the fullest
viewes of his glory. 1 These. 4.17.


His Fatherly Probation.
My Fatherly Probation. I will chasten you, because I love you, that you may
not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11.32. Prove. 3.11.12.


God the Son to be a husband to us.
My Son I give unto you, in a Marriage-Covenan^ for ever: Esaias 9.6. and 42.6. 2
Cor. 11.2.
I make him over to you, as Wisdom, for your Illumination; Righteousness, for
your Justification; Sanctification, for the curing of your Corruptions,
Redemption, for your Deliverance from your Enemies. 1 Cor. 1.30.
I bestow him upon you with all his fullness, all his merits, and all his
graces. He shall be yours, in all his Offices. I have anointed him for a
Prophet. Are you ignorant, he shall teach you; he shall be eye salve to you: Esaias
49.6. and 42.16. Rev. 3.18.
I have sent him to Preach the Gospel to the poor, and recovering of sight to
the blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised. Luke 4:18.
I have established him by Oath, as a Priest for ever. Psalm. 110 4.
If any sin, he shall be your Advocate: He shall expiate your guilt, and make
the Atonement. 1 John 2.1,2. Zech. 13.1.
Have you any sacrifice, any service to offer; bring it unto him, and you shall
receive an Answer of Peace. 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15.


Present your Petitions by his hand, him will I accept. Ioh. 14.13.14.
Having such an High Priest over the house of God, Heb. 10.19,20,21,22.
you may come, and welcome; come with boldness. Him have I set up as King,
upon my holy Hill of Sion. He shall rule you, he shall defend you. Esaias 9.6,7.
Mat. 1.21.
He is the King of Righteousness, King of Peace; and such a King shall he be to
you. Heb. 7.2. Jer. 23.6. Ephesians. 2.14.
I will set up his Standard for you: Esaias 49.22.
I will set up his Throne in you. Psalm. 110 2.
He shall reign in righteousness, and rule in Judgment: and he shall be a hiding
place from the wind, a covert from the tempest, and the shadow of a great Rock
in a weary Land. Esaias 32.1^2.
He shall hear your causes, judge your Enemies, Esaias 11.3.4,5.
and reign till he has put all under his feet. Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25.
Yea, and under your feet; for they shall be as ashes under you, and you shall
tread them says the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 4.3.
Yea I will undo them that afflict you, and all they that despised you, shall
bow themselves down at the soles of your feet. Esaias 60.^4. Zeph. 3.19.
And you shall go forth, and behold the carcasses of the men that have
transgressed against me, for their Worm shall not die, neither shall their fire
be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh. Esaias 66.24.


God the Spirit to be Counselor and Comforter to us.
My Spirit do I give unto you for your Counselor, and your Comforter. Ioh.
16.7 Romans 8.14
He shall be a constant Inmate with you, and shall dwell in you, and abide with
you for ever. Ezekiel. 36 27. John 14.16,17.


I consecrate you as Temples to his Holiness. 1 Cor. ^.16,17. and 6.19.
He shall be your Guide, he shall lead you into all truth. Gal. 5.18. Ioh. 14 26.
He shall be your Advocate, to endite your prayers, and make intercession for
you, and shall fill your mouths with the Arguments, that he knows will prevail
with me. Romans 8.26.27.
He shall be Oil to your Wheels, and Strength to your Ancles, Wine to your
Hearts, and Marrow to your Bones, and Wind to your Sails. He shall witness your
Adoption. Romans 8.16.
He shall seal you up to the day of Redemption, and be to you the earnest of
your Inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession. Ephesians. 4.30.
and 13,14. 2 Cor. 1.22.


He gives all things with himself, both present and to come.
And as I give you my self, so much more all things with my self. Rom 8.32.
Earth, and Heaven, Life, and Death, things present, and things to come. 1 Cor.
3.22.


Things present ours.
Things present are yours: Lo I give you Calebs blessing, The upper Springs, and
the nether Springs. I will bless you with all Spiritual blessings, in Heavenly
places in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3


The upper springs, or blessings spiritual, as Adoption, Access, Audience,
Peace, Perseverance, etc.
To you pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the
Service of God, and the Promises. Romans 9.4
To you will I give the white Stone, and the new Name, Rev. 2.17.
access into my presence, Ephesians. 3.12.
the acceptance of your Persons, Ephesians. 1.6
the audience of your Prayers. 1 John 5.14,15.


Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Joh. 14.27.
I will undertake for your perseverance, and keep you to the end, and then will
crown mine own gift with eternal life. Jer. 32.40. Joh. 10 28,29. 1 Pet. 1.5.
Phil. 1.6.
I have made you heirs of God, and coheirs with your Lord Jesus Christ, and
you shall inherit all things. To. 8.17. Rev. 21.7.


I have granted you mine Angels for your Guardians. The Protection of his
Angels.
The Courtiers of Heaven shall attend upon you; they shall be all ministering
spirits for your good. Heb. 1.14.
Behold I have given them charge over you, upon their fidelity to look after
you, and as the tender Nurse, to bear you in their arms, and to keep you from
coming to any hurt. Psalm. 91.11,12.
These shall be as the careful Shepherds, to watch over my Flock by night, and
to encamp round about my Fold. Psalm. 34.7.


The Inspection of his Ministers.
My Ministers I give for your Guides. Ephesians 4.11.
Paul, Apollos, Cephas, all are yours. 1 Cor. 3.22.
I am always with them, and they shall be always with you to the end of the
world. Matt. 28 20. Ephesians. 4.13.
You shall have Pastors after mine own heart, Jer. 3.15. and 23.4.
and this shall be my Covenant with you, that my Spirit which is upon you, and
my words which I have put into your mouth, shall not depart out of your mouth,
nor the mouth of your seed, nor of your seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. Esaias 59.21.


The Rod of his Discipline.
In short, All my Officers shall be for the profiting, and perfecting of you.
Ephesians. 4.12,
All mine Ordinances shall be for edifying and saving of you. Act. 20.32. Romans
1.16.
The very severities of my house, Admonitions, Censures, etc. And the whole
Discipline of my Family shall be for preventing, of your infection, curing of
corruption, procuring your salvation. 1 Cor. 5.5,6,7. Matt. 18.15.


The light of his Word
My WORD have I ordained, for converting your souls, enlightening your eyes,
rejoicing your hearts, cautioning you of your dangers, cleansing your
defilements, and conforming you to mine Image. Psalm. 19 7,8,9,11. Ephesians. 5 26. 2
Cor. 3.18.
To you I commit the Oracles of God. Romans 3.2
Here you shall be furnished against Temptations; Matt. 4.4,7. Ephesians. 6.17.
hence you shall be comforted under Distresses and afflictio s. Psalm. 119 92,93.
Here you shall find my whole Counsel. Act. 20.27.
This shall instruct you in your way, correct you in your wanderings, direct you
into the truths to be believed, detect to you the errors to be rejected. 2 Timothy 3.16. Psalm. 119.105.


The pledges of his Sacraments.
My Sacraments I give you, as the Pledges of my love. You shall freely claim
them, they are childrens bread. Lo I have given them as Seals, to certify all
that I have here promised you; Romans 4.11.
and when these sacred signs are delivered unto you, then know, and remember,
and consider in your hearts, that I therein plight you my troth, and set to my
hand, and do thereby ratify and confirm every Article of these Indentures, and
do actually deliver into your own hands this glorious Charter, with all its
Immunities and Privileges, as your own for ever. 1 Cor. 11.25. Genesis 17.10.


The Nether-springs, or Mercies Temporal.
And having sowed to you so largely in Spiritual blessings, shall you not much
more reap the Temporal? Be you not of doubtful mind, all these things shall be
added unto you. Luke 12.29,31.
The supply of his Creatures.
My creatures I grant for your servants, and supplies. Psalm. 8.3. to the end
Heaven and Earth shall minister to you. All the stars in their courses shall
serve you, and (if need be) shall fight for you. Jud. 5.20
And I will make my Covenant for you with the Beasts of the field, and with the
fouls of Heaven; and you shall be in league with the stones of the field, and
all shall be at peace with you. Job 5.23 Hos. 2.18.
I will undertake for all your necessities. Do I feed the Fowls, and clothe
the grass? and do you think I will neglect my children? Matt. 6.25. to the end.
I hear the young Ravens when they cry; shall I not much more fulfill the desires
of them that fear me? Psalm. 145 19. with the 147.9.
Fear not, you shall be sure to want no good thing; Psalm. 34. ver. 10.
and you would not your selves desire riches, pleasures, or preferment to your
hurt. I will give meat to them that fear me: I will be ever mindful of my
Covenant Psalm. 111 5.


The Cooperation of his Providence.
My Providence shall cooperate to your good. Romans 8.28.
The cross winds shall blow you the sooner and swifter into your Harbor. Y^u
shall be preferred, when you seem most debased; and then be greatest gainers,
when you seem to be deepest losers; and most effectually promote your good,
when you seem most to deny it. 2 Cor. 4.17. Mark 10.29. Phil. 1.29
Things to come ours.
Things to come are yours, the Perfecting of your souls, the Redemption of your
bodies, the Consummation of your bliss.

At death in Glorification Initiate.
When you have glorified me for a while on Earth, and finished the work I have
given you to do, you shall be caught up into Paradise, and rest from your
Labors, and your works shall follow you. Rev. 14.13. Luke 23.43.
The Convoy of Angels.
I will send of mine own Lifeguard, to conduct home your departing souls, Luke
16.22.
and receive you among the spirits of just men made perfect. Heb. 12.23.
And you shall look back upon Pharaoh, and all his Host, and see your enemies
dead upon the Shore. Redemption from all Afflictions and Corruptions.
Then shall be your Redemption from all your Afflictions, and all your
Corruptions. Luke ^1.28. Ephesians. 4 30.
The thorn in the flesh taken out
The thorn in the flesh shall be pulled out, and the hour of temptation shall be
over, and the Tempter for ever out of work.

The sweat wiped off from our brows.
The sweat shall be wiped off from your brows, and the day of cooling and
refreshing shall come, and you shall sit you down for ever under my shadow. Acts
3.19. Heb, 4.9.
For the Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne shall feed you, and lead you to
the living Fountains of waters. Rev. 7.17.


The tears wiped away from our eyes.
The tears shall be wiped away from your eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are
passed away, and behold I make all things new. Rev. 21.4,5.
I will change Marah into Naomi, and the cup of sorrow, into the cup of
salvation, and the bread and water of affliction, into the wine of eternal
consolation. Joh 16.20.21,22. Luke 6.21.
You shall take down your Harps from the Willows, and I will turn your tears
into Pearls, and your penitential Psalms into songs of Deliverance. You shall
change your Ichabods into Hosanna's; and your Ejahs of sorrow, into Hallelujahs
of Joy. Rev. 19.1,4,6.


The Cross taken off from our backs.
The cross shall be taken off from your backs, and you shall come out of your
great Tribulations, and wash your Robes, and make them white in the blood of
the Lamb; and you shall be before the Throne of God, and serve him night and day
in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne, shall dwell among you, and
you shall hunger no more, and thirst no more, neither shall the sun light upon
you, nor any heat. Rev. 7.14,15,16
The load taken off from our consciences.
The load shall be taken off from your Consciences. Sins nor doubts shall no more
defile you, nor distress you. Rev. 21.27. and Heb. 12.23.
I will make an end of sin, and knock off the Fetters of your corruptions, and
you shall be a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but Holy, and without blemish. Ephesians. 5.27. Rev. 7.9.13,14.


The souls admission into the chamber of Presence, and Vision of God.
Thus shall you be brought to the King all glorious, in raiment of Needle Work,
and clothing of Gold; with gladness and rejoicing shall you be brought, and
enter into the Kings Palace. Psa. 45.9,13,14,15.
So shall the beloved of the Lord dwell safely by him, and you shall stand
continually before him, and behold the beauty of the Lord. and hear his Wisdom.
1 Cor. 13,12.
Then will I open in you an everlasting spring of joy, and you shall break forth
into singing, and never cease more, nor rest day nor night, saying Holy, holy,
holy. Rev. 4.8. Ps. 16.11.


Thus shall the grand Enemy expire with your breath, and the body of death be
put off with your dying body; and the day of your death shall be the birthday
of your glory. Phi. i. 23 Lu. 23.43


Have faith in God. Mark 11.22.
Wait but a little, and sorrow shall cease, and sin be no more.

At the Resurrection in Glorification consummate. Redemption complete
And then a little longer, and death shall be no more; Rev. 20 14. and 21.4.
but your last enemy shall be destroyed, and your victory completed. 1 Cor.
15.26.
The Return of the Redeemer.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and you also shall
appear with him in glory. Heb. 10 37. Col. 3.4.
This same Jesus which is taken from you into Heaven, Act. 1.11.
shall so come as he went up into Heaven: and when he comes, he will receive
you to himself, that where he is, there you may be also. Ioh. 14.3
Behold his sign; he comes in the clouds of Heaven with Power, and great
Glory, and every eye shall see him, and all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn
because of him; Rev. 1.7 Mat. 24.30.
but you shall lift up your heads, because the day of your Redemption draws
nigh. Luke 21.28.
The raising of the body.
Then shall he sound his Trump, 1 Cor. 15.52. 1 These. 4.16.
and make you to hear his voice in your dust, Ioh. 5.28
and shall send his mighty Angels to gather you from the four winds of heaven,
Mat. 24.31.
who shall carry you in the triumphant Chariot of the Clouds, to meet your Lord;
1 These. 4.17.
and you shall be prepared for him, and presented to him, as a Bride adorned for
her Husband. Rev. 2.2.
And as you have borne the Image of the Earthly, so shall you bear the Image of
the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49.
Full conformity both in body and soul to our glorified Savior.
and you shall be fully conformed both in body and spirit, to your glorious
head. Phil. 3.21. Heb. 12.23.
Then shall he confess you before his Angels, Rev. 3.5.
Public Approbation and Absolution.
and you shall receive your open Absolution before all flesh, and be owned,
approved, and applauded in the Public audience of the general Assembly. Mat.
10.32. and 26 32,34,35, etc.
Solemn Espousals.
And you shall be with all Royal solemnities, espoused unto the King of glory,
in the presence of all his shining Courtiers, Rev. 19.7,8. 2 Cor. 4.14. Mat.
25.31.
to the envy, and gnashing, and terror of your Adversaries. Luke 13.28.


The Co^ovation and Enthronement of the Saints. Their sitting in judgment upon
the World.
So shall your Lord with his own hand crown you, Rev. 2.10.
and set you in Thrones, Rev. 3.21. Mat. 19.28.
and you shall judge men, and Angels: 1 Cor. ^.2,3.
and you shall have power over the Nations, Rev. 2.26,27.
and you shall set your feet upon the necks of your enemies. Psalm. 49.14.


Lo I have set the very day for your en^aiment; Acts 17.31.
I have provided your Crowns, 2 Timothy 4.8.
I have prepared the King^om. Mat. 25.34.
Wherefore do you doubt, O you of little faith? These are the true sayings of
God. Rev. 19.9.
Are you sure that you are now on Earth? so surely shall you be shortly with me
in Heaven. Are you sure that you shall die? so surely shall you rise again in
glory. Lo, I have said it, and who shall reverse it? You shall see me face to
face, and be with me where I am, and behold my glory. 1 Cor. 13.12. Ioh. 17.24.
For I will be glorified in my Saints, and admired in all them that believe; 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
and all flesh shall know that I have loved you. Rev. 3 9.
For I will make you the instances of my grace, Ephesians. 1.5 6. and 2.7
in whom the whole world shall see, how unutterably the Almighty God can advance
the poor Worms-meat, and dust of the ground. And the despisers shall behold, and
wonder, and perish: Act. 13.41.
for they shall be witnesses to the riches of my magnificence, and exceeding
greatness of my Power. Luke 16.23.
They shall go away into everlasting punishment, but you into life eternal. Mat.
25.46.


Our Triumphant Ascension into heaven
For no sooner shall their doom be past, but the Bench shall rise, Mat. 25.41,46.
and the Judge shall return with all his glorious Train; with sound of trumpet,
and shouts incredible shall he ascend, and shall lead you to your Fathers house.
Psalm. 45.14,15. Mat. 25.23. Joh. 14.2. with 2 Cor. 5.1.
Then shall the triumphal Arches lift up their heads, and the everlasting Gates
stand open, and the heavens shall receive you all, and so shall you be ever with
the Lord. Joh. 12.26. 1 Th. 4.17.


And now will I rejoice over you with singing, and rest in my love, Zeph. 3.17.
and Heaven shall ring with joys and acclamations, because I have received you
safe and sound. Luke 15.10,23,25,27.


And in that day you shall know, that I am a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek me; Heb. 11.6.
and that I did record your words, Mal. 3.16.
and bottle your tears, and tell your wanderings, Psalm. 56.8.
and keep an account, even to a cup of cold water, of whatever you said or did
for my Name. Mat. 10.42.
Blessed Eternity!
You shall surely find, that nothing shall be lost; 1 Cor. 15.58.
but you shall have full measure, pressed down, and running over, thousands of
years in Paradise, for the least good thought, and thousand thousands, for the
least good word; and then the reckoning shall begin again, till all Arithmatick
be non-plust. For you shall be swallowed up in a blessed Eternity, and the doors
of Heaven shall be shut upon you, and there shall be no more going out. Dan.
12.2,3. Rev. 3.12. Luke 16.26.


Glorious company.
The glorious Quire of mine holy Angels, the goodly fellowship of my blessed
Prophets, the happy society of Triumphant Apostles, the royal Hosts of
victorious Martyrs, these shall be your Companions for ever. Mat. 8.11,12. Heb.
12.22,23.
And you shall come in white Robes, with Palms in your hands, every one having
the Harps of God, and golden Vials full of Odours, and shall cast your Crowns
before me, and strike in with the multitude of the heavenly Hosts, glorifying
God, and saying, Hallelujah; the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. Rev.
7.9,10,11,12. and 19 5.6.
Blessing, honor, glory, and Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Rev. 5.13.


In short, I will make you equal to the Angels Luke 20.36.
of God, and you shall be the everlasting Trumpets of my praise. Rev.
7.10,11,12,15.
You shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of my House, and I will make
you drink of the Rivers of my pleasures. Psalm. 36.8.
You shall be an eternal Excellency, Esaias 60.15.
and if God can die, and Eternity run out, then, and not else shall your joys
expire. Beatifical Vision.
For you shall see me as I am, 1 John 3.2.
and know me, as you are known; 1 Cor. 13 12.
and shall behold my face in righteousness, and be satisfied with my likeness.
Psalm. 17.25.
And you shall be the vessels of my Glory, whose blessed use shall be to receive
the overflowings of my Goodness, and to have mine infinite Love and Glory
poured out into you brimfull, and running over for evermore. Romans 9 23. 2 Timothy
2,20. Rev. 22.1.


And blessed is he that has believed, for there shall be a performance of the
things that have been told him. Lu. 1.45.
The Lord has spoken it, you shall see my Face, and my Name shall be written
in your foreheads, and you shall no more need the Sun, nor the Moon, for the
Lord God shall give you light, and you shall reign for ever and ever. Rev.
22.3,4,5.


He takes us for his people.
And as I give my self to you for your God, and all things with my self: so I
take you for my Vovenant People, Heb 8.10 Esaias 43 1.
and you shall be mine in the Day when I make up my jewels, says the Lord of
hosts, and I will spare you as a man spares his own Son that serves him. Mal
3.17
The Lord shall count, when he writes up the people, Surely they are my
children. Psa. 87 6 Esaias 63.8.


I do not only require you to be mine, if you would have me to be for you: but
I do promise to make you mine, Lev. 20.26. Ezekiel. 36. 28.
and to work in you the conditions which I require of you. I will circumcise
your hearts to love me. Deu. 30.6.
I will take out the heart of stone. Ezekiel. 36.26.
My Laws will I write within you. J^. 31.33.


Yet you must know that I will be sought unto for these things, Eze. 36,37.
and as ever you expect to partake of the mercies, I charge you to lie at the
Pool, and wait for my Spirit, and be diligent in the use of the meanss Prove.
2.3.4,5, and 8.38. Lu. 11.13.


I am content to abate the rigor of the old terms. Romans 4.6
I shall not stand upon satisfaction. Lu. 7.42
I have received a ransom, and do only expect your acceptance. Rev. 22.17. 1 Timothy 2.6.
I shall not insist upon perfection. 1 John 1.8,9.
Walk before me, and be upright, and sincerity shall carry the Crown. Prove.
11.20. Genesis 17.1. Psa. 97.11.
Yea, both the faith and obedience that I require of you are mine own gifts.
Ephesians. 2.8 Phil. 2.13.


I require you to accept my Son by believing: but I will give you an hand to
take him, Phi. 1.29 Joh. 6.65.
and to submit to and obey him: but I must and will guide your hands to write
after him, and cause you to walk in my statutes. Ezekiel. 36 27.
I will take you by the arms, and teach you to go: Hos. 11.3,4.
I will order your steps. Psalm, 37.^3,31.
Yea those things will I accept of you, as the conditions of Life, which viewed
in the strictness of my Justice, would deserve eternal Death. Ephesians. 3.8 with 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Heb. 5.9. with Eccl. 7.20.


Grace! Grace!
The voice of the Redeemed.
AMen, Hallelujah. Be it to thy servants according to thy word. But who are we,
and what is our Fathers House, that thou have brought us hitherto? And now O
Lord God, what shall thy servant say unto thee? for we are silenced with Wonder,
and must sit down in Astonishment, for we cannot utter the least title of thy
Praises. What means the height of this strange love? And whence is this unto
us, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth should condescend to enter into Covenant
with his Dust, and take into his Bosom the viperous brood, that have so often
spit their venom in his face. We are not worthy to be as the Handmaids, to
wash the feet of the servants of our Lord: how much less to be thy Sons and
Heirs, and to be made partakers of all these blessed Liberties and Privileges,
which thou have settled upon us. But for thy goodness sake, and according to
thine own heart have thou done all these great things. Even so Father, because
so it seemed good in thy sight.

Wherefore thou art great O God, for there is none like thee, neither is there
any God besides thee. Sam. 7.18. to the end.
And what Nation on Earth is like thy people, whom God went to redeem for a
people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for them great things and
terrible? For thou have confirmed them to thy self, to be a people unto thee
for ever, and thou Lord art become their God.

Wonder O Heavens, and be moved O Earth, at this great thing! Rev. 21.4.
For behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
Be astonished and ravished with wonder, for the infinite breach is made up. The
Offender is received, and God and man reconciled, and a Covenant of peace
entered, and Heaven and Earth are all agreed upon the terms, and have struck
their hands, and sealed the Indentures. O happy Conclusion! O blessed
Conjunction! Shall the stars dwell wtth the dust? Or the wide distant Poles be
brought to mutual embraces and cohabitation?

But here the distance of the terms is infinitely greater, Rejoice O Angels,
shout O Seraphims. O all ye friends of the Bridegroom, prepare an Epithalamium,
be ready with the Marriage song. Lo here is the wonder of wonders: For Jehovah
has betrothed himself for ever to his hopeless Captives, and ownes the
Marriage before all the world, and is become one with us, and we with him. He
has bequeathed to us the precious things of Heaven above, and the precious
things of the Earth beneath, with the fullness thereof, and has kept back
nothing from us.

And now, O Lord, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou have
promised this goodness unto thy servants, and have left us nothing to ask at
thy hands, but what thou have already freely granted. Only the w^rd which thou
have spoken concerning thy servants, establish it for ever, and do as thou have
said, and let thy Name be magnified for ever, saying, The Lord of Hosts, he is
the God of Israel. Amen.

Hallelujah.
A SOLILOQUY, Representing The Believers Triumph in Gods Covenant: And the
various Conflicts, and glorious Conquests of Faith over Unbelief. By the same
Author. CHAP. XVIII.
The soul takes hold on Gods Covenant.
YEa, Has God said [I will be a God unto thee?] Is it true indeed? Will the
Lord be mine? Will he lay aside the Controversy, and conclude a Peace? Will he
receive the Rebel to mercy, and open his doors to his Prodigal? I will surely
go unto my Father, I will take unto me words, and bow my self before his
Footstool, and say; Esaias 56.4.
O Lord, I have heard thy words, and do here lay hold on thy Covenant. I accept
the kindness of God, and will adventure my self upon thy Fidelity, and trust my
whole happiness here and hereafter upon these thy Promises.

Farewell deceitful world, get thee under my feet. Too long have I feared thy
vain threats; too long have I been deluded with thy flattering Promises. Can
thou promise me, or deny me such things as God has Covenanted to give me? I
know thou can not, and therefore I renounce thee for ever, from being the
Object of my Faith, or Fear. Nor longer will I lean to this rotten Reed, no
longer will I trust to this broken Idol. Avoid Satan with thy tempting Baits.
In vain do thou dress the Harlot in her Paint and Bravery, and tell me, Matt.
4.8,9.
ALL THIS WILL I GIVE THEE. Can thou show me such a Crown, such a kingdom, as
God has promised to settle upon me? Or that which will balance the loss of an
infinite God, who here gives himself unto me? Away deceitful Lusts, and
Pleasures; get you hence. I have enough in Christ and his Promises, to give my
soul full content. These have I lodged in my heart, and there is no longer room
for such guests as you: Never shall you have quiet entertainment more within
these doors.

Thou God of Truth, I here take thee at thy word. Thou requirest but my
acceptance and consent, and here thou have it. Good is the word of the Lord
which he has spoken, and as my Lord has said, so will thy servant do. My soul
catches hold of thy Promises. These have I taken as my heritage for ever. Let
others carry the Preferments, and Possessions of this world; it shall be enough
to me to be an Heir of thy Promises.

She makes her boast in God.
O happy Soul, how rich art thou! What a Booty have I gotten! It is all mine
own. I have the Promises of this life, and of that which is to come. Oh what
can I wish more! How full a Charter is here! Now my doubting Soul may boldly
and believingly say with Thomas, 1 Timothy 4.8.
My Lord, and my God! What need we any further witness? We have heard his
words. He has sworn by his Holiness, that his Decree may not be changed; and
has signed it with his own Signet.

Rejoice ye Heavens, strike up Celestial Quires. Help Heaven and Earth; Sing
unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his. Bless the Lord O my Soul. Oh had I the
tongue of men and Angels, all were too little for my single turn. Had I as many
tongues as hairs, the whole Quire were not sufficient to utter my Creators
praises.

Cant. 2.16.
My Beloved is mine, and I am His. The Grant is clear, and my claim is firm. Who
durst deny it, when God himself does own it. Is it an hard adventure to speak
after Christ himself? Why, this is the Message that he has sent me; I ascend
to my Father, and your Father; Joh. 20.17
my God, and your God. He has put words into my mouth, and bid me to say OUR
FATHER.

I believe, Lord help mine unbelief. O my God, and my Father, I accept thee
with all humble thankfulness, and am bold to take hold of thee. O my King, and
my God, I subject my soul, and all its Powers to thee. O my Glory, in thee will
I boast all the day. Oh my Rock, on thee will I build all my confidence, and my
hopes. Cant. 2.3.
O staff of my life, and strength of my heart, the life of my joys, and joy of
my life, I will sit and sing under thy shadow, and glory in thy holy Name.

O my Soul, arise, and take possession. Inherit thy blessedness, and cast up
thy riches. Thine is the Kingdom, thine is the Glory, and thine is the
Victory. The whole Trinity is thine. All the Persons in the Godhead, all the
Attributes in the Godhead are thine. And behold here is the Evidence, and these
are the writings, by which all is made sure to thee for ever.

Psalm. 116.7. Psalm. 16.6
And now return to thy rest, O my Soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee. Say if thy Lines be not fallen to thee in a pleasant place, and if this
be not a goodly Heritage! She quelleth Discontent, and reasons down unbelief
in Sequentib.
Oh Blasphemous Discontent! How absurd and unreasonable an evil art thou, whom
all the fullness of the Godhead cannot satisfy, because thou art denied in a
petty comfort, or crossed in thy vain expectations from the world. O my
unthankful Soul, shall not a Trinity content thee? Shall not Allsufficiency
suffice thee? Silence you murmuring thoughts for ever. I have enough, I abound,
and am full. Infiniteness, and Eternity is mine, and what more can I ask?

The Assaults of unbelief. 1. It questions the truth of the Promise.
But methinks I feel some secret Damps upon my joy, and when I would soar aloft,
and triumph in the riches of my Portion, a secret diffidence plucks me back, as
the string does the Bird, and unbelief whispers in mine ear, Sure this is too
good to be true.

The Triumph of Faith in the certainty of Gods Truth.
But who art thou that disputest against God? The Lord has spoken it, and shall
not I believe him? Will he be angry if I give my assent, and speak it
confidently upon the credit of his word?

Esaias 54.5. Hos. 2.19. Jer. 3.19. Psalm. 50.7. 2 Cor. 6.18.
O my Lord suffer me to spread the writing before thee. Have not thou said, Thy
Maker is thy Husband; I will betroth thee unto me: Thou shall call me, My
Father? I pray thee O Lord, was not this thy saying; I am God, even thy God; I
will be a Father unto you, and ye my Sons and Daughters? Why then should I
doubt? Is not the truth of the living God sure-footing for my faith?

Esaias 31.3 Prove. 23.5
Silence then O quarrelling Unbelief. I know in whom I have believed. Not in
Friends, though numerous and potent; for they are men, and not God. Psalm.
146.3,4.
Not in Riches, for they make themselves wings. Not in Princes, for their
breath is in their Nostrils. But let God be true, and every man a Liar. In God
have I put my trust, in his word do I hope. Matt. 7.25. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Oh sure word! Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot, nor tittle of
this. I have not built upon the sand of mortality. Let the rain descend, and
the floods come, and the winds blow; nevertheless the Foundation of God
stands sure. His everlasting Counsel, and everlasting Covenant are my stay. I
am built upon his Promises, and let Hell and Earth do their worst to blow up
this Foundation.

Now shall my Faith triumph, and my heart be glad, and my glory rejoice. 1 Kin.
18.39 Heb. 11.16.
I will shout with the exulting Multitude. The Lord he is the God, and he is
not ashamed to be called My God. He is not ashamed of my Rags, nor Poverty, of
my Parrentage, not Pedigree* and since his infinite condescension will own me,
will he take it ill if I own him? 1 Cor. 1.29,31.
Though I have nothing of my own to glory in, (unless I should glory in my
shame) yet I will glory in the Lord, and bless my self in him.

Deuteronomy. 33.26.
For who is like unto the God of Jeshurun? Bring forth your gods, O ye Nations.
Lift up now your eyes, and behold who has created all these things. Can any do
for their Favorites as the Lord can? Or if he be angry, who is that God that
shall deliver out of his hands? Will you set Dagon before the Ark? Or shall
Mammon contend with the Holy One! O ambitious Haman, where is now thine
Idol-honour? O rich Glutton, that made a god of Pleasure, where is now the
god whom thou have served? O sensual worldling, that knew not where, nor how
to bestow thy Goods: Do riches profit thee? Could Mammon save thee? Deceived
souls! Go now to the gods that you have chosen. Alas, they cannot for ever
administer a drop of water to cool your tongues.

Jer. 10.16. Psa. 90.2.
But the Portion of Jacob is not like them: From everlasting to everlasting he
is God. His Power is my confidence; his Goodness is my maintenance; his Truth
is my shield and my buckler.

2. It confounds the soul with amazing Greatness, and difficulty of the things.
But my clamourous unbelief has many wiles, and afresh assaults me with the
difficulty of the things promised, and labors to nonplus and confound me with
their amazing greatness.

The Triumph of Faith in Gods Omnipotency and Veracity.
But why should I stagger at the Promise through unbelief, robbing at once my
Master of his glory, and my soul of her comfort. It is my great sin to doubt
and dispute, and yet shall I be afraid to believe? O my soul, it is the highest
honor thou can put upon thy Lord, to believe against difficulties, and to
look for, and reckon upon great things and wonderful, passing all created
Power, and humane faith.

Let not the greatness, nor the strangeness of the benefits bequeathed to thee,
put thee to a stand. It is with a God thou have to do, and therefore thou must
not look for little things; that were to darken the glory of his munificence,
and the Infiniteness of his Power and Goodness. Know thou not that it is his
design to make his Name glorious? and to make thee know he is able to do for
thee, above all thou can ask or think? Surely they cannot be any small or
ordinary things, that shall be done for thee, when the Lord shall show in thee,
what a God can do, and shall carry thee in Triumph before the world, and make
Proclamation before thee. Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the Lord
delights to honor. What wonder if thou can not comprehend these things? If
they exceed all thy apprehensions and conceptions? This is a good Argument for
thy faith: for this is that which the Lord has said, That it has not entered
into the heart of man, to conceive what things he has prepared for them that
love him. Now if thou could conceive and comprehend them, how should his
word be made good. It is enough for thee that the Lord has spoken it. Is not
the word nigh thee? Has God said I will receive you? You shall be Kings and
Priests unto God, and inherit all things; and shall sit in Thrones, and judge
Angels, and be ever with the Lord, and shall I dare to say him nay? Unreasonable
Unbelief! What never satisfied? Still contradicting, and blaspheming? False
whisperer, no more of thy tales. Acts 27.25.
I believe God, that it shall be as he has told me.

2 Cor. 2.14. Psalm. 71.23. Psalm. 92.4. Psalm. 104.33.
And now thanks be to God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ;
therefore my lips shall praise thee, and my soul which thou have redeemed. For
thou have made me glad through thy word, and I will triumph in the works of thy
hands. I will praise the Lord whilst I live; I will sing praises to my God
whilst I have any being.

Oh my soul, if thou could wear out thy fingers upon the Harp, and wear thy
tongue to the Roots, thou could yet never sufficiently praise thy Redeemer.

O mine Enemies, where is now your confidence, and where is your Armor,
wherein you trusted? I will set Christ alone, against all your multitudes, and
all the Power, and Malice, and Policy wherewith they are Armed. Col. 2 15. 1
Cor. 15.57.
The field is already won, and the Captain of our salvation returned, with the
spoils of his Enemies, having made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in his Cross. And thanks be to God, who has given us the Victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Of whom then should I be afraid? Behold he is near that justifies me, who
shall plead with me?

Matt. 16.18.
O ye Powers of Hell! you are but chained Captives, and we have a sure word,
that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against us. Though the world be in Arms
against us, and the Devil in the head of them as their Champion; 1 Samuel
17.45,46,47
yet who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the Armies of
the living God? Behold I come out to thee, as the stripling against Goliath, not
with Sword and with Spear, but in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, in whose
strength I am more then a Conqueror.

O Grave, where is now thy Victory? Christ is risen, and has broken up thy
Prison, and rolled away the stone, so that all thy Prisoners have made an
escape. Mic. 7,8.
Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy; though I fall, I shall rise again; though
I lie in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. Enlarge not thy desires O
Tophet, but shut up thy flaming Romans 8.1.
mouth for there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

Joh. 16.33 1 Cor. 3.22.
O deceitful world, thou art already overcome, and the conquered Enemy is become
my servant, and I am fed with the honey taken out of the carcass of the slain
Lion. 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 John 5.4.
I fear not thy Threats, nor the Enchantments of thy Syren-songs, being kept by
the Power of God, through a Victorious faith unto salvation.

O my sins, you are already buried, never to have any Resurrection, and the
remembrance of you shall be no more. Heb. 8.12.
I see my sins nailed to the Cross, and their dominion is taken away, though
their lives be prolonged yet for a little season. Awake therefore, O my glory,
awake Psaltery and Harp, and meet the Deliverer with triumph; Psalm. 98.1,3.
for his right Hand, and his holy Arm have gotten us the Victory, and all the
ends of the Earth, have seen the salvation of our God.

3. It upbraids the trembling Soul with its Unworthiness.
Yet methinks my unworthiness flies in my face, and I hear my cavilling Unbelief
thus upbraiding me, and crying out, O proud Presumption! That thou that art
conscious to thy self of thy great unworthiness, should pretend a claim to
God and glory! Shall daring dust think to share with the Almighty? and say of
his endless Perfections, They are my right? Bold sinner, stand off, and tremble
at thy presumptuous Arrogance.

Faith subscribes the charge, and Triumphs in Gods free grace.
O my God, I lay my hand upon my mouth. I confess the charge of mine
unworthiness. My guilt and shame is such as I cannot cover, but thou can, and
do. Thou have cast a Mantle upon my nakedness, and have promised my
transgressions shall not be mentioned, and that thou will multiply Pardons. And
shall I rake up what thou have buried, and then affright my self with the Ghosts
that infidelity has raised? Is it presumption to take the Pardon that thou
do offer? or to receive and claim thee as mine, when it is but what thou have
promised. I durst not have approached thee, but upon thy call; nor have
pretended a Title, but upon thy Grant. I should have thought it Diobolical
pride, to have pleaded an Interest in thee, and claimed kindred to thee, but
that thou have showed me the way.

And thou my soul, art thou ignorant of Gods great Design? Know thou not,
that it is his purpose to glorify Free Grace? And how should Grace appear to
be Grace indeed, were there any worthiness in the subject. Thine unworthiness
is but a foil, to set off the Beauty and Riches of Free Love and Mercy.

4. It questions the Believers Title to Gods grace and interest in the Promise.
But I cannot shake off this Briar. Alas, what a cavilling Sophister is
Unbelief! And will never be answered! Now is it ready to tell me, What if the
Promise should be a sure Foundation? yet thou may not build upon another
man's ground. What though the grace and mercies of God are infinite? yet Dogs
may not catch at the Childrens bread. Thou have not right, nor title to the
Promise, therefore cease thy pretended claim.

The Triumph of Faith in the clearness of the B^lievers Evidences.
But O my soul, wherefore should thou doubt? Whose Image and Superscription
is this? Do thou not bear upon thee the marks of the Lord Jesus? I have given
up my name to him, and taken hold of his Covenant, and therefore may claim an
interest.

Esaias 56.4.
I have accepted the matter, and closed with the Mediator, and subscribed to
the conditions of the Covenant, and therefore cannot question but it is mine.

The Lord has offered to be my God, and I have took hold of his offer. Psalm.
73.25,26.
I have taken him as God, and given him the supremacy. O my soul, look round
about thee in Heaven and in Earth; is there any thou do esteem or value in
comparison of God? Phil. 3.8.
Is there any thou do love like him, or take that content or felicity in,
that thou do in him? Phil. 1 20
Are not thy chief desires and designs to glorify, and enjoy him? Thou can
not deny but it is truly thus. Psalm 26.8. and 84 1,2,3. Psalm. 27.4. and 119.57.
Psa. 119 38 2 Cor. 5.8 Act. 24.16. with Romans 6.19. Luke 14.33. Psalm 16 5,6.
I am sure nothing but God will content me. I am never so well in all the
world, as in his company. My soul seeks him above all, and rests in him
alone, as my satisfactory Portion. He offers to take me as one of his people,
and I have resigned my self accordingly to him as his; and have put both my
Inward, and Outward man under his Government, and given up All to his dispose,
and am resolved to be content with him, as my Allsufficient happiness.

John 1.12.
Besides I have taken him in his own way through Christ, whom he has tendered
to me as my Head and Husband, and I have accordingly, solemnly and deliberately
taken him. Luke 14.26. to the end. Matthew. 11.29. Phil. 3.9. 2 Timothy 1.12.
O my soul, do not thou know thy often debates? have thou not put Christ and
all the world into the balance? have thou not cast up the cost, and reckoned
upon the Cross, and willingly put thy neck under Christ's yoke, and ventured thy
salvation upon Christ alone, and trusted him with all thy happiness, and all
thy hopes? have thou not over and over resolved to take him with what comes,
and that he shall be enough, though in the loss of all things? 1 Cor. 1.20.
Thou can not but know, that these have been the transactions between Christ
and thee, and therefore he is thine, and all the Promises. Yea and Amen to thee
through him.

Act. 20.21: Romans 2.7.
And for the terms of the Covenant, I love, and like them: my soul embraces
them; neither do I desire to be saved in any other way, then by repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and sincere obedience to
his Go^pel.

Phil. 3.^. to the 10. 2 Cor. 5.7. 2 Cor. 4.18. 1 These. 1.9 10. Tit. 2.13. Heb.
10 34. and 11.35.
I am willing to go out of my flesh, and do look unto Jesu for righteousness,
and strength, and trust my salvation wholly in this bottom. I am content to
deal upon trust, and venture all in hopes of what is to come, and to tarry till
the next world for my preferment. I am willing to wait till the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and have laid up my happiness on the other side the Grave.

Romans 7.24. Gal. 5.17.
And though my sins be many, yet I should belie mine own knowledge, if I should
say they were not my constant trouble and burden, and the enemies against
which I daily watch, and with whom my soul has no peace. Psalm. 39.1. and 17.3.
Mine own heart knows that I hate them, and desire and endeavor their utter
destruction, and do resolve against them all, and am willing to use all Gods
means (that I know) to mortify them. Psalm. 119.101,104. Romans 7.15,16, etc. 1
Cor. 9.26,27. 1 John 1.9. Rom 6.16. Psalm. 119.6. Psalm. 119.5 30,173. Mat. 6.33.
2 Cor. 5.9.
It Is too true that I often fall, and fail; yet my conscience bears me
witness, that I confess and bewail it, and do not ordinarily, and deliberately
allow my self in any sin whatsoever against my knowledge. And though my
obedience be miserably lame, yet, O Lord, thou know, that I have respect
unto all thy commandments, and do strive to come up to what thou requirest. The
Holy Ghost is witness, and my conscience also, that I first seek the Kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof; and that it is my chief care to please
God, and keep from sin. Psa. 18.23. and 19.13. and 119.133. Matt. 5.6.
Speak Oh my soul, Is not holiness thy design? do thou not thirst for it, and
follow after it? do thou not in thy settled choice prefer the holy ways of
God, before all the pleasures and delights of sin? Psalm. 119.14,15,16. 111,112.
Thou know it is thus; and therefore no more disputing; thou have sincerely
taken hold of Gods Covenant, and without controversy it must be thine.

O my God, I see thou have been at work with my soul. I find the prints, I see
the footsteps. Surely this is the finger of God. I am thy Servant, O Lord,
truly I am thy Servant; Psalm. 116.16. Psalm. 16.2.
and my soul has said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord. It must be so. Would
thou ever set thy mark upon another goods? or shall God disown his own
workmanship? My name is written in Heaven. Thou have written thy Name upon my
heart, and therefore I cannot question but thou have my name on thine heart. I
have chosen thee O Lord as my happiness, and heritage, and therefore I am sure
thou have chosen me; 1 John 4.19.
for I could not have loved thee, except thou had loved me first. O my Lord
discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, the bracelets, and the
staff? I know thou will acknowledge them.

1 Pet. 1.3.
And now blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his
abundant mercy has begotten me again to a lively hope.

Faith makes its claim to all the benefits of the Covenant, and stirs up the
soul to joy and thankfulness, in sequentib.
And thou my soul, believe, and wait, look through the window, and cry through
the lattice, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. Hab. 2.3.
The Vision is for an appointed time, wait for it. It will come in the end, and
will not tarry. Jam. 5 7.
Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the Earth. Be thou
also patient. He has long patience, and wilt not thou have a little patience?
he for the fruits of the Earth, but thou for the joys of Heaven. He upon mere
probabilities, but thou upon infallible certainties. He for a Crop of Corn, but
thou for a Crown of Glory. Were he but sure that every Corn would bear a Crow,
how plentifully would he sow, how joyfully would he wait? Why such is thy
harvest. As sure as the Summer delights do follow the Winters severities; as
sure as the wisht-for Harvest does follow the toilsome and costly Seeds-time,
so sure shall thy Lord return, and bring thy reward with him. Revel. 22.12.
Therefore my soul, love and long for the approaching Jubilee, and wait all the
days of my appointed time, until my change shall come.

O blessed state that my Lord has translated me into! O happy change that he
has made! I was a stranger, and he took me in, and made me an heir; and
preferred me from the Dunghill to the Throne, and from a Hewer of wood, and
Drawer of water, to attend his Court, and know his Counsels, and do his
pleasure. Happy am I that ever I was born to partake of this endless dignity.

Hebr. 12.22,23,24.
O my Lord, it is no little thing thou have given me in hand. I am already come
to mount Zion, and the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of Angels; to the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, and to God the Judge of all, and unto the Spirits of Just men made
perfect, and unto Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and unto the blood of
sprinkling. Gal. 4.6. Luke 5.20.
My heart reviveth, as Jacobs, when I behold the tokens which thou have sent
me, the spirit of Adoption, the pardon of my sins, my patent for Heaven, the
chain of thy Graces, the Son of thy Bosom, and the New Testament in his blood,
1 Cor. 11.25. Luke 12.32. Cant. 1.10. Joh. 3.16. Joh. 14.21,23.
and the Letters of his love. My Lord has said that he will love me, and
manifest himself unto me; and that the Father will love me, and both will come
unto me, and make their abode in me. But is it true indeed? Will the Lord dwell
on Earth? Or if he will, shall so foul a Stable, so unclean a Stye, as my heart
has been, shall this be the place that the Lord of life will take up his
lodging, and keep his Court in? Will he indeed come with all his Train of
Graces, and live, and walk in me? How can these things be? But he has said it,
and I do, and I will believe it.

Psalm. 31.19.
Yet all this is but the earnest of what is to come. Oh how great is thy
goodness, laid up for them that fear thee? Yet a little while, and my warfare
shall be accomplished, and the Heavens must receive me, till the time of the
restitution of all things. 2 Pet. 1.14.
It is but for a short term that I shall dwell in this dirty flesh, in an earthen
Tabernacle. Joh. 12.26
My Lord has showed me, that where he is, there shall his servant be. Now the
living, is tied to the dead; and my Soul is a Stage of strife, and a Field of
war. 1 Cor. 13.10.
But it is but a little moment, and that which is perfect shall come; perfect
Holiness, and perfect Peace; eternal Serenity, and a Serene Eternity.

O my sins. Rev. 21.27.
I am going where you cannot come; where no unclean thing shall enter, nor any
thing that defiles. Methinks I see all my Afflictions and Temptations, all
mine infirmities, and corruptions falling off me, as Elijah's Mantle at his
translation.

O my Soul, do thou not see the Chariots of fire, and the Horses of fire come
to take thee up? Luke 16.22.
Be thou as poor as Lazarus, yet God will not disdain to send a Party of Angels
to conduct thee home. How can thou doubt of ready reception, who have such a
friend in Court, who will lead thee with boldness into his Fathers presence.
Genesis 45.16.
If there were Joy in Pharaoh's Court, when it was said, Joseph's Brethren are
come; surely it will be welcome news in Heaven, when its told, Jesus his
Brethren are come.

My Soul, fear not to enter, though the Lord be clothed with Terror and
Majesty: For thy Redeemer will procure thee favor, and plead thy right. Joh.
16.27
I am sure of welcome, for the Father himself loves me. I have tasted and tried
his love; Luke 15.
and when I had played the wicked Prodigal, yet he despised not my Rags, but
fell on my neck, and kissed me, and Heaven it self made merry over me. Much
more will he receive me gladly, and let out his loves upon me, when presented
to him by his Son, in his perfect likeness, as a fit Object for his everlasting
delight. Fear not, O my Soul, as if thou were going to a strange place. Why
Heaven is thy Country, and thy home: will thou doubt of leave, or fear of
welcome, when it is thine own home? Why, my Soul, thou wast born from above,
and here is thy Kindred, and thy Fathers House, and therefore thou shall surely
be admitted. And then shall I see the glorious preparations of Eternal Love,
and the blissful Mansions of the Heavenly Inhabitants.

Doubtless it shall be thus. These are not sick-mens Dreams, or childrens hopes.
The living God cannot deceive me: and may not I certainly promise my self, what
the Lord has promised me? I will sooner think that all my senses are deluded,
and what I see and feel, and taste, is but a fancy, then think that the living
God will deceive me, or that his unchangeable Covenant will fail. 1 John 3.2.
Now I am a son of God, but it does not yet appear what I shall be: but this I
know, I shall be like him, and see him as he is.

I know it shall be thus. Why, what security should I ask of God? He has given
me all the assurance in the world. And though the word of God be enough, yet he
willing to show more abundantly to the Heits of Promise, the immutability of
his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: Heb. 6.17.
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, I
might have strong consolation. O unreasonable Unbelief! What shall not the Oath
of a God put an end to thy strife?

O my God, I am satisfied: it is enough. Now I may be bold without presumption,
and boast without Pride. And will no more call my Duty Arrogance, nor my Faith
a Fancy.

O my Soul! There is but a short life betwixt thee and Glory, where holy
Angels, and glorified Saints shall be mine only Associates, and Love and Praise
mine only employment. Job. 38.7.
Methinks I hear already how the Morningstars sing together, and all the sons
of God shout for joy. O that I could come in for one! But it was said unto me,
I should rest yet for a little season, but I shall stand in the lot at the end
of the days. Dan. 12.13.


It is well Lord; thy word is enough. Thy Bond is as good, as ready payment.
The holy Ghost tells me, that life and glory abide me; Luke 23.43.
that look what day I loose from the body, the same day I shall be landed in
Paradise. Amen. It is as I would have it.

But this is not all. When my body has slept a short Nap in the dust, Christ
will call to it, Come up hither. Ah true Yoke Fellow, it will be hard parting,
but welcome meeting. I could not leave thee, but to live with Christ. Col. 3.4.
But he will raise thee a glorious Temple; and when he shall appear, will bring
me with himself in glory; and then I shall reenter thee as a Royal Mansion,
wherein I shall abide with the Lord for ever. For as we have served our Redeemer
together, so we must be glorified together with him. And when the Lord has
married us both together again, then will he marry us both unto himself. For I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the last day over the
Earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh I
shall see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my Reins be consumed within me. My Lord has already told me
how it shall be. He has set down the time, and showed me the Robes of
immortality, and the Crown of life, that I must put on; and the Throne of
glory, and the Seat of judgment, that I must sit in. He has told me the
manner in which I shall be presented to him, and espoused by him. He has told
me where he will set me, and what he will say to me, and how he will
acknowledge my mean services, and remember what I have forgotten: Mat 25.35,37.
how he will praise the works, that I have been ashamed of, and reward me
openly, for what I have buried in secrecy; Mat. 6.4.
and not forget the poorest Alms that I have given for his Name. Then will he
confess me before his Father, and before the Angels of God. Thus says the
true, and faithful witness, and we know that his Testimony is true.

1 John 5.10
Ah my Soul, see that thou make not God a Liar.

O my God, I have believed thy report, and do look for all these things,
according to thy Promise. I know thou intendest me but for a very little while
for this lower Region. This world is but the house of my Pilgrimage, and my
soul now is but like a Bird in the shel: but when the shel is cracked, then shall
she take wings like a Dove, and soar aloft to thee, and flee away, and be at
rest.

Yet I doubt not thy care for my despicable dust. I know that nothing will be
lost; Joh. 6.39.
I know not where they will lay me: but thy wakeful eye observes, and will not
be to seeking at what door to knock, nor at what grave to call for me. I
believe, and am sure that I shall come a glorious piece out of thy hands, fair
as the Moon, clear as the Sun, crowned with honor and glory. And when my
Absolution is read, and sentence past upon the world, then must I be taken up
to dwell with thee.

Let not my Lord be angry, that thy dust and ashes speaks thus unto thee.
Thou Lord have raised my expectations, and haste made me to look for all these
great things from thee. In vain haste thou written all these things unto me, if
I should not believe them; and a distrustful diffidence would put a high
dishonor upon thy Truth.

O Lord it repents me, it repents me of my jealousies, and my doubtful
thoughts about thee. I know thou love an humble confidence, and delightest in
nothing more then to see thy children trust thee. I know the building of my
hopes, lies not an hairs breadth over the foundation of thy Promises; yea, it is
sure, my expectations are infinitely short of what I shall find.

Joh. 3.33. Ephesians. 2.20 Mat 7.25 Psalm. 39.7.
O my God, my heart trusts safely in thee, and I here set to my seal that thou
art true. Christ is my Bottom in which I venture, and the Cornerstone on which
I build, and therefore my fraught is ensured, and my building shall challenge
the winds and floods.

And now, O Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee. O my blessedness, let me
enjoy thee. O my life, let me possess thee. O desire of mine eyes, let me see
thy face, and hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is
comely. I ask but what thou have promised: Matthew. 5.8.
for thou have told me, that I shall see God, and thou will speak to me mouth
to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of God
shall I behold.

1 Cor. 13.9,^0.
So shall my knowledge be perfected, and I shall see the inaccessible light, and
my tender eye shall not water, nor my sight dazzle; but I shall with open face
look steadfastly on the Son of Righteousness, and behold his glory. Then shall
Faith be turned into fruition, and Hope into Possession, and Love shall arise
like the full Moon in her brightness, and never wax, nor wane more.

O thou God of my hopes, I look for a new body, and a new soul, for new
Heavens, and for a new Earth, according to thy promise; when my whole soul
shall be wholly taken up with thee, and all mine affections strained to the
highest Peg, and all the Wheels of my raised powers set in most vigorous and
perpetual motion toward thee, still letting in, and still laying out: and thus
shall there be an everlasting communication of joy and glory from thee, and of
love and praise from me.

O my soul, thou art rich indeed, and increased in goods. Thou have no reason
to envy the glory nor grandeur of the mightiest on earth: Psa. 49.14,17.
For their glory shall not descend after them; like Sheep shall they be laid in
their graves, and Death shall feed upon them, and there is an eternal end of all
their pomp and excellency. But my Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom. My Robes
shall never wear, my Crown shall never totter, my Throne shall never be vacant;
My Bread shall never mold, my Garland shall never wither, my House shall never
moulder, my Wine shall never sour, but everlasting joy shall be upon my head,
and sorrow and sighing shall fly away.

O my God, how happy have thou made me! It is better then I could have wished.
Thou have done all things well. Thou have settled them for ever. The whole Earth
cannot show any such heritage or Tenure. The world can state out her
possessions but for years, nor can she make a good title for that neither. But
mine Inheritance is for ever, and none can put me out of possession. The thing
is established in Heaven; and in the Volume of the Book it is written of me. My
evidence cannot be lost. It is recorded in the Court above, and enrolled in the
sacred leaves of the Word, and entered upon the Book of my Conscience, and
herein I do, and will rejoice.

Now my soul wipe up thine eyes, and go away with Hannah, and be no more sad.
What though mine House be not so with God, so happy, so prosperous as I could
wish? What though they be increased that trouble me, and my temptations and
afflictions be like the rolling Billows, riding on one another backs for
haste. Yet shall my soul be as a rock unmoved, and sit down satisfied in the
security and amplitude of my portion. For God has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; and herein is all my salvation, and
all my desire.

And now what remains, O Lord, but that I should spend the remainder of my
days in loving, praising, and admiring thee. But wherewith shall I come before
the Lord, or bow my self to the most High God. What shall I give thee to
express my thankfulness, though not to requite thy bounty? Alas my poor little
soul! Alas that thou art so little. How narrow are thy capacities! How
disproportionate are thy powers! Alas that my voice can reach to no higher a
note! But shall I do nothing, because I cannot do all?

Lord I resign to thee. With the poor Widow, I cast my two mites (my soul and
body) into thy Treasury. All my powers shall love and serve thee. All my
members shall be weapons of Righteousness for thee. Here is my good will.
Behold my substance is thy stock; mine interest is for thy service. I lay all
at thy feet: There thou have them, they are thine. My Children I enter as thy
Servants. My possessions I resign as thy right. I will call nothing mine, but
thee. All mine are thine: I can say My Lord, and my God, and that is enough; I
thankfully quit my claim to all things else. I will no more say, My House is
mine, or my Estate mine; I my self am not mine own: Yet it is infinitely better
for me to be thine, then if I were mine own. This is my happiness, that I can
say my own God, my own Father. And O what a blessed exchange have thou made
with me! to give me thy Self who art an infinite Sum, for my self who am but an
insignificant Cipher.

And now Lord, do thou accept, and own my claim. I am not worthy of any thing
of thine, much less of thee. But since I have a Deed to show, I bring thy Word
in my hand, and am bold to take possession. Do thou not know this hand? will thou not own this name? will thou not confirm thine own grant? It were
infidelity to doubt it. I will not disparage the faithfulness of my Lord, nor
be afraid to aver, and stand to what he has said and sworn. Have thou said,
Thou art my God, and shall I fear thou art mine enemy? Have thou told me, Thou
art my Father, and shall I stand aloof, as if I were a stranger? I will
believe. Lord silence my fears; and as thou have given me the claim and title
of a Child, so give me the confidence of a Child. Let my heart be daily kept
alive by thy promises, and with this staff let me pass over Jordan. May these
be my undivided companions, and comforters: When I go, let them lead me; when I
sleep, let them keep me; when I awake, let them talk with me. And do thou keep
these things for ever upon the imaginations of the thoughts of the hearts of
thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. And let the heart of thy
Servant be the Ark of thy Testament, wherein the sacred records of what has
passed between thee and my soul, may for ever be preserved. Amen.

Thus far my Friend. So be it.
CHAP. XIX. An Exhortation to Sinners.
O Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord: Ye men of this world, ye
spirits that are in Prison, held captive to iniquity, under the Prince of this
world; in a Covenant with Death, at an agreement with Hell; without Christ,
Alians from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant of Promise,
having no hope, without God in the world; who have said, We will not have this
man to rule over us; let us break his Bonds asunder, and cast his Cords from
us; who are joined to Idols, have chosen you other gods, are following after
other Lovers: who walk after the course of this world, according to the Prince
of the Power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the children of
Disobedience; having your conversation in the Lusts of the flesh, fulfilling
the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and being still as you were by
nature, the children of Wrath, in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

O ye sons of death, ye children of the night, and of darkness, Hear and your
souls shall live; to you also is the word of this salvation sent; even the
strangers, and those that are afar off, that will lay hold on the Covenant, and
choose the thing that pleases God, these also shall have a name in his house,
even the glorious name of Sons and Daughters. The Lord has sent a word into
Jacob, and it shall light upon Edom and Amaleck, and the uncircumcised
Philistines, even as many of them, as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39.

Hearken O people, you that are polluted in your blood; written in the Earth,,
free among the dead; come in, let your Covenant with death be made void, and
your agreement with Hell be disanulled, strike a League with the Almighty, and
your names also shall be written amongst the living in Jerusalem.

Stand ye before the Lord, come and let us reason together.

Where are you? What is your Portion and Inheritance? Ye are cursed with a
Curse. Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion
of your cup, Psalm. 11.6. What are you seeking? whither are you traveling?
After a few years of your vanity are over, where must your dwelling be? Who can
dwell with the devouring fire? Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Look
before you, behold that smoking Furnace, that burning Lake, that bottomless
Pit that is gaping for you, and at your next step may swallow you up. Escape for
your lives, why will ye dye? Turn and live.

Do you believe the Resurrection from the dead? the Judgment to come, and the
invisible World? Is it to the spirit of a man, as to the spirit of a beast?
Does it perish with his carkase? Dies a Man as a Dog dies? Dies a wise man
as a fool dies? Fall all things alike to all? just, and unjust, good and bad,
after this life, as well as in it?

Do you believe the Scriptures? Are they but a Fable? If you hope they are, are
you sure they are? Dare you venture your souls upon it? Whilst the Saints
venture on the Truth, dare you venture your souls on the Falsehood of it? Dare
you stand forth and say, If this word be not a lie, let me be damned for ever?
I am content that the everlasting worm shall gnaw my heart, that the infernal
fire shall burn my flesh, and bones, and soul for ever and ever, if it prove not
at last a mere Forgery and Imposture.

Do you believe the Scriptures to be true indeed? If you do, what do they
preach to you? Do they speak any thing if not this, That there is another life
and death, besides that which is within the kenn of mortal eyes; that the other
life, and the other death are Eternal; that upon your being found within, or
without the Covenant of God, hangs your eternal judgment, either for life or
death; that whilst you are in a Covenant with death, and in a course of
iniquity, you are without the Covenant of God, and can have no benefit by it;
that under sin, and out of Covenant, out of Covenant and out of Christ; out of
Christ, and under Condemnation.

Are there any things which that word which you profess to believe to be as
true, and to stand as sure as Heaven and Earth; are there any things that this
speaks more plainly, then these things, and such like? What and yet secure in a
state of sin? Aliens from God, enemies of all Righteousness, and yet in quiet?
Are you resolved to sell Eternity for time, life for death, a soul for the
pleasures of sin? Is this the choice you have made, and are you resolved to
stand to it? Let me have this world; my Portion here, my good things here, and
then let me be damned in the other world: Let me sin here, and suffer
hereafter; let me laugh here, and lament hereafter; let me flourish, and
prosper, and live at ease, and in honor, and in pleasure and at liberty here,
and let my Prison, and my Pain, and my Anguish, and my Plagues be beneath;
there let me be torn, let me burn, let me roar, let me die; so I may be rich,
and be merry, and rejoice a while here; let time be my Heaven, and eternity be
my Hell; speak in earnest, is this your choice? or that you may not be put to
it to make a new choice, will you take upon you to make a new Gospel? And
dividing what God has joined together, will you join what he has divided?
Will you write this for Gospel? Holiness and Hell, sin and glory, Christ and
the Curse, the Devil and the Crown: Let the wicked hold on his way, and the
unrighteous his thoughts, let him still run away from the Lord, and be shall
have mercy; and from his God, and he will abundantly pardon. Strait is the
gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto death, and few there be that
find it; but broad is the gate, and wide is the way that leads unto life,
and the whole world are going in thereat. Blessed are the proud in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are they that laugh now, blessed are
the froward, the merciless, the impure in heart, the persecutors for
Righteousness sake, for great is their reward in Heaven. Within shall be the
Dogs, and the Swine, the Whoremongers, the Sorcerers, the Drunkards, the
Ruffians, the Blasphemers, the Gallants, the Idolaters, and whosoever loves
and makes a lie: And without shall be the Lambs, and the Doves, the Holy, and
the Humble, and the Meek, and the Merciful, and the Upight in heart, and the
Poor in spirit, and Peacemakers, the persecuted for Righteousness sake, and
whosoever loves truth, and makes God his trust, these shall go into
everlasting fire, but the ungodly into life Eternal.

Are these the Articles of your Creed? Is this your Gospel? if it be, O what is
your Heaven? If it be not, if the old Gospel must stand, Oh where are your
souls? Are your souls lost, and are they not worth the recovery? Why will ye
dye, turn and live; Oh when shall it once be?

As an Ambassador for Christ, to whom is committed the word of Reconciliation,
having hinted to you what is Law, so in the name of the Eternal God, I publish
to you the everlasting Gospel.

The Lord God having entered into a Covenant of life, with the first Adam, for
himself and all mankind in him; this Covenant being broken, whereby sin has
entered, and death by sin, and all the world is now become guilty before God;
bound over to the vengeance of eternal Fire, and under an utter impossibility
of recovery, by ought that that Covenant can do; has out of his abundant
grace, made a new Covenant, on which whosoever shall lay hold, shall be delivered
out of the state of Death and Wrath, into a state of Life and Blessedness, Romans
8.3. What the Law could not do, being weak through the flesh, God sent his Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh; and with him this gracious grant, that
whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh.
3.16. And this is the Covenant that has been declared unto you.

This new Covenant is a Marriage-Covenant, Hos. 2.10. I will betroth thee unto
me for ever, yea I will betroth thee to me in righteousness, and in
loving kindness, and in mercies. In it the Lord makes offer, and invites you to
accept of an Husband, and a Dower: The Husband is the Kings son, the Lord Jesus
Christ; and with him the lost Kingdom, and all that belongs to the Kingdom of
God. for a Dower. Liberty for the Captives, the opening of the Prison to them
that are bound; riches to the poor, eyes to the blind, feet to the lame,
healing to the diseased, and life to the dead.

And whoever among you all, who are persons under the Law, held by the cords of
your sins, whose souls are fast bound in fetters of Iron, who are willing that
your Covenant with death be made void, and your agreement with Hell be
disannulled; and will join your selves to the Lord, and be brought within the
bonds of this Covenant, all the blessings of this Covenant are made over, and
stand sure unto you.

The Grant is made, the Deed is drawn, and sealed; the Lord has set to his
Seal, come you in, and seal the Counter-part; set to your seal, and the Match
is made up. Christ, and with him all things are yours, and you are his. Accept
and live, refuse and dye for ever.

Come on then, sinner, what say thou? Do thou consent? Do thou accept?
Or as Laban to Rebekah, Will thou go with this man? Let me espouse thee to this
one Husband; only let me first tell thee, The matter is solemn, and thou must
be serious. It Is for life, it is for Eternity.

Consider therefore, and let thine heart, lying prostrate before the Almighty,
come in and make answer to these demands, which from him, and in his great and
dreadful Name I make unto thee.

1. Will thou have Jesus for thine Husband? Understand before thou answer. The
taking of Christ for thine Husband, implies, Intimate Union. Ingenuous
Subjection. Total Dependence.


1. Intimate Union; by choosing and accepting of him for thine, and resigning
and giving up thy self to him, for his own; to cohabit and live with him, in
the dearest conjugal affection for ever.

2. Ingenious Subjection; by a free and cheerful putting thy self under him, as
thy Lord whom thou will obey, and be subject to, in all things. The Wife must
be subject to her Husband; yet not as a slave by constraint, but freely, and by
consent.

3. Total Dependanse; holding of him as thy head, expecting nothing, owning
nothing, but what descends upon thee from him. Depending on him for all things;
the bearing of thy debts, thy discharge from thy Bonds, and thy whole provision
for a livelihood and maintenance.

Consider then, what say thou? Does thine heart choose, and accept, and
resign up it self unto Christ? Do thou choose him as an Husband? Thou can
choose him as a Refuge, to hide thee from danger; thou can choose him as a
Friend, to help thee in thy need; but do thou choose him for thine Husband?
Will thou cleave to him? love, honor, and obey him? Do thou understand his
manner? the Law of his house, his Family order, and discipline? Do thou know
his Commands and Expectations? how holy, how spiritual, how strict, and
self-denying, how humble and submissive he looks thy whole carriage should be?
Will thou be at his finding? Will thou look unto him, and lean upon him for all
thou need? Shall all thy desire be to him, and thy dependence on him? Thou
art a Bondsman, who shall be thy Redemption? Thou art a Malefactor, who shall be
thy Satisfaction? Thou art a Leper, whence do look for cleansing? Thou art a
Beggar, whence do expect an Inheritance? Wilt lean upon thy Beloved for all!
Shall he be thy Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption, and
Inheritance? Wilt do him this honor, to trust him for all this? to cast all
thy Burdens, thy care, thy fears, thy sins, thy guilt, thy hopes upon him?
Can say, O my God, I have sinned, I have sinned, thy Law have I broken, thy
love have I slighted, I have fallen from thee, and run over to thine Enemies; I
have fallen under thy displeasure, wrath is provoked, justice has taken hold
of me, my soul is undone, how dreadful is thy controversy with me, and I have
nothing to answer but this, my Jesus shall answer for me.

O my Jesus, thou have wooed and invited sinners unto thee, thou have sent
forth thy Messengers, and thy Word, into the high ways and hedges, into the
Goales and Hospitals of the world; among the poor, the blind, and the bound,
and the diseased, and those that are in debt, and distress; to take from among
them a Wife for thy bosom. Behold thy word has found among the Captives, this
wretched Adulteress, my poor Harlot soul; which has dealt treacherously with
thee, and has followed after other Lovers, has fallen among Thieves and
Robbers, is bruised, wounded, and undone; having Prodigally spent and wasted
all that I had.

But behold I come at thy word, if thou say, I have no pleasure in thee, if
thou spit in my face, and spurn me with thy foot, and trample me in the dirt,
or send me back to my Prison, and leave me to bear the shame of my Whoredoms, I
must be silent and speechless.

But will thou receive me? Will thou take me into thine house? Will thou spread
thy skirt over me? shall I be called by thy Name? Will thou love me, and be
joined unto me? Will thou be Surety for thy servant? Will thou that my debts be
upon thee? my bonds be upon thee? My wants, my sins, my sorrows, my fears, my
plagues, my help, my soul be upon thee? Will thou Lord? and can I say thee nay?
will thou take them, and can I refuse to lay them upon thee? I consent Lord, I
consent to thee; be thou mine Husband, and mine helper; love me, discharge me
of this guilt, loose me from these fetters, cleanse me from this filthiness,
and then ask what thou will; impose upon me whatever thou please. Love thee?
honor thee? obey thee? Oh what is my love, what is my obedience, that thou
should accept, or I should deny it to thee? It Is but little that I can do,
this heart is so false and so feeble, that I am afraid how I undertake for it,
but such as it is, take it to thee. I bestow it wholly upon thee, with this
promise, that if thou will help me I will love thee, if thou will help me I
will be subject to thee, and lay up all my hopes and expectations with thee.
Now Soul, now that thou know what it means, now say, will thou have Christ
for thine husband?

2. Will thou take him for better for worse, for richer for poorer?

Though thy Lord be a King, yet his Kingdom is not of this world. He came not
to be ministered unto, but minister; he came to serve, and to suffer, and all
those that will follow him, must suffer with him. He came not to divide lands,
and spoils, and crowns, and temporal dignities, and honors amongst his
Disciples; but crosses, and prisons, and scourges, and wants. Thou will join
thy self to the Lord, but will thou take up thy lot with him? Thou will live
with him, and abide with him, but do know where he dwells, and what his
entertainment is? Sometimes he has bread, and sometimes he is hungry;
sometimes he has clothes, and sometimes is naked; sometimes he has an house,
and sometimes he has none, sometimes he has friends, and sometimes he has
none; he is sometimes used kindly, and sometimes as coursly; sometimes it is
Hosanna, and sometimes Crucifige; sometimes he is cried up as a King, sometimes
cried out against as a Devil; and as it is with the Master, so will it be with
the Scholar; as with the Lord, so with the Disciple; where he is, thou must be
also. Can thou say, Whither thou go, I will go with the; where thou
feedest, I will feed with thee; where my Lord dwells, if in a tent, if in a
cave, if in a dungeon, if in a wilderness, where ever my Lord dwells, let me
dwell with him? Consider what thou say, and be not overhasty. May be thou
do not yet know, what hunger and thirst, and nakedness mean; what the wrath
of man, what their reproachings, and spittings, and stripes, and bonds mean;
may be thou have thought, this may be far enough off, and may never come upon
me; or have taken up a resolution through incogitancy, not weighing how sharp,
and how pinching they may be to thee. But suppose thou were now just come to
it; and that thou saw, that thy first foot Christ-ward, would be the parting
point betwixt thee and all that is dear unto thee in the world; that thy first
step heavenward would be into the fire, or the water, or into the camp of the
Philistines, whose faces were all filled with fury against thee. Have thou yet
such a far deeper sense of the eternal sufferings, thou art in danger of; such
a settled belief, of thy absolute necessity of Christ to thy escaping these;
such an high value of the love of Christ, and the everlasting salvation thou
expectest by him, as does overbalance and swallow up the sharpest and the
quickest sense thou have or can have, of the greatest things thou shall
suffer by him? have thou cast up all afflictions imaginable, and then put thy
soul to it? now resolve what to do; either this or no Christ, either this or no
Crown, either this Cross or the Curse, either the wrath of man or the wrath of
God, Scorpions, and Dragons, and Devils; shriecking and howling, and gnashing
of teeth for ever and ever. Confess Christ and be confessed of him, suffer with
Christ and reign with him, weep with Christ and rejoice with him, die with
Christ and live for ever, deny Christ, forsake Christ and perish for ever? have
thou thus put thy self to it? and after the most solemn debate thou have had,
what is the result? Now tell me, Christ or no Christ? will thou have Christ for
better for worse? how dear soever he cost thee?

3. Will thou forsake all others?

Thou have three Husbands that lay claim to thee; Sin, the World, and the
Devil. Will thou renounce, and be divorced from all these? There Is no
compounding betwixt Christ and them; he or they must go.

The renouncing of sin stands, In the disengaging of the heart from it. In the
engaging of the heart against it.


1. In the disengaging or loosening of the heart from sin. It Is an hearty
willingness to let it go; a willingness to part, is our parting with sin. A
breaking the Peace, the cutting off the League betwixt sin and the soul, when a
sinner stands so clearly convinced of the worth of Christ, of the value of a
soul, of the enmity of sin against Christ and and the soul, of the unworthiness
of sin, with all its pleasures and so advantages, to be laid in the balance
with Christ, is willing to be rid of it. What is there in it? What can it do
for me? How long will it last me? Where will it lead me? O the after births of
sin: O the tail of these Locusts, the sting, the sting that I see there! Can I
want a Christ? or can I hope that he will dwell with such Neighbors? Can I bear
the loss of my soul? or can it escape if these escape? I see its vain to think
of keeping both Christ and Lusts; its vain to think of saving both my sins, and
my soul: it is all one, as to be saved and to be damned, I may as well bring
Heaven and Hell together. Well, let them go: henceforth hold thy peace sin,
plead no more with me for entertainment; be a stranger for ever to me;
henceforth I know thee no more.

2. In the engaging the heart against sin. When the heart is not only content
to let it depart, but gives it a Bill of divorce, and sends it away. When it
can want it, and cannot bear it; when it deals with it, as the Egyptians with
Israel; at first they have only leave given them to be gone, but at length
they thrust them out, Exodus 12.33. They were urgent upon them, that they might
send them out of the Land in have; for they said, we be all but dead men.

Be gone sin, I am but a dead man if thou abidest with me; and so it will no
longer court it as a friend, but curse it as an enemy; fears it, hates it, and
is resolved to be its mortal enemy; and to this end is determined to use all
Gods means, To discover, To destroy it.


1. To use all Gods means to discover it; to bring to light the hidden things
of darkness. Sin goes under a disguise, it is hard to know friends from enemies;
they had need have their senses about them, and well exercised too, that can
discern betwixt good and evil. Heb. 5.14. Who can understand his Errors? Psalm.
19.12. Sin lies in the dark. The heart of man is desperately wicked, who can
know it? There Is too much wickedness, and it lies too deep to be discerned by
every eye; he that means in earnest to cast out, must first search out his
iniquities. Let us search and try our ways, Lam. 3.40. He must search the
Scriptures which describe these Enemies, and mark them out what they are, and
how many, and how they may be known; where ever you find them, and under what
disguise soever they appear; must search the heart, where if they walk no more
openly, they will hide themselves, that they be not discovered or suspected.

Thou art a fool, a self-deceiver, Sinner, who take thy self to be an
adversary to sin, and take no care to find it out; much more who willingly
hidest it out of sight. He takes part with sin, which will not take pains to
know it. I hate the Devil, and all his works; I repent, I forsake all my sins,
and though I have done iniquity, by the Grace of God I will do so no more: Thus
vain men talk, but do know what thou say? What is sin? Do know a friend
from an enemy, good from evil? What are [thy] sins? What have thou done?
Wherein have thou transgressed? What are they that have done thee mischief?
What are their names? May be thou will say their name is Legion, for they are
many.

In many things I have transgressed, in many things I have offendied; but in
what things? Do know thine enemy when thou see him? or would thou know
him if thou could? Do thou make any search or enquiry after him? when thou
read of a proud heart in the Scriptures, art able to say there is one of
them, that have done me mischief? or of a covetous heart, there is another of
them; or of an envious, malitous, froward heart, there are more of them; or of
an hard, and hypocritical, ignorant, unbelieving heart; this is he: This is my
great Enemy; or if thou can not tell do ask? Is not this he? Are not these
they? O that I could understand mine errors, Lord make me to know my
transgressions.

Sinners, never make your selves believe you are enemies to sin, till you make
narrow and particular enquiry after it; after all sin, the several kinds of it
whether of Omission, or Commission; whether Outward or Spiritual, Open or
Secret, Greater or Smaller, sins of Ignorance, or Knowledge, of Infirmities or
Presumption; your beloved, your most pleasing sins, your most gainful sins,
whatever they be, you never renounce, till you resolve to make a diligent
search after them.

2. To use all Gods means to destroy and overcome them. He that hides his
enemy, and he that will spare him when he has found him, is not an enemy, but
a friend. He that says I will destroy, and will not use his weapons, either
knows not what he says, or says what he never means. Thou say thou will
renounce and resist all thy sins, but art thou in earnest? What course do
mean to take? Will thou take Gods way? He bids thee hear, believe, pray, fast,
mourn, strive, fight, watch, etc. Will thou hearken to his Counsels? will thou
be healed of thy diseases? But will thou take the counsel of the Physician?
Will thou use his Medicines? Thou will overcome thine enemy, but will thou take
heed of him? Will thou fight against him? Will thou take in all the help that is
offered thee? Will thou not only believe, and lean upon God for his help, but
will thou pray, and lift up thy heart for his help? Will thou not only pray
against thy sins, but watch against them? against the occasions temptations,
and beginnings of sin? Will thou use (all) Gods means, and against (all) thy
sins? shall not thine eyes spare any of them? will thou make thorough work with
them root and branch, old and young? Shall there be neither the lowing of the
Oxen, nor the bleating of the sheep heard with thee? Will thou destroy the
greater, and dash the little ones also against the stones?

Will thou avenge thy self of thine Advetsaries, and will thou never again
agree with thine Adversaries? Will thou never again say, Is it peace, Jehu,? is
it peace, Jezabel? So if thy sins say to thee, Is it peace soul, will thou
answer, What have you to do with peace? get you behind me. Will thou neither
make a truce with sin, nor embrace a parley, nor entertain a Treaty for peace
with it? Will thou not draw back thine hand, nor put up thy Weapons, nor give
over thy watch, nor go off thy Guard, till all thine enemies become thy
footstool; all this is included in the renouncing of sin.

Beware you be not mistaken here, this is the damnation of the world, their
mistakes about repentance. They easily say I repent of my sins, I forsake the
Devil and all his works; and they as easily persuade themselves, that they do
as they say: But did they understand what there is in this repentance, a
searching out their sins, dividing their souls from them; a painful and
watchful shunning and resisting them in their whole course: did they know what
their particular sins are, how near they are to their hearts, how they have
been nursed in their bosoms, and how hard twill be now to part; even this
Covetousness must go, even this sensuallity must go, these dear pleasures,
these beloved gains, these pleasant companions, must all be sent away; not one
to be spared nor so much as once more; did they understand this, they would
then see what wind all their good words be. They as much mean to pluck their
eyes out of their heads, to tear their flesh off their bones, as to repent, if
this be repentance. Well now say, will thou repent? Will thou now renounce sin?

Will thou renounce the world also? By the world understand, all the substance
of the world; Houses, Lands, Money, and whatsoever worldly Possessions; all the
shadows of the world; its Honors, Pleasures, Pomps, with all its glory. The
men of this world, the friendship of the world; all fleshly Relations: Fathers,
Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Children, all sinful Companions, and societies
whatsoever is in, and of the world.

These are then renounced, when we are resolved that they shall neither be Our
gods or Idols: Our devils or Tempters.


1. Not our gods. Then we make the world a god to us, when we make it out
happiness, or end. When we bless our selves in it, and count that our very life
consists in the abundance of the things which we possess. When we devote our
selves to it, making it as the blessedness, so the great business of our life.
He that can want the world, and yet be blessed; he that can want, or have the
world, and yet not serve it; he has renounced it, even whilst he has it;
though it is his still, yet it is not his God.

2. Not our devils or Tempters. The world tempts in a double way:

1. Per modum Objecti; as Objects, which by something that is apprehended
desirable in them, entices and invites out the heart after them; or by
something apprehended as formidable, affrights us out of our way. Thus pleasant
meats tempts the Glutton, and wine the Drunkard, and a Lion in the streets the
Coward.

2. Per modum causae Instrumentalis; as under devils, or the devils
Instruments, or Agitators by which he betrays and beguiles unstable souls: In
the former sense the things of the world, in the latter, the men of the world
are temptations and Tempters to us. He renounces the world, that will not be
tempted by the world; that takes up with Christ, and will not be bribed off by
worldly advantages, nor proslyted by worldly companions.

He that is resolved for Christ, though with the loss of all, and with the
displeasure of all the world. He that can be poor for Christ, that can be vile
for Christ, that can go hungry and naked with Christ, that can go alone with
Christ, and that even then, when it is but turning away from Christ; and he may
be rich, and honorable, and be clothed, and be filled, and have company
enough, as much as he desires, he forsakes the world.

He that (can) renounce the world, whenever it comes to be a case either Christ
must be forsaken, or all things for Christ; he that [can] whose heart is
brought to it, he [hath] renounced the world What say thou now Soul?

Thou will have Christ, but what if thou must leave all behind thee? What if
he say to thee s^l all that thou have and follow me? Can thou be poor? Can
(...) be naked? Can thou be hungry for Christ? Thou will have Christ, but how
will thou leave thy Companions? What will all thy carnal friends say of thee?
He Is a fool, he is mad, he is besides himself. How wilt look thy Father, or thy
Mother, or thy Wife in the face, who are all against it? who will be
persuading, beseeching thee, weeping over thee, hanging upon thy neck; or it
may be, scoffing, and reviling, and spitting in thy face, to discourage and
hold thee back: What say thou now? Art thou yet for Christ? VVilt thou
forsake them all, cast off all that stands in thy way?

VVilt thou forsake the devil also? But I need not now ask thee that; that is
done already, farewell Devil, when once sin and the world are cast out. If thou will not be tempted to sin, if the world ceases to be a temptation, the Devil
were as good cease to be a Tempter. There be many that say, I defy the Devil,
and yet defy not sin and the world; wise men! They like not the Devil, but yet
will lick up his Excrements; they hate the Devil, and yet are never well longer
then they are dancing in his chains. Defy the Devil, and yet love sin? such
defiance is his delight. Let sin be defied, let the world be despised, and the
Devil is conquered.

4. And lastly, Will thou cleave unto Christ, from henceforth, unto death?

Thou will have Christ, but when? Shall this be the Marriage-day? VVilt thou
from henceforth be the Lords? or when shall it be? Must it be to morrow first,
or next month, or next year, or some time or other thou know not when? May
we not take thy promise as they did the Prophecy, Ezekiel. 12. Is it not for many
days to come? is it not of the times that are afar off? To morrow thou will,
hereafter thou will, as good as thou have said nothing. As good thou had said
[never] as [not yet] Speak Soul, wilt give thy self to the Lord? wilt
presently? if thou will, how long will thou abide with him? will thou not
endorse on thy Deed of Gift, a power of revocation? will thou not repent, not
return again from Heaven to Earth? wilt be chaste and play the Harlot no more?
wilt be faithful to the death? obedient to the death? Is this thy voice, I have
opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back? As the Lord lives, nothing
but death, no not death it self shall part thee and me. I am persuaded I am
resolved, that neither life nor death, Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers,
nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
Creature shall separate me from the love of God, or withdraw me from Jesus
Christ my Lord.

Now Soul, gather up all this together; stand thou before the Lord, the God of
all the Earth, and this once more say, Will thou have Jesus Christ for thy
Husband? do thou choose him for thy Lord? will thou cleave to him in love?
will thou lean upon him for righteousness and strength? for righteousness to
pay thy debts, and for strength to pay thy vows? will thou be subject to him?
thou know the commandments, how holy, how strict they be. Will thou obey
them in all things? wilt exercise thy self to godliness in the strictness of
it? wilt be a thorow-pac'd Disciple? wilt not content thy self with such a cold
or lukewarm indifferency in Religion as thy lazy flesh will bear, as thy
credit, thy safety, or the temper of the times will bear? wilt follow thy Lord
fully? Will thou take up thy lot with Christ, be it better or worse? shall his
Father be thy Father, his Inheritance be thy Inheritance? yea and his
Sufferings thy Sufferings? his stripes, his bonds, his poverty be thine? will thou espouse not his Crown only, but his Cross too? whither ever he goes will thou go? where he dwells will thou dwell? wilt say, where ever my Lord is,
there let his Servant be? Will thou forsake all others? all thy sins? will thou
be made clean? wilt give up thy sores, and thy ulcers, thy filthy and fleshly
lusts to be purged out? does thine heart stand disengaged from every sin? is
there not any one iniquity, concerning which thine heart says, Let this stay
with me? wilt search out thy sins? wilt accomplish a diligent search, sweep
every corner, search every chamber of thine heart and life? wilt go down to the
bottom of thy great deep, to find out what lodges there? wilt faithfully
endeavor, no more to allow thy self in any known iniquity? wilt use all Gods
means for the conquering and casting them out? Wilt forsake the world? wilt
cast away thine Idols? shall thy Mammon be no more a god nor a demy-god to
thee? shall it neither carry away thine heart from him, nor so much as share
with him in it? will thou not bow down to this golden Image nor serve it? will thou no longer serve thy greedy appetite? shall thine heart no longer go after
thy covetousness? will thou abandon thine estate, thy pleasures, thine honors,
thy friends and companions, so far forth as any of these divide or entice, or
steal away thine heart from thy Lord? When ever they say, Come away, will thou
say, Get you hence? VVilt forsake the Devil? wilt fear, and fly from, and no
longer hearken to his temptations? wilt no longer regard his promises nor his
threatenings? his flatteries nor his frowns? Coming off from the tents of all
these, wilt cleave unto thy Lord from henceforth, from this day forward, and
not depart from him for ever? Wilt hold on thy course, wilt run out thy race,
wilt be faithful to the death, wilt hope to the end for the grace that shall be
brought unto thee at the revelation of Jesus Christ?

What say thou? If thou say [no] as the Lord lives, thou speak this
word against thine own life. If thou refusest to enter into this Covenant, thou
say, I will not be the Lords, I will none of him, I will not live; let
death, and wrath, and chains, and plagues be my portion for ever. I will not be
the Lords; I will not leave my sins, and my pleasures, and my companions for
his love: that is, I will be a Fool, and a beast, and a Devil; I will die and
will not see life. Mistake not thy self, be not deceived, it is a matter of life
and death that is before thee. It Is whether Heaven or Hell, a God or no God, a
Christ or no Christ, a Soul or a lost Soul, everlasting life or everlasting
Fire, shall be thy portion, that stands now to be determined, by thy consent or
refusal, look to it, be wise; this once for eternity. Consent and thou art
blessed, consent and he is thine, and with him the Kingdom. Thy Lord has
given his consent already; view the handwriting, the whole New Testament,
which is written in blood, and sealed as it is written; there thou have his [I
will] in every line almost, visible before thee: put to thine and it is done.
What say thou? do thou consent? shall thine heart come in, and put to
thine hand, and subscribe for thee?

I will. Let that be done and then say after me.

A form of words expressing man's covenanting with God.
O Most Dreadful God, for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech Thee accept of thy
poor Prodigal now prostrating himself at thy Door: I have fallen from thee by
mine iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousand-fold more the
Child of Hell by my Wicked practice: The Terms of our conversion, are either
from which, or to which.
But of thine infinite Grace thou have promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I
will but turn to thee with all my heart: Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel,
I am now come in, and throwing down my Weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy.

The Terms from which we must turn, are Sin, Satan, the World, and our own
Righteousness, which must be thus renounced.
And because thou requirest, as the Condition of my Peace with thee, that I
should put away mine Idols, and be at defiance with all thine Enemies, which I
acknowledge I have wickedly sided with against thee, I here from the bottom of
my heart renounce them all, firmly Covenanting with thee, not to allow my self
in any known Sin, but Conscientiously to use all means that I know thou have
prescribed, for the Death and utter Destruction of all my Corruptions. And
whereas I have formerly inordinately and idolatrously let out my affections
upon the World, I do here resign my Heart to thee that made it, humbly
protesting before thy Glorious Majesty, that it is the firm resolution of my
heart, and that I do unfeignedly desire Grace from thee, that when thou shall
call me hereunto, I may practice this my resolution, through thy Assistance, to
forsake all that is dear unto me in this World, rather then to turn from thee
to the ways of sin, and that I will watch against all its Temptations, whether
of Prosperity or Adversity, least they should withdraw my Heart from thee,
beseeching thee also to help me against the Temptations of Satan, to whose
wicked Suggestions, I resolve, by thy Grace, never to yield my self a Servant.
And because my own righteousness is but menstruous Rags, I renounce all
confidence therein, and acknowledge that I am of my self a hopeless, helpless,
undone creature, without righteousness or strength.

The Terms to which we must turn, are either ultimate or mediate.
And forasmuch as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most Graciously to
me wretched sinner, to be again my God through Christ, if I would accept of
thee: I call Heaven and Earth to record this day, that The ultimate is God, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who must be thus accepted.
I do here solemnly avouch thee for the Lord my God, and with all possible
veneration, bowing the neck or my Soul under the feet of thy most sacred
Majesty, I do here take thee the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for
my portion and chief good, and do give up my self, body and soul for thy
servant, promising and vowing to serve thee in holiness and righteousness all
the days of my life.

The mediate terms, are either principal, or less principal.
The Principal is Christ the Mediator, who must thus be embraced.
And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, the only means of coming
unto thee, I do here upon the bended knees of my Soul accept of him as the
only New and Living Way, by which Sinners may have access to thee, and do here
solemnly join my self in a marriage covenant to him.

O blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor and wretched,
and miserable, and blind, and naked, a most loathsome polluted wretch, a
guilty condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the servants
of my Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory: But since
such is thine unparalled love, I do here with all my power accept thee, and
do take thee for my Head and Husband, for better for worse, for richer for
poorer, for all times and conditions, to love, honor, and obey thee before all
others, and this to the death. I embrace thee in all thine Offices: I renounce
mine own unworthiness, and do here avow thee to be the Lord my Righteousness: I
renounce mine own wisdom, and do here take thee for mine only Guide: I
renounce mine own will, and take thy Will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here
covenant with thee to take my lot, as it falls, with thee, and by thy grace
assisting to run all hazards with thee, verily supposing, that neither life nor
death shall part between thee and me.

The less Principles, are the Laws of Christ, which must be thus accepted.
And because thou have been pleased to give me thy holy Laws, as the Rule of my
life, and the way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom; I do here willingly
put my Neck under thy Yoke, and set my Shoulder to thy Burden, and subscribing
to all thy Laws, as holy, just, and good; I solemnly take them, as the rule of
my words, thoughts, and actions; promising, that though my flesh contradict and
rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my whole life according to thy
direction, and will not allow my self in the neglect of any thing that I know
to be my duty.

Only because through the frailty of my flesh, I am subject to many failings;
I am bold humbly to protest, That unallowed miscarriages, contrary to the
settled bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant; for
so thou have said.

Now Almighty God, searcher of hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this day, without any known guile or reservation, bebeseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any flaw or falsehood therein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it aright.

And now glory be to thee, O God, the Father, whom I shall be bold from this
day forward, to look upon as my God and Father; That ever thou should find
out such a way for the recovery of undone sinners; Glory be to thee, O God the
Son, who have loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own blood, and art
now become my Savior and Redeemer: Glory be to thee, O God the holy Ghost, who
by the finger of thine Almighty Power, have turned about my heart from sin to
God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; thou
art now become my Covenant-friend, and I through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant-servant, Amen, So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

CHAP. XX, and Last. An exhortation to the Saints.
COme ye People beloved, you that are highly favored; The Lord is with you.
Blessed are you amongst men and women. The Likes are fallen to you in a
pleasant place, yea you have a goodly heritage. Come and enter upon your Lot;
let your hearts be glad, let your glory rejoice, but that your joy may be full,
hearken to these following counsels:

Make sure your interest in the Covenant. Rejoice not in that that's none of
thine. Make sure, all lies upon this: Your life, and all the comforts and
concernments of it, both your eternal safety hereafter, and your success in all
the parts of your Christian course here, depend on your interest in the
Covenant. What have you if Christ be not yours? and what have you in Christ,
if you be not in Covenant? whence are your hopes, either of mercy at last, or
of prospering in any thing at present, but from the Covenant of Promise? And
what have you thence, if your name be not in it! Oh give not rest to your
selves, till this be put out of doubt; what ever duties you perform, what ever
ease, or hope you find hereupon, what ever transportation of affection you
feel in your hearts, in the midst of all enquiry.

But am I in Covenant? How shall I know that you will say; why make a strict and
narrow enquiry, whether those special graces already mentioned be wrought upon
you. Common mercies, though even these be Covenant mercies to the Saints, yet
will they not prove themselves so to be; but specially graces will be their own
evidence. Things outward, fall alike to all: No man knows love or hatred by
ought that befalls him, Eccles. 9.1. Thou may be a son or a bastard,
notwithstanding all that thou enjoyest or suffer here; but not one of the
forementioned graces, but is a childs portion: Gods mark upon the heart, to
distinguish children from strangers. Prove that thou truly know the Lord,
have one heart, a tender heart, etc. and thou therein provest thy self to be a
child of Promise. Read over the descriptions that have been given of these
graces; observe diligently where the main differen^e lies betwixt common and
special grace; compare thine heart with it, and thereby thou may give a
judgment of thy state. If it be yet questionable, whether it be sound or no;
sit not down till thou have obtained: but having obtained,

2. Keep your evidences clear. Have you peace? maintain it carefully. The
hidden Manna will never breed worms by long keeping. Content not your selves
that you once had peace; 'twill be but a poor livelihood, you will get out of
what is wasted and lost. Get you good evidences that God is yours, and keep them
by you, till you need them no more. Grace is your best evidence, cherish and
preserve it. Get a seeing eye, and keep your eye open; get a single heart, and
let it not be again divided; get a tender heart, and keep it tender; let the
love and fear of God be acted in holy Obedience. An obedient, gracious,
watchful, active life, will keep grace in heart; and flourishing grace will
speak for it self and you. Look not that the Lord should so far countenance
your declinings to a more fleshly careless state, as to smile upon you in such
a state; God will not be an Abettor to sin. Count upon it, that your grace and
peace, your duty and comfort will rise and fall together; suspect those
comforts that accompany you into the tents of wickedness, and forsake you not,
when you forsake your God. Keep up your spirits, and then lift up your heads,
keep heedfully on your way, and your joy shall no man take from you.
Particularly, 1. Keep close by God. 2. Keep hold on Christ. 3. Keep touch with
the Spirit. 4. Keep in with Conscience.


1. Keep close to God. Keep thy self under his eye and influences. Both thy
grace and thy comforts as they had their birth, so must they have their
nourishment from Heaven. Lose the sight of the Sun, and darkness follows. Let
thine eyes be toward the hills. Let divine love be the pleasure of thy life.
Let it be thy Lords cord upon thine heart, let it bind thee to him; be loves
Captive, let thine ear be bored to the threshold, be familiar in Heaven, keep
thine acquaintance there, and be at peace; chide back thy gadding heart, Soul;
whither art thou going? who has the words of eternal life? let the interviews
of love betwixt thy Lord and thee, be constant; let them not be only on some
few holy days of thy life.

Count not thou have lived that day, in which thou have not lived with God.

Keep close to God, by keeping close to duty. Keep close to duty, and keep
close to God in duty. Call not that a duty, which thou can not call communion
with God. Make not duty to do the work of sin, to take God out of sight. Let
not Prayer, or Hearing, or Sacraments, be instead of a God to thee. Such
praying and hearing there is amonst many, but know not thou any thing for
Religion, wherein thou meetest not with God.

Behold the face of God, but behold his face in righteousness, Psalm. 17.15.
It Is ill looking on God with a blood-shot eye. Guilt upon the heart, will be a
cloud that will make the Sun as darkness to thee. Walk in the light of the
Lord. Walk in the light, as he is in the light. In thy light (the holiness of
thy life) thou shall see his light. The light of his holiness in thee, will be
attended with the light of his countenance upon thee. By the light of his
countenance, thou will both see thy self in thy way to thine hopes, and learn
thy way more perfectly, Psalm. 119.135. Make thy face to shine upon thy Servant,
and teach me thy statutes. God has many ways of teaching; he teaches by Book,
he teaches by his Finger, he teaches by his Rod; but his most comfortable and
effectual teaching, is by the light of his Eye. Send forth thy light and thy
truth, let them lead me, let them bring me to thy holy Hill.

2. Keep hold on Christ. He is thy peace. Appear not before God, but in the
blood of the Lamb; let him carry up thy duties, and own not that for a comfort,
which is not brought thee by his hand. Let him be thy way to the Father, and
thy Fathers way to thee. Keep fresh upon thine heart, the memory of his death
and satisfaction, and let that be thy life, and thine hope. Have thou cast
Anchor on this Rock, lose not thy hold; hang upon the horns of the Altar: Thou
can not live, but there; if thou must dye, say; but I will dye here. Put
forth fresh Acts of faith everyday and hour. Believe, believe, believe, and
thou shall be established. Fall not into Unbelief, then thou art gone; thou
departest from the living God, Heb. 3.12.

3. Keep touch with the Spirit. Observe and obey his motions; when he excites,
get thee on; when he checks, get thee back; know the holy from the evil spirit,
by its according or differing with the Scriptures; reject that spirit in the
heart, that is not the same with the Spirit in the word. Try the Wind, what and
whence it is, by thy Card and Gompass; To the Law, and to the Testimony. And
when thou perceivest its from above, hoise up thy sails, and get thee on.
Quench not the Spirit: Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby thou art
sealed to the day of Redemption.

4. Keep in with Conscience. Make not thy witness thine enemy. Deal friendly
with it; thou will need its good word, which thou can not have, if it receive
blows from thee; it will not learn this Lesson to speak good for evil: or if
thou should beat it into it, thou art undone; if an abuse conscience speak
peace, it becomes thy Traitor.

Give due respect to Conscience. Let it abide with thee, in Peace, and in
Power. Keep up its Authority, as Gods Vicegerent. Next under God, commit the
keeping of thy soul to conscience, as the Lord has, so do thou make it
superintendent in thy soul; the Judge and Over-seer of all thy motions and
actions. Let conscience counsel thee, and tell thee thy way; let conscience
quicken thee, and put thee on in thy way; let conscience watch thee, that thou
turn not out of thy way; let conscience check thee, and reduce thee into thy
way. Whither ever thou go, carry conscence along with thee; carry conscience
into thy Closet, let it watch thee how thou behavest thy self there; carry
conscience into thy shop, let it eye thee what thou do there; carry
conscience into the fields, into the market, amongst thy friends, amongst thine
enemies, let it observe how thou behavest thy self amongst them; carry
conscience with thee to thy recreation, to thy bed, to thy table; whither ever
thou go, there is like to be but sad work, if conscience be not with thee.
Commit the keeping of thy Covenant to conscience; let it be the Ark in which
the Tables of the Testimony are kept and preserved; let it be the Executor of
thy Testament. Conscience is bound by thy Covenant, the Covenant lays hold on
it, let it lay hold on thee. Is thy conscience bound? seek not to be loosed; is
thy conscience bound, give it leave to bind thine whole man: let it bind thy
thoughts, and bind thy will, and bind thy affections, and hind thy tongue, and
thy whole practice; thou never live as a man in Covenant, longer then thou
live as a man of Conscience. What becomes of the Covenant, when a breach is
made upon Conscience? Oh what is there in the world when conscience is not!
what faith, or truth, or peace is there left alive? what are Vows, and
Covenants, and Promises? what are our duties to the Lord, our dealings with
men, when there is no conscience toward God? Keep thy conscience, and thou
keep thy soul; keep thy Conscience? and thou keep thy Covenant; keep thy
Covenant, and thou keep thy Peace; let that go, and all is lost.

Let conscience govern what God has put under its power, and let it resist all
adverse Power. Let it resist temptations. When ever Satan and thy flesh fall
upon thee, and tempt thee; Pity thy self, spare thy self; take thy liberty,
take thine ease, take thy pleasure, provide for thy safety; what need is there
of so much ado? Why can not take the same liberty, and allow thy self the
same latitude as others do? they have souls as well as thou, and they have
dangers as well as thou, and they have hopes as well as thou, and they have
reasons and understandings to know what they do as well as thou; and why can
thou not he content to do as they? Why let this be thy answer, But what
conscience is there for it? With what conscience can I be idle, when I have
said I will be doing? With what conscience can I take mine ease, when I have
said I will take pains? With what conscience can I serve my flesh, when I have
said I will crucify it? With what conscience can I love this world, when I
have said I will renounce it? With what conscience can I walk at liberty, when
I have said I will walk circumspectly? If all this were more then needs, (far
be it from me to have such a thought, till the serving my God, and the saving
my soul be more then needs.) But if it were more then needs, yet is it any more
then I am bound to? Are there any such liberties put into my Indentures? Was
there any exception made, of this duty, or that duty? was there any limitation
made, to this measure, or that measure? hitherto I will go and no further, this
little I will do and no more? Was there any such proviso put in, I will serve
the Lord, Provided I may with ease or with safety? Have I not solemnly engaged
to the Lord, to obey him in all things, to follow him fully, to love him and
serve him with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength, and this
to the death? And Oh shall I lie unto God? Is it more then needs to be
righteous, and to keep my faith? Come O my soul, come on; thou have opened thy
mouth to the Lord, and thou must not go back. Be true, be honest; be honest,
though thou must swear for it, be honest, though thou suffer for it. Remember
what thy mouth has spoken, and see that thou fulfill it with thine hand.

Keep conscience pure. Its the book in which all thy Records are written; let
no blot be upon thy Book. Beware of sinning against conscience. Every sin
against conscience, is a blot upon conscience; and blots upon conscience, are
blots upon thy Covenant-evidence; thou will not be able to read, whether there
be any thing written there for thee or not. Ah foolish soul, what art thou
doing? Dashing out all thy hopes with thine own hand. Beware thou content not
thy self with blotted evidences.

Christians, forget not this counsel; keep your Evidences clear. He who has
his whole estate in bonds or writings, how charily will he keep them! If these
be torn, or lost, or so blured, that they cannot be read, he is undone. What
ever else be lost, if his money be gone, if his goods be lost, if his house be
burnt, yet if his writings be safe, he is well enough. Oh take heed and keep
your writings safe and fair; keep your Title to your God clear, and you can
never be poor or miserable. Whatever earth or hell can do against you, till
they can tear the Covennnt of your God, or make you blot out your own names,
they have left you abundantly enough, even when they have left you nothing.

O how highly are we concerned to be tender of conscience, and yet how little
care is there taken of it! What Is become of the authority of conscience? when
thy thoughts, and thy passions, when thines eyes and thine ears,, and thine
appetite, and thy tongue are left unbridled and unconquered; when every Servant
is set up to be Master, and bears rule in thee, where is thy Conscience? what is
become of its authority? When thy s ul has been no better kept (what poverty
and leanness is there grown upon it, what a starveling is it become, both in
grace and peace, eaten out with lust, evaporated into vanity, sunk into
sensuality, thy spirit even transubstantiated into flesh, ready to perish, and
die away for want of good looking to.) When thy Soul has been no better kept,
where is thy Conscience? when thy covenant has been no better kept, when thy
duties thou have vowed to perform, are so hastily and heedlesly shuffled over,
if not totally thrust aside; when thy hours of prayer are such short hours, thy
Sabbaths such Winter days, so short and so cold too; when thy God is so
shamefully neglected, can never hear of thee, but when thou have nothing else
to do, no nor it may be then neither, when thy spare hours are hardly spared
for God; when this earth, thy corn, and thy cattle, and thy pleasures and thy
friends, which thou have vowed to renounce, are let in again upon thine heart,
and have stolen it away from Heaven, where is thy Conscience? When thou
sleep so, and have let the enemy come in and sow his tares in thy field;
when thou art such a busie-body in other men's matters, and thine own vineyard
thou have not kept, but have let it lie fallow, like the field of the Sluggard,
all overgrown with thorns and nettles; when both thine heart and thine house
are so much out of order; when thy Wife, and thy Children, and thy Servants are
left at random, to do all, what is right in their own eyes; when more care is
taken for the Asses, then for thy Sons and Daughters; when thy house is a very
hospital, of blind, and lame, and sick Souls, ready to die for want of
instruction and good discipline; where is thy Conscience? and if Conscience be
not, where is thy Covenant? and if thy Covenant be not, oh where is thy God and
thy peace?

Ah Conscience! where art thou become? what is become of that good thing
committed to thee, yea what is become of thee?

Ah Soul! where is thy peace? how is the keeper of thy peace laid low, and the
covenant of thy peace broken? what peace whilst no Conscience, and what have
thou left, whilst no peace? Ah Lord! thy treacherous dealers, how treacherously
have they dealt with thee? thy Children have forgotten thee, thy Servants are
run-awayes from thee; thou art our Father, but where is thine honor? thou art
our Master, but where is thy fear? we are thy Servants, but where is our faith?
Ah Lord! we have dealt falsely in thy Covenant.

Return, O Lord, return; repair thy watches, recover thine honors, reduce thy
wanderers, restore conscience, revive our peace, cause us to return and renew
our covenant; and remember break not thou thy covenant with us.

Christians, let us bewail lost conscience, and let it be recovered; let us
weep over our dead, and let their souls return into them. Let those of us, that
have obtained grace to be faithful, and watchful, and tender, rejoice and take
heed: let him that stands take heed lest he fall. Go on in the Name of the
Lord: Remember his counsels; keep close by God, keep hold on Christ, keep touch
with the Spirit, keep in with Conscience; keep thine heart, keep thy garments,
keep up thy watch, keep on thy way, finish thy course, keep the faith; and then
let the devil do his worst, thy peace shall be extended to thee as a River, and
established as a Rock; and thou shall be able to say in the words, and in the
faith of the Apostle, Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
which God the righteous Judge shall give unto me at that day, and not to me
only but to all that love his appearing.

3. Add to your covenant, your sacrifice, Psa. 50.5. Gather my Saints together
unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. God has made
with you, and he expects that you make covenant with him [by sacrifice.]
Sacrifices were seals of the Covenant. As Gods part of the Covenant, so our
part also must be sealed, and sealed with blood; his with the blood of his Son,
ours with the blood of our sins.

Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren by the mercies of God, that you
present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God. The
sacrificing of our selves to the Lord conprehends in it three things:
Alienation, Dedication, Oblation.


1. Alienation, or the passing away of our selves, from our selves. Ye are not
your own, you are bought with a price. Thus he has said, and he expects that
we should say also, True Lord, I am not mine own.

2. Dedication. or the passing over our selves to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.35. Ye
have consecrated your selves to the Lord. His we are by purchase, but he
expects that we be his also by donation: his we are by conquest, but he expects
we should be his by consent also. Though he may challenge us as his right, yet
the most acceptable claim is, when he has us by gift. When our hearts say, I
am thine Lord; then his heart will answer, Soul, thou art mine.

3. Oblation, or the actual surrender, or offering up our selves to him. In the
offering this sacrifice is included the Immolation, or slaying of it: We must
slay our selves (in a spiritual sense) be mortified, be crucified with Christ,
and so offered up a sacrifice to him. You will say, How is it then required,
that we offer up our selves [a living sacrifice?] Answ. We are never truly
alive till we are dead, Col. 3.3. Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in God. When our flesh is dead our spirit is life, Romans 8. As the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15. that which thou sowest, so that which thou sacrificest is not
quickened except it die. Mortificatio est mors viva. Alapid. It Is only the
mortified Christian that is a living sacrifice.

Christians, come and sacrifice your selves to the Lord. Come and slay your
sacrifices, and so offer them up. Your sacrifice is then slain (as before it is
intimaed) when your carnal self, your old man is crucified with Christ, and the
body of sin destroyed, Romans 6. when the wisdom of the flesh is crucified, and
made to vanish before the wisdom of God; when the will of the flesh is
subdued, and swallowed up of the Will of God; when the lusts of the flesh are
vanquished, and made captives by the Law of God.

Christians, It may be you are willing to make your claim to the Covenant of
God, but have you made covenant with him? you have entered into covenant with
God, but will you confirm your covenant by sacrifice? you will give your selves
a sacrifice to the Lord, but is your sacrifice slain? Is the wisdom of the
flesh made foolishness? How is it with your carnal wills? Is the will of the
flesh broken and brought into subjection, yielding it self up to the Lord? O
for an exinanition of wills, an emptying them into the Will of God! What will thou do? What will thou have? nothing but what God will. What the Lord will
have me do, or avoid, or suffer, I can no longer say him nay. Is this the Will
of God, my sanctification? so it is mine. Is this the Will of God, my
humiliation? so it is mine? Is this the Will of God, my tribulation? so it is
mine. Is God for holiness? through Grace so am I. Is God for his own Will? so
am I: this is all the Will I have, that the Lord may have his Will of me; may
be all to me, have all from me, rule all in me, and dispose of all that
concerns me.

How is it with your carnal affections, and fleshly lusts? are these slain? Is
your covetousness, your sensuality, your pride, and envy; are your carnal
joys, and fears, and worldly sorrows, are these destroyed? those wild-fires,
of passion, and fury, and rage, are these quenched? Come put the Knife to the
throat of all these, and then there is a sacrifice for God. Go and offer it up;
and let it be

A Free-will-offering, A Thank-offering.

1. A Freewil-offering. Offer your selves willingly to the Lord, Psalm. 110. Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy Power. O may that glorious day dawn
upon us! God loves a cheerful giver; offer up your hearts, with all your heart;
grudge not that the Lord requires, but bless God, that he will accept of an
offering; this has a comfortable signification: If the Lord had meant to
destroy us, he would not have accepted an offering at our hands, Judge. 13.23.

2. A Thank-offering. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the
most High; Offer up your selves in token of yuor thankfulness to the Lord.: Be
ye both the Priests, and the Lambs for the sacrifice. Present your selves to
the Lord, as the accomplishments of his Covenant, as the fruits of the death of
your Redeemer, as the Trophies of his Victory, as the spoils which he has
recovered from Death and Hell, making a show of them openly, that it may be
seen that the promise of God is not of none effect, and that Christ did not die
in vain. Let your Lord Jesus when he comes down into his Garden where he left
his blood, reap his pleasant fruits, and carry up your purified Souls as the
signals of his glorious achievement. Offer up your sins to the Lord; these
unclean beasts will be an acceptable sacrifice. There Is more real honor
growing up to the Lord, from one mortified Saint, then from ten thousand
Anthems from the most seraphick tongues. Offer up your duties to the Lord; your
obedience for a sacrifice. To obey is better then sacrifice; then thousands of
Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil. Let your whole life be this
sacrifice: let every day be a Sabbath, every duty an Eucharist, every member a
Cymbal sounding out the praises of God, Offer up the calves of your lips unto
the Lord. O let your souls be filled with wonder, and your mouths with praise.
Whence in this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? Oh whence
is this to us, that the Lord our Father should come, and come so near to us! Oh
whence is it, That the Mighty God should indent, and come into bond with sinful
man! that he who was free from all men, should make himself debtor to any! That
the high and lofty One, that inhabits Eternity, should dwell in Houses of Clay,
and pitch his Tabernacle in the Dust! That he who humbles himself to behold
the Heavens, should come down into the earth; and after what is he come down,
but after a dead Dog or a Flea? that he should make a league with the stones of
the g^ound, with the beasts of the field, and creeping things? should espouse
dust and ashes, and gather up vile worms into his bosom? should set his heart
upon shadows, and adopt the refuse of the earth for Sons and Daughters to
himself? should raise the poor out of the dust, and the beggar from the
Dunghill? should do such great things, and should choose the foolish, and the
weak, and the base, and the contemptible, and bostow on [them] among all the
world these high honors? should make them the Head and the honorable, whom the
world has made the Tail, the filth and the offscouring of all things? should
give himself to be the portion, his Son to be the ransom, his kingdom to be
the heritage of bankrupts, prisoners, and captives? Lord what is man that thou
art thus mindful of him! Soul, what is God that thou should be yet unmindful
of him? How is it that the tongue of the dumb is not yet loosened, that the
feet of the lame do not leap as an Heart?

Oh what is that love, whence this strange thing has broken forth? This this
is the womb that bare thee; hence has thy righteousness sprung forth; hence
have thy dignities, thy astonishing hope, and joys arisen to thee; this is it
that yearned upon thee in thy mercy, that reprived thee from death, redeemed
thee from darkness, rescued thee as a brand out of the burning; that pitied
thee in thy blood, washed thee from thy blood; spared thee, pardoned thee,
reconciled thee, and brought thee, an enemy, a rebel, a traitor, into a
Covenant of peace with the God of glory. Ah contemptible dust! that ever there
should be such compassionate contrivements, and such astonishing condescentions
of the eternal Deity, toward so vile a thing! O love the Lord all ye his
Saints! O bless the Lord ye beloved, ye people near unto the Lord. Alas that
our hearts should be so narrow, that the waters should be so shallow with us;
where are our eyes, if we be not yet filled with wonders; what hearts have we,
if we have not yet filled our lips with praise: Open all thy springs, O my
soul, let them flow forth in streams of love and joy; let every faculty be
tuned and strained to the height; let heart and hands, and tongue, and eyes
lift up their voice; be astonished O heavens, be moved ye strong foundations of
the earth, fall down ye Elders, strike up ye heavenly Quires, lend poor mortals
your Notes, to sing forth the high praises of God, who rides on the heavens,
and has caused us to ride on the high places of the earth, and made us sit
together in hevenly places, showing forth the exceeding riches of his grace, in
his kindness to us in Christ Jesus.

Awake up my Glory, awake Psaltery and Harps, I my self will awake right early.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior;
for he that is mighty has done for me great things, and holy is his Name.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his People;
who has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant
David; who has laid help on one who is mighty, and exalted one chosen among
the People, and has given him for a Covenant to them. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name; who has redeemed thy life
from death, and crowned thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. Salvation
to our God, that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb. Let the Redeemed of
the Lord say so, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and glory, and honor, and blessing; for thou
livedst, and wast dead, and art alive for evermore. Thou have redeemed us to
God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and
have made us Kings and Priests unto our God for ever. Hallelujah, Hallelujah.

FINIS.

