Querela Cantabrigiensis:

OR, A REMONSTRANCE By way of APOLOGY,

For the banished Members of the late flourishing UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

By some of the said sufferers.

S. MATTHEW. 10. 17, 18. Beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the
Councils, and they will scourge you in their Synagogues. And ye shall be
brought before Governors, etc. Basil, Magn, Epist. 79. Eustach. Episc.
Sebastiae. (...). Anno Dom. 1647.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To every indifferent Reader.
Christian Brethren, and Fellow Subjects,
IT is a memorable saying of an ancient Heathen Moralist, Curae leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent: And the like may be said concerning sorrows; when
they come once to overcharge the heart, they stupifie it, and obstruct those
passages, by which it should ease it self of them. This has been our
particular case: Our being deprived of our livelyhoods (for how small a Trifle
this ensuing Remonstrance will manifest) has filled our hearts with sorrow:
But when we considered, not only the hand from whence this oppression comes,
(even that which pretexdeth to the infallible weild of the Sword of Justice)
but withal that through our sides such a fatal stroke is given to one of the
most famous Universities of Christendom: this sad prospect did so far
surcharge us with grief, that it cast us for a long time into a fit of Musing,
till at last (the fire being kindled) we spoke with our tongue.

And now that the string of our tongue is untyed, our earnest desire is, that
none of these its sorrowful expressions may be mis-interpreted by any. And to
that end we have prefixed this advertisement, to prevent three mistakes, which
are all we can possibly imagine the malice of our greatest enemies can any way
fancy against this our Remonstrance.

I. The first is, That perhaps it may be groundless, because we have not
therein set down the express words, either of those Protections by which we
might securely have expected an Indemnity, or of those Orders by which we
suffered.

To which we answer, That the reason hereof was partly to avoid tediousness,
and therefore we gave only some short hints in the margent. And partly because
(being dispersed) we could not possibly have the true Copies of all of them by
us. And to publish any thing that was but supposititious, could not consist
with our constant endeavor still to maintain the truth, notwithstanding
whatsoever difficulties to the contrary. But yet (to prevent all mistakes as
near as we can) we have here inserted the true Copies of such as we had by
us: whereby the indifferent Reader will not only guess at the rest, but also
easily imagine what rigor and malice there was used in the execution of them,
which we assure him are as much (or more) then he can possibly phancie. For
they being to deal with an University, which then had a reverend esteem over
the whole Kingdom must counterfeit Jacobs voice as much as possibly he could
in their Orders, though their hands were far rougher then Esaus in the
execution of them. And accordingly (though now it is too apparent it was but
only in mockery) we had sent us these two following Protections.

Die Sabbati 4. Mar. 1642.
THe Earl of Holland, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, having this
day represented in the House the present condition of the said University; The
Lords in Parliament apprehending that through the public distractions, and by
reason of great multitudes of Soldiers resorting from several places to the
Town of Cambridge, some disturbance might happen to the quiet and studies of
the Scholars: For preventing therefore of any such mischief, have thought fit
to declare the esteem and care they have of that ancient and noble Seminary of
Learning; And have accordingly Ordered, That no person or persons whatsoever,
shall presume to offer any outrage or violence either by themselves or others
unto any the Colleges, Chapels, Libraries, Schools, or other buildings
belonging to the said University, or to any the Scholars or public Ministers
thereof: Nor plunder, purloyne, deface, spoil, or take away any the Books,
goods, chattels, or housholdstuffe of or belonging to the said University, or
any College there, or to any Scholar or public Minister thereof, under any
color or pretense whatsoever, as they will answer the contrary to this House
at their utmost perils. And that Divine Service may be quietly performed and
executed throughout all the said University according to the settlement of the
Church of England, without any trouble, let, or disturbance, until the
pleasure of the Parliament be further signified. Provided nevertheless that
this Protection shall not extend to stop any due, course of Law, or proceeding
of Parliament, that may or might have had its course if this Protection had not
been granted. And herein ready obedience is to be given by all such whom this
does or may concern, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

THese are to will, require, and command you, and every of you, to forbear
(under any pretense whatsoever) to prejudice or offer any damage to the
University of Cambridge, or to any the Schools, Colleges, Halls, Libraries,
Chapels, or other places belonging to the said University, by plundering the
same or any part thereof in any kind whatsoever. Hereof fail not as you will
answer the contrary at your perils.

Given under my hand and seal the 7. day of March, 1642. Essex.

To all Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Captains, and all other officers and
Soldiers of the Army under any command.
These indeed were our Protections, but they were blasted in the bud by this
following Warrant.

THese are to authorize you to enter into the houses of all Papists,
Malignants, and other persons whatsoever, that have or shall refuse to appear
at Musters, or to contribute according to the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament, or refuse to enter into the Association: And to seize upon all such
Horses, Arms, and Ammunition, as shall be found in their custodies, and to
apprehend their said persons, and them to be brought before me, or any one of
the Deputy-Lievtenants of the County: and in case of Resistance, to force the
same, Commanding all Mayors, Sheriffs, Captains, Trained-Bands, and other
inferior Officers whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting to Colonel Coke
herein.

Dated Feb. 23. 1642. Gray of Wark.

To Col. Coke, Lieutenant-Col. Brildon, or any other of his Officers.
This Warrant was issued out the more suddenly, and prosecuted the more
violently, in regard that our Protections were then in procuring: But the
rigorous prosecution of this, made those to be of little or no use, more then
the name, unless it was to shut the Stable door after the Steed was stolen.
For under pretense of Papists, Malignants, etc. there was scarce a Scholar in
all the University which escaped examination: And left our Colledge-Chappels,
Libraries, or Treasuries, or even the privatest Cabinet therein, or in any of
our Chambers or Studies, should (perchance) have been converted into Stables
for Horses, or Magazines for Arms and Ammunition, they searched them all so
strictly, and plandered them all so thoroughly, that nothing which they liked
escaped their fingers, our ancient Coins not excepted.

When we had seen their unparalled rigor herein, and how we were slighted
when we admitted our just Complaints against it, we did not much regard
whether they had any Commission or not for whatsoever they did to us afterward.
But like Christian sufferers, when they took our cloaks, we forbade them not to
take our coats also: and when they took our goods, we asked them not again.
For we did plainly see that we were destinated to ruin, and that all these
were but previous dispositious, to take us down and fit us for the great
stroke, when they should please to lay it upon us. And therefore (omitting all
the rest, though we could insert some) we shall here only add two other
Warrants, mentioned hereafter: The one their general Summons, the other their
first form of their Writs of Ejection.

THese are to will and require you upon sight hereof, to give speedy
advertisement, viis mediis and modis, to Master, Fellows, Scholars, and
Officers of your College, to be resident in your said College the 10. day of
March next ensuing, to give an account wherein they shall be required, and to
answer such things as may be demanded by me, or such Commissioners as I shall
appoint.

Given under my hand and seal the 26. of Feb. 1643. E. Manchester.

To the President or Locum tenens of -- College.
BY virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, entitled, An Ordinance for
regulating the University of Cambridge, and the removing of Scandalous
Ministers in the seven Associated Counties; giving me likewise power to eject
such Masters of Colleges as are scandalous in their lives or doctrines, or do
oppose the proceedings of Parliament: I do eject -- from being Master of --
College in Cambridge, for opposing the proceedings of Parliament, and Mark. It
was not FOR scandalous acts, but for opposing.
other scandalous acts in the University of Cambridge. And I require you to
sequester the Profits of his Mastership for one that I shall appoint in his
place; and to cut his name out of the Butteries, and to certify me of this
your act within one day.

Given under my hand and seal the 13. of March 1643. E. Manchester.

To the President and Fellows of -- College in Cambridge.
This, we hope, will satisfy the indifferent Reader concerning the truth and
ground of our Sufferings.

II. But lest a second mistake should arise, That (supposing them to be true,
yet) they are not (perhaps) so great as we pretend, because that for the most
part we have given but a slight glance at them; we held it very requisite to
give this further Advertisement:

1. That in matters of this nature, a man ought not to macerate his soul too
much by reflecting on his own misery, lest the devil thereby get an advantage
upon him, to tempt him to a melancholy despair. 2. Though we desire hereby to
move every compassionate Christian to a fellow-feeling of our miseries; yet
have we endeavored (as much as we could) to forbear the long insisting upon
particulars, lest we should offend his ears instead of moving his compassion.
For as in Music the harshnesse of a discord may be omitted, if it be not too
long produced; so have we studied to temper these harsh notes to the tender
ear of the Christian Auditor, by making a speedy transition from one to
anotier. 3. We had so many matters of complaint, (and might have had many more,
if we had been all together to confer our sufferings) that this small
remonstrance would have swelled to (an lliada malorum) a just Volumne, if we
had not purposely endeavored to comprise an Ilias in a Nutshell, by instancing
only in some, and reducing those to as small a model as possibly we could.
And to this end also we have used as much plainness of speech in our
expressions, as ingeniousnesse of the truth of the thing it self. And indeed
if we should but a little have indulged our pen the liberty of a Rhetorical
flourish, we should thereby have made our sufferings (which in themselves are
almost beyond belief) to have seemed altogether incredible.

III. But our greatest aur last fear is, least the intolerable weight of
those heavy pressures under which we have so long groaned, have (perhaps)
extorted from us some expressions which may not seem altogether to become
persecuted Christians. And in this we submit our selves wholly to the candor
of the charitable Reader, desiring him to interpret all things in the best
sense. For though we have used our endeavors to avoid all manner of
expressions which might seem to savor of malice, yet carrying about us those
passions which accompany flesh and blood, it is impossible but we should
sometimes slip. We know very well, and acknowledge, that Prayers and tears are
the only defensive weapons of a Chrstian against persecutions: And if any
thing, which is not fully confonant hereunto, has passed from our pen, we
desire it may be imputed to out many infirmities; seeing we are still ready to
pray for our Persecutors, that God would open their eyes, that they may yet see
and repent of those many and great wrongs which they have done to him, his true
Religion and Service, to his Anointed our gracious Sovereign, as also to us
in particular, and other their fellow subjects. Which if it would please him to
grant unto them, we might quickly recover the temporal peace of this
distracted Kingdom; and they the possibility of enjoying everlasting peace in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

1 PET. 4. 16. If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but
let him glorify God on this behalf. ACT. 5. 41. They departed from the
presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his Name. JOHN 16. 33. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be
of good cheer, I have overcome the world. Aug. in Psalm. 93. Boni laborant quia
flagellantur ut filii: mali exultant quia damnantur ut alieni. Idem in Psalm.
125. Sicut qui seminat per hyemem non deterretur ab opere propter hyemem: Sie
and nos pressura mundi non debemus a bono opere deterreri, quia qui seminant in
lachrymis, in gaudio metent. Querela Cantabrigiensis: OR, The Universities
Complaint.
THough an Apology for our long silence might better become us then any other
form of Prefacing, yet were there some that thought it better to fit down in
the shade of cool patience, and sweeten the sad prospect of our own miseries,
by reflecting on the great public woes of this Kingdom, then incur the
suspicion of querelous natures, such as are apt to cry out only at the
imagination of being hurt. But seeing our miseries are real, and our
sufferings not so much intended against us, as against that famous University,
whereof by right, we are still actual members; And that the adverse party,
has hitherto made so much advantage of our tamenesse, as to steal away our
livelihood from us, and conceal the Theft: though our own Mothers mouth be
stopped, by violently seizing her press, and thereby not suffered to speak,
but (like Apollo's Statue of old) just as the evil spirit speaks in her,
which at this time utters little else but disloyalty and Rebellion: yet seeing
it has pleased the hand of providence to give us this happy opportunity freely
to bewail our own miseries; We are at length resolved to do Justice to these
Men's iniquity and our own innocence, that our Fellow Subjects may know, (and
if they leave so much learning as to speak in another language, the whole world
may hereafter understand) how, and by what A^^s the Knipperdullings of this Age
(who think shortly to make themselves Kings of this Sion) have reduced a
glorious and renowned University, almost to a mere Munster, and have done
more, in less then three years, then the Apostate Julian could effect in all
his reign, viz. broken the heart strings of Learning and Learned men, and
thereby luxated all the joints of Christianity in this Kingdom.

The particulars whereof, and the barbarous courses taken to bring these
designs to effect, as we shall truly and impartially set them down, so we
fear not to appeal to any impartial Judge, whether if the Goths and
Vandalls, or even the Turks themselves, had overrun this Nation, they would
more inhumanely have abused a flourishing University, then these pretended
advancers of Religion and Learning have done; it being a constant custom (if
not also the law of Nations) in the fiercest encounters of the most enraged
parties, to exempt and privilege Scholars from, if not protect them by their
Martial proceedings.

To begin therefore with the first occasion, (as we conceive) from whence they
pretended any cause of this rage and persecution against us, (though the mere
conscience of so senseless a Rebellion cried up only by the illiterate herd,
might afford reason enough for them to look asquint upon all Scholars qua
tales) The contribution of a small pittance of money to our Sovereigns extreme
necessity before any War was thought on by us, is made to be our impardonable
crime, (though not then prohibited by any Order or Ordinance) which (added to
the tenderness of our consciences in refusing their wicked consederacie,
commonly called the Covenant) by the help of their Legislative engine, has
bereaved us of all, and cast us from our livelyhoods, maintenance and Colleges,

For when His Sacred Majesty (whom they made to be the first Grand Delinquent,
and whose Crowne-Revenues and Estate, together with His Towns, Ships, and
Magazines, they sequestered and seized on) daigned (by His Royal Letters to
acquaint his poor University with his strange wants, even of sustenance for
his very household: Our hearts burned within us, to hear our living Founder,
whom we expected to be made (by that time) a great and glorious King, (as was
promised him) should almost starve while we had bread on our Table. Whereupon
out of our poverty, a small and inconsiderable sum of money was collected and
tendered, as a Testimony not only of our Loyalty to him as King, or of our
gratitude as our most gracious and bountiful Protector and Benefactor^ but
also of our Charity to him as a Christian, then in extreme want and necessity.
We hope our Persecutors will pardon us this expression, seeing our
Metaphysics may with less danger of Treason abstract Charles from King, then
their bullets; And this was the first flower out of which they sucked all that
venom which shortly after they disgorged upon us.

Hereupon His Sacred Majesty (knowing well how eager that party was in
revenging the least seeming provocation, and being informed of that Cloud which
was then hanging over us and ours, for that action of Humanity, Loyalty, and
Christianity) out of His care and tenderness, proffered to secure our College
plate (if we were content to deposit it in his hands) which their intended
Revenge, had already swallowed without any Grace, so much as of the Public
Faith: and therefore wrote his most gracious Letters to us to take an exact
survey of it, not only for the weight, but also of the form of every piece,
together with the Names, Arms, and Mottoes of the respective Donors, that if
(perhaps) his Majesty could not preserve it entire as it was, he might restore
it hereafter in the same weight and form, and with the same marks: All which
he graciously insured upon his Royal word.

It behoved not us to refuse protection from that hand to which God (for that
end) had entrusted a Scepter, especially considering the concurrence of Actions
about that time. It is not unknown to most part of this Kingdom, that not
long before this, the zealous Brethren of Essex and Suffolk had packt
themselves together in a religious rout, to give the first Essay of a Popular
Reformation: How happily this work did thrive in their hands, has been already
published to the Kingdom, and the ruins of the two magnificent houses of the
Countess Rivers (with many other gentlemen's houses of quality) are still
dismal I witnesses. Vid. Mercur.
So that (having found the sweat of their labors) the Reformers would in all
likelihood have prosecuted the great work as far as Cambridge, Rustic. 2.
for a less prize then our University plate, (thanks be to God and our good
Benefactors.) And we had good reason to fear the increase of their Army, if
they had come near us, seeing the inferior part of the Town had provided Arms,
and yet had no Commanders; and some that durst discharge a Musket, made it
their practice to terrify us, and disturb our studies by shooting in at our
windows. This particular appears by a paper delivered into the Registers
Office, under the hands (if not also upon the Oaths) of Master Christopher
Terne, and Mr. Anthony Walker, both of St. John's College, who had Muskets
several times discharged in at their windows, as also diverse others.
And therefore lest our Plate should become a bait to have our Libraries
rifled, our Colleges pulled down, and perhaps our throats cut, we thought it
our wisest course to secure all, by securing that in His Majesty's gracious
hands.

Upon these reasons (which no judicious man will esteem otherwise then weighty)
we endeavored to convey away some part of our Plate about the beginning of
August, 1642. (which by the way was before either His Majesty's Standard was
erected, or His Proclamation issued out to that end: However many of us, and
others have suffered for it, as fomenters of this War.) But within a few
days after, (see how the just grounds of our fears concentrated) one Master
Cromwell, Burgess for the Town of Cambridge, and then newly turned a Man of
War, was sent down by his Masters above, at the invitation of his Masters
below, (as himself confessed) to gather what strength he could to stop all
passages that no Plate might be sent: But his designs being frustrated, and
his opinion as of an active subtle man, thereby somewhat shaken and
endangered, he has ever since bent himself to work what revenge and
mischief he could against us. In pursuit whereof, before that month was
expired, down he comes again in a terrible manner with what Forces he could
draw together, and surrounds diverse Colleges, while we were at our devotion in
our several Chapels, taking away Prisoners, several Doctors of Divinity,
Heads of Colleges, viz. D. Beale Master of S. John's College, D. Martin
Master of Queens Col. and D. Stern Master of Jesus Col. men of such eminent
worth and abilities, as render them above the reach of our commendation, and
these he carries with him to London in triumph: And though there was an
express Order from the Lords House for their imprisonment in the Tower, which
met them at Tottenham-High cross, (wherein notwithstanding there was no Crime
expressed) yet were they led captive through Bartholomew Fair, and so as far
as Temple Bar, and back through the City to prison in the Tower, on purpose
that they might be houted at, or stoned by the rabble-rout.

Since which time, now above three years together they have been hurried up
and down from one prison to another at excessive and unreasonable charges, and
fees exacted from them, far beyond their abilities to defray, having all
their goods plundered, and their Masterships and Livings taken from them, which
should preserve them from famishing. And though in all this time there was
never any accusation brought, much less proved against any of them; yet have
they suffered intolerable imprisonment over since, both by Land and Water,
especially that in the Ship, where for ten days together, they (with many
other Gentlemen of great rank) were kept under deck, without liberty to come to
breath in the common air, or to ease nature, except at the courtesy of the
rude Saylors, which oftentimes was denied them. In which condition, they were
more like Gally-slaves, then freeborn Subjects, and men of such quality and
condition; and had been so indeed, might some have had their wills, who were
bargaining with the Merchants to sell them to Argiers, Alex. Rigby the Lawyer.
Vide Declar. of the Parl. at Oxf. March 19. 1643.
or as bad a place, as has been since notoriously known upon no false or
fraudulent information.

And now that we are mentioning our Reverend and worthy Heads of Houses, we may
not omit, what our long exile from the said University will not suffer us
otherwise then by certain Report to be apprehensive of: Namely, that a very
great number of them are since in the same condition with us, that is, deprived
of all, and banished: Particularly, the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of Exeter, against whom their malice could invent no more then that he
was a Bishop, nor pretend any thing, but that, being Vice Chancellor, he did
according to his office preach a learned and pious Sermon in Saint Mary's,
March 27. 1645. being the day of His Majesty's most happy inauguration. To whom
we may add that most reverend and learned man, Doctor Collins, His Majesty's
Professor of Divinity, whose extraordinary worth and pains had continued him
in that place almost thirty years, and made his name famous, and his person
desirable in every Protestant University in Christendom: And yet his Loyalty
and conscience caused our new pretended Reformers to think him unworthy so much
as of a Country Cure, (for they sequestered likewise both his Livings) though
since, as we hear, they have restored him to his Professors place, which none
of them are able to discharge, and he living in their Quarters, durst not deny.
Thus likewise have Doctor Comber, D. Pask, D. Cousin, and D. Lany, been deprived
of their several Masterships and Livings, and some of them also plundered of
their goods, though all of them be very eminent for their Learning, Prudence,
Judgment and Piety, among all that know them, and have no prejudice of them.
And for conclusion (as the epitome of all) we add D. Holdsworth, whose
universal approbation put him up-the troublesome office of
Vice-chancellour-ship for three years together in the beginning of these
troubles; yet before his Trienniall office was expired, his person was seized
upon and imprisoned, first in Ely-house, then (because they thought that was
not expensive enough, though they had plundered him of all) they thrust him
into the Tower only for his Loyalty in seeing His Majesty's Commands executed
for the printing of such Declarations at Cambridge, as were formerly printed at
York; which though the Committees before which he appeared have always
objected against him as Licensing the Kings Books, yet has he ever denied it,
(for the manner, though not for the matter) prosessing himself before them,
not to be so saucy as to offer to License any thing which His Majesty commanded
to be printed: but yet still enjoining the Printer (as he would answer the
contrary at his peril) that the thing might be performed according to His
Majesty's Command.

And that the whole Body of the University might fare no better then the Heads;
not long after the carrying up of the first three, they gave us an Argument of
a sad presage. What was like to become of that ancient and famous Seminary of
Learning and Religion, when those Root-and-Branch-men chose that place for the
prime Garrison and Ran^ezvouz of their Association? whereby the subtle
Enginiers of the great pretended work of Reformation hoped not so much to
gain security to their disloyal actions by any fortifications of that Town,
(which it never was capable of, as now plainly appears) as some countenance
and authority rather (which they had more need of) from the sacred name of an
University to be listed Theirs. By this means instead of carrying us all to
London Gaoles, (thanks be to our multitude, not their mercy) they found a
device to convey a Prison to us, and under color of Fortification confined us
only in a larger enclosure, not suffering any Scholars to pass out of the
Town, unless some Townesman of their Tribe would promise for him that he was
a Consider, as they call it.

And after this intrenchment for almost two years together, (we are forced
with unsp^akable grief of mind to think) what prophanations, violence,
outrages and wrongs our Chapels, Colleges and Persons have suffered by the
uncontrolled fury of rude Soldiers, notwithstanding two several protections
to the contrary, one from the House of Peers, the other from the Generalissimo
the Earl of Essex. It is grievous to our memories to recount, how our
Vicechancellour and Heads of Colleges solemnly assembled in Consistory, being
many of them threescore years old and upward, were kept Prisoners in the
Public Schools in an exceeding cold night till midnight, without any
accommodations for food, On Good Friday, Mar. 30. 1643.
firing or lodging; and for no other reason, but only because they could not
in conscience comply or contribute any thing to this detestable War against
his Majesty: Yet they, notwithstanding all terrors and ill usage the day
following this their ^m^r^sonment, did constantly and unanimously avouch and
decla^e before the then Gonerall of the Association, That it was against true
Religion and good Conscience for any to contribute to the Parliament in this
War. Whereupon our Learned and Reverend Professors, two of Divinity, and one
of the Law, the very Junior whereof (as well as the other two) had faithfully
discharged his place almost so long as that by the Imperial Laws (his own
profession) ever since Valens the Emperor, he might have challenged to have
been Imperator Valens Grammaticos, Sophistas, Legum Professores, qui per
viginti annos probe munere docendi functi sunt, annumerari and honorari cum
its, qui ex vicaria sint principis dignitate jubet and inter Comites. Greg.
Tholossan. Syntog. lib. 19. c. 1.. 8. uvi citat l. uni de Professor. qui in
urbe Constantinop. lib. 12. C. tit. 1. juncta rub. and gl.
Comes Imperii; yet all the encouragement any of them could get from these was,
perpetually to be harrowed by Plundering and redious imprisonment to betray
their Loialty, Learning, and Consciences to the advancement of this present
Rebellion, till at last that Reverend man whom Posterity will honor
(henceforth as much for his Loyalty as his Learning) Doctor Samuel Ward (a man
of known integrity and universal approbation even amongst those who were his
adversaties in this Cause) took the wings of a dove to fly away and be at
rest: whose dying words (as if the cause of his Martyrdom had been written in
golden letters upon his heart) were breathed up to heaven with his parting
soul, GOD BLESS THE KING.

And though the grave resolutions of all the Reverend Professors of Divinity
and Law in so famous an University ought to be more sacred and powerful with
them then the noise of their new Teachers and obstreperous American
Lay-Lecturers, yet they are not ashamed, after all these (upon mature
deliberation and consultation with the rest of the Learned men of that famous
University) have publicly and unanimously declared their proceedings to be
flatly contrary to Christian Religion and Loyalty, (and have stood therein even
to imprisonment and death) to persuade the silly abused multitude, that all is
for the Defense of His Majesty, and the Protestant Religion.

Neither is their wild fury confinable within those banks, it swells yet higher:
for as the Tyrant wished that Rome had but one neck, that he might cut it off
at one stroke; so these having got the opportunity, imprisoned the whole
University, March 23. 1643. which day the whole Senate, (the Representative
Body of it) being solemnly assembled in the Regent House, were there violently
environed with great Binds of Armed Soldiers, who wanted nothing but the Word
to dispatch us, because we would not vote in a matter as they would have us,
though that matter did not any whit concern them or their Cause, more then the
conferring of a Degree upon such a man as the whole University in their
consciences judged unworthy of it: And one Master Danes, (General of that
famous Expedition, but formerly a member of that House which he then so abused)
adding Perjury to his former sins, came in a terrible manner, (contrary to
his Oath formerly taken to his Mother the University) and flatly denied the
Vice Chancellor leave to dissolve the Congregation, unless he would first
promise that the matter should be voted, as they required: Whereupon sundry
Members of that Senate, being observed to make use of that Statute-liberty and
Freedom, which was essential to that Assembly, were forrhwith seized on, and
imprisoned by the Committee, in no better Lodgings then the common Court of
Guard. Which strange and violent perverting of our Universities proceedings,
we wondered at the less, for that this Captain had not done more to us, then
Captain Ven with his Raggamuffins had done formerly to the sacred Senate of
the whole Kingdom.

And that all Academicall Exercises might expire, and so the face of an
University be quite takenaway, a grave Divine (the Lady Margarets Public
Preacher) going to Preach Ad Clerum, M. Power.
(according to his office) pridie Termini, was furiously pursued over the
market place by a confused number of Soldiers, who in a barbarous uncivil
manner cried out, A Pope, A Pope, and vowed high revenge if he offered to go
into the Pulpit; whereupon the Church was straightwayes filled with great
multitudes, and when some who accompanied the Preacher, told them, It was an
University Exercise, and to be by Statute performed in Latin, they replied,
They knew no reason why all Sermons should not be performed in English, that
all might be edified, threatening withal to tear the Hoods and Habits which
Graduates then wore, according to the University Statute. Yet all this may
perhaps be extenuated as a sudden uproare of undisciplined Soldiers, but
(which is the aggravation of all, and makes us believe that these petty
Reformers were but the senseless instruments of higher Agents) when all this
was related to their then General of the Association, no course was taken at
all to prevent these growing mischiefs, Lord Gray of Warke.
but the Divine appointed by Statute to preach ad Clerum, was enforced to
return Re infecta, and glad he could escape so: And this is the great
protection which Learning is like to find from these grand pretenders to
advance it.

And that Religion might fare no better then Learning in the University Church,
(for perhaps it may be Idolatry now to call it Saint Mary's) in the presence of
the then General our Common Prayer Book was torn before our faces, See the
Preface.
notwithstanding our Protection from the House of Peers for the free use of
it, some (now great one) encouraging them in it, M. Cromwell.
and openly rebuking the University Clerk who complained of it before his
Soldiers. Thus those Reverend Fathers, the Compilers of it, who sealed the
truth thereof with their dearest blood, being content to burn at a stake for
the light of the Gospel, are now this second time martyred and torn in pieces
in their Liturgy, yet all this under pretense of Religion.

It will not be strange now to hear how our persons have been abused, seeing
Religion and Learning have suffered so deeply amongst us: how diverse of us have
been imprisoned without so much as pretending any cause, but snatched up in the
streets, and thrown into prison at the pleasure of a small sneaking Captain,
where we have lain three or four months together, Jordan.
not so much as accused, much less heard, but quite and clean forgotten, as
if there had been no such thing in nature. How some of us (and many others with
us) have been thrust out of bed in the night, that our Chambers might forthwith
be converted into Prison Lodgings: So at Saint John's Coll.
How our young Scholars with terror have been commanded to accuse and cut out
the names of their own Tutors, and some of them thrown into prison for not
being old enough to take their Covenant So was Joh. Bullock of S. John's.
: But (to pass higher) how often have our Colleges been beset, and broken
open, and Guards thrust into them sometimes at midnight, while we were asleep
in our beds? How often our Libraries and Treasuries ransackt and rifled, not
sparing so much as our ancient So at Saint John's College, whence they took in
ancient Coins to the value of 22. l. according to weight.
Coins? which those that know any thing, know to be a great light to the
understanding of History. How often has that small pit^ance of Commons which
our Founders and Benefactors allotted for our sustenance, been taken from off
our Tables by the wanton Soldier? How often have our Rents been extorted from
our Tenants, or if received, remanded of our Bursars and Stewards, and by force
taken from them? and all this under the old odious title of Plundering, which
word though they cannot endure to hear of, since that new term of
Sequestration was invented; yet the thing is the same, and more practiced then
ever, they having for above two years together set themselves upon little else
then to seize and take away our goods and furniture belonging to our Chambers,
prizing and selling away our Books at a tenth part of their value, which are
our only tools and instruments whereby the trade and profession of Learning
should be holden up. And to this end they have constituted a decayed Hatter,
Fortune.
Plunder-Master General, who (together with a Conventieling Barber and a
Confiding Tailor) has full Commission, Parrell.
for our propriety sake, Curd.
to Lord over us, and dispose of out goods as they please: So despicable a
thing to them is an University, or any that belong unto it.

But their malice is unsatiable, and cannot be contained within the Line of
their Fortifications, and therefore to propagate their own wickedness, and
make us odious and abominable to the whole Country, as we were already (though
most undeservedly) to some of themselves, they have invented a pretty device to
reserve out of their plunder all sorts of pictures, were they but paper prints
of the twelve Apostles, and every market day to burn them openly in the
marketplace, proclaiming them the Popish Idols of the University, until we
became so hated by the weaker sort of the deceived people, that a Scholar could
have small security from being stoned or affronted as he walked the streets.

But why do we insist so long upon particular men's plundering, when whole
Colleges (wherein not only the present, but also the future propagation of
Religion and Learning is concerned) have drunk so deeply the dregs of their
malice? For besides the cutting down of our Walks and Orchards, (contrary to
their own Generalissimo's Orders of War) they have cut down the Woods and
Groves belonging to our Colleges, So at Jesus Coll.
and sold them before our eyes to a great value, when by an Ordinance they were
declared not Sequestrable: And (which was likewise contrary to an Order) they
have seized and taken away the Materials of our intended buildings, to the
worth of three or four hundred pounds in Timber, which our pious and
charitable Benefactors had out of their devotion conferred toward the
re-edifying of an ancient College which Time had impaired: Clare Hali.
And, to show what violent passions they are transported withal, they have
pulled down, demolished and defaced five or six fair Bridges of Stone and
Timber belonging to several Colleges, S. John's, Trin. Kings, Garret Hostle,
and z. at Queens.
and have spoiled a goodly Walk with a new Gate pertaining to one of our Kings
Coll.
Colleges, upon pretense of keeping our Cavaliers, and yet for forty shillings
they would feign have been hired to spare it, and cast up a Work beyond. And
let the world judge whether this was not done to get the countenance of a
Contribution from a College to their Fortifications, and consequently to this
War against the King.

But (as if Bridges and materials for Buildings were nothing) they have yet
proceeded further, even to the very Structure it self of one of the fairest
Colleges in our University, S. John's Coll.
which they plundered the true owners of, for above sixteen months together,
as an especial argument of their love to Learning, and have converted all the
old Court thereof into a Prison for His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, (which
before the other was built, has contained above three hundred Students at a
time) not suffering any whom it concerned to remove any bedding or other goods,
whereof the Jailer could make any use or benefit, but renting them all out
together with the Chambers at above five hundred pounds per An.

And as if spoiling of one College were not enough, their malice has since
extended it self to all the rest, in Quartering multitudes of Common Soldiers
in those glorious and ancient Structures, which our devour and Royal Founders
designed for Sanctuaries of Learning and Piety, but were made by them mere
Spittles and Bawdy-houses for sick and debauched Soldiers, being filled with
Queans, Drabs, Fiddlers, and Revels night and day. Which black deeds of
darkness being diverse times complained of by us to their Officers, and the
particular men thewed them, who had thus lewdly abused our Colleges, none of
these new Reformers were ever punished, Pembr. Hall.
nor the holy Sisters removed, nor so much as called before any that then bore
rule among us. By which means, (see what Religion they fight for, and what a
glorious Reformation we may expect) they have dishonored God, countenanced
lewdness, scandalized modest and civil men, and driven from us, or poisoned
among us, those young Students which were lest.

To this we may add, how they have torn and defaced those Reverend buildings,
pulled down and burned the Wainscot of our Chambers, our Bed-steads, Chaires,
Stools, Tables, and Shelves for our Books, so as they may now have some plea
for multiplying of Gaoles, if the Liberty of the Subject shall so require. And
when their ragged Regiments which had lain lowzing before Crowland nigh a
fortnight, were commanded to Cambridge, forthwith the Colleges are appointed
for their Kennels, and fourscore were turned loose into one of the least Halls
in the University, Pembr. Hall.
and charged by their Officers to shift for themselves; who without any more
ado, broke open the Fellows and Scholars Chambers, and took their Beds from
under them. But when the Kings Prisoners taken at Hilsden-house were brought
famished and naked in triumph by Cambridge to London, some of our Scholars were
knocked down in the streets, only for offering them a cup of small beer to
sustain nature, and the drink thrown in the keanell, rather then the famished
and parched throats of the wicked, as they esteemed them, should usurp one drop
of the creature. And it is much to be feared, they would have starved them in
prison there, Mistress Cumbers maid.
if a valiant Chambermaid had not relieved them by force, trampling under her
feet in the kennell their great persecuter, a Lubberly Scotch Major. Homes.


What should we mention moreover, how we have been overwhelmed with
insupportable Taxes extorted from us by plundering, sessed not by any of our
own Body, but (which is directly contrary to our established privileges) by
the Arbitration of a few confiding Aldermen, our professed Enemies, who,
instead of that gratitude which very nature requires at their hands, now repay
us with unsatiable malice and Envy; which property of theirs have since
commended and qualified them to be appointed Commissioners and Judges to strip
us of our Estates and Livelyhoods. And when neither our Consciences nor Estates
could extend any further to defray their imposts for our very Chambers (which
their Soldiers then possessed and burnt) besides all excises, weekly paiments,
Taxes, fifth and twentieth part, upon all our Revenews, and other such new
terms of property and liberty, all the favor we can expect from them, is,
quietly to be thrust into prison without further abusings.

And although all these are but sad Theames to be thus far enlarged and
dilated upon, yet they think they can stop the noise of all these just
complaints with their usual grinning objection, that sundry of our Students
are in the Kings Army: making that to be their crime, to which if their own
innate Loyalty did not draw them, yet their haughty and heathenish usage would
of necessity drive them: For who had not rather fall upon the bed of honor,
and assert with his dearest blood, his Religion, Loyalty, and Liberty, then
live a slave under them, to set his surviving footsteps upon the graves and
ashes of expired Loyalty, Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Civility it self?

And now to tell how they have profaned and abused our several Chapels;
though our pens flowed as fast with vinegar and gall, as our eyes do with
tears, yet were it impossible sufficiently to be expressed: when as multitudes
of enraged Soldiers (let loose to reform) have to me down all carved work,
not respecting the very Monuments of the dead: And have ruined a beautiful
carved structure in the Universitie Church (though indeed that was not done
without direction from a great one, as appeared after upon complaint, M.
Cromwell.
made to him) which stood us in a great sum of money, and had not one jot of
Imagery or statue work about it. And when that Reverend man the then
Vice-Chancelour told them mildly, D. Ward.
That they might be better employed, they returned him such Language, as we are
ashamed here to express.

Nor was it any whit strange to find whole Bands of Soldiers training and
excercising in the Royal Chapel of King Henry the sixth: Kings Coll.
Nay even the Commanders themselves (being commanded to show their new Major
General Crawford.
how well they understood their trade) chose that place to train in, (whether
in policy to conceal their Mystery, or out of fear to betray their
ignorance, or on purpose to show their Soldiers how little Gods house was to be
regarded, let the world conjecture.) And one who calls himself John Dowsing,
and by virtue of a pretended Commission goes about the Country like a Bedlam,
breaking gloss windows, having battered and beaten down all our painted
glass, not only in our Chapels, but (contrary to Order) in our public
Schools, College Halls, See the Pref.
Libraries, and Chambers, mistaking perhaps the Liberal Arts for Saints (with
they in end in time to pull down too) and having (against an Order) defaced and
dug up the floors of our Chapels, many of which had lien so for two or
three hundred years together, not regarding the dust of our founders and
predecessors, who likely were buried there; compelled us by armed Soldiers to
pay forty shillings a College for not mending what he had spoiled and
defaced, or forthwith to go to Prison: We shall need to use no more instances
then these two, to show that neither place, person nor thing, has any
reverence, or respect amongst them. Master Pawson of Sidney College, though
since he has proved himself an arrant honest man, and is rewarded for it
with a Fellowship in S. John's.
A Fellow of one of our Colleges was violently plucked from the Communion, as
he was ready to receive that holy Sacrament before the solemn Election of a
Master of that College, and thrown into Jail, to the great disturbance of the
Election: And at another S. John's.
College the Communion-Plate was most sacrilegiously seized upon and taken
away from the very Communion Table, notwithstanding it was (upon a former
Plunder) restored to the said College by an Order from the Close Committee of
the 18. of September, 1643. under the hands of the Earl of Pembrooke, Earl of
Denbigh, Lord Say, Lord Howard, Sir William Waller, and Master Pym.

And yet all these actions of theirs were but preparatory Pills to dispose our
whole Body for its final purge of Reformation, when ever they should please to
think it sick of us: And that is this last act, which is none of the least
arguments of this our sad complaint. For although we were seldom in any
freedom for any time near these three years from some Protestation, Oath,
Association, Vow and Covenant, etc. menaced upon us, yet this last only
brought with it the fatal doom of our final extirpation: though we must
have leave to wonder that all Liberty of Conscience should be denied us by
them, who lately pleaded nothing else against the established Ecclesiastical
laws, and now pretend partly to fight for the same: But indeed the Covenant
was not the true cause but the pretense only for our Ejection, (for that is
the word of Art, for this newly invented Mystery) as appears by several writs
issued out under hand and seal without mention of refusing the Covenant. The
thing was absolutely determined by a perentptory decree, to plant a new
University for propagating at least, if not inventing a new Religion: And to
that end the Old one must be removed, at least so much of it, for the present,
as might hinder this great design; only some means and plausible pretenses
were yet wanting.

The first that was attempted was to summon all those that were absent to
return within ten days. But then they were so far to seek for reason of
Ejection, as that after almost half ten days more study all they could insert
in their writ was, For opposing the Proceedings of Parliament, See Preface.
and other Scandalous Actions in the University: Their tongues thereby
testifying their minds, though perhaps out of incogitancy, which are so
furiously set upon their great work of Reformation as to punish the opposing
of Scandalous Actions, with the loss of all a man's livelihood. Whether they
were ashamed of the phrase or not, we know not; but they had very good reason
to be ashamed of the Act, being so different from all show of Justice, as to
enjoyne impossibilities in commanding men to return within twelve days, after
issuing the summons, which at that time were above two hundred miles distant,
and had two Armies to pass through all the ways: or enjoining them to be
resident at Cambridge, whom themselves at the same time kept fast prisoners at
London: And yet for non appearance, for no man knows any other cause, these
must be ejected.

But though this be not so plausible, yet they have a sure reserve, their
Solemn League and Covenant, which coming from their dear Brethren of
Scotland, they think no penalty too great for refusal of it: And this,
because it carries in its frontispice a pretense of Reformation, comes not
alone, but (though without any visible Order) accompanied with a new
Legislative fangle called An Oath of discovery, but indeed was an Oath of
Treachery, a wild unlimited devise to call whom they would before them, and
make them accuse their nearest and dearest Friends, Benefactors, Tutors, and
Masters, and betray the Members and Acts of their several Societies,
manifestly contrary to our Peaceable Statutes formerly sworn unto by us, which
provide against all faction and sedition, which these men only hunt after,
[Viz. Non revelabis aliquod secretum Collegii; Non malum aut damnum inferes
Collegio aut cuilibet Sociorum:] And apparently reviving the Oath Ex Offishio,
(as their Commissioners spell it) abolished this present Parliament, to accuse
our selves: For what is it else to accuse our own Societies and Corporations,
whereof our selves are parts and members?

And though we would not any whit derogate from the Oath Ex Officio as it is
used this day in most Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths, nay even in
Scotland and Geneva, and may be of excellent use, if not stretched beyond the
due limits of Law: yet this Oath of discovery, all, we think, except one or
two, refused, perceiving that thereby the design of a second Century was to be
promoted; for they finding no accusation or crime objected against any of us,
wherewith to color their ugly purposes, which they had already plotted in
private against us, and yet their Covenant must be for Reformation, they
resolved to shrive us with an Auricular Confession sanctified to the Cause,
that so we might help them out with their malice, which was otherwise like to
be borne blind, though hitherto it has been Eagle-eyed over our most venial
slips; And forthwith upon refusal of this Oath was their Solemn league and
Covenant urged upon us.

We cannot but signify by the way, that seeing it must be tendered to the
University, as their printed instructions told us, we hoped it should have
been to the whole body Statuteablie assembled, either to admit of, or
otherwise humbly to show reasons of denial, but they were wise enough to
foresee what entertainment such stuff was like to find from all the learned
Men of so famous an Universitie, and were not willing it should be blasted with
their Universal refusal. And therefore contrary to our hopes, a selected
number of particular men are culled out, partly as the lot fell, for it much
resembled a lottery, but chiefly of such whom they most redoubted, and of whom
by some petty information, they had received a black Character of Loyalty
termed Malignancy, and to these, yet severally, was tendered the Oath of
discovery, and after that the Covenant.

And though indeed we should, by Gods help, as often have refused it, as it
should have bin offered, yet after one single denial, without a second tender,
Contrary to the Eleaventh Article of the Instructions, a warrant was
straightway issued forth under the Earl of Manchesters hand and seal for our
Ejection and Banishment from the universitie of Cambridge for refusing to take
the Solemn League and covenant, and other Misdemenors in the said Universitie,
which were surely no other then the denial of the Oath of discovery, for not
one of us who were there present, had any one accusation brought, much less
proved against him, when we appeared upon their Summons. And without any delay
our names are cut out of the College Tables, and we strictly commanded in
three days space to quit the universitie and Town under pain of Imprisonment
and Plunder, if any thing was left.

And it is here not to be passed by, that whereas by the laws of the Land we
were ever reputed to have as good an interest in our several fellowships during
life, as any of our fellow Subjects in his see Simple, provided we carried our
selves according to those Statutes by which our several Colleges were
respectively to be governed, yet now we are utterly deprived of them by the
mere Arbitrary power of one of our fellow Subjects without transgressing of any
one Statute, or being called to answer for any pretended offense whatsoever.
Nay, so little was Propriety valued, that a pair of M. Ash, and M. Good.
Camp-Chaplains, or one of them, might expunge, eject, and banish whom they
pleased, especially such as would not sacrifice their Loyalitie and Consciences
to the nerves and cement of this Rebellion, called the Covenant. For instance,
when a Warrant for Ejection of certain Fellows of Saint John's College was
issued out under hand and seal, and their names expressly mentioned in it, yet
M. Ash knows very well who it was that expunged M. Henmans name, and put in M.
Botelers, without so much at writing the Warrant over again.

And now (seeing what courses were taken) it will not seem strange to the
Reader, to hear that no less then 29. Fellows, (together with the Master)
have been thrust out of the said College, the emoluments of whose places have
been ever since swallowed up by not half the number, and not content with
that neither. And in another they have made a through Reformation, Queens
College.
Root and Branch, leaving neither Fellow nor Scholar. In others indeed they
have left perhaps one or two, (or more as they see good) like Gibeonites, to
hew wood and draw water, till such time as they have discovered unto them all
the mysteries concerning their College Revenues, and by that time they will
find enough godly men of their own Tribe, learned enough to pocket the profits
of two Fellowships apiece, which is the end of all this blessed Reformation.
Thus is their old pretense of Regulation vanished, in place whereof their true
intention of a total Extirpation of the whole ancient Body of the University
does now so plainly appear, that they which run may read it; which though a
great many would not believe, till by woeful experience they found it, yet was
it conspicuous enough from the very beginning to any that was but tollerably
provident in matters of this nature.

For it was hardly possible that Cambridge should be free from these two crying
sins of Sacrilege and Rebellion, which the devil has long endeavored to
make this whole Kingdom guilty of; and to that end (mis-calling them by the
names of Religion and Liberty) had masked under the counterfeit vizard of a
Covenant for Reformation: By which means though the simplicity of the vulgar
was much abused, to the extreme hazard of this once flourishing Church and
State; yet seeing it could not be able to endure the strict search, which in
such an Universitie of all sorts of learned and conscientious men it was not
like to escape; it could not be otherwise expected, but that those who were his
instruments herein, would lay a sure foundation, and (how moderate soever their
pretenses were) reform Root and Branch, as they called it, that seeing they
could not make the University of Cambridge to rebel by taking their Covenant,
they might at least make a rebellious University at Cambridge which should take
it.

And to this end those new intruders which falsely call themselves Masters and
Fellows of our several Colleges, instead of those solemn Oaths which our
pious and prudent Founders and Legislators enjoined to be taken, (and without
taking of which, no man can pretend any right to any of their foundations)
only take their Covenant again, and make a Protestation to reform all our
wholesome Laws and Statutes according to that Covenant.

A Covenant with hell, begot between Munster and Mecha, by the help of a
Jesuit, the most impious and unchristian confederacy that their grand master
the devil could contrive: the chief end whereof is to dethrone the Lords
anointed, and throw down the Church and Apostolical government thereof, and to
force not only their Fellow Subjects, to contradict their Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, but even their most gracious Sovereign to perjurie, in
violating that this sacred Oath which he solemnly made at his Coronation. And
to complete that their most horrid and heinous sin, to join in Arms with a
foreign Nation, to lay desolate their own native Country, to stain this
Earth with the Blood of their own Countrymen and fellow-Subiects, and to
expose the treasures of England, the Cream of these fruitful valleys, to the
Empty and hungry maw of a Rebellious Scot: and then vow never to have peace,
but what shall be written in the blood of their Enemies (His majesty and his
Loyal Subjects) and lastly, most cruelly and wickedly to exhort and solicit
all Protestants in the Christian world to undertake the like course with them
by rising in Rebellious Arms; thereby exposing the throats and lives of all
our Brethren the Protestants in France and elsewhere to the Just iealousy of
their several princes. And yet (forsooth) this Covenant is made the foundation
of the great work of their glorious Reformation, and under pretense of
refusing this we must be banished, and thrust out of all we have.

It will not be more then what upon trial will be found true, if we here
mention a mystery which many (we conceive) will not a little wonder at, viz.
That this Covenant, for which all this persecution has been, consisted of 6.
Articles, and those Articles of 666. words. This is not the first time that
peresecution has risen in England upon 6. Articles, (witness those in the
reign of King Hen. the 8. See M. Fox, Act. and Mon.
) But as for the number of the beast, to answer directly to the words of those
six Articles, Vol. 2. p. 443.
it is a thing, Edit. London. 1631.
which (considering Gods blessed providence in every particular thing) has
made many of us and others seriously and often to reflect upon it; though we
were never so superstitiously Caballisticall as to ascribe much to numbers.
This discovery (we confess) was not made by any of us, but by a very judicious
and worthy Divine, formerly of our University, and then a Prisoner (for his
Conscience) within the precincts of it, M. Geast.
and not yet restored to his liberty, but removed to London. And therefore we
shall forbear to insist any farther, either upon it, or the occasion of it.

For our own particulars we shall only add thus much, that seeing some of our
own Reasons with which we had armed our selves against that Mystery of
Iniquity have since that time been published to the world (in such humility of
phrase as well became Christian sufferers, though in such distraction as may
sufficiently testify who were the Authors and what their Condition) we appeal
to any who with Judgment and moderation has or shall read the same; whether we
have causlesly and foolishly triffed away those fair advantages wherewith God
by the means of our renowned Benefactors had endowed us, for the advancement
of his Glory, and further propagation of learning and true Religion; or whether
we had not rather sufter'd an unjust deprivall of all our livelyhoods under the
merciless hands of cruel Tyrants, who neither fear God not respect the just
sctuples of tender Consciences.

For when a Member or our University was brought upon this occasion before the
E. M. Maldero.
of Manchester, and being not satisfied in conscience, desired his LOP that his
Chaplain (then present) might resolve him in some Scruples about it; to this
motion (being then thought not unreasonable ot his LOP, and much pressed by
some that were there present) his Reverend Chaplain learnedly replied before
the whole Company, that he came not thither to resolve Men's Consciences, but to
preach to his LOP. Whereupon the Gentleman was not long after sent up prisoner
to London by the said Earl for tendering the Reasons of his refusing the
Covenant, though invited and required thereunto by his Lordship: And there
without farther hearing committed to prison, where he continued a long time at
excessive charges, which is all the satisfaction he could find (or any other
can expect) from them, for the scruples of a tender conscience.

Thus are we imprisoned or banished for our consciences, being not so much as
accused of any thing else, only suspected of Loyalty to our King, and Fidelity
to our Mother the Church of England; and not only so, but quite stripped of all
our livelihood, and exposed to beggary, having nothing left us to sustain the
necessities of nature, and many of us no friends to go to, but destitute and
forlorn, not knowing whither to bend one step when we set footing out of
Cambridge, having one only companion, which will make us rejoice in our utmost
afflictions, viz. A clear Conscience in a righteous cause: Humbly submitting
our selves to the chastisement of the Almighty, who after he has tried us,
will at last cast his rods into the fire.

As for us, God forbid that we should take up any railing or cursing, who are
commanded only to bless: we are so far from that, that we have rather chosen
to let the names of our greatest persecutors rot in our ruins, then so much as
mention them with our pen, save only where necessity compelled us unto it.

But though we spare their names, we hope we may without offense to any
describe their qualities: And therefore if Posterity shall ask, Who thrust out
one of the eyes of this Kingdom? Who made Eloquence dumb, Phylosophie
sottish, widdowed the Arts, and drove the Muses from their ancient habitation?
Who plucked the Reverend and Orthodox Professors out of their Chaires, and
silenced them in prison or their graves? Who turned Religion into Rebellion,
and changed the Apostolical Chair into a Deske for Blasphemy, and tore the
garland from off the head of Learning, to place it on the dull brows of
disloyal Ignorance? If they shall ask, who made those Ancient and beautiful
Chappells, the sweet remembrancers and Monuments of our fore-father Charity,
and kind fomenters of their childrens devotion, to become ruinous heaps of dust
and stones? or who unhived those numerous swarms of laboring Bees, which used
to drop honey-dews over all this Kingdom, to place in their rooms swarms of
senseless Drones? It Is quickly answered, Those they were, who endeavoring to
share three Crowns, and put them in their own pockets, have transformed this
free Kingdom into a large Jail, to keep the Liberty of the Subject: They who
maintain 100000. robbers and murderers by sea and land, to protect our lives,
and the propriety of our goods: That have gone a King-catching these six
years, hunting their most gracious Sovereign like a Partridge on the
mountains in his own defense; They who have possessed themselves of His
Majesty's Towns, Navy, and Magazines, and robbed him of all his revenues, to
make him a glorious King: Who have multiplied Oaths, Protestations, vows,
Leagues and Covenants for the ease of tender consciences: Filling all Pulpits
with jugglets for the Cause, canting Sedition, Atheism, and Rebellion, to root
out Popery and Babylon, and settle the Kingdom of Christ: who from a trembling
guilt of a legalltry all have engaged three flourishing Kingdoms, and left
them weltring in their own blood, They (lastly) which when they had glutted
themselves with spoil and rapine, hissed for a foreign viper to come and
care up the bowels of their dear mother: The very same have stopped the mouth of
all Learning, (following herein the example of their elder brother the Turk)
lest any should be wiser then themselves, or Posterity know what a world of
wickedness they have committed.

And now seeing they are not content to deprive us of our estates, but (which
is much more grievous unto us) have also robbed us of our good names, branding
all of us in our several writs of Ejectment with a black Character of
misdemeaners in general (and yet not any one particular was alleged against
any one of us, which were then there, much less offered to be proved by any
one single witness, although especial care was taken by an Ordinance for
appointing a Committee to sit at Cambridge for that purpose) we challenge and
conjure them as they will one day answer for this slander and oppression, that
they declare and prove what those Misdemeaners are; which if they do, the
shame and guilt will be ours: if not (as we are confident they cannot) we must
appeal herein from these unjust Judges to the impartial Tribunal of the
righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, who knows our integrity, and to whom we
submit our selves and cause, Humbly beseeching him not to lay this Sin to
their charge. For though for our many sins against him we may justly receive
at his hands, heavier Judgments then these: yet our Innocence will plead Not
Guilty, to the face of any man who shall object against us any Civil
misdemeanors, whereby we can more justly be deprived of our Fellow. ships then
any free Subject in England of his fee Simple, if they please to say he is
guilty of Misdemeanors.

And as it has pleased our gracious Master (whose Ministers we are) to make us
examples (though but of suffering) to the rest of our Brethren: So we hope he
will continue unto us his grace of humiliation under his mighty hand, as an
earnest of his exalting us in due time: And in the interim, that he will lay no
more upon us, then he shall be pleased to strengthen our infirmities to bear:
And that he will still preserve unto us a good conscience, that whereas our
persecutors speak evil of us as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that
falsely accuse our good conversation in Christ.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of such Heads and Fellows of Colleges, and other Learned,
Reverend, and Religious Gentlemen, of the famous University of Cambridge, as
have been Ejected, Plundered, Imprisoned, or Banished thence, for their
constancy in the Protestant Religion established by Law, and Loyalty to their
Sovereign.

Trinity College.
D. Combar, Master, and Dean of Carlisle, ejected, and M. Hill put in his place,
now Doctor, and Vice Chancellor. D. Row, Doctor in Divin. D. Meridith, D. D.
Master Thorndike: Master Briscoe: Master Nevile: Master Jones: Master Marshall*
B. D. Master West senior: Master Salmon. Master Chamberlain, sen: Master
Ashton, since dead. Master Willis, B. D. Master Barrey. Master Coake senior.
Master Wyat. Master Herbert. Master Shaw. Master Parrat. Master Ofley. Master
Crane. Master Creswell. Master Arundell. Master Bourcher. Master Sherley.
Master Crawley Master Slater. Master Cook junior. Master Price. Master Cave.
Master Appleby. Master Meade. Master Wheeler. Master Howard. Master Trevis.
Master Campian. Master Cowley. Master Yeardley. Master Lister.
I could not learn certainly how many of these were Bachelors in Divinity.

Master Leech. Master Scarlet. Master Yates.
These three were Conducts for the Chapel, and all the rest Fellows.

Saint John's College.
D. Beale, Master, ejected, who was some years in prison, and exchanged, and
master Arrowsmith put into his place. Master Thornton. Bodurda. Ridding.
Terwhit. Bletchinden. Mason. Buckley. Ambrose. Greenbagh. Cooper. Potter, since
dead. Rogers. Wrench. Lacy.
All these and the former were Bachelors in Div.

Master Cleveland. Barwick senior. Richardson. Whittingham. Spooner. Bullock.
Otwey. Jones. Barwick junior. Morgan. Neale. Hattou. Boteler. Watts. Drake.
All these masters in Arts.

Kings College.
D. Collins Professor in Divinity, and Provost, long imprisoned ejected, and
master VVhitscot put into his place. Master Edmonds. Mason. Barlow. Franklin.
Anstey. M. in Arts.
Queens College.
D. Martin Doctor in Divinity, in prison, above these 4. years, and master
Palmer put into his place. D. Cox, D. in Law. D. Capel, D. in Div. D. Bardsey,
D. in Div. Master Chandler. Marley. VVicherley. Coldham. Kemp. Master Bryan.
Sparrow. Hills.
These Bachelors in Di.

Master Rogers. Cox. VValpole. Appleby. Freare. Natley. Wells. Whitehead.
These masters in Arts.

Christ's College.
D. Bambrigg, Master, who was not ejected, but dyed, and master Bolton chosen
into his place. Master Power, Bachelor in Divinity, and the Lady Margarets
Preacher, ejected. M. Norton. M. Brearly. Bambrigg. VVildnet. Tonstall. Potts.
since dead. Huntley. Mathews.
All Masters in Arts.

Jesus College.
D. Stern, D. in Divinity, who has been in prison above 4. years, and master
Young put into his place. M. Hall, prisoner above 3. years in the Comptet in
Southwarke. master Anscell. Clerkeson. Bussey.
Bachelors in Divinity.

master Blakeston, Robinson, Beale, Tailor, Hanson, Lincoln, Green, Mason,
Short, Walker,
These masters in Arts.

Saint Peter's College.
D. Cosins, D. in Divinity, ejected, and now gone beyond sea, and master Seaman
put into his place. M. Tolley. Barrow, Maxwell, Wilson, Terringham, Pennyman,
Beaumont, Bancks, Crashaw, Sr Blackeston, M. Collet, War, VVilsford, Archer,
Gowyn, Bargrave, Symsafe, Holder, Sandys
I could not learn how many of these were Bachelors in Divinity.

Emanuel College.
D. Holdsworth, Doctor in Divinity, Master, and long imprisoned, and ejected,
and master Tuckney put into his place. M. Soresby, Bachelor in Divinity,
ejected.
Pembroke Hall.
D. Laney, Doctor in Divinity, master, ejected, and is now gone beyond sea, and
master Vi^es put into his place. M. Vaughan. Map le tossed. Frank.
Bachelors in Divinity.

M. Poley, Randall, VVeeden, Ashton, Heath, Lenthall, Depden, Quarles, Cacot,
Hamond, Keen senior. Felton, who was ejected for refusing the Covenant five
days before he was asked the question whether he would take it or no, as the
Warrant for his Ejectment shows. Keen Junior. May.
These masters in Arts.

Bokenham: tanquam socius.
Magdalen College.
D. Rainbow, Doctor in Divinity, master, who continues still not ejected.
Ejected, Doctor Green, Doctor of the Civil Law. M. Howorth, Pullen, Erskin,
Leech,
Bachelors in Divinity,

Butler, ma: in Arts.
Gunvile and Caius College.
D. Bachcraft, Doctor in Divinity, Master, who was not ejected, but continues
there still. Ejected, master Loveland, Salter, London, Buxton, Pickarell,
Colebrand, Watson, Halliburton,
All masters in Arts, and all sequestered.

M. Scarborough, since commenced Doctor of Physic at Oxford.
Clare-Hall.
D. Paske, D. in Divinity, Master andejected, and master Cudworth put into his
place. M. Oley, Carter, Bachelors in Divinity. M. Gunning, Fabian, Hickman,
Bing, Havers,
masters in Arts.

Sidney, Sussex College.
D. Ward, D. in Divinity, and Professor, Master, who was long imprisoned here,
and afterward dyed, and D. Minshall chosen into his place. Ejected, master
Bartu, Lawson, who dyed afterward. Ward, Gibson, Pawson, Ma: in Arts.
Trinity-Hall.
D. Eden, Doctor in Law, Master, not ejected* but is dead, and D. Bond is
chosen into his place, and none of all that College were ejected.
Katherine Hall.
D. Brownrigg, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop of Exeter, master, and ejected,
and master Spurstow put into his place, and none of that College ejected
besides.
Corpus Christi, alias Bennet College.
D. Love, D. in divinity, master, who was not ejected but continues there
still. master Tunstall, Bachelor in divinity, Palgrave, Bachelor in divinity,
Briggs, ejected.
ECCLES. 4. 1. So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done
under the Sun; and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had
no comforter: and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they
had no comforter. ECCLES. 5. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the
matter: for he that is higher then the highest, regards; and there be higher
then they. ACT. 13. 50. But the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable
women, and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts. FINIS.

