THE Good VVomans Champion Or, A defense for the weaker Vessel, being fit for
Widows, Wives, Maidens, or others, to read or hear.

Wherein is vindicated the bitter reproaches, a^ scandalous writings of some
fantastic men, against poor^ harmless Women, and Maids.

With a careful Wives good Counsel to a careless bad Husband.

By I. A.



Printed at London for Francis Grove, and are to be sold at his Shop near the
Sarazens Head on Snow Hill.

To all the good women in England of what degree soever.
MAdam, or Mistress, Dame, or courteous Maid
Your virtues here in brief I have displayed;
If you be pleased these lines to over-looke,
For whose sweet sakes I pend this little Book,
In spite of envy, who so harsh did write,
Seeking for to eclipse your glory quite;
But you, like silver Cinthia do appear
Unto your Phoebus, usher of the year;
Or like those golden Stars so bright that shines,
Which spacious Heaven in its Orb combines;
To you, fair Souls, this Work I dedicate,
Because that malice, virtue still does hate.
I am no Pimp, nor Champion for a Whore,
To usher Puncks, or in a Tavern rear,
The wrongs of all good women I would right,
I am your Champion, and for you i will fight;
My Sword and Pen your honors shall maintains,
Saluting you, I rest, yet still remain
The admirer of your virtues, I. A.

The good Woman's Champion, Or, A defense for the weaker Vessel.
GEntle Reader, or Hearer, I know it is a hard task to please all fancies, and
I am as certain there are many snarling critics in this age, that willout of
their malicious wisdoms give a harsh censure on this ensuing Subject; which if
they do I care the less, because the matter which I write of is honest, and in
defense of harmless and virtuous Women.

Therefore when I considered the manifold aspersions, bitter taunts, envious
revilings, slanderous raylings, and malignant writings of some inveterate
ill-bred Spirits (which would be accounted men) against poor harmless, silly,
and weak women, who are not able with that little piece of flesh, called their
Tongue, (which is their chief defense or weapon) to express, or otherwise to
vindicate themselves, in writing the injuries and scandals daily divulged
abroad in fantastic Pamphlets and Verses, as the Bear-baiting of women, the
Parliament of Women, the Woman-hater, the Gossips meeting, the Crab-tree
Lecture, Vinegar and Mustard, and I know not what; for all these, and more are
spightfully fomented against that noble Sex, of matchless and immaculate
creatures, whose deserved worth to illustrate and set forth I cannot, either
with speech, or in writing.

Those men I say, (whose tongues are like a double-edged sword, their pens made
of Goosequils, their ink of Galls, and their brains adled, who has neither
charity wisdom, or modesty) they surely forget that ever they came of a woman,
or had a mother, who (under God) first gave them life, nourished them in her
body, brought them into the world with pain, and like the Pelican, fed them
with her own blood, and bred them with care and industry such men may very
fitly be compared to the Viper, that destroys the womb that bare them, and
we all do know that ingratitude is a Monster, and she which brought forth such
an abortive birth into the world was surely delivered before her time.

A woman was the most beautiful and rare piece of Architecture that ever was
erected upon the face of the earth, and framed by the best workman in the
world; for when she was first created or borne, she was not a child or infant
but a perfect and complete woman; neither was she made of base earth or clay as
man was, but of the purest of her Husbands flesh and blood, being a rib taken
out of his side, and next of all to his heart, and therefore (in my opinion) it
is against nature, nay against the Law of God, to abuse or hurt the same, being
their own flesh and blood, as too many do, which is much to be lamented; but
herein the old proverb is truly verified, that the weakest still goes to the
walls, and a low hedge is soon stepped over.

Therefore you satyricall Antagonists, and others, that so bitterly enveigh
against poor women, if you would be pleased but to view the sacred Scriptures,
where you may find sufficient proof that they ought to have more due respect
allotted them, then some of you will acknowledge, or profess they should
enjoy; and although man be the head, and is (or ought to be) endued with more
wisdom and strength then a weak woman, yet he ought not to triumph over, or
injure so harmless a Soul, without whom man by no means can subsist; for did
not God say of Adam in the creation, It is not good for man to be alone; And
further, God says, I will make him an Helper meet for him; therefore shall a
man leave his father, and mother and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall
be one flesh. Thus you may perceive how necessary is the swet society and
company of a virtuous woman to her Husband, for she is his helper at all
assaies, being careful of her family, keeping him neat and decent both in
woollen, linnon, and other necessaries, cleanly in dressing his diet, and a
loving Nurse to him both in sickness and health; wherefore a man ought to love
his wife above all the world, they being (as the Lord says) one flesh.

If you will hear what St. Paul says of a woman, it is thus; A woman is the
glory of man. And Solomon (the wisest of men) says, A virtuous woman is a
crown to her Husband; now if a woman be a glory to her husband, how is that
man blessed which enjoys such a wife, who does crown his heart with variety of
content; she, like the fruitful Vine brings forth swet children (which are
the blessings of God) being the fruit of their own loins, who preserves (if
the Lord please) their Fathers name to the end of the world by their posterity:
And the wise man further says, Who so finds such a wise, obtains favor of
the Lord. O ten thousand times happy is that man, that with a wife can obtain
such heavenly favor; but Solomon further adds, that the price of a virtuous
woman is far above Rubies, and let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe,
and be thou ravished always with her love.

It is the common custom now adays among most men to hearken after wives with
a great portion, and rich friends, never regarding how she is qualified, or
whether she be addicted to virtue or vice, but wealth is the chief mark at
which they aim, and sometimes they hit the white they shoot at, yet come hom
by weping cross; but a poor woman, be she never so virtuous, is not regarded
with them; but you have heard her price, and how high a rate the wise man does
velue her at; yet for all this (though a good woman be as loving as the Hind,
and pleasant as the Roe to her Husband, seking by all means possible she can to
please him, either with kind and loving speches, or pleasant and modest
behavior) there are some froward men (like churlish Naball) that are never
contented with whatsoever she does or says, when a kind and loving husband
would think himself blessed to enjoy such a treasure, and be ravished with the
love of such a wife.

If you will be pleased to hear what St. Peter does say for wives, it is thus;
Husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife,
as unto the weaker vessel, being heirs together of the grace of life, that
your prayers be not hindered.

These words are to show Husbands, that there should be a kind of loving duty
by them allowed to their wives, and that they should live and dwell together in
civil and discreet knowledge, and not with wrangling, discord, and envy; for
a wise man will give honor to his wife above all women for many respects;
first, because she is his wife (and it may be has horn him children) then as
she is a woman, and a Christian; likewise he is to bear with her imbicilities
(if she have any) because she indeed is the weaker Vessel; for God has joined
them together as one body, that they should both be heirs to inherit the grace
of eternal life; for where man and wife does live in unity and peace, their
prayers no doubt shall be heard.

St. Paul writing to the Ephesians says thus; Husbands, love your wives, even
as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. And in another place
he utters these words; Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against
them. I could heartily desire that some unkind husbands would take notice, and
hearken to those words of the blessed Apostle, with what a tie he does persuade
and exhort them to love their wives, which would almost move a stone to hear;
and I could with them to mark with reverence, and to take it to their heart of
whom he speaks, and his comparison, which is the Church; for he coniureth
them by no less then Christ, the blessed Son of God, our Savior and Redeemer,
who gave his life for us, to redeem our sinful Souls from Hell and
damnation; this is a deep, yet a sweet persuasion to love. The Apostle also
exhorts Husbands not to be bitter to their wives but there are too many now
adays that will not hearken to his counsel, but I will use the words of
Solomon, who says thus; A contentious man is apt to kindle strife, and hatred
stirs up contentions, but love covers all trespasses.

This saying of the wise man methinkes should quell those foolish men's follies
which utter and write such invectives, and fantastico revilings, taunts, and
jests against women, for these are those wicked spirits the Devils Agents,
which sows discord, and breeds contentions, kindling the coals of strife,
hatred, and disdain in diverse families betwixt man and wife never persuading
to peace, love or unity, which should hide and cover all domestic iarrs or
trespasses; and they make as though a woman were but as a mere cipher, and
stood for nothing, but let them know thus much, that a woman is worthy of a far
better respect, for she is the vessel of eternity, and is (or ought to be) the
closet or cabinet of a man's heart, his summum bonum, or his All in all, his
chiefest Secretary, or his second self; for (as it is said) they are one
flesh, yet some snarling critics there are who will not blush to say, that unto
a woman we should reveal no secret, or that they hardly ever hoard or read of
a discret, virtuous, or wise woman. To answer them in brief amongst many, let
them but look into the first of Samuel, where they may find it written thus:

Abigall was a woman of good understanding, but her husband Naball was
churlish, and evil in his doings. Now, if she had not bin a woman of wisdom
and understanding, David had slain her husband and every one of his servants,
(for his Family was great) which Abigall, for her wisdom, David did marry
after her husbands death. Also in the second of Samuel you may read, how a wise
woman saved the City from destruction when it was besieged by Joab. Likewise,
did not Holefurnes and his servants marvel at the wisdom of Judeth, and she
afterward saved the City (when he had besiedged it, by cutting off his head.
Also, Boaz said to Ruth, All the city of my people does know that thou art a
virtuous woman. And was not Susanna a virtuous woman, that would rather suffer
death then yield to the vicious and wicked Elders, Many more proofs may be
objected against those envious back-biters, and standerers of that worthy Sex;
for a woman was the vessel of the Holy Ghost, which nourished in her womb,
and brought forth into the world (the Redeemer of Mankind) our blessed Savior
Christ Jesus; Also, did not diverse women follow Christ, and ministered unto him,
being present at his death? to whom he appeared at his Resurrection: And did
not Pilates wife fore-warne her husband to have nothing to do with Christ's
death?

Having thus briefly written of some virtuous, good, and discreet wives and
women, I think it not amiss to say a little in defense of virtuous Virgins and
Maids; In the 22. of Deuteronomy. it is said, That they are to be punished that bring
an evil name upon a Virgin; and in 1 Cor. 7. it is thus, If a Virgin marry she
has not sinned; and was not Jepthas daughter of Israel a virtuous Virgin, who
willingly submitted her self for a sacrifice to fulfill her Fathers vow? And
did not Christ compare the five wise Virgins to the kingdom of heaven? But
amongst other Virgins, me thinks I should not bury in oblivion the memory of
our famous Countrywoman, Elizabeth, late Queen of England. who for her time
was accounted the Phoenix of Christendom, and admired for virtue and wisdom
throughout the world; She kept her land in peace, and her foreign enemies in
awe; she was truly religious, for which the Lord ever blessed her to her end;
and thus much i will ^y of her (inspight of envious detractors) she dyed a good
woman, and a Virgin Queen.

Thus have I in brief related some passages and collections out of the sacred
Scriptures in defense of good, virtuous, and barmlesse women, but if there be
any that will not believe the same, let them hear what St. Paul says unto
them; Unbelievers shall not enter into everlasting rest. And now in my opinion
it is unchristian, uncharitable, and immodest, for any man so bitterly to
enveigh and write against a woman, which naturally he should love, cherish, and
honor (for many respects, as is before said) above all the creatures in this
world. I must confess that the conditions and humors of some fantastic men
are fickle various, and unconstant; they are double tongued, and false hearted,
they will protest, and say one thing, and mean another, as too too many good
women have found by woeful experience; for when they sue for love, oh, what
dissembling tears, feigned sighs, deep protestations, solemn vows, large
promises, and flattering speeches will proceed from their dissembling lips? now
many a gentle and tenderhearted Woman and Maid has compassionated and pittyed
their Crocadilian tears, and believed their periurd vows, which oftentimes
has procured their sorrow; for when such false men have obtained their desires
they grow careless, and slight a woman, ae not worthy of their soriety; and
for their love, they are requited with reproaches, harsh language, scorn, and
disdain. But I speak not this in general, for I know there are many
provident, honest, and loving men, that gives all due respect to their wives,
and are careful of their reputation and charge; and I heartily wish that the
number of such men were greater, for then so many good and honest women should
not feel so much grief, sorrow, and misery, as both they and their families
do now sustain.

I could have written more amply both Divine, and Moral, in defense of
virtuous women, but I suppose these few examples will give some satisfaction to
the courteous and affable Reader, hoping none will dislike, or take exceptions
thereat, unless it be those carping critics before spoken of, which has
written so bitterly and scoffingly against the worthy Sex of women; but I could
wish them to petition for peace, and to make their recantations, and to
confess their follies, for thus I salute them: Blush foul envy, and give
over,
Split your Pens, and write no more,
Silent be, and hold your tongue,
Sue for pardon, (that did wrong
Virtue, goodness, modesty)
which kind hearts will not deny.


A careful Wives good counsel to a careless bad Husband, in a Dialogue.
Woman. GOod counsel never is out of date,
(Pray Husband hear me speak)
But if to me you will give no ear,
I think my heart will break;
Such careful thoughts possess my mind,
and lodges in my breast*
My head is troubled night and day
that I can take no rest.

Man. If you will needs turn Counselor,
then at the Bar go plead,
I do not like this Lecture well
that you to me do read;
But if your heart and head does ache
you may lie down to sleep,
And there I shall not hear you prate,
nor such a coile to keep.

Woman. You know how every one complains,
the world is grown so bad,
All trading now is quite decayed,
no work is to be had;
And all provision is grown dear,
bread, butter, cheese, and meat,
Fish, roots, soap, candles, oat-meale, coals,
the price of all is great.

Man. All do complain the world is bad,
that helps to make it so;
And if that I no work can get
then I to play must go;
Indeed my Purse it does complain,
that victuals they are dear,
But the Excise does grieve me most
that is set on Ale, and Beer.

Woman. Alas, provision must be had
i we a house will keep,
And for to run upon the score
it quickly will grow deep;
Our children, they want hose and shoes,
and clothes unto their back,
Our shirts, smocks, napkins, towels, sheets,
all wear, and go to wrack.

Man. The Chandler I do know has chalk,
go tell him I will pay,
And though that I am in his debt
I will not run away;
Tush, let the children barefoot go,
the weather ^s not cold,
E're thou shall want i will pawn the sheets,
or else they may be sold.

Woman. Good Husband take another course,
for this is not the way,
Our Creditors will have their due,
or you in prison lay;
And those which now you think are friends,
if you should need, or lack,
Will all forsake your company,
and on you turn their back.

Man. That man which does most money owe
his credit is not small,
To those I owe, when I grow rich
I mean to pay them all;
My company good fellows are,
and each one is my friend,
Hang money, it is but dirt and trash,
and it was made to spend.

Woman. Wast not your coin for fear you want,
and that you should grow poor,
Your Hostis, when your means is spent
will turn you out of door,
She loves none with her should score,
or any money borrow,
To such she will this answer make,
I trust not till to morrow.

Man. Tush, tell not me of this, or that,
thou love for to prate,
I Will have my humor come what will,
for baseness I do hate;
Go wash your dishes, or go spin,
and do not talk to me,
I Will play, or ramble where I please,
and never be ruled by thee.

Woman. If you this course of life still take,
I shall not have a dish
To wash, or any other thing
that will hold flesh, or fish;
And I may take my wheel and spin,
but you i am sure will reele:
Which is the cause that I and mine
such misery does feel.

Man. What, do thou think I will be tied
always to be at home,
And have no recreation,
but sit still like a mome?
I am not of that mettle made,
but must be frank and free,
And whatsoever thou do say
I Will not be ruled by thee.

Woman. If you would stay at home and work
great comfort you should find,
It would be pleasing unto God,
and quiet to your mind;
You might get money in your purse,
and have sufficient gain,
The bread is sweet with labor got,
^ir charge for to maintain.

Man. (...)t, do you preach, is this your text?
your audience is but small,
The breath you spend it is in vain,
go prate unto the wall;
When I do please to work, i will work,
when I do please i will play,
And to the Alehouse I will go
to drive sad care away.

Woman. To drink and swill distempers you,
diseases it will breed,
And those which too much uses it
have no desire to feed;
It spoils the brain and memory,
so does your Indian smoke,
Which stinkes, that all are near the same,
they ready are to choke.

Man. A Fool, or a Physician,
thou one of them must be,
I wonder where you learned this Art,
you have great skill I see:
Good drink (you fool) it breeds good blood,
it is meat, and drink, and cloth,
Tobacco dries up the Rhume,
and Phlegm that is like froth.

Woman. Well, I perceive my words are wind,
my counsel you disdain,
All the entreaties I can use
I see they are in vain:
But if you follow still this course,
and all consume and spend,
We all shall samish, starve, and dye,
and so there is an end.

FINIS.

