A DISCOURSE OF THE EXCELLENCY OF THE SOUL, AND THE Care every Christian ought
to have of it.

IN A SERMON Preached in Spanish, By Dr. Joseph de Barzia and Zambrana, Canon
and Reader of Scripture in Granada.

Translated out of Spanish.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner, near Turn-Stile in Holborn. M DC LXXXV.

Note, that the Quotations of Scripture are taken out of the Vulgar Edition.

A Discourse of the Excellency of the Soul, and the Care every Christian ought
to have of it.
Ecclesiasticus, cap. 10. ver. 31. Fili, in mansuetudine serva Animam tuam, and
da illi honorem secundum meritum suum.

Son, in mildness keep thy Soul, and give him honor according to his desert.


IT is no small Misery and Confusion, that through our own Fault, we know not
our selves. We see Men daily employed in finding out the Course of the Stars,
in discovering the Nature of Plants, the Temper of humane Bodies, and the
Properties of all other living Creatures; and this without the least care of
understanding the Soul, which gives them Life. Ah, what Industry (complains the
great St. Basil) Bas. ho. 10. in exam.
in making Anatomies, in taking the Body in pieces, to look into its most
subtle and retired parts, and leave nothing in it undiscerned; while there is
almost no Diligence in enquiring after the Souls Perfections; but so universal
a neglect of this kind, that Men seem to live, as if they had nothing more than
Body; since to this alone are directed all their Endeavors, their Labors, and
their Studies. This was the Case of the rich Man in the Gospel, Lu. 12.
who speaking to his Soul, said, Requiesce, comede, bibe, and epulare, Take thy
ease, eat, drink and be merry, thou have Goods laid up for many Years; whose
Folly was so great, as St. Basil takes notice, that he lived wholly unmindful
of the Excellency of his Soul, and was so altogether delivered up to the
Appetites of his Flesh, that those gross Provisions, which he had hoarded up
for his Body, he designed should serve for his Soul too. Tam improvidus es erga
bona Animae, ut escas corporeas Animae Bas. in Cat. D. Tho. Luc. 12
tribuas. And, what is the greatest Misery, this blind Inconsiderateness, we
find every where, even amongst Christians, who, though they have received from
the liberal hand of their Maker, a Soul so perfect; yet they apply themselves
not at all to understand this Honor, but are content to live like Beasts;
which was lamented long ago by the Royal Prophet; Homo cum in honor esset, non
Ps. 49.
intellexit; comparatus est jumentis insipentibus and similis factus est illis.
And what other Reason, that men thus basely degenerate, and become like Brutes;
but only because they neglect the knowledge of their Souls? Of this we are
informed from the Words of Christ, threatening the Soul, which is the Spouse.
She inquired of him in the Canticles, Where was the place of his Repose? Vbi
cubes in meridie? And he returned her this Answer. Si ignoras te, O pulcherrima
inter Mulieres, egredere, and abi post vestigia gregum. If thou know not thy
self, thou fairest among Women, that is (as Origin has it) if thou know not,
O Soul, thy own great Beauty, thy own Excellency above all corporeal Beings, if
thou know not, that I made thee for the enjoyment of my self: Egredere and
abi, Go forth and follow after the Steps of the Flocks; Go forth and live like
the Beasts, for thou deservest not better Company, if thou have no esteem for
thy own Perfection. Nisi cognoveris te ipsam, quae sis, jubeo te exire, and in
ultimis gregum vestigiis collocari. O formidable Sentence! Orig. expos. 2. Can.
ho. 2.


Give Ear, O Christian: If thou know not thy self, the holy Ghost says to
thee; Egredere, Go out of my House, that is, be gone from my Protection and
Government, for they are no part of my care who understand not themselves.
Egredere, depart from my Fold; for he cannot be in my Flock, who is ignorant of
himself. Egredere, be gone from my Friendship; for I have no Pleasure in any,
but such as know what they are, and what they possess. Egredere, be gone even
from thy self too; for thou can have no comfort in thy own Being, if thou
know not what thou art: Egredere, Go forth. But this is not all, whither
must a Soul go, that is a Stranger to it self? Abi post vestigia gregum, Go
follow after the Steps Ber. ser. 35. in Cant.
of the Flocks, Go behind the Beasts, since like them thou live without
Knowledge. And here, it is the remark of St. Bernard, it is not said, Go forth,
keep Company with the Beasts; but follow after, go behind them; which is yet to
be more miserable than they: for these, with this Life end all their Miseries:
But that Soul, which has lived in a stupid ignorance of the Greatness and
Excellency of its own Being, with Death is to expect yet greater Miseries, in
Punishment of its Neglect. Abi post vestigia gregum. So many Evils, and yet
more, attend this one; whence we may see how much it ought to be the concern of
every one to know themselves.

Upon this Consideration it was, that St. Augustine cried out; What Profits it a
Man to know the whole World, if he know not himself? And in another Place,
addressing himself to Man, he says; What is it you admire, in beholding the
Grandeur and Beauty of the Sun and Stars, and the vast abyss of the Ocean?
What is it you admire? Animi tui abyssum intra. Call but your Thoughts in upon
your self, and ponder the Greatness and Excellency of Aug. l. 4. de Trin.
thy Soul; and thou will be soon convinced, that none of these things are worth
thy Admiration. The like Advice gave St. Bernard to his Eugenius: A te tua
Consideratio incohet, Let thy Consideration begin first with thy self. Ber. l.
2. de Consid.
Behold and understand what thou art; without this, all other Knowledge is but
vain: Ne frustra extendaris ad alia, te neglecto. And for this reason, the four
living Creatures, which Ezekiel saw, (the Symbol of Holy Men, according to St.
Gregory) being moved by the force of the Spirit, Went every one before his
Face; Coram Facie sua ambulabat: that is, they were present to themselves. It
being proper to those who design toward Heaven, to Ezekiel. c. 1. Ed. Vulg.
make the Knowledge of themselves a great part of their Concern: and this not
only as to the Misery of the Body, but also as to the Excellency of the Soul;
according to the Advice of St. Francis Sales.

And now, since it is my whole Design in these Sermons, to excite all Faithful
Christians, to forsake the ways of Sin, and to spend their whole Endeavors in
the gaining eternal Life; I Will lay before you to day, the great Beauty and
Perfection of your Soul; that having considered this thoroughly, ye may
understand how base and unworthy a thing it is, to blemish and defile it with
Sin; and how much reason you have to conceive high Thoughts of it, proportioned
to its Excellency. This Method I borrow from the Canticles; where the Holy
Ghost speaking to his Beloved, the Soul, in the beginning says thus to her;
Cant. 1.
Ecce tu pulcra es, amica mea, ecce tu pulcra es. Behold thou art fair, my
Love, and then repeats it again, Behold thou art fair. And Origin gives the
Reason, Because the first thing he recommends to her is, to understand her
self; that so being sensible of her own Perfection, she may entertain such
noble Thoughts of her self, as never to yield and submit to Sin: Primo sermon
invitaevit Sponsus Sponsam, ut agnosceret seipsam. Come therefore, Christians,
Orig. ho. 3. in Cant.
raise your Thoughts, for a while, above all vain and terrene Objects, that so
your Minds may be wholly taken up in the Contemplation of that Greatness, which
you possess within ye. And I hope that this Consideration will be a means, that
ye conceive a horror against all Sin, and detest it; especially if the Holy
Ghost assists me with his divine Grace, and enables me to do this as I ought.

Fili, in Mansuetudine serva animam tuam, and da illi honorem secundum meritum
suum. Son, in Mildness keep thy Soul, and give him Honor according to his
Desert. Eccl. c. 10. v. 31. Before I propose to you the great worth of the
Soul, What the Soul is.
and how unreasonable it is to debase it with Sin, I must ask one Question:
Christians, do you know that you have rational Souls? It Is true, the external
Shape and Figure you bear, speak you to be Men; yet this falls short of
concluding you to be so. There were great Numbers in the Beginning of the
World, which carried this Argument in their Face, and yet amongst those vast
Multitudes there was only one, whom the Holy Ghost styles Man; to wit, Enos,
whose whole Employ was in the Service of God. Enos, says Eusebius Caesariensis,
L. 7. Praep. Eu. c. 3.
verus homo interpretatur: neminem enim putant esse verum hominem, praeter eum,
qui verum Deum agnoscit and pie colit. This it is alone, which makes a Man
worthy of that Name. Wherefore, says St. Chrysostom, speaking to Sinners, if
with these external Lineaments of Men, I see the Actions and Customs of Beasts,
how can I reckon you amongst the Number of Men? Qua ratione in hominum Ho. 23.
in Genesis
^e possum numerum collocare? Tell me therefore, Sinner, have thou the Soul of
a man? But I fear, thou have not yet considered, whether thou have a Soul or
no: it is the Misery of too many Sinners, and that which a Holy Person sadly
deplored: Would it not be gross Man's. 1. c. 1.
Ignorance for one, being asked, Who he was, not to know himself, nor
understand who was his Father or Mother, or what Country he was born in? If
this then would be strange Brutishness, incomparably greater is that which is
found in us, when we endeavor not to know what we are, but fix our Thoughts
upon these Bodies, and know not that we have Souls, but only in gross, in as
much as we have heard it, and because Faith tells us so; but what Good this
Soul comprises, who lives within it, or its great Value, we seldom consider;
and so take but little Care to preserve its Beauty, being wholly intent in
polishing the Roughness of this Case, and looking after the Walls of this
Castle, which are these Bodies. Thus this devout Lady lamented the miserable
Neglect of Men in not endeavoring to understand the Excellency of their Souls.

But let this Neglect, Christians, at length have an end: You have all Souls;
and such as have any doubt in this Point, St. Chrysostom invites to the Sight
of a Corpse: Behold, says he, how foul it is, how loathsome and full Hom. 12. in
Genesis
of Horror, and without Motion; and this, because it is left by that Soul, which
gave it Life. Let any one move his Hand, is it not the Soul that gives the
motion? You have a vegetative Life, as in Trees; you have a sensitive, as in
Animals; and whence this, but from the Soul? But more than this, you see that
you remember things that are past, you understand things, and frame Discourses
upon them, you make Inferences, deducing one thing from another. You have a
Propension to Good, an Aversion to Evil; why all this is from the Soul. In
fine, the Soul is a rational, intellectual, and spiritual Substance, created by
God of nothing. It Is a Spirit, like to the Angels, immortal and eternal; it had
a Beginning, but shall never have an end: it is whole in the whole Body, and
whole in every part. And what is most admirable, it is so capacious, that it can
be satisfied and filled by none but God that made it. It Is dignified moreover
with a free Will, by which it has the Liberty of embracing either Vice or
Virtue, and so becomes worthy of Punishment or a Reward; which was the thing
intimated by God to Cain: Nonne si been egeris, recipies? Si autem male, statim
in foribus peccatum tuum aderit. This is, Christian, Genesis 4.
that Queen which resides in that mean Palace of thy Body: it is a Pearl
enclosed in that rough Shell; it is the Lady and Mistress of that House; it is
the Epitome of all created Perfections. O blessed for ever be the Goodness of
our Creator, for the Excellency of this Work. But stay here a little,
Christians, and ponder seriously, what it is that God has put into your own
hands: in manu consilii tui; viz. the choice of Good or Evil, of Virtue or
Vice, and that to work out your Salvation, or Condemnation, is left in some
manner to the Determination of your own Free Will. See this a little.

In the Creation of the World, the Works of God had no sooner received their
Being from his omnipotent Hand, but they also received their Approbation of
being good. He made the Light, and God saw the Light, that it was good. Vidit
Deus lucem, quod esset bona. The same is repeated five times, at the Birth of
other Creatures; But when Man comes to be made, we don't read that God should
say, that he was good. And what can be the Reason of this? Is Man less
deserving than the other Works of the Creation? Shall they be welcomed into the
World with a Blessing, and is there none for Man, who contains the Perfections
of them all? Are the Beasts, the Birds, the Fishes, more priviledg'd than Man,
who is their Lord and Sovereign? No, says St. Ambrose, they are not. And the
reason why they, at their coming into the World, meet with an Approbation of
being good, and not man, is, Because at their first step into a Being, they are
perfect, and complete as to their Substance, without any dependence of any free
Operation or Choice, of which they are incapable. But Man, though he comes like
them, thus complete into the World, yet he cannot be said to be perfect;
because his Perfection and last Accomplishment has a Dependence on his own free
Will. For, if he will, by the Grace of God, he may be good; and if he will,
through his own Malice, he may become evil. So that though at the first Instant
of his Creation, he was equally the Work of God with other Creatures, yet
having not exercised his Liberty in the choice of Good, his Approbation is
suspended, till it appears to which side he apply himself, making choice either
of Good or Evil. Ideo homo non ante laudatur, says St. Ambrose, quia non in
forensi pelle, sed in interiore homine ante probandus, Amb. de Inst. Virg. c. 2.
sic praedicandus est. But let me clear this Point a little farther.

Amongst the ancient Romans, 'twas a Custom, when they sent forth Soldiers to
the War, to deliver to every Pier. l. 42.
one a white Buckler; that hence they might understand, that if at their Return
they expected Rewards of the Senate, they should so behave themselves in the
War, that with the description of their own Gests and Achievements, they might
fill up the White of their Shields. And for this Reason, says Rabbanus, they
were called in Latin, Scuta; Scutum dictum, quasi Sculptum, quod in ipso,
Antiqui L. 20. de Vniv. c. 12.
sua facta signabant. The Roman Soldier therefore, must take care how he
behaves himself in the War, being to expect no greater Honor at his Return,
than he gains by his own Prowess and Valor; he carries forth with him a white
Shield, to be blazoned with his own Actions. See now Christians, the Soul of
Man is called by the Philosopher, a smooth and plain Table, which has nothing
painted or deciphered on it. When God puts it into this World, he sends it to
the War. Militia est vita hominis super terram. The Life of Man upon Earth is a
Job c, 7. Ed. Vulg.
Warfare: it carries with it a Free Will, which is, as it were, a white
Buckler; that so, by a true Christian Valor, having won many Victories over
Vice and the Devil, they may be all engraven and displayed on it; thus to gain
Honor and Perfection, and at the hour of Death to receive the Commendation of
him, who at its Creation sent it forth to Battle.

Look back now, Faithful, and see how long it is since you came into this World;
for so long it is since you entered the Campaign with your white Shields. What
is it that you have engraven on them? How have you employed your free Will?
Have you made War against Vice, or Virtue? Have you followed the Colors of
Satan, or the Standard of Jesus Christ? In what Condition are your Souls? Are
they defiled with the Abominations of Sin? O base and unworthy Choice! How can
you ever expect the Welcome and Approbation of your Maker? It Is a thing St.
Augustine could never cease to admire, That Man Ser. 12. de Ver. Dom. in Mat.
should desire every thing that is for his service, to be good about him,
except his Soul. You desire, says the Saint, that the Fields should be good, in
which you sow; that the Timber should be good, which you purchase; that the
House should be good, in which you live; that the Horse should be good, which
you buy; and that the Clothes should be good which you wear: solam Animam vis
habere malam; Only your Soul, you don't care how ill it is. Quid te offendisti?
complains the same holy Father, Quid de te, tu ipse meruisti? What Injury has
thy Soul done thee? What is the Reason, thou have deserved so ill of thy self?
That being industrious to provide every thing that is good, thou have Patience
to see only one thing ill about thee, and that is thy Soul? Praepone vitam tuam
caligae tuae.

But that thou may see, that thy Soul deserves not this Neglect from thy
Hands, the Holy Ghost says to you to day, Da illi honorem secundum meritum
suum; Give it Honor according to its desert. And this it is that I intend you
should consider now, in what Esteem you ought to have your Soul; how much it
deserves, being compared to the Body; how much it deserves, for being the Image
of God: what Respect is due to it, for being redeemed by the Blood of Jesus
Christ; and finally, what Care you ought to have of it, for that it is created
for the Fruition of eternal Glory. Da illi honorem secundum meritum suum; Give
it Honor according to its Desert. I begin now.

One of the principal Duties of a Christian, is, to esteem The Excellency of
the Soul compared to the Body.
all things according to their Worth and Dignity, giving to them the Place that
is due to them, either as to Love, or Hatred. And this the Holy Spouse, in the
Canticles, reckons for one of the chief Presents she had received from the
Divine Spirit; to wit, That he had placed in order her Love and Affections;
Ordinavit in me Charitatem. So Cant. 2.
that whosoever bears a Love to that which he ought to hate, or gives the first
Place in his Affections to what should only have the last, does not only not do
like a Christian, but even not like a rational Creature. When Aeneas fled from
his Country, now going into Ashes, his Enemies gave him leave to take with him
out of that common Ruin, the thing which was most dear unto him: and he
immediately made choice of his Gods. And this his Zeal was so well liked by the
Grecians, that upon this, 'twas permitted him to save something else: then he
took his Father. A third time Liberty was given him, and he named his Relations
and Friends; preferring these before his Goods and Riches. At which Order in
his Affections, they were so well satisfied, that he had forthwith leave to
redeem every thing that belonged to him, from those Flames. Now see Christian,
God created the Soul, he formed the Body, and gave a Being to all other things,
for the Service of Man; but so, that all was to be subordinate to the Soul. Now
the business of a Christian is, to see that the Soul has the Precedence in all
Occasions, and that he has always a greater Esteem for it, than for the Body,
or any other transient and sublunary thing: so that whenever any danger
threatens, his first care ought to be, to secure his Soul, although all the rest
perish. Let Life, let Honor, let Possessions, let Friends and all go, rather
than for the saving of these, to hazard the loss of his Soul. For, What can it
profit a man, according to our B. Redeemer's Words, to gain the whole World, if
he lose Mat. 26.
his Soul? Quid prodest homini? Supposing therefore this Order according to the
Worth of things, let us proceed, and see what Comparison there can be betwixt
the Soul and Body, as to the Esteem, that is due to them. And for the setting
forth of this, I Will ask this one Question:

Seeing that the Soul of Man, according to the Psalmist, is a Spirit like to
the Angels, what can be the Reason, that God should confine and shut up this so
noble a Creature, within the Limits of a Body, so infirm, and subject to so
many Miseries? If she had been exempt from this clog of Earth, and lived alone,
as the Angels do, she had been freed from the Treachery of her Companion, the
Flesh. But no, says the great Nazianzen, this was not Orat. 2. post Pasc.
agreeable to the Divine Providence; Ne sicut Angelus, homo superbiret, and
periret. God made choice, says he, of this means, so to secure her against the
Temptation of her own Excellency. He created the Angels noble and glorious
Spirits; but Lucifer, with the third part of that celestial Host, viewing their
own Excellency and Beauty, soon fell into Pride, and so from Heaven. God
therefore, to prevent the loss of the Soul, enclosed it within a Case of Earth,
thus to remove all Occasions; and that Pride, as in the Angels, might not be
her Ruin. Ne sicut Angelus, homo superbiret and periret. Such therefore, O
Christian, is the Greatness of thy Soul, that God thought fit to cast over it,
a gross and heavy Body, that so it might be out of danger of losing it self, in
the Contemplation of its own Beauty and Perfection. This is the Poise which,
Job says, God made to the Winds, c. 28.
to wit, the Souls of Men, as St. Gregory expounds it; L. 19. mor. c. 4.
Qui fecit ventis pondus. That as the little Be, grasping a Peeble, secures it
self from the Violence of a stormy Air; so the Soul, being checked and kept
down by a weight of Clay, may remain steady and fixed, and frustrate all the
Attempts of Pride, endeavoring to raise her above her self; so much care has
the Soul cost her Creator, in providing means for her security. And according
to this Doctrine now, What is the Body? But only the Case of this Jewel, the
Slave of this Empress, the Ballast of this Ship. This is the Order they hold
from the Appointment of God. But how are they ranked by the Inordinacy of thy
Malice? The Soul is the Lady and Empress; Dominamini, said God to Adam. Subter
te erit Appetitus tuus, Genesis 1.
he said to Cain. Consequently she ought to be honored Genesis 4.
and served by the Body: Da illi honorem cui honor competit; Give that
Deference to the Soul which is due to it, as being the Chief. Honor animae
debitus est, (writes C. A. lapide) ut illa quasi Regina imperet Corpori, and
sensibus, 10 Eccl.
quasi subditis and ancillis. The Body, with all its Senses ought to attend on,
and serve the Soul, for the obtaining Life everlasting. How unreasonable
therefore is it, that the Flesh, designed for nothing, but to be a Servant and
Slave, should be caressed and waited on; and the Soul, a Queen and Monarch,
should be made to drudge? What a monstrous kind of Disorder is this, says St.
Bernard? Could any Christian, with Patience, see L. Med. c. 3.
this in his House? Why then does he suffer and allow of that within himself,
which in his Family, it is not possible he should endure? There are three
things, says Solomon, Prove. 30.
which disturb the Earth, and the fourth it cannot sustain. Per tria movetur
terra, and quartum non potest sustinere. The first is, when a Servant reigns;
the second, a Fool that is filled with Meat; the third, an odious Woman, that
is taken in Marriage: these are the three things by which the Earth is moved.
But what is that which is insufferable, and cannot be sustained? Per ancillam,
cum fuerit haeres Dominae suae; which the Septuagint read thus; Serva, cum
Dominam suam ejecerit. It Is a Servant that commands and domineers over her
Lady, and turns her out of doors. And hear now St. Antony of Padua expounding
what this is; It Is the Flesh, says he, when it is raised up, and takes the
Command in hand, is in all things observed, obeyed, and waited on; while the
Soul, being dethroned, is neglected, scorned, despised, and made a Servant to
her Slave: this it is that is intolerable. Domina est Ratio, ancilla est
sensualitas, quam etiam terra sustinere non potest, cum sibi ipsi dominationem
usurpaverit Ser. Dom. 9. Pent.
Rationis. But I Will come now to Particulars.

Come hither therefore, first, you Covetous Men; you, The Sinner makes his Soul
a Slave.
who, according to the Character of St. Ambrose, water your Fields with the
Tears of the Poor; you, who concluding your selves Lords and Sovereigns of all
that God Am. Ser. 59. de Au.
has lent you for your use, shut your Ears to the Cries of the Needy, and spend
nothing but on Vice, or your selves; you, who consume your whole Care in
increasing your Heaps; and matter not how much you trample under Foot the Law
of God, and your injured Neighbor, so you can but advance upon them your
Wealth and Possessions: Come hither, I say, and tell me, does your Soul command
or serve? is she Mistress or Slave? But let the Royal Prophet answer for you;
Dormierunt somnum suum, and nihil invenerunt omnes viri divitiarum in Ps. 75.
manibus suis. They slept their sleep, says he, and all the men of Riches found
nothing in their hands. Where though the Words seem to import no more, than that
Riches cannot exempt their Owners from dying, nor redeem them from Hell, if
they are condemned to those Flames; yet St. Ambrose has found a Criticism in
them, a direct L. de Nabuc. c. 15.
Answer to our Question: for he takes notice, that Covetous Men are here
called, Viri divitiarum, Men of Riches: Been viros divitiarum appellat, non
divitias virorum, there being a great difference between the Riches of Men and
Men of Riches. We must see therefore, which belongs to which: Does the Master
belong to his Servant, or the Servant to his Master? It Is out of doubt, the
Servant is his Master's. But by what are we to know, which is the Servant? This
too is evident; for Servants are laboring and toyling in their several
Employments, while the Master is taking his Ease, or divertising himself in
some Recreation. Now let us look into the House of a Covetous Man, and we shall
be soon satisfied as to our Query: there we shall behold his Bags, his
Treasure, laid up, and oh! with how much Care and Solicitude; all still and
quiet. But he, how busy, how uneasy! hard at work in securing, and as earnest
in drawing in more. In this, his Memory is wholly taken up, it is the Concern of
his Understanding, and his Will and Affections are in a perpetual rack. And
now, which here belongs to which? Which the Servant, which the Master? He Is
slaving it all day, while his Riches lie undisturbed, and without Employ. It Is
certain therefore, the Riches are not of the Man, but he is the Man of his
Riches. Viri divitiarum, says St. Ambrose, ut ostenderet eos, non possessores
divitiarum Sup.
esse, sed a suis divitiis possideri, aliena custodit ut famulus, non tanquam
Dominis suis utitur. And this is the Answer of the Psalmist, calling Misers,
Men of Riches, to signify to us, that while they wait on their Bags, like
Servants, and do not use them, like Owners; they are not the Masters of their
Money, but its Slaves. And is not this an intolerable Blindness of Men, that
whenas God has given them Souls, that should command and rule, they subject
them to the Body, and make them Servants to dross? O base Slavery of
Covetousness! and this is the Injury every Miser does his Soul, thus does he
debase it.

But let us come now to the unclean and luxurious man. This is in all Propriety
a Slave to his Flesh. O poor Soul! did God create thee to serve the Body in
these filthy and brutal Desires? Is it not strange, that a Soul so noble, which
its Maker enriched with a Memory to reflect on his Benefits, with an
Understanding to know his Greatness, and with a Will to love his Goodness,
should now employ all his Thoughts, his Desires, his Memory, and Affections, in
serving the Body in its Uncleanness, and waiting on it, in those its swinish
Delights? O Baseness, to be lamented with Tears of Blood! O Soul, unworthy of
that Name! O, that thou would be ashamed and confounded, to see thy self a
Slave to such a bestial Appetite! We read in Genesis, that Potiphar's Wife,
full of Concupiscence, cast her Eyes upon c. 39.
Joseph, then a Servant in her House: And it is very observable, how the
Septuagint (followed by St. Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose) word it. Injecit uxor
domini oculos in Joseph. And it came to pass, that his Master's Wife cast her
Eyes upon Joseph. Now it is plain, that she was not only his Master's Wife, but
also Joseph's Mistress, and Joseph was her Servant. And it had been a more
compendious Expression, to have styled her his Mistress than his Master's Wife.
It Is true, says St. Ambrose, it had been more compendious, but not so proper:
for why should she be called a Mistress who was such a Slave to her Lust? No,
rather his Master's Wife, Vxor Domini, is more agreeable; for she is unworthy
of the Name of Mistress, who is at the Command of so brutish a Passion: Recte
Vxor Domini, (they are the Words of St. Ambrose) non ipsa Domina L. 1. de Jos.
c. 5.
dicitur -- Quomodo Domina, quae dominandi non habebat affectum, quae servilis
libidinis incentiva praestabat? Scorn therefore, Christian, to be led along by
a Beast. Be ashamed thus to debase thy Soul, and to make it a Servant to thy
Body, which it ought to command.

Tell me, Christian, what would thou say, if thou should see, passing
through the Streets, a Horse nobly decked, his Saddle embroidered with Gold,
his Bridle of Silver, his Trappings wrought with Diamonds, and the Owner on his
Back scarcely covered with Rags? Would not thou think that he had lost his
Judgment? And what if thou should behold the Sight which the Wiseman saw;
Vidi servos in equis, and Principes ambulantes super terram quasi servos. I
have seen, says he, Servants upon Horses, Eccl. c. 10.
and Princes walking on the Ground as Servants. Would not this have surprised
thee? What! Peers and Princes at the Horses Heels, waiting on their Servants!
What a Madness! and yet no other Madness than thou art guilty of, when
pamp'ring thy Body, and giving it all Respect and Attendance imaginable, thou
neglect'st thy Soul, leaving it basely disfigured, and covered over with the
filth of Vice and Debauchery: no other Madness, Christian, than thou art guilty
of, as often as thou permittest thy Soul, that noble Lady, an Empress created
for the Possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, to be basely dragged through all
the Mazes of Sin, in Obedience to the slavish Commands of thy unruly Flesh. O,
how disorderly and preposterous is this! And yet this every Sinner does as
often as he offends against his Maker; and is it not a Madness, enough to fill
your Hearts with Horror and Confusion? But this is not all, says the Reverend
Master Avila; a Sinner, when he offends, yet goes farther; he does not only
make the Av. in andi silia. c. 11.
Slave ride in state, and the Prince go on foot; but even makes the Beast lead
the Prince bridled where it lists. The Beast governs and commands, and the
Prince likes well to be at such a Beck. What Sense would thou have,
Christian, of such a monstrous Spectacle? A noble Man, a Prince, one admirable
both in Learning and Arms, to be at the Command of a Bit, while a Brute has the
Management of the Bridle! What would thou say, Christian, but that such an
one is only fit Company for Madmen? Why then, say it to thy self, Thou art he.
For what is thy Body, but a kind of Animal, void of Reason and Understanding?
and what is thy Soul, a Spirit, Prince of all Creatures, and capable of
enjoying God? and thou permittest thy Body, with its bestial Appetities, to
lead thy Soul, without either Law or Reason, wheresoever they list. What is
this, Sinner, what is this luxurious Man? Where is thy Understanding? and
whither will thou go at last, dragged by this wild and untamed Beast? whither,
but to thy eternal Ruin? And what can be the Conclusion of this disordered
Government, where the whole Command is in the hand of a Slave? Give ear a
little.

It Is related in History, that Semiramis from a Slave became Empress in
Babylon; and it happened thus. Ninus, Aelian. l. 3. de Var. hist.
then King, blind in Love, obliged himself to grant her whatsoever she should
ask: she desired, that she might have the Management of the Empire for one day;
and immediately, by his Consent, the Slave was raised to be a Sovereign. And
being thus enthroned, she ordered several things, and was forthwith obeyed.
Amongst the rest, she commanded, that Ninus should be seized, and have his Head
cut off: this also was immediately done. For what else could be expected where
Slavery ruled the Scepter, but Blood and Tyranny? And what is to be expected,
Sinner, from this Dominion which thou have delivered to thy Flesh? What is to
be the end of this Obedience which thou yieldest to thy lustful Appetites?
What, but an eternal Death? O! how this was lamented by the Prophet Jeremy?
Principes manu suspensi sunt. He Is Lam. c. 5.
deploring the Miseries which the People of Israel suffered in Babylon, and he
says, that the Chaldeans had hanged up their Princes, and gave no Respect to
the Ancients, Facies senum non erubuerunt. All was full of Sadness and Horror.
And how came this, O Israelites? What was it that drew upon you these
Afflictions? The Prophet had declared it just before: Aegypto dedimus manum,
and Assyrirs ut saturaremur pane. We, say the miserable Captives, we delivered
our selves to the Egyptians and the Assyrians, and we became Slaves to our
Slaves. Servi dominati sunt nostri. And this was the Origin of all their
Misfortunes. And you, O Christian Souls, who are overruled by your Slaves, by
your carnal Appetites, what Conclusion can you expect? Death and eternal
Torments wait for you. Oh, when will you resolve to regain the Dominion over
your Body? Will you put off, and neglect, till all Recovery is become
impossible?

Stay a while, and give ear to the Cries of those miserable Souls, who are in
Hell Flames, there condemned to suffer for all Eternity; hear what they say;
Ergo erravimus a via veritatis, and justitiae lumen non luxit nobis. We Wis. 5.
therefore have erred, is their common Voice. O poor Wretches! And now are you
become sensible of it, when you are past Remedy? David was more circumspect,
who made this Reflection in time: Erravi sicut ovis. I have erred, Ps. 118.
says David; and, We have erred, is the Cry of the Damned. David pronounced it
in season, it being in him the Voice of Repentance; but they have neglected
their time, and in them it is only the effect of Despair. Ergo erravimus; We
have therefore erred, say they. A consequence indeed, but very ill timed. The
Antecedent in this Life, spent in Sensuality and Lust, and the Consequence in
Hell? O! how this will conclude little before the Mercy-seat! Do you see,
Christians, how they lament? and how now, too late, they understand their
Error? Reflect now a little, and consider what it was, and wherein their Error
did consist? But they declare it themselves: Et justitiae lumen non luxit
nobis. We followed not the Directions of Justice. Justice is that which gives
to every one their own. And here they begin to understand what was their Error.
That whereas they were bound to give to their Souls the Honor and Respect of a
Lady and Empress, and treat their Bodies like Servants; they, on the contrary,
gave the Honor to the Body which did not belong to it, and abused their Souls,
like Slaves. And this it is which they now fruitlesly lament, in the middle of
their Torments: Justitiae lumen non luxit nobis; and the same will be their
Complaint, without hopes of Remedy, for a long Eternity. Merito conqueruntur,
says a Learned Author, in inferno Labat.
damnati, se justitiae lumine caruisse, quia vere mali nesciunt unicuique rei
debitam aestimationem tribuere; pluris enim corpus, quam animam faciunt, etc.

And, you Christians, who hear this, till how long will you expect, before you
understand your Error; till when there shall be no longer a Possibility of
Remedy? Da illi honorem secundum meritum suum. Ah! rather let your Souls now
have the Honor which is due to them; let them have the Precedence of your
Body, in all Respects. It Is base, and unbeseeming a Christian, to make his Body
the whole Business of his Concern, while his Soul shall lie neglected, and be
no part of his Care. Who is there of you so unreasonable, that if he should see
his House on Fire, his Servants in danger, his Wife exposed to the Flames,
would be first sollicitous in saving his Servants? And yet, you Sinners, who
have your Souls ready to be seized on by Hellfire, and your Flesh burning with
Concupiscence; to which do you run first with Assistance? Do you seek for
Plenty of Tears to secure your Soul from the Flames of Hell; or the Water of
vain Delights and unlawful Pleasures, to extinguish, or rather satisfy the
fire of your own Lust? O Misery, to thrust your Souls more into the Flames,
that your Bodies may be at ease! Da illi honorem. Ah Christians, look rather to
secure your Souls, though your Bodies perish. The Body is attended by many
Necessities, the Soul is in want of the Divine Grace: that the Body may be
supplied, how little is it to run over the whole World, and to trample all
Difficulties under foot; and shall no Pains be taken, that the Soul may have
her Support? Da illi honorem. Is it the Soul of a Beast that you have within
you, that it seems so unworthy of your Care? Who ever saw a Soldier receive
the Dart in his Breast that he might preserve his Shield untouched? The Serpent
exposes his Body to the Blow, to secure his Head, wherein his Soul resides: and
is it beseeming a Christian, to let his Soul lie open to all the Assaults of
the Devil, that his Body may be kept harmless? No, the Body was intended to
receive the Blows, and the Soul for Honor: Da illi honorem. And if thou can
not comply so far, as to let thy Soul be the chief part of thy care, at least,
let it have an equal share with thy Body. Take but notice, says St. Chrysostom,
Ho. 14. in Mat.
with how much Solicitude thy Body is waited on, if indisposed; and how
careful thou art, to free thy Eye from any thing that molests it: Animam autem
tuam tanta malorum congerie pressam negligis. But thy Soul, lying under a
Complication of Distempers, how little Concern for her Delivery? Why is she
thus neglected? If thy House be in danger of falling, thou do not let every
Trifle divert thee from preventing the Ruin; but that which is most
considerable, is certain of having thy first Assistance. Why, have the same
care then for thy Soul, as for thy House; at least, as thou have for every
Beast that goes along the Highway: Cadit asinus, is the Complaint of St.
Bernard, and invenit, qui se sublevet; cadit anima, and non est qui Ser. 14. in
Cant.
manum apponat. The Beast falls in the way, says the Saint, and there never
want those who will help it up: but the Soul falls into Sin, and she is left in
the mire. How unchristian is this! Have the same care for it as thou have for
the Garment thou wearest; as for the Shoes under thy Feet, which thou have not
Patience to see out of order. Let not thy Soul be in the Extremity of Wants,
disfigured, nay, almost devoured by Sin, and yet want Assistance: Da illi
honorem secundum meritum suum.

The Excellency of the Soul is yet made clearer to us from another
Consideration; in as much as it is The Excellency of the Soul, in as much as
it is the Image of God.
the Work of God, a work framed after his own Image. Upon which account, a much
greater Respect is yet due to it. Da illi honorem. For the laying open this,
make a short Reflection, Christians, how great an Esteem Men generally have for
any Picture or Statue, of the hand of any famous and excellent Artist. We have
a Relation in Pliny, that King Demetrius having laid Siege to L. 35. c. 11.
Rhodes, and there being no prospect of his gaining the City, but by opening a
Breach in that part of the Wall where stood a Picture, the Workmanship of the
great Protogenes; he, not to injure the Piece, immediately commanded the Siege
to be raised; choosing rather to omit the making himself Master of so
considerable a Post, than to prejudice the work of that great Master.
Parcentemque Picturae fugit occasio victoriae. And was not this Piece of
Protogenes highly valued by Demetrius? And how much higher Value yet ought we
to put upon our Souls for being the Work of God? it being certain, that
whenever our Vicious Appetites are drawing forth in opposition to the Divine
Law, and our wicked Desires are making an Attack on the City of God, it is
impossible we should proceed in these Designs without defacing and even ruining
our Souls, made by the hand of that Divine Artist. Manus tuae secerunt me. Thy
hands have made Ps. 118.
me. Let us have therefore a respect for our Souls, due to the Greatness of the
Omnipotent hand that made us. But if we consider a little farther, we shall
discover our Souls to be not only the Work of God, but also his Image: a yet
more forcing Argument for our Respect. There was in Athens a Statue of Minerva,
made by Phidias, which was much celebrated among the Ancients: and the reason
was, as Aristotle relates it, because in the Shield of the Goddess, the Author
had so ingeniously wrought his own Image, that 'twas impossible to efface this,
without quite ruining the whole. How much more have we to say for our selves,
Christians, having Souls whose whole Substance is the very Image of their
Creator? Ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram? How much greater is our
Privilege, bearing stamped in our Humane Being, the Genesis 1.
Pourtraiture of our God: Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine? But
'twill not be amiss now, to hear from the Mouths of the Holy Fathers, in what
manner our Soul is made after God's own Image.

St. John Chrysostom says, it consists in this; that as God is far above all
Creatures whatsoever, so the Soul of Man Chr. ho. 10. in. Gent.
is superior to all corporeal Beings, in Dignity, Command, and Power. St.
Augustine says, the Likeness consists chiefly in that the Soul is endowed with
an Understanding; Aug. li. 8. in 1. Joan.
and that as God knows and loves himself, so also does the Soul. St. Ambrose,
because as God is whole in the whole Universe, and whole in every part, so also
is the Am. l. dign. cor. hum.
Soul in respect of its Body: and as God is one in Essence, and three in
Persons; so is the Soul one in its Essence, and three in its Powers, the Will,
Memory, and Understanding. S. John Damascen, that as God is free, so likewise
the Soul. St. Thomas says, it is the Image of God, because it Dam. l. 2. Fid.
has a larger Portion of the Divine Perfections than any O. Th. 1. p. q. 93.
ar. 2.
other Creature. God has a Being, he has Life and Understanding: the Heavens
and Elements partake of his Being; the Plants and Beasts, of Life; and Angels
of his Understanding. But the Soul has a share of all together, it is ennobled
with a Being, with Life and Understanding, all Excellencies of God himself. O
Soul, did thou but know thy own Perfection, what esteem would set upon
thy self! Agnosce, O Christian, says St. Leo, dignitatem tuam, and divinae
consors factus naturae, noli in veterem Ser. 1. de Not. Do.
vilitatem degeneri conversatione redire. Understand, says he, and acknowledge
thy own Excellency; and since God has raised thee to be Partaker of his own
Being; be not so base, as by Sin to degrade thy self from this so great an
Honor. For this only reason, Christian, has God priviledg'd thy Soul, above
all other Creatures; that thy Life may be answerable to thy Origin. Nobilem,
says Eucherius, vult esse vitam tuam, qui tibi comisit imaginem suam. He Ho. 2.
de syms.
that has imprinted his own Likeness in thy very Being, intends that thou
should be also like him in thy way of living. God's Life consists in his
knowing and loving himself; and it ought to be the Life of thy Soul, to know
and love God. Dat unde ipsi quoque, are the Words of St. Leo, quod operatur,
operemur. This is thy Being, this thy Obligation. But thou, Sinner, how have
thou complied Ser. 1. de (...). 10. man.
with this thy Duty? O the Wickedness of Sin! How often have thou contemned and
trodden upon this Dignity of thy Soul? How often have thou, by thy Villainies,
defiled, nay quite defaced this Image of thy God? Denigrata est facies, eorum
super carbones. Thou have made thy Soul more black than the very Coals; and at
that time, when thou did commit thy Iniquities, thou did wipe off from thy
Soul, that Likeness of the Blessed Trinity, which till then it wore, by the
Grace of thy Maker. Exhonorat animam, said Rabbanus, qui peccatis illam
polluit. L. 3. in Eccl. c. 3.
He treats his Soul unworthily who pollutes it with Sin. But hear now, how it
is that Sin strikes off from the Soul the Image of God.

The Soul of Man is, as it were, a Seal, bearing on it the Image of the Blessed
Trinity: Tu signaculum similitudinis. Ezekiel. 28.
And it is, as Rupertus describes it, as if the King, with his Signet, should
imprint on Wax, his Arms and Picture: Tanquam cera sigilli Testatoris imagine
signata. For L. 2. in Genesis c. 2.
just so has God stamped on the Soul of Man, as in Wax, the likeness of his own
Divine Being. But when a Sinner, unmindful of his Duty, offends against his
Creator, O what a sudden change, how this likeness soon disappears! David, very
sensible of this, exactly lays before us the manner of it: Sicut fluit cera a
facie ignis, sic pereant peccatores Ps. 67.
a facie Dei. Let any one take into his hand a piece of Wax, that has a Figure
stamped on it, of a Lamb, a Dove, etc. let him hold it to the Fire; the Wax
soon dissolves, and the Image it bore is utterly lost: Sicut fluit cera a facie
ignis. In like manner does Sin quite destroy the Likeness of God, imprinted on
the Soul. Sic pereant peccatores a facie Dei. The Soul, when it is in Grace, is
nobly beautified with God's own Image; but approaching to the Fire of
Concupiscence, of Anger, of Pride, the Soul begins, in a manner to melt away,
to be dissolved; and the Image that it bore of its Maker is quite effaced. A
facie ignis, says Novarinus, a sole ab aestu concupiscentiae, sic perit in eis
In Elect.
and efluit imago dei, ut fluit cera a facie ignis. Consider then, Sinner, what
thou do, when thou put thy self in occasion of offending God, when thou
follow'st ill Company, give ear to idle Discourse; this is to hold the Wax
out to the Fire; it is to wipe off the Likeness of God from thy Soul, and
exchange it for that of the Devil. O, if thou did but behold, how foul and
ugly thou art within, at the very Instant thou consentest to any wicked
Thought! if thou did but see how horrid and deformed thy Soul is rendered by
every mortal Sin! It may be called indeed the Image of its Creator, but so
abused and disfigured, that there is no Likeness left. Stay therefore on this
Consideration a little, and tell me for the present, what would thou say, if
thou should see, in the middle of the Street, some wicked Jew, or any other
profane Miscreant, treading under his feet the Image of our Blessed Redeemer;
and full of Contempt and Spite defacing it with a thousand irreligious Blows?
What would thou say, Christian, in this case? Would not thy Zeal put thee on
to rescue it from such an unchristian Abuse, and the Respect thou owe to him
whom it represents, oblige thee to place it some where with Decency out of the
reach of such a hellish Malice? Why look then, Sinner, see where thy Soul is;
it lies under the feet of the Devils: Do thou know it? Cujus est Mat. 22.
Imago haec? Whose is this Image? Is it not the Image of thy God, and of thy
Maker and Redeemer? See how it is abused, how disfigured; how it is without all
Beauty and Grace. Egressus est a filia Sion omnis decor ejus. Why do not
thou, without delay, redeem it from these Injuries? How can thou have
Patience to see it trampled on by these infernal Furies? Ah! force it away,
snatch it up, and by a sincere and hearty Repentance, deliver it into the hands
of thy God, that he may cleanse it and restore it to its former Beauty. Da illi
honorem secundum meritum suum.

But as yet we have not seen the full worth of the Soul: it deserves a yet
higher esteem from us, if we consider at The Excellency of the Soul redeemed
with the Blood of Jesus. Ho. 2. de Symb.
how great a rate it was held by Jesus Christ, and how much he gave for it.
Quam pretiosus sis, said Eucherius, si Factorem forte non credis, interroga
Redemptorem. If thou know not, O Soul, to set a value upon thy self, for
being the Image of thy Creator, turn to thy Redeemer, and learn of him, how
much thou art worth. O how much! St. Hilary, after a thorough Consideration of
this Point, says, that the Son of God gave so much for the Soul, that it seems
in some manner Ap. Eus. hum. 8.
to be worth even God himself: Tam copioso munere ipsa Redemptio agitur, ut
homo Deum valere videatur. St. Augustine said it more expressly, Sanguinem fudit
Vnicus Filius in Ps. 102.
Dei pro nobis. O Anima, erige te, tanti vales. The only Son of God shed his
Blood for us: O Soul, look up, for so much art thou worth. Yes, Christian Soul,
have an esteem for thy self; the Son of God gave his Blood for thee. Thou art
that Lost Sheep for whose Recovery the Heavenly Pastor undertook so laborious
and chargeable a Journey. Thou art that precious Dram that was lost, for the
regaining of which, that inaccessible Light, the second Person in the Blessed
Trinity, was brought forth in our Humanity; God being made Man, for the
Redemption of Man. Thou art that precious Jewel, for the purchasing of which,
the Divine Lapidary, who knew well its Value, gave all that he had: he gave his
Blood, his Life, his Honor, he gave all, he gave his whole self, that he might
have thee; not thinking any price too high in such a Purchase. See then,
Christian, how much thou ought to prize thy Soul, since Jesus Christ valued
it at so high a rate, that he did not only lay down his Life for thee, but if
'twere necessary, would return, and do it a second time. O blessed be such
Love, blessed be such Goodness! But, thou, Sinner, tell me after all this, to
whom does thy Soul belong, to whom have thou delivered it? Imagine with thy
self, that here comes in at present Jesus Christ on one side, and the Devil on
the other, both with a Design to buy this Jewel, thy Soul. Christ offers thee
for it, all that thou have already heard. The Devil gives thee a little Smoke
which he calls Honor; a little Dross, which he calls Interest; a short
Imagination which he calls Gust or Pleasure. Now what have thou accepted? To
which have thou given thy Soul? In iniquitatibus vestris venditi estis. At the
very Instant that thou consented'st to sin, you made a sale of your Soul; but
to whom? To Jesus Christ, who gives so high for it, or to the Devil, who gives
you nothing? O vile Contract of a Sinner! thou have sold it to the Devil. St.
Augustine declares it to thee in plain terms; Vnusquisque peccando Ep. ad Romans
prop. 42.
animam suam diabolo vendit, accepto tanquam precio, dulcedine temporalis
voluptatis. Whosoever sins, says he, sells his Soul to the Devil, at the price
of some vain and fading Delight. But stay, Sinner, what do thou do? Do
thou make a delivery of thy Soul to the Devil, being a Jewel which cost the Son
of God no less a price than his own Blood? Give ear a little to David, at that
time when the Philistines had laid Siege to Bethlehem; O siquis mihi daret potum
aquae de cisterna, quae est in Bethlehem. O (says 2 Kin. 23.
he) that some Man would give me drink of the Water of the Cistern that is in
Bethlehem. Which when some of his Captains had heard, three of them broke
through the Camp of the Enemies, and having drawn Water out of the Cistern of
Bethlehem, they brought it to David. But he, noluit bihere, he would not drink;
but offered it to our Lord. Libavit eam Domino. And he gives the reason; Number
sanguinem hominum istorum, and animarum periculum bibam! Shall I drink (says
he) the Blood of these Men, and the peril of their lives? Water that cost so
dear is not proper to be drunk, but to be made a Sacrifice: so that he seems to
have reasoned thus with himself; This Water I may now either give to my self,
in satisfaction of my Appetite; or else to God, to whom it is due. But seeing,
in the procuring, it cost these Men the hazard of their Lives, I Will never let
it be spent on a Gust of my own, but I Will offer it up to my God: Libavit eam
Domino.

Ah Christians, Christians! If David put so high a Value on a little Water, for
respect of the Danger these men underwent; how ought you to esteem your Souls,
which have been purchased not only with Dangers, and an uninterrupted toil of
33 Years, but even with the Life and Blood of Jesus Christ? Quanti quaeso, says
a Learned Author, facienda est salus nostra, non quidem hausta periculo Labat.
sanguinis, and vitae puri hominis, sed sanguine ipso, and vita ipsa hominis
dei nostri? Thou have cost (O Soul) not only the danger of Life, but even Life
it self; and that not of Man, but of thy Redeemer, God and Man. And this Soul
which has been so dearly purchased, thou basely deliverest into the hands of
thy greatest Enemy. And this, as the Prophet has it; Propter pugillum hordei,
and fragmen Ez. 13.
panis; for a handful of Barley and a morsel of Bread; for any of these little
and inconsiderable Nothings of this World: and how many times even for less?
how many times without Gain, without Gust, without Honor? how many times have
thou laid it down before hand; sinning to day, on some design for the next
Year? and how many times without all Hopes of any advantage, but rather with
Discontents, Poverty, and public Disgrace? How often have thou gone forth, and
like the Apostate-Disciple, invited the Devils to take thy Soul at their own
rate? Quid vultis mihi dare, and ego eum vobis tradam? What delight will you
give in Exchange of my Soul? O unreasonable Vileness of Sinners! O monstrous
Ingratitude! What a Madness is this, exclaims St. Bernard, that a Christian
should so disesteem his Soul, and make less Account of it than the Devil does?
Satan offered to Christ, for his, all the Kingdoms in the World, when as yet he
did not know him to be the Son of God; and the wicked Christian delivers his
without any Agreement, but standing wholly to the Devil's Courtesy? Quis furor
tam viles habere animas, quas etiam Demon pretiosas habet! But tell me,
Sinner, Ap. Hortig. coron. c. 9.. 4.
what would thou take to be a Slave under the inhumane Turks, where thou art
to expect nothing but a most cruel Usage, Hunger, Blows, and Tyranny, without
Ease, Rest, or Sleep; or any satisfaction whatsoever? Is there any Price that
can hire thee? I believe not. And yet of thy own Accord, thou make thy self
one of the Devil's Slaves; thou put thy self under him, where thy Captivity
shall be far more intolerable, and without all hopes of Redemption; since thou
unworthily tramplest under foot the Blood of thy Redeemer. Quare tibi tam vilis
es, qui tam pretiosus es Deo? Why, says St. Chrysologus, art thou so base to
thy self, who art so highly esteemed by the God? Think of this with Shame and
Confusion; esteem thy Soul as God esteems it, at least esteem it more than the
Devil himself does: Da illi honorem secundum meritum suum.

The Respect due to the Soul is raised yet one degree The Excellency of the
Soul, created for Glory.
higher, inasmuch as the design of its first Creation was for the Enjoyment of
an eternal Felicity, being made capable of God himself, and the Possession of
the clear and beatifical Vision of its Maker in Glory. Secundum meritum suum,
spe futurae mercedis, says Rabbanus, Give it its L. 3. in Eccl. c. 3.
due, says he, on hope of a future Reward. God did not create thy Soul,
Christian, for the empty Vanities of this World: no, raise thy Thoughts higher.
Hearken to Holy Job; Homo ad laborem nascitur, and avis ad volatum. Man is born
to Labor, and the Bird to Flight; which, according to the Moral Gloss,
signifies, that the Body was intended for Labor and Toil, but that the Soul
was created Gl. mor. in Job. c. 5.
for to take its Flight to Heaven, and raise it self to God. This Honor, this
Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, was purchased for us by Jesus Christ; who by
his own most precious Blood did wipe out the Hand writing which the Devil held
against us for our Exclusion from Glory: Delens quod adversus nos erat
chyrographum decreti. O Soul! and what an Honor is this, that thou were not
made Colos. 2.
for Eating, Clothing, and the little businesses of the Earth! Thou have a
Right to an eternal Crown; O, how would thou esteem thy self, if thou did
but know what thou art!

Ochozias, King of Juda, being dead, Athalia his Mother, full of Cruelty, and
the Ambition of Ruling, immediately slew all the King's Sons, excepting only
Joas, who was snatched from the Slaughter by Josaba his Aunt, who, keeping him
in Disguise six Years, brought him up in the Temple, till at length he was
crowned King. Eratque cum 4 Kin. 11.
ea sex annis clam in domo domini. Now those that were not privy to the Secret,
and knew him not to have a Right to the Kingdom, we may easily imagine, gave
him no other Respects, than to other Youths, to whom his Education made him a
Companion: while those few that were conscious of the whole Intrigue, honored
him as a Prince, and served him as their Sovereign; knowing that in a short
time he would come to be vested with his Imperial Robes, and sway the Scepter
of Judah, though then he was but in a mean rank, and reputed as ordinary: Ab iis
(says the Eusebius Eus. Nier. ho. 8. sect. 5.
of our Age) qui filium Regis noverant, magno habebatur honor, non quia regiis
ornabatur insignibus, sed quia ornandus erat. O Christian Souls! says the holy
Evangelist St. John; now, while you are in this Life, your great Dignity is
known but by few; you are as yet hid and in disguise, and, like young Joas,
without your princely Robes, without the Ensigns of Bliss. Nondum apparuit,
quid erimus; but there 1 Jo. 3. (...)
will come a time, when you shall be called to your Kingdom, and crowned with
Glory. Cum autem apparuerit similes ei erimus, etc. O admirable Greatness! and
is there any that knows how to respect you according to desert! but have you,
Christian, made any Reflection upon this Excellency of your Soul? I wish the
gross and foggy Delights of this transitory Life, have not raised a Mist before
your eyes, and quite clouded your Understanding. It Is very remarkable what Lyra
relates of the famous Nebuchodonozor, Lyr. in Dan. c. 1.
King of Babylon. He says, that he was no sooner born, but exposed in the
Woods, where he was brought up at the care of a wild Goat; till at length a
poor Countryman passing by, took him, and brought him up amongst his Children,
without any distinction of Fare or Apparel. Now it is beyond all doubt, says a
learned Modern, that Causin.
if any one had come and assured him, that he was not the Son of his reputed
Country-Father, but of a great Monarch; that he was not born for the Harrow or
Plow, but to have the Command over Empires; no doubt, but he would immediately
have raised his Thoughts above those rustic Concerns, and followed such
Designs as the nobleness of his Descent, and the hopes of a Crown, should have
suggested to him. Now give ear, Christians, to what the Royal Prophet speaks to
you; Filii hominum (or as another Reading has it) Filii viri inclyti; ut quid
diligitis vanitatem? Christian Souls, Children of God, shut up within this poor
Cottage of Clay, and that have no other Knowledge than what is derived to you
by the Senses; take notice, that you were created for an Empire. Let it not be
always said to you, that you are Dust and Ashes, this is only meant of the
Body. But that you are of the Lineage of God; Ipsius and genus sumus. Let it be
said to Act. 17.
you, that you were born for an unchangeable Crown; that these your mean
Garments shall be changed into Imperial Robes, and your Sweats and Toil into
Ornaments of an everlasting Bliss. Lift up your Eyes to Heaven: behold the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars; Why, you were created to be exalted above all these, to
tread them under your feet. And if so; Vt quid diligitis vanitatem? What, do
you make this World your whole Concern, and busy your selves in its
short-lived Vanities?

If we should behold a young Prince, choosing Boys in the Street for his
Companions, and inclined to no other Education than what was to be had from
their useless and unmanly sports; would it be prudent to mind him, that he was
made of the same Earth with the rest; or rather, with a respectful Check, to
tell him, that those common Toys were beneath his Quality, and that he ought to
remember, he was born to a Crown? Souls of Christians, you are Heirs to a
Kingdom; Haeredes Romans 8.
quidem Dei: Lay aside these vain concerns, so much inferior to your
Greatness: Vt quid diligitis vanitatem? Why do you so disesteem and neglect
that right to Glory which Jesus Christ has purchased for you? The Title you
have to any Temporal Estate, to any Lordship, or Principality, you maintain
with all diligence and industry imaginable. And if any seek to injure you, or
deprive you of it, you are not wont to sit still and behold your self wronged
with Patience and Silence. God Almighty, by his Prophet, puts to you this
Question: Si Abd. 1.
Fures introissent ad te, si latrones per noctem; quomodo conticuisses. If
Thieves had gone into thee, if Robbers by night, how had thou held thy
Peace? It Is certain you would have cried out for Assistance. Why then, since
you see your selves spoiled by Sin, of all your Titles and Right to Glory; why
don't you cry out in an humble and hearty Confession? Why don't you, in
penitent sighs, call upon him who alone is able to relieve you? And why,
instead of this, do you disable your selves from laying any claim to Heaven,
and rashly invite in those whose business it is to rob your Souls of that
Inheritance. Come, there is enough, enough of this Folly; have that Respect for
your Souls which they deserve, and maintain their Title to Bliss: Da illi
honorem secundum meritum suum, spe futurae mercedis.

Finally, for the conclusion of this Discourse, 'twill contribute much to the
imprinting this Doctrine in your Heart, if you reflect on the words of my Text,
how that the Holy Ghost commanding you to honor your Soul, says, Da illi, in
the singular; to mind us, that we have but one. It Is one, says the Spouse in
the Canticles, Vna est columba Cant. 6. Ps. 21.
mea. It Is only one, says David; De manu Canis Vnicam meam. Christians, we have
but one Soul, only one. God has given us (as discourses St. Chrysostom) two
Eyes, two Ears, two Hands, and two Feet, Orat. de an.
that if one be injured or lost, we may have the comfort and assistance of the
other: Animam vero dedit unam nobis; si hanc perdiderimus, quanam vivamus? But
he has given us but one Soul; and if this be lost have we any other for a
Supply? No, certainly. Why then should we be so inconsiderate, as to hazard
this every moment, and to put it to the venture of a remediless Eternity of
Miseries? In Noblemens Houses it is customary at night, to have two or three
Lights in their Presence, that so if by any Accident one should fail, they may
not remain in Darkness, but be supplied by the other. But, Christians have but
one Light, one Soul within them, and if this miscarry, nothing is to be
expected, but an eternal Darkness, subject to the just Indignation of their
God. You have read, how full of Wrath David was when the Parable of the little
Ewe was put to him by Nathan the Prophet. He demanded Justice at the King's
hands, for that a Rich man in the City, who abounded in Sheep and Oxen, took
away from a certain Poor man a little Ewe, whose Stock went not beyond this
one, and of this made a Feast for the entertainment of a Stranger that came to
his House; Nihil habebat omnino praeter ovem unam parvulam. At which David,
being filled with Indignation, protested before the Lord, Vivit Dominus, that
the Man that had done the thing should pay it fourfold. At which the Prophet
replying to the King, said, Thou art the Man, against whom thou art so justly
angry. And I may turn to thee, Sinner, and say, Thou art the Man. For is not
thy Soul, that little Sheep, which Christ bought at the price of his own Blood;
is it not that which God created, redeemed, and has designed for his Eternal
Glory? And this thou offerest to the Devil thy Guest; thou make of it a
Banquet, to entertain Lucifer, being only one, and which has cost thy God so
dear. And do not thou in this provoke the omnipotent hand of God against
thee? Thou have one only Jewel, and this thou mortgagest every day more and
more, by thy Offenses: it will come one day to remain wholly in the power of
thy Enemy, to whom thou have thus engaged it. Thou have only one piece of Land,
and this thou neglectest to Till or Plant with good Works; wilt not thou by
this means come to perish eternally with Hunger? Thou have one only House, and
seeing this all in flames, consuming with the Fire of Sin, thou do not at all
bring Relief, nor seek plenty of Tears to extinguish it: and is not this the
way to cast thy Soul into Hell, as a Fuel for those never-ending Flames? Ah,
rather seek to prevent these Mischless, and give the Honor to the Soul which
is due to it. Da illi honorem secundum meritum suum.

Come therefore, Christian; Miserere Animae tuae, take Compassion on thy poor
Soul. Enter a while, retire within thy self, says St. Augustine, and thou will
find thy Soul, necessitous and miserable, asking thee an Alms, begging for
Relief. Redi ad conscientiam tuam, and ibi Ser. 31. de verb. Dom. Isa. 46.
invenies, egentem, and mendicantem animam tuam. Look in, and thou will behold
the Mistress serving, and the Slave commanding. Look in, and thou will see the
Image of God, under the feet of the Devil. Look in, and thou will see that
which Jesus Christ bought at the Price of his own Blood, sold and made over to
Satan for a little Air for nothing. Look in, Sinner, and thou will find that
which was created for an everlasting Kingdom, to be now obnoxious to an eternal
Ignominy. Look in, and thou will behold thy poor Soul, without God, without
Life: Semiviva relicta, waiting every Instant to be thrown into Hell. Miserere
animae tuae, Take pity on thy Soul. Behold her made a public Mansion of
Devils, where they enter and dwell without any opposition, by wicked Thoughts,
profane Words, and worse Works. Fac ergo eleemosynam animae tuae. Bring
therefore some Vbi sup.
Relief, says St. Augustine, to thy Soul, in this her extremity of wants; give
ear to her Petitions, and be not deaf to her sad Complaints in these her
Miseries. And for the present be attentive to this Relation:

We read of a certain wretched Man, who living unmindful of Tho. de Cantipr. l.
2. apum. c. 56.
God and his Soul, gave himself up wholly to Licentiousness and Debauchery. On
an occasion, he was making merry with his Companions, eating and drinking
without measure; and amongst other things, they began a Discourse of, What was
to be after this Life? Many things had been said, when behold a Stranger comes
in, desiring to know the matter of their Dispute: to whom this miserable man;
Here, says he, we are entertained with a pretty Debate, of what is to become of
our Souls when they have left the Body; but for my part, if I could find a
Chapman, I would sell my Soul, and feast my Friends with the price of it. At
which, the Stranger answered, that he would buy it: and forthwith the Bargain
being agreed on, paid the Money; with which the other entertained the whole
Company. But night being come, he that had made the Purchase said, It Is now
time we should break up, and therefore, I declare to you all, that I am the
Devil: this Wretch has made a delivery to me of his Soul, and I have Command
of the Highest, to carry him away, both Soul and Body; and immediately taking
him into the Air, he disappeared, and hurried him into the bottomless Pit of
Hell, where he is now consuming in those never-ending Flames, and shall be, as
long as God shall be God, without hopes of Ease or Relief.

See now, Sinner, what is the Conclusion of those who neglect their Soul; the
same miserable Fate attends thee, if thou do not amend: thou have yet time to
prevent all, by a serious and hearty Repentance: at that time when thou did
sin against thy God, thou made over thy Soul to the Devil; but the Contract
may be yet broken off, and made null, by a true Sorrow and an hearty
Contrition. Come then, make haste to revoke thy Word, and undo so unjust a
Bargain. Allege that there was fraud in the Sale, that the Purchaser has
abused the Jewel, and cheated the Owner. Let the abundance of thy Tears cancel
the Writings, and the Intenseness of thy Repentance make void all the
Obligations, by which thou delivered'st thy self to the Power of Satan.
Christian, there is enough of Blindness. You have only one God, you have one
Soul alone, and but once can you expect to dye; Why is it that you continue in
Sin? Your Soul in Possession of the Devil! Your Soul in danger to be damned
eternally! Oh, why don't you prostrate your selves at the feet of your merciful
Redeemer, of your Crucified Jesus? See what he gave for your Soul; he spilt his
Blood once for you, and would do it again a thousand times for your Salvation;
and will you still continue Slaves to Sin and the Devil? Sons of my Blood (he
says to you) Children of my Love, for your Soul's Good was I nailed to the
Cross, and my Wounds, yet fresh, are crying aloud to you, to forsake your evil
ways, and to follow me. And what Answer do you return, Christians, to these
Complaints of your Loving Redeemer? Do you say, you will not? O never, never
let it be so; but rather with a true sense of your Sins, and a hearty sorrow
for having lived so long in Blindness, fall down at his Feet, and say from the
bottom of your Heart; My Lord Jesus Christ, my God, my Father, my Redeemer, in
whom I believe, in whom I put my Trust, and whom I love more than my own Life,
more than my Soul, and above all things whatsoever: it repents me, Dear Lord,
it repents me from my heart, that I have offended against thee. O infinite
Goodness! O my Jesus! O, that I had never broken thy Commandments! O, that I
had died a thousand Deaths, rather than have sinned against thy Divine Majesty!
I am sorry for thy sake alone, for being who thou art, so infinitely holy, so
good, so amiable; I am sorry, Dear Father, that I have injured thee with my
Offenses. And here I make a firm purpose, by the assistance of thy Grace, never
more to sin: I offer here a thousand Lives, rather than return to my Iniquity;
and resolve to avoid all Occasions and Dangers of committing any Crime against
thee: I here intend to make a sincere Confession of all my Wickedness, and to
comply with all the Obligations that shall be laid on me; and I trust, that
through the Merits and Passion of my loving Redeemer, I shall obtain pardon of
all my Offenses. I have sinned, Lord I have sinned; but thou, my God, have
Mercy on me; Mercy, Blessed Savior; Mercy, my Jesus. I love thee above all
things, O my Jesus: Let thy Love, let thy Faith live and increase; and
replenish us with thy Grace, the Pledge of eternal Glory, ad quam nos perducat
Sancta and individua Trinitas, Pater, and Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus, to
which, God of his infinite Mercy bring us. Amen.

FINIS.

